
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
WORKING PAPER
FEBRUARY 2024
BELFER CENTER
Unraveling
the Political
Dynamics
Shaping the
U.S. Strategy
for Technology
Leadership
Constanza M. Vidal Bustamante
Douglass Vijay Calidas

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
www.belfercenter.org
Statements and views expressed in this report are solely those of the author(s) and do not imply
endorsement by Harvard University, Harvard Kennedy School, or the Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material on the maps in this report do not imply
the expression of any opinion whatsoever concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or
area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Copyright 2024, President and Fellows of Harvard College

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
WORKING PAPER
FEBRUARY 2024
BELFER CENTER
Unraveling
the Political
Dynamics
Shaping the
U.S. Strategy
for Technology
Leadership
Constanza M. Vidal Bustamante
Douglass Vijay Calidas

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
ii
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
About the Authors
Constanza Vidal Bustamante is a Ph.D. candidate at the Harvard Griffin
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences and student researcher with the Belfer
Center for Science and International Affairs at the Harvard Kennedy School.
She has written about emerging technologies, their associated opportunities and
impacts, and the regulatory landscape. Constanza is President of the Harvard
Science Policy Group and was recently named a 2024 Mirzayan Science and
Technology Policy Fellow with the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine. She holds Master’s and Bachelor’s degrees in psychology and
cognitive neuroscience from Harvard University.
Douglass Vijay Calidas is a Fellow with the Belfer Center and a former
Technology and Public Purpose Fellow (2022-2023). He spent five years as a senior
advisor to Senator Amy Klobuchar, most recently serving as the Senator’s Chief
of Staff. Before advising Senator Klobuchar, Doug served as Chief Counsel for
Senator Joe Manchin. He began his time in the Senate as a Fellow on the staff of
the Senate Finance Committee under Senator Ron Wyden. Prior to working on
Capitol Hill, Doug spent six years as an attorney in private practice at the law firm
of Steptoe & Johnson in Washington, D.C. He is a graduate of Duke University
School of Law, where he was an Editor of the Duke Law Journal and a member
of the moot court board, and the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School of
Business, where he studied finance, economics, and international relations as a
Joseph Wharton Scholar.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank William B. Bonvillian for feedback on previous
drafts, and Charles A. Jordan for early discussions of some of the contents. The
authors would also like to thank the many congressional staffers in both parties
who shared their insight into current and past policy efforts and political dynamics
relevant to the national technology strategy.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
iii
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
About the Belfer Center
The Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs is the hub of Harvard
Kennedy School’s research, teaching, and training in international security and
diplomacy, environmental and resource issues, and science and technology
policy. The Center has a dual mission: (1) to provide leadership in advancing
policy-relevant knowledge about the most important challenges of international
security and other critical issues where science, technology, environmental policy,
and international affairs intersect; and (2) to prepare future generations of leaders
for these arenas.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Table of Contents
Introduction ...................................................................................................... 1
Technology leadership for what? Considerations of national security,
economic prosperity, and societal wellbeing ...........................................5
National Security ....................................................................................................................... 6
Economic Prosperity ................................................................................................................7
Social Policies .............................................................................................................................9
Leadership through what means? Defensive and offensive strategies ...... 11
What stages of the technology development pipeline should the
government fund, and through what financial mechanisms? From
R&D to scale-up manufacturing ............................................................... 13
Ongoing challenges and the future of the U.S. tech leadership strategy ..18
Endnotes .........................................................................................................20

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
vi
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
President Joe Biden speaks during an event to support legislation that would encourage domestic
manufacturing and strengthen supply chains for computer chips on the White House campus March
9, 2022 (AP Photo/Patrick Semansky)

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
1
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
Introduction
“While the battlefield has changed since the Cold War,
leadership in science, technology, and innovation remains
the most important weapon in the current competitive
environment.”1

Securing U.S. leadership in cutting-edge, dual-use technologies2 is now an
overarching policy priority shared by Republicans and Democrats. Leaders in both
parties routinely tout U.S. competitiveness in semiconductors, AI, and other ‘critical’
technologies as necessary to address a series of global and domestic challenges—from
China’s steady rise as a geopolitical adversary, to climate change, to the hollowing out
of manufacturing capacity in the heartland of the United States. Policies intended to
protect and promote technology competitiveness have featured so prominently in the
administrations of Presidents Trump and Biden that many observers claim we may be
entering a new era of U.S. industrial policy in advanced technologies.3
Although there is broad agreement between the two major parties on the desirability
of technology leadership, significant sources of tension—and confusion—persist.
These include disagreements about whether to focus exclusively on national
security objectives or to also address economic development and social policy goals;
whether to invest heavily in strengthening domestic productive capacity or simply
slow geopolitical rivals’ progress; and whether to fund early-stage research and
development or invest in more advanced stages of technology development such as
scale-up manufacturing. These issues, which often block consensus both within and
between the two major parties, are likely to influence the course and effectiveness of
any federal technology leadership strategy for the foreseeable future.
By examining the political dynamics that led to the enactment of the CHIPS and
Science Act, we probe these tensions and seek to assess their likely impact on the
federal technology strategy in the coming years. We contend that safeguarding
national security has been and will remain a core factor driving bipartisan consensus
on expanding the federal government’s role in developing technological capabilities
at home and restricting the transfer of knowledge and resources overseas. However,
this factor alone may not be sufficient to bridge unresolved ideological disagreements
over the proper role of government in the economy, the economic merits of industrial
policy, and the proper balance of geopolitical objectives and broader societal goals in
shaping the national technology strategy.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
2
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
Box 1: Major policy developments related to technology leadership in
recent years
CHIPS and Science Act of 2022: This landmark bill was signed into law in August
2022 and has two main components:4
• CHIPS Act funding: Aimed at revitalizing the semiconductor industry in the
United States, this component of the law appropriated $52 billion in subsidies,
in addition to investment tax credits and loan guarantees, for semiconductor
manufacturing facilities and research and development. Its purpose is to
reduce U.S. reliance on foreign semiconductor production and strengthen
domestic supply chains. First introduced by Senators John Cornyn (R-TX)
and Mark Warner (D-V A), the original CHIPS Act5 became law as part of the
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Y ear 2021, but the CHIPS and
Science Act appropriated the funding.
• “Science” component: This component of the law authorized funding
(without direct appropriations) for research agencies—primarily the National
Science Foundation (NSF) and the Department of Energy (DOE)—to finance
R&D in strategic technology areas including semiconductor materials,
quantum computing, biotechnology, and artificial intelligence. This included
both reauthorizations of the agencies’ basic research activities as well as the
creation of a permanent new NSF Directorate for Technology, Innovation,
and Partnerships (TIP Directorate). The TIP Directorate will support the
translation and transfer of basic research into practical and commercial
applications, foster public-private partnerships that can accelerate technology
development and deployment, and invest in education and training programs
to prepare a skilled workforce in emerging technology sectors. The law
authorized funding in the amount of $20 billion to create the new permanent
directorate but left it to future Congresses to decide whether or not to
appropriate the authorized funding. These components of the bill originated in
the Senate as part of the Endless Frontier Act of 20206 introduced by Majority
Leader Charles Schumer (D-NY) and Republican Todd Y oung (R-IN), and
were blended with House-originated provisions to become the “Science” part
of the CHIPS and Science Act.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
3
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
Technology export and investment restrictions under Trump and Biden
presidential administrations
• US-China trade war under President Trump: In June 2018, the Trump
administration imposed tariffs on billions of dollars worth of Chinese goods,
citing unfair trade practices and intellectual property theft.7 This triggered a
series of escalating tariffs and trade measures between the two countries that
has continued into the Biden administration. Although the original targets
included a wide range of products—from solar panels and washing machines
to steel and aluminum—the dispute became increasingly centered around high
technology products that posed national security concerns, especially products
manufactured by Chinese tech companies like Huawei. In May 2019, the U.S.
government raised concerns about the security of Huawei’s products and their
potential use for espionage by the Chinese government, leading to significant
restrictions and sanctions.8 The “US-China trade war” started under President
Trump helped cement technological competition as a major aspect of the
US-China rivalry.
• Exports and investment controls under President Biden: The Biden
administration has continued and expanded upon the restrictions started
under President Trump, implementing export and investment controls in
advanced technologies to limit China’s technological advancements in areas
that may threaten U.S. national security. These measures include export
controls on advanced computing semiconductors and semiconductor
manufacturing equipment, first announced by the Commerce Department
in October 2022.9 In August 2023, President Biden issued an executive order
further restricting U.S. investments in Chinese entities engaged in the design,
fabrication, or packaging of advanced semiconductors, as well as quantum
computing and AI systems used for military or intelligence end-uses.10
Science and Technology components of the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022:
Passed at a time when the Democratic Party controlled both chambers of Congress
and the White House, the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) directed unprecedented
levels of federal spending to mitigate climate change and bolster clean energy
production in the United States. The law allocated nearly $400 billion, largely
in consumer and industry incentives, for clean energy technologies and electric
vehicles,11 with the aim of reducing carbon emissions substantially over the next
decade and positioning the U.S. as a leader in green technology.12 Large-scale

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
4
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
climate technology efforts like the IRA currently rest on a highly partisan basis
of support and depend on unified Democratic control of the White House, the
Senate, and the House of Representatives.
President Biden’s 2021 Executive Order to Secure Supply Chains: Executive
Order 14017, issued in February 2021, called for an all-of-government approach
to assess vulnerabilities and strengthen the resilience of the United States’ critical
supply chains across several sectors.13 A first priority was conducting vulnerability
assessments for four critical product categories: semiconductor manufacturing
and advanced packaging, large capacity batteries, critical minerals and materials,
and pharmaceuticals and active pharmaceutical ingredients. The results of these
assessments informed several later efforts related to the U.S. technology strategy,
including supporting domestic production of critical medicines, securing an
end-to-end domestic supply chain for advanced batteries, investing in sustainable
domestic and international production and processing of critical minerals,
and partnering with industry, allies, and partners to address semiconductor
shortages.14 Considerations of supply chain vulnerabilities and potential solutions
also influenced the various pieces of legislation that became law as part of the
CHIPS and Science Act of 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
5
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
Technology leadership for what?
Considerations of national security,
economic prosperity, and societal
wellbeing
The broad popularity of the CHIPS and Science Act notwithstanding, major
disagreements remain regarding what the explicit goals of the U.S. technology
strategy should be and how these goals should be prioritized.15 Many Democrats
and a significant number of Republican lawmakers are reevaluating the federal
government’s decades-long commitment to neoliberal economic policies
and champion investments in technology and advanced manufacturing as
an effective method for creating good new jobs and broad-based economic
prosperity. At the same time, deeply ingrained free-market principles continue
to inspire considerable opposition to classic industrial policy, which most
American economists have long criticized for its perceived inefficiency and
waste.16 Additionally, some Democrats dislike framing the country’s science and
technology strategy solely in terms of geopolitical competition, advocating instead
for a more comprehensive approach that incorporates broader societal challenges
including environmental protection and social equity.
Wind turbines turn behind a solar farm in Rapshagen, Germany, Thursday, Oct. 28, 2021. (AP Photo/
Michael Sohn, File)

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
6
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
Disagreement over the relative importance of national security, economic security,
and societal wellbeing sparked heated debates among—as well as within—both
political parties and chambers of Congress throughout the legislative process that
produced the CHIPS and Science Act. Aspects of this debate continued during the
implementation of the semiconductor subsidies program,17 and are likely to pose
obstacles for future legislative efforts aimed at safeguarding U.S. technological
leadership.
National Security
National security issues have revitalized the Cold War-era consensus on the
importance of technology leadership and the role of the federal government in
safeguarding it. Indeed, the United States’ rising geopolitical competition with
China was singled out by Members in both parties as the primary motivation for
funding both large-scale investments in semiconductor manufacturing and high-
technology research and development more generally.18
Leadership in technological innovation has historically been a critical component
of the U.S. military’s “offset strategies, ” where technological advances are leveraged
to overcome an adversary’s relative advantage (such as numerical superiority),
helping ensure victory during conflict as well as deterring potential confrontations
altogether.19 Emerging dual-use technologies like AI are already powering increased
automation and cyber warfare around the world, and are poised to continue
revolutionizing military capabilities.20 It is therefore no surprise that rising
geopolitical tensions between the United States and China, paired with China’s
astounding progress in technological sophistication over the past few decades,
have motivated policymakers to focus squarely on securing the United States’
technological leadership.21
Its elite research universities and attractive innovation ecosystems nonwithstanding,
there are ominous signs that the U.S. cannot continue to take its technological
superiority for granted.22 A telling example, cited frequently to build public support
for the CHIPS and Science Act, is the stark decline in the United States’ share of
global semiconductor manufacturing, which plummeted from 37 percent in 1990
to 12 percent in 2022.23 Meanwhile, China has made remarkable strides in science
and technology over the past three decades, as the Chinese Communist Party (CCP)
rolled out an aggressive and tightly coordinated series of initiatives to position

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
7
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
China as a global leader in dual-use technologies. Chinese R&D investments
have surged exponentially since 1990 and are set to overtake U.S. levels in the
next few years, while the number of STEM Ph.D. graduates produced by Chinese
universities has consistently exceeded those produced by U.S. universities for the
past several years.24
In addition to R&D investment and talent development, the CCP has aggressively
deployed a series of far-reaching industrial policy tools, including heavy subsidies
for domestic industries, systematic acquisition of international companies, strict
technology transfer conditions on foreign investment, industrial espionage and
cybertheft, and a “military-civil fusion” strategy that seeks to harness commercial
technological developments for military advantage.25
American voters have long supported a strong role for the federal government in
supporting certain sectors of the economy when such policies are justified by acute
national security concerns. Indeed, the United States can be said to have been
funding industrial policy in dual-use technologies for decades through its defense
system,26 and it is no accident that policymakers turn to national security first
when building public support for technology leadership strategies.
Economic Prosperity
The importance of the United States’ technology leadership strategy is further
evidenced by the attention it now receives in debates regarding the country’s
economic strength and competitiveness, particularly at a time of rising discontent
with entrenched neoliberal economic policies. Both Democrats and Republicans
now routinely acknowledge that an overreliance on unfettered trade with countries
like China contributed significantly to the erosion of America’s industrial base, the
offshoring of manufacturing jobs, and the creation of vulnerable “chokepoints”
in the U.S. supply chain. Meanwhile, China’s economy experienced decades of
striking growth, though this trajectory has slowed substantially in recent years.27
Voters’ discontent with neoliberal economics, simmering since the 2008 financial
crisis, reached a tipping point during the 2016 presidential election. Then-
candidates Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders loudly criticized the offshoring of
U.S. manufacturing jobs to China and China’s unfair trade practices and aggressive
industrial policies, and their insurgent campaigns sparked a dizzying redrawing

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
8
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
of economic policy fault lines within the two major parties.28 Trump won the
Republican primary election—and ultimately the general election—in large part
by running against the neoliberal establishment in both parties and capitalizing on
working class Americans’ resentments about international trade and manufacturing
job losses. Similarly, Sanders overperformed in the Democratic primary and
came close to winning the nomination by the promise of giving voice to working
class voters (and young progressives) who had largely been neglected in favor of
corporate interests since the Clinton Administration held power.
The public response to the Trump and Sanders campaigns led to bipartisan
recognition of China as a geopolitical and economic competitor and prompted
a reassessment of the role of the federal government in the economy.29 A faction
of populist Republicans has emerged, branding themselves as “pro-worker” and
advocates of “common good capitalism. ”30 Recognizing this shift in political
sentiment, President Biden has also prioritized industrial policies related
to advanced technologies in formulating his economic policy agenda.31 By
strengthening domestic technological capacity, political leaders can credibly claim
to create new manufacturing jobs (which are popular with the electorate), realign
supply chains to make them less reliant on other countries, and drive long-term
economic growth, especially when policies focus on dual-use technologies with
large commercial markets, such as semiconductors.
Such considerations of economic competitiveness were instrumental in building
bipartisan support for the CHIPS and Science Act. In addition to its Republican co-
leads, the bill became law with the support of seventeen other Republican senators,
including prominent figures like Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, Mitt
Romney, and Lindsey Graham.32 It also gained the support of 24 Republican
House Members, primarily those hailing from states such as Ohio, Texas, and
Michigan, whose voters expected to benefit from the opening of new manufacturing
facilities.33
“Economic security” arguments have met resistance from a range of groups,
spanning libertarians to some moderate Democrats, who argue that industrial
policy runs counter to the United States’ modern aversion to protectionist policies.
In U.S. politics, letting the government “pick winners” has long been associated
with market inefficiencies and the potential for corruption and political rent-
seeking by corporate lobbyists and insiders.34 Contrary to these conventional

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
9
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
beliefs, an emerging body of research using large historical datasets and modern
statistical analysis now suggests that industrial policies have often led to beneficial
economic outcomes in the long term, including job creation and enhanced
productivity and export performance in the targeted industries.35 Nevertheless,
“kneejerk opposition” to industrial policy remains well-entrenched in mainstream
economics, complicating efforts to direct continued public investment into specific
commercial sectors such as semiconductors.36
In supporting and implementing a wave of industrial policies without precedent
in the past fifty years, the Biden administration and congressional Democrats
have chosen to straddle the line between national security and economic security
goals, sometimes highlighting the overarching importance of national security
considerations37 and sometimes emphasizing the importance of job creation
and economic security.38 This ambiguity has only prolonged the debate over
the proper role of the federal government in the economy, with experts in both
parties convinced that the neoliberal consensus is dead but unsure what exactly
will replace it.39 Complicating the debate further is the widespread recognition
that dual-use technologies are by definition important for military capabilities
while also having a substantial commercial market, making it nearly impossible to
separate considerations of “national security” from “economic security” in crafting
a technology leadership strategy. This is especially difficult when the primary
“country of concern” that these policies are aimed at does not recognize this
distinction.40
Social Policies
Many progressive policymakers and advocacy groups have called for a technology
leadership strategy that explicitly addresses societal wellbeing, arguing that issues
related to climate, health, and social equity are themselves matters of national
and economic security. In their view, explicitly prioritizing societal wellbeing is a
necessary response to the decades-long failure of free-market economic policies
to deliver equitable opportunities as a byproduct of promised economic growth.
In a similar vein, the Biden Administration has defended the inclusion of “social
policy” conditions attached to federal subsidies—including hiring union-eligible
workers and providing on-site childcare—as necessary to attract and maintain the
workforce required to expand manufacturing in the United States.41

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
10
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
Opponents of these ideas claim that incorporating social policy goals into the
technology leadership strategy threatens to dilute the intensity of efforts to
address urgent national security issues currently facing the United States. More
pragmatically, centering these goals tends to weaken bipartisan support for major
policy proposals, especially since decisions about which social policy goals to
pursue can often appear subjective to opponents.42 Industry leaders and many
Republicans in Congress—including Senator John Cornyn, who introduced
the CHIPS Act in the Senate—have opposed the inclusion of social policy
considerations in the evaluation process for awarding semiconductor subsidies
under the Act.43 They argue that these considerations were not part of the
original legislation and may prove counterproductive by discouraging companies
from applying for subsidies due to the increased cost of compliance. In this view,
prioritizing U.S. leadership in advanced semiconductor manufacturing should
involve supporting leading-edge entities rather than trying to simultaneously
address multiple broad and complex objectives like geographic diversity, equity
and sustainability.
Efforts to integrate social policy goals into the U.S. technology strategy sparked
substantial disagreements between Members of the Senate and the House
(and between and within the two parties) during the drafting of the Science
components of the CHIPS and Science Act. House Democrats, led by then-Chair
of the Science Committee Eddie Bernice Johnson (D-TX), crafted their own
version of the bill to expand government support for research that addressed
grand societal challenges, such as climate change and social inequality. This
approach contrasted sharply with the prioritization of a list of technologies
critical for geopolitical competition found in the original Endless Frontier
Act proposal led by Senators Schumer and Y oung.44 Although a compromise
was eventually reached to get the legislation passed,45 the impact of these
disagreements over societal versus national security approaches to science and
technology policy is likely to be enduring. Republican opposition to using public
funding to advance public policy goals related to societal wellbeing may have
contributed to the lower-than-expected appropriations for the Science portions of
the bill,46 and are likely to continue to complicate efforts to pass future large-scale
legislation for technology leadership.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
11
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
Leadership through what means?
Defensive and offensive strategies
The CHIPS and Science Act’s large-scale investments in domestic semiconductor
manufacturing and high-tech R&D are one element within the broader national
strategy for technology leadership. Both the Trump and Biden administrations
have pressured Congress and pursued multiple initiatives through Executive
branch agencies to secure the United States’ technology lead (see Box 1 for an
overview). These policies have been organized under two general approaches:
protecting national interests from other rival nations, (a “defensive” approach),
and promoting the development of domestic capacity (an “offensive” approach.)
The “defensive” pieces of the agenda were a major focus under President Trump’s
unequivocally hawkish stance against China, including banning Chinese entities
from buying U.S. technology without special approval and effectively barring
Huawei equipment from U.S. telecommunications networks.47 The Trump
administration’s focus on the imposition of tariffs (a more straightforward policy
tool)48 and disinterest in building domestic capacity49 reflected President Trump’s
sanction-favoring style that has been characterized as “all sticks and no carrots. ”50
At the same time, the Trump Administration’s actions radically changed bilateral
relations between the U.S. and China and likely helped galvanize public support
for a more vigorous federal role in preserving U.S. technology leadership.
Over the past three years, the Biden administration has presented a more balanced
strategy for technology leadership that emphasizes both offensive and defensive
components.51 The “promote” agenda was a main strategic focus during the
first two years of the Biden Administration, when Democrats controlled both
the Senate and the House. President Biden leveraged this favorable political
climate to consolidate domestic investments in strategically important sectors
of the economy, from infrastructure and clean energy to science and technology
innovation, leading a wave of industrial policies without precedent in the past fifty
years. In addition to the CHIPS and Science Act, which President Biden lauded as
an “inflection point” in the U.S. approach to industrial policy,52 Congress passed
both the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act and the Inflation Reduction Act,
both of which stand as landmark examples of industrial policy legislation in
nondefense sectors.53

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
12
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
After Congress approved nearly half a trillion dollars in federal spending
during President Biden’s first two years in office, Republicans won control
of the House in the midterm elections of November 2022, effectively halting
any significant new policy proposals from the Biden Administration or
congressional Democrats. Since that time, the Biden administration’s focus
has shifted to implementing the recently enacted laws and doubling down on
trade restrictions aimed at containing and countering China. Picking up the
thread from Trump’s presidency, the Biden administration has expanded export
and outbound investment controls on advanced semiconductors for China in
an attempt to prevent U.S. technology and funding from furthering Chinese
military capabilities. The notion of “decoupling” critical supply chains, especially
from China, arose early on in the Trump administration, but the COVID-19
pandemic’s strain on critical supply chains helped accelerate and cement the
notion among leaders in both parties that globally distributed supply chains are
vulnerable to substantial “chokepoints” that can be exploited by the United States’
geopolitical adversaries.54
Notwithstanding the Biden administration’s demonstrated commitment
to imposing strong protective measures against China, key administration
officials have taken pains to emphasize that they still view China as a strategic
partner over the long term and to assuage concerns about U.S. isolationism.55
Administration officials generally avoid using the term “decoupling” and prefer
the terms “de-risking and diversifying” favored by European allies and anchored
on national security objectives. Likewise, the administration has insisted that
their export controls on advanced semiconductors represent a “high fence, small
yard” approach, whereby comprehensive protective measures are limited to a
“narrow slice” of advanced technologies that, if incorporated into geopolitical
rivals’ military capability, would represent a critical threat to the United States’
national security.56

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
13
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
What stages of the technology
development pipeline should the
government fund, and through what
financial mechanisms? From R&D to
scale-up manufacturing
Another source of tension in defining the U.S. technology leadership strategy
pertains to whether the government should support all stages of technology
development or focus on only some. While the federal government has long
been a primary funder of basic research, the CHIPS and Science Act (as well
as the Inflation Reduction Act and the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act)
broke the mold by supporting all technology development stages—from applied
R&D to scale-up manufacturing—leading to substantial disagreement among
policymakers, academic researchers, and other stakeholders.
A seven cubit quantum device is seen at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center in Yorktown
Heights, N.Y. in 2018 (AP Photo/Seth Wenig)

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
14
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
Since the postwar period—when the United States’ science and technology policy
underwent a substantial and enduring reorganization—federal science investments
in the civilian sector have been largely limited to basic research and early-stage
development.57 This approach has been buttressed by the mainstream neoliberal
tradition, which considers basic research a form of market failure.58 In this view,
government involvement in later stages of technology development beyond basic
research could potentially lead to market distortions, inefficiencies, and even the
politicization of science and technology, so they should be left to the private sector
and privately funded academic researchers.
Indeed, the CHIPS and Science Act’s establishment of a new arm within the
National Science Foundation focused on applied and translational R&D in
specific “key technologies” raised concerns about a potential shift away from the
agency’s core mission of supporting basic research.59 Critics, especially within the
scientific community, feared that allocating significant resources to applied R&D
might reduce the funds otherwise available for fundamental science and would
ultimately lead to a top-down imposition of research priorities by the government.
More practically, negotiations over the bill’s proposal to expand the scope of the
NSF also triggered concerns about potential overlap with the roles of other federal
agencies, such as the Department of Energy and the Department of Defense.
In contrast to these agencies, which also fund applied research and technology
development, the NSF had only limited experience supporting technology
development efforts beyond basic research.
While the legislation’s ambitions for the new NSF Technology directorate got
whittled down during the legislative process, the directorate itself was preserved in
the final version of the bill that became law. Supporters pitched this new NSF arm
as an elegant institutional solution to the proverbial “valley of death”—a term that
refers to the fate faced by the multitude of breakthroughs in fundamental research
that never make it into technology implementation.60 Inconsistent government
support during the high-risk stages of research translation has been repeatedly
held responsible for this problem, and by focusing directly on use-inspired and
translational research, the new Directorate aims to bridge this gap and “[advance]
U.S. competitiveness through investments that accelerate the development of key
technologies and address pressing societal and economic challenges. ”61

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
15
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
Government involvement in manufacturing stages of technology development
elicits even greater controversy. Investments in domestic semiconductor
manufacturing capacity is arguably a more time-sensitive use of government funds
compared to early-stage research and development, and has the additional benefits
of helping create jobs, spur additional investments in these sectors, and ultimately
foster economic growth.62 Y et, as discussed earlier, reservations about industrial
policy and the inefficiencies of government interventions in the economy remain
entrenched, and the once job-heavy manufacturing sector is viewed as particularly
ripe for political favoritism. Notably, although the federal government has been
funding all stages of technological development in the defense sector—including
development, prototyping, testing, demonstration, and oftentimes serving as
the initial market—in the civilian sector the definition of innovation (and its
associated market failures) has not included advanced manufacturing processes,
but rather remained limited to the earliest stages of technology development.63
Even among those who supported the CHIPS and Science Act’s substantial
government investments in the economy, disagreements remain over whether
this scale of funding should remain rare or serve as a gateway into a new era of
enhanced federal spending on advanced technology R&D and manufacturing.
For those that support limited government involvement, the government should
pass the baton to the private sector; in this view, the hundreds of billions of dollars
in domestic and foreign private investments that are already being “crowded in”
for semiconductor manufacturing as a consequence of the CHIPS and Science
Act64 should be able to sustain the industry moving forward. Skepticism about
the wisdom and practicality of financing any fresh efforts in industrial policy are
further reinforced by the substantial and growing budget deficits faced by the
federal government in recent years.65
Meanwhile, others argue that this should be but the first of a series of bills
investing in domestic production capacity in semiconductors as well as other
critical technologies, especially since American voters in both parties support
such investments.66 They point out that the CHIPS and Science Act investments,
while substantial, are dwarfed by the much larger and repeated subsidies provided
by governments like China, South Korea, and Singapore to their respective
domestic industries.67 Moreover, with the funding appropriated by the “Science”
components of the bill falling substantially short of its authorizations,68 there
are increasing calls for additional funding that matches the original scope of the
legislation’s technology R&D ambitions.69

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
16
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
If this Congress or a future Congress decides to fund manufacturing efforts to spur
technological leadership in strategic technologies, there are a variety of financial
mechanisms to do so, as outlined in a recent piece by David Adler and William
Bonvillian:70
• Direct subsidies and grants from the government to fund new advanced
production facilities for critical technologies, like the semiconductor
manufacturing subsidies offered by the CHIPS and Science Act.
• Tax credits and incentives, as used in the Inflation Reduction Act as well
as the CHIPS and Science Act to encourage private investments and
adoption of advanced manufacturing processes and production in priority
technology sectors.
• Guaranteed contracts from the government to reduce risks for companies
and assure production, as the government did with COVID-19 vaccine
makers via the successful Operation Warp Speed.71
• Expanding lending authority of existing federal institutions, like the
Department of Energy Loan Programs Office, which has provided
financing for scale-up of new energy technologies since 2005, including a
$465 million loan to Tesla in 2009. The Inflation Reduction Act authorized
close to $12 billion for this office to expand its loan authority by
approximately $100 billion, as well as $5 billion to create a new program
of up to $250 billion for upgrading energy infrastructure.72 Moreover,
in response to the supply chain risk assessments conducted as part of
President Biden’s executive order on Securing Supply Chains (see Box 1),
the administration proposed repurposing an established federal bank, the
Export-Import Bank, to provide manufacturing scale-up support alongside
its long-standing export financing role.73
• Establishing new financing institutions, such as Senator Chris Coons’
(D-DE) proposal to create an industrial finance corporation to provide
scale-up financing for innovative manufacturing. Similarly, in 2022 the
DOD created a new “Office of Strategic Capital” for technology scale-up,
though likely limited to technology with direct military applications.74

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
17
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
Since political actors typically have different levels of comfort with direct subsidies,
loans, and tax credits, proposals that utilize a variety of financing mechanisms
are more likely to remain in play across a broader range of political climates.
Many advocates who favor public investment to secure technology leadership
recommend that policymakers provide substantial and reliable funding through
established institutional mechanisms, viewing this as a more efficient and
stable approach to supporting technological innovation and development when
compared with discrete, time-limited legislative efforts as large and politically
complex as the CHIPS and Science Act.
U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken speaks to a robot as he visits a tech showcase at Hanoi
University of Science and Technology in Hanoi, Vietnam, Saturday, April 15, 2023. (AP Photo/
Andrew Harnik, Pool)

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
18
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
Ongoing challenges and the future
of the U.S. tech leadership strategy
The CHIPS and Science Act was an unprecedented effort to boost the United
States’ lead in cutting-edge, dual-use technologies. Despite the bill’s bipartisan
support and strong popularity with the American public,75 prospects for similar
legislative efforts in the near term are uncertain. Substantial disagreements persist
both between and among Democratic and Republican lawmakers, including
disagreements about whether the U.S. technology strategy should be framed
around geopolitical competition, economic competitiveness, or societal wellbeing;
whether the U.S. should focus on building domestic capacity or preventing
adversaries from accessing American technologies; and the extent and avenues
of federal intervention in different stages of technological development, from
research and development to scale-up manufacturing.
Core to these tensions is many policymakers’ continued ambivalence over the role
of government in the economy, especially in spurring technological innovation
and development in a climate of heightened geopolitical competition. Industrial
policy efforts are especially politicized, not only because they undermine
longstanding economic orthodoxy, but additionally because they create tangible
outcomes—such as the opening of new facilities and employment opportunities—
that political leaders often highlight as accomplishments in re-election
campaigns.76
In the coming years, much will depend on the outcome of the 2024 elections,
especially the presidential election. If President Biden wins re-election, he will
likely attempt to recreate the coalitions that proved so successful in coordinating
passage of the landmark industrial policy laws enacted during his first two years in
office, though he will have a difficult time convincing congressional Republicans to
support his efforts—especially if Republicans control either chamber of Congress.
If leading Republican candidate Donald Trump returns to power, he may find
industrial policy to be one area of policy that is ripe for bipartisan cooperation—if
he is willing to propose measures that are closely targeted to national security and
economic growth and do not require Democrats to abandon core principles, such
as longstanding commitments to labor and the environment.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
19
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
President Biden has already demonstrated his willingness to build upon President
Trump’s defensive trade and financial policy vis-a-vis China. Both candidates can
be expected to continue this defensive approach if they were to be inaugurated
in January 2025, though former President Trump’s stated plans for countering
China in a second term are even more radical than the policies he proposed and
implemented during his time in office.77
Regardless of who holds power, policymakers face an array of challenges in
crafting and implementing a successful strategy to maintain the United States’
technology leadership. In addition to the political tensions outlined in this
article, cross-cutting policy challenges include developing a skilled workforce,
coordinating policy efforts across dozens of government agencies as well as with
industry and academia, and ensuring sustained international alignment with allies
and trusted partners. Ultimately, any successful vision for technology leadership
will have to contend with a wide range of complicated and interrelated national
security, economic, and societal issues while consolidating the nascent support
that exists among voters in both parties for a more assertive federal role on this
issue. The stakes are high, and the challenges are not likely to recede.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
20
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
Endnotes
1 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, “Protecting U.S. Technological Advantage” (2022), https:/ /
nap.nationalacademies.org/catalog/26647/protecting-us-technological-advantage
2 Broadly, dual-use technologies refer to those that have both military and civilian applications. For a discussion of the
term and its usage, see Jordi Molas-Gallart, Which way to go? Defence technology and the diversity of ‘dual-use’ technology
transfer, Research Policy 26(3) (1997): 367-385, https:/ /doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(97)00023-1
3 See, e.g., Willy C. Shih, The New Era of Industrial Policy is Here, Harvard Business Review (Sept. – Oct. 2023), https:/ /
hbr.org/2023/09/the-new-era-of-industrial-policy-is-here. William Bonvillian has termed these policy efforts “industrial
innovation policy.” William B. Bonvillian, Industrial Innovation Policy in the United States, Annals of Science and Technology
Policy, v. 6, n. 4: 318-352, 373-392 (Nov. 2022), https:/ /www.researchgate.net/publication/365741066_Industrial_
Innovation_Policy_in_the_United_States
4 The White House, “FACT SHEET: CHIPS and Science Act Will Lower Costs, Create Jobs, Strengthen Supply Chains, and
Counter China” (Aug. 9, 2022), https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/08/09/fact-sheet-
chips-and-science-act-will-lower-costs-create-jobs-strengthen-supply-chains-and-counter-china
5 Press Release, Senator Mark Warner, “Bipartisan, Bicameral Bill Will Help Bring Production of Semiconductors, Critical
to National Security, Back to U.S.” (July 10, 2020), https:/ /www.warner.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/2020/6/bipartisan-
bicameral-bill-will-help-bring-production-of-semiconductors-critical-to-national-security-back-to-u-s
6 Press Release, Senator Todd Young, “Young, Schumer Unveil Endless Frontier Act to Bolster U.S. Tech Leadership and
Combat China” (May 27, 2020), https:/ /www.young.senate.gov/newsroom/press-releases/young-schumer-unveil-endless-
frontier-act-to-bolster-us-tech-leadership-and-combat-china
7 Press Release, Office of the United States Trade Representative, “USTR Issues Tariffs on Chinese Products in Response
to Unfair Trade Practices” (June 15, 2018), https:/ /ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/press-releases/2018/june/
ustr-issues-tariffs-chinese-products
8 David Lawder & Susan Heavey, U.S. blacklists China’s Huawei as trade dispute clouds global outlook, Reuters (May 15,
2019), https:/ /www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trade-china-idUSKCN1SL2DI/
9 Press Release, U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, “Commerce Implements New Export
Controls on Advanced Computing and Semiconductor Manufacturing Items to the People’s Republic of China (PRC)” (Oct.
9, 2022), https:/ /www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/documents/about-bis/newsroom/press-releases/3158-2022-10-07-bis-press-
release-advanced-computing-and-semiconductor-manufacturing-controls-final/file. These controls were later tightened
and expanded to additional countries to mitigate the risk of trade merely diverting through other nations to China. See
Press Release, U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, “Commerce Strengthens Restrictions on
Advanced Computing Semiconductors, Semiconductor Manufacturing Equipment, and Supercomputing Items to Countries
of Concern” (Oct. 17, 2023), https:/ /www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/documents/about-bis/newsroom/press-releases/3355-
2023-10-17-bis-press-release-acs-and-sme-rules-final-js/file
10 The White House, Exec. Order No. 14105, “Addressing United States Investments in Certain National Security
Technologies and Products in Countries of Concern,” 88 Fed. Reg. 54867 (Aug. 9, 2023), https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/
briefing-room/presidential-actions/2023/08/09/executive-order-on-addressing-united-states-investments-in-certain-
national-security-technologies-and-products-in-countries-of-concern
11 McKinsey & Co., “The Inflation Reduction Act: Here’s what’s in it” (Oct. 24, 2022), https:/ /www.mckinsey.com/industries/
public-sector/our-insights/the-inflation-reduction-act-heres-whats-in-it. The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law of 2021 also
included $20 billion in funding for energy technology demonstration programs and research hubs. U.S. Department of
Energy, “DOE Fact Sheet: The Bipartisan Infrastructure Deal Will Deliver For American Workers, Families and Usher in the
Clean Energy Future” (Nov. 9, 2021), https:/ /www.energy.gov/articles/doe-fact-sheet-bipartisan-infrastructure-deal-will-
deliver-american-workers-families-and-0
12 To offset this expenditure and reduce the federal deficit, the law also included measures to generate revenue, including
increases in corporate tax rates and improved enforcement of tax collection by the IRS. It also featured a range of
provisions pertaining to health care and pharmaceutical drugs, some of which were expected to raise revenue due to their
impact on existing federal spending obligations.
13 The White House, Exec. Order No. 14017, “Executive Order on America’s Supply Chains,” (Feb. 24, 2021), https:/ /www.
whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/02/24/executive-order-on-americas-supply-chains
14 The White House, “FACT SHEET: Biden-Harris Administration Announces Supply Chain Disruptions Task Force to
Address Short-Term Supply Chain Discontinuities” (June 8, 2021), https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/06/08/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-announces-supply-chain-disruptions-task-force-to-address-
short-term-supply-chain-discontinuities
15 Julius Krein, What Should Be the Goal of U.S. Industrial Strategy?, The Liberal Patriot (Nov. 13, 2023), https:/ /www.
liberalpatriot.com/p/what-should-be-the-goal-of-us-industrial; Robert Atkinson, Industrial Policy May Have Finally Arrived:
But For What?, American Compass (Nov. 16, 2020), https:/ /americancompass.org/industrial-policy-may-have-finally-
arrived-but-for-what/

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
21
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
16 While industrial policy has many definitions, we use the most common definition – “government support for industries
that are deemed strategically important.” See Anshu Siripurapu & Noah Berman, “Is Industrial Policy Making a Comeback?,”
Council on Foreign Relations (Sept. 18, 2023), https:/ /www.cfr.org/backgrounder/industrial-policy-making-comeback
17 Sabrina Siddiqui and Yuka Yahashi, No ‘Social Policy’ in Chips Act Rules, Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo Says, Wall
Street Journal (Mar. 28, 2023) https:/ /www.wsj.com/articles/no-social-policy-in-chips-act-rules-commerce-secretary-gina-
raimondo-says-616f156e
18 This includes both the CHIPS for America Act of 2020 and the Endless Frontier Act of 2020, the bipartisan precursors
of the measures that would ultimately become law as the joint CHIPS and Science Act of 2022 (see Box 1 for more details).
Andrea Peterson, “Lawmakers Propose Multibillion Dollar Semiconductor R&D Push,” American Institute of Physics (June
24, 2020), https:/ /ww2.aip.org/fyi/2020/lawmakers-propose-multibillion-dollar-semiconductor-rd-push; Press Release,
Senator Todd Young, “Young, Schumer Unveil Endless Frontier Act to Bolster U.S. Tech Leadership and Combat China”
(May 27, 2020) https:/ /www.young.senate.gov/newsroom/press-releases/young-schumer-unveil-endless-frontier-act-to-
bolster-us-tech-leadership-and-combat-china
19 Gian Gentile et al., “A History of the Third Offset, 2014–2018,” The RAND Corporation (2021), https:/ /www.rand.org/
pubs/research_reports/RRA454-1.html
20 Kelley Sayler, “Emerging Military Technologies: Background and Issues for Congress,” Congressional Research Service
(Nov. 1, 2022), https:/ /crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R46458; Ryan Fedasiu et al., “Harnessed Lightning: How
the Chinese Military is Adopting Artificial Intelligence,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology (Oct. 2021), https:/ /
cset.georgetown.edu/publication/harnessed-lightning; Jacob Stokes et al., “U.S.-China Competition and Military AI: How
Washington Can Manage Strategic Risks amid Rivalry with Beijing,” Center for a New American Security (July 25, 2023),
https:/ /www.cnas.org/publications/reports/u-s-china-competition-and-military-ai; Ulrike Franke, “Not smart enough: The
poverty of European military thinking on artificial intelligence,” European Council on Foreign Relations (Dec. 18, 2019),
https:/ /ecfr.eu/publication/not_smart_enough_poverty_european_military_thinking_artificial_intelligence
21 Indeed, advanced science and technology have taken center stage in the US-China rivalry, with many experts in both
Beijing and Washington referring to leadership in emerging technologies as the most critical battleground. Peter Engelke
& Emily Weinstein, “Assessing China’s approach to technological competition with the United States,” The Atlantic Council
(Apr. 24, 2023), https:/ /www.atlanticcouncil.org/content-series/strategic-insights-memos/assessing-chinas-approach-to-
technological-competition-with-the-united-states; Graham Allison et al., “The Great Tech Rivalry: China vs. the U.S.,” Belfer
Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School (2021), https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/
files/GreatTechRivalry_ChinavsUS_211207.pdf
22 National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine, “Protecting U.S. Technological Advantage” (2022), https:/ /
nap.nationalacademies.org/catalog/26647/protecting-us-technological-advantage
23 Semiconductor Industry Association, 2022 SIA Factbook, https:/ /www.semiconductors.org/wp-content/
uploads/2022/05/SIA-2022-Factbook_May-2022.pdf
24 American Academy of Arts & Sciences, “The perils of complacency: America at a tipping point in science and
engineering” (2020), https:/ /www.amacad.org/sites/default/files/publication/downloads/Perils-of-Complacency_Report-
Brief_4.pdf; Remco Zweetsloot et al., “China is Fast Outpacing U.S. STEM PhD Growth,” Center for Security and Emerging
Technology (Aug. 2021), https:/ /cset.georgetown.edu/publication/china-is-fast-outpacing-u-s-stem-phd-growth; National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, “Protecting U.S. Technological Advantage” (2022), https:/ /nap.
nationalacademies.org/catalog/26647/protecting-us-technological-advantage
25 James McGregor, “China’s Drive for ‘Indigenous Innovation’: A Web of Industrial Policies,” U.S. Chamber of Commerce
(2010), https:/ /www.uschamber.com/assets/archived/images/documents/files/100728chinareport_0_0.pdf; Jeroen
Groenewegen-Lau & Michael Laha, “Controlling the Innovation Chain: China’s strategy to become a science & technology
superpower,” Mercator Institute for China Studies (Feb. 2, 2023), https:/ /merics.org/sites/default/files/2023-02/merics-
report-controlling-the-innovation-chain.pdf; Karen Sutter, “‘Made in China 2025’ Industrial Policies: Issues for Congress,”
Congressional Research Service (Mar. 10, 2023), https:/ /sgp.fas.org/crs/row/IF10964.pdf
26 William B. Bonvillian, Industrial Innovation Policy in the United States, Annals of Science and Technology Policy, v. 6, n.
4: 318-352, 373-392 (Nov. 2022), https:/ /www.researchgate.net/publication/365741066_Industrial_Innovation_Policy_in_
the_United_States;
27 Testimony of Logan Wright, Partner and Director of China Markets Research, Rhodium Group, US-China Economic
Security and Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Financial and Economic Challenges (Aug. 21, 2023), https:/ /www.
uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2023-08/Logan_Wright_Testimony.pdf
28 See Michael Lind, How to Transform US Politics—and How Not To, Compact Magazine (Mar. 14, 2023), https:/ /www.
compactmag.com/article/how-to-transform-us-politics-and-how-not-to; Julius Krein, America after neoliberalism, The New
Statesman (Dec. 23, 2023), https:/ /www.newstatesman.com/the-weekend-essay/2023/12/america-after-neoliberalism
29 The Obama Administration paid close attention to China – particularly during President Obama’s second term – and
treated China as a worthy competitor whose actions would shape U.S. policy for the next generation. However, this
assessment primarily impacted the strategies of the Defense and State Departments (rather than economic policies) and,
with some notable exceptions, did not form a core part of President Obama’s public communications strategy.
30 Eliana Johnson, A Big Policy Fight Is Brewing on the Right. And It’s Not All About Trump., Politico (Aug. 5, 2021), https:/ /
www.politico.com/news/magazine/2021/08/05/republican-economic-populism-502412

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
22
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
31 Greg Ip, Bidenomics and Its Contradictions, Wall Street Journal (June 8, 2023), https:/ /www.wsj.com/articles/
bidenomics-and-its-contradictions-4d76ee7d; Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan at the Brookings
Institution, “The Biden administration’s international economic agenda: A conversation with National Security Advisor Jake
Sullivan” (Apr. 27, 2023), https:/ /www.brookings.edu/events/the-biden-administrations-international-economic-agenda-a-
conversation-with-national-security-advisor-jake-sullivan; Office of the United States Trade Representative, “Ambassador
Katherine Tai›s Remarks at the National Press Club on Supply Chain Resilience” (June 15, 2023), https:/ /ustr.gov/about-us/
policy-offices/press-office/speeches-and-remarks/2023/june/ambassador-katherine-tais-remarks-national-press-club-
supply-chain-resilience; The White House, “Remarks by Heather Boushey on How President Biden’s Invest in America
Agenda has Laid the Foundation for Decades of Strong, Stable, and Sustained, Equitable Growth” (May 31, 2023), https:/ /
www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2023/05/31/remarks-by-heather-boushey-on-how-president-
bidens-invest-in-america-agenda-has-laid-the-foundation-for-decades-of-strong-stable-and-sustained-equitable-growth
32 U.S. Senate, Roll Call Vote 271, 117th Congress, Second Session (July 27, 2022), https:/ /www.senate.gov/legislative/LIS/
roll_call_votes/vote1172/vote_117_2_00271.htm
33 Office of the Clerk, U.S. House of Representatives, Roll Call Vote 404, 117th Congress, Second Session (July 28, 2022),
https:/ /clerk.house.gov/Votes/2022404. Securing twenty-four Republican votes for the CHIPS and Science Act was
no small accomplishment given the timing of the vote, which took place the day after Senate Majority Leader Charles
Schumer and Senator Joe Manchin (D-WV) announced a separate agreement on a proposal that would become the
Inflation Reduction Act, shocking Republicans who believed that a Democratic-only clean-energy bill was no longer on the
table. See Mychael Schnell & Emily Brooks, Whip-lash: House GOP moves to oppose CHIPS-Plus bill in rebuke to Manchin
deal, The Hill (July 27, 2022), https:/ /thehill.com/homenews/house/3577342-whip-lash-house-gop-moves-to-oppose-
chips-plus-bill-in-rebuke-to-manchin-deal
34 Adam Posen, America’s Zero-Sum Economics Doesn’t Add Up, Foreign Policy (Mar. 24, 2023), https:/ /foreignpolicy.
com/2023/03/24/economy-trade-united-states-china-industry-manufacturing-supply-chains-biden; Greg Ip, This Part
of Bidenomics Needs More Economics, Wall Street Journal (July 12, 2023), https:/ /www.wsj.com/articles/this-part-of-
bidenomics-needs-more-economics-2cea1641; John Abbott, “US CHIPS Act is only a small step toward a very big problem,”
S&P Global Market Intelligence (Aug. 22, 2022), https:/ /www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/blog/
us-chips-act-is-only-a-small-step-toward-a-very-big-problem; Erika York, “Careful What You Wish For: CHIPS Subsidies
Require ‘Excess Profits’ Sharing,” Tax Foundation (Mar. 2, 2023), https:/ /taxfoundation.org/blog/biden-semiconductor-
chips-act-subsidies
35 Réka Juhász, Nathan Lane & Dani Rodrik, “The New Economics of Industrial Policy,” HKS Working Paper (Aug. 2023),
https:/ /papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4542861
36 See id. (“There are few economic policies that generate more kneejerk opposition from economists than
industrial policy.”).
37 Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo, whose agency was tasked with disbursing the CHIPS Act funds, has consistently
cited national security concerns as the reason for these investments, arguing that “this is not the first in a ‘wave’ of
industrial policies. Trade with China is good and must continue, but we must also protect the security of the United States.”
Remarks by Secretary Gina Raimondo, “A Conversation with US Commerce Secretary Gina M. Raimondo and Sen. Todd
Young (R-IN) on the Future of US Semiconductor Policy,” American Enterprise Institute (July 26, 2023), https:/ /www.aei.
org/events/a-conversation-with-us-commerce-secretary-gina-m-raimondo-on-the-future-of-us-semiconductor-policy
38 See, e.g., The White House, “Statement from National Economic Advisor Lael Brainard on Today’s CHIPS & Science Act
Announcement” (Jan. 4, 2024), https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2024/01/04/statement-
from-national-economic-advisor-lael-brainard-on-todays-chips-science-act-announcement (noting how CHIPS Act
investments are “creating good jobs”); House Democratic Leader Hakeem Jeffries (D-NY), Floor Remarks in support of
the Inflation Reduction Act (Aug. 22, 2022), https:/ /www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CREC-2022-08-12/pdf/CREC-2022-08-
12.pdf (“We passed the CHIPS and Science Act that will bring back domestic manufacturing jobs to the United States of
America.”).
39 See, e.g., Dani Rodrik, Washington’s New Narrative for the Global Economy, Project Syndicate (May 9, 2023) https:/ /
www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/biden-administration-international-economic-agenda-must-not-undermine-
global-economy-by-dani-rodrik-2023-05; Julius Krein, What Should Be the Goal of U.S. Industrial Strategy?, The Liberal
Patriot (Nov. 13, 2023), https:/ /www.liberalpatriot.com/p/what-should-be-the-goal-of-us-industrial; (U.S. Senator) Chris
Murphy, The Wreckage of Neoliberalism, The Atlantic (Oct. 25, 2022), https:/ /www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2022/10/
democrats-should-reject-neoliberalism/671850
40 Both the legislative text of the CHIPS and Science Act and the Commerce Department’s implementation documents
refer euphemistically to “countries of concern” – a group of geopolitical adversaries that includes Russia, Iran, and North
Korea – even though many of the restrictions are aimed at countering China in particular. See, e.g., Press Release, U.S.
Department of Commerce, “Commerce Department Outlines Proposed National Security Guardrails for CHIPS for America
Incentives Program,” (Mar. 21, 2023), https:/ /www.commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2023/03/commerce-department-
outlines-proposed-national-security-guardrails. According to Senator Chris Coons (D-DE), “The commercial and military
distinction is eroded in China’s case.” David E. Sanger et al., Senate Poised to Pass Huge Industrial Policy Bill to Counter
China, New York Times (June 7, 2021) (quoting Senator Coons), https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2021/06/07/us/politics/senate-
china-semiconductors.html

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
23
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
41 Sabrina Siddiqui & Yuka Yahashi, No ‘Social Policy’ in Chips Act Rules, Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo Says, Wall
Street Journal (Mar. 28, 2023), https:/ /www.wsj.com/articles/no-social-policy-in-chips-act-rules-commerce-secretary-gina-
raimondo-says-616f156e (discussing the requirements that U.S. companies must meet in order to be eligible for subsidies
under the CHIPS and Science Act)
42 Suzanne Berger, Back Down to Earth, Boston Review (Sept. 15, 2021), https:/ /www.bostonreview.net/forum_response/
back-down-to-earth
43 Press Release, Senator John Cornyn, “Cornyn Warns Against Partisan CHIPS Implementation” (Mar. 16, 2023), https:/ /
www.cornyn.senate.gov/news/cornyn-warns-against-partisan-chips-implementation
44 According to several congressional staffers, difficulties in harmonizing House Democrats’ insistence that social policy
provisions be included with Senate Republicans’ insistence that they be excluded nearly led to the entire “Science”
component of the bill being eliminated in order to salvage the component funding the CHIPS Act.
45 The final version of the Science parts of the bill included the establishment of a new NSF Directorate for Technology,
Innovation and Partnerships focused on ten critical technologies and five “national, societal, and economic goals.” Tim
Clancy, “CHIPS and Science Act Enshrines Policy for New NSF Technology Directorate,” American Institute of Physics (Nov.
23, 2022), https:/ /ww2.aip.org/fyi/2022/chips-and-science-act-enshrines-policy-new-nsf-technology-directorate
46 Matt Hourihan et al., “The bold vision of the CHIPS and Science Act isn’t getting the funding it needs,” Brookings
Institution (May 17, 2023), https:/ /www.brookings.edu/articles/the-bold-vision-of-the-chips-and-science-act-isnt-getting-
the-funding-it-needs/; Madeleine Ngo, CHIPS Act Funding for Science and Research Falls Short, New York Times (May 30,
2023), https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2023/05/30/us/politics/chips-act-science-funding.html
47 David Shepardson & Karen Freifeld, Trump administration hits China’s Huawei with one-two punch, Reuters (May 16,
2019), https:/ /www.reuters.com/article/idUSKCN1SL2QX
48 As President Trump stated in a famous 2018 tweet, “trade wars are good, and easy to win.” President Donald J. Trump
[@realDonaldTrump], March 2, 2018, https:/ /twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/969525362580484098
49 Many Republican leaders framed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, which led to substantial reductions in corporate
taxes, as a policy tool to support business development and innovation for global competitiveness. However, the “global
competitiveness” argument was aimed at a range of European and East Asian competitors; aggressive geopolitical
competition with China would not come into focus until later in the Trump presidency. Meanwhile, the Trump
Administration’s frequent invocation of “Infrastructure Week” attracted frequent criticism because the Administration’s
messaging on the importance of improving the nation’s infrastructure was never coupled with a sustained attempt to enact
major legislation on the issue. See Katie Rogers, How ‘Infrastructure Week’ Became a Long-Running Joke, New York Times
(May 22, 2019), https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2019/05/22/us/politics/trump-infrastructure-week.html
50 Gardiner Harris, Trump Has Only Sticks, No Carrots, New York Times (Nov. 9, 2018) https:/ /www.nytimes.
com/2018/11/09/sunday-review/trump-sanctions-iran-foreign-policy.html
51 Alexandra Alper, Explainer: Biden combines billions in chipmaking grants with China curbs to keep US ahead, Reuters
(Oct. 17, 2023), https:/ /www.reuters.com/technology/bidens-latest-china-curbs-are-part-plan-shift-chip-production-
stateside-2023-10-17; Gavin Bade, ‘A sea change’: Biden reverses decades of Chinese trade policy, Politico (Dec. 26, 2022),
https:/ /www.politico.com/news/2022/12/26/china-trade-tech-00072232;
52 The White House, “Remarks by President Biden at Signing of H.R. 4346, ‘The CHIPS and Science Act of 2022,’” (Aug.
9, 2022), https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/08/09/remarks-by-president-biden-at-
signing-of-h-r-4346-the-chips-and-science-act-of-2022
53 The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) remains better known by its informal title, the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law. Insofar as transportation infrastructure and utilities are classic “public goods” that governments are
expected to fund or subsidize, major components of the IIJA are not considered industrial policy, strictly speaking. Other
components of the IIJA – such as its expansive investments in clean energy demonstration projects and subsidies for
affordable broadband internet access, blur the line between infrastructure and industrial policy. More importantly, the
political realignment that made space for a reinvigorated federal role in laying the groundwork for economic activity was
the necessary condition for making all three of these laws possible.
54 United States Trade Representative, “Ambassador Katherine Tai’s Remarks at the National Press Club on Supply Chain
Resilience” (June 15, 2023), https:/ /ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/speeches-and-remarks/2023/june/
ambassador-katherine-tais-remarks-national-press-club-supply-chain-resilience
55 Press Release, Department of the Treasury, “Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen on the U.S. -
China Economic Relationship at Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies” (Apr. 20, 2023), https:/ /
home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1425; David Shepardson, Raimondo: crucial US, China have stable economic
relationship, Reuters (Aug. 28, 2023) https:/ /www.reuters.com/markets/raimondo-crucial-us-china-have-stable-economic-
relationship-2023-08-28; Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan at the Brookings Institution, “The Biden
administration’s international economic agenda: A conversation with National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan” (Apr. 27,
2023), https:/ /www.brookings.edu/events/the-biden-administrations-international-economic-agenda-a-conversation-with-
national-security-advisor-jake-sullivan

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
24
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
56 Many observers view the Administration’s preferred rhetoric as an exercise in semantics, insofar as the protective trade
measures implemented by the Administration are hawkish in substance while the nuanced distinctions between terms
used to describe the U.S.-China relationship are primarily symbolic. Nevertheless, the Biden administration generally avoids
antagonizing China through rhetoric alone, in contrast to President Trump, who often lambasted China in colorful terms
while often praising Chinese President Xi Jinping for his strength of leadership.
57 The establishment of a science and technology policy strategy centered on basic research (and not further stages of
technology development) has been credited to Vannevar Bush, Science Advisor to President Roosevelt. In his famous 1945
report titled Science, The Endless Frontier, Bush laid out a model of innovation that followed a linear trajectory whereby
the government funds basic research and the results are taken up by industry and further developed into technology
products that may eventually reach the market. Bush’s report inspired the title of Senators Schumer and Young’s Endless
Frontier Act that served as the foundation for the “Science” component of the CHIPS and Science Act. Vannevar Bush,
“Science, the Endless Frontier: A Report to the President by Vannevar Bush, Director of the Office of Scientific Research
and Development” (1945), https:/ /www.nsf.gov/about/history/EndlessFrontier_w.pdf; William Bonvillian, Encompassing
the Innovation Panoply, Issues in Science and Technology v. 38, n. 2: 37-43 (Winter 2022), https:/ /issues.org/us-industrial-
policy-innovation-bonvillian
58 The private sector systematically under-invests in curiosity-driven research due to long timelines, high costs, uncertain
outcomes, and difficulty in capturing benefits. Public investments are justified by these private underinvestments and the
large positive externalities created by scientific research.
59 Mitch Ambrose, “NSF Doubles Budget of Its New Technology Directorate,” American Physical Society News (May 11,
2023), https:/ /www.aps.org/publications/apsnews/202306/nsf-budget.cfm
60 Philip E. Auerswald & Lewis M. Branscomb, Valleys of death and Darwinian seas: Financing the invention to innovation
transition in the United States, The Journal of Technology Transfer, v. 28: 227-239 (2003); Donald E. Stokes, Pasteur’s
Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological Innovation, Brookings Institution Press (2011).
61 Note that this mission statement includes references to national security, economic competitiveness, and societal
missions, reflecting a political compromise regarding the diverse goals attached to technology leadership, as discussed
earlier; U.S. National Science Foundation, “Technology, Innovation and Partnerships: A new directorate at the U.S. National
Science Foundation,” https:/ /new.nsf.gov/tip/latest (accessed January 24, 2024).
62 Justin Badlam et al., “The CHIPS and Science Act: Here’s what’s in it,” McKinsey & Co. (Oct. 4, 2022), https:/ /www.
mckinsey.com/industries/public-sector/our-insights/the-chips-and-science-act-heres-whats-in-it; https:/ /www.spglobal.
com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/blog/us-chips-act-is-only-a-small-step-toward-a-very-big-problem
63 William B. Bonvillian, Industrial Innovation Policy in the United States, Annals of Science and Technology Policy, v. 6, n.
4: 318-352, 373-392 (Nov. 2022), https:/ /www.researchgate.net/publication/365741066_Industrial_Innovation_Policy_in_
the_United_States; David Adler and William B. Bonvillian, America’s Advanced Manufacturing Problem—and How to Fix It,
American Affairs, v. 7, n. 3 (Fall 2023), https:/ /americanaffairsjournal.org/issue/fall-2023
64 Robert Casanova, “The CHIPS Act Has Already Sparked $200 Billion in Private Investments for U.S. Semiconductor
Production,” Semiconductor Industry Association (Dec. 14, 2022), https:/ /www.semiconductors.org/the-chips-act-has-
already-sparked-200-billion-in-private-investments-for-u-s-semiconductor-production
65 U.S. Department of the Treasury, FiscalData, “What is the national deficit?” (accessed January 10, 2024), https:/ /
fiscaldata.treasury.gov/americas-finance-guide/national-deficit
66 See John Halpin, “What’s the Point? Americans Support the CHIPS and Science Act,” Center for American Progress
Action Fund (Aug. 19, 2022), https:/ /www.americanprogressaction.org/article/whats-the-point-americans-support-the-
chips-and-science-act (“Hopefully, this legislation can become a model for bipartisan federal efforts to improve America’s
economy and create good jobs for workers and their families.”); Congressman Ro Khanna, who led the Endless Frontier Act
in the House, has proposed: “Let’s have a CHIPS act for aluminum, for steel, for paper, for microelectronics, for advanced
auto parts and for climate technologies.” Press Release, Office of Congressman Ro Khanna (D-CA), “Khanna delivers
remarks on rebalancing China with a new economic patriotism” (Apr. 24, 2023), https:/ /khanna.house.gov/media/press-
releases/khanna-delivers-remarks-rebalancing-china-new-economic-patriotism
67 Gerard DiPippo et al., “Red Ink: Estimating Chinese Industrial Policy Spending in Comparative Perspective,” Center for
Strategic and International Studies (May 23, 2022), https:/ /www.csis.org/analysis/red-ink-estimating-chinese-industrial-
policy-spending-comparative-perspective
68 Matt Hourihan, “CHIPS and Science: FY24 Research Appropriations Short by Over $7 Billion,” Federation of American
Scientists (Oct. 3, 2023), https:/ /fas.org/publication/fy24-chips-short-7-billion/
69 See, e.g., Laura Colton, President, The Science Coalition, Commentary, To Win in the 21st Century, the 118th Congress
Must Act on Science, The Well News (Mar. 21, 2023), https:/ /www.thewellnews.com/opinions/to-win-in-the-21st-century-
the-118th-congress-must-act-on-science (“Leaders in both the House and Senate must work together this year to finalize
an appropriations package that allocates new federal money to keep American science at the forefront. The next century
of discovery depends on it.”); Science & Technology Action Committee, “STAC’s Statement on the One Year Anniversary
of the CHIPS and Science Act,” (Aug. 9, 2023) (“Now, both sides of the aisle must continue that great collaboration to
unleash the full potential of the law they so diligently worked on to pass.”), https:/ /sciencetechaction.org/news-item/stacs-
statement-on-the-one-year-anniversary-of-the-chips-and-science-act/

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
25
Unraveling the Political Dynamics Shaping the U.S. Strategy for Technology Leadership
70 David Adler & William B. Bonvillian, America’s Advanced Manufacturing Problem—and How to Fix It, American Affairs, v.
7, n. 3 (Fall 2023), https:/ /americanaffairsjournal.org/issue/fall-2023
71 David Adler, Inside Operation Warp Speed: A New Model for Industrial Policy, American Affairs v. 5, n. 2 (Summer 2021),
https:/ /americanaffairsjournal.org/2021/05/inside-operation-warp-speed-a-new-model-for-industrial-policy/
72 Department of Energy, Loan Programs Office, “Inflation Reduction Act of 2022,” https:/ /www.energy.gov/lpo/inflation-
reduction-act-2022
73 Press Release, The White House, “The Biden-Harris Plan to Revitalize American Manufacturing and Secure Critical
Supply Chains in 2022” (Feb. 24, 2022), https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/02/24/the-
biden-harris-plan-to-revitalize-american-manufacturing-and-secure-critical-supply-chains-in-2022
74 C. Todd Lopez, New Defense Office Connects Next-Gen Tech Developers With Much-Needed Capital, U.S. Department of
Defense, DOD News (Dec. 1, 2022), https:/ /www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/Article/3233894/new-defense-
office-connects-next-gen-tech-developers-with-much-needed-capital/
75 Chris Teale, Regardless of Political Leaning, at Least 3 in 5 Voters Back Government Help for U.S. Chipmaking,
Morning Consult (Mar. 20, 2022), https:/ /pro.morningconsult.com/instant-intel/domestic-chipmaking-subsidies-survey;
Research!America, “Survey Shows Strong Bipartisan Support for Investing in Research” (Feb. 2, 2023), https:/ /www.
researchamerica.org/press-releases-statements/survey-shows-strong-bipartisan-support-for-investing-in-research/
76 As a result, many lawmakers are likely to support industrial policy efforts only when their party holds power. This is
especially the case for congressional Republicans, many of whom are loath to provide votes for any additional investments
in domestic production capacity that President Biden can claim as accomplishments in his re-election campaign.
77 Yuka Hayashi, Trump Is Primed for a Trade War in a Second Term, Calling for ‘Eye-for-Eye’ Tariffs, Wall Street
Journal(Dec. 26, 2023), https:/ /www.wsj.com/politics/elections/trump-is-primed-for-a-trade-war-in-a-second-term-
calling-for-eye-for-eye-tariffs-aff5bec5?mod=hp_lead_pos6; Rintaro Tobita, Trump will raise China tariffs if he wins White
House: ex-USTR, Nikkei Asia (Aug. 6, 2023), https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/Politics/International-relations/US-China-tensions/
Trump-will-raise-China-tariffs-if-he-wins-White-House-ex-USTR; Donald J. Trump for President 2024, “President Trump
Will Stop China From Owning America,” https:/ /www.donaldjtrump.com/agenda47/president-trump-will-stop-china-from-
owning-america

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
www.belfercenter.org
Copyright 2024, President and Fellows of Harvard College
Printed in the United States of America
