
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
TECHNOLOGY AND PUBLIC PURPOSE PROJECT
TECHNOLOGY PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS
Augmented and Virtual
Reality for the Metaverse

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
April 2023
AUTHORS
Jacob Boyd (Harvard Kennedy School / Northwestern Kellogg)
Sandra Lam (MIT Sloan)
Stephan Florian Rihs, PhD (Harvard Kennedy School / UPenn
Wharton)
Li Sun (MIT Sloan)
Ariel Higuchi, Tech Primers Project Lead (Harvard Kennedy School)
Amritha Jayanti (Harvard Kennedy School)
REVIEWERS
Micaela Mantegna (Berkman Klein Center, Harvard)
Tibor Merey (Boston Consulting Group)
Greg Pryor (Reed Smith)
John Yang (United Talent Agency, former Magic Leap)
FACULTY LEADS
Ash Carter, Faculty Director, Technology and Public Purpose
Project, in memoriam
Francis J. Doyle III, Dean, Harvard John A. Paulson School of
Engineering and Applied Sciences
Statements and views expressed in this publication are solely those of the authors and
do not imply endorsement by the Reviewers and their respective organizations, Harvard
University, Harvard Kennedy School, the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs,
or Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences.
The Technology Primer Series was designed to provide a brief overview of each technology and related policy considerations. These
papers are not meant to be exhaustive.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Technology and Public Purpose Project
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard Kennedy School
79 John F. Kennedy Street, Cambridge, MA 02138
www.belfercenter.org/TAPP
Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering
and Applied Sciences
29 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138
www.seas.harvard.edu
The Technology and Public Purpose (TAPP) Project would like to thank Sofía Jarrín for
constructive copyediting of the factsheet.
Copyright 2023, Presidents and Fellows of Harvard College
Printed in the United States of America

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Contents
Executive Summary 1
PART 1: Technology 2
What Is the Metaverse? 2
What Isn’t the Metaverse? 3
What Is AR and VR? 4
How Are AR and VR Different? 4
How Might AR and VR Be Integrated or Coexist? 5
Components of AR/VR for the Metaverse 6
PART 2: Applications and Market Overview 7
Applications & Use Cases 8
Barriers and Limitations 11
Market Development 13
PART 3: Current Governance and Regulation 14
Navigating Law in a Virtual World 14
U.S. Regulation and Governance 15
Proposed Federal and State Legislation 16
International Regulation and Governance 17
Self-Regulation and Governance 18
PART 4: Public Purpose Considerations 21
Selected Readings and Additional Resources 27
About the Technology and Public Purpose (TAPP) Project 28

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 1
Executive Summary
Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR) refer to computer-generated content that integrates
into the real world (in the case of AR) or is entirely self-contained (in the case of VR). These technologies,
typically accessed through smartphones and headset devices, allow users to access a shared virtual
environment, often referred to as a metaverse.
It has been three decades since the term “metaverse” was coined, but a convergence of market factors and a
level of sophistication of AR and VR technologies have created a new emphasis on the metaverse. In 2021,
Facebook invested $10 billion in its Reality Labs division and renamed itself Meta Platforms, Inc.1 Microsoft
made a $70 billion dollar bet in 2022 on the metaverse in its acquisition of gaming studio Activision
Blizzard.2 Advancements in AR and VR have been made across several industries with notable use cases in
gaming and entertainment, education and training, and virtual work.
While investments such as these have created enormous hype, significant technical limitations exist such
as computing power, user discomfort, and interoperability challenges. Non technical barriers, including
high hardware costs and supply shortages, have also created problems. Further, most of these platforms are
being developed in isolation. To achieve the metaverse that many evangelists for this technology envision,
significant coordination would need to occur between firms.
Governments have acknowledged the important role AR and VR will have in society, but regulation and
governance structures are still underdeveloped. Many public purpose concerns related to current internet
issues such as user privacy, intellectual property protection, and market power apply to AR/VR platforms
and the metaverse. However, virtual experiences also pose new regulatory conundrums that will need to
be addressed. While the European Union and China have taken some steps toward creating a regulatory
framework for metaverse-related internet policy issues, the United States will need to make significant
progress toward the many open legal questions that exist.
1 Naomi Nix et al., “Facebook Changes Name to Meta in Embrace of Virtual Reality,” Bloomberg News, October 28, 2021, https:/ /www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-10-28/facebook-changes-name-to-meta-in-embrace-of-virtual-reality#xj4y7vzkg.
2 Karen Weise et al., “Microsoft will buy Activision Blizzard, betting $70 billion on the future of games.,” The New York Times, January 18, 2022,
https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2022/01/18/business/microsoft-activision-blizzard.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 2
PART 1: The Technology
What Is the Metaverse?
For the purposes of this primer, a metaverse can be defined as a simulated digital environment or virtual
world that, in many instances, leverages augmented reality (“ AR”) and virtual reality (“VR”) to create
spaces for richer user experience and interaction. The definition of metaverse could overlap with that of
“virtual world” and “virtual space, ” terms which are used to describe computer-simulated environments in
which multiple users interact and communicate with each other.3
The goal of a metaverse is to create a substantially more immersive, engaging, and closer-to-life virtual
experience than was possible with previous technologies. Enthusiasts see the metaverse as the next
generation of the internet: a digital, interconnected reality seamlessly woven into our physical world.
However, AR and VR are not necessary to access a metaverse. Today most users access metaverses
using 2-D screens on personal computers and mobile phones. As AR and VR mature, the share of 3-D
metaverse experiences is expected to increase.
Contrary to what one might expect, given the recent hype around this technology and potential future
applications, metaverse-related applications have been around since the 1980s and 1990s (e.g., VR arcade
video games)4 and 2000s (e.g., virtual worlds such as Second Life).5
It is important to note that the metaverse is a concept. The metaverse is “created/enabled” through a
combination of various technologies, as shown in figure 1.With that in mind, various competing visions
and interpretations of the term metaverse do exist. The number of experiences and applications that can
be labeled as the metaverse is almost endless. It is also important to note that the current landscape of
virtual worlds is highly fragmented. No clear frontrunner has emerged yet, and their interoperability has
not been established. Therefore, it seems more accurate to speak of metaverses or competing visions and
definitions of new types of virtual experiences, rather than to speak of the metaverse as a unitary concept
or definition. The term metaverse is also evolving based on emerging applications and technologies.
3 Richard A. Bartle, Designing Virtual Worlds (Indianapolis, IN: New Riders, 2003).
4 Benj Edwards, “The Wacky World of VR in the 80s and 90s,” PC Magazine, April 17, 2018, https:/ /www.pcmag.com/news/
the-wacky-world-of-vr-in-the-80s-and-90s.
5 “Linden Lab announces name of new online world ‘Second LifeTM’ and availability of beta program,” Linden Lab, October 30, 2002, https:/ /
www.lindenlab.com/releases/linden-lab-announces-name-of-new-online-world-39-second-life-39-and-availability-of-beta-program.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 3
Figure 1. Reprinted from Matthew Ball, “Framework for the Metaverse,” MatthewBall.Vc, June 29, 2021,
https:/ /www.matthewball.vc/all/forwardtothemetaverseprimer
What Isn’t the Metaverse?
It is also important to clarify some common misconceptions about the metaverse:6
1. Metaverse is not synonymous with VR: Some have described the metaverse as the equivalent of
VR, but while VR is indeed a way to experience the metaverse, many people participate without VR
devices. VR devices are not the metaverse, just like smartphones are not the mobile internet.
2. A metaverse is not just for gaming: There are video games that exist in the metaverse, but that
is not the metaverse itself. The metaverse experience has expanded beyond video games to daily
interactions such as learning, working, and more.
3. The metaverse is not a technology itself: While the metaverse is an environment enabled by
technology, it is not a technology itself. It is also not a single platform or a privately-owned entity.
There are multiple metaverses operated by several companies, each with its own vision of what the
metaverse could be.7
6 Ward de Kruiff, “What is the Metaverse & What is it Not?,” epam, June 13, 2022, https:/ /www.epam.com/insights/blogs/
what-is-the-metaverse-and-what-is-it-not.
7 Stephen Shankland, “The Metaverse Will Be a Multi-Platform Mess,” CNET, March 26, 2022, https:/ /www.cnet.com/tech/computing/features/
here-comes-the-multi-metaverse-mess/.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 4
What Is AR and VR?
AR and VR are important technology enablers of the metaverse and are the core focus of this technology
primer. The advancement of AR and VR technologies has led to the increasing popularity of the
metaverse. Sometimes, the definitions of AR and VR can vary depending on the use case.
Augmented reality (AR) uses software and hardware technologies to enhance real-world experiences by
overlaying digital elements (e.g., visual, sound, or other sensory features) onto real-world objects. Users
perceive a virtual layer of data while simultaneously perceiving the real physical environment.
Virtual reality (VR) is a computer-generated simulation that alters users’ perception of reality and allows
them to interact with a three-dimensional environment. VR fully immerses a user in an imagined or
replicated world (like video games, movies, or a flight simulation) or simulates presence in the real world
(like watching a sporting event live).
How Are AR and VR Different?
The key difference between AR and VR is that AR incorporates your real surroundings, whereas VR
is made up entirely of virtual information. VR creates a more immersive experience than AR in which
the user is separated from the baseline sensual and perceptual experience of physical reality. Instead, it
exposes users to an entirely simulated environment and stimuli (e.g., visual, sound, tactile inputs, and
feedback).The use cases and required technology of AR and VR are also different. Table 1 contains simple
use cases to illustrate the differences between AR and VR.
Table 1. AR and VR Use Cases
Use Case AR VR
User interacts with a ball as a
digital element.
User opens an AR mobile application on the
smartphone. The application augments reality
by adding the presence of the ball in the real
surroundings. The user can place the ball
augmented in different locations by moving
the smartphone camera as it interacts with
real objects. Figure 2.8
User puts on a headset and sees an entirely
virtual environment where the ball is presented
as an object. The user might use their motion,
detected by sensors, to move, throw, kick, and
resize the ball within the virtual environment.
Figure 3.9
8 Adapted from Milan Virijevic, Getty Images Signature, Canva.com.
9 Adapted from Janet Smith, “VR Headsets Give Viewers a Salmon’s Underwater Eye View as UNINTERRUPTED Moves to Lonsdale Quay, July 14
to 24,” Stir, July 11, 2021, https:/ /www.createastir.ca/articles/uniinterrupted-lonsdale.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 5
How Might AR and VR Be Integrated or Coexist?
Mixed reality (MR), or hybrid reality, is a term sometimes used to refer to immersive AR in which real
and virtual worlds merge to produce new environments and visualizations where physical and digital
objects coexist and interact in real time. Whereas AR often layers computer-generated images over the
user’s view of the physical world and VR provides total immersion into a virtual world, MR combines
both worlds—virtual and physical objects coexist equally. One example is Microsoft HoloLens, a pair
of MR smart glasses developed and manufactured by Microsoft that allows users to experience 3D
holographic images that are designed to blend with the environment.
Extended reality (XR) is an umbrella term that covers all technologies, including AR, VR, and MR.
Some do not accept the distinction between AR and VR anymore, and many believe that three to five
years from now these categories will become blurry and converge, where these distinctions will no longer
apply.10 Figure 4 below represents how AR, MR, and VR overlap under the XR umbrella term.
Figure 4. Reprinted from Laila Tremosa, Beyond AR vs. VR: What is the Difference between AR vs. MR vs. VR vs.
XR?, Interaction Design Foundation, January 26, 2022, https:/ /www.interaction-design.org/literature/
article/beyond-ar-vs-vr-what-is-the-difference-between-ar-vs-mr-vs-vr-vs-xr.
10 KPMG, “The Future of the Metaverse and Extended Reality,” April 2022, https:/ /kpmg.com/xx/en/home/insights/2022/04/the-future-of-
the-metaverse.html; Emory Craig, “XR Glasses Coming in Five Years According to Qualcomm,” Digital Bodies, June 3, 2020, https:/ /www.
digitalbodies.net/xr-glasses-coming-in-five-years-according-to-qualcomm/.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 6
Components of AR/VR for the Metaverse
One helpful approach to a taxonomy of AR/VR in the metaverse is thinking about the infrastructure
required for access to these experiences.
Hardware: AR/VR can be accessed via traditional mainstream devices, such as smartphones, laptop
computers, tablets, or gaming consoles. More sophisticated applications require the user to obtain an AR/
VR set that typically consists of glasses or a headset, handheld controllers, or other sensors and input
mechanisms that can enable a more immersive experience. These consumer hardware devices rely on
strong computational central processing (CPU) and graphics processing units (GPU) and sensors.
As the number of AR and VR users climbs, mobile AR, which leverages smartphone cameras and
processing power to superimpose information on what the phone is seeing, helps bridge the transition.
More than half of the six billion smartphones in use today are sufficiently powerful to enable mobile AR.11
Example of an AR headset
Figure 5. Reprinted from Sanket Prabhu, “What Is Augmented Reality and How Does It Work?,” ARreverie
 Technology (blog), December 18, 2017, http:/ /www.arreverie.com/blogs/how-ar-work/.
Software: AR/VR experiences in the metaverse require programs and code to run on physical hardware.
Much like in the console or mobile space, device manufacturers will likely provide a general framework
for applications or games and third-party developers will need to use the programming language and
tools provided by the manufacturer. In terms of programming language and complexity, there is no
significant deviation from traditional programming (similar languages and graphics engines).
11 Jean-François Bobier et al., The Corporate Hitchhiker’s guide to the Metaverse (Boston: Boston Consulting Group, 2022).

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 7
PART 2: Applications and Market
Overview
As of today, neither consumers nor businesses have widely adopted metaverse applications. While there are
more use cases being discussed, a report by Wunderman Thompson showed that only 38 percent of global
consumers have heard of the term metaverse.12 The average consumer does not own a sophisticated AR/VR
device (only 17.7 percent of the U.S. population is estimated to own a VR headset)13 and does not frequent
a virtual world to work, socialize or play on a daily or even weekly basis. Most experts and observers agree
that the vision of a fully-fledged and seamless virtual experience is still years, perhaps even decades away.
While several new devices expected to launch may accelerate technical advancement, many experts expect
that the actual shift toward a broader adoption of AR/VR technology will realistically take another five
to ten years.14 Therefore, a lot of the current debate and hype about the metaverse should be met with a
healthy dose of skepticism and scrutiny.
Although some major corporations have invested heavily into AR/VR, most companies are still in the
experimentation/pilot phase of exploring AR/VR technology. Applications for AR/VR technology have
developed across several sectors; table 2 below highlights some of the most significant current use cases
and recent examples.
12 Wunderman Thompson, “Wunderman Thompson Launches ‘Into the Metaverse’ - a Metaverse Road Map for Brands,” CISION PR Newswire,
September 16, 2021, https:/ /www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/wunderman-thompson-launches-into-the-metaverse---a-metaverse-road-
map-for-brands-301377977.html.
13 Andrew Kirkcaldy, “How Many People Own VR”, PC Guide, August 19, 2022, https:/ /www.pcguide.com/vr/faq/how-many-people-own-vr/.
14 See Mark Zuckerberg’s comments in Meta Inc.’s Q1 2022 earnings call: “(I)t’s not going to be until those products [Meta’s AR/VR/metaverse
efforts] really hit the market and scale in a meaningful way and this market [the metaverse] ends up being big that this will be a big revenue
or profit contributor to the business. . . . Maybe primarily, this is laying the groundwork for what I expect to be a very exciting 2030s when
this [AR/VR/metaverse] is . . .sort of more established as the primary computing platform at that point.” “Meta Earning Call,” Q1 2022 Results
Conference Call, Meta, Inc., April 27, 2022, https:/ /s21.q4cdn.com/399680738/files/doc_financials/2022/q1/Meta-Q1-2022-Earnings-Call-
Transcript.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 8
Applications & Use Cases
Table 2. AR/VR Current Applications and Use Cases
Industry Overview Examples
Military Simulate battlefield training Microsoft HoloLens
Gaming Allow for 3D in-game experience Oculus Quest (Meta); HTC VIVE
Entertainment Sporting events and concerts VR concert by Imagine Dragons; National
Basketball Association courtside in Oculus
Education Classroom learning Froggipedia
Virtual work/collaboration Virtual meetings Horizon Workrooms (Meta)
Immersive e-commerce VR shopping Audi and Sephora
Healthcare Surgery and psychotherapy Stanford Medicine Neurosurgical Simulation and
Virtual Reality Center by Surgical Theater
Each use case described in Table 2 is outlined in more detail below
Military: The U.S. military is piloting the use of AR/VR technology to train soldiers by simulating
battlefield scenarios and to better equip soldiers with more advanced awareness tools. Example: In
March 2021, Microsoft secured a deal to produce a customized HoloLens headset for the U.S. Army. The
headset is meant to provide enhanced situational awareness that will enable soldiers to fight, rehearse,
and train using a single platform.15 The device uses an Integrated Visual Augmentation System to allow
soldiers to see through smoke and dark environments, use holographic imagery for training, and 3D
terrain maps projected onto their field of vision.16
Gaming: Video games are the most prominent VR use case for consumers, allowing them to experience
video games in 3D, which enhances the in-game user experience. Examples: Many manufacturers of
VR headsets have developed their own games, which are bundled with the purchase of their hardware.
The major players are Oculus (acquired by Meta), Google, HTC VIVE, Microsoft, and Samsung.17
Independent game developers like Unity are also developing 3D games compatible with the VR consoles.
15 Mary Jo Foley, “US Army Postpones Its $22 Billion Microsoft Augmented-reality Headset Deliverables to Late 2022,” ZDNet, October 14, 2021,
https:/ /www.zdnet.com/article/us-army-postpones-to-2022-its-22-billion-microsoft-augmented-reality-headset-contract.
16 Deborah. Bach, “US Army to Use HoloLens Technology in High-tech Headsets for Soldiers,” Microsoft Transform, June 8, 2021, https:/ /news.
microsoft.com/transform/u-s-army-to-use-hololens-technology-in-high-tech-headsets-for-soldier/.
17 Bryan Wirtz, “The World’s Largest Virtual Reality Companies: Meet the Studios Dominating the Industry,” Game Designing, August 25, 2022,
https:/ /www.gamedesigning.org/gaming/virtual-reality-companies/.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 9
Entertainment: VR allows fans to experience entertainment events without the constraint of physically
being there. VR events are becoming more prominent in the entertainment space as the technology
is applied to all forms of entertainment. Examples: The National Basketball Association (NBA) offers
virtual courtside seats on Meta’s Oculus device. The Oculus headset simulates a courtside experience by
allowing NBA fans to experience live in-game immersive views and feel close to the action. Major League
Baseball is also utilizing VR technology to give their fans a 360-degree in-game experience at home. The
National Football League and NASCAR have also been experimenting with VR to provide in-game/
in-race experiences for their fans.
Education: During the COVID-19 pandemic, both schools and employers increasingly turned to online
learning to educate students and the workforce in a virtual environment. AR and VR technology can be
used to enhance the virtual learning experience. Examples: Froggipedia is an AR mobile device app that
teaches students about the anatomical details of a frog. Instead of dissecting a frog in-person, students
can dissect the frog virtually. Another example is the VR Microsoft HoloLens’ HoloTours, which allows
students to virtually explore a new city rather than viewing photos in a textbook. While the Froggipedia
app is a few dollars, the Microsoft HoloLens headset is several thousands of dollars, making it largely
unaffordable for most classrooms.
Figure 6. Reprinted from Elliot Hu-Au, “Microsoft HoloLens’ Holotours: Making History Come Alive,’’
Virtual Reality for Education, October 22, 2016, http:/ /virtualrealityforeducation.com/microsoft-hololens-
holotours-making-history-come-alive/.
Virtual work and collaboration: Participating in virtual meetings using applications such as Zoom or
Microsoft Teams is now commonplace full use of AR/VR technology to engage in is still nascent.18 Much
of the value of the metaverse may ultimately lie in business applications, such as virtual meetings and
training sessions. Example: Meta created an internal VR meeting room called Horizon Workrooms,
allowing work colleagues to collaborate and conduct meetings using avatars.
18 Mark Purdy, “How the Metaverse Could Change Work,” Harvard Business Review, April 05, 2022, https:/ /hbr.org/2022/04/
how-the-metaverse-could-change-work.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 10
Figure 7. Reprinted from “7 Tips for Powering Up Your Sales Enablement Using a Virtual Reality Platform,”
MeetinVR (blog), March 15, 2021, https:/ /www.meetinvr.com/2021/03/15/sales-enablement/.
Immersive e-commerce experience: Using VR headsets shoppers can browse through virtual
showrooms and virtually meet with friends to go shopping as if they were inside a physical store.
Example: VR and AR allow users to virtually “try on” products without the presence of the actual
product. For example, Sephora teamed up with AR company ModiFace to release an app called Sephora
Virtual Artist. After scanning the user’s face, the app applies algorithms based on the user’s facial features
to recommend products accordingly. The app also comes with tutorials and recommendations, where the
user can learn and experiment with different products on their virtual face.
Healthcare applications: In 2021, the global healthcare VR market was valued at $459 million.19 Two
prominent VR use cases include applications to enhance surgery and psychotherapy.
Example 1 - surgery: In 2022, VR helped surgeons simulate the complex operation of separating
congenital twins by allowing surgeons to visualize different scenarios in an operation and collaborate
in real time with surgeons in different countries.20 In 2017, Stanford Medicine announced that it began
using a “new software system that combines imaging from MRI’s, CT scans and angiograms to create a
three-dimensional model that physicians and patients can see and manipulate—just like in a VR game. ”
The VR system, created by Surgical Theater, helps train medical residents, assist surgeons in operations,
and educate patients.21
Example 2 - psychotherapy: VR psychotherapy has been successfully used to treat people with
post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety, phobias, depression, etc. The advantage is that the VR
19 “Virtual Reality (VR) in Healthcare Market Size,” Fortune Business Insight, May 2022, https:/ /www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/
industry-reports/virtual-reality-vr-in-healthcare-market-101679.
20 Shiona McCallum, “Conjoined Twins Separated with the Help of Virtual Reality,” BBC News, August 1, 2022, https:/ /www.bbc.com/news/
technology-62378452.
21 Mandy Erickson, “Virtual Reality System Helps Surgeons, Reassures Patients,” Stanford Medicine, July 11, 2017, https:/ /med.stanford.edu/news/
all-news/2017/07/virtual-reality-system-helps-surgeons-reassures-patients.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 11
environment can be personalized to the patients’ needs.22 For example, in VR exposure therapy, patients
are exposed to safe and controlled virtual environments designed to recreate personalized experiences.
By mimicking the personalized trauma, therapists can gradually treat patients’ symptoms through the
exposures in VR.
Barriers and Limitations
There are several technical and nontechnical limitations in the development of AR, VR, and the
metaverse.
Technical limitations:
• Optical correction/adjustment: AR/VR headset lenses need active optics that rapidly adjust focus.
This causes significant visual fatigue on the user. Researchers are working to improve the field of view
and resolution in near-eye displays to address visual fatigue.
• Computing power: Although gradually improving, AR and VR still require powerful computing
capabilities to render the technology. The high computing power must be processed in a relatively
small device, which comes with some challenges:
• Reaching wide-spread adoption of the metaverse will require massive networking power, both
from fixed (fiber) networks as well as mobile networks.
• To continue to increase the performance of headsets, while at the same time driving down their
size and weight, computing and storage needs to be moved off the headset and be computed and
stored elsewhere (e.g., on another device nearby, on an edge server, or in the cloud).
• Given the immersiveness of the experience, the connection between the headset and the remote
server (latency) tends to be very slow.
• User comfort: Some users experience motion sickness and discomfort with the headsets (e.g., some
headsets can weigh three pounds).
22 Jeremy Sutton, “What is Virtual Reality Therapy? The Future of Psychology,” Positive Psychology, November 4, 2020, https:/ /positivepsychol-
ogy.com/virtual-reality-therapy/.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 12
• Interoperability: Currently users lack the ability to transfer digital goods and information across
different metaverses.23 There are “many different file formats used to structure and store data in
different metaverses. ”24
• Immersiveness: Even the most cutting-edge products, both in the current and upcoming generation,
do not yet provide anywhere near the seamlessness and immersiveness of people engaging with each
other in person.
Nontechnical limitations:
• High cost of hardware: High-end systems are very expensive although the cost of customer-facing
products has decreased significantly.
• Market fragmentation: Multiple competing metaverses with different interfaces, rules, and virtual
environments can create confusing user experiences.
• Supply shortages: The manufacturing shortage of electronic parts, particularly chips, could severely
constrain hardware production.
• High barrier to entry: The limited number of devices currently on the market could reduce
innovation speed.
• Accessibility: Large swaths of the population are likely not to engage with the metaverse due to
accessibility and cultural constraints. They might not be able to purchase the hardware and navigate
the technology, or they may prefer not to engage with the metaverse due to a strong preference for
in-person experiences and a strong aversion to some of the visions currently promoted by metaverse
enthusiasts.
23 The lack of interoperability is not only a technical limitation. In Part 4: Public Purpose Considerations, the authors provide a brief description of
interoperability concerns pertaining to user mobility and the portability and digital assets.
24 A Matthew Ball, “The Metaverse: And How It Will Revolutionize Everything” (New York: Liveright, 2022).

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 13
Market Development
The AR and VR market size was valued at $14.84 billion in 2020 and is projected to reach $454.73 billion
by 2030, representing a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 40.7 percent25 (for comparison, the
Internet of Things market has a CAGR of 26.4 percent).26 Growth of the mobile gaming industry and
increase in internet connectivity act as key drivers of the global AR and VR market. In addition, an
increase in the use of consumer electronic devices is expected to fuel the global augmented and VR
market growth.27
North America dominates the AR and VR market given the growing demand from gaming,
entertainment and media, aerospace and defense, retail, and manufacturing industries. North America is
also the home of major technology players with advanced research capabilities.
By application, the AR and VR market share was dominated by the consumer segment in 2020, which is
expected to remain the dominant segment in upcoming years.28 However, beyond consumer use cases
(e.g., video games), the adoption of AR and VR technology has also been heading toward enterprises.
Innovative companies are experimenting with a wave of new applications for AR and VR, driving the
growth of the overall market.
In a recent study that polled information technology and business leaders 7 percent reported that they
are making significant investments in VR, 15 percent plan to invest in the next three years, 10 percent
reported that they are making considerable investments in AR, and 24 percent are planning to invest in
the next three years.
25 Vikas Gaikwad, “Augmented and Virtual Reality Market,” Allied Market Research, October 2021, https:/ /www.alliedmarketresearch.com/
augmented-and-virtual-reality-market.
26 Fortune Business Insights, “With 26.4% CAGR, Internet of Things (IOT) Market worth USD 2465.26 Billion by 2029,” Global Newswire, August
3, 2022, https:/ /www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2022/08/03/2491076/0/en/With-26-4-CAGR-Internet-of-Things-IoT-Market-Worth-
USD-2465-26-Billion-by-2029.html.
27 Gaikwad, “Augmented and Virtual Reality Market.”
28 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 14
PART 3: Current Governance and
Regulation
While iterations of AR/VR technologies have existed for many years, regulatory and governance
frameworks have struggled to keep pace. As of today, no laws exist that are specific to the metaverse,
although regulation is being designed to control different components of this digital space. However,
some of the existing laws governing the web and technology industry in general are applicable. Several
traditional regulatory concerns around privacy, security, intellectual property, and the market power of
big tech corporations carry over to a metaverse context.
Metaverse governance is a multifaceted challenge with tradeoffs between interoperability, privacy, safety,
and security that will be hard to neatly manage. Existing models may not work in the metaverse, and new
models will have to go through stress testing before they can be enacted at scale.
Currently, few major international organizations or bodies have attempted to tackle the issue of
metaverse regulation. A recent proposal at the 2022 World Economic Forum is one of the major
nonprofit initiatives dedicated to providing frameworks for potential future governance and regulation.
It is likely that any regulatory attempts will take place on a national level (with the exception of the
European Union), across the domains of telecommunications and internet regulation, as well as
competition (antitrust) regulation and enforcement. Both legislative and executive branch actions may be
considered.
Navigating Law in a Virtual World
AR and VR for the metaverse present legal questions for courts, companies, and users. Some are new
takes on classic legal questions that will not require a fundamental rethinking of legal doctrine. However,
AR and VR may raise more fundamental questions about whether these simulated realities are not
“real” in the way we normally use the term. Regulators will need to adapt current frameworks to new
augmented, mixed, or entirely new virtual realities.
As with the internet, metaverse platforms operate across country borders and generally national
laws apply to prosecute offenses. Metaverse platforms also have their own policies and procedures to
regulate from inappropriate speech to how data can be accessed, which will be influenced by domestic
laws. Governments in several countries are in the process of implementing laws that will better protect
children in the metaverse.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 15
Laws in the metaverse will initially draw upon the laws of the countries in which the relevant platforms
operate, in a similar way that social media platforms or search engines do so today. However, the
mainstream internet platforms of today are much more limited in scope than metaverse platforms.
In fully immersive digital worlds, it is conceivable that metaverse platforms will self-regulate, that is,
implement internal compliance policies and procedures (i.e., private laws.) Virtual world laws may
interact and overlap with national and international laws in a much broader array of areas than internet
platforms have, creating discrepancies and novel legal questions.
If a global audience gravitates toward one, or even just a few metaverse platforms, a single platform
and its privacy laws may have more influence than even large nation-state governments. For example,
Facebook had approximately 2.91 billion monthly active users in the fourth quarter of 2021, dwarfing the
population of any nation-state. If a metaverse platform reaches a similar user base, its role in lawmaking
and standard setting could be profound.
While current laws may be able to resolve some legal issues arising from augmented or virtual
technologies, many questions remain unanswered. For example, how might the law treat “street
crimes”—behavior such as disturbing the peace, indecent exposure, or deliberately harmful visuals—in
VR and AR? Open questions remain in several areas of the law including tort, intellectual property,
contract, defamation and free speech, and tax law.
U.S. Regulation and Governance
While no U.S. laws currently exist that are specific to the metaverse, several laws pertaining to speech,
privacy, antitrust, and protection of minors are relevant. For a more detailed explanation of many of these
laws please see the “Technology Primer: Social Media Recommendation Algorithms” for policymakers.29
Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act of 1996 (CDA, Section 230). Enforced by the Federal
Communications Commission, CDA ’s Section 230 provides protection to “interactive computer service
providers, ” from liability related to: (1) hosting information provided by another information content
provider, and (2) voluntarily acting “in good faith” to restrict access to objectionable material. Given
much of the content created on the metaverse would be generated by third parties, platforms would likely
meet the necessary elements of a Section 230 defense and thus enjoy broad immunity.
29 Constanza M. Vidal et al Technology Primer: Social Media Recommendation Algorithms (Cambridge: Belfer Center for Science and International
Affairs, 2022), https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/publication/technology-primer-social-media-recommendation-algorithms.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 16
First Amendment: The creation and curation of content is considered speech by the Supreme Court, which
means that AR/VR content can be constitutionally protected as lawful speech under the First Amendment.
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 (COPP A): Implemented by the Federal Trade
Commission, COPPA provides data protection requirements for children’s information collected by online
operators.30 Specifically, COPPA prohibits collecting personal data from children under the age of thirteen
without obtaining parental consent prior to data collection.
State-level privacy laws: The states of California, New Y ork, Texas, Colorado, among others, have passed
or attempted to pass new legislation to protect citizens’ privacy rights. This is an important step because
AR/VR devices also collect private and confidential information that can be accessed and disseminated
on the internet without the user’s consent. As AR/VR devices are able to collect biometric and behavioral
information about users—information that can be sold or compromised— it is critical that there be
transparency, practical options, and security for the interested parties.
California Consumer Privacy Act (CPP A) is a particularly strong state data law that gives consumers
more control over the personal information that businesses collect about them.31 This new law provides
new privacy rights for California consumers, including:
• The right to know about the personal information a business collects about them and how it is used
and shared;
• The right to delete personal information collected from them (with some exceptions);
• The right to opt-out of the sale of their personal information; and
• The right to nondiscrimination for exercising their CCPA right.
Proposed Federal and State Legislation
CDA ’s Section 230 reform: Several bills in both the U.S. Senate and the House have been introduced to
address concerns around Big Tech and content moderation.
Federal data privacy laws are also being considered such as the American Data Privacy and Protection Act.
30 Stephen P. Mulligan and Chris D. Linebaugh, “Data Protection Law: An Overview,” Congressional Research Service, March 25, 2019, https:/ /
crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R45631.
31 “California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA),” State of California, Department of Justice, Office of the Attorney General, March 28, 2022, https:/ /oag.
ca.gov/privacy/ccpa.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 17
California Age-Appropriate Design Code Act (A.B. 2273):32 Aims to improve the privacy protection of
minors online by compelling platforms to assess the privacy and protection of children in the design of any
digital product or service they offer.
As U.S. federal and state laws are underdeveloped in this area, we have provided some examples below on law
in other countries leading digital regulations.
International Regulation and Governance
Europe
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR): This comprehensive framework for the protection of user
data and privacy includes consumer access and information rights, restrictions on data storage processing,
and other consumer protections.
Digital Markets Act (DMA)33 and Digital Services Act: These new pieces of European Union regulation
on digital markets and services contain new and far-reaching provisions related to leveling the playing
field in the digital space. For example, platform providers will be required to enable access to third-party
payment services as well as apps by third-party developers, and third-party app stores will have less freedom
to rank their own products or services over those of other companies. Given the consolidation of metaverse
platforms,34 several potential enforcement actions may be brought against metaverse companies based on the
DMA in the coming years.
Parental control law: Law no. 2022-300 enacted March 2022 in France35 requires manufacturers of devices
that allow access to sensitive content to build in a pre-installed parental control function that allows parents to
restrict access.
32 “This bill . . . would require a business that provides an online service, product, or feature likely to be accessed by a child to comply with
specified requirements, including configuring all default privacy settings offered by the online service, product, or feature to the settings
that offer a high level of privacy protection offered by the business, and providing privacy information, terms of service, policies, and com-
munity standards concisely, prominently, and using clear language suited to the age of children likely to access that online service, prod-
uct, or feature,” as quoted in California AB2273, The California Age-Appropriate Design Code Act, TrackBill, https:/ /trackbill.com/bill/
california-assembly-bill-2273-the-california-age-appropriate-design-code-act/2228971/.
33 See “Questions and Answers: Digital Markets Act: Ensuring Fair and Open Digital Markets,” European Commission, October 31, 2022, https:/ /
ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/QANDA_20_2349.
34 Patrick McGee, “Meta Sparks Anger by Charging for VR Apps,” Financial Times, June 29, 2022, https:/ /www.ft.com/content/
e8910bad-b873-407d-b1ca-46eb4ceb3db2.
35 Kristof Van Quathem, Alix Bertrand, and Nicholas Shepherd, “France Enacts New Law on Parental Controls,” Lexology, March 10, 2022, https:/ /
www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=7644ba21-cc7f-41b8-b3c4-16f99defb0a3.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 18
China
The Personal Information Protection Law36 lays out for the first time in China a comprehensive set of
rules around data collection, processing, and protection, that were previously governed by piecemeal
legislation. This legislation is similar to the European GDPR and addresses concerns over the amount of
data that companies, especially internet sector companies, collect from users.
Content censorship: Around the world, regulators are concerned about the social impact of video games,
especially among children. Chinese regulators—who oversee the world’s biggest gaming market—froze
the approval of new domestic online game licenses in late March 2018. Subsequently, in 2019, China
imposed a ban on games that feature blood or corpses. Game developers will need to reintroduce
censored versions of the titles to avoid legal risks. However, China’s desire to dominate the global VR
market leads us to believe that regulators will not attempt to stifle the industry with heavy-handed
regulation.
Protection for minors: China recently passed a series of anti-digital addiction laws. Most recently in
2021, China restricted online gaming time for children under 18 to three hours weekly.37 Additionally,
China imposed age restrictions on live streaming. Age restrictions are likely to emerge in the coming
years, which will prevent children from accessing violent games.
Ban on cryptocurrency: A key factor for shaping the kind of metaverse that emerges in China is the
country’s blanket ban on cryptocurrencies. However, the government encourages the development of
blockchain technologies and is not critical of non-fungible tokens (NFTs), which are known in China as
digital collectibles.
Self-Regulation and Governance
Self-regulation efforts so far have mostly centered around topics of interoperability and the development
of common standards across the industry. While many major (and smaller) industry players have signed
on and joined these initiatives, critics argue that it is not in their best interest to comply and that progress
for these efforts will be limited at best. In recent years, social platforms have become more inclined to
protect user privacy and safety due to the negative public relations consequences of failing to do so.
Almost certainly, metaverse platforms and environments will be inclined to follow suit.
36 Miranda Katz, “The Personal Information Protection Law: China’s Version of the GDPR?,” Columbia Journal of Transnational Law, February 15,
2022, https:/ /www.jtl.columbia.edu/bulletin-blog/the-personal-information-protection-law-chinas-version-of-the-gdpr.
37 See the Reuters coverage at “Why and How China is Drastically Limiting Online Gaming for Under 18s,” Reuters, August 21, 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 19
Several examples of self-regulation and self-governance have emerged in the last several years:
Innovation guidelines: Firms have identified guiding principles for product development, such as
privacy, inclusiveness, and interoperability, that are broadly considered in product design. One example is
Meta’s Responsible Innovation Principles.38
Oversight boards: Firms such as Meta have developed oversight boards that include independent
journalists, politicians, and other experts to provide final judgment on content issues including those
related to VR.
However, these efforts have been met with significant criticism. Meta established its global oversight
board in 2020, a first-of-its-kind internet governance body. The firm received criticism that the board
was a way to abrogate the responsibility of moderating Facebook to another body. While all of the board’s
decisions are binding, its policy recommendations are not, and the company is sometimes unwilling to
heed recommendations.39 The board itself has faced questions over its political balance, with Republicans
arguing it is ideologically skewed toward left-wing academics.40
Interoperability groups for the metaverse: Organizations, such as the nonprofit Open Metaverse
Interoperability Group, serve as an open-source community of industry professionals and enthusiasts
advocating for a more open internet.41
Industry standards: The Metaverse Standards Forum is an industry group that brings together standards
organizations and companies for industry-wide cooperation on interoperability standards. The group
includes over 500 firms and the major metaverse companies. The Metaverse Standards Forum provides a
venue for cooperation between standards organizations and companies to foster the development of an
open and inclusive metaverse and interoperability standards by funding projects. Standards generated
by the forum are driven by industry and are nonbinding. Standards development organizations include
the Khronos Group, the World Wide Web Consortium, the Open Geospatial Consortium, the Open AR
Cloud, and the Spatial Web Foundation, and others.
38 “Responsible Innovation: Meta,” Meta, accessed September 7, 2022, https:/ /about.facebook.com/metaverse/responsible-innovation/.
39 Sara Fischer, “Meta Provides Another $150 Million in Funding for Its Oversight Board,” Axios, July 22, 2022, https:/ /www.axios.
com/2022/07/22/meta-facebook-oversight-board-funding.
40 Matthew Field, “Facebook’s ‘Supreme Court’ Spends $25M in Its First Year,” Telegraph, July 17, 2022, https:/ /www.telegraph.co.uk/
business/2022/07/17/facebooks-supreme-court-spends-25m-first-year/.
41 “Open Metaverse Interoperability Group,” omigroup, February 17, 2022, https:/ /omigroup.org/.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 20
Private metaverse governance: Corporate/centralized iterations of virtual worlds are likely to follow
traditional rules of corporate governance. For example, the metaverse created by Meta is likely to be a
virtual environment fully owned and run by the firm, which determines access rules and controls the
marketplace. Consequently, overall legal responsibility resides with Meta and its board of directors, who
would be the addressees of any regulatory or enforcement action.
Decentralized metaverse governance: Decentralized metaverse applications or virtual worlds are
likely to follow a different model of corporate governance. Advocates argue that one day decentralized
autonomous organizations (DAOs) could provide a governance structure for the metaverse. A DAO is
a method of organizing a company or entity that provides all decision power to its members. All of the
DAO’s actions and funding can be seen and analyzed by anyone because every transaction is recorded on
the blockchain. This transparency reduces the risk of corruption, illicit activity, or fraud by preventing
important information from being censored.
However, decentralized metaverse governance may also reduce accountability and responsiveness to
regulatory and legislative pressure. If a decentralized platform does not have a designated geographical
seat, headquarter, or board of directors, it may be more difficult to enforce regulation on the
decentralized platform.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 21
Part 4: Public Purpose Considerations
The scope and nature of public purpose considerations pertaining to AR/VR in the metaverse will depend
both on the specific application at hand, and the future direction of the metaverse industry. If ultimately
most metaverse applications will be dominated by centralized, corporate platforms (such as Meta, Apple,
etc.), many existing concerns around the power of large gatekeeper companies on the internet will most
likely carry over to the metaverse.42 At the same time, regulation and enforcement would, in theory,
be relatively straightforward. If, however, the competing vision of a more decentralized, user-run and
user-owned metaverse is realized, the new more fragmented governance might pose distinct challenges for
both regulations and their enforcement.43
Generally, we believe that many long-term public purpose considerations and debates from related fields
in the past few decades—gaming and protection of minors online, big tech regulation, antitrust law, online
intellectual property protection, security, identity, inclusivity—will come to bear in a metaverse context.
Consequently, from today’s perspective, the metaverse may not pose many fundamentally new public
purpose conundrums. However, existing public purpose concerns may be exacerbated by emerging AR/VR
and metaverse applications.44
Public purpose issues related to AR/VR for the metaverse45 include several considerations.
Safety: Protection of Minors, Risk of Identity Theft, and Fraud
• Protection of minors: With minors potentially spending more time socializing, gaming, and
consuming entertainment in more immersive virtual environments, dangers to their mental health and
the potential for disruption of their social and general development will increase. For instance, they
may be exposed to inappropriate/explicit content or bullying and harassment by other users.46
42 See the Federal Trade Commission’s recent enforcement actions. Mark McCarthy, “FTC’s Case Against Meta’s Acquisition of Within Seeks to
Shape the Emerging VR Market,” Brookings, August 4, 2022).
43 See Tambiama Madiega, Polona Car, Maria Niestadt, and Louise Van de Pol, “Metaverse: Opportunities, Risks, and Policy Implications,”
briefing, European Parliamentary Research Service, June 2022, 7: “Experts warn that intellectual property (IP) enforcement is a challenge in
the metaverse environment. This is because it is more difficult to identify the provider that can take down infringing content, since metaverse
content is distributed and replicated across decentralized networks running on Web 3.0 and blockchain-based platforms.”
44 See the assessment by Tom Wheeler, “The Metachallenges of the Metaverse,” Brookings, September 30, 2021.
45 Compare, for instance, the enumeration in the European Parliament Research Service Briefing, that lists competition, data protection, liabilities,
financial transactions, cybersecurity, health, and accessibility and inclusiveness. Madiega et al., “Metaverse.”
46 See the example of a BBC reporter who entered a virtual world posing as a 13-year-old. Andy Phippen, “Protecting Children in the Metaverse: It’s
Easy to Blame Big Tech, But We All Have a Role to Play, ” Conversation, February 28 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 22
• Regulatory gap 1 - consumer protection and safeguards: As in traditional gaming, consumer
protection and safeguards for minors are lacking, and children may easily spend hundreds of
dollars on virtual goods or other items. While the economic liberty and self-expression of the
consumer should be respected, certain guardrails should be put in place to ensure that minors are
not taken advantage of. For example, consider the case of “loot boxes, ” which are virtual items that
users can purchase. The loot box, similar in concept to gambling, is a game of chance. The user
does not know what is in the box; there is a low probability that the item in the box is of high value
and a high probability that the item is of low value. Without guardrails in place, minors may be
taken advantage of when targeted by advertisements and cannot evaluate the benefit and costs of a
loot box or similar purchases.
• Regulatory gap 2 - speech/content moderation: While protections around hate speech,
harassment, and protection of minors exist in many jurisdictions, and most likely apply to
companies offering virtual world services, it may be worthwhile considering more concrete
legal requirements around content moderation and user protection in these new virtual spaces.47
Misconduct and harassment by an avatar (e.g., sexual harassment) may not be covered sufficiently
at this point.48
• Identity theft and identity management and solutions: While virtual worlds and blockchain-based
applications can incorporate robust identity management solutions, identity theft in the metaverse is
currently much easier than in the physical world.49 Identity thieves may easily use a user’s real name
and likeness, and pose as them, often without easy recourse for the authentic user to claim fraud and
retrieve their identity. Effective alerts and actions against identity fraud are also limited in the current
technological environment. Through the introduction of (mandated or self-regulated) digital identity
management solutions, this danger could be mitigated in the future.50
• Regulatory gap 1 - rights of digital persons: Clarification may be needed on personality rights in
the metaverse, as pertaining to the rights of one’s digital twin identity and personhood (avatar).51
47 It is also important to note that the moderation of AR/VR content and voice in real time is markedly distinct from the simple task of moderating
text, such as social media postings and might need to be regulated and implemented differently. See Ryan Hsu, “Meet the New ‘Verse, Same as
the Old ‘Verse: Moderating the Metaverse,’” Georgetown Law Technology Review, May 2022.
48 See Tanya Basu, “The Metaverse Has a Groping Problem Already,” MIT Technology Review, December 16, 2021.
49 See Louis Rosenberg, “How the Metaverse Will Create New Forms of Fraud and Deception,” bigthink.com, April 25, 2022. Another version of this
is the so-called evil twin, where hackers use personal data about an individual to create a digital twin of that person (based on their traits and
likeness), to control and use for fraudulent purposes.
50 For potential solutions, see the Identity section in the following Frank Badalamenti, Roberto Hernandez, Vikram Panjwani, and Emmanuelle
Rivet, “Trust and Risk Considerations for the Metaverse,” pwc, April 5, 2022.
51 See Madiega et al., “Metaverse,” 7.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 23
• Regulatory gap 2 - identity management and authentication: Used to reduce the likelihood of
identity theft, fraud, harassment, and counterparty risk more broadly. In the absence of industry
consensus on shared verification standards and a more stringent management of digital identities,
regulation may be required to provide a framework on these topics.52
• Fraud: A number of features of cryptocurrencies and metaverse applications, such as the anonymity of
users and user wallets (accounts), and the absence of stringent securities and transactions regulation
and enforcement, can lead to an increased risk of fraud.53 In contrast to fraud in the physical world,
where the counterparty is known and can be held liable through the traditional legal system,
prosecution and enforcement of claims in the virtual world is highly challenging.
• Regulatory gap 1 - digital offerings and transactions: More stringent regulation of digital
offerings and transactions, comparable to existing securities or banking regulation, may be needed
to discourage fraudulent behavior.
• Regulatory gap 2 - digital property rights: Regulatory clarification may be needed for the
definition, transfer, and enforcement of digital property rights, such as when dealing with NFTs.54
Privacy: Collection of More, and More Sensitive Data
• Concerns around privacy and data protection apply to metaverse applications as much as they apply
to traditional internet/web services. However, the concerns are potentially heightened by the fact that
troves of new sensible data can be collected, such as biometric data (response time, brain waves, etc.).
Also, providers offering both traditional internet and metaverse infrastructure (Apple, Meta, Microsoft,
and the like) might connect and monetize these comprehensive data sets in potentially concerning
ways.55
• Regulatory gap - health data: It is important to note that AR/VR headsets and devices will
potentially allow companies to collect ever more kinetic, health, and physiological data on users,
similar to health data collection through smart wearables. The data feed of a user’s emotional state,
stress level, heartbeat, reaction time, and the like may, combined with other data sources, provide
corporations with an even more complete understanding of the user. More specific regulation for
the processing, usage, and sale of these types of data may be considered in certain jurisdictions.
52 See, for instance, Paul Sawers, “Identity and Authentication in the Metaverse,” VentureBeat, January 26, 2022; and Shade Oladetimi, “Protecting
Your Digital Identity in the Metaverse,” JD Supra, June 14, 2022.
53 Some sources view transactional risks as the main metaverse concern. Martin Boyd, “Regulating the Metaverse: Can We Govern the
Ungovernable?,” Forbes, March 31, 2022.
54 For some of the potential legal issues pertaining to NFTs, and how existing internet protocol might still be sufficient to navigate them, see
Sophie Goossens and Nick Breen, “NFTs: Ownership in the Metaverse—the Birth of a New Concept,” ReedSmith, August 1, 2022.
55 See Tatum Hunter, “Surveillance Will Follow Us into ‘the Metaverse’, and Our Bodies Could Be Its New Data Source,” Washington Post, January
13, 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 24
Security: Infrastructure, Cybersecurity, and Governance Risks
• Centralized metaverses (Meta Horizon Worlds, Roblox) run by large corporations on its cloud servers
presumably constitute a similar security environment to traditional corporate internet players (Meta,
Google, Amazon, etc.). Other decentralized metaverse applications may rely on a more decentralized
infrastructure, user input, or computing capacity, that is, they are run on a large number of user
devices randomly distributed across its network or may be run through a DAO. These decentralized
metaverse applications are subject to other additional security and governance risks.56 For instance,
a bad actor may acquire most of the computing capacity or voting rights and then take the entire
project/application offline (in the context of bitcoin, this is known as the “51 percent problem”). On
the flip side, these decentralized networks are potentially less vulnerable to central server attacks or
security exploits.
• On the cybersecurity side, AR/VR devices—and the fact that most services will run on cloud
infrastructure—will provide additional entry points for malicious attackers, therefore, maintaining
device security and integrity will be key.57 This will, in part, also depend on the users and the amount
of care they invest to prevent those attacks.
• Regulatory gap - security: The establishment of a minimum threshold of (cyber)security and
governance standards, by means of self-regulation or actual regulation, may help mitigate these
concerns.
Environment: Energy Consumption as a Key Concern
• Energy usage: Similar to other blockchain-based services and applications, AR/VR metaverse
applications will consume significant amounts of energy, for the servers, the underlying blockchain
(currency) infrastructure, and hardware devices. While energy efficiency is expected to increase
gradually, this still poses an environmental concern.
• Regulatory gap - energy consumption: Policymakers may want to provide incentives or even
legal requirements for service providers to reduce the energy consumption of their devices and
services, or they may want to limit certain types of applications with an outsized ecological
footprint.
56 “Many projects in web3 include a governance aspect, in which token-holders can put forward and vote on proposals to alter the network. While
this presents an opportunity for continual evolution and improvement, it also opens a backdoor to introduce malicious proposals that may
damage the network if enacted. Attackers have devised new methods to circumvent controls, commandeer leadership, and loot treasuries.
Once a theoretical concern, governance attacks have now been demonstrated in the wild. Attackers can take out massive ‘flash loans’ to swing
votes,…” as quoted in Riyaz Faizullabhoy and Matt Gleason, “Web 3 Security: Attack Types and Lessons Learned,” Andreessen Horowitz, April
23, 2022.
57 See Rick Bye, “Technological Challenges to the Security of the Metaverse,” Technology Magazine, August 29, 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 25
Accessibility Limitations
• If the metaverse one day becomes a ubiquitous platform for social gatherings, people with disabilities
such as visual impairment or sensory process disorders58 may have difficulties accessing activities in
a metaverse if the platforms are not designed with accessibility in mind.59 Comfort with the use of
digital equipment and technology is also required to access and navigate metaverse applications.
• Regulatory gap - accessibility: Concrete statutory requirements may be needed to ensure that
AR/VR devices and metaverse applications are built to accommodate accessibility needs.
Market Concentration/Antitrust Concerns: -Open Innovation or Oligopoly?
• Like e-commerce or social media, metaverses will enjoy a certain degree of network effects: users
are more likely to join a platform their contacts are using. These network advantages could lead to
a limited number of companies and platforms as frontrunners. With outsized market power, these
firms could manage access to their ecosystem in restrictive ways, putting up entrance barriers for
potential newcomers. There are strong economic incentives to engage in anti-competitive practices,
in the absence of effective regulation banning such behavior.
• Additionally, it seems that many of the leading players in today’s consumer internet (e.g., Meta,
Apple, Microsoft), through existing infrastructure and substantial funding and investments, are
well-positioned to be leading players in the metaverse space. Their potential market dominance
across both traditional consumer internet and future metaverse applications might exacerbate
antitrust concerns. Given that the metaverse market is still in its infancy, it seems all the more
important that a large number of actors beyond traditional major technology companies are able to
operate and innovate in that space, to encourage competition and user value creation.60
• Regulatory gap 1 - interoperability and portability: The interoperability of virtual worlds,
and portability of assets (such as avatars, or avatar accessories such as clothing in the form of
NFTs) would give users greater control over the digital content they create by allowing users the
flexibility to move their content across different platforms.61 However, it is doubtful that industry
self-regulation alone will lead to interoperability and portability of assets, given that there is a
strong incentive for the leading players to maintain their advantage and build a walled garden
infrastructure around their respective digital worlds.
58 Gus Alexiou, “Is the Metaverse Likely to Be Accessible and Inclusive of People with Disabilities?,” Forbes, March 31, 2022, https:/ /www.forbes.
com/sites/gusalexiou/2022/03/31/is-the-metaverse-likely-to-be-accessible-and-inclusive-of-people-with-disabilities/?sh=62da20334d20.
59 See Mayank Sharma, “How the Metaverse Could Worsen the Digital Divide,” Lifewire, January, 12, 2022.
60 See Alison McCauley, “The Battle for Control of The Metaverse: Can Open Innovation Outrun Corporate Domination?,” Forbes, March 22, 2022.
61 See, among others, Rolf Illenberger, “The Metaverse Paradox: Why the Industry Needs Standardization,” World Economic Forum, July 11, 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 26
• Regulatory gap 2 - market dominance and antitrust concerns: Much like effective gatekeeper/
platform regulation is lacking in most jurisdictions when it comes to the traditional web and
online services, many jurisdictions currently do not have comprehensive antitrust frameworks
that would prevent individual players gain an overwhelming advantage in the metaverse
marketplace, or to leverage their market power to exclude other actors from entering that space.62
To foster true and sustainable innovation and prevent monopolization, more stringent antitrust
regulation—or more extensive application of existing regulation—might be required.63K
Taxation
• Taxation of digital transactions and goods has proven challenging and will remain so. Given that
many virtual worlds are running on their own virtual economies, equivalents of sales tax and
value-added tax of goods and services should be considered.64 This would most likely require
companies to adopt fiat money instead of existing cryptocurrencies. Similarly, traditionally highly
taxed and tightly regulated activities, such as gambling, are currently being carried out in the
metaverse65 in circumvention of existing tax and regulatory regimes. Regulators will need to fill those
loopholes.66 Federal and state budgets, and with them, the broader public, might benefit.htS
• Regulatory gap - clarity and enforcement: Lack of clear guidelines and enforcement
mechanisms for existing taxation to certain virtual spaces and applications.
62 For an overview and potential segways for antitrust action given existing regulatory regimes, see Wilson Sonsini, “Antitrust: Into the
Metaverse,” Wilson Sonini, March 18, 2022.
63 In the United States, recent antitrust enforcement actions by the Federal Trade Commission taken in the metaverse context rest on a some-
what shaky legal foundation. See Cecilia Kang, “F.T.C. Chair Upends Antitrust Standards with Meta Lawsuit,” New York Times, July 28, 2022.
64 Some states in the United States are moving in that direction, see the example of Washington. Caile Gole, “How Should States Tax NFT Sales?,”
CPA Practice Advisor, July 31, 2022.
65 See, for instance, the Decentraland casino and related offerings. Eli Tan, “Who’s Using the Metaverse? Poker Players in Decentraland,” Coin-
desk, February 3, 2022.
66 See Tom Ara, Mark Radcliffe, Michael Fluhr, and Katherine Imp, “Exploring the Metaverse: What Laws Will Apply?,” DLA Piper, June 22, 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 27
Selected Readings and Additional Resources
The list below highlights some of the citations in this document or comprehensive documents on specific topics
and is not meant to be exhaustive.
On the Technology
• Ball, Matthew. The Metaverse: And How It Will Revolutionize Everything. New Y ork: Liveright, 2022.
• Hackl, Cathy, Dirk Lueth, , and Tomasso Di Bartolo.. Navigating the Metaverse: A Guide to Limitless
Possibilities in a Web 3.0 World . Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2022.
On Applications and Market Overview
• Bellini, Heather, et al. Virtual & Augmented Reality. Understanding the Race for the Next Computing
Platform. Profiles in Innovation Series. (New Y ork: Goldman Sachs, January 2016).
• Shamash, David, and Robin Andre Nordnes. State of The Open Metaverse 2021/22. (London: Outlier
Ventures, 2021).
On Regulations and Oversight
• Lemley, Mark A., and Eugene Volokh. “Law, Virtual Reality, and Augmented Reality. ” University of
Pennsylvania Law Review 166, no. 1051 (April 2017). https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2933867.
• Li, Cathy. “Who Will Govern the Metaverse?” World Economic Forum. May 25, 2022. https://www.
weforum.org/agenda/2022/05/metaverse-governance/.
On Public Purpose Considerations
• Tambiama Madiega, Polona Car, Maria Niestadt, and Louise Van de Pol L. “Metaverse: Opportunities,
Risks, and Policy Implications, ” briefing. European Parliamentary Research Service, June 2022.
• Zhu, Ling. “The Metaverse: Concepts and Issues for Congress. ” Congressional Research Service,
August 26, 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 28
About the Technology and Public
Purpose (TAPP) Project
The arc of innovative progress has reached an inflection point. It is our responsibility to ensure it bends
toward public good.
Technological change has brought immeasurable benefits to billions through improved health,
productivity, and convenience. Y et as recent events have shown, unless we actively manage their risks to
society, new technologies may also bring unforeseen destructive consequences.
Making technological change positive for all is the critical challenge of our time. We ourselves - not only
the logic of discovery and market forces - must manage it. To create a future where technology serves
humanity as a whole and where public purpose drives innovation, we need a new approach.
Founded by former U.S. Secretary of Defense Ash Carter, the TAPP Project works to ensure that
emerging technologies are developed and managed in ways that serve the overall public good.
TAPP Project Principles:
1. Technology’s advance is inevitable, and it often brings with it much progress for some. Y et, progress
for all is not guaranteed. We have an obligation to foresee the dilemmas presented by emerging
technology and to generate solutions to them.
2. There is no silver bullet; effective solutions to technology-induced public dilemmas require a mix of
government regulation and tech-sector self-governance. The right mix can only result from strong
and trusted linkages between the tech sector and government.
3. Ensuring a future where public purpose drives innovation requires the next generation of tech leaders
to act; we must train and inspire them to implement sustainable solutions and carry the torch.
For more information, visit: www.belfercenter.org/TAPP

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 29

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
TECH PRIMERS FOR POLICYMAKERS: AR AND VR FOR THE METAVERSE 30
