
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
PAPER
AUGUST 2023
Democracy
and the Liberal
World Order
Amid the Rise of
Authoritarianism
Leveraging the Digital Public Sphere
to Revive Trust in Democracy
Nicolas Cimarra Etchenique
PROJECT ON EUROPE AND THE TRANSATLANTIC RELATIONSHIP

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Project on Europe and the Transatlantic Relationship
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
www.belfercenter.org/
Statements and views expressed in this report are solely those of the author(s) and do not imply
endorsement by Harvard University, Harvard Kennedy School, or the Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs.
Copyright 2023, President and Fellows of Harvard College

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
PAPER
AUGUST 2023
Democracy
and the Liberal
World Order
Amid the Rise of
Authoritarianism
Leveraging the Digital Public Sphere
to Revive Trust in Democracy
Nicolas Cimarra Etchenique
PROJECT ON EUROPE AND THE TRANSATLANTIC RELATIONSHIP

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
ii
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Foreword
Multilateral diplomacy has been my main field of work since I joined the
Spanish Foreign Service in 2005. I’ve been fortunate enough to serve in several
multilateral settings, including the United Nations in New Y ork and the OSCE
(Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe) in Vienna. Throughout
my diplomatic career, I’ve often asked myself: is it possible to achieve a better
international cooperation, one that is up to the task of adequately addressing the
main challenges and threats that humanity is facing in the 21st century? How will
governments and societies manage to mobilize the energies that are required to
confront the worsening climate emergency, or the disruptions that will be caused
by AI?
It didn’t take me too long to understand that our institutions and, more
importantly, our mental frameworks, are ill-equipped to deal with a rapidly
changing global reality. My two-year experience in the UN Security Council,
during Spain’s tenure in 2015-2016, confirmed this impression. My work at the
OSCE reinforced it. As Deputy Permanent Representative for politico-military
affairs, I had the honor to coordinate the Structured Dialogue process in 2020-
2021, which was chaired by the Spanish Ambassador to the OSCE, Luis Cuesta.
This process had been launched a few years before, with the aim of restoring
a certain level of understanding on security challenges and conventional arms
control amongst OSCE participating States (pS). The Spanish Chairmanship
adopted the following motto for its tenure: “Understanding for Security” (or
U4S). The process of dialogue was conceived as a sequence that should follow
and respect four essential steps: listening, reflecting, sharing and learning. All
delegations engaged as constructively as they could. Distrust between capitals,
however, burdened the efforts made in Vienna. It ran too high since Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine and its illegal annexation of Crimea in 2014.
When the Kremlin launched its full-scale illegal invasion of Ukraine on February
last year, despite all international efforts to prevent it, including at the OSCE,
any remnants of trust that might have been left between pS were shattered. Some
months later, in September 2022, I started my fellowship at the Belfer Center. My
aim was to envisage possible ways to regenerate trust ‘internationally’ , in order to
be able to reestablish a robust European Security Architecture in the future.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
iii
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
During this journey, I came to the conclusion that, for that to happen, democratic
resilience needed to be enhanced first. The reason is that, as long as autocracies,
and particularly Russia and China, believe that they can achieve a reshaping
of the world order that suits their interests, I consider that they are likely to
keep pursuing that objective, even by coercion and force. Liberal democracies,
therefore, need to prepare for a protracted confrontation, a new Cold War,
with Moscow and Beijing. A competition between democracy and autocracy is
currently unfolding.
Russia and China, certainly, face huge challenges in this competition. However,
as I started focusing on the situation of the democratic ‘home front’ , and its
interconnection with the geopolitical situation, I reached a second conclusion:
distrust and polarization run too high in liberal democracies. This is the case in
the U.S., which faced an electoral crisis in 2020-21, and will face a very challenging
election in 2024, but also in other western democracies. Distrust and polarization
are strategic vulnerabilities of democracies, and autocracies are exploiting them
through hybrid warfare and disinformation. This reality is a central element of the
new Cold War, if not the main one.
At this juncture of my research, I asked myself the logical question: how can
democracies depolarize and restore their citizens’ trust? How can they achieve
this, in the midst of the renewed great power competition, and the emerging
challenge of AI? There are certainly many possible approaches to this conundrum.
My choice was to focus on what I consider most relevant: the development of
a well-functioning digital public sphere. In my view, if democracies manage to
develop a constructive online civic dialogue between citizens, based on reliable
information, distrust and polarization will wane. Why I consider this to be of
critical importance, and a proposal on how to move in that direction, is the object
of this paper.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
iv
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
About the Author
Nicolas Cimarra Etchenique is the Rafael del Pino-Spanish Ministry of Foreign
Affairs Fellow at the Project on Europe and the Transatlantic Relationship. He
joined the Spanish Foreign Service in 2005. He was posted to the Embassy of
Spain to Ethiopia and to the African Union (2008-2011), the Embassy of Spain to
Pakistan (2011-2012) and the Mission of Spain to the United Nations (2012-2017).
From 2019 to 2022 Cimarra Etchenique served as the Deputy Permanent
Representative for political and military affairs at the Permanent Representation of
Spain to the OSCE, and he was the Coordinator of the Structured Dialogue process
in 2020 and 2021.
In the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, European Union and Cooperation, he has
served as Desk Officer at the Spanish Agency for International Cooperation
(2005-2006), as Desk Officer at the EU Directorate (2007-2008), and as Assistant
Deputy Director at the Africa Directorate (2017-2019). He graduated in Law from
Universidad Complutense of Madrid.
About the Project on Europe and
Transatlantic Relationship
The Harvard Kennedy School Project on Europe and the Transatlantic
Relationship aims to strengthen the University’s capacities for teaching, research,
and policy on the relationship between the United States and Europe. The program
is designed to deepen a relationship which has — for over 70 years— served as an
anchor of global order, driven the expansion of the world economy, provided peace
and stability and reunited peoples once divided by war. In doing so, we hope to
prepare a new generation of leaders on both sides of the Atlantic.
For more, visit belfercenter.org/transatlantic

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
v
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Acknowledgements
I am very thankful for my fellowship at the Project on Europe and the
Transatlantic Relationship at the Belfer Center. It has been a very enriching and
valuable experience that has allowed me to learn about ongoing developments
in the fields of international relations, domestic politics and new technologies. I
thank the Belfer Center, the Fundación Rafael del Pino and the Spanish Ministry
of Foreign Affairs for the opportunity and their support.
I am very grateful to Juliette Kayyem, Karl Kaiser and Erika Manouselis for their
guidance, trust and unwavering support. This paper wouldn’t have been possible
without their help and patience. I am also very grateful to Svenja Kirsch for her
kind help and advice. My Research Assistant, Alejandro Martin Rodriguez, also
deserves a special mention. His support, highly professional, efficient, positive and
friendly, has been pivotal for this endeavor.
I was highly inspired by the regular Belfer Center Director and Board events,
which I was honored to attend. I came to admire its Director Ash Carter for his
vision, leadership and charisma, and later Eric Rosenbach, for the same reasons.
I thank them for their invitation to participate in the numerous events held in the
Belfer Center throughout the year. I benefited greatly from the conversations with
Erica Chenoweth, Archon Fung, Sergio Imparato, Joseph Nye, Bruce Schneier, and
Bina Venkataraman, amongst others, and from the classes of Juliette Kayyem and
Michael Sandel. I learned a lot from all of them, and I thank them for their help.
I would also like to extend my thanks to all the friends and colleagues who
patiently read the ceaseless series of drafts of this paper and provided very valuable
advice: Karl Kaiser, Juliette Kayyem, Erika Manouselis, Svenja Kirsch, Alejandro
Martin, Arsen Fazlovic, Xavier Bellmont, Javier Cantero, Alberto Diaz, Sonja Free,
Lucia Garcia Rico, Dylan Gottlieb, Sergio Imparato, Antonio Ramos, Jose Thovar
and Bina Venkataraman. Finally, special thanks to my wife Funda Akin and my
daughter, Sofia Elif, for providing me with the company, support, encouragement
and inspiration that made this journey possible and wonderful.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Waves crash over the harbour and a lighthouse, as Storm Ciara hits Newhaven, on the south coast
of England, Sunday, Feb. 9, 2020. (AP Photo/Matt Dunham)

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
vii
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Table of Contents
Introduction ......................................................................................................6
The Global Maelstrom of Distrust: Democracy and The Liberal World Order
Amid The Rise Of Authoritarianism ..........................................................9
General background .................................................................................................................9
Notions of trust .........................................................................................................................11
The global maelstrom of distrust ........................................................................................13
Distrust Within Geopolitics: “The Edge of The Whirl;” Great Power
Competition and The Battle of Democracy and Autocracy. ..................15
Great power competition: Russia, China and the West ................................................16
The renewed battle between democracy and autocracy ...........................................25
Distrust Within Domestic Politics: “The Mouth of The Tunnel;” The Crisis
of Liberal Democracy and The Rise of Polarization and Illiberalism ....34
Distrust and The Public Sphere: “The Hidden Core;” The Impact of Media,
Social Media and AI On Democratic Backsliding .................................. 46
Reviving The Lighthouse of Democracy: A Policy Proposal to Aid
Democracies Rebuild Their Public Spheres and Protect The Liberal
World Order .............................................................................................. 70
Policy background .................................................................................................................. 74
Policy basis: Public options Large Language Models: LLM, and AI governance .77
Policy proposal: Adapting the Lighthouse of Democracy to the Internet
and AI .........................................................................................................................................78
Conclusion .....................................................................................................112
Endnotes .........................................................................................................117
Bibliography ...................................................................................................141
Secondary Literature ...........................................................................................................160

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
1
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
“ A house divided against itself cannot stand. ”
“ – Abraham Lincoln.
 Illinois Republican State Convention, Springfield, Illinois June 16, 1858

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
2
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Executive Summary
Democracies must strengthen their home front to succeed in the competition
with Russia and China that has resulted in a new Cold War and a new
battle between democracy and autocracy. Democracies are experiencing
high polarization, which is undermining democratic governance and trust in
democracy itself. Democratic backsliding in the West has major geopolitical
implications. It compromises the West’s international position and degrades
U.S. and European soft power. Furthermore, distrust and internal divisions are
exploited by autocracies. Autocracies will continue undermining the liberal
world order as long as the crisis of liberal democracy is not reverted. To uphold
democracy and the liberal world order, the U.S. and the EU must lead an effort to
regenerate democracies’ public spheres, which are seriously damaged.
Media, and particularly social media, is playing a central role on the rise of
distrust and polarization in democracies. Large for-profit digital platforms,
such as Twitter (now “X”), TikTok or Facebook, are contributing to this corrosive
process. Furthermore, social media has been weaponized by Russia and China to
manipulate political divisions and interfere in electoral processes in democracies.
The quickly accelerating development of AI makes the situation more pressing.
Autocracies are using digital technologies and AI to enhance their surveillance
and repressive capacities. Within democracies, unregulated, or poorly regulated
AI, may work as a Trojan horse of autocracy: it may deliver productivity gains
and geopolitical advantages to the U.S., but in a way that could backfire against
democracy, as it could dramatically erode social trust. Today, democracies’ public
spheres can be hacked by autocratic actors using digital platforms and increasingly
sophisticated AI tools. Tomorrow, if human responsibility is massively outsourced
to inadequately regulated AI, trust levels in democracy could further plummet.
In order to address the crisis of democracy and preserve the liberal world
order, the U.S. and the EU should cooperate to revive trust in democracy at
the domestic and the international levels. Such cooperation must synchronically
confront three sets of challenges:

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
3
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
1. Great power competition and the authoritarian offensive against
democracy,
2. The rise of political polarization and illiberalism, and
3. The adverse impact of social media and AI on democracy.
These sets of challenges feed on distrust and amplify it. As a result, they have
evolved into a series of cycles of distrust within democracies and into a great
geopolitical cycle of distrust.
The entanglement and feedback loops among the domestic and the geopolitical
cycles of distrust have resulted in a cohesive threat to democracy: a downward
political spiral that is pulling societies towards enmity. This spiral feeds on and
generates destructive human emotions at massive scale, such as outrage and
hatred, that lead to violence, war, and autocracy, so it can be better understood
as a dangerous global maelstrom of distrust, which could sink democracy
worldwide. As showcased by historical evidence, domestic and international
forces do not act in isolation from each other. Democratic backsliding, the rise
of authoritarianism and totalitarianism, and the politics of aggression generated
feedback loops in the 1930s, that resulted in WWII. Similar forces are again
working in the 2020s.
If massive distrust can wreck democracy worldwide, it follows that
the regeneration of trust is the path to democratic revitalization.
Recommendations to regenerate trust in democracy:
1. Civic dialogue should act as a compass, or lighthouse, of democratic
revival. Democracy is, in essence, a dialogue, that takes place within
institutions and among citizens. Dialogue shapes the public sphere of
democracies. A civic dialogue based on truthful information can cut
through the noise of polarization and shine through the darkness of
disinformation. A strategic segment of civic dialogue is channeled and
framed by digital technologies. To regenerate civic dialogue, democracies
should work together on innovative strategies to contain the systemic
risks of social media and AI on democratic governance. Stricter
regulations of social media and AI and enforcement of anti-trust
legislation are necessary but might not be sufficient. Complementary
paths must also be explored.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
4
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
2. The EU and the U.S. should promote the development a network of safe
havens for civic life online. In doing so, they would be leading a process
to make digital platforms and AI work to regenerate democracy and the
liberal world order.
• These safe havens could consist of global public options of civic
platforms (PCPs). PCPs would be an alternative to exiting social media
for political deliberations, and an anchor of different e-governance tools.
They would provide a public service designed to allow and enhance a civic
democratic deliberation among citizens, based on reliable information.
Their inner governance could be managed through partnerships of CSOs,
academia and citizen juries, that would form Digital Civic Communities
(DCCs).
• PCPs, managed by DCCs, would provide safe havens for civic life
online. They could function as ‘digital town squares’ , in a way that
for-profit social media cannot. They could be connected to democratic
institutions by ‘digital bridges’ , ensuring reliable information and adequate
standards on ID verification, privacy, and security. The digital public
sphere is loosely regulated, fragmented, and vulnerable to hacking by
nefarious actors. As a result, it extends its disruptive effects to democratic
institutions designed long before digital technologies could be imagined.
PCPs could be the cornerstone of a transatlantic effort to regenerate civic
dialogue and democracy in the digital age.
3. An International Agency for Cooperation on AI for Democracy
(IACAID, or Agency) should coordinate the network, setting standards
and ensuring adequate PCP and DCC oversight. Through its creation,
the U.S. and the EU would not only protect civic deliberation in their own
societies, sheltering the public sphere from autocratic interferences. They
would also revitalize the transatlantic relationship and their democratic
soft power, sending a signal of moral, political, and technological
leadership to the international community. The Agency would constitute
the centerpiece of a strategy, named AI for Democracy (AI4D), designed
to bring democracies together into a global effort to protect and restore
democracy, and the liberal world order. After its creation by the EU
and the U.S., the Agency should open its doors to other OECD countries,
establish mechanisms to allow the participation of countries transitioning

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
5
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
to democracy as Observers, and promote dialogue with non-democratic
countries. By creating the AI4D system, democracies would take a major
step to restore civic dialogue and trust in democracy, revitalizing their
soft power. This system would protect and promote democracy worldwide,
and help democracies navigate the global maelstrom of distrust.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
6
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Introduction
In March 2022, reacting to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, President Biden
described the new global reality as a “battle between democracy and autocracy” .1
With these words, he conveyed the message that democracy and the liberal world
order were being challenged by the most powerful autocracies: Russia, but also
China. This being the case, what is the situation of democracy worldwide? The
reality in this regard is that it has been receding globally since the Great
Recession.2 It is not in good shape to face a battle with autocracy.
The crisis of liberal democracy is a global phenomenon, which includes
quantitative and qualitative elements. However, from the perspective of the
preservation of the liberal world order, democratic backsliding does not matter the
same everywhere: since the U.S. is still the most powerful country in the world,
the condition of its democracy matters most to global stability. The situation in
EU countries is also decisive, as the EU represents the third largest economic bloc
in the world and the largest union of advanced liberal democracies on Earth. For
these reasons, this paper will focus primarily on the political situation in the U.S.
and establish connections and comparisons with other democracies, mainly in
Europe, when appropriate.
While great power competition is the domain of geopolitics, democratic resilience
mostly concerns domestic politics. President Biden has defined the domestic
political challenges to democracy in the U.S. as a ‘battle for the soul of the nation’3.
This narrative correlates with the ‘battle between democracy and autocracy’ that
takes place at the geopolitical level. Rising distrust in government and society,
polarization and illiberalism are particularly relevant to the international position
of Washington and its soft power, as they are compromising democratic stability
within the U.S.
The paper will be divided in two parts: a diagnosis, called ‘the global maelstrom of
distrust’ , and a policy proposal, called ‘the lighthouse of democracy’ .4
The diagnosis focuses on the cumulative effect of three sets of challenges to
democracy: a) great power competition and the authoritarian offensive against
democracy, b) the rise of polarization and illiberalism, and c) the impact of social
media and AI on democracy. This section of the paper will argue that these sets

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
7
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
of challenges feed on distrust and amplify it. Furthermore, they have evolved into a
series of cycles of distrust within democracies and into a great geopolitical cycle of
distrust. Finally, the entanglement and feedback loops among the domestic and the
geopolitical cycles of distrust have generated a cohesive threat to democracy. This
threat is represented by a downward spiral that is pulling societies and the global
community towards enmity. It feeds on and generates destructive human emotions,
such as outrage and hatred, which include a strong irrational and unconscious
dimension, and thus leads to violence, war, and autocracy. In consequence, it can be
better understood as a dangerous global maelstrom, which could sink democracy
worldwide. The global maelstrom of distrust has a geopolitical and a domestic
expression.5 If distrust and polarization reach a certain threshold in the international
arena, war ensues. If both forces reach a certain threshold domestically, civil war, or
democratic collapse, ensues.
The policy proposal has been named ‘the lighthouse of democracy’ , for three reasons.
First, because it focuses on the promotion of civic dialogue based on reliable
information to protect and promote trust in democracy. The metaphor of the
lighthouse has sometimes been applied to the press, because free and independent
journalism sheds light on the work of government and all matters relevant to the civic
life of a democracy. Reliable information is a necessary condition of a functioning
civic dialogue and a cohesive public sphere.6 In this paper, the concept of the
lighthouse is applied to the entire public sphere: the argument is that democracy
dies in darkness, distrust and violence, but it can recover in the light of trust, civic
dialogue and cooperation. A cohesive public sphere is a necessary condition for
democratic regeneration.
The second reason is that the metaphor of the lighthouse is a representation of
the positive soft power of democracy, as opposed to the negative soft power of
authoritarianism.7 The ‘shining city on a hill’ is a Biblical concept used by the U.S.
political leadership as an expression of the country’s exceptionalism; the metaphor
of the ‘lighthouse’ can be applied to any democracy with a cohesive public sphere
that respects the rule of law and human rights, including full political equality.8 The
third reason is that the policy proposal constitutes an idealized framework for a well-
functioning digital public sphere that can better work for democracy and the liberal
world order. As a lighthouse, its purpose is to signal a direction of navigation, away
from the maelstrom of distrust and towards democratic recovery, but not an end-
destination. Given its long-term ambitions, the destination lies beyond the horizon

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
8
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
and, as is known, the devil is in the details. However, despite all obstacles, the
journey is worth the effort.
The dark, violent, maelstrom is laid in opposition to the bright, expansive
lighthouse, in the same way that autocracy lays in opposition to democracy. The
maelstrom and the lighthouse ultimately represent two key forces of the human
psyche: fear, that leads to distrust and violence, and hope, that leads to trust,
dialogue and cooperation. All humans and all human societies have always faced
the tension inherent in this polarity.9 To remain free, democracies need to observe
and understand the pulling force of fear and follow the guidance of hope based on
facts. The restoration of civic dialogue and trust is the most powerful instrument at
their disposal.10

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
9
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
The Global Maelstrom of
Distrust: Democracy and The
Liberal World Order Amid The
Rise Of Authoritarianism
General background
Trust in democratic governments and institutions has been eroding globally.
It plummeted after the Great Recession, and then again with the COVID-19
pandemic.11 The OECD Trust Survey finds public confidence is evenly split
between people who say they trust their national government and those who
do not. On average, about four in ten people say they trust their national
government (41.4%) and another four in ten (41.1%) say they do not.12 The 2022
Edelman Trust Barometer, tracking respondents in 28 countries, reaches similar
conclusions. It affirms that “government and media fuel a vicious cycle of distrust” ,
as nearly one out of two respondents view government and media as divisive
forces in society.13
The situation in the U.S. is particularly problematic. According to More in
Common’s research, less than one in four Americans believe the federal
government, American corporations, and national media to be honest. This
distrust is not limited to institutions either: fewer than two in five Americans
feel “most people can be trusted” .14 The Pew Research Center has informed of a
steady decline of public trust in government since 1958.15 Gallup reaches similar
conclusions for trust in media and confirms that Americans trust in this key
institution for democracy remains near record low.16
The situation appears to be relatively better for the EU, albeit not as much for all of
its Member States at the national level. The summer 2022 Standard Eurobarometer
showed increased trust in the EU and continued strong support for the EU’s
response to the Russian aggression against Ukraine. The positive image of the EU
was then at 47%, its highest level since autumn 2009, while 36% of respondents
had neutral views and 16% negative views about the EU. In addition, 49% of
Europeans tend to trust the EU. However, this survey also indicated that only
34% of respondents tend to trust their national government.17 Levels of trust in
government are low in many EU countries.18

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
10
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Trust in democracies has been steadily eroding, but it is uncertain whether a
similar phenomenon is taking place within autocracies. The 2022 Edelman Trust
Barometer suggests this is not happening. However, as Peter T. Coleman, professor
of psychology and education at Teachers College Columbia University, has noted, it
is problematic to compare measures of trust between democracies and autocracies.
He has observed that the most trusted nations identified in the 2022 Edelman Trust
Barometer report are China, UAE, India, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, and Thailand,
while the least trusted included Spain, the UK, the US, Germany, Japan and South
Korea. However, many of the top “trusted” nations are some of the most corrupt
and least transparent in the world, according to Transparency International.19
As professor Coleman asks, “Might it be that respondents in these societies are
less inclined to report feelings of institutional distrust in a survey than, say, citizens
of Germany and the U.S.? So, what, exactly, are we to make of such results? Are
autocracies better at instilling trust or arousing fear?”20
According to Kevin Valier of the Niskanen Center, political trust literature shows
that authoritarian regimes can exhibit high levels of political trust, as long as they
manage corruption and economic performance effectively.21 This could be the
case of China, where trust in government is believed to hold at around 90% of
the population.22 The 2022 Edelman Trust Barometer established last year levels
of trust in China at a record 91%.23 Autocracies, however, are much better than
democracies at arousing fear. Levels of social trust, government support or political
polarization in authoritarian or totalitarian regimes are difficult to gauge, given
the lack of political freedoms. Dissent and discontent are eclipsed by repression.
Repression, at the same time, may also enhance social conformity and strengthen
‘the spiral of silence’ , as individuals’ willingness to express their opinion is often a
function of how they perceive public opinion.24 As a result, revolutions, civil wars
and regimes’ collapse in autocracies often take the international community by
surprise.25 What is undeniable, however, is that the last two decades have not been
good for democracy worldwide, and particularly the last one. Erosion of trust in
democracy is a global pattern, and so is democratic backsliding.26 Different trends
are driving democratic decay in the Western world and fueling the attractiveness of
the authoritarian alternative.27

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
11
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Notions of trust
The argument that the paper advances is that the crisis of liberal democracy and
of the liberal world order are, at the core, a global crisis of trust. This perspective
considers trust to be at the center of social and political relations. Certainly,
trust is often viewed as “the glue that holds society together. ”28 There are different
definitions and understandings about what trust is. For the purpose of this policy
paper, the following notions will be considered: i) trust as a belief, or idea; the
difference between social and political trust, ii) trust within the binomial trust-
distrust, iii) trust and emotions, iv) trust and distrust as mirror images of the
media and ICT landscape, v) trust in international relations.
i. Trust as a belief or idea: For this policy paper, trust will be considered
as the belief or idea that a person (or institution, or political actor) is
reliable.29 A relevant difference exists between political and social trust:
Social trust can be understood broadly as trust in society, or trust that
persons will abide by social norms, publicly recognized, shared social
rules that people both in fact expect one another to follow and think
that everyone morally ought to follow. Political trust can be understood
to include trust in government broadly or trust in democracy, as well as
trust in more specific institutions and groups, such as the civil service,
parliament, and particular elected officials.30 This policy paper will focus
on political trust and refer to social trust when necessary.
ii. The binomial trust-distrust. Academically, trust can be related to two other
members of its conceptual family: mistrust and distrust. As argued by
Daniel Devine, Jennifer Gaskell, Will Jennings and Gerry Stoker, “political
trust makes good governance possible. Mistrust (or political skepticism),
in the right measure, supports good governance by driving accountability.
Distrust is viewed as a threat to good governance, as it risks disengagement
and disorder”.31 Despite the high political relevance of this nuance,
the literature to date has mostly focused on the presence or absence of
trust. More research is required on the trinomial trust-mistrust-distrust.
For this reason, this policy paper will in general gravitate around the
binomial trust-distrust, and only when necessary, refer to the trinomial
trust-mistrust-distrust.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
12
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
iii. Trust and emotions. The belief or idea of trust, however, is not merely
neutral or rational. Philosopher and cognitive scientist Paul Thagard
argues that trust is a complex neural process that includes emotions.32
The importance of the emotional dimension of trust can be better
understood in relation with the other members of its conceptual family.
As Paul Thagard explains, “mistrusting someone is not just a prediction of
betrayal, but also a bad emotional feeling about the untrustworthy person. ”33
Mistrust and, to a larger extent, distrust, are charged with strong negative
emotions. Levels of trust in institutions, such as the ones measured by
Gallup, The Pew Research Center, or the Eurobarometer, reflect large-scale
societal patterns, but cannot take properly into account the emotional or
unconscious dimension of distrust. They do not probe into the psyches,
values or the life experiences of respondents to surveys, so they can
offer no clues about how these factors might affect a given individual’s
inclination to trust other people.34 Neither can this paper, but it shall
suffice to stress that trust and distrust are not only ideas or beliefs, but also
emotional realities, with an unconscious dimension.35
iv. Trust, distrust and the media and ICT landscape. Marshall McLuhan, one
of the most prominent media theorists, argued that ‘the medium is the
message’ and that ‘we shape our tools, and then our tools shape us’.36 In other
words: we shape our media, and then our media shapes us (and our trust).
Today, the Internet and social media have become the main mediums
of communication and are shaping the media landscape, displacing
journalism. Hence, in mass societies, to a large extent, political trust and
distrust and the public sphere are nowadays mirror images of the media
and social media landscape.37 Furthermore, AI is accelerating and bringing
a whole new dimension to this reality. There is a longstanding debate on
whether the influence of media on political trust is positive or negative.
This policy paper will consider both effects of the media and social media
aspect: trust enabling and trust eroding.
v. Trust in international relations. Trust is at the center of diplomacy and
multilateral cooperation and has always implicitly been at the center of
international relations theory.38 Realism, liberalism and constructivism
conceive of trust differently. The theory of strategic cooperation and game
theory rely on the binomial trust-distrust.39 This paper will focus on the

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
13
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
role played by trust on two of its dimensions at the geopolitical level: great
power competition and ideological competition. Trust in international
relations is different from social and political trust within countries. The
former applies to countries, the latter to citizens.
The global maelstrom of distrust
The last decade and a half have shown a rise of distrust within democracies and
between countries. Is there a relation between the domestic and the geopolitical
cycles of distrust? Both phenomena are usually analyzed separately. However,
this paper will develop the argument that there is a correlation between them,
and between both and the media and ICT landscape, and that there is merit in
analyzing these developments jointly. Furthermore, it will argue that rising distrust
in democracy is fueling a global crisis of distrust.
To better understand the correlation between both cycles of distrust, the argument
will be structured around the pattern of a maelstrom. This figure is helpful to
understand that when the domestic cycles of distrust meet the geopolitical one,
they energize each other until they merge into a single global maelstrom of
distrust, which can potentially bring down democracy and the liberal world order.
In 1841 Edgar Allan Poe described a maelstrom masterfully.40 He wrote: “The
edge of the whirl was represented by a broad belt of gleaming spray; but no particle
of this slipped into the mouth of the terrific tunnel, whose interior, as far as the eye
could fathom it, was a smooth, shining, and jet black wall of water, inclined to the
horizon at an angle of some forty-five degrees, speeding dizzily round and round with
a swaying and sweltering motion, and sending forth to the winds an appalling voice,
half shriek, half roar, such as not even the mighty cataract of Niagara ever lifts up in
its agony to Heaven. ”
McLuhan found the pattern of the maelstrom to be especially powerful and often
used Edgar Allan Poe’s story, The Descent into the Maelstrom, as an example of how
modern people can recognize complex patterns amid the overwhelming deluge of
information they are faced with. He suggested that ‘it is how we perceive and react
to cataclysmic environmental changes that will determine their ultimate psychic and
social consequences’, and added that ‘if we refuse to see them, we will become their
servants (…), but if we keep our cool during the descent into the maelstrom, studying
the process, we can come through’.41 In Poe’s story, a fisherman was caught in a

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
14
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
deadly whirlpool and faced certain death but ultimately saved his life by observing
the pattern of the maelstrom and understanding how it operates.42
To preserve democracy and the liberal world order, democratic governments, as
Poe’s fisherman, must understand the expansive and cohesive nature of the threat of
distrust. A vicious cycle is active at the geopolitical level. Several vicious cycles are
active at the domestic level. All these cycles feed each other, and so do media and
social media. Unregulated or poorly regulated AI will further accelerate this multi-
dimensional downward spiral. Only by observing its pattern and mechanics, will
democracies be able to safely navigate their social bodies away from it. The analysis
of the global maelstrom of distrust is structured in three levels:
1. Distrust within geopolitics: This dimension constitutes the ‘edge of the
whirl’ of the global maelstrom of distrust. It draws on neorealist, liberal and
constructivist doctrines and focuses on great power competition and the
battle between democracy and autocracy.
2. Distrust within domestic politics: This dimension constitutes the ‘mouth of
the tunnel’ of the global maelstrom of distrust. It mostly draws on sociology
and history and focuses on democratic backsliding, particularly the rise of
polarization and illiberalism in democracies.
3. Distrust, the public sphere and the media and ICT landscape: This
dimension constitutes ‘the hidden core’ of the global maelstrom of distrust.
It mostly draws on communications theory, democratic deliberation
theory and political philosophy and focuses on the problem of distrust in
democracies in relation with the impact of media, social media and AI on
the public sphere.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
15
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Distrust Within Geopolitics: “The
Edge of The Whirl;” Great Power
Competition and The Battle of
Democracy and Autocracy.
Trust and distrust play a central role in international relations. Diplomacy,
multilateralism and international law require and enable trust among States. The
rules-based international order in itself is a liberal architecture of trust. As argued
by Richard Haass, the world order is liberal in the sense that it was to be based
on the rule of law and respect for countries’ sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Human rights were to be protected and institutions like the United Nations and
the Bretton Woods system were developed.43 The liberal world order was designed
after WWII to prevent great wars between major powers, along philosophical
principles that can loosely be traced back to Kant’s perpetual peace.44 At least on
paper, the liberal world order was well-conceived to enable a virtuous cycle of trust
and cooperation among states.
To function effectively, however, the liberal world order requires the backing of
states, particularly the most powerful ones. According to most historians, the
League of Nations failed, to a large extent, due to lack of participation of the
U.S.45 As a result, it could not prevent the rise of distrust among nations and the
politics of aggression of totalitarian regimes that led to WWII. The situation and
the role of the U.S. changed after the war. As argued by Professor John Ikenberry,
“the United States is not just a powerful state operating in a world of anarchy. It
is a producer of world order. ”46 Throughout crises and confrontations, including
the entire Cold War, the modern liberal world order and the UN system have
been sufficiently backed by most states. Crucially, the U.S. has most often been its
bulwark.47 Circumstances, however, have changed and the current situation of the
liberal world order is dire.48 It is suffering a clear erosion and recession, thus not
enabling adequate trust and cooperation among states.49
To better understand this erosion, the paper will consider two factors that have
turned the dreams of a virtuous cycle of trust and cooperation among States into a
vicious cycle of distrust: a) the rise of great power competition, and b) the renewed
battle between democracy and autocracy. The geopolitical cycle constitutes the
edge of the whirl of the global maelstrom of distrust.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
16
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Great power competition: Russia, China and the West
Distrust is embedded in geopolitics. International Relations are, to a large extent,
the study of distrust among powers. This is particularly true for realist doctrines
and especially for neorealism, or structural realism. This school of thought,
though, is far from being monolithic. Offensive realism considers that states seek
power and influence to achieve security through domination and hegemony.
Defensive realism argues that the anarchical structure of the international
system encourages states to maintain moderate policies to attain security.50
Despite the differences between authors, most neorealist scholars would agree
that the international system is anarchic, that there is no credible power above
the states that can compromise the system, that states cannot be certain of the
intentions of other states, and that they all seek to survive and retain influence
in world politics.51 Furthermore, structural realism has little faith in the value of
multilateralism or international institutions: it considers that states have no choice
but to compete with every other state for relative power, as they are locked in a
zero-sum game.
As a result, the management of international distrust, for neorealism, is essentially
the management of the balance of power. Therefore, any changes in this balance,
at global or regional level, exacerbate competition among states and, with it,
distrust. Since the end of WWII, the liberal world order has lived through different
configurations of global power: bipolarity during the Cold War, unipolarity with
the dissolution of the Eastern bloc and the USSR and a more fluid, complex and
unstable situation since the Great Recession.52 As argued by Professor Joseph
Nye, the current world “is neither unipolar, multipolar, nor chaotic, it is all three
at the same time. ”53 Ian Bremmer and Nouriel Roubini have argued that “we are
now living in a G-Zero world, one in which no single country or bloc of countries
has the political and economic leverage -- or the will -- to drive a truly international
agenda”.54 The global balance of power has quickly changed and, as a result,
competition and distrust among states has risen, bringing the geopolitical cycle of
distrust to a dangerous level. To better understand these developments, the paper
will consider two central elements of the changing global balance of power and
their effect on geopolitical distrust: i) relations between Russia and the West, ii) the
impact of China’s rise.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
17
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Relations between Russia and the West
The Russian invasion of Ukraine has ignited the geopolitical cycle of distrust, a
development that has the potential of bringing down the rules based international
order. This claim is based on the consideration that, even if the war is fought
between an invading Russia and a defensive Ukraine, the conflict is much more
than just regional.55 Furthermore, it has ignited distrust between Russia and the
West, but also between China and the U.S.
The West is assisting Ukraine and working to contain and isolate Russia.56 Its
threat perception has dramatically changed, with Finland and Sweden joining
NATO, Germany adopting its ‘Zeitenwende’ , and the EU accepting Ukraine as
a candidate country.57 Moscow also regards the war as a conflict with the entire
West.58 So far, the war is geographically limited to Ukraine, but this country has
historically been (and still is) a geostrategic breakwater of geopolitical tensions
between western powers and the Russian or Soviet Empires, as argued among
others by Mackinder.59
The sources of distrust between Moscow and its western neighbors are deeply
rooted in a violent history that has seen Eastern Europe and the Balkans as the
epicenter of many 19th century great power conflicts and both world wars. For
these and other reasons, George Kennan, the architect of the post WWII Soviet
containment strategy, cautioned in 1997 that the eastward expansion of NATO
would doom democracy in Russia and ignite another Cold War.60 Historic
geostrategic balances would be altered and distrust between the West and Russia
could become unmanageable. Such expansion would have eaten at Moscow’s
sphere of influence, enabling the stationing of allied troops close to its borders.
NATO’s expansion was energized by western distrust on Moscow’s present or
future military intentions towards Eastern Europe. At the same time, even if
NATO is a defensive alliance, Russia’s distrust towards western present or future
military intentions overshadowed this reality. Indeed, Russia had consistently
argued that it felt threatened by NATO’s eastern expansion. Building on these
warnings, Moscow has framed the invasion of Ukraine as a protective war against
the West. Its aggression against Ukraine has been branded with the label of “Z” ,
which stands for Zapad, or ‘West’ . In its December 2021 demands to the US and
NATO (prior to the invasion), amongst other issues, Moscow had requested legally
binding security guarantees that NATO would not expand further, including to

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
18
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Ukraine, and that it would not deploy force or weapons in countries that had
joined the alliance after May 1997. Even if these demands were possibly intended
for rejection, they were reinstating a longstanding Russian view contrary to
NATO’s eastern expansion.61 They were also based on the belief that the West
had violated a commitment not to expand NATO, taking advantage of Russia’s
weakness after the end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the USSR.62 With its
invasion of Ukraine, Russia has tried to assert by force a sphere of influence denied
by NATO’s process of expansion, past and future.
The U.S. and other European capitals may have never formally finalized a
commitment not to expand the military alliance, but they understood that
expanding it to countries that were former members of the Warsaw Pact, and
particularly of the USSR itself, as much as it might have been a historical duty,
could set relations with Russia on a problematic path. The belief, however, was
that Moscow’s distrust on NATO’s intentions could be managed economically
by trade relations and investments and politically through adequate dialogue
and cooperation on strategic stability, conventional arms control and confidence
building measures (CBMs).63
The post-Cold War European Security Architecture reflected this belief, which
held for years. As trade and economic relations grew between the West (especially
the EU) and Russia, so did dialogue and cooperation. This happened bilaterally,
between the U.S. and Moscow, and between the EU and EU MS and Moscow, but
also multilaterally, through the NATO-Russia Council (NRC), within the OSCE,
and at the arms control committees, including the Joint Consultative Group (JCG)
and the Open Skies Consultative Commission (OSCC). As NATO expanded
eastwards, denying Russia’s sphere of influence, however, relations soured, distrust
rose and, ultimately, Moscow initiated its politics of aggression: 2008 against
Georgia, 2014 against Ukraine, 2022 against Ukraine again. Increased economic
interdependence and politico-military dialogue did not suffice to keep the
relationship between Russia and the West afloat. Distrust ultimately overwhelmed
the European Security Architecture and the post-Cold War liberal world order.
However, was the historic cycle of distrust between Moscow and the West
reactivated as a direct consequence of NATOs progressive expansion into Russia’s
perceived sphere of influence? Or where there other issues at play? The U.S. and
Russia had gone through a short ‘honeymoon’ after the 9-11 attacks, while Putin

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
19
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
was in his first term in power and Moscow supported Washington’s war on terror
and its campaign against the Taliban regime in Afghanistan.64 This East-West
rapprochement happened after NATO’s 1999 expansion, which means that this
geostrategic movement did not derail relations between Russia and the West, even
if President Y eltsin had considered it unacceptable at the time. Neither did the
2004 expansion, even if it strongly upset Russia, including by the addition of the
three Baltic states into NATO.
2007 is the year when Russian distrust towards the West and particularly the U.S.
became evident. President Putin gave a speech at the Munich Security Conference
where he accused the U.S. of trying to create a unipolar world, with only ‘one
master, one sovereign’ .65 He raised several issues, including the Iraq War. NATO
expansion did not appear to be Moscow’s exclusive concern, although it had
remained a major issue for years. Furthermore, that same year, Russia suspended
the observance of the CFE treaty.66 The dismantlement of Europe’s post-Cold War
security architecture had begun. A year later, at the Bucharest summit, Putin did
complain about NATO’s possible future expansion to Georgia and Ukraine. Four
months later, it launched the invasion of Georgia.67
In 2007-2008, Russian trust towards the West appeared to be already broken,
or at least severely weakened. The color revolutions and the progressive shift of
Ukraine towards the West only hardened Moscow’s distrust and resolve to push
back against Washington and its European allies. It took over a decade, and the
illegal and brutal full-scale invasion of Ukraine, for most western countries to fully
understand the depth of Russia’s distrust and resentment, and the magnitude of
its challenge to the liberal world order.68 The West reacted in a way that Putin did
not predict. The combination of Ukrainian resistance and Western support has so
far thwarted Putin’s imperialist ambitions, and partially upheld the liberal world
order. It has made clear that there are consequences for the countries that attack
world peace and violate the UN Charter, even if these consequences have not been
able to bend the Kremlin’s will, or isolate Russia.69
At this stage, however, the East-West cycle of distrust appears to be almost
unbreakable. NATO’s eastern expansion is a central factor of this distrust, from
Moscow’s perspective. Russia’s aspiration to establish a sphere of influence in
Eastern Europe and to violently break a liberal world order that does not serve its

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
20
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
expansionist ambitions is the central factor, from the West’s perspective. In the
Global South, things are perceived very differently. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is
mostly regarded as a great power conflict between Moscow and Washington, with
echoes of the Cold War. As a result, aside from their clear stance against Russia’s
invasion at the UN’s General Assembly (UNGA), most governments and societies
in the region have resisted supporting Ukraine or cutting ties with Russia, even
if the global implications of the invasion are clear.70 For a better understanding
of the problem, however, all these perspectives need to be placed in the broader
context of the impact of China’s rise on the landscape of global power.
The impact of China’s rise on the landscape of global
power
The conflict between Russia and the West cannot be fully understood unless it is
placed in the context of a potentially larger conflict between the U.S. and China.
The cycle of distrust between Moscow and the West is correlated and reinforced
by a second cycle of distrust between Beijing, Washington and its Asian allies. This
second cycle of distrust has been activated by the shifting global balance of power.
The U.S. does not hold anymore the hegemony it used to since the end of the Cold
War. At the same time, Beijing’s power has risen dramatically in the economic,
political, technological and military spheres, and can be considered a peer of
Washington on key accounts of global power, or a strategic competitor.71
China is the rising power, the country that is changing the global landscape of
power.72 Without Beijing’s backing or acquiescence, Russia would not have been in
a position to confront the West.73 Putin confirmed this stance at his meeting with
Xi Jinping ahead of the Beijing Winter Olympics opening ceremony in February
2022, where they described the relationship between both countries as a friendship
with no limits and no forbidden areas of cooperation.74 The Kremlin can challenge
the U.S., NATO and the EU, albeit mostly indirectly. It can invade neighboring
countries, engage in hybrid warfare, disinformation, and election interference. It
can destabilize and even trigger a nuclear conflict. But it does not have the power
to ‘create anew’ . It cannot defeat the West. Moscow needed and still needs Beijing’s
backing or acquiescence.
The size of Russia’s economy is similar to Italy’s (even if, when measured in PPP , it
is closer to Germany’s, and it has proven to be particularly resilient to sanctions).75
The transatlantic alliance has proved to be economically and militarily more

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
21
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
powerful than Russia, although it still must show its mid- and long-term resilience.
As argued by James Dobbins, Howard J Shatz and Ali Wyne, “Russia is a rogue, not
a peer. ”76 The rise of China, on the other hand, is perceived as a more fundamental
challenge by the U.S.77 The new National Security Strategy (NSS) and National
Defense Strategy (NDS) prioritize China and the Indo-Pacific, even if the former was
published almost eight months after the Russian invasion of Ukraine. This appeared
to signal that “the U.S. will not allow other crisis to derail the strategic prioritization
of the Indo-Pacific and competition with China. ”78
The rise of China is at the center of Washington’s concerns. Harvard Kennedy School
Professor Graham Allison has argued that this geopolitical change is resulting in
increased structural tensions between Washington and Beijing, as a result of both
powers being locked in Thucydides’ trap.79 .This concept refers to the 5th-century
B.C. History of the Peloponnesian War, when ancient Athenian historian and
military general Thucydides posits, “it was the rise of Athens and the fear that this
instilled in Sparta that made war inevitable. ”80 Joe Nye, however, has warned that
the U.S. should not overestimate Chinese power, which may have peaked already.81
In his view, Washington has long-term advantages over China, even more so when
considering the economic power of its allies. Despite these advantages, the U.S.
increasingly regards Beijing as a peer competitor, economically, militarily and
technologically.82 At the same time, Beijing believes that Washington is striving to
contain and rollback its power, and to isolate it internationally.83
To consolidate its international position and gather support from the Global
South, China has engaged in important economic international initiatives, such
as the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China and
South Africa) or the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific
Partnership (CPTPP).84 The Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), which
is centered on security cooperation and has expanded to joint military exercises,
includes most of the Asian territory. Furthermore, it has developed with Russia
the most consequential non-declared alliance in the world.85 The U.S., in return, is
stepping up the ante. It has done so economically, with the CHIPS Act 2022 or the
Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment (PGII), diplomatically, with
the promotion of AUKUS (Australia, UK and U.S.) and the QUAD (U.S., Australia,
India and Japan), and militarily, with the creation of new military bases in the region
and the support to the rearmament of its Asian allies, particularly Japan and the
Philippines.86

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
22
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
The rise of China and its impact on the global landscape of power has activated
a powerful cycle of distrust between Washington and Beijing. What this entails,
and whether it is manageable, is debated. Policy makers and scholars are striving
to define the new paradigm. Abrams and Hirsch, amongst others, consider that
the world has clearly entered a new Cold War.87 Abrams argues that the U.S. faces
challenges to its interests that are growing each year and may actually be greater
than those of the 20th century: “that is the risk presented when a fully rearmed,
aggressive Russia and a rich, aggressive, and technologically advanced China tell
us that the international order that has lasted since 1945 must end, and American
predominance with it. ”88
Others consider that the paradigm of the Cold War does not apply to the present
situation, as the situation of the global landscape of power and the rivalry between
the U.S. and China is very different from that between the U.S. and the USSR. Most
importantly, the Soviet Union was excluded from the rest of the global economy
behind the Iron Curtain during the Cold War, while China is currently the main
trading power of a still globalized economy, and neither the U.S. nor the EU can
easily decouple from Beijing. Graham Allison considers that, even if “fundamental
and irresolvable differences in values and interests compel the United States and
China to be formidable rivals, this does not mean a hot war is a viable option. ”89
In his view, the U.S. and China are locked in a classic “Thucydidean rivalry, ”
albeit in conditions defined by two contradictory imperatives: to compete in the
greatest rivalry of all time, and to cooperate for each to ensure its own survival.90
Kupchan argues that bipolarity is back, and that competition between the U.S.
and China is better portrayed by the term ‘Cold Peace’ .91 According to Mark
Leonard, Washington is drawing on its experience from the Cold War and trying to
revamp the alliances and institutions that helped it defeat the USSR. Beijing, in the
meantime, is betting that U.S. efforts will be futile, as the world has entered a state
of disorder that excludes the possibility of forming Cold-War style blocs.92
All of these arguments are valid. However, bearing in mind legitimate caveats and
nuances, the argument of this paper is that, as argued by Allison, China and the
U.S. are currently locked in Thucydides’ trap, but also, that this situation is leading
to a new Cold War. Both possibilities are fully compatible. The new Cold War has
not yet fully crystallized, but it is quickly taking shape. It may still lose strength and
evolve into a “thaw” , as announced by President Biden.93 The need of cooperation
may prevail over the pressures towards competition and confrontation.94 But, for

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
23
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
both domestic and geopolitical reasons, distrust between Washington and Beijing
will most likely remain at very high levels and shake bilateral efforts to lower
tensions.
As happened during the Cold War, distrust and rivalry between the two greatest
world powers will shape geopolitics for decades to come. It has already produced
a seismic shift. The changing landscape of power has brought Moscow and Beijing
closer than ever, due to strategic and ideological reasons.95 This runs against the
historic rivalry between both countries.96 China and Russia are challenging U.S.
power and the liberal world order. Washington and its allies are cooperating to
contain or rollback their revisionist power. True, the Global South is abstaining
from taking sides, and this is still an important (relative) difference with the past
Cold War.97 But some southern capitals could tip the balance if they did. For the
time being, many perceive the confrontation between the West and Russia as the
preamble of the potentially more destabilizing competition between the U.S. and its
allies and China.
Like in the Cold War between the U.S. and the USSR, the current geopolitical
competition between the U.S. and China is unstable and prone to military
escalation. A possible military crisis over Taiwan looms on the horizon.98 Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine has shown that powerful autocracies can be ready to initiate
wars despite western assumptions about the irrationality of such behavior. As
happened during the lowest levels of the Cold War, trust among the great powers is
broken or severely eroded. As a result, the existing competition could slide towards
a hot great power war.99 There are reasons to believe that a U.S.-China war could
even erupt sooner than expected. General Minihan, who heads the Air Force’s Air
Mobility Command, wrote in an internal memo, circulated on social media, to the
leadership of its 110,000 members, that President Xi Jinping “secured his third term
and set his war council in October 2022. Taiwan’s presidential elections are in 2024
and will offer Xi a reason. United States’ presidential elections are in 2024 and will
offer Xi a distracted America. Xi’s team, reason, and opportunity are all aligned for
2025. ”100 As in the Cold War, nuclear deterrence and the paradigm of M.A.D. may
prevent this from happening, but the risk of nuclear escalation is alive.101
At the same time, the new Cold War that is taking shape is certainly very different
from the previous one between the Eastern and Western blocs. The world’s
balance of power is more complex, the Global South weighs much more in terms

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
24
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
of relative power, relationships and rivalries are multilayered, and the stakes are
more unpredictable. Furthermore, the new Cold War in the making is so far
asymmetric, unlike the previous one. This is so because there are two distinct
conflict dyads, two distinct sets of opposing blocs and two primal geopolitical
cycles of distrust, instead of only one. One conflict dyad opposes the West and
Russia and the second one the U.S. and its Asian allies and China. The West is
united as a single NATO bloc against Russia.102 The competition with China,
though, is very different, as it is a priority for the U.S., but continental Europe is
more reluctant to adopt a confrontational stance vis--vis Beijing. This asymmetry
between both conflict dyads poses challenges to the transatlantic strategy, but it
can also be useful to set some global guardrails in the power competition between
the U.S. and China.
Keeping stable relations is important for China and the EU, given the magnitude
of their economic and commercial relationship. European countries are more
aware than ever of the geopolitical risks derived from an economic dependency
on China, as the energetic dependency from Russia has shown. HR/VP Borrell has
clearly talked about the need for the EU to confront the reality of its three main
external dependencies (energetic with Russia, economic with China and security
with the U.S.).103 Even if the new geopolitical direction may be clear, and trust
between Brussels and other European capitals and Beijing is scarce, the economic
repercussions of the Russian invasion of Ukraine in Europe have made it more
difficult to decouple from China. Despite rising distrust, the EU and China must
keep their economic relationship afloat out of mutual dependency. As decoupling
is not possible, so far, the EU and the U.S. seem to agree on a more limited goal,
which is that of ‘de-risking’ the relationship with China and promote ‘friend
shoring’ strategies.104 The positive side effect of this more limited approach is that
it may prevent further economic damage, while retaining more leverage to prevent
Beijing from getting even closer to Moscow, or at least delay this risk.105
However, the asymmetric Cold War in the making could quickly evolve in a very
dangerous direction. It could evolve into a Great Cold War if China and the U.S.
escalate their confrontation, as such developments would most likely contribute to
a merging of both conflict dyads into a single one. Under such a scenario, the EU
would likely follow the U.S. more closely to contain Beijing, and a bloc including
the West and its Asian allies would be facing another bloc consisting of China,
Russia and their partners, with few or irrelevant asymmetries. A Great Cold War

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
25
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
could see tensions rise and bring the world dangerously close to a possible military
confrontation. This scenario, undesired for all parties, could lose steam if the
current efforts of dialogue between the U.S. and China are not derailed by any
unfortunate development, such as the “silly balloon” incident of February 2023.106
The changing landscape of global power has ignited the geopolitical cycle of
distrust. As has been explained, the collapse of the Soviet Empire, the Eastern
expansion of NATO, and Russia’s military build-up and aggression has reactivated
the historical cycle of distrust between the West and Moscow. The rise of China,
its aspiration to become Asia’s hegemonic power, and Washington’s push-back,
has energized the cycle of distrust between China and the U.S. and its Asian allies.
The central position of the U.S. within both cycles of distrust and the undeclared
alliance between Russia and China has contributed to merge both cycles of distrust
into a single geopolitical cycle of distrust.
The origins of this single geopolitical cycle of distrust are partly rooted in great
power competition, but not only. An ideological battle is also feeding it, at a deeper
level. The ideologic dimension is necessary to fully understand the reasons behind
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and the decided Western reaction. It is also necessary
to better understand the partnership between Moscow and Beijing. Rather
than trying to balance a rising China, Russia has accepted to become its junior
partner, in a maneuver that goes against a longstanding policy since the Tsars.107
Putin seems to be more worried about the immediate stability of his regime, the
protection and expansion of his nationalist project, and democracy in general,
than about possible future military buildups across the borders of Russia.
The renewed battle between democracy and autocracy
The new Cold War in the making has a deep ideological component. There is
a long-term competition between democracy and autocracy, which has been
activated by the renewed great power rivalry. Powerful autocracies distrust
powerful democracies, as the latter defend a world order that interferes with
their interests and undermines their legitimacy.108 Powerful democracies distrust
powerful autocracies, as the latter push to change, erode or overthrow the western-
led liberal world order. An ideological competition feeds the power rivalry, and
vice versa.109 The new Cold War in the making is taking the shape of a battle
between democracy and autocracy.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
26
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
This battle constitutes the key element that has merged the U.S.-China cycle of
distrust and the Western-Russia cycle of distrust into a single geopolitical cycle of
distrust which is enabling the new Cold War in the making. The process is not yet
completed, because even if ideology matters, it is not the only force at play: strong
economic and commercial interests, namely in Europe, but also in the U.S. and
China, are acting as headwinds of the battle between democracy and autocracy.
The compatibility between political regimes is a central element of international
relations, but not the only one. As was analyzed in the previous section, power
matters, raw interests matter, not only ideology. Interests, ideology and morals can
be combined in very diverse ways.110 Currently, globalization is pushing in one
direction, and the geopolitical cycle of distrust in the opposite one. Globalization
has been dominant for over two decades. The geopolitical cycle of distrust is the
novel element, the unwelcome guest to the process of rethinking the world order.
Absent the ideological component, there would be no single geopolitical cycle
of distrust. Russia and China would not have formed their undeclared alliance,
and Washington would not have succeeded in rallying its European and Asian
democratic allies to push back against autocratic efforts to undermine the liberal
world order. The ideological component, however, is present. Security, prosperity,
and the protection of the liberal world order are the paramount objectives of the
transatlantic alliance and the relationship between the U.S. and its Asian allies.
But ideological affinity, or democracy, is the enabler, or ‘glue’ , as it facilitates trust
among diverse countries. Security, prosperity and the transformation of the world
order into a friendly environment for autocracies are the paramount objectives
of Russia and China. Ideological affinity, or autocracy, is the enabler, as it allows
two great powers with competing geopolitical interests to work together against
liberal democracy. This section of the paper will cover two dimensions of the
battle between democracy and autocracy: i) the roots of distrust, ii) the autocratic
offensive.
The roots of distrust between democracies and
autocracies
On March 26, 2022, U.S. President Biden remarked that “we emerged anew in the
great battle for freedom: a battle between democracy and autocracy, between liberty
and repression, between a rules-based order and one governed by brute force. In this
battle, we need to be clear-eyed. This battle will not be won in days or months either.
We need to steel ourselves for the long fight ahead. ”111

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
27
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
This framing has been criticized by several analysts, pointing to its inaccuracies.112
Some, coming from a neorealist perspective, consider that ideology is not the main
issue at play in the conflict between Moscow and Kyiv, nor the main motivation
of Washington either. In their view, the main driver would be security and power.
Others argue that many democracies, particularly in the Global South, are neither
working to isolate Russia, nor siding with the West and Ukraine. An incorrect
framing of the conflict could complicate its resolution, making it intractable.113
In essence, however, and despite the possible inaccuracies and inconveniences
of the ‘democracy versus autocracy’ framing, President Biden was correct. When
power, security, and the definition of the world order are at play, the longstanding
ideological competition and distrust between democracy and autocracy naturally
arise at the apex of global power. The changed and changing landscape of power
has reignited this ideological competition between the great powers. It happened
in the 1930’s, during the Cold War, and it is happening again.
President Biden is not alone in the understanding that there is a conflict
between democracy and autocracy. President Zelensky has consistently framed
the Ukrainian self-defense battle as one being motivated by the desire of
independence, freedom and democracy.114 On February 22, 2023, Ukraine’s
Foreign Minister Kuleba said, during an event at the Harvard Kennedy School,
“freedom is what makes Ukraine part of the West”. Similarly, the EU’s new Strategic
Compass describes a “competition of governance systems accompanied by a real
battle of narratives. ”115 Most European leaders see the conflict in a similar fashion.
This is the main reason why Ukraine has been given the candidate country status
in the EU. Ukraine’s resistance is perceived as a courageous war effort that is
protecting Europe, its stability, prosperity and democracy.
Joseph Nye’s concept of soft power is essential to understand the ideological
dimension of modern-day international relations. It has been described through
the following example: “when one country gets other countries to want what it
wants might be called co-optive or soft power in contrast with the hard or command
power of ordering others to do what it wants”.116 Soft power would be non-coercive,
and it includes culture, political values and foreign policy. Nye also asserts that,
“seduction is always more effective than coercion, and many values like democracy,
human rights, and individual opportunities are deeply seductive. ”117 The soft power
of democracy has enabled the clear alignment of U.S. and European countries to

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
28
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
provide assistance to Ukraine and push back against Russia.
Democracy and human rights being seductive presents a key challenge for
autocracies, though. The fall of communism and the collapse of the USSR,
perceived by Putin as the worst geopolitical catastrophe of the 20th century, did
not come as a result of military defeat. The implosion took place mostly from
within. As argued by Larisa Deriglazova, “most experts tend to believe that the
dissolution of the USSR was a natural process that could not be prevented and
that the Soviet collapse was the result of internal contradictions. ”118 These internal
contradictions, however, became evident in contrast with lifestyle in the West.
Diana Viliers Negroponte explains that Glasnost (opening) encouraged the
publication of critical letters in Izvestia, Pravda, and on Russian television: “This
greater freedom of expression combined with the lifting of the ban on Western radio
broadcasts allowed Soviet citizens to both criticize their own government and learn
about national movements for freedom in Eastern Europe. ”119
The press and the TV , as much as communist economic and political sclerosis and
western technological superiority, made this possible. These mediums channeled
the values and lifestyle of the West, which acted as a lighthouse of democracy in
a bipolar world.120 The PRC received its own warning about the seductive power
of democracy and human rights during the 1989 Tiananmen protests, which it
brutally crushed.121 The magnetic influence of Western soft power was a decisive
element to win the Cold War.122 Hard power contained the USSR. Soft power
defeated it.
Soft power, though, is bivalent. As Angelo Codevilla observed, an often-
overlooked essential aspect of soft power is that different parts of populations are
attracted or repelled by different things, ideas, images, or prospects. Soft power
is hampered when policies, culture, or values repel others instead of attracting
them.123 Autocrats have good reasons to distrust democracies, as they promote
democracy and human rights and, in doing so, challenge their rule.124 Autocracies
also possess soft power, although it is based on very different values and ideals as
democracies. Liberal democracies are founded on the notion of universal human
rights, and particularly on the values of freedom and political equality. Autocracies
value order above all else, dictatorial or elitist, and are ready to use force and
violence to crash political dissent. Freedom, political equality and universal human
rights are incompatible with authoritarian rule.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
29
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
This conflictive political reality is well exemplified by the downward turn of
relations between the West and Russia. As was argued before, NATOs eastern
expansion was a major source of rising distrust between Moscow and the West,
but not the only one. After being one of the strongest supporters of the U.S. after
9-11, Putin turned around, deciding that Washington had disrespected Russia and
was unreliable. As David Ignatius has explained, the declassification of documents
from the George W . Bush Administration has shown that the Russian-American
counterterrorism alliance ruptured after the attacks by Chechen separatists on a
school in Beslan in 2004, where 333 people were killed; “In the aftermath, Putin
blamed the United States for encouraging the separatists by offering asylum to
‘moderate’ Chechens and urging Russia to negotiate with them. ” (…) “We never got
back on track” after the Beslan incident, argued Thomas Graham, who was Bush’s
National Security Council senior director for Russia at the time. “Putin concluded
(wrongly in the U.S. view) that the U.S. counterterrorism campaign was just a
smokescreen to cover American geopolitical advance in Eurasia at Russia’s expense. ”125
Putin lost trust on the U.S., and this perception was later aggravated by the
evolution of internal politics in Ukraine, the color revolutions, and the perception
of Western involvement. Everything went downhill from there. The U.S. had
established a solid relationship with Russia, based on pragmatism and a common
interest of fighting international terrorism. This can be called a clear example of
realpolitik. But this relationship came off the rails by the internal mechanics of
two radically different political systems and traditions.126 What is ordinary in a
liberal democracy can be considered hostile by an illiberal pseudo-democracy, an
anocracy, or an authoritarian regime. Moscow could not understand the concession
of asylum to a Chechen leader by the U.S. (or the award of a federally funded
fellowship) but in the framework of a political decision to undermine Russia. A
solid partnership between a liberal democracy and an illiberal government couldn’t
work indefinitely, particularly if both were great powers with diverging geopolitical
interests. The inner mechanics of their respective political systems would sooner or
later drive them apart, as real understanding and trust were unachievable.
The invasion of Ukraine took place against the backdrop of this distrust. A
hypothetical future NATO expansion to Ukraine can be perceived by the Kremlin as
a potential military threat to Russia, as Moscow has often stated and as was already
analyzed. However, the ideological dimension and, more concretely, the democracy
vs. autocracy paradigm, in the context of the reality of Russian nationalism, appears

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
30
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
to be a more decisive factor. On July 12, 2021, Russian President Vladimir Putin
published an essay “On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians. ” He
wrote: “During the recent Direct Line, when I was asked about Russian-Ukrainian
relations, I said that Russians and Ukrainians were one people – a single whole, ” (…),
and added “the wall that has emerged in recent years between Russia and Ukraine,
between the parts of what is essentially the same historical and spiritual space
(…) is also the result of deliberate efforts by those forces that have always sought
to undermine our unity (…), the overarching goal being to divide and then to pit
the parts of a single people against one another (…). ”127
Ukraine’s willingness to move towards the West, towards the EU and NATO,
represented (and still does) a major ideological threat to nationalist Russia’s
conception of itself. Ukraine’s independence, self-determination and democratic
evolution was (and still is) the main challenge to an autocratic Russia. NATO’s
possible expansion to Ukraine basically consolidated that threat. From the
perspective of western democracies, Russia’s aggression is unacceptable in itself
and as a consequence of the threat that it constitutes to the main tenets of the UN
Charter. In helping Ukraine, the West is also aiming to protect European security,
democracy and the entire liberal world order. The ideological element is central to
both sides.
Beijing and Moscow have understood the problem that Western liberal democratic
soft power poses to their regimes and have acted in consequence. Defensively,
autocracies have closed their public spheres, which had become increasingly
permeated by the Internet and the spread of liberal and democratic ideas. The
development of the Great Firewall of China is one of the most relevant steps of this
authoritarian inward, protective, shift.128 This shift has been particularly evident
since the financial and economic crisis of 2007-2008, which showed cracks in
Western power, resilience and credibility.129 When power and the definition of
the rules of the game are at stake, the clash between (powerful) democracies and
(powerful) autocracies is unavoidable. The democratic peace theory only applies to
relations between democracies.130 The changed and changing landscape of global
power has reopened the centuries-old battle between democracy and autocracy
and enabled the formation of a single geopolitical cycle of distrust.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
31
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
The autocratic offensive
In the context of this renewed ideological battle, Russia and China have turned
increasingly to the offensive. For years, their official narratives have denounced
what they call Western interference and double standards.131 Their use of
international fora to remind States of Western military interventions, including in
Kosovo, Iraq, Afghanistan or Libya, is coupled with the criminalization of the use
of sanctions by the West, or of political statements on electoral crises and human
rights violations.132 Russia and China present themselves as non-interventionist
actors in the global sphere, consistently respectful of other countries’ sovereignty
and independence, as opposed to the West.
In theory, Moscow should have lost all credibility in the wake of its 2008
aggression against Georgia, 2014 against Ukraine, its intervention later in Syria
to support Assad, and its unprovoked full-scale invasion of Ukraine since 2022.
The Wagner Group’s presence and interference in the domestic affairs of African
countries added to Moscow’s interventionist offensive.133 One of Russia’s most
common talking points is that the West has done worse things globally. This
argument is often effective to keep many countries in the Global South from
effectively ‘taking sides’ against Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Beyond their votes at
the UNGA, most are not keen on supporting Ukraine militarily or economically,
or isolating Russia.
Beijing is directly sponsoring its model of autocracy, which it calls ‘socialist
democracy’ , across the world, labeling it as a superior form of rule than liberal
democracy.134 The PRC can present the outstanding economic success of having
lifted hundreds of millions of citizens out of poverty in an incredibly short
timeframe, and contrast it with Western economic, social and political troubles
since the Great Recession. Its Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) is not only a massive
project of infrastructure development and economic expansion, but also a massive
investment on public diplomacy.135 The ideological challenge of Russia and
China against Western liberal democracy is real, and central to these countries
strategies to erode and dismantle -in Moscow’s case- or change -in Beijing’s case-
the liberal world order.136 Both countries want to move away from a world order
that keeps the protection and promotion of universal human rights at its center.137
In their view, this model represents an outdated system of Western democratic
domination, conceived to weaken and threaten their rule.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
32
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Hybrid warfare is a central element of Russia’s and China’s offensive against
democracies and includes a decisive ideological component.138 Political and
social stability across the world, including in the West, is targeted, particularly
by Moscow. Its actions have included electoral interference and disinformation
campaigns.139 Decaying trust in democracy and political polarization are
perceived as strategic vulnerabilities of democracies, their real “ Achilles heel” , as
will be further analyzed in the next section. Russia and China are leaving no stone
unturned to erode Western unity and its reputation in the world. They consider
that, this time, they can win the ideological battle against the West, partly because
they perceive Western soft power as being in decay, and they actively sponsor this
narrative.140
“There are at least two Wests, ” Putin has said. One, he has said, is a West of
“traditional, mainly Christian values” with which Russians feel kinship. But, in his
view, “there’s another West — aggressive, cosmopolitan, neocolonial, acting as the
weapon of the neoliberal elite, ” and trying to impose its “pretty strange” values on
the rest of the world.141 These words fit into a pattern of actions, that confirms
that Russia also believes that there’s an existential battle between democracy and
autocracy. From Moscow’s perspective, though, the liberal West is ‘aggressive,
cosmopolitan, neocolonial, acts as the weapon of the neoliberal elite and tries to
impose its “pretty strange” values on the rest of the world’ . Russia, on the other
side, is traditional and inspired by Christian values, just like ‘the other West’ .
For Putin, Russia is on the democratic side of the battle, and the West in the
authoritarian one. Already in June 2007 he said: “Of course, I am an absolute, pure
democrat. But you know the problem? It’s not even a problem, it’s a real tragedy.
The thing is that I am the only one, there just aren’t any others in the world. ”142
Putin, like Xi Jinping, has consistently claimed his country to be a democracy,
‘with its own traditions of national self-government, and not the realization of
standards foisted on us from outside’ . He has also consistently attacked the West
and questioned its democratic credentials, and even more so after his invasion of
Ukraine, which was partly framed as a crusade against Nazism. But Putin has also
made clear that there are ‘at least two Wests’ . One is an enemy, but the other one
can be a friend. In his view, there’s a West ‘of traditional, mainly Christian values’ ,
that Russians feel kinship with.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
33
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
This perspective, rather than being dismissed as a propaganda effort to sow
divisions in the West, must be analyzed, as it provides an insight into Moscow’s
strategy. It is necessary to determine whether there are ‘at least two Wests’ , and
what this means. This question connects the geopolitical cycle of distrust with
the analysis of democracies’ domestic cycles of distrust, particularly in the U.S.
This analysis is essential because, together, the geopolitical and domestic cycles
of distrust have formed the global maelstrom of distrust that can bring down
democracy and the liberal world order.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
34
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Distrust Within Domestic Politics:
“The Mouth of The Tunnel;” The
Crisis of Liberal Democracy and The
Rise of Polarization and Illiberalism
Trust within geopolitics is shaped by three dimensions: power, ideology, and
interpersonal relations. The previous section of the paper has focused on power
relations and ideology, and only anecdotally on interpersonal relations. However,
these constitute an essential element of trust at every level of human relations,
including geopolitics.143 Trust or distrust among Presidents, Prime Ministers and
Ministers of Foreign Affairs shape international relations. Trust or distrust among
Ambassadors and diplomats in general modulate cooperation in multilateral
organizations and bilateral relations.144 Interpersonal trust is the essence of
any form of trust, but it is constrained by structural factors, such as power and
ideological competition.
Within these constraints, interpersonal trust between political leaders can
make an important difference, for good and for bad. For instance, the current
geopolitical cycle of distrust is partly enabled by the existing distrust between
the political leadership of the great powers, particularly the Presidents of the
U.S. and the Russian Federation.145 Constraints on interpersonal trust between
leaders, however, are not only geopolitical, but also domestic. Trump, for instance,
could not fully develop his proclaimed aim of improving relations with Russia to
undermine the liberal world order, as a consequence of international and domestic
factors, including opposition by the Democratic Party. During his presidency, he
tried to remove those constraints.146 Now, domestic politics might also complicate
President Biden’s efforts to move towards a “thaw” in relations with China.147
In democracies, foreign policy is always constrained by domestic and electoral
politics, and governments’ margins of maneuver are limited. Besides, political
competition generates a frequent democratic “swing of the pendulum” , which
autocracies and many other actors, foreign and domestic, try to manipulate in
their favor. Trump’s reversal of Obama’s foreign policy achievements, on climate
change, Iran or Cuba, are recent examples. The role of lobbies and electoral politics
are better indicators of these reversals than foreign policy considerations. As

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
35
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Tip O’ Neill, former Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives, used to say, “all
politics is local. ”148
Given the centrality of domestic realities in all politics, including geopolitics, the
next part of the paper will focus on a particular type of structural constraint on the
foreign policy of democratic countries: the impact of rising distrust. Even if this
rise can be traced back several decades, its effects have only become evident in the
last decade, and more concretely in 2016, year of Brexit and the election of Donald
Trump. Rising distrust within democracies has been feeding a spiral of political
polarization and illiberalism, a phenomenon that is in the radar of autocracies.
Distrust in democracy is a severe democratic vulnerability, the “ Achilles heel” of
democracies in the battle with autocracy. Russia and China are exploiting this
vulnerability through hybrid warfare and disinformation.
As a result, the domestic cycles of distrust within democracies and the geopolitical
cycle of distrust between great powers are generating powerful feedback loops
amongst each other. These cycles have been synchronized and, together, they
have formed the global maelstrom of distrust. The geopolitical cycle may be the
most visible, but it only constitutes the edge of the whirl. Below it, the domestic
cycles of distrust form the mouth of the tunnel of the maelstrom. The analysis of
distrust within domestic democratic politics will focus on two issues: i) democratic
vulnerability to autocratic interference, ii) rising polarization and illiberalism.
Democratic vulnerability to autocratic interference.
In 1858, after accepting the Illinois Republican Party’s nomination as the state’s US
senator, Abraham Lincoln said “a House divided against Itself cannot stand” .149 This
concept is ancient wisdom.150 The inner life of political entities (Republics, Empires,
States or Nation-States) is a central factor of geopolitics.151 It was the case in the 19th
century, when Abraham Lincoln presided over the greatest crisis in U.S. history, and
it is now.152 During the American Civil war, every other nation was officially neutral,
and none formally recognized the Confederacy. American weakness during its Civil
war did not come without severe consequences in the international arena, though.153
The inner life of modern States is a central factor of present-day geopolitics too.154
Today, the changing landscape of global power has revitalized the secular battle
between democracy and autocracy. This confrontation, though, finds liberal

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
36
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
democracies in a precarious situation.155 Many are experiencing historically
high and very concerning levels of distrust and political polarization, which is
undermining democratic governance. Democracy has been in retreat worldwide,
even more so since the Great Recession, and even advanced Western democracies
are suffering the consequences.156
Certainly, not only democracies face internal challenges. Autocracies are generally
more unstable. The collapse of communist regimes in Eastern Europe and the
USSR is a good historic example. Color revolutions, or the Arab Spring, have
taken root mostly within autocracies, not in liberal democracies. As argued
by David Brooks, “government against the people is a recipe for decline. ”157
The questioning of its flawed legitimacy is destabilizing for authoritarian
regimes. Bruce Schneier and Henry Farrell, for instance, contrast the stability
of democracies and autocracies through the lens of information security.158 As
they explain, “autocracies do not require common political knowledge about
the efficacy and fairness of elections, and strive to maintain a monopoly on
other forms of common political knowledge”: “they actively suppress common
political knowledge about potential groupings within their society, their levels
of popular support, and how they might form coalitions with each other. ” As a
result, “authoritarian regimes are vulnerable to information attacks that challenge
their monopoly on common political knowledge. ”159 Autocracies need censorship,
repression and propaganda to preserve their stability. Truth corrodes their
legitimacy.
Prigozhin’s recent insurrection against Putin’s authority, even if short-lived,
shows that stability is unpredictable in a country that is ruled by fear, corruption
and propaganda. Putin’s strong-man reputation has been shattered, and also his
reasons to invade Ukraine. As argued by David Ignatius, “Prigozhin told the truth
flat out in the days before his march on Moscow. Ukraine didn’t threaten Russia, and
Russia’s invasion was unnecessary — a mistake of epic proportions. ”160 However, it is
uncertain whether the failed mutiny will leave President Vladimir Putin weakened,
strengthened or vindictive.161 His regime may have been lethally wounded, or it
may consolidate itself by turning more totalitarian.
Furthermore, as argued by Alexey Navalny, even if Ukraine achieves success
against the Russian invasion, “where is the guarantee that the world will not
find itself confronting an even more aggressive regime, tormented by resentment

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
37
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
and imperial ideas that have little to do with reality?”162 Putin’s invasion may
ultimately fail, and this outcome would be desirable for Ukraine, for the West, for
the liberal world order and for Russia itself. Putin’s regime may even collapse, yet
it is unclear in which direction would Russia head. The odds are, it may remain
autocratic and resentful of the West, which means that both the U.S., the EU and
its Member States, and other allies, must still prepare themselves for the new
Cold War, and strengthen their democratic resilience.
China is also facing very relevant domestic challenges: political, economic, and
demographic, amongst others.163 But the reality of Russia’s troubles and the
possibility of “peak China” do not imply that the perspectives for democracies are
necessarily excellent. Autocratic instability does not undermine the arguments
to reinforce democratic resilience, it strengthens them. The reason is that, if
autocracies feel strong, and perceive democracies to be vulnerable, they will
interfere and try to destabilize them. If autocracies feel weak, yet perceive
democracies to be vulnerable, they might double down on interference, out of
resentment and desperation. If autocracies collapse, the ripple effects may further
destabilize democracies. The aftermath of the Arab Spring and the civil wars in
Libya or Syria, which generated a massive flow of refugees into Europe, is a case
in point.164
There is only one scenario which reduces these threats: increased democratic
resilience. If democracies are strong, stable, cohesive, and generally trusted by
their citizens, autocracies will detect a steep reduction in their vulnerability to
foreign interference. As a result, their incentives to engage in hybrid warfare and
disinformation will be reduced. At the same time, their incentives to find avenues
of cooperation will increase. Gorbachev’s reforms, for instance, happened against
the backdrop of a Soviet perception that the U.S. was powerful and stable and
Cold War tensions had to be reduced if Moscow wanted to focus on internal
reconstruction.165 Furthermore, stable and resilient democracies are logically
more able to cope with crises, including those originated by autocracies’ collapse.
Increasing democratic resilience is the path to regain domestic and geopolitical
trust and stability, but the current domestic situation of democracies is far from
optimal. In the West, distrust and polarization are extremely high. Information
corrodes autocracy, but disinformation corrodes democracy, and disinformation
is rampant nowadays. The “battle between democracy and autocracy” is not only

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
38
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
taking place between great powers, but also within democracies. The attack on the
U.S. Capitol on January 6th, 2021, epitomizes the domestic autocratic threat. In the
U.S., President Biden has named the struggle between democracy and autocracy
“the battle for the Soul of the Nation. ”166 Democratic backsliding has made progress
throughout the world and is re-shaping some democracies into autocracies or
anocracies.167 Developments in Hungary, Poland, Turkey, India, or Israel, to name
just a few, are known examples of democratic backsliding.168
Anocracies, regimes which are neither fully democratic nor fully autocratic (they
may run elections, but rights and freedoms, like the freedom of the press, are
curtailed), are actually the most volatile political regimes.169 As argued by Barbara
F . Walter, compared with democracies, anocracies with more democratic than
autocratic features are three times more likely to experience political instability
or civil war.170 Autocracies and anocracies deprive people from some or most of
their rights, including the right to political equality, which is the foundation of
liberal democracy.171 Logically, such regimes are uninterested in preserving the
liberal world order as is, and would rather dismantle the international humans
right system.172 Hence, democratic backsliding is not only a domestic political
development, it is a major geopolitical development.
Rising distrust within democracies, particularly in the U.S. and the EU, constitutes
the “mouth of the tunnel” of the global maelstrom of distrust. The U.S. ’ domestic
cycle of distrust influences democratic politics worldwide, especially in Europe and
Latin America.173 At the same time, it also constitutes the center of gravity of the
geopolitical cycle of distrust. The reason is that all geopolitical actors are taking
note of rising distrust and polarization within the U.S., as it may enable the largest
reshaping of the world order since the fall of the USSR, and possibly since the end
of WWII.
The domestic cycles of distrust within European countries, especially in EU
Member States and the UK, are also crucial. They also influence democratic politics
worldwide, and they constitute a second center of gravity of the geopolitical cycle
of distrust. Brexit is a case in point. All geopolitical actors are taking note of this
phenomenon. This is the case particularly of Russia, that keeps feeding the European
cycles of distrust, in the hope that far-right, illiberal parties, “the West that Russia
can be friends with, ” will benefit from the situation. Moscow’s hope is, ultimately, to
weaken and if possible divide the EU and NATO.174

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
39
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
The domestic cycles of distrust in the U.S. and in EU Member States are the
central tectonic plates that condition great power competition worldwide. They
are “the mouth of the tunnel” of the global maelstrom of distrust. Hence, a strong,
stable U.S., in alliance with a strong, stable EU and other democratic actors, are
the only possible guarantors of the liberal world order. Democratic backsliding,
particularly in the West, is a welcome development for autocracies, which find
reasons to trust that a better world order for their interests is possible. Eroding
trust and internal divisions in democracies are perceived by autocracies as
vulnerabilities of liberal democracies.
China, and especially Russia, are aggressively interfering in the internal affairs of
liberal democracies.175 This also happened in the past Cold War, but all Soviet
efforts were mostly unsuccessful then. The U.S. in particular always remained
strongly united internally against communism. The situation this time is different.
Political polarization in the U.S. and Europe are enabling Russia’s offensive.
Against this troublesome background, it is difficult to deny that there are currently
two Wests, as Putin claims. Most Westerners remain identified with liberal
democratic principles, but a substantive portion of the Western population has
lost significant trust in democratic institutions and is supporting populist and
even extremist political options.176 Political polarization and gridlock are common
currencies of contemporary democratic governance.
Moscow’s hybrid warfare has already had successes. The Kremlin did interfere
in the 2016 U.S. elections, and the candidate it supported was elected President.
Whether Russia’s interference was a decisive factor of Trump’s victory, or not,
is secondary. Russia learned that it could interfere in a democratic election in
the most powerful country on Earth, sow chaos and divisions, see its preferred
candidate elected, and pay little political price, as polarization keeps Americans
divided also about Russia. As Robert Putnam has explained, “a long-term
bipartisan consensus on U.S.-Russian relations was rapidly converted to mass
polarization after 2016, as President Trump signaled to his base that sympathy for
Russia was now the appropriate policy view. ”177
There are few reasons to believe the Kremlin will not try to repeat this feat in the
2024 U.S. Presidential elections (and other European elections). In the U.S., the
possible election of Trump or another illiberal populist candidate could radically
change the state of international affairs. It may or may not happen, but a second

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
40
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Trump Presidency could weaken and possibly break up NATO, stop Western
support to Ukraine, and see Moscow’s geopolitical objectives fully or partially
achieved, in a way that seems unfeasible if President Biden was reelected.178
More importantly, the U.S. could come out more weakened and fractured from a
contentious presidential election, regardless of its concrete outcome.
An isolationist turn in Washington could be the result of policies furthered by a
new Administration, or of generalized political dysfunction. Either way, it would
constitute the downfall of the liberal world order. The last time that the U.S.
followed an isolationist foreign policy, the world order collapsed: fascist Italy,
Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan seized the opportunity to launch their politics
of aggression, which led to WWII. These are enough reasons for the Kremlin
to continue betting on interference. As long as the U.S. and other democracies
appear to be “a house divided, ” autocracies will continue interfering in their affairs
and aiming to subvert the liberal world order. Ultimately, the global maelstrom
of distrust revolves around democracies’ divisions, which enable autocratic
interference. It is therefore necessary to better understand the sources of these
divisions.
Rising polarization and illiberalism
Hybrid warfare and disinformation from autocracies are not the only threats
with geopolitical repercussions that are magnified by the rise of distrust and
polarization in liberal democracies. The most relevant challenges arise from
democracies themselves. A U.S. default due to failed debt ceiling negotiations, for
instance, could be a major blow to the world economy and global stability. It has
been so far averted but could happen in a future if political polarization remains
so high. Likewise, if the U.S. suffered another post-election crisis after the 2024
Presidential elections, or if politically motivated violence increased, U.S. stability
and the fate of the liberal world order could be seriously compromised. It is not
even necessary to analyze whether worst-case scenarios (such as the eruption of
massive political violence in the U.S. or even a civil war) are likely or even feasible,
and what their global geopolitical repercussions would be.179 Less extreme
scenarios, such as the ones described, can be already extremely destabilizing, and
do not seem too far-fetched anymore.
Most of these scenarios derive from domestic political dysfunction, which comes

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
41
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
as a result of (and is manifested in) rising distrust in government and society and
increased polarization. Is there a correlation, though, between these two factors?
Political philosopher Kevin Vallier considers that collapsing trust is arguably
connected to increasing American political polarization, perhaps as both cause and
effect. As he explains, “we can see the causal arrows running in both directions: low
trust in government increases polarization, and high polarization decreases trust in
government. ”180 Furthermore, he argues that there is probably a negative feedback
loop between falling social and political trust and rising political polarization,
which he calls the ‘distrust-divergence hypothesis’ (social and political distrust leads
to partisan divergence, but increased trust reduces partisan divergence).181
The correlation, however, goes beyond this feedback loop. As explained by Professor
Henry E. Brady, confidence in governing institutions has not only fallen but it is
also politically polarized.182 Furthermore, it also affects non-political institutions.
In the U.S., as expected, there are partisan differences in confidence in political
institutions (Republicans trust Republican presidents and Democrats trust
Democratic presidents).183 However, what is more striking, is that this phenomenon
has increasingly affected non-political institutions: “For the Democrats, confidence
is higher than for the Republicans in what we might call the knowledge-producing
institutions: the press, TV news, public schools, higher education, and science. For
the Republicans, confidence is higher than for the Democrats in the norm-enforcing
and order-preserving institutions: religion, police, and the military. ” In sum: trust
in both governing and non-governing institutions has declined since the 1970s,
and confidence in these institutions is now more polarized.184 This is a major
challenge for democracy. As argued by Professor Brady, recent events suggest that
distrusted institutions (such as police and public health) cannot be effective, and
polarized trust leads to vastly different views on institutional performance and on
how institutions should eventually be reformed. Given partisan differences in the
evaluation of institutions, it is hard to know how they can continue to be effective
when a crisis occurs.185
The rest of the diagnostic part of the paper will draw on the “distrust-divergence
hypothesis” and on findings regarding the polarization of trust to further the
argument that the domestic cycles of distrust and polarization are intertwined:
distrust and polarization are two sides or perspectives of the same problem. The
perspective of rising social and political distrust within democracies was covered
in the sections “general background” and “notions of trust” . Thus, at this juncture, it

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
42
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
is necessary to further analyze the problem more concretely from the perspective
of polarization.
Social psychologist Peter T. Coleman explains that polarization has long referred
to the divergence of political attitudes toward more ideological extremes.186
Distinctions can be made, however, between “affective polarization” (the tendency
of members of oppositional groups to feel negatively about the opposing group
members), “ideological polarization” (the divergence of attitudes on substantive
issues) and “political polarization” (which refers to cases in which an individual’s
stance on a given issue, policy or person is more likely to be influenced by
identification with a particular party or ideology, that with understanding the issue
or person).187
There are many theories on the origins of polarization. Peter T. Coleman divides
them in three categories: a) the people story ( which include neural polarization,
cognitive biases and similar biological and psychological explanations); b) the
group story (socialization splits individuals into in-groups and out-groups, which
are easily manipulated); and c) the societal story (in large societies, people tend to
locate at the top or bottom of a hierarchy, and this position affects identities and
access to resources and information).188 Peter T. Coleman argues that all of these
factors “fuel each other in complex and ever-increasing ways, establishing vicious
cycles. ”189 Drawing on Karl Popper’s distinction between “clock problems” and
“cloud problems” (the former being mechanical, predictable and controllable,
and the latter irregular, disorderly and unpredictable), he concludes that
polarization mostly resembles “cloud problems” .190 As a result, they cannot be
fixed by administering one or more technical solutions (eg: “like bringing reds
and blues together to talk”). Furthermore, he argues that when the elements that
compose cloud problems “become more tightly linked or aligned”, they can become
“attractors”, which means that they “form coherent patterns that draw us in and
resist change. ”191
However, even if all of the above-mentioned groups of theories on the roots of
polarization are correct, not all of them can fully explain the particular problem
concerning the rise of polarization in the last decades. There is a clear upward
trajectory that requires an explanation. The “people story” and the “group story”
do not fully capture the historical dynamics of the rise and fall of polarization.
For instance, cognitive biases are always present, and so are in-group and out-

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
43
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
group dynamics, yet societies historically present varying degrees of polarization.
The “societal story” can provide a useful insight, though, as it implies that “more
insolated and competitive structures and norms between groups inherently drive
polarization” , even more so when power struggles and scarcity of resources are
added. As explained by Peter T. Coleman, “the negative emotional consequences
around these divisions often accumulate over time and create volatile conditions for
intergroup strife. ”192
In other words: individualism and competition increase polarization, while
comity and cooperation reduce it. These factors help explain the fall and rise of
polarization (and distrust) in the U.S. in the last century. Professor of Public Policy
and former Dean of the Harvard Kennedy School Robert D. Putnam, for instance,
tracing trends in the U.S. between 1895 and 2015, provides a unified statistical
story and discerns a single core phenomenon: “one inverted U-curve that provides
a summary of the past 125 years in America’s story. ” He explains that this meta-
trend is a phenomenon that can be called “the I-We-I curve” (“I” refers to more
individualistic periods, and “We” to more communitarian ones).193
Figure 1 Community Vs. Individualism in America, 1890-2017
Putnam’s work shows how the U.S. was a highly unequal and individualistic society
in the Gilded Age (the first “I” period), turned to ever increasing rates of equality
and communitarianism up to its peak in the ‘50’s and early 60’s (the “We” period),
and then fell again to highly unequal and individualistic standards all the way until
the present moment (the second “I” period).194 This trajectory, Putnam argues,
“has been experienced in our experience of equality, our expression of democracy,
our stock of social capital, our cultural identity, and our shared understanding of
what this nation (the U.S.) is all about. ”195 Levels of political polarization in the U.S.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
44
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
have followed a similar trajectory. Political polarization was high during the Gilded
Age, started to decrease during the Progressive Era, and reached its lowest levels
during the New Deal and WWII, all the way to the 1950’s. “Not until the 1970’s
did partisanship begin to become more intense and bipartisan collaboration rarer.
The last five decades of steadily accelerating partisanship have produced the deeply
polarized world in which we live today, ” explains Putnam.196
Putnam describes the trajectory of polarization in the US as a path “from tribalism
to comity and back again” . The same trajectory can be applied to trust. The US had
managed to substantially ‘depolarize’ as American society became more equal and
communitarian, but polarization resurged after 1970. The rise of individualism
helps understand the rise of distrust and polarization in the U.S., but also in Europe
and other advanced democracies.197 Comity, cooperation and the civic dialogue
they require moderate and counterbalance neural polarization, cognitive biases and
in-group vs out-group competition and distrust. The depletion of these resources
constitutes the main vulnerability of democracy, from a domestic or a geopolitical
perspective.198 The reason is that high distrust and polarization are the soil where
illiberalism and authoritarianism thrive.
As argued by Jennifer L. Mc Coy and Murat Somer, “severe ‘Us’ vs. ‘Them’
polarization gives rise to illiberalism when intentionally illiberal or autocratic political
leaders use polarizing strategies to divide the electorate and generate loyalty despite
their illiberal actions, and when liberal political actors turn to polarizing strategies for
their own electoral ambitions and become transformed by its logic. ”199 The resulting
distrust, dislike, and mutual perceptions of existential threat of the two political
camps incentivizes voters to tolerate or even endorse illiberalism to enhance their
“sides” political position.200 A consequence of this process is that, at some stage,
an illiberal government can be elected. Then, as explained by Fareed Zakaria,
democratically elected regimes, often ones that have been reelected or reaffirmed
through referenda, routinely ignore constitutional limits on their power and deprive
their citizens of basic rights and freedoms.201 Fareed Zakaria wrote about this
problem in 1997, when the “rise of illiberal democracy” appeared to be confined to
Latin America, Africa, Asia or Russia.
With the years, though, democratic backsliding expanded to some Eastern
European countries, including EU Member States, such as Hungary or Poland. And,
more recently, it has even affected longstanding democratic countries in the West,

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
45
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
including the U.S. The election of Trump in 2016 did not come out of nowhere: it
was the manifestation of a decades-long process of rising distrust and polarization.
Liberal democracies cannot resist these forces eternally: at some point, social
and political trust is so low, social cohesion so damaged, and the public sphere so
eroded, that democracy itself cannot stand. Social and political distrust end up
generating electoral distrust.202
Countries in this situation may keep elections and certain formal democratic
appearances but, if they persist in the trap of their domestic cycles of distrust
long enough, and elect illiberal leaders that undermine political equality, at some
point, ‘democracy’ , and even ‘illiberal democracy’ is not the correct term to define
them anymore. As argued by Wendy Brown, “political equality is democracy’s
foundation and when it is absent, the demos ceases to rule. ”203 Governments
that deprive citizens of their basic rights and freedoms should be considered
autocracies or anocracies.
Rising distrust and its twin, rising polarization, lead to democratic backsliding,
illiberalism and autocracy. For several decades, the domestic cycles of distrust
have generated a worldwide erosion of democracy and, with it, of the liberal world
order. Aware of these developments, Russia and China have taken on the offensive.
Beijing’s rising assertiveness and Moscow’s rising aggressiveness are incentivized
by their perception of western democratic vulnerability, which implies that, in
their view, the shaping of a new world order is up for grabs. The domestic and
the geopolitical cycles of distrust are now intertwined. The rise of individualism,
polarization and distrust within western liberal democracies constitutes the mouth
of the tunnel of this global maelstrom of distrust. The next section of the paper will
focus on a central aspect of this phenomenon: the role played by mass-media and
digital technologies, particularly social media and AI.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
46
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Distrust and The Public Sphere:
“The Hidden Core;” The Impact
of Media, Social Media and AI
On Democratic Backsliding
This section of the paper will forward the argument, shared by numerous scholars,
that the contemporary crisis of democracy is mainly a crisis of communication.204
The reason is that political trust and distrust, and the entire public sphere, have
become mirror images of the media and social media landscapes, which have
been undermining democracy.205 This implies that, if democracies want to protect
their stability and the liberal world order and regain their citizens’ trust, they must
address the ongoing crisis of democratic communication as a matter of priority, by
rebuilding their public spheres.
This argument mostly draws on research from the fields of communications
theory, political philosophy and deliberative democracy. As was analyzed in
the previous section, rising distrust and polarization are correlated with rising
individualism and falling comity.206 This section of the paper will further argue
that all of these trends are mainly effects of dramatic changes in the public
sphere of democracies. Comity and trust are manifestations of social psychology
and are shaped within the public sphere. Hence, their erosion, and the rise of
individualism, distrust and polarization, are first of all a by-product of the erosion
of the public sphere.
The public sphere requires trust and generates trust. An eroded public sphere
generates distrust and polarization. Hence, the public sphere can be conceived
as the “central nervous system” of democracy. Its failure leads to the activation
of the domestic cycles of distrust within democracies, the rise of polarization
and illiberalism and, ultimately, to democracy’s demise. The hidden core of the
global maelstrom of distrust is constituted by the erosion and fragmentation
of democracies’ public spheres. The rise of authoritarianism, domestically and
globally, is the result of this illness of democracy. Democratic leaders invested in
the battle between democracy and autocracy must bear this reality in mind.
The notion of public sphere was thoroughly developed by German political

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
47
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
philosopher Juergen Habermas, who described it as “made up of private people
gathered together as a public and articulating the needs of society with the state. ”207 As
he explained, “a portion of the public sphere comes into being in every conversation in
which private individuals assemble to form a public body. ” Habermas distinguished
the public sphere from the ‘political public sphere’ , which refers to occasions when
public discussion deals with objects connected to the activity of the state.208 For
him, the public sphere was separate from the state (and from the economy), but
should influence the states’ policies, as it essentially was “a society engaged in critical
public debate. ”209 The institutions of representative democracy should be able to
listen and act up on the deliberations of citizens on matters of common interest,
which expressed a public opinion.210
Certainly, certain conditions should be met for the public sphere to effectively
function. A well-functioning public sphere requires a set of rights and opportunities
to ensure equal, substantive communicative freedom: a) rights (including liberty
of expression and association), b) expression (equal chance to express views on
issues of public concern to a public audience), c) access (good and equal access
to reliable information, d) diversity (range of views on issues of public concern),
and e) communicative power (capacity for sustained collective action).211 Some
norms are also required for the political culture of a well-functioning public
sphere, particularly truthfulness, the search for the common good, and the duty
of civility.212 The respect of these rights, opportunities and norms would result in
an open, free, equitable, inclusive, rational and constructive civic dialogue, based
on truthful information. Aside from being a central element of democracy (and
correlated to this), a well-functioning public sphere is an essential bulwark for the
effective protection of human rights.
The habermasian concept of public sphere was not a complete historic novelty,
though, as it was built upon the classical western idea of citizens participating
in their governance through public discussion, originated in ancient Greece and
Rome.213 The modern revival of this idea was incorporated in the liberal political
theory of the eighteenth century that addressed the relations between the states and
its citizens in a democracy.214 Its importance since then has only grown. In modern
mass societies, the public sphere is considered “the theater in which political
participation is enacted through the medium of talk” and “the realm where public
opinion can be formed and where it becomes political action. ”215 Furthermore, it is
the space where deliberative and participatory democracy can develop.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
48
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
From the twentieth century, there has been increased focus on the impact of mass
media upon civic practice.216 Habermas explained that “in a large public body
this kind of communication requires specific means for transmitting information
and influencing those who receive it. Today, newspapers and magazines, radio and
television are the media of the public sphere. ”217 Hence, the media landscape lies
at the strategic center of the public sphere and of democracy itself. As Marshall
McLuhan would argue, “the medium is the message. ”218 In other words: societies
shape media, and then media shapes societies, public spheres and democracies.
Habermas’s and McLuhan’s theories were developed in the 1960’s, long before
the advent of digital technologies.219 Today, the Internet and social media have
become the main mediums of communication and are shaping the public sphere
of democracies, displacing journalism. Since the public sphere is nowadays
mediated by digital technologies, it is often considered a “digital public sphere. ”220
In sum: nowadays, the media and social media landscape are the crucibles where
democracy and human rights are being shaped, for good and for bad.
The domestic cycles of distrust are mainly “cycles of distrust” created in the “digital
public spheres” of democracies. As the Internet and social media have a global
dimension, very similar cycles of distrust are taking root in very diverse societies.
Social media are eroding democracies’ public spheres globally, deepening the
synchronization between the domestic and the geopolitical cycles of distrust.
Eroded and fragmented public spheres have become the “hidden core” of the
global maelstrom of distrust. AI is quickly accelerating this dangerous trend, to
the point that it can soon become unmanageable for democracies. The analysis of
this section of the paper will focus on four issues: i) the mass media public sphere,
ii) mass media and rising distrust and polarization, iii) the digital public sphere
and digital and AI disruption, and iv) international competition and cooperation on
digital technologies.
The mass media public sphere
Media are essential for any modern society and for any modern form of power.
They are central to democracy and to authoritarianism, as they are the primal
means to legitimize their power. Authoritarian regimes need subservient media,
to manipulate populations through State propaganda. Democratic regimes need
free media, to check political power and contribute to protect the rights and

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
49
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
freedoms of the people. In liberal democracies, free media are essential to preserve
democracy itself. In authoritarian regimes, subservient media are essential to
preserve autocracy itself.
The media landscape forms the strategic core of the public sphere of liberal
democracies. Free, independent journalism is a condition of real democracy,
which is why it is constitutionally protected in most advanced democracies. It is
also a central pillar of the liberal world order. The right to freedom of expression
is enshrined in Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and is a
prerequisite and a driver to the enjoyment of all other human rights. The UN General
Assembly proclaimed the World Press Freedom Day in December 1993.221
As a result, in liberal democracies, “freedom of the press” has been defined in relation
to the social purpose of media. Unlike freedom of expression or, in the US, freedom of
speech, freedom of the press is not ‘purpose free’ , as it is meant to serve a public good
(information of the citizenship) and abide by certain standards. Journalism, at its core,
is a service occupation, meant to empower the populace with truth. There are around
400 codes covering journalistic work around the world. While various codes may differ
in the detail of their content and come from different cultural traditions, most share
common elements including the principles of truthfulness, accuracy and fact-based
communications, independence, objectivity, impartiality, fairness, respect for others
and public accountability.222
The development of the ethical codes and standards of journalism has been the result
of historical failures of mass media towards democracies. Instead of enabling a public
sphere, as the press had done in the late eighteenth century, some scholars argue that
the new mass media of the twentieth often threatened to subvert the public sphere
and democracy.223 In their view, mass media, such as radio and TV , turned publics
into crowds. The effects of this phenomenon could be seen in the rise of fascism in the
1920’s and 1930’s. Spanish philosopher Ortega y Gasset described this danger in his
work “The revolt of the masses. ” As he said, “anybody who is not like everybody, who
does not think like everybody, runs the risk of being eliminated. ”224
The revolt of the masses forecasted the downfall of democracies. Publics were
considered to have a constructive role in societies, whereas crowds, or masses, were
destructive.225 In the U.S., the debate was led in the 1920’s by Walter Lippman and
John Dewey. The former considered the mass incapable of performing its role as a true

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
50
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
‘public’ and in need of guidance through propaganda (mass media messages) by an
educated elite. Dewey, on the other hand, conceived public as the natural emergence of
community efforts to solve shared problems, with solutions then institutionalized
in government.226
Ever since the development of modern mass media, the public sphere has been
mediated by media outlets and corporations. Professor Archon Fung, Director of
the Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation, and Joshua Cohen,
senior Director at Apple Inc Professor, name this manifestation of the public
sphere the “mass-media public sphere. ”227 And ever since, there has been a debate
on whether mass media’s influence on the public sphere and on political trust has
been positive or negative. The debate started in the 1920’s and continues today.
In the 1930’s, when other western liberal democracies were collapsing before the
advance of fascism and Nazism, President Roosevelt understood the strategic
importance of media. His Administration leveraged its influence to be able to
implement the New Deal and the policies that were required to bring the U.S.
out of the disaster of the Great Depression and, later, to victory in WWII.228 His
31 “fireside chats” were the central element of the explanation of his leadership
and program, a decisive tool that helped him cut through the “unjustified terror
which paralyzes. ”229 The media outlets that aired his messages in an unfiltered
way to the American People provided a novel public service which went beyond
the traditional role of independent journalism. In the UK, the BBC, a public
broadcaster, provided a unique platform for Churchill to mobilize the morale and
energies of the British People.230 WWII might not have been won, and democracy
might not have been saved, in the absence of a democratic mass-media public
sphere and media outlets that would provide an essential public service to the
cause of democracy.
FDR and Churchill managed to use their “bully pulpits” to achieve their policy
aims through the use of mass media, but this does not imply that all worked well
in the media landscape of democracies in the 1940’s. On the contrary: as explained
by Professor Stephen Bates, “newsroom bias, distrust of the media, foreign and
domestic propaganda, corporate domination of political discourse, a fragmenting
and polarized electorate, hate speech and demagoguery, and what we now call
echo chambers, trolls, deplatforming, and post-truth politics’ afflicted the U.S.
of the 1940’s, as it does today. ”231 To respond to this challenge, a commission

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
51
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
of intellectuals was formed to redefine freedom of the press.232 The result of
their work was reflected in the 1947 Hutchins Commission report, “ A Free and
Responsible Press, ” possibly the most influential in media history.233 As explained
by Archon Fung and Joshua Cohen, “ American mass media grew to conform with
the Hutchins Commissions’ vision and recommendations. ”234
A highly professional media landscape emerged and increased the standards of the
public service of journalism. As positive as it was its contribution to democracy,
the system still imposed structural constraints on the principles of the public
sphere and hence on democracy itself. Major broadcast and major print media
would be one- to- many communication technologies run by a few large, for-
profit companies.235 The mass- media public sphere thus had a narrow aperture
of information, with a few, industrially concentrated voices addressing large
audiences, without much room for those in the audience to talk back or develop
new themes and topics among themselves: “this was emphatically not a media
system designed to foster communicative power, which is why C. Wright Mills called
this the world of mass opinion, not public opinion. ”236
Aside from the constraint of the “narrow aperture” , several scholars of the news
media have pointed to other democratic challenges posed by mass-media.237
Some have argued that greater exposure to political news leads to greater mistrust
in government. Robinson popularized the term “videomalaise” in reference to
television’s ability to instigate political cynicism, arguing that the negativity and
conflict found in television news, especially television coverage of elections,
undermine public confidence in government.238 Other authors have pointed
towards the beneficial effects of media on trust and democracy. Pippa Norris,
for instance, has proposed the “virtuous circle” theory, which asserts that media
exposure leads to greater trust in government and civic engagement. In her
view, if the disengaged are exposed to some political news, they are not likely to
afford it much attention because they mistrust the media and news content, thus
minimizing the media’s potential influence.239
The “virtuous circle theory” , however, implies that distrust in mainstream media is
in itself a problem for political trust, as distrustful citizens will form their political
views through the Internet and social media, which potentially channel much
higher levels of disinformation. Data shows that distrust in media runs very high
in liberal democracies. Gallup, for instance, confirms that Americans trust in this

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
52
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
key institution for democracy remains near record low.240 This is a serious liability
for any liberal democracy: if trust in media is low, the public sphere degrades, and
this phenomenon jeopardizes the capacity of the government to deliver public
policies that are synchronized with the public will, thus accelerating the domestic
cycle of distrust.
The historical lessons on the mass-media public sphere appear to be mixed.
Ultimately, the impact of media on democracy can be positive or negative,
depending on how media operate. When media comply with the ethical norms
and standards of journalism, they help preserve democracy. This is so because,
first of all, they provide the public with the information that it requires to form
a valid political opinion. And, secondly, a free, independent press can even be a
‘watchdog of democracy’ when it sheds light on any abuse or extra limitation of
power, political or economic. In the U.S., for instance, this happened when The
Washington Post broke open the Watergate scandal in the 1970s.241
However, when media fail to comply with the ethical norms and standards of
journalism, they sow distrust, erode the public sphere and undermine democracy
itself. Deregulation and increased competition turned the business model of
corporate media into a trap from the 1980’s. Technological developments and the
expansion of cable TV in the 1990’s enabled an explosion of entertainment and
news supply, allowing viewers to consume their preferred product. This “broadened
the aperture of information” relative to the previous mass-media model, but, in an
ultra-competitive market, fighting for human attention, some private media steered
away from the ethical norms and standards of independent journalism.242 Media
had to reinvent themselves to attract viewership and revenue. This opened the doors
to the 24/7 news cycle, entertainment reporting and, ultimately, the partisan sale
of political narratives by some media outlets.243 Habermas himself argued that the
evolution of mass media into large for-profit corporate conglomerates that incurred
in the commodification of news contributed to the erosion (or “refeudalization”) of
the public sphere.244
The impact of this development on trust and democracy has been adverse. For
instance, a University of Maryland study on American public opinion found,
amongst other issues, that sixty-nine percent of mainstream media viewers believed
that Saddam Hussein was personally involved in the September 11 attacks. In the
composite analysis of the PIPA study, 80% of Fox News watchers had one or more

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
53
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
(false) perceptions about the Iraq war, in contrast to 71% for CBS and 27%
who tuned to NPR/PBS.245 Not all media are the same for democracy, but most
suffer from the decaying trust of the public (even if, as was analyzed, trust in
media is polarized).246
Mass media and rising distrust and polarization
Mass media can have a positive or negative impact on the public sphere of
democracies, depending on how they operate. Hence, the net effect of the mass-
media public sphere is bivalent. However, given the evolution of the mass-media
landscape since WWII, it is worth analyzing whether these changes are directly
responsible of the steep rise of distrust and polarization in liberal democracies in
the last decades. More concretely: are media that fail to comply with the ethical
norms and standards of journalism responsible of activating and exacerbating the
domestic cycles of distrust within democracies?
Certainly, free and independent journalism is positive for democracy, and
deceptive and manipulative journalism is negative. But questions on root causes
of complex social and political problems often lack a straightforward answer.
“Bad journalism” can be detrimental to democracy, yet its effects can be minor,
compared to other possible causes, such as the rise of inequalities. The rest of this
section of the paper will argue that, amongst the many economic, cultural and
social reasons to explain the rise of distrust and political polarization in the West,
the impact of mass-media stands as particularly crucial.247
The reason is that, even if the root causes (economic, cultural, social, etc) may vary
and coexist, distrust and polarization are ultimately psychological realities, which
are channeled and shaped by media (and now the Internet and social media). The
main mediums of transmission of ideas and information are also the main vectors
of contagion of disinformation, distrust, polarization and radicalization. A media
landscape that permits or incentivizes “bad journalism” and weakens comity is not
a peripheral problem of democracy, but a central one.
The scourge of rising inequalities is a case in point.248 Even if inequalities are
measured by economic indicators, they are yet another manifestation of rising
distrust and polarization, not a separate reality. Rising inequality is mostly an effect
of changing economic realities and public policies, which are shaped as a response

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
54
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
to public opinion demands (and economic interests). Higher social distrust and
affective polarization leads to waning support to redistributive policies.249 Higher
political distrust and political polarization leads to waning support to the role of
government in the market.250
Professor Putnam seems to acknowledge this possibility. He explains that “even if
economic inequality and political polarization have moved in lockstep over the last
125 years, it is not clear which force is the primary driver. Data appears to show
that ‘rising inequality has shown up later than political polarization’ , and the fact
that ‘both are highly correlated over time’ is consistent with the possibility that
both are the consequences of an unidentified third factor. ” As he says, “Change in the
mass media (from “yellow journalism in 1900 to Uncle Walter Cronkite in mid-
century to Fox News and Twitter feeds today) is a plausible suspect in this mystery,
but research has found no clear answer to which is cause and which effect. ”251
Determining with scientific certainty whether changes in mass media are a cause
or an effect of polarization and distrust may indeed be complicated. There are
surely feedback loops between these phenomena. It can be argued, though, that
for distrust and polarization to take root, changes in mass media were required.
Distrust started to rise in the U.S. in the mid/late 1960’s, alongside falling
comity.252 Political polarization followed closely. Its modern resurgence can be
traced back to the 1970’s.253 Electronic mass media, namely the radio and the
TV , had already left their footprint in western industrialized societies, reshaping
them.254
This footprint had three clear manifestations. First, as Mc Luhan explained,
because “we shape our tools, and then our tools shape us”: the invention of TV
was a key step to create a more individualistic society, as people started spending
more time indoors, than interacting with their neighbors, communities, and
even families.255 There is a clear correlation between falling comity and rising
polarization, as Putnam’s “I-We-I” curve shows.256 The rates of membership in
unions and civic associations have been in decline in the U.S. since the mid-
1960’s, and so has the quality of this membership. Nowadays, for instance, the
commitment of most members of CSOs is only to pay their membership fees
or give donations, but not anymore to engage in a civic dialogue.257 Religious
attendance has followed a similar trajectory, although more sharply from the
2010’s.258 As a result, the rise of individualism strongly eroded or destroyed the

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
55
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
worker’s and the citizens’ public spheres.259 To be clear, the rise of individualism
was not only a result of a changed media landscape, but the media factor was
central, not peripheral, for this to happen. Changes in media rewired human
brains in a more individualistic manner. Comity, trust and cooperation retreated,
the public sphere eroded and, therefore, people became more susceptible of
becoming polarized.260
Second, because, other than rewiring people and societies to be more
individualistic, jointly with the economic forces that owned them, the most
important effect of corporate media was to create a consumerist culture. As is
thoroughly explained in the 2002 BBC documentary “The Century of the Self, ”
mass media, under the guidance of Edward Bernays, applying Freudian techniques
of mass psychology, proved to be incredibly powerful instruments to shape and
manipulate mass societies.261 The ceaseless bombardment of advertisements and
political propaganda through mass media, particularly TV , targeted the human
unconscious, and framed a new, consumerist society.262 Abundant research
points in this direction.263 Advertisers spend millions researching how to induce
consumers and their findings often lead to increasingly innovative, and sometimes
intrusive, ways to market their products.264
Furthermore, this process intensified as the media landscape changed. The mid-
century mass-media public sphere (particularly since the 1947 Hutchins report)
was very different to the late 20th century mass-media public sphere. In the U.S.,
the former was dominated by few broadcasting corporations, that were able to
couple their shaping of a consumerist society with the provision of a high-quality
public service of journalism. Individualism and consumerism rose, but the effects
were somewhat offset by conscientious information to the public, which could
be more easily controlled given the ‘narrow aperture’ to information that this
media structure enabled. In most European countries, public broadcasters were
the only available option: public service was their sole task. The late 20th century
mass-media landscape, on the other hand, was shaped by the rise of cable TV and
increased competition for human attention and advertising resources.
Ultimately, news themselves became products, and were tailored to consumers’
preferences. This process ended up leading to a situation where one of the most
influential news outlets in the country, Fox News, endorsed false claims that the
2020 U.S. Presidential election was stolen.265 Distrust in elections was fostered by

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
56
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
politicians but endorsed and reinforced by a segment of a media landscape more
worried about ratings and revenue than the truth. In doing so, Fox News was
not behaving as a ‘watchdog of democracy’ , but rather the opposite. The U.S. had
moved, as Putnam explained, from “Uncle Walter Cronkite in mid-century to Fox
News. ”266 That is: from a media landscape with a strong public service orientation,
to one often devoid of it.
The role of politicians themselves should not be neglected. As argued by Professor
Putnam, “the balance of opinion among experts currently is that (in polarization)
the primary impetus is top-down’’; and “elites send polarizing messages to the
electorate in an effort to win support with partisan appeals”; and “as leaders ‘signal’
increasingly divergent views on specific issues, that divergence can quickly spread to
their followers. ”267 The fact that the balance of opinion among experts is that the
primary impetus is ‘top down’ does not imply that the influence is not reciprocal.
As Putnam explains, too, “probably it was a bit of both, with feedback in both
directions, as voters’ partisan hostility and leaders’ refusal to compromise are two
sides of a vicious feedback loop. ”268
What is essential to underline here, is that this vicious cycle of polarization was
permanently mediated and enabled by a changing mass-media landscape, that
broadened the aperture of information and the scope of acceptable debate, or the
so-called “Overton window. ”269 According to Joseph Lehman, who coined the
term, “the most common misconception is that lawmakers themselves are in the
business of shifting the Overton window. That is absolutely false. Lawmakers are
actually in the business of detecting where the window is, and then moving to be in
accordance with it. ”270 Which means that think-tanks, academia, PR firms, but
even celebrities, are some of the actors that can gradually work on public opinion,
through mass-media, to amplify or change the Overton window. Politicians mostly
need to work within that framework, to be electable (although they can and do
push the limits too, but never alone).271
Mass-media fostered and accelerated consumerism, and this process eroded
the public sphere by turning citizens acting politically into passive, acritical,
consumers. Consumerism also contributed to broaden the scope of information
and accepted political debate, which is in principle positive, but it did so with
the decreasing mediation of independent journalism, which can leave too much
space for unethical ideas and even lies.272 At the same time, it enabled the rise of a

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
57
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
meritocratic ethos, which further diluted social and communitarian bonds,
and eroded the public sphere of democracies. As argued by Professor Michael
Sandel, the dark side of meritocracy is that it divides societies between winners
and losers, justifying inequalities and furthering polarization: “ Among the winners,
it generates hubris; among the losers, humiliation and resentment. These moral
sentiments are at the heart of the populist uprising against elites. ”273
The third main manifestation of the late 20th century mass-media footprint on
democracy was the deepening and expansion of public opinion’s fragmentation
into opposite and often irreconcilable worldviews. Citizens inhabiting a certain
media ‘bubble’ or ‘echo chamber’ would access a completely different kind of
information and public narrative than those at the other side of the political
spectrum. Habermas argued that “maintaining a media structure that ensures
the inclusive character of the public sphere and the deliberative formation of public
opinion and political will is not a matter of political preference but a constitutional
imperative. ”274 This did not happen, and the fragmentation of the public narrative
resulted in the fragmentation of the understanding of core values of democracy,
such as freedom and equality. This process was deepened and expanded by
changes in the mass media landscape, and later reinforced and accelerated by
digital technologies and social media, as will be analyzed in the next section.
As a result of this process, the meaning of democracy itself eroded in liberal
democracies. Carl Jung explained that “meaninglessness inhibits fullness of life and
is therefore equivalent to illness. ”275 Fragmentation led to different constituencies
searching for meaning in different narratives, at the expense of the communal
narrative of democracies, generating a sort of schizophrenia of the body politic.
Identity politics and what Putnam calls “the war of the we’s” , has come at the
expense of the shared meaning of democracy, with all the hard deliberations and
transactions that it requires to be kept alive.276 The fragmentation of the public
sphere of democracies has enabled the rise of social and political distrust and
affective and political polarization. And what distrust and polarization ultimately
entail is the collision of opposing worldviews and value systems, or what Lincoln
would call “a house divided. ”
Electoral trust can hardly work if these opposing views are not woven back
together into a communal narrative. Societies need ‘thicker’ areas of common
purpose and life to remain together in a functional way. True, liberal democracies

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
58
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
have changed dramatically, and so have citizen’s identities, as a result of economic
and cultural change, migrations, the role of religion, etc.277 However, it is in
the nature of societies to be in flux, and this trend will most likely grow, not
diminish. Higher levels of diversity and pluralism is positive for societies and more
representative of the basic universal human right of freedom, yet, in the rightful
and enrichening expression of individuality, democratic societies also need to find
ways to constantly weave back their commonality.
Civic dialogue, enabled by a well-functioning public sphere, appears to be the only
solid proposal to make this possible.278 Reconciling diversity and unity is the job
of the public sphere and the essence of liberal democracies. Nationalism is often
the authoritarian way of weaving societies together, and it comes at the expense of
diversity and individual freedoms, as it is bound to a single understanding of what
belonging to a society means.279 Nationalism is the core proposal of Russia and
China to their populations, and it comes at the expense of their inner ethnic and
ideological diversity. In autocracies, common narratives are imposed, and their
questioning are a threat to their stability.280
But illiberal nationalism is not exclusive to authoritarian regimes, it has been rising
in polarized democracies, bolstered by distrust in politics and far-right parties.281
These parties do not support the liberal world order, and have or can forge close
relations with autocracies, particularly Russia. Moscow’s aim is to have illiberal far-
right parties in the West supporting its objective of bringing down the rules-based
order. This is the scenario of the “two Wests” that Putin talked about and has been
actively sponsoring. Civic deliberation, or patriotic constitutionalism, is the most
effective alternative to illiberal nationalism and the method for democracies to
come together.282 It is enshrined in different democratic Constitutions in different
ways. In the U.S., it is codified in its motto, “e pluribus unum. ” To be able to make
“out of many, one” is the role of a well-functioning public sphere. It implies that
common narratives need to be woven by an open and inclusive free and equal
deliberation amongst citizens.
The advent of an individualistic, consumerist, meritocratic culture, was made
possible by mass media and the shifting of the public sphere into a mass-media
public sphere.283 This trend was later accelerated into social fragmentation by
the mass-media transition to a model often void of a public service dimension.
As argued by Karl Popper, “we are social creatures to the inmost center of our

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
59
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
being. The notion that one can begin anything at all from scratch, free from the
past, or unindebted to others, could not conceivably be more wrong. ”284 The media-
sponsored rise of an individualistic, selfish ethos may have benefitted capitalism
in the short term, but it has undermined democracy in the longer one. Free,
independent journalism had been considered a central pillar of liberal democracy
since its inception, and even had constitutional protections in most democracies.
Y et, the neoliberal wave of the 1980’s and 1990’s eroded the model of independent
journalism as a public service, transforming it into a consumption good. As argued
by Michael Sandel, the marketisation of everything has undermined democracy.285
Individualism and consumerism gradually crowded out comity, civism and
trust. In the void left by this encroachment of democratic values by market
forces into the public sphere, distrust, polarization and fragmentation naturally
grew. The ultimate reason for this downfall is that humans being social animals,
societies are ill-equipped to deal with extreme forms of individualism. The
breakup of communitarian bonds generates distrust and fear. When comity,
civism and trust are strong, the natural drive of people towards disagreement
and conflict (consequence of cognitive biases, neural polarization, in-group/
out-group dynamics, etc), can be balanced. 286 When comity, civism and trust
are weakened, this natural drive rearises, and can be manipulated, politically
or economically. Changes in the media landscape brought about the more
individualistic, consumerist, and meritocratic society desired by economic forces,
but an unintended effect was that the public sphere of democracies fragmented.
As a result, polarization, distrust and fear rose and, with them, illiberalism and the
threat of democratic backsliding into authoritarianism.
The 2019 report “Crisis in Democracy: Renewing Trust in America” , elaborated
by the Knight Commission on Trust, Media and Democracy, acknowledges the
impact of the media landscape on rising distrust and polarization. It states that
“there is an urgency today in the United States. Political polarization has reached
crisis proportions. Americans cannot assume that their fellow citizens are operating
under the same set of facts. Many of us live inside echo chambers where only our
own political sentiments can be heard, and distrust those who do not agree with our
particular viewpoint. ”287 With an analysis that parallels the 1947 report “ A Free and
Responsible Press” , the Knight report echoes many of the concerns that inspired
the Hutchins Commission’s deliberations on the role of the press after WWII, but
with recommendations that apply to journalism, technology, and citizenship in the
digital age.288

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
60
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
The digital public sphere and the digital disruption
In the U.S., the domestic cycle of distrust was re-activated in the mid/late 1960’s,
long before the advent of the Internet or social media.289 Certainly, social media
platforms could not be the origin of these phenomena. They could, though, reinforce
them and further accelerate them, making them more salient and problematic for
democracy, and so they did. The opposite could have happened.
This section of the paper will argue that the Internet, particularly social media,
have further eroded the public sphere of democracies, turning a crisis which could
have been managed by the institutions of representative democracy, into an almost
intractable one, which will require deep reforms and innovations. Given the current
situation of distrust and polarization within their societies, if liberal democracies
overcome their crises, it will be as a result of a “radical relandscaping” of their
perspectives, tools and procedures.290 As argued by Professor Coleman, “intractable
forms of harmful polarization require that their edifice be restructured. ”291
The reason for this assessment is that digital technologies have, at the same time,
the potential to fully dismantle democracy, if wrongly used, but also the capacity to
serve as an indispensable instrument for democratic recovery. The digital threat has
become more apparent in 2023, with the irruption of generative AI, and so has the
digital opportunity.292 Democracy, and the liberal world order, are at a crossroads.
And the decisions taken to regulate and control AI and digital media may matter
more to the future of democracy than the confrontation with Russia and China.
Furthermore, a revitalized democratic home front will reduce the incentives for
authoritarian interference and aggression.
Why do digital technologies matter so much? The global economy and most, if not
all, measures of power, have nowadays a digital dimension. The U.S. CHIPS and
Science Act and Washington’s efforts to stay ahead of China on AI bear witness of
this importance.293 But the weight of digital technologies goes beyond the economy
and material measures of power: democratic resilience and societal cohesion also
contain a strategic digital dimension. The reason is that the
Internet, and particularly social media, brought about a revolution to a decaying
public sphere.
Free, independent journalism had provided citizens with reliable information to

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
61
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
deliberate and form a public opinion, whereas corporate mass electronic media,
particularly from the 1990’s, had too often degraded and fragmented the public
sphere by turning citizens into passive consumers of partisan news.294 Social
media were revolutionary insofar they allowed citizens, for the first time in history,
to engage and deliberate in large numbers through digital means. The reach of
social media went far beyond the 18th century Parisian cafes, Viennese salons and
New England-style colonial-era town hall meetings that inspired Habermas to
conceptualize the birth of the “bourgeois public sphere. ”295 Facebook, for instance,
currently has about 3 billion users worldwide, double the population of China.296
The Internet and social media created a new “digital public sphere. ” It now
overlaps and is as influential or more than the ‘mass media public sphere’ . This
paper follows the notion of digital public sphere as described by Professor Archon
Fung, Director of the Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation,
and Joshua Cohen, senior Director at Apple Inc.: “By ‘the digital public sphere, ’
we mean a public sphere in which discussion about matters of potentially shared
concern is shaped in part by communication on online platforms (intermediaries
that store users’ information and enable its public dissemination). Thus, the digital
public sphere is neither everything that happens online or on online platforms (much
of which is not discussion of matters of shared concern), nor is it only online. It is
a public sphere in which communication on platforms plays an important role in
shaping public discussion. ”297
Whether the digital public sphere approaches the ideal criteria of the old,
idealized, public sphere, which relies on an open, free, inclusive, egalitarian,
rational debate on public matters, is actually debated. Cyber pessimists point to the
existing flaws of interactions within the digital realm and in social media (degree
of participation, lack of diversity due to fragmentation into like-minded groups,
influence of Big Tech and private interests, absence of face-to-face interactions,
etc).298 Cyber-optimists, on the other hand, point to the opportunities (open,
easy and fast access, empowerment of people given the absence of ‘gatekeepers’ ,
production of new decentralized ways of communication and collaboration, such
as Wikis, etc).299
Both positions are probably correct, as they are mostly compatible. As happens
with mass-media, digital media can enable or erode the public sphere, depending
on how they work. The rest of this section will mostly focus on the flaws of

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
62
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
present-day mainstream digital media, particularly social media. The reason is
that, in their current manifestation, they are mostly detrimental to democracy,
as they fail to fulfil the criteria of a well-functioning public sphere and are thus
accelerating the domestic cycles of distrust within democracies. The next section
of the paper will forward a policy proposal to revitalize the digital public sphere of
democracies, based on the opportunities offered by digital technologies. As argued
by Archon Fung and Joshua Cohen, “online information and communication are
so much less than they could be. They fall far short of their democratic potential for
fostering diverse and interconnected engagements. ”300
The first major problem of mainstream social media goes beyond social media.
Facebook, Twitter (rebranded “X”), Y ouTube, TikTok, and now Threads, emerged
in individualistic, consumerist, fragmented societies, and were built on the same
structure of incentives than corporate private media: they needed to attract
their users’ attention to profit from advertising. These companies emerged in
a particular neoliberal socio-economic and cultural context of intense market
competition and search for quick profits. From a business perspective, they did
what they were supposed to do according to the surrounding economic culture:
achieve success. “Move fast and break things”, became Facebook’s motto. It now
sounds unappealing, but it represented the business zeitgeist of the time.301
Social media, as a result of their design and nature, radically broadened the
aperture of information, compared to any mass-media model. As explained by
Archon Fung and Joshua Cohen, “the distribution mechanism is different, the range
of voices is greater. ”302 Also, “social conditions of polarization and fragmentation
combine with low barriers to content creation and high user choice to create an
informational environment that is much more diverse but in which users find
it easier to cluster into— or find themselves algorithmically shepherded into—
homogeneous information spaces that share less epistemic common ground across
different spaces than in the mass- media public sphere. ”303 Ultimately, with all of its
positive effects, the wider aperture of information also expands opportunities for
expression and communication that violate norms of truth seeking, a common-
good orientation, and civility.304
Furthermore, social media were allowed to take the business model of attention-
seeking many steps further than mass-media outlets, as they could also harvest
the private data of their users for profit, in a way that traditional media could

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
63
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
not. Besides, unlike media outlets, in the U.S., social media were provided
immunity from liability with respect to third-party content generated by its users
by Section 230 of the U.S. Telecommunications Act.305 Fox News, for instance,
has faced consequences for the Dominion Voting System lawsuit, in a way that
Big Tech cannot face. Unlike broadcasters, digital media platforms typically do
not create content; instead, their power lies in providing and governing a digital
infrastructure. Although that infrastructure could serve as a digital public sphere,
it is the platforms that exert much control over the dynamics of information
flow.306 Due to the economic and regulatory surrounding environment, and the
nature of their activity, social media companies have found little to no incentives
to develop their business model with a public service approach. As a result, they
have become one of the biggest obstacles to a cohesive public sphere that functions
for democracy.
Harvard’s Democracy and Internet Government Initiative, for instance, has
recently published its final report “towards digital platforms and public purpose” .
In its executive summary, the report states: “While platforms have brought
numerous benefits, there is now an overwhelming recognition of their potential
negative effects on individuals, society, and democracy. From the spread of
misinformation and privacy concerns to cyberbullying and algorithmic biases, these
harms demand a comprehensive and nuanced understanding, as well as mitigation
strategies. ”307 It also states that “sociologists, computer scientists, political scientists,
economists, lawyers, and anthropologists alike—have more or less converged to say
one thing: social media’s negative externalities and companies’ exploitive behavior is
a known quantity issue and we need to act. ”308
Furthermore, a 2023 systematic review of worldwide causal and correlational
evidence on digital media and democracy has found out that “the large majority of
reported associations between digital media use and trust appear to be detrimental
for democracy”, that “digital media use is associated with eroding the ‘glue that
keeps democracies together’: trust in political institutions, ” and that “digital media
use is associated with increases in hate, populism and polarization. ”309 This review
concludes that “Our results provide grounds for concern. Alongside the positive
effects of digital media for democracy, there is clear evidence of serious threats to
democracy. Considering the importance of these corrosive and potentially difficult-to-
reverse effects for democracy, a better understanding of the diverging effects of digital
media in different political contexts (for example, authoritarian vs democratic) is

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
64
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
urgently needed. ”310 An ongoing collaborative review on social media and political
dysfunction, and further research, will shed further light on the matter.311
It is clear that large social media platforms have not strengthened comity and
civism, but distrust and polarization. They are too often vectors of contagion
of disinformation, and sometimes their incubators too, as their algorithms are
designed to keep a high degree of engagement, which is often obtained through
falsehoods and outrage.312 Their role in fostering conspiracy theories, illiberal
and autocratic narratives has been a central feature of the decay of public trust
in democratic institutions.313 Furthermore, they have deepened and expanded
fragmentation. As argued by Habermas, the “more or less exclusive use of social
media” blurs “the distinction between public and private, and thus the inclusive
meaning of the public sphere. ”314 This implies that “citizens increasingly refuse -or
fail to recognize the need- to comply with the standards of public autonomy even when
issues of the common good are at stake. The result is the emergence of semi-publics,
whose members no longer regard the general public as the place for the discursive
clarification of validity of claims, but see it as a realm of hypocrisy whose protagonists
ignore ‘the truth’ (i.e. what appears as such from within self-referential spaces). What
was once an inclusive space, integrating all citizens, is thus degraded, in the perception
of some members of society, to just another sectarian semi-public. ”315
As has been analyzed, there are several reasons to explain the rise of distrust and
political polarization, but the centrality of mass-media and now of social media
as vectors of contagion and incubators of distrust and fear cannot be diminished.
Rather than contributing to restore comity and trust in the digital realm, major
social media platforms have often acted as trust eroding and polarizing machines.
The expansion of QAnon and the MAGA movement, and the attack on the U.S.
Capitol on January 6th, 2021, cannot be understood without analyzing the role
played by social media platforms, and the same applies to the attacks against
Brazil’s institutions earlier this year.316 Furthermore, social media platforms have
also been weaponized by foreign autocratic governments to consolidate their rule,
manipulate and expand political divisions and interfere in electoral processes in
liberal democracies.
The quickly accelerating development of AI technologies make this issue even more
pressing, as its impact on democratic governance can be devastating. ChatGPT 2023
is only a small step towards a world where every aspect of life will be influenced and

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
65
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
possibly compromised by AI. The digital public sphere of democracies, democratic
institutions and the democratic process that binds them together can be hacked
today by autocratic actors, foreign or national, using existing digital platforms and
increasingly sophisticated AI tools.
On March 22, 2023, prominent tech and social leaders, experts on the field of AI,
and citizens, signed an Open Letter titled “Pause Giant AI experiments” which
called on all AI labs to immediately pause for at least six months the training of AI
systems more powerful than GPT-4.317 The following is an excerpt from the letter:
“Contemporary AI systems are now becoming human-competitive at general tasks, and
we must ask ourselves: Should we let machines flood our information channels with
propaganda and untruth? Should we automate away all the jobs, including the
fulfilling ones? Should we develop nonhuman minds that might eventually outnumber,
outsmart, obsolete and replace us? Should we risk loss of control of our civilization?
Such decisions must not be delegated to unelected tech leaders. Powerful AI systems
should be developed only once we are confident that their effects will be positive and
their risks will be manageable. ”
With the exception of Elon Musk and Steve Wozniak, however, most Big Tech
leaders were reluctant to sign a letter concretely requesting a pause on giant
AI experiments. Bill Gates released an article presenting a completely different
approach to the question of AI, mostly highlighting the opportunities for
humanity.318 Some weeks later, a shorter statement, signed this time by most tech
leaders or representatives from Big Tech (including those that did not sign the
March Open Letter, like Bill Gates or Sam Altman), briefly said “mitigating the risk
of extinction from AI should be a global priority alongside other societal-scale risks
such as pandemics and nuclear war. ” The pronouncements of the most prominent
experts and leaders on AI on the risks of this technology not only to democracy, but to
the survival of the human species, sent shockwaves through the world.319
There can be little doubt on the threat that AI represents to democracy worldwide,
given the warnings casted even by Big Tech itself. Free, independent journalism
was and still is a necessary condition of a functioning public sphere, yet the
developments of mass media, particularly since the development of cable TV ,
undermined the public sphere of democracies. The Internet and social media
brought about the promise of a renewed public sphere, yet the business model and
structure of incentives of large social media platforms accelerated distrust and

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
66
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
polarization, further undermining democracies’ public spheres. Large language
models (LLMs), the basis of generative AI, could fragment and damage the public
sphere way beyond what democracies have experienced so far.
As argued by historian and philosopher Yuval Noah Harari, AI has hacked the
operating system of human civilization.320 This is because, as he explains: “humans
often don’t have direct access to reality. We are cocooned by culture, experiencing
reality through a cultural prism. Our political views are shaped by the reports of
journalists and the anecdotes of friends. Our sexual preferences are tweaked by
art and religion. That cultural cocoon has hitherto been woven by other humans.
What will it be like to experience reality through a prism produced by nonhuman
intelligence?”321
If left unregulated, or if inadequately regulated, AI would turn the concept and
ideal of the public sphere into an illusion, void of any substantive meaning. How
can an open, inclusive, rational and constructive dialogue between free and
equal citizens on matters of common interest take place, when human agency
is outsourced to LLMs? How can the commitments to truth, appropriateness
and sincerity be fulfilled in a civic dialogue, when AI bots, deepfakes, and
‘hallucinations’ swarm the communication playing field? Habermas denounced
that consumerism and mass media had turned active citizens acting politically
into passive, unthinking, consumers, but still believed that deliberative democracy
could help achieve the Enlightenment notion of human emancipation.322 Would
this still be possible, in a world where ‘ AI personal assistants’ , designed in giant
corporate AI labs, guide human actions, communications and thinking processes?
Unregulated digital technologies are the “hidden core” of the global maelstrom of
distrust. Developments on AI have now made this ‘core’ more visible.
International competition and cooperation on digital
technologies
Experts, philosophers, social scientists and even Big Tech have sounded the
alarms. The calls for industry moderation are coupled with an urge to quickly
regulate AI, but to do it properly.323 For some, regulating AI properly means
intensively, providing an adequate protection of citizens’ rights, with the aim of
preserving social and political trust and the common good. For others, regulating
AI properly means lightly, avoiding impediments to the development of the new

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
67
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
technology, which provides massive opportunities and resources of power. The
former view is mostly enshrined in the approach of the EU, the latter in that of
the U.S.
There is a general consensus on the fact that AI represents a systemic risk to
humanity, which means that global cooperation is required. Ian Bremmer, for
instance, has argued that “we’ll need national action, global cooperation, and
some commonsense cooperation from the US and Chinese governments, in
particular. ”324 Furthermore, he considers that “the United Nations has a role
to play as the only institution with the convening power to develop a global
consensus. A UN-led approach to AI will never be the most efficient response,
but by building consensus on the nature of the problem and pooling international
resources, it will help. ”325 He has also suggested that “there could also be an artificial
intelligence agency modeled on the International Atomic Energy Agency to help
police AI proliferation. ”326
Given the distrust and confrontation between Washington and Beijing, even
if necessary, this effort may be difficult to achieve. Ian Bremmer himself
acknowledges that it is far-fetched: “The timing is terrible because these
breakthroughs arrive at a time of intense competition between two powerful
countries that really don’t trust one another. ”327 Certainly, the ongoing geopolitical
cycle of distrust may not make this approach possible for the time being, as
necessary as it may be. Furthermore, given the connection of this cycle with
the domestic cycles of distrust, any effort to achieve such a rapprochement may
ultimately backfire.
The U.S. faces a challenging presidential election in 2024, which may turn efforts
to regulate AI domestically, or to cooperate with China, electorally problematic.
Professor Steve Pearlstein’s account on how Congress has failed to rein in Big
Tech may prove an indicator of the regulatory perspectives in Washington, which
can be extended to cooperation with China on AI.328 Xi Jinping may also be
unwilling to cooperate with the U.S. on AI, in the same way that it has rejected
cooperation on transparency and risk reduction.329 Beijing does not want to tie its
hands on strategic issues, as it does not want its rise to be impeded or contained
by Washington. True, the U.S. is ahead on AI. But China appears to prioritize the
internal stability of its regime over great power competition with the U.S. on AI:
LLMs can be unpredictable, and the future of the CCP matters most.330

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
68
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
If cooperation between the U.S. and China on AI is unlikely, and as a result
necessary efforts at the UN will probably either stall or be unfruitful, the
potential of another path can be further examined: reinforced cooperation
between democracies, particularly between the U.S. and the EU. But even this
path of cooperation may prove to be challenging. There are wide differences on
Washington’s and Brussels’s approaches.
Within advanced democracies, the EU has taken a lead on digital and AI
regulation. The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), the Digital Services
Act (DSA), and the Digital Markets Act (DMA), establish an advanced framework
of governance of big digital platforms (‘gatekeepers’), that sets boundaries to their
operations and recognizes the digital rights of users. The GDPR enshrined privacy
rights on the Internet, the DMA aimed to ensure fair and open digital markets and
the DSA is the most ambitious effort in regulating social media and constitutes
a challenge for Silicon Valley.331 Soon, the AI Act will represent the main global
effort to regulate AI. Due to the size of its internal market and the power of its
regulatory authorities, there has been an extensive “Brussels effect” of EU digital
regulations: instead of making the costly decision of creating separate business
models, firms try to conform to EU’s regulations worldwide.
The U.S., though, is following a much laxer approach than the EU.332 Political
polarization and gridlock, the large scope of the First Amendment, and the
lobbying power of Big Tech, is so far preventing the U.S. from effectively regulating
digital technologies, particularly social media.333 However, the “Protecting Kids on
Social Media Act, ” introduced in April by a bipartisan group of senators, could be
a step in the right direction.334 Furthermore, new, innovative proposals, are adding
energy to the debate. For instance, after analyzing more than 200 proposals related
to U.S.-based platform governance across industry, government and civil society,
Harvard’s Democracy and Internet Government Initiative has proposed a risk
framework, including risks generated or exacerbated by the use of digital platforms
to help guide better solutions for digital platform governance.335
The aim of Harvard’s proposal, which is “to pull the conversation away from the
mainstream political dialogue and towards something that can be implemented in a
bi-partisan manner–and through the collaboration of business, government, and civil
society, ” could be fruitful, as awareness of the problem posed by social media has
been steadily growing in the country. Possible AI regulations appear to be facing

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
69
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
better perspectives, as the industry is asking to be regulated.336 Senate Majority
Leader Chuck Schumer is laying the groundwork for legislation to regulate
AI. But, for the moment, President Biden’s AI Bill of Rights is of non-binding
nature, and so are the guardrails recently agreed by AI companies.337 Ultimately,
geopolitical considerations may delay or water-down U.S. efforts to further
regulate AI.338
For the time being, the EU and the U.S. are still in very different places in terms of
digital regulation. If this situation persists, the transatlantic rift on digital and AI
regulations could eventually affect the relationship between the U.S. and the EU.
The divergences at both sides of the Atlantic on the balance between democracy
and the market could have geopolitical effects at a time when the transatlantic
unity is most required.339 It is unlikely that tech companies will pause giant AI
experiments, or that the U.S. government will establish a moratorium, as leading
tech experts have suggested.340 Whether Washington will succeed in aptly and
promptly regulating AI and social media is to be seen.
Big Tech is helping the U.S. take the lead on AI. The paradox is that this and
other digital technologies, without due democratic control, will continue eroding
democracy and enhancing autocracy, generating a “boomerang effect” against the
West. In the meantime, autocracies will continue using digital technologies and AI
to enhance their surveillance and repressive capacities.
The lack of regulation of social media in the U.S. generated a worldwide challenge
to democracy, which EU regulations alone will hardly be able to offset. Applying
an uncoordinated approach to AI could be detrimental to democracy globally.
The U.S. and the EU need to fully repair their digital rift to better protect
democracy at home and the liberal world order. Both sides have recently finalized
a new deal on data transfers, the EU-U.S. Data Privacy Framework. It is a step in
the good direction, but it is likely that it will be challenged again in court and, in
such case, could come to the European Court of Justice in early 2024.341 It is also
possibly not enough to repair the digital rift, as both sides still maintain divergent
approaches to digital regulation. A concrete policy proposal on a possible
contribution to foster a digital rapprochement between both sides is advanced in
the next section of the paper.

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
70
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Reviving The Lighthouse of
Democracy: A Policy Proposal
to Aid Democracies Rebuild
Their Public Spheres and Protect
The Liberal World Order
“ There are three things necessary for
government: weapons, food and trust. If a
ruler cannot hold on to all three, he should
give up weapons first and food next. Trust
should be guarded to the end: without trust
we cannot stand”.
“ – Confucius
This proposal’s theory of change is based on the consideration that substantial
democratic reforms in polarized societies require a prior exercise of rehabilitation
of the functionality of the digital public sphere, which cannot be achieved through
the existing for-profit social media ecosystem, given its externalities. In other
words, to regenerate democracy’s central nervous system, and re-activate trust in
democracy, the civic mobilization of citizen’s efforts towards a common purpose
will be required.
Reliable information and civic dialogue are the core elements of the public
sphere, democratic stability, and the preservation of the rules-based international
order. Advanced democracies must ensure that the full potential of the Internet,
social media, and AI is applied to regenerate democratic trust, amongst their
own citizens, and worldwide. This will be the main antidote against the rise of
authoritarianism, domestically and globally.

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
71
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
This policy proposal will forward the argument that, in the 2020s, the protection
of democracy at both the domestic and international level has essential civic
and digital dimensions. This is the case because democracy is, in essence, a civic
dialogue. And today, to a large extent, it takes place on the Internet and through
digital technologies. A cohesive public sphere works as an incubator of social and
political trust, where democratic culture and governance can flourish. The public
sphere of democracies has fragmented and polarized in the last decades and years,
bringing as a result a decline of trust on democratic politics. Illiberalism and
authoritarianism are filling the void left by the erosion of civic dialogue and the
public sphere.
As Habermas argued: “the modern state presupposes as the principle of its own
truth the sovereignty of the people, and this in turn is supposed to be public opinion.
Without this attribution, without the substitution of public opinion as the origin of
all authority for decisions binding the whole, modern democracy lacks the substance
of its own truth. ”342 Many policy measures will be necessary to protect and repair
liberal democracy, including economic, social, political and environmental.
Addressing inequalities will be absolutely essential.
This paper focuses specifically on the reparation of the digital public sphere, which
is a necessary condition to revive democracy itself.343 It is a condition to restore
trust and reduce polarization. It is also one of many measures required to reduce
inequalities, as equal and free participation is a requirement of a well-functioning
public sphere.344 Political equality is the essence of democracy. An effective
democratic governance, based on a vibrant public sphere, is required to face
domestic and international challenges, from the rise of authoritarianism to climate
change and inequalities. The environment, the economy, and the world order
cannot be repaired if a civic dialogue based on reliable information is not restored
first within democracies.
The free press is sometimes named the lighthouse of democracy. In this paper, the
concept of lighthouse is expanded, to include the entire public sphere. The role of
independent journalism is rendered ineffective if its information does not reach
the entire political audience, or if it is silenced by the noise of disinformation,
propaganda and deep fakes. A mass-scale civic dialogue is unfeasible in the
absence of reliable information. Truthful information is toxic for autocracies, but
indispensable for democracies. Massive disinformation is a necessary condition of

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
72
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
autocracy, but it’s lethal for democracy. In the 2020’s, the lighthouse of democracy
is not just the free press or the mass media public sphere. It is trustworthy
information reaching all society and enabling civic dialogue. From a domestic
perspective, the lighthouse of democracy is the entire public sphere: old and new,
mass media and digital. From a global perspective, the lighthouse of the liberal
world order is democracy itself.
Some authors have underlined the utopian elements of Habermas’s idealized public
sphere, as free and unfettered communication remains an unfulfilled illusion, in
the positive and rational sense.345 Habermas himself acknowledged that “the ‘good’
is neither a convention nor an essence, but rather the result of fantasy. ” But he also
stated that “it must be fantasized so exactly that it corresponds to and articulates a
fundamental interest. ”346 The public sphere, democracy, and a peaceful, cooperative
world order are human psychological constructs, which require points of
reference. In the absence of idealized points of reference, democratic navigation is
unfeasible.
As argued by psychiatrist neurologist and philosopher Viktor Frankl, who was
also a Holocaust survivor, “if we take man as he really is, we make him worse. But
if we overestimate him…if we seem to be idealists and are overrating man, expecting
him to be higher than he can, you know what happens? We promote him to what
he really can be. So we have to be idealists in a way, because then we wind up as
the true realists. ”347 Or, as expressed more pragmatically by Mariana Mazzucato,
Marietje Schaake, Seb Krier, and Josh Entsminger: “having a point on the horizon
matters;” “strategies that prioritize innovation and investment have traditionally
focused on improving the rate of technological development, but the direction of
that development has received less attention. ”348 In the age of rampant distrust,
polarization, illiberalism and rising authoritarianism, reviving democracy and the
liberal world order will require setting ambitious points of reference, particularly
for new technological developments, such as AI.
As mentioned in the introduction, the aim of this policy proposal is to provide
an idealized framework for a well-functioning digital public sphere which,
like a lighthouse, could better work for democracy and the liberal world order.
Its purpose is to signal a direction of navigation, away from the maelstrom
of distrust and towards democratic recovery, but not an end-destination. Its
recommendations are based on an ambitious architecture of digital platforms that,

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
73
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
combining technology and human cooperation, could help restore civic dialogue
and political and social trust. Hence, this proposal should be seen as an “idealized
sketch, ” or “draft, ” that could be useful for the vibrant ongoing discussion on how
to make digital technologies reinforce democracy, rather than undermine it. It
has brought many obstacles and challenges into consideration, and many remain
unsolved. None, however, should be considered unsolvable. As argued by Spanish
poet Antonio Machado: “caminante no hay camino, se hace camino al andar. ”349 Its
central argument is based on this understanding: truthful information and civic
dialogue are essential public goods for democracy, everywhere, and their provision
requires strong and reliable public services. The journey of developing a strong
public service for the digital public sphere is worth the effort.
Autocracies are not the only or single challenge for democratic rule worldwide.
Autocracy also emerges from within democracies, when democratic institutions
fail to provide the services and, above all, the trust, that democratic governance
requires. The fast development of AI can contribute to further energize the global
maelstrom of distrust, if it further erodes and fragments the public spheres of
democracies. However, technology also represents an opportunity. Democracies
can seize it, by applying the best techniques of human control, democratic
governance and civic deliberation to AI, and then by using democratically
controlled AI as a lever to scale-up a better, more open and more inclusive
democratic governance.
Currently, the digital public sphere is not working for democracy as it could and
should. But technologies are not the problem, their use and governance are. Well-
governed mass-media are necessary for large democracies. Well-governed digital
technologies, including AI, can dramatically improve the functioning of present-
day democracy.350 Reviving the digital public sphere is possible: there are countless
positive experiences that prove it. What is mostly required is to find ways to scale
them up, domestically and globally. The following is a policy proposal to move
towards that aim. It will be developed in three main sections:
1. Policy background
2. Policy building block: Public options LLMs and AI governance
3. Policy proposal. Adapting the Lighthouse of Democracy to the Internet
and AI

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
74
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Policy background
In the 1990s, the Internet brought about hopes of democratic revival through
increased citizenship participation in the newly formed digital public sphere.
These hopes are yet to materialize. As of 2023, trust in democracy keeps waning,
while polarization remains at historic highs. The Internet and social media
have made it clear that it is possible to organize massive citizens’ conversations,
and make democratic institutions be aware of them. But improvements in
e-governance or the digital strategies traditional media or CSOs have not matched
the crisis of trust and polarization that is taking place within democracies.
The Internet is too vast, and only mega-hubs, like the biggest platforms owned by
Big Tech, attract enough attention and can exert a systemic influence on the public
sphere of large societies. Social media are not effectively working to generate
trust in democracy, empower citizenship or manage a constructive dialogue. The
opposite is happening. Democracies are being eroded by distrust, polarization and
fragmentation, and the liberal world order is threatened by the rising assertiveness
and aggressiveness of authoritarian regimes.
The situation, however, can be reverted. The Internet and social media, including
AI, can become effective tools to revert the current hyper-individualistic trend,
regenerate civic communities, and pump trust back into the body politic of
democracy, in a way that will help protect the liberal world order. They can
facilitate the task of “weaving back’” common societal narratives and the
democratic consensus. The first logical step to try to achieve this objective would
be to develop adequate regulatory frameworks and to harmonize them across
advanced democracies.
The EU, as was analyzed, has already responded to the challenge with the adoption
of the GDPR, the DSA, the DMA and, soon, the AI Act.351 Brussels has de facto
become the world’s most relevant digital regulator. Washington, though, is not
yet following suit in terms of regulation, due to legislative gridlock, Big Tech
lobbying and different geopolitical calculations: the U.S. has the most powerful
and advanced tech companies in the world, leads on AI, and is locked into a great
geopolitical rivalry with China.352

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
75
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
The transatlantic digital regulatory rift is a roadblock on the way to revert the
adverse impact of social media and AI on democracy worldwide. The extension
of EU regulations to the U.S. may be a temporary solution, but it cannot be
a permanent fix, and at some point, it can generate a serious backlash in the
relationship. Jay Clayton, former chairman of the Securities and Exchange
Commission, and Gary D. Cohn, former chairman of the National Economic
Council during the Trump Administration, have argued that regulatory
outsourcing by the U.S. to the EU is “a blow to American sovereignty. ”353 This
could be an anticipation of more difficult times for the transatlantic relationship
under a possible future Republican Administration, which could further erode the
digital regulatory rift.
On the EU side, there is the perception that some Big Tech companies are not
effectively complying with its regulations. The 1.2 billion euro fine on Meta for
violating the GDPR is one of the most recent examples.354 As was mentioned, both
sides have succeeded in finalizing a new deal on data transfers, the EU-U.S. Data
Privacy Framework. It is certainly a step in the good direction, but it is likely that
it will be challenged again in court and, in such case, could come to the European
Court of Justice in early 2024.355 Previous deals (such as Privacy Shield and Safe
Harbor) were struck down by the European Court of Justice, over fears of U.S.
intelligence services’ surveillance practices.356
The EU-U.S. Data Privacy Framework is a step in the right direction, but possibly
not enough to repair the digital rift, as both sides still maintain divergent
approaches to digital regulation. Many more measures will be needed, as the
digital rift is not limited to just the privacy aspects of digital platforms but reflects
two different political realities: one based on ambitious regulations, and another
one on a “laissez-faire” approach. Sarah Eaton, Daniel Fuchs and Paul Triolo share
concerns on the digital “rough sailing” that the EU-U.S. are headed to.357 Eileen
Donahoe, in a paper co-authored with Alina Polyakova, President and CEO of the
Center for European Policy Analysis (CEPA), has warned of the risks of this rift in
face of China’s rising digital authoritarian model, and suggested that the U.S. and
the EU “must overcome their own tech policy divisions and embrace responsibility to
develop a democratic digital strategy that attracts global support. The agenda must
simultaneously drive innovation and solidify a normative framework for governance
of data and technology that protects fundamental rights. ”358

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====
76
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
This is correct, yet a central element of a democratic digital strategy that attracts
global support may require the development of projects that go beyond a digital
transatlantic regulatory rapprochement. The reason is that this rapprochement
is extremely challenging, as it is difficult to foresee deep changes at either side of
the Atlantic. The EU can be expected to continue regulating the digital realm,
including AI, as it is its duty. The U.S., unless a significant political realignment
takes place, can be expected to maintain its loose regulatory approach towards
Big Tech.359 Hence, the U.S. will increase its lead on digital and AI with, possibly,
larger social, political and cultural costs. The EU will consolidate and increase
its lead on digital and AI regulation, but it may lag behind on possible paths of
innovation and the power dividends of these new technologies.
A consolidation of this transatlantic bifurcation would be unfortunate. It would
not be aligned with the geopolitical challenge of the new Cold War nor the
ideological confrontation between democracy and autocracy. Furthermore,
it would place the U.S. and the EU at odds on a crucial element of power
competition and democratic stability at a critical moment. It would not serve
the domestic interests of the U.S., as its social cohesion and digital public sphere
would suffer most, causing an increase in political polarization, radicalization and
distrust. It would not serve the interests of the EU, either, because it would lag
further behind on innovation linked to power capacities, which would also make it
more difficult to keep pace with adequate regulations.360
If a transatlantic regulatory rapprochement is unlikely, and a digital rift is
counter-productive, other measures must also be considered. Industrial and civic
cooperation to enhance a common approach to the protection of democracy at
home and worldwide can be a fruitful option. States have a longstanding tradition
of cooperation on science, technology, industry and education. The International
Space Station (ISS), the European Council for Nuclear Research (CERN), or the
Erasmus program are well-known examples. Democracies, led by the EU and the
U.S., can develop a framework of technological, industrial and civic cooperation
on digital technologies to support their digital public spheres, democratic
resilience and the liberal world order.

===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
77
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Policy basis: Public options Large Language Models:
LLM, and AI governance
Bruce Schneier, Henry Farrell, and Nathan E. Sanders have suggested the
development of public options LLM (Large Language Models, such as GPT4)
to aid democracy. The authors argue that “ A.I. could advance the public good,
not private profit, and bolster democracy instead of undermining it. That would
require an A.I. not under the control of a large tech monopoly, but rather developed
by government and available to all citizens. ”361 The current model of digital
public sphere, structured around the monopolistic dominance of Big Tech, is
unsatisfactory, as it does not satisfy the criteria of a well-functioning public sphere.
As was analyzed already, the problem is not in the technology, but in the use and
governance of that technology.
The aforementioned authors consider that “public LLMs could test new applications
that could support democracy, rather than undermining it. (…). They could help
citizens formulate their perspectives and policy positions, making political arguments
more cogent and informed, whether in social media, letters to the editor, or comments
to rule-making agencies (…).362 The next generation of A.I. experimentation should
happen in the laboratories of democracy: states and municipalities. Online town
halls to discuss participatory budgeting could be an easy first step. ”
The authors’ view on how public LLMs could support democracy, rather than
undermine it, is the first building block of this policy proposal, which focuses on
human, social and institutional arrangements that could contribute to use AI and
digital technologies for the common good. The proposal is also inspired by Archon
Fung and Joshua Cohen’s assessment of the digital public sphere, contained in
their 2021 paper on “Digital Technology and Democratic Theory” and the 2019
Knight report “Crisis in Democracy: Renewing Trust in America. ”363
UNESCO’s recommendation on the Ethics of AI, adopted by 193 Member States in
November of 2021, which calls for a human-centered AI, and the development of
international and national policies and regulatory frameworks to ensure that these
emerging technologies benefit humanity as a whole, has also been considered.364
The proposal is also inspired by the Open Letter “Pause Giant AI experiments” of
March 22, 2023, signed by prominent tech and social leaders, experts on the field
of AI, and citizens, which called on all AI labs to immediately pause for at least six

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
78
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
months the training of AI systems more powerful than GPT-4.365 The following
is an excerpt from the letter: Contemporary AI systems are now becoming human-
competitive at general tasks, and we must ask ourselves: Should we let machines flood
our information channels with propaganda and untruth? Should we automate away
all the jobs, including the fulfilling ones? Should we develop nonhuman minds that
might eventually outnumber, outsmart, obsolete and replace us? Should we risk loss
of control of our civilization? Such decisions must not be delegated to unelected tech
leaders. Powerful AI systems should be developed only once we are confident that
their effects will be positive and their risks will be manageable. ”
If AI labs effectively paused giant AI experiments, or if governments established a
moratorium, would there be any governance solutions that could be established,
beyond the urgently needed regulations? How could such solutions balance the
internal needs of democracies and the demands of geopolitics, including the
generation of a transatlantic digital rapprochement? Even in the absence of a
moratorium: can a human-led AI contribute to repair the digital public sphere and
regenerate trust on democracy in the context of the current maelstrom of distrust?
Policy proposal: Adapting the Lighthouse of
Democracy to the Internet and AI
Transitioning from a disruptive to a constructive model
Large private tech companies are founded on an ad-revenue model, which requires
the ceaseless extraction of citizens’ attention and, as was analyzed, have developed
algorithms that generate adverse mental health and social externalities. The social
media models these businesses have generated do not resemble ‘public squares’ ,
or comply with the conditions of the public sphere. Private corporations do not
have the pursuit of the common good enshrined in their business models and, a
as a result, are unlikely to create viable commercial products resembling public
squares. Even if individuals can find use and purpose on existing social media,
by their monopolistic nature and design, as Sociology Professor Zeynep Tufekci
explains, “the totality of these interactions creates a tragedy of commons – actions
that may be reasonable for individuals creates an environment which has dramatic
consequences for everyone. ”366 Markets, as has been seen in the past decades, will
not fulfill a role which belongs to public institutions.

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
79
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
As argued by Archon Fung and Joshua Cohen, “a well- functioning, democratic
public sphere offers relevant and reliable information and brings different
arguments and views into connection and confrontation. But with a large mix
of irrelevant noise, bullshit, and expressions of hatred, and the segregation of
views from one another with each segment working to deepen its own views in
opposition to the others, diversity, expression, and access may be limited, despite
the apparent gains. Doxxing, swarming, and threatening, for example, are familiar
digital violations of the norms of common good and civility. ”367
The current model of social media has resulted in a highly disruptive model,
as portrayed in figure 2. The current digital public sphere, englobes ‘matters
of potential shared concern’ discussed in digital platforms (most prominently,
political discussions on social media), is functionally similar to an anarchic model,
as disinformation is high, moderation low, and a focus on achieving compromises
for the common good is often absent. The philosophy and social engineering of
‘move fast and break things’ , from Mark Zuckerberg, has fulfilled its promise. It has
accelerated the pace of the democratic conversation, turning reasoned deliberation
into a competition for attention. It has broken the public sphere of democracies,
clustering ideas by political affinity and turning civic deliberation into tribal
polarization. And it has eroded the functioning of democratic institutions, because
institutions inhabit the cultural medium provided by the public sphere. If the civic
conversation fails, democracy cannot function.
Figure 2 Disruptive Model

===== PDF_PAGE 89 =====
80
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
However, as was analyzed, the problem is not in the technology, but in its
governance and use. The technology of digital platforms can contribute
to turn things around, as argued by technologist Aviv Ovayda. 368 As he
explains, “in the past decade especially, countries all over the world have begun
experimenting with new(ish) forms of democracy—and it turns out that some work
very well. In fact, they work especially well for the messy issues that are hyperpolarized
or where no powerful actor can really be trusted. ”369 A very valuable example of
‘platform democracy’ provided by the author could be a citizen’s assembly
in the U.S. on Facebook. 370 In this case, Mark Zuckerberg would provide
a fixed ‘lump sum’ to an impartial assembly facilitation organization for
implementation of a “platform assembly” on a pre-defined issue. The process
of digital deliberation online would then move forward. 371
Facebook enjoys already the benefit of its size and reach, but large for-
profit platforms present many externalities to the digital public sphere, as
has been analyzed. Aside from their structure of incentives and all potential
conflicts of interests, there is a problem of democratic legitimacy and of
alignment with the common good. The technology of digital platforms can
indeed contribute to turn things around, but the devil is in the detail of
their governance, as digital platforms’ governance and functions need to be
adapted to the requirements of a well-functioning public sphere. Who and
how, then, should run these platforms? After purchasing Twitter, Elon Musk
tweeted “it is important to the future of civilization to have a common digital square. ”
He might be right, but as Jack Dorsey, Twitter’s cofounder and former CEO,
replied “It can’t be a company. This is why I left … It can’t have an advertising model
… It should be funded by a foundation. ”372
This policy proposal will forward the argument that digital platforms conceived
to restore trust in democracy need to be fully conceived as public services. They
could be labeled public civic platforms (PCPs), rather than social media or public
social media, as they should neither compete nor fully overlap with existing
social media. They should only focus on matters of common public interest which
pertain to the public sphere and on the fulfilment of the basic conditions to make
citizen’s participation possible, using e-governance solutions. There are already
many models of civic technology platforms to enhance citizen’s participation and
deliberations, mostly at the local level (for instance, for participatory budgeting).
The Obama Administration launched a website, “We the People” for citizen’s
petitions, but it is no longer active. 373

===== PDF_PAGE 90 =====
81
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Some of these solutions will be analyzed in the next pages. Mostly, they still lack the
scale necessary to produce a substantive impact on the digital public sphere and are
not associated with LLMs. The systematic development of PCPs could contribute
to turn things around, as it could bring the best digital governance solutions into
the scale that is required for a large impact. PCPs, specifically designed to facilitate
a collective deliberation for the common good, based on reliable information, and
partly empowered by public LLMs, could become safe havens of civic life. They
could function as real ‘digital public squares’ , in a way that for-profit social media
cannot. Civil society, organized through ‘digital Civic Communities’ (DCCs), could
be entrusted to manage the substantive aspects of PCPs to curate deliberations in a
constructive direction.
An International Agency for Cooperation on AI for Democracy (IACAID, or
Agency), open to advanced democracies and countries transitioning to democracy,
could coordinate these efforts. If well-resourced and managed, PCPs and DCCs
could work as digital public squares with human independent management and
become the cornerstone of a democratic strategy to regenerate public trust. Under
the coordination of the Agency and democratic States, they could contribute to
repair the digital public sphere of democracies, build back a better democratic
governance and protect the democratic home front from the authoritarian offensive.
The disruptive model could pave the way to a constructive model, as seen in figure 3.
Figure 3 Constructive Model

===== PDF_PAGE 91 =====
82
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
The proposed system can be understood as a set of ‘matryoshkas’ , or Russian
nesting dolls, where each element fits into a larger, more complex one. As happens
with ‘matryoshkas’ , it is necessary for the different elements to be adequately
integrated. Otherwise, the ensemble can hardly work. The four proposed elements
are: public LLMs, Public Civic Platforms (PCPs), Digital Civic Communities
(DCCs) and the International Agency for Cooperation on AI for Democracy
(IACAID). The next pages of the proposal will address how the elements should
be combined.
The notion and possible functions of public LLMs were addressed in the section
“policy basis. ”374 Public LLMs, which are basically generative AI systems, such
as GPT4, would be integrated within larger PCPs (PCPs would combine some
elements of social media and e-governance systems and would be run by a
combination of LLMs and human experts). At the same time, deliberations and
other actions within PCPs would be managed by DCCs (DCCs would be civic
associations aimed at furthering the common good through digital means).
Finally, all public LLMs, PCPs and DCCs would operate under the framework of
governance established by the Agency, which would also have certification and
oversight capacities.
In sum: it is essential that humans in general and democratic institutions in
particular stay fully in control of AI. AI, and public AI, can be a tool of democracy
and for the common good, only if it remains under the effective control of
humans, which means, of their democratic institutions. These institutions need to
quickly adapt to an environment which is changing massively and quickly, because
neither AI nor autocracies are going to wait for them to be ready. For democracy
to remain the government ‘of the People, for the People and by the People’ , humans
need to stay in charge, and the institutions of democracy need to swiftly adapt to
the change.
Some might consider that states and international organizations lack the
capacities, skills, or incentives to set such a system in motion.375 Some might
object to it for ideological or legal considerations. In the U.S., for instance, the
main obstacle could relate to objections about the state playing a substantive role
in the moderation of freedom of speech, enshrined in the First Amendment.
A U.S. District Judge in Louisiana has recently forbid a wide range of federal
officials from communicating with social media companies to urge the removal

===== PDF_PAGE 92 =====
83
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
or demotion of constitutionally protected speech.376 States, certainly, can manage
the challenge of facilitating the development of PCPs, if there is adequate political
will. They have already addressed and are addressing much more complicated
issues.377 But how to do it in a way that is effective and generates trust is the
key issue. The next pages will further outline the proposal and address these
understandable caveats.
Creating safe havens: Public Civic Platforms (PCPs) as
public services
The creation of a new public service
It is proving to be difficult for democracies to adequately regulate Big Tech, social
media and AI. A transatlantic digital regulatory rift has emerged. Regulatory
efforts, anti-trust measures and international cooperation on these matters need
to continue and increase. Regulations, such as the ones developed by the EU
(GDPR, DSA, DMA), where applied, have improved and are still improving the
rights of users of online platforms, but the main business model of social media
has not changed, and their negative externalities are as strong as ever.378 Social
media are not trusted platforms of information or citizen’s participation, and
the core problem democratic societies are facing is distrust. Turbocharged by
increasingly powerful AI algorithms, social media can become more addictive
and potentially disruptive. If this path is likely, yet regulations are falling short of
their purpose, additional solutions should be considered.
The concept of ‘digital public square’ , or ‘global town square’ can become an
excellent tool for citizen’s engagement, to regenerate trust, and protect and
promote democracy. But this idea should not be privately owned or locked in
a for-profit system which is unsafe for democratic deliberation. It needs to be
conceived as a public service. A parallel, complementary path to regulation
can also be considered. It combines the notions of public service, industrial
policy, and international cooperation. The first step in this path would be the
development of digital Public Civic Platforms (PCPs) as public services and safe
havens for civic life online.379 PCPs could be an alternative to some functions of
social media and enable different tools of e-governance.
The issue of financing is a central concern. Financing by a foundation or non-

===== PDF_PAGE 93 =====
84
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
profit, as suggested by Jack Dorsey, could radically change the business model
and structure of incentives of social media. Digital town squares, designed
to enable a constructive deliberation, not to attract and distract users, could
function with a civic purpose, if the structure of incentives is adequate. To allow
this model to take root and grow, a foundation or coalition of foundations could
be instrumental. Several platforms are already following such a civic philosophy,
as will be further explored in the section on “PCPs and social media” but, as was
argued before, none of them have succeeded in reaching mainstream use yet.
This argument needs to be taken a step forward, though. Foundations or
non-profits could run digital town squares but, if they were well designed
and effectively functioned for the common good, they would be providing an
unvaluable public service. Still, they would have to compete with for-profit social
media for citizen’s time and attention, which is naturally limited, and either find
a way to make a revenue or incur in financial loss. And they would still lack the
authoritative validation of the state as a public service.
Well-designed, well-functioning, local, national and global digital town squares
need to be fully conceived as public services.380 PCPs would become safe
havens for civic life online and enable a ‘whole of society’ approach to protect
and promote democracy. As such, they should be supported, sponsored and
supervised by the whole infrastructure of the democratic State.381 This could
also solve one of the main concerns on the impact of social media on the public
sphere, which is, as argued by Habermas, and mentioned previously, the blurring
of “the distinction between ‘public’ and ‘private’ , and thus the inclusive meaning
of the public sphere. ”382
States should, first of all, ensure the financing of PCPs, which could be done by
the general budget or by the imposition of a digital service tax (DST) on large
for-profit platforms.383 This could remove one of the most importance ‘entrance
barriers’ faced by civic platforms: the inadequacy of their funding to achieve
large-scale results. Only this, however, may not be enough. Adequate funding
does not guarantee that citizens would pay attention to PCPs. That is why these
platforms should not replicate the functions of social media, nor be too focused
on a particular civic activity. They should include a wide range of functions, in
order to achieve scale.

===== PDF_PAGE 94 =====
85
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
PCPs functions
PCPs should allow citizens to manage their whole civic life through a single
digital point of entry. For that, they should mirror the public sphere and enable an
adequate access to all public services. Through a single platform, citizens should
be able to deliberate online, forward petitions and proposals to institutions, access
government’s messages and pay their taxes. Functionality would drive scalability.
And scale would bring impact. This proposal suggests PCPs to focus on four tracks
of activities:
1. The distribution of fact-based verified information
2. The organization of community deliberations to achieve objectives of
common interest
3. The support of citizens’ access to democratic processes and public services
4. The management of political differences through dialogue and mediation
PCPs could take advantage of the latest developments of AI and benefit from
multiple synergies with the public LLMs. PCPs, though, would not be entirely
digital and would need to be adequately staffed by human teams, capable of
exerting an adequate and permanent oversight of their functioning and that of
the associated LLMs. The systemic cooperation between highly sophisticated AI,
designed with a narrow and specific public purpose, and groups of human experts,
could enable PCPs to achieve the facilitation of their four tracks of activities. As a
result:
• If the distribution of fact-based verified information is effective, PCPs
would work as trust-enabling systems and contribute to the regeneration of
the digital public sphere of democracies. In the fulfilment of this function,
PCPs would be facilitating the role of public broadcasters.
• If the organization of constructive collective deliberations is effective,
PCPs would work as community-building systems. In the fulfilment of this
function, PCPs would be facilitating the role of community organizers and
CSOs.
• If the support of citizen’s access to democratic processes and public services
is ambitious enough, and institutions open-up adequate avenues to channel

===== PDF_PAGE 95 =====
86
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
this participation, PCPs would also contribute to re-synchronize the public
sphere with the political public sphere, bringing the political system back
to a better balance. 384 In the fulfilment of this function, PCPs would be
providing a new ‘bridge of dialogue’ between the different demos and their
public representatives.
• If, finally, the management of political differences can be accomplished
with the assistance of online mediation, PCPs would become depolarizing
and deradicalizing systems. In the fulfilment of this function, PCPs would
be facilitating the role of political mediation and conflict resolution.
PCPs themselves would not take the role of broadcasters, community organizers,
institutions of representative democracy, or mediators. PCPs would be public
digital platforms, designed to ‘facilitate’ a ‘whole of society’ approach aimed at
ensuring democratic cohesion and resilience by ensuring the availability of civic
dialogue and engagement based on reliable information.385 Given their public
nature and purpose, PCPs would need to ensure adequate ID verification. This
requirement would be necessary for the good governance of the platforms, to
ensure compliance with their rules and standards, and even for something as basic
as to ascertain that there’s a real human being at the other side, and not an AI-
bot.386 Other than ID verification, there would be no harvesting of private data,
for commercial or any other purposes, as PCPs would not be designed for that
purpose in the first place.387
PCPs, social media and examples of civic platforms
PCPs should not be developed as substitutes for social media. There are already
too many, competing for citizen’s attention.388 PCPs would provide citizens with
a public option that they can trust to access reliable information and engage
with other citizens constructively, without the fear that their privacy could be
compromised, or that their ideas and proposals could become fodder of partisan
ideological warfare. Insofar, they would be safe havens for civic life. But PCPs
would not enter the “social” dimension of social media and could even help social
media refocus their efforts on the core nature of their business, which is providing
social connections, not becoming digital “public squares” or de facto organizers of
political debates. The complementarity with for-profit social media could happen
by allowing the redirection of the anarchic political conversation that takes place
in social media towards PCPs.389 Social media themselves could be interested

===== PDF_PAGE 96 =====
87
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
in providing adequate avenues for this redirecting to take place, as the burden
of check-proving information and managing a civic engagement online is too
burdensome and sensitive for them.390
As was already mentioned, there are already many initiatives of civic social
media and digital apps and tools designed to facilitate citizens’ deliberation and
democratic participation. Most of them, though, lack the funding or scale to
be able to have a systemic and sustained social impact. Mastodon has been one
of the most visible, it offers a decentralized and community-driven experience,
but its adoption and impact are still limited. Participedia, an innovative global
crowdsourcing platform, has a focus on public participation and democratic
innovations. Its adoption is also still limited. The sector, though, is moving
very fast, and AI will further accelerate changes. As explained by Science Policy
Expert and Journalist Bina Venkataraman: “Innovators are creating ranking
systems that would enable people to vote on a community’s content-moderation
algorithm based on what it amplifies and suppresses, rather than accept a single
company’s default strategy. Researchers are working on algorithms that would ‘bridge’
divides, amplifying not what’s causing strong reactions but what people of various
persuasions, whether political affiliations or musical tastes, agree on. ”391
Some of the most promising initiatives so far are being implemented with
public leadership or support, but mostly at the local level. An example would be
Decide Madrid, a civic technology platform created in 2015 to promote citizen
participation in policymaking and improve governance in the city.392 Participatory
budgeting is one of the most often used tools and it is being employed in
many cities and local communities across the world. Ambitious experiences,
though, have also been applied at national level. As was mentioned earlier, the
Obama Administration launched a website, “We the People” , which is no longer
active. South Korea’s “e-government” is one of the most advanced systems of
e-governance worldwide.393 Ireland has used a system of deliberative mini-publics
(DMPs) to bring ordinary citizens to deliberate on public policy issues.394
The EU itself developed “EuroPolis” , an experiment to assess “how political and
social attitudes toward European Union (EU) issues change as a result of exposure
to information, and what implications this has for political participation and voter
turnout. ”395 It functioned as a deliberative polity-making project, and also used
DMPs from across the continent to deliberate on matters of common interest.396 It

===== PDF_PAGE 97 =====
88
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
achieved positive results and, as argued by Fishkin at al, the mini-public or micro-
cosmic version of the EU wide public sphere is a viable democratic tool: “If there
is at some point enough interest in bringing the people of Europe into decisions in a
thoughtful and representative way, then the mini-public version can be convened. ”397
Citizens’ juries, deliberative polls, and citizens’ assemblies are increasingly being
used worldwide. But Taiwan’s digital democracy is possibly the most advanced
and ambitious initiative in this regard and will be further examined in the section
dedicated to track 3 Supportive DCCs.
PCPs would provide a massive step forward in the direction of ensuring
that citizens of democracies have access to reliable information and ample
opportunities to participate digitally in the democratic life of their communities
and countries, not in opposition with the elected bodies of representative
democracy, but in collaboration with them. Digital technologies allow a deepened
cooperation between the citizen’s public sphere and the political public sphere. In
the same way that postal services or public broadcasters were created in the past to
facilitate communications and the flow of information within democracies, PCPs
could become public services in the digital public sphere. Past and existing systems
and experiences of civic platforms and participatory e-democracy at local level, or
experiences in countries such as Ireland, the RoK and Taiwan, or even at the EU
level, could be taken as a model for implementing an international network of safe
havens for civic life and the protection and promotion of democracy.
In most advanced Western democracies, public postal services and public
broadcasters coexist with private providers of the same or similar services. What
public postal services and public broadcasters do is to ensure that a safe, reliable,
public option, designed with a public service mission, is available to all citizens.
A civic media public service is nowadays required and cannot be outsourced to
large for-profit social media. As argued by Martin Wolf, “the more the functions of
the State are commercialized, the more difficult preservation of a public service ethos
becomes”.398 The 2019 Knight report also recognizes that “the free market may not
create all the forms of networks that would benefit democratic and open societies”,
and states that “much as a healthy media ecosystem needs both for-profit and
nonprofit players, the internet market deserves the same. ”399 PCPs should do what
social media cannot do, which is the public service dimension of their activity and
additional e-governance tasks.

===== PDF_PAGE 98 =====
89
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Ensuring universal and effective access to reliable information and facilitating
citizens’ free and equal constructive participation are the two main pillars to
restore trust and depolarize. Both pillars have a clear digital dimension in the
present day. The process, certainly, would only produce effects in the long term
and if applied systematically. Democratic recovery is unlikely to be achieved with
quick, short-term fixes, as it requires cultural change. Unlike autocracy, democracy
is a craft that requires patience and constant care. That is why it is historically
rare in massive societies. In the U.S., for instance, the social and political upswing
generated during the Progressive Era was a slow and steady process, that took
decades to materialize.
The U.S. that won WWII and built the liberal world order was the result of that
patient communitarian effort. It may still be the richest and most powerful country
on Earth, but it has lost social capital, democratic resilience and soft power. It
will have to recover from these losses and build up a large and robust democratic
alliance with its closest democratic partners, and especially with the EU, the
largest Union of liberal democracies in the world, to protect and rebuild the world
order. PCPs could provide the necessary safe online havens for a new democratic
upswing to start taking root worldwide. To be fruitful, though, the effort will have
to follow a “whole of society approach” and mobilize civil society and institutions.
The role of human civil society and institutions: Digital
Civic Communities (DCCs)
“ We do not know how to control these
things”.400
“ – Geoffrey Hinton, Pioneer AI scientist
The main challenge would be to ensure an adequate human control and
democratic governance of the new public service of PCP . This is essential, to
counter the risk of these platforms being used in the wrong way.401 Humans
will have to control PCPs and their AI components. More concretely, a human
institution should be entrusted with this role. AI will affect every aspect of life,

===== PDF_PAGE 99 =====
90
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
and in the political sphere, regulating it will be essential to protect democracy.
The EU is preparing to adopt the AI Act, which will be an important step forward
in. The U.S. and other countries are still lagging behind, and China (and other
autocracies) will increasingly use AI as a tool of state surveillance and population
control. Regulatory efforts must speed up dramatically. The creation of PCPs can
be instrumental.
If created, PCPs would only affect a small portion of the digital traffic on the
Internet. As ‘safe havens’ , however, they could be used as ‘sandboxes’ to experiment
on large-scale systems to enable a human control of AI. The experimental systems
developed for the inner governance of PCPs could inform better regulations of AI
and social media across the board. Teams of experts would have to control public
LLMs within PCPs. These teams of human operators, though, might be well suited
to exercise a technical oversight of the platforms and their AI components, but
they would not be in an adequate position to manage the human governance of
PCPs. Who is to ensure that the information provided by public civic platforms is
reliable? Who could ensure that citizens can engage in constructive deliberations
within PCPs?
Even if central to democracies, many public services, as was analyzed, have been
affected by the same crisis of distrust that is corroding democratic politics and
institutions. If PCPs were to be developed, the central task would be to design
them in a way that would generate a sufficient level of public support. The
biggest challenge may be to attract citizens from across the political spectrum
of democracies to the PCPs and explain the nature of the new public service.
Adequate funding and broad functionality would contribute to sort some
obstacles, but not all. The central, critical question of trust would remain.402 Three
actions can be considered in this regard:
1. Public campaigns: public campaigns can be developed to explain PCPs and
their public service nature to society, with special attention to the sectors
of the population than could benefit most from them (minors, vulnerable
sectors of society, persons with disabilities, elders, etc). E-governance
elements could be highlighted, to underscore that PCPs are meant to
facilitate citizen’s access to diverse public services, and equal access to the
digital public sphere.

===== PDF_PAGE 100 =====
91
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
2. Phased-implementation: the introduction of PCPs can first be
implemented for educational purposes. Social media have detrimental
effects on mental health, particularly of children and teenagers.
Regulations may increasingly ban or limit the use of social media for
minors. Bans, though, are difficult to implement. PCPs can become a
valuable educational tool and can be used to teach students how to safely
develop a civic online presence. As PCPs would be digital safe havens, they
could also become effective alternatives to social media for minors.
3. Civil society leadership: Digital Civic Communities (DCCs) could be
created as the drivers of the information and communication process
within the PCPs. They could provide “built-in” checks and balances of
the system, to prevent its abuse, from governments or other actors. This
proposed action requires a thorough explanation.
As has been repeatedly stated, technology is not the problem, its governance and
use is. Hence, it is necessary to ensure an adequate governance structure of PCPs,
unlike the one existing in private social media. As argued by Bina Venkataraman,
“Better online communities won’t grow from the same kinds of ideas, companies and
thinkers who got us here. The next era should be shaped by the wide public it will
serve. ”403 PCPs, being public, would need a much more robust system to ensure
their credibility and accountability amongst the larger public.404 They should
be human-centered and ensure an adequate human-algorithm balance, where
humans and human institutions permanently stay in control of AI processes.
But, to remain independent and neutral, PCPs would also need to be separate from
government political influence in all functions unrelated to e-governance. Their
role would be more effective if they do not work as new branches of government
but retain their own autonomy. In the U.S., for instance, as was mentioned, there
are concerns about government interfering in any possible way with the freedom
of speech enshrined in the First Amendment.405 For this and other related issues
concerning public trust, governments should not participate in the curation of
civic deliberations withing PCPs. PCPs would need to rely on and cooperate with
other actors from civil society to perform this task. As Habermas argued, the
(citizen’s) “public sphere” and the “political public sphere” are distinct.
This proposal agrees that these spheres are distinct but considers that digital
technologies can enable adequate ways of communication and cooperation

===== PDF_PAGE 101 =====
92
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
between both. As such, the digital public sphere as mediated by PCPs can be
synchronized with public institutions, as was reflected in the constructive model in
figure 3. There are many examples of such cooperation within liberal democracies.
A case in point would be public universities: they receive public funding but have
full autonomy from government, within the existing laws and regulations. Most
often, public funding within democracies does not undermine freedom of speech,
but it enhances it.406
Therefore, the role of curating deliberations within PCPs should be entrusted to
DCCs. Credited social organizations, new digital communities, and citizens, could
form DCCs and become the main drivers of PCPs, as long as they are independent
themselves, and their main focus is the public interest. The actors and their roles
would differ, depending on the area of activity, but they would be entrusted in
all cases with the promotion of democratic responsibility within PCPs.407 The
judiciary would ultimately ensure that DCCs act within their constitutional and
legal limits and mandates, and so would the IACAID (as will be later explained).
The rest of this section will consider the roles of these civic communities in the
four tracks of activity of PCPs. As was already mentioned, the following lines
provide an “idealized sketch” of a possible architecture for a well-functioning
digital public sphere. Many challenges would arise, foreseen and unforeseen.
Track 1. DCCs for the distribution of fact-based verified
information (Informative DCCs)
Well-regulated, independent public broadcasters could be the main anchors of
these DCCs.408 In partnership with other independent media outlets, associations
and cooperatives of journalism, and academia, they could form “Informative
DCCs” , under the framework established by the IACAD and their country of
origin. Their mission would be to curate the distribution of fact-based verified
information within the PCPs.409 These DCCs could functionally work as “digital
alliances for independent journalism. ”
The rationale for the creation of these DCCs would be that ensuring a provision
of reliable information is essential for a well-functioning public sphere and a
high-quality democracy. Archon Fung and Joshua Cohen argue that “perhaps the
best cure for fake news is not to suppress it but rather to increase access to better
information that is both informative and reliable: raise the floor instead of imposing

===== PDF_PAGE 102 =====
93
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
ceilings. In the mass- media era, good news was produced (however imperfectly)
by professional journalists. ”410 Today, as they mention, platform companies,
governments, and citizens can do more to finance good news.411
The PCP audience would rely on trustworthy track 1 DCCs to obtain their
information. As DCC-1 anchors, public broadcasters, in accordance with
international and domestic democratic codes and norms of independent
journalism, would set the general parameters of information that could flow
through PCPs.412 This implies that track 1 DCCs should establish a system to
constantly monitor the truthfulness of all information shared within PCPs, with
the collaboration of public LLMs. Some systems are already in place. Independent,
journalistic fact- checking websites (such as PolitiFact, Snopes, and FactCheck.org)
can help provide inputs for platform judgments (in some geographies).413
Credited news outlets of independent journalism from across the political
spectrum could be important strategic partners of public broadcasters within
DCC-1.414 The development of a system of partnerships between media outlets
within PCPs would be aligned with several recommendations of the 2019 Knight
report, including the recommendation to “encourage more collaboration among
journalism entities at all levels” , the recommendation to “develop non-profit
mission-driven journalistic entities (Community News Organizations, or CNOs), ”
the recommendation to “use technology to enhance journalism’s roles in fostering
democracy” , or the recommendation to “build a news and information ecosystem
that reflects the diversity of individual communities and our nation” .415
Such partnerships could include a system of economic compensation for private
news outlets that share news in PCPs. The financing model of independent
journalism has been shattered by the loss of advertising revenue that has flowed,
amongst other places, to large social media platforms. Trustworthy information
being a public good, it should be appropriately funded.416 Revenue from a
possible DST could be then returned to media and journalists participating in
track 1 DCCs.417
Partnerships could also be especially useful to support outlets that operate at the
local level, since communities across the West have experienced the decimation
of a rich ecosystem of local media, eroding trust and comity in rural areas, and
contributing to the rise of political polarization. DCC-1 partnerships would also

===== PDF_PAGE 103 =====
94
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
be particularly helpful to distribute academic work and make it more accessible
to the general public. Informative DCCs would organize themselves internally
with great autonomy, with the only limitation of having to abide by the general
framework of governance and code of conduct approved by the IACAID and the
laws and rules applicable in the different countries.
Different PCPs could follow different information strategies: in some countries,
PCPs might prefer to only facilitate information provided by established
Informative DCCs; other PCPs, though, might opt for a more open strategy,
allowing, like social media does, user generated content (UGC), but always under
a system of supervision by DCC-1. In this case, the combination of a system of
ID verification, a platform design that would impede viralization, and the role
of Informative DCCs in monitoring information’s trustworthiness, would drain
deepfakes, general disinformation and hate speech, ensuring that PCPs would be
reliable sources of information. Even if UGC was allowed, this would not make
track 1 DCCs “digital public squares. ” Their mission would be informing. Not
“more” or “faster, ” but “better” and “deeper. ” There should be a clear separation
between the role of informing the public, and the role of assisting citizens’ efforts
of collective deliberation.418
PCPs can help democratic societies maintain and support independent
journalism, as the proposed model keeps it at the center of the design. Through
the constitution of Informative DCCs, the model would entrust journalists with
the responsibility of using AI as a tool and would not allow AI systems to take
over any editorial responsibilities. Under track 1, PCPs would provide the kind of
information that democracies and deliberative communities in general need to
function. Verified, accurate. Pedagogic, when necessary. Trustworthy and human,
always. Citizens would know where to look for, when searching for information
online. PCPs, under the direction of a credited alliance of independent journalists,
would be safe havens of reliable information. Independent journalism must be at
the center of the efforts to repair the lighthouse of democracy.

===== PDF_PAGE 104 =====
95
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Track 2. DCCs for the organization of constructive community
deliberations to achieve objectives of common interest
(Deliberative DCCs)
Academia, or associations of CSOs-existing or to be created- could be the anchors
of these DCCs.419 In partnership with unions, CSOs, cooperatives, charities,
and citizen juries, they could form “Deliberative DCCs” , under the framework
established by the IACAD and their respective country of origin.420 The inner
structure of these Deliberative DCCs could be tripartite: academia would form
the first tier, CSOs and other existing organizations would form the second one,
and citizen juries the third one. Randomly selected citizens would form part of
these deliberative juries, which would collaborate with existing organizations and
academia within DCCs.421 The mission of track 2-DCCs would be to promote
and facilitate community deliberations within PCPs, transforming them in “digital
public squares. ” 422
Paul Hawken has described the social and environmental movement as the largest
on Earth, although it’s lacking any single leadership or structure.423 Whether this
conception is accurate, and whether the diverse landscape of non-profits and
community organizations can be considered a “movement” , with at least some
basic cohesion and unity of purpose, is debatable. It possibly depends on the
perspective and level of abstraction applied. What is clear, though, is that CSOs,
-environmental, social, humanitarian, civil rights, etc-, are filling a very important
void left by the decrease of unionization and other communitarian associations
in Western liberal democracies. And they are deploying major efforts to face the
multiple crisis that the world and most societies are facing, trying to reach out to
the rest of the citizenship.
Even if in the last decades -as Putnam explains-, the membership rate of CSOs,
and the level of engagement of members, has been declining, CSOs represent one
of the major pillars of comity and civic commitment in modern democracies.
They are the most relevant actors advocating for social justice, environmental
protection, human rights and the common good. The ceaseless efforts of
thousands of CSOs, communities and activists have created the social awareness
that has later allowed political leaders to adopt courageous reforms, in matters
such as civil rights or the protection of the environment. There would have been
no Paris Agreement absent a strong and sustain push of CSOs, communities,

===== PDF_PAGE 105 =====
96
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
and activists.424 Deliberative DCCs would facilitate an active and systemic
collaboration between existing CSOs and communities, academia, and citizen
juries representative of the broad citizenship. This would strengthen trust and
comity and the pursuit of the common good. The next big climate agreement,
for instance, will need an even stronger and better coordinated push by the
civil society than in the past, given the higher fragmentation of formal political
processes, both at national and international level. Deliberative DCCs can be
instrumental to better articulate this and other societal efforts.
The creation of a three-tiered structure of DCCs could be useful to enhance
trust, depolarize and reduce the fragmentation of the public sphere. The reason
is that this system would enable and incentivize the cooperation of academia,
diverse CSOs, and citizens.425 CSOs and communities with different missions and
ideological background may find it difficult to cooperate. Academia and citizen
juries could moderate their differences. CSOs would find benefits in cooperating
within PCPs, rather than competing for attention and resources. Cooperation
would be rewarded by reaching to larger audiences. It would also contribute to
decrease social media’s tendency to create “semi-publics. ”426
Deliberative DCCs could follow different strategies: some might opt to
organize small groups of experts to deliberate on sectorial interests (civil rights,
environment, local issues, etc), to be followed by discussions at larger groups, less
homogeneous and like-minded. Others may opt to organize larger fora to discuss
topics of cross-cutting nature.427 All DCCs, however, should establish ways to
enable the participation of interested citizens in their deliberations. Public LLMs
would be an essential instrument of the organization of these deliberations.428
Until the development of generative AI, it has not been technically possible to
adequately “scale-up” civic dialogue in large democracies. Technology, with
adequate human and societal guidance, may now provide an opportunity for
this endeavor.429
The formation of large and diverse civil society coalitions and the presentation
of moderate, constructive proposals would be essential to attract citizens to the
debates. DCCs may be the drivers of PCPs, but as a public service these platforms
are meant to allow the entrance and participation of all interested citizens and
reach the largest possible audience, in accordance with the conditions of a well-
functioning public sphere.430 The combination of the system of ID verification and

===== PDF_PAGE 106 =====
97
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
the role of Deliberative DCCs as moderators would allow the organization within
PCPs of constructive citizens’ deliberations, in a way that for-profit social media
cannot provide. Their mission would not be to promote outrage, or “guilt” , but
understanding, and “sharing. ”
PCPs would provide the kind of civic dialogue in the digital public sphere that
democracies and organizations in general need to function. They would be
designed to help citizens build bridges to discuss issues of common interest, for
them particularly and for society as a whole, to weave back social consensus.
431 It can be argued that democracies already have their institutional bodies of
elected representatives, and that direct democracy, or processes that emulate
it, is unmanageable and dangerous. The Framers of the U.S. Constitution were
particularly suspicious about this.432 The reality, though, is that social media are
already providing digital spaces that citizens are de facto using as “digital public
squares” , and that elected representatives are constantly paying attention to the
conversations that arise in social media (on Facebook, Twitter or, more recently,
TikTok), and even using these social media to “interact” with citizens. This is the
disruptive model described in figure 2. The Framers would most likely not have
approved this reality, which they could not predict anyway. It is now with us.
The situation is paradoxical, because social media have not been designed to
promote a civic and constructive deliberation, and their negative externalities
are well known. Many ideas and proposals that move forward in social media
are too often informed by passions and emotions, including anger and fear.
Strong emotions generate clicks, attention, virality, the energy that keeps
the business model of social media running. It is detrimental to democracy.
Collective deliberation, if well managed, can be extremely helpful to regenerate
trust on liberal democracy. It would be better to place it under the leadership of
communities and organizations that know how to manage it, rather than on for-
profit corporations that lack a real interest on civic life.433
Track 2 DCCs could be particularly useful to deliberate on critical questions
related to democratic governance, distrust and polarization, from the financing of
political parties, to gerrymandering, electoral modalities (including rank choice
voting), or the reform of institutions. They could also coordinate to organize
synchronic deliberations amongst dozens of “digital public squares” within several
PCPs across different democratic countries. This could be done on matters of

===== PDF_PAGE 107 =====
98
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
common global interest. A possible set of deliberations could involve ideas and
actions to combat climate change, an issue where a wider and deeper involvement
of interested citizens could be especially fruitful.434 On matters of global,
systemic and inter-generational public interest, promoting a higher involvement
of world citizens would be ethically and politically advisable. And, aside from
informing democracies of their deliberations, they could also inform International
Organizations, and namely the UN, which already has multiple channels of
participation of NGOs, but not a platform which is designed to also include
millions of citizens in the process of collective deliberation for the common good.
The system of representative democracy was already disrupted by the development
of social media. It is necessary to acknowledge that democracy cannot properly
function in a social media environment designed to move fast and break things,
as it is a system that is depleting trust and eroding the public sphere of our
societies.435 To protect and restore democracy, reliable information is necessary,
but not enough. New spaces for the development of civic dialogue are also
essential to repair the lighthouse of democracy.
Track 3. DCCs for the support of citizens’ access to democratic
processes and public services
Track 3 DCCs could provide citizens with all the possibilities of e-governance of
the particular state of reference. Therefore, “Supportive DCCs” should include
public institutions as central actors and main anchors. Informative DCCs rely on
independent media and Deliberative DCCs on civil society. Supportive DCCs
should also include independent media and civil society, including academia and
citizen juries, but as partners of public institutions, who would be the main drivers
of their work.
Supportive DCCs’ structure would be quadripartite: the first tier would be formed
by public institutions, the second by media, the third by CSOs and the fourth by
citizen juries. The purpose of track 3 DCCs would be to support citizens’ access
to democratic processes and public services. They would work as “digital bridges”
between institutions and citizens. This would be the only segment of PCPs with
direct government involvement. It would align the “political public sphere” with
the “citizen’s public sphere” , to enable a more fruitful and transparent process of
transforming the public opinion into public policies.

===== PDF_PAGE 108 =====
99
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Once citizens have had access to reliable information (track 1) and to a
constructive deliberation (track 2), some may wish to increase their level of
engagement and participate more proactively in any democratic processes that
are open to citizens. Exercising the right to vote and participating in elections
would be the most basic one. Even if these issues are mostly solved in all advanced
democracies, some are facing challenges in this regard.436 Aside from voting
in elections, there are many other ways to participate in the political process
in modern democracies. Referenda, popular initiatives, recalls, petitions or
participatory budgeting processes are nowadays common mechanisms of direct or
participatory democracy. They are usually more often applied at local or regional
level, but sometimes also at national level. The Internet and the development
of e-governance has made participatory democracy much more feasible and
common. Where applied, it almost always coexists remarkably well with the
institutions of representative democracy.437
With the assistance of public LLMs, track 3 DCCs could support citizens’
engagement in many or most mechanisms of participatory democracy. They
could do so by, first of all, by informing them of the existing channels (which are
often ignored by most citizens). Secondly, they could assist them on accessing the
information which is relevant to the particular process they want to engage with
and redirect them to any possible previous deliberations on the matter. Thirdly,
they could become drivers of democratic mobilization, proactively encouraging
and promoting citizens’ participation, and making it clear that their voice, ideas
and engagement matters.
If democratic governments become especially involved in the process, expanding
enough avenues of citizen’s participation, advanced liberal democracies could well
evolve into “participatory liberal democracies” , and synchronize the institutions of
representative democracy with the best methods of direct democracy. As Audrey
Tang, digital minister of Taiwan, explained in 2022, “Taiwan’s digital democracy
can be seen as a precursor in this regard. On the country’s online platform, anyone
can file a petition. There is no need to be affiliated with any political party.
Twice a month, for petitions that gather 5,000 signatures, we hold face-to-face
collaborative meetings across related ministries to explore ways to incorporate them
into policymaking. ”438 Taiwan’s ‘digital democracy’ is possibly one of the most
remarkable examples of symbiosis between government institutions, civil society,
industry and tech to develop an advanced participatory democracy.

===== PDF_PAGE 109 =====
100
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
True, Taiwan is a very particular case, and it holds some of the most advanced
technologies in the world. It’s democracy, though, is very young, and its means
are not larger than those of Western countries. The success of its “digital
democracy” is not even mainly a technological prowess. As Sam Robbins
argues, “What is impressive about Taiwan is that there is a government working
to implement an open government and open parliament plan, including the
implementation of ‘participation officers to increase openness in transparency across
all government agencies (…). Indeed, the most awe-inspiring facets of Taiwan are
often not digital at all, but rather that a critical mass of people and government effort
is being placed on slowly building channels of dialogue. ”439 It is not only Taiwan
that has embarked on such project of digital participation, although its model is
possibly the most ambitious in the world. South Korea and Ireland have followed
this path, too. Ireland, for instance, established a deliberative assembly in 2016
to advise the Irish Parliament on abortion and on the question to be put to the
people in a referendum. 440 Local institutions are also trying novel systems of
e-governance and e-democracy.
Supporting citizens’ access and engagement with democratic processes would
only be one part of the role of track 3 DCCs. Supporting their access to public
services would be the second part of their role. Following the guidance of
institutions, they could link e-governance webpages and tools to the PCPs,
generating a single point of entrance for citizens to interact with their
governments, at local, regional or national level. This, as was explained, is also
important to scale-up PCPs. This way, citizens would have the possibility of
accessing all their administrative information and carry out all their legal and
administrative demarches (taxes, health, etc), easily. This could provide a useful
public service particularly for vulnerable populations, which often do not know
the rights and mechanisms of support that are available to them. 441
Supportive DCCs would assist them in being able to exercise their rights and
come into the radar and protection of governments. PCPs could be a tool to
advance in social cohesion and justice, and the protection of those who most
need public services. E-governance mechanisms are already relatively advanced
in some advanced democracies, but not in all. 442 Navigating interactions with
the different public administrations can still be extremely complicated and
burdensome in many countries. Differences are also wide within countries,
depending on the region, the kind of public service in question, etc. The creation

===== PDF_PAGE 110 =====
101
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
of PCPs could help the less-digitalized Administrations to close the e-governance
gap with the most advanced ones.
The development of a transnational network of PCPs amongst democracies could
also facilitate the coordination of authorities’ messages to their populations on
matters of important or urgent international interest, such as pandemics, natural
disasters, or wars. A robust and reliable network of democratic PCPs could cut
through the noise and disinformation generated in social media, to make citizens
know where to find credible information. The fact that governments currently
rely on social media for purposes of public information is a vulnerability, as
private platforms mix truth and fake, responsibility and anarchy, in a way that is
profoundly unreliable. This challenge is only going to grow as AI generated deep
fakes flood and clog the existing channels of communication, rendering them
useless as vehicles for governments and institutions public messages. Churchill
and FDR made of public and private broadcasters important instruments of their
public communication during WWII. Democratic leaders could use PCPs, when
the need arises. 443
Track 3 DCCs could create a large impact to increase citizens’ trust on
democratic institutions, as they would facilitate the interactions between citizens
and their governments and make democratic processes and public services more
transparent and accessible. Citizens often compare poorly funded public services
with the efficient provision of goods and services by large, wealthy corporations.
With the assistance of digital technologies, the quality of public services could
improve substantially, increasing citizens’ trust. Supportive DCCs could become
useful tools to develop better systems of e-governance and more responsive
democracies. Developing effective mechanisms to help citizens engage with
democratic processes and public services can also be essential elements to repair
the lighthouse of democracy.
Track 4. DCCs for the management of political differences
through dialogue and mediation
Last, Mediating DCCs could take shape, to form “digital depolarizing alliances. ”
All DCC models are conceived as depolarizing and trust-enhancing public
solutions, but track-4 DCCs would have depolarization and the management
of disputes as their single objective. Their structure could be tripartite. One

===== PDF_PAGE 111 =====
102
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
tier would include CSOs and religious congregations committed to mediation,
another one academia and the third one citizen juries. As other DCCs, they
would operate under the framework provided by the IACAID and their country
of origin.444 Several CSOs have developed relevant skills to facilitate the
resolution of conflicts through dialogue and mediation. This has also been done
by some religious congregations, which are also essential to promote interfaith
dialogue. Alliances of these organizations could be entrusted as main anchors
of Mediating DCCs, to develop a public service aimed at furthering tolerance
amongst citizens.
The main dimension of this role could be developed online. Difficult
deliberations within other DCCs could be redirected towards Mediating DCCs.
This dialogue would need to be thoroughly prepared and guided. Citizens
involved in the dispute would need to agree to certain standards of behavior and
be informed of possible consequences in case of misbehavior (including the use
of insults and threats). As argued by Archon Fung and Joshua Coen, “fostering
participant responsibilities must play a central role in remedying the deficiencies of
the digital public sphere in order to capture some of the desirable qualities of the mass
media public sphere. ”445
The use of videoconferencing solutions might be especially useful for these
dialogues, as text alone would most likely not suffice. Seeing human faces,
even if through a screen, humanize interactions. Guidance and pedagogy can
also have an important depolarizing effect. A 2022 megastudy has found 23
short interventions that significantly reduce partisan animosity, like videos
and informational messages. 446 Providing people corrective information that
fixes misperceptions on political opponents’ stances decreases the support to
political violence and democratic backsliding from their own party. Two of the
authors of the megastudy, Willer and Voelkel, have expressed hope “that the
project’s results will be a useful resource for organizations, political leaders, and
social media platforms looking to foster a healthy democratic environment. ”447 In a
PBS interview, Willer explained that cable news and social media platforms do
not have “a lot of motivation to take action on this problem, in fact, they may have
the reverse, they may be benefiting from polarization and from increasing it. You
don’t have any obvious actors who have an interest in and the means to effectively
intervene on this problem. ”448

===== PDF_PAGE 112 =====
103
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
PCPs could be the actors entrusted to implement the toolkit of trust enabling
and depolarizing solutions that are being developed. In the U.S., for instance,
Mediating DCCs could implement novel solutions for citizens to discuss issues
such as abortion, gun control and other topics of the so-called “culture wars” .
The 2019 Knight report provides some examples of local civic dialogues to
rebuild trust and bridge divisions, such as LocalVoicesNetwork, Deliberation
Day, Citizen University or America’s Civic Square.449 Professor Peter T. Coleman
also provides different examples and experiences on this matter in his book The
Way Out: How to Overcome Toxic Polarization. He explains how it is possible
to generate “virtuous cycles” to depolarize and achieve sustainable peace, from
Costa Rica, New Zealand and the Nordic countries to counties or regions in the
U.S., Australia, Brazil or India. 450
With the assistance of public LLMs, and the guidance of track 4 DCCs, PCPs
could contribute to scale-up and standardize the best international practices.
Their end-goal does not need be to depolarize by reaching common agreements
-although this could be a positive side effect of their job-, but rather to guide
citizens on how to respect peers with different views, and to weave back social
trust and common ground. 451 A society of fully like-minded people is neither
possible nor desirable. A society geared towards enmity and violence is possible,
but extremely undesirable and dangerous. Patience and time are essential
components to move in the direction of a culture of understanding and respect,
and those ingredients cannot be found in the social media business model. PCPs,
with the collaboration of Mediating DCCs, could provide such a model. 452
The PCP-DCC framework relies on a combination of technology, including
AI, and humans. Humans, individuals and organizations, are at the cusp of the
model. This is particularly important for track 4 DCCs. Often, videoconferencing
might not suffice. PCPs could become platforms of coordination for in-person
meetings. Many track-4 processes might need to be redirected to physical
settings. This level of organization is obviously very challenging, but there
is no reason to immediately deploy the full arsenal of governance tools and
mechanisms that could be implemented through PCPs. Difficult dialogues which
require mediation and even physical presence can be developed first through
pilot projects, in experimental settings. As CSOs, religious congregations
and academia would have a central role to play, they could also provide their
members and students with opportunities for volunteering in the process. The
best solutions could later be standardized.

===== PDF_PAGE 113 =====
104
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Developing effective mechanisms to help citizens discuss their differences
in a civic way can be the fourth essential element to repair the lighthouse of
democracy. Logically, not all solutions can be developed online. But digital tools
can be better used to organize large-scale social arrangements, which can be
good for democracy. None of these solutions are new, many are all well-known
and widely used, in different setting across advanced societies and worldwide.
For-profit social media are not the adequate digital platforms to address the
social and political challenges and threats to democracy. Public Civic Platforms,
driven by CSOs, independent journalists, academia, communities, citizen juries,
etc, and open to the entire civil society, could become powerful public services to
protect and promote democracy worldwide.
The Lighthouse: The AI for Democracy system (AI4D)
Modern, liberal democracies are not well equipped to face the simultaneous
challenge brought about by the politics of aggression, intimidation and
interference of autocracies, the growth of populism, far-right extremism and
authoritarianism worldwide, and the systemic impact of social media and
generative AI, in a world which is also increasingly ravaged by the effects of
climate change, pandemics and war. The solutions to face these “multi-crises” and
protect and promote democracy, will not be easy.
Open, profound and constructive deliberations are needed to try to provide
answers to the following question: what ideas can shape the strategies of
democracies to better navigate the current global maelstrom of distrust that is
disfiguring them and the liberal world order? The development of PCPs and DCCs
can be part of the solution, as it would provide an efficient framework of action
for democracies to be able to restore trust on democratic governance through
the creation of a new public service that would result in the establishment of
an ambitious digital archipelago of safe havens. Governments would provide a
policy setting that would enable the cooperation of longstanding credited civic
institutions on digital public civic platforms, to explore and promote solutions for
the common good.
Putnam has argued that an increase of comity and cooperation allowed the U.S.
to escape the deep inequities and divisions of the Gilded Age to become a more
equal, fair and stable society. In the 2020’s, a new democratic upswing would
require mobilizing the same energies of civism that characterized the Progressive

===== PDF_PAGE 114 =====
105
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Era, using the best instruments at the disposal of democracies nowadays. The
restoration of well-functioning public spheres within democracies should be a
priority. PCPs and DCCs can be such instruments. The same digital technologies
that would make them possible, would also allow to use them at international
scale, as a bulwark to protect and regenerate the liberal world order. Public
civic platforms and digital civic communities could set the basis of the “ AI
for Democracy system” (AI4D), a process conceived to protect and promote
democracy in the midst of the global maelstrom of distrust that is eroding it from
its core.
If the combined soft power of democracies is leveraged to better articulate a
common narrative of a more equitable and peaceful liberal world order, the
lighthouse of democracy could drain autocracies’ hopes of breaking this order
for their own purposes. The ideological rearmament of liberal democracy is
more important and relevant to navigate the maelstrom, than doubling down on
military or technological superiority. If the West manages to “heal the Achilles’
heel” of its social and political divisions and attract the Global South to its vision
of world order, the democratic core of the liberal world order would be revitalized.
In such a scenario, Russia, and more importantly China, will find more reasons to
gradually abandon their confrontational course. In the mid to long-term, the new
Cold War in the making might pave the way to a new détente or cold peace, where
serious discussions of global governance could be reinvigorated.
To move in that direction, democracies could create the “ AI for Democracy”
system (AI4D), building upon the PCP-DCC model. As was mentioned already,
this is an “idealized framework” , which would face many challenges, foreseen and
unforeseen. The AI4D system could be developed in three phases:
1. Establishment of the IACAID by and for advanced democracies.
2. Opening up of the IACAID to countries transitioning to democracy.
3. Development of partnerships with other interested countries.

===== PDF_PAGE 115 =====
106
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Establishment of the International Agency for Cooperation on AI
for Democracy (IACAID) by and for advanced democracies
An Agency could be established to coordinate the national development of PCPs
and DCCs. The IACAID would establish the basic parameters of technical and
democratic governance, including the optimal AI-human ratio, of the PCPs and
DCCs, and provide assistance to countries for the development of the system.
Countries would be able to develop their own preferred models of PCPs and
DCCs, within the parameters established by the Agency. The Agency would
certify the PCP and DCC proposals presented by the Member States that meet
the relevant criteria. It would also exercise adequate oversight, ensuring adequate
accountability of the system and thus an additional layer of “checks and balances. ”
The Agency could be an intergovernmental organization with a parliamentarian
and civil society components. It could be composed of an Assembly, a Council,
a Forum and a Secretariat. All Member States (MS) would participate in the
Assembly. The largest MS demographically, and unions of States that represent
a large enough share of the Agency’s population, such as the EU, could have
a permanent seat at the Council. The Assembly and the Council would be
the governing bodies of the Agency, as agreed by MS in the Agency’s statutes.
Representatives of Parliaments and civil society could participate in the
deliberations of the Forum, which could convene joint or separate meetings.
National DCCs would elect their representatives in the Forum. The Forum would
be the main advisory body of the Assembly and the Council. On certain matters,
the proposals of the Forum may be automatically introduced in the agenda of the
governing bodies, for relevant decision. The Secretariat should have high technical
capacities on digital technologies and AI, and high expertise on democratic
governance, to adequately assist the governing bodies and MS on the process of
establishment and oversight of PCPs and DCCs.
The Agency could be first developed by the EU and the U.S., in the framework
of their bilateral dialogue and cooperation. The EU-US Trade and Technology
Council (TTC) could deliberate on an initial proposal, that could be presented by
either side, developed jointly, or commissioned to a joint or independent group of
experts. When agreed, the Agency could be created, with the single participation
of the U.S., the EU and EU MS at an initial stage. The Agency would start as a
transatlantic project, as a bridge to help overcome the digital regulatory rift and

===== PDF_PAGE 116 =====
107
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
reinforce the transatlantic cooperation on the protection of democracy and the
liberal world order.
The EU-U.S. cooperation relationship seems to be the best viable existing setting
to create the Agency as the EU and the U.S. combine large populations and the
technological and institutional capacities that are required to launch such a
project. Working on a common project that would create public options of civic
platforms could also contribute to regenerate a transatlantic relationship that
has been deeply affected in recent years by several major developments, on the
political, economic and regulatory dimensions. There is already a push for both
the EU and the U.S. to develop new agencies for AI, in the understanding that the
current institutional settings are an inadequate response to the challenges of AI.453
If created, an EU AI Office and a U.S. federal AI agency could find in the IACAID
a promising platform for bilateral cooperation.454
The AI4D system could revitalize the transatlantic relationship with the
common aim of protecting the liberal world order. It would also help establish
an additional mechanism of cooperation, complementary to the work of the
military alliance. A joint framework of cooperation to enhance the resilience of
democracies would be an ideal complement to the role of NATO, and particularly
well suited to face Russia’s and China’s hybrid warfare, particularly in the field of
disinformation. There is no reason to keep hard power as the most important
track of transatlantic cooperation, as both the EU and the U.S. share a common
interest on the protection of democracy and the liberal world order, and this
is better done if cooperation is also developed and institutionalized on the soft
dimension of power.
Once established, other OECD countries could also be invited to participate in
the Agency. It may only be feasible to create the AI4D system amongst a reduced
set of stakeholders, and the U.S.-EU relationship seems the best venue for this to
happen.455 Established democracies within the OECD framework, though, could
also be invited to participate in the AI4D system, which should ultimately be
conceived as a platform to facilitate the international cooperation of democracies
on the digital and AI fields (or, in other words, a process to reinforce the
“democratic core” within the liberal world order). The OECD already has a
developed framework of cooperation on AI, which includes a Policy Observatory
and a set of AI principles. Its principle 2.5 concerns “international cooperation

===== PDF_PAGE 117 =====
108
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
for trustworthy AI” , which amongst other principles states that “Governments,
including developing countries and with stakeholders, should actively cooperate to
advance these principles and to progress on responsible stewardship of trustworthy
AI. ”456 Its principle 2.3 concerns the “shaping of an enabling policy environment for
AI, ” and states that “Governments should review and adapt, as appropriate, their
policy and regulatory frameworks and assessment mechanisms as they apply to AI
systems to encourage innovation and competition for trustworthy AI. ”
The mechanisms of cooperation provided by the AI4D framework would fit the
principles and policy guidelines of the OECD. OECD countries are already cooperating
along ambitious lines on AI, so opening up the IACAID to their participation would
be a logical next step. Membership in the OECD should not limit the possible
participation in the AI4D framework, though. All democracies worldwide should
be able to present their candidatures of accession. The Agency would examine the
democratic merits of candidate countries, and particularly their respect to human
rights and the rights and freedoms of civil society. DCCs being at the center of the
AI4D system, the Agency would only be enabled to allow the full membership of well-
functioning democracies.
Opening up the IACAID to countries transitioning to democracy
The AI4D system can also be conceived as a useful tool to attract countries
worldwide, and particularly in the Global South, to a balanced and open
multistakeholder approach to AI and digital democratic governance. Countries
transitioning to democracy should be encouraged to participate as Observers
in the Agency, and to prepare themselves for a possible future accession. While
China, Russia and other autocracies can be expected to increasingly sponsor
digital and AI governance systems designed to dramatically expand the
surveillance and population control capacities of States, further fracturing the
Internet into national splinternets, advanced democracies must counter their
influence with a proposal conceived as a way to protect and promote democracy
in the digital realm.
At the geopolitical level, the cycle of great power competition has two dimensions,
hard and soft. The most visible part of the global maelstrom, the outer edge of
the whirl, is a manifestation of traditional power politics (hard power). Military,
economic and technological advantages, including the control of microchip

===== PDF_PAGE 118 =====
109
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
production and the race for more powerful AI, are at play here. The U.S. is
deploying large efforts to stay ahead in the new Cold War with China and
Russia. The less visible part, the inner edge of the whirl, is a manifestation of the
also traditional, but less acknowledged, ideological dimension of great power
competition (soft power). The battle between democracy and autocracy operates
at this level. Political and social resilience, and the capacity to subtly attract other
countries to democracies’ values and processes -with no coercion-, are at play
here. In the 21st century, the Internet, digital technologies and AI will be the
main ideological battlefields of the contest between democracies and autocracies.
Countries in the Global South must be attracted to the democratic proposal.
So far, neither the U.S. nor the EU are investing enough on revitalizing their public
spheres or the soft power of democracy. As a result, populations worldwide do not
perceive liberal democracy to be the solution to most of their problems as strongly
as in the past. Democracy as a philosophy and ideal still exerts a strong magnetic
pull, derived from its ethics and values, but existing advanced democracies,
drained by inequalities, political polarization and governance gridlock and
dysfunctions, are not always perceived as models to follow. Many countries in
the Global South are looking towards the Chinese governance model, or other
autocratic solutions.457 Even a large sector of voters in the West itself are placing
their hopes in illiberal and authoritarian solutions.
The AI4D process would address this problem. By developing PCPs, advanced
democracies would counter the critique that they are conferring too much power
to markets and established industries to solve societies’ problems. The notion of
public service would be enhanced, to serve democracy’s needs. Placing civil society
at the center of democracies’ model of digital democratic governance would also
show that, unlike autocracies, democracies trust the people, and work with the
people and for the people. The AI4D system could help repair the lighthouse of
democracy, restoring its magnetic soft power, internally and globally.
Countries transitioning to democracy could be invited to participate as Observers,
to learn how the model works. Special partnerships could be developed between
the Agency and Observer States, with future membership in sight. These
partnerships should include mechanisms of international assistance to help these
countries advance in their paths of democratic reform. The AI4D system could
be modeled in a similar way as the EU accession process, which has succeeded

===== PDF_PAGE 119 =====
110
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
in attracting most European countries towards EU integration. The EU has a
limited geographic scope and covers all dimensions of national sovereignty. The
IACAID would have a global geographic scope, limited to the digital public sphere
dimension of democratic governance. As a global club of democracies, it should set
adequate mechanisms of cooperation and dialogue with non-democratic countries.
Development of partnerships with other countries
The Agency could consider different mechanisms of dialogue and cooperation
with non-democratic countries, and other countries that are not interested to join
the AI4D system. The Agency would, first of all, facilitate that democracies speak
with a single or coherent view on other international fora that deal with Internet,
digital and AI governance, and the UN system in particular, if they so decide.
Discussions on these matters take place within the UNGA itself and the ITU. The
AI4D system would contribute to reinforce dialogue in the UN bodies, revitalizing
the democratic narrative, but establishing possible avenues of understanding and
cooperation with non-democratic countries.
The establishment of a public service of public civic platforms could be an area of
future potential understanding, as democracies would open their multistakeholder
approach of Internet governance to a new balance, with larger state involvement
and less dependent on western tech industries. This state-rebalancing, though,
would indeed be a democratic rebalancing, as the AI4D model would be centered
around the role of civil society within DCCs. These outreach efforts could be
fruitful in the mid and long-term, once the benefits of increased democratic
resilience are evident. In opening up avenues of dialogue with non-democratic
countries, democracies would be facilitating a blueprint on how countries can
manage their digital public spheres in a democratic manner, fully respectful of
all human rights. Ultimately, this could create a new track of dialogue between
democracies and authoritarian governments such as the one that took place during
the détente, and that resulted in the creation of the CSCE.
The détente during the Cold War provides an example of how a broad perspective
on security, that included human rights, could become an adequate platform for
dialogue and cooperation amongst opposing ideological blocs. In the new Cold
War, it will be essential to establish a mechanism for democracies and autocracies
to reduce tensions and discuss on matters of common interest, in a way that should

===== PDF_PAGE 120 =====
111
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
encompass human rights. The AI4D system could provide a platform for this to
happen in the strategic fields of Internet, digital and AI governance, which will be
the main ideological battlefields of the 21st century. It could contribute to ensure
that the concept of security remains “indivisible” in the decades ahead, and hence
focused on the soft dimension of power as much as on the hard. But democratic
resilience should be enhanced for such a process to be possible.

===== PDF_PAGE 121 =====
112
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Conclusion
This paper has made the argument that distrust between democracies and
autocracies when power competition is at stake is consubstantial to their
relationship. The confrontation between democracy and autocracy is a central
element of the new Cold War that is taking shape between Russia, China and the
U.S. and its allies.458 This is because soft power matters as much as hard power,
and the re-emerging ideological confrontation between democracy and autocracy
has energized the geopolitical cycle of distrust, which is also fueled by great power
competition.
The democracy vs autocracy paradigm implies that geopolitical dynamics are
strongly correlated with domestic politics. This is the case for democratic and for
autocratic regimes. Domestic developments, in Ukraine, Russia, the West, Taiwan,
China, Japan, the RoK, India, etc, are at the center of the geopolitical cycle of
distrust, as foreign policy decisions are shaped by domestic politics. Autocracies
face indeed important challenges to their stability. Economic and demographic,
amongst many others, in China’s case. Social, political, demographic, military
and economic, amongst many others, in Russia’s case. These challenges, however,
do not imply that these countries should be expected to act less assertively in the
international sphere, but rather the opposite. Bearing in mind this fact and given
the centrality of the U.S. and European countries to the protection of the liberal
world order, this paper has considered of particular importance to analyze the
structural situation of their domestic politics (especially in the U.S., as the main
power and primal anchor of the world order). If a renewed power competition is
taking place between democracies and autocracies, what are the perspectives of
democratic resilience?
Special attention has been devoted to the problem of democratic backsliding,
particularly the challenges of rising polarization and illiberalism. The authoritarian
challenge to democracy is not only international, but also domestic. Both levels
are intertwined. The impact of mass-media, social media and AI on the erosion
and fragmentation of the public sphere of democracies has been described as
the central and most urgent challenge that democracies have to face in order
to recover citizen’s trust in democracy and hence restore a better democratic
governance. The reason is that the public sphere constitutes the “central nervous
system” of democracy and its erosion and fragmentation has resulted in the

===== PDF_PAGE 122 =====
113
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
activation of strong cycles of political, social and electoral distrust within
democracies, epitomized by the 2021 attack against the U.S. Capitol. Russia and
China perceive these developments as democratic vulnerabilities and, as a result,
have engaged in actions of “hybrid warfare” against western democracies and are
targeting and aiming to hack their “central nervous systems. ”
Furthermore, the dynamics of distrust within democracies, coupled with China’s
rise, has triggered expectations on the side of Moscow and Beijing that the liberal
world order can be challenged and ultimately changed. Their ambition is the
development of a world order more adapted to their autocratic nature, hence
devoid of human rights or democratic protections. Ultimately, the domestic cycles
of distrust within democracies, particularly in the U.S., have been synchronized
with the geopolitical cycle of distrust, as China and Russia are betting that they can
change the liberal world order in the midst of democracies’ vulnerabilities, which
they are exploiting. This synchronization has resulted in the creation of a global
maelstrom of distrust, where geopolitical decisions and domestic developments
are intertwined and feeding each other in a dangerous spiral that can wreak
democracy and the liberal world order.
In face of this global challenge, this paper has developed a policy proposal aimed
at restoring trust in democracy at the domestic and the international levels. Its
objective is to provide an insight into how to revive the “lighthouse of democracy:”
the appeal of democracy, domestically or globally, is ultimately based on a
well-functioning public sphere. The policy proposal has provided an idealized
framework for a well-functioning digital public sphere that can better work for
democracy and the liberal world order.
Domestically, the proposal has recommended the development by democracies of
public civic platforms to enable citizen’s deliberations online on matters of public
interest. It has argued that these platforms, or PCPs, should be run by partnerships
of CSOs, academia and citizens chosen by sortition, that could form digital civic
communities (or DCCs). With the assistance of public options of AI, the mission
of these DCCs would be to ensure the provision of reliable information to citizens
and facilitate constructive deliberations to shape public opinion and further
understanding across the ideological spectrum. The proposal’s theory of change
is based on the consideration that substantial democratic reforms in polarized
societies require a prior exercise of rehabilitation of the functionality of the digital

===== PDF_PAGE 123 =====
114
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
public sphere, which cannot be achieved through the existing for-profit social
media ecosystem, given its externalities. In other words, to regenerate democracy’s
central nervous system, and re-activate the lighthouse of democracy, the civic
mobilization of citizen’s efforts towards a common purpose will be required.
As a result of the current geopolitical context of competition between autocracies
and democracies, the proposal has argued that the development of PCPs could
be instrumental to build-up the resilience and soft power of the latter. It has
recommended that the U.S. and the EU lead the process of creation of an
international network of PCPs between democracies, which would act as a web
of “safe havens” for democratic life, including the protection of human rights,
in the digital public sphere, free from disinformation, deep fakes, virality and
hate speech. The process could be named “ AI for Democracy” (AI4D) and would
be structured around a new International Agency For Cooperation On AI For
Democracy (IACAID).
Countries transitioning to democracy could participate as Observers, and the
system should establish ways of dialogue and cooperation with non-democratic
countries on AI and digital technologies. These outreach efforts could be fruitful
in the mid and long-term, once the benefits of increased democratic resilience
are evident. In opening up ways of cooperation with countries transitioning to
democracy and avenues of dialogue with non-democratic countries, democracies
would be facilitating a blueprint on how countries can manage their digital public
spheres in a democratic manner, fully respectful of all human rights.
These recommendations have sketched an ambitious architecture of digital
platforms that, combining technology and human cooperation, could help restore
civic dialogue and political and social trust. They should be understood as a “draft
proposal” that, together with other ideas, proposals, and innovations, could be
useful for the vibrant ongoing discussion on how to make digital technologies
reinforce democracy, rather than undermine it. Its central argument is based on
the following understanding: truthful information and civic dialogue are essential
public goods for democracy, everywhere, and their provision requires strong
and reliable public services. Ultimately, the paper considers that the journey of
developing a strong public service for the digital public sphere of democracies is
worth the effort, as the potential benefits far outweigh the potential costs, and the
risks of inaction are way more concerning.

===== PDF_PAGE 124 =====
115
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Autocracies are not the only or single challenge for democratic rule worldwide.
Autocracy also emerges from within democracies, when democratic institutions
fail to provide the services and, above all, the trust, that democratic governance
requires. The fast development of AI can contribute to further energize the global
maelstrom of distrust, if it further erodes and fragments the public spheres of
democracies. However, technology also represents an opportunity. Democracies
can seize it, by applying the best techniques of human control, democratic
governance and civic deliberation to AI, and then by using democratically
controlled AI as a lever to scale-up a better, more open and more inclusive
democratic governance.

===== PDF_PAGE 125 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 126 =====
117
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Endnotes
1 The White House (2022). Remarks by President Biden on the United Efforts of the Free World to Support the People
of Ukraine. https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/03/26/remarks-by-president-biden-
on-the-united-efforts-of-the-free-world-to-support-the-people-of-ukraine/
2 Freedom House (2023). Freedom in the World: Marking 50 Years in the Struggle for Democracy. https:/ /
freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/2023-03/FIW_World_2023_DigtalPDF.pdf
3 White House (2022). Remarks by President Biden on the Continued Battle for the Soul of the Nation. https:/ /www.
whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/09/01/remarks-by-president-bidenon-the-continued-battle-
for-the-soul-of-the-nation/
4 The notion ‘maelstrom of distrust’ builds upon an article by Peter T Coleman, professor of psychology and education
at Teachers College Columbia University. Coleman, P.T. (2022). Can We Trust the Arbiters of Our Trust? Medium.
https:/ /pc84.medium.com/can-we-trust-the-arbiters-of-our-trust-9cae888128d9. The author also employs this
metaphor often in his book. Coleman, P.T. (2021). The way out: how to overcome toxic polarization. Columbia
University Press, New York.
5 Carl Jung argued that water is the commonest symbol for the unconscious. Jung, C. G., & Hull, R. F. C. (1969). The
archetypes and the collective unconscious (2d ed.). Princeton University Press.
6 The notion of public sphere was thoroughly developed by Jurgen Habermas, who described it as “made up of private
people gathered together as a public and articulating the needs of society with the state”. Soules, M. (2023). JÜRGEN
HABERMAS AND THE PUBLIC SPHERE. https:/ /www.media-studies.ca/articles/habermas.htm
7 The metaphor of the lighthouse of democracy has also been used by Chinese State media, referring to democratic
erosion in the U.S. CGTN (2021). A reality check: The lighthouse of democracy dies down. https:/ /news.cgtn.com/
news/2021-12-10/A-reality-check-The-lighthouse-of-democracy-dies-down-15SeM1af1Nm/index.html
8 “Political equality is democracy’s foundation. Everything else is optional -from constitutions to personal liberty, from
specific economic forms to specific political institutions. Political equality alone ensures that the composition and
exercise of political power is authorized by the whole and accountable to the whole. When political equality is absent,
whether from extreme social disparities, from uneven or managed access to knowledge, or from manipulation of
the electoral system, political power will inevitably be exercised by and for a part, rather than the whole. The demos
ceases to rule”. Brown, W. (2019). In the Ruins of Neoliberalism: The Rise of Antidemocratic Politics in the West.
Columbia University Press.
9 Descartes argued that “Hope is a disposition of the soul to persuade itself that what it desires will come to pass,
which is caused by a particular movement of the spirits, namely, by that of mingled joy and desire. And fear is
another disposition of the soul, which persuades it that the thing will not come to pass.” Descartes, R. (1649). The
passions of the soul. Cambridge University Press.
PBS News Hour (2004). Barack Obama’s Keynote Address at the 2004 Democratic National Convention. https:/ /www.
pbs.org/newshour/show/barack-obamas-keynote-address-at-the-2004-democratic-national-convention
10 Note of the author: Metaphorical writing is often used to represent abstract concepts or processes. Metaphorical
expressions are communication tools in the hands of politicians, civil servants or academics. They can be useful
instruments of public diplomacy and political communication. Examples of their use in international or domestic
politics would be terms such as ‘cold war’, ‘soft’ power, ‘shining city on a hill’, ‘rogue States’, ‘invisible hand’, ‘public
sphere’, etc. There is something innately human in the use of symbolic language and the construction of metaphors.
However, generative AI can already replicate human language and, in doing so, it can mimic humanity itself. When
I started working on this paper, in October 2022, I did not expect that GPT would dissolve the human-machine
communication borders so soon. This paper has been written without any assistance of any AI tool but has benefitted
from the assistance and collaboration of the humans that I mention in the section of acknowledgments.
11 OECD (2022). Building Trust to Reinforce Democracy Summary brief presenting the main findings from the OECD
Trust Survey. https:/ /www.oecd.org/governance/trust-in-government/oecd-trust-survey-main-findings-en.pdf
12 Ibid.
13 Edelman (2022). Edelman Trust Barometer. https:/ /www.edelman.com/trust/2022-trust-barometer
14 More in Common (2021). Two Stories of In America. https:/ /www.moreincommon.com/media/yfcbfmmp/mic_two-
stories-of-distrust.pdf
15 Pew Research Center (2022). Public Trust in Government: 1958-2022. https:/ /www.pewresearch.org/
politics/2022/06/06/public-trust-in-government-1958-2022/
16 Brenan, M. (2022). Americans’ Trust In Media Remains Near Record Low. Gallup. https:/ /news.gallup.com/
poll/403166/americans-trust-media-remains-near-record-low.aspx
17 PubAffairs Bruxxelles (2022). Eurobarometer: Trust in the EU on the rise, amid strong support for the EU’s response
to Russia invasion of Ukraine and energy policies. https:/ /www.pubaffairsbruxelles.eu/eu-institution-news/

===== PDF_PAGE 127 =====
eurobarometer-trust-in-the-eu-on-the-rise-amid-strong-support-for-the-eus-response-to-russia-invasion-of-ukraine-
and-energy-policies/
18 There are however large differences between countries. Nordic countries in particular stand apart as holding
higher levels of social and political trust. Ortiz-Ospina, E. and Roser, M. (2023). Trust. Our World in Data. https:/ /
ourworldindata.org/trust
19 Transparency International (2021). Corruption Perception Index. https:/ /www.transparency.org/en/cpi/2021?gclid=Cj0
KCQiA0p2QBhDvARIsAACSOONN4qwy8bbHghDdPxM9HcKMDxDXq6XKHRE22--nXO17hswweQDsihwaAuePEALw_
wcB
20 Coleman, P.T. (2022). Can We Trust the Arbiters of Our Trust? Medium. https:/ /pc84.medium.com/can-we-trust-the-
arbiters-of-our-trust-9cae888128d9
21 Vallier, K. (2019). SOCIAL AND POLITICAL TRUST. Concepts, Causes, and Consequences. Niskanen Center. https:/ /
www.niskanencenter.org/wp-content/uploads/old_uploads/2019/05/Vallier-Social-and-Political-Trust-Niskanen.pdf
22 Statista (2023). Trust Level in Government in China: 2016-2022. https:/ /www.statista.com/statistics/1116013/china-
trust-in-government-2020/#:~:text=According%20to%20a%20global%20survey,place%20among%2028%20
surveyed%20countries.
23 Lehr, D. (2022). Trust in China. Edelman. https:/ /www.edelman.com/trust/2022-trust-barometer/trust-china
24 Taylor, D. Garth. (1982).  Pluralistic Ignorance and the Spiral of Silence. Public Opinion Quarterly, Volume 46, Issue 3,
FALL 1982, Pages 311–335, https:/ /doi.org/10.1086/268729
Xu, X., & Jin, X. (2018). The autocratic roots of social distrust. Journal of Comparative Economics, 46(1), 362–380.
https:/ /doi.org/10.1016/j.jce.2017.12.002
25 The fall of the Berlin Wall, the collapse of communist regimes in Eastern Europe, or the USSR itself, being amongst
the best-known examples. But also the disintegration of the ex-Yugoslavia, the different color revolutions across the
world, the Arab Spring, or the civil war in Syria.
26 Gorokhovskaia, Y.; Shahbaz, A.; Slipowitz, A. (2023). Marking 50 Years in the Struggle for Democracy. Freedom
House. Freedom House. https:/ /freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/2023/marking-50-years
27 Shea, J. (2022). Autocracies versus democracies: 7-3 at halftime, but a lot can still happen in the second half. Friends
of Europe. https:/ /www.friendsofeurope.org/insights/autocracies-versus-democracies-7-3-at-halftime-but-a-lot-can-
still-happen-in-the-second-half/
28 Schilke, O., Reimann, M., & Cook, K. S. (2021). Trust in Social Relations. Annual Review of Sociology, 47(1), 239–259.
https:/ /doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-082120-082850
29 Cambridge Dictionary (2023). Trust. https:/ /dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/trust
30 Vallier, K. (2019). SOCIAL AND POLITICAL TRUST, Concepts, Causes, and Consequences. Niskanen Center. https:/ /
www.niskanencenter.org/wp-content/uploads/old_uploads/2019/05/Vallier-Social-and-Political-Trust-Niskanen.pdf
31 Devine, D., Gaskell, J., Jennings, W., and Stoker, G. (2020). Exploring Trust, Mistrust and Distrust. University
of Southampton Discussion Paper for the 1st Digital Workshop of the ESRC. https:/ /static1.squarespace.com/
static/5c21090f8f5130d0f2e4dc24/t/5e995ec3f866cd1282cf57b1/1587109577707/TrustGov+-+Trust+mistrust+distru
st+-+20.04.2020.pdf
32 Thagard, P. (2019). Mind-society : from brains to social sciences and professions. Oxford University Press.
33 Thagard, P. (2018). What is Trust. Psychology Today. https:/ /www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/hot-
thought/201810/what-is-trust#:~:text=Trust%20is%20a%20belief%20in,security%20that%20a%20partner%20cares.
34 Pew Research Center (2022). Americans and Social Trust: Who, Where and Why. https:/ /www.pewresearch.org/
social-trends/2007/02/22/americans-and-social-trust-who-where-and-why/#:~:text=Social%20trust%20is%20a%20
belief,out%20who%20trusts%2C%20or%20why
35 The implications of this are profound. A shared belief with emotional roots turns out to be the glue or enabler of
society. Biologist and naturalist Edward O.Wilson explains that “coevolving with the structure of the brain, language
freed the mind from the animal to be creative, thence to enter and imagine other worlds infinite in time and space”.
Across his work, historian Yuval Noah Harari argues that humans are driven by fictions. Therefore, when fictions and
imagined worlds are coupled with trust, constructive cooperation can arise, enabling social change for the common
good. However, when shared fictions and imagined worlds are marred by distrust, they may break and dissolve. Lack
of trust, of course, can be offset by coercion and violence, which is the essence of autocratic rule. Democratic rule,
though, is based on consent, and consent requires trust.
36 Miner, W. (2023). “We shape our tools and thereafter our tools shape us”. McLuhan Galaxy. https:/ /mcluhangalaxy.
wordpress.com/2013/04/01/we-shape-our-tools-and-thereafter-our-tools-shape-us/
37 Scartascini, C. (2021). Testing the Impact of Social Media on Trust. IDB. https:/ /blogs.iadb.org/ideas-matter/en/
testing-the-impact-of-social-media-on-trust/
38 Wrighton, S. (2022). Trust in international relations, public diplomacy and soft power. British Council. https:/ /www.
britishcouncil.org/research-policy-insight/policy-reports/trust-international-relations-soft-power

===== PDF_PAGE 128 =====
119
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
39 Andrew H. Kydd defines ‘trust’ as the belief that the other side prefers mutual cooperation to exploiting one’s own
cooperation. By contrast, ‘mistrust’ (or distrust, following the term used in this paper) is a belief that the other side
prefers exploiting one’s cooperation to returning it. Kydd, A. H. (2018). Trust and Mistrust in International Relations.
Princeton University Press.
40 Poe, E.A. (1845). A descent into the maelstrom. https:/ /poestories.com/read/descent
41 McLuhan, M. (1969). Interview. Playboy. https:/ /web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~rogaway/classes/188/spring07/mcluhan.pdf
42 The fisherman succeeds in overcoming his fear and uses his capacity of reason to understand that due to their
physical properties, some objects are pulled deeper into the maelstrom, where they are ultimately destroyed, while
other objects escape the wrath of the whirlpool and are released to the surface. Upon this realization, the fisherman
attaches himself to a cylindrical cask, casts himself into the maelstrom and is later rescued by another fishing vessel.
43 Haas, R. (2018). Liberal World Order, R.I.P. Project Syndicate. https:/ /www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/end-of-
liberal-world-order-by-richard-n--haass-2018-03?barrier=accesspaylog
There are different notions on why the world order is considered ‘liberal’. From the perspective of this paper,
the most relevant is the political notion, as argued by Richard Haass. Kundnani, H. (2017). What is the Liberal
International Order? GMF. https:/ /www.gmfus.org/news/what-liberal-international-order
44 Kant, I., & Humphrey, T. (2003). To perpetual peace : a philosophical sketch. Hackett Pub.
45 Office of the Historian (2023). The League of Nations, 1920. https:/ /history.state.gov/milestones/1914-1920/league
46 Ikenberry, G. J. (2005). Power and liberal order: America’s postwar world order in transition. International Relations of
the Asia-Pacific, 5(2), 133–152. https:/ /doi.org/10.1093/irap/lci112
47 It has not been the case always, as the U.S. has incurred in violations of International Law and the norms and
principles of the liberal world order, thus undermining it, on several occasions. The illegal invasion of Iraq is a good
case in point.
48 Haas, R. (2018). Liberal World Order, R.I.P. Project Syndicate. https:/ /www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/end-of-
liberal-world-order-by-richard-n--haass-2018-03?barrier=accesspaylog
Kagan, R. (2017). The twilight of the liberal world order. Brookings. https:/ /www.brookings.edu/research/the-twilight-
of-the-liberal-world-order/
49 Cooley, A. and Nexon, D. (2022). The Real Crisis of Global Order: Illiberalism on the Rise. Foreign Affairs. https:/ /
www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/world/2021-12-14/illiberalism-real-crisis-global-order
50 Lobell, E. (2010). Structural Realism/Offensive and Defensive Realism. International Studies. https:/ /oxfordre.com/
internationalstudies/display/10.1093/acrefore/9780190846626.001.0001/acrefore-9780190846626-e-304;jsessioni
d=9824D0755308829B637119200DD249A0?rskey=UetDHT&result=51#:~:text=On%20the%20one%20hand%2C%20
offensive,reserved%20policies%20to%20attain%20security.
51 Wikiversity (2023). International Relations / Structural Realism. https:/ /en.wikiversity.org/wiki/International_
Relations/Structural_Realism
52 Bremmer, I. (2023). The Next Global Superpower Isn’t Who You Think. Foreign Policy. https:/ /foreignpolicy.
com/2023/06/17/china-russia-us-multipolar-world-technology/
53 Nye, J. S. (2011). The future of power (1st ed.). PublicAffairs.
54 Bremmer I. and Roubini, N. (2011). A G-Zero World: The New Economic Club Will Produce Conflict, Not Cooperation.
Foreign Affairs. https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/world/g-zero-world
55 Ramos Membrive, A. L. (2023). De umbral en umbral (Apuntes sobre los orígenes, el presente y el desenlace
de la guerra en Ucrania). Global Square. https:/ /www.globalsquaremagazine.com/2023/06/20/de-umbral-en-
umbralapuntes-sobre-los-origenes-el-presente-y-el-desenlace-de-la-guerra-en-ucrania/
56 For this paper, the political concept of the ‘West’ is equivalent to NATO countries. The concept of the West is
broader than the strict politico-military commitments of NATO. Substantially, it also includes political and economic
coordination among NATO countries. On many political and economic matters, the most relevant western actors
are the U.S. and the EU, together with the rest of non-EU NATO members. There are certainly nuances on positions
and outliers within NATO, particularly Turkey and Hungary. Ankara and Budapest strive to keep closer relations with
Moscow. With these caveats, the paper will alternatively use the terms ‘West’, western countries or powers, NATO,
allies, the U.S. and the EU, and signal out relevant nuances when necessary. Geographically, the West is arguably
wider than Europe and North America. On broader, richer, conceptions of the West, that would also include Latin
America, the following article provides a clear insight: Ramos Membrive, A.L. (2018). George Kennan and the
Hispanic-Lusitanian world. Global Square Magazine. https:/ /www.globalsquaremagazine.com/2018/10/16/george-
kennan-and-the-hispanic-lusitanian-world/
57 Quinville, R.S. (2022). Germany’s Zeitenwende: New Era, New Language. Wilson Center. https:/ /www.wilsoncenter.
org/article/germanys-zeitenwende-new-era-new-language
European Council (2023). Ukraine. https:/ /www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/enlargement/ukraine/
58 Associated Press (2023). Putin tells WWII event West is waging a ‘real war’ on Russia. AP. https:/ /apnews.com/
article/russia-ukraine-war-parade-victory-day-3bc68ae74f7343d679bbb05ab3aec98d

===== PDF_PAGE 129 =====
120
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
59 Ramos Membrive, A. L. (2023). De umbral en umbral (Apuntes sobre los orígenes, el presente y el desenlace
de la guerra en Ucrania). Global Square. https:/ /www.globalsquaremagazine.com/2023/06/20/de-umbral-en-
umbralapuntes-sobre-los-origenes-el-presente-y-el-desenlace-de-la-guerra-en-ucrania/
60 Costigliola, F. (2023). Kennan’s Warning on Ukraine: Ambition, Insecurity, and the Perils of Independence. Foreign
Affairs. https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/ukraine/george-kennan-warning-on-ukraine
61 Pifer, S. (2021). Russia’s draft agreements with NATO and the United States: Intended for rejection? Brookings.
https:/ /www.brookings.edu/blog/order-from-chaos/2021/12/21/russias-draft-agreements-with-nato-and-the-united-
states-intended-for-rejection/
62 Goldgeier, J. (2019). PROMISES MADE, PROMISES BROKEN? WHAT YELTSIN WAS TOLD ABOUT NATO IN 1993 AND
WHY IT MATTERS. War on the Rocks. https:/ /warontherocks.com/2019/11/promises-made-promises-broken-what-
yeltsin-was-told-about-nato-in-1993-and-why-it-matters-2/
63 Baunov, A. (2023). Russia, “The West” and Germany - Taking stock and looking ahead. Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace. https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/politika/89905
Mikelsaar, A. (2022). Between Ostpolitik and Zeitenwende—Germany’s Dual Dependence on China and Russia.
International Centre for Defence and Security. https:/ /icds.ee/en/between-ostpolitik-and-zeitenwende-germanys-
dual-dependence-on-china-and-russia/
64 Stent, A. (2021). The impact of September 11 on US-Russian relations. Brookings. https:/ /www.brookings.edu/blog/
order-from-chaos/2021/09/08/the-impact-of-september-11-on-us-russian-relations/
65 Fried, D. and Volker, K. (2022). Opinion - The Speech In Which Putin Told Us Who He Was. Politico. https:/ /www.
politico.com/news/magazine/2022/02/18/putin-speech-wake-up-call-post-cold-war-order-liberal-2007-00009918
66 RadioFreeEurope (2007). Russia Suspends Participation In CFE Treaty. https:/ /www.rferl.org/a/1079256.html
67 Moskowitz, K. (2023). Did NATO Expansion Really Cause Putin’s Invasion? AFSA. https:/ /afsa.org/did-nato-
expansion-really-cause-putins-invasion
Erlangen, S. (2008). Putin, at NATO Meeting, Curbs Combative Rhetoric. The New York Times. https:/ /www.nytimes.
com/2008/04/05/world/europe/05nato.html
Dickinson, P. (2021). The 2008 Russo-Georgian War: Putin’s green light. Atlantic Council. https:/ /www.atlanticcouncil.
org/blogs/ukrainealert/the-2008-russo-georgian-war-putins-green-light/
68 Appelmaum, A. (2022). THERE IS NO LIBERAL WORLD ORDER: Unless democracies defend themselves, the forces of
autocracy will destroy them. The Atlantic. https:/ /www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2022/05/autocracy-could-
destroy-democracy-russia-ukraine/629363/
69 Holder, J., Leatherby, L., Troianovski, A., and Cai, W. (2023). The West Tried to Isolate Russia. It Didn’t Work. New York
Times. https:/ /www.nytimes.com/interactive/2023/02/23/world/russia-ukraine-geopolitics.html
70 Haddad, M. (2023). Where does your country stand on the Russia-Ukraine war? AlJazeera. https:/ /www.aljazeera.
com/news/2023/2/16/mapping-where-every-country-stands-on-the-russia-ukraine-war
71 Dobbins, J., Shatz, H. J., & Wyne, A. (2019). Russia Is a Rogue, Not a Peer; China Is a Peer, Not a Rogue: Different
Challenges, Different Responses. RAND Corporation.
Bader, J. (2020). Meeting The China Challenge: A Strategic Competitor, Not An Enemy. Brookings. https:/ /www.
brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/Jeffrey-Bader.pdf
Eaglen, M. (2023). It’s Time to Retire the Term “Near-Peer” Competitor When It Comes to China. AEI. https:/ /www.aei.
org/foreign-and-defense-policy/its-time-to-retire-the-term-near-peer-competitor-when-it-comes-to-china/
72 Kaiser, K. (2019). China’s Role in World Affairs: How it Matters. Belfer Center. https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/
publication/chinas-role-world-affairs-how-it-matters
73 US-China Economic and Security Review Commission (2023). China’s Position on Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine. https:/ /
www.uscc.gov/research/chinas-position-russias-invasion-ukraine
74 The shift in the global landscape of power conditions worldwide geopolitics. The Russian invasion of Ukraine, for
instance, took place against this backdrop: the rise of China brought a tailwind to Moscow’s decision to attack Kyiv
and challenge the U.S. led liberal world order.
75 Roa, C. (2023). Can We Please Stop Comparing Russia’s Economy to Italy’s? The National Interest.
https:/ /nationalinterest.org/feature/can-we-please-stop-comparing-russia%E2%80%99s-economy-
italy%E2%80%99s-206404
76 Dobbins, J., Shatz, H. J., & Wyne, A. (2019). Russia Is a Rogue, Not a Peer; China Is a Peer, Not a Rogue: Different
Challenges, Different Responses. In Policy File. RAND Corporation.
77 Ibid.
78 Neuhard, R. (2022). The new US National Security Strategy: Four Takeaways for Asia policy. FPRI. https:/ /www.fpri.
org/article/2022/10/the-new-us-national-security-strategy-four-takeaways-for-asia-policy/
79 Allison, G.T. (2017) Destined for war: Can America and China escape Thucydides’ trap? Melbourne: Scribe.
80 As Allison has noted, in 16 historical occasions when a presumptive power challenged an established one, no less
than 12 resulted in war.

===== PDF_PAGE 130 =====
121
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
81 Nye, J. (2023). Peak China? Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/
publication/peak-china
82 Garamone, J. (2022). U.S. Intel Officials Detail Threats From China, Russia. U.S. Department of Defense.: https:/ /www.
defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/Article/2960113/us-intel-officials-detail-threats-from-china-russia/
83 Leonard, M. (2023). China Is Ready for a World of Disorder. Foreign Affairs. https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/united-
states/china-ready-world-disorder?utm_medium=promo_email&utm_source=promo_1&utm_campaign=PROM_
jun23-camp1-promall-panel-a&utm_content=20230621&utm_term=EPPAZ003U3
84 Green, M. A. (2023). The BRICS Rivalry. Wilson Center. https:/ /www.wilsoncenter.org/blog-post/brics-rivalry
McBride, J., Berman, N. and Chatzky, A. (2023). China’s Massive Belt and Road Initiative. Council on Foreign Relations.
https:/ /www.cfr.org/backgrounder/chinas-massive-belt-and-road-initiative
Solís, M. (2021). China moves to join the CPTPP, but don’t expect a fast pass. Brookings. https:/ /www.brookings.edu/
blog/order-from-chaos/2021/09/23/china-moves-to-join-the-cptpp-but-dont-expect-a-fast-pass/
85 Allison, G. (2023). US-China Relations: An Interview with Graham Allison. Belfer Center. https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/
publication/us-china-relations-interview-graham-allison
86 The White House (2022). FACT SHEET: CHIPS and Science Act Will Lower Costs, Create Jobs, Strengthen Supply
Chains, and Counter China. https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/08/09/fact-sheet-
chips-and-science-act-will-lower-costs-create-jobs-strengthen-supply-chains-and-counter-china/
The White House (2023). FACT SHEET: Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment at the G7 Summit.
https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/05/20/fact-sheet-partnership-for-global-
infrastructure-and-investment-at-the-g7-summit/
U.S. Department of Defense (2023). AUKUS: The Trilateral Security Partnership Between Australia, U.K. and U.S.
https:/ /www.defense.gov/Spotlights/AUKUS/
87 Abrams, E. (2022). The New Cold War. Council on Foreign Relations. https:/ /www.cfr.org/blog/new-cold-
war-0 / Osnos, E. (2023). Sliding Toward a New Cold War. The New Yorker. https:/ /www.newyorker.com/
magazine/2023/03/06/sliding-toward-a-new-cold-war / Hirsh, M. (2022). We Are Now in a Global Cold War. Foreign
Policy. https:/ /foreignpolicy.com/2022/06/27/new-cold-war-nato-summit-united-states-russia-ukraine-china/
88 Abrams, E. (2022). The New Cold War. Council on Foreign Relations. https:/ /www.cfr.org/blog/new-cold-
war-0 / Osnos, E. (2023). Sliding Toward a New Cold War. The New Yorker. https:/ /www.newyorker.com/
magazine/2023/03/06/sliding-toward-a-new-cold-war /
89 Allison, G. (2023). Can two great powers cooperate to build a safer world? It has happened before. Washington Post.
https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/06/14/china-war-taiwan-partnership/
90 Allison, G. (2023). US-China Relations: An Interview with Graham Allison. Belfer Center. https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/
publication/us-china-relations-interview-graham-allison
91 Kupchan, C. (2022). Bipolarity is Back: Why It Matters. Eurasia Group. https:/ /www.eurasiagroup.net/live-post/
bipolarity-is-back-why-it-matters
92 Leonard, M. (2023). China Is Ready for a World of Disorder. Foreign Affairs. https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/united-
states/china-ready-world-disorder?utm_medium=promo_email&utm_source=promo_1&utm_campaign=PROM_
jun23-camp1-promall-panel-a&utm_content=20230621&utm_term=EPPAZ003U3
93 Banker, P. and Sanger, D. (2023). Biden Sees Coming ‘Thaw’ With China, Even as He Rallies Allies Against Beijing. New
York Times. https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2023/05/22/us/politics/biden-china-g7.html
Gill, B., Haley, N., Liu, Z.Z., Mazza, M., Browne, A., Wood, C., and La Bruyère, E. (2023). Biden wants a ‘thaw’ with
China. What would that take? https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/06/16/china-blinken-visit-thaw-
experts/
94 Allison, G. (2023). US-China Relations: An Interview with Graham Allison. Belfer Center. https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/
publication/us-china-relations-interview-graham-allison
95 Liik, K. (2021). It’s complicated: Russia’s tricky relationship with China. European Council on Foreign Relations. https:/ /
ecfr.eu/publication/its-complicated-russias-tricky-relationship-with-china/
96 Maizland, L. (2022). China and Russia: Exploring Ties Between Two Authoritarian Powers. CFR. https:/ /www.cfr.org/
backgrounder/china-russia-relationship-xi-putin-taiwan-ukraine
Kaplan, R. (2017). The Quiet Rivalry Between China and Russia. NY Times. https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2017/11/03/
opinion/china-russia-rivalry.html
97 Both geopolitical situations do not require to be identical to be able draw parallels. At the beginning of the Cold War
between the U.S. and the USSR, for instance, the world was yet to decolonize. The situation in the 1950’s or during
the Cuba missile crisis had little to do with that in the 1970s or 1980s. Many countries in the South, or ‘Third World’,
followed a path of non-alignment. Yet, despite all nuances, the whole period between the end of WWII and the fall of
communism is usually labeled as the Cold War.
98 Maizland, L. (2023). Why China-Taiwan Relations Are So Tense. Council on Foreign Relations. https:/ /www.cfr.org/
backgrounder/china-taiwan-relations-tension-us-policy-biden
99 Kaiser, K. (2019). New Battleground? China-Europe vs. America-Europe. Belfer Center. https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/
publication/new-battleground-china-europe-vs-america-europe

===== PDF_PAGE 131 =====
122
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
100 Campbell, C. (2023). U.S. General’s Prediction of War With China ‘in 2025’ Risks Turning Worst Fears Into Reality,
Time. https:/ /time.com/6251419/us-china-general-war-2025/
101 Bunn, M. (2022). Pathways to Disaster: How Might a Nuclear War Start? Belfer Center. https:/ /scholar.harvard.edu/
files/matthew_bunn/files/pathwaystodisaster-2022.pdf
102 There are, as explained beforehand, nuances and outliers within NATO, particularly Turkey and Hungary. Despite this
fact, it cannot be denied that NATO is acting as a bloc in assisting Ukraine and pushing back against the Russian
aggression.
103 Borrell, J. (2022). EU Ambassadors Annual Conference 2022: Opening speech by High Representative Josep
Borrell. EEAS. https:/ /www.eeas.europa.eu/eeas/eu-ambassadors-annual-conference-2022-opening-speech-high-
representative-josep-borrell_en
104 Gewirtz, P. (2023). Words and policies: “De-risking” and China Policy. Brookings. https:/ /www.brookings.edu/articles/
words-and-policies-de-risking-and-china-policy/#:~:text=The%20G%2D7%20communiques%20focus,chains%2C%20
and%20resist%20economic%20coercion.
Baschuk, B. (2022). What ‘Friend-Shoring’ Means for Trade in a Less-Friendly World. The Washington
Post. https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/business/what-friend-shoringmeans-for-trade-in-a-less-friendly-
world/2022/12/06/539fc8e6-75a8-11ed-a199-927b334b939f_story.html
105 De-risking and friend shoring can be preambles of further efforts to decouple liberal-democratic market economies
from state-led authoritarian ones.
106 Baker, P., & Sanger, D. E. (2023). Biden Sees Coming ‘Thaw’ With China, Even as He Rallies Allies Against Beijing. The
New York Times. https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2023/05/22/us/politics/biden-china-g7.html
107 Haenle, P., and Wyone, A. (2022). The Paradox of the Russia-China Relationship. Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace. https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/2022/08/18/paradox-of-russia-china-relationship-pub-87695
Long, K. (2023). Meet China’s ‘junior partner’. Politico. https:/ /www.politico.com/newsletters/politico-
nightly/2023/03/21/chinas-new-era-with-its-junior-partner-00088193
108 Applemaum, A. (2022). THERE IS NO LIBERAL WORLD ORDER: Unless democracies defend themselves, the forces of
autocracy will destroy them. The Atlantic. https:/ /www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2022/05/autocracy-could-
destroy-democracy-russia-ukraine/629363/
109 Neorealist doctrines often overlook the ideological dimension of conflicts, which does not fit properly in a worldview
focused on the raw pursuit of power. This paper considers, though, that ideology is central to international relations.
Constructivist and liberal doctrines take it well into account. Constructivism, for instance, focuses on the impact of
shared ideas (knowledge) in international relationships. Alexander Wendt points out that “the structures of human
association (including national interests) are determined primarily by shared ideas rather than material forces Wendt,
A. (1992). ‘Anarchy is What States Make of It: The Social Construction of Power Politics’. International Organization, 2,
391-425 and Wendt, A. (1999). ‘Social Theory of International Politics’, First Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
110 Nye, J. S. (2019). Do morals matter? presidents and foreign policy from FDR to Trump. Oxford University Press.
111 White House (2022). Remarks by President Biden on the United Efforts of the Free World to Support the People of
Ukraine. https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/03/26/remarks-by-president-biden-on-
the-united-efforts-of-the-free-world-to-support-the-people-of-ukraine/
112 Ganesh, J. (2022). The Ukraine war is not about democracy versus autocracy. Financial times. https:/ /www.ft.com/
content/182adfa1-daae-449a-bdd9-8fe4265c20ed
113 Kundnani, H. (2023). The War in Ukraine, Democracy, and the Global South: We Have a Problem. International
Centre for Defence and Security. https:/ /icds.ee/en/the-war-in-ukraine-democracy-and-the-global-south-we-have-
a-problem/ / / Tsuruoka, M. (2022). Why the War in Ukraine is not about Democracy versus Authoritarianism. RUSI.
https:/ /www.rusi.org/explore-our-research/publications/commentary/why-war-ukraine-not-about-democracy-versus-
authoritarianism
114 The New York Times (2022). Full Transcript of Zelensky’s Speech Before Congress. https:/ /www.nytimes.
com/2022/12/21/us/politics/zelensky-speech-transcript.html
Democracy vs. autocracy is not the only ideological element present in the conflict between Russia and Ukraine.
Nationalism also weighs strongly. Ukraine, though, has increasingly woven its national independence and existence
with liberal democratic principles, whereas Russia has done it with autocratic rule. More information on the
importance of nationalism available at: Pillar. P.R. (2022). Ukraine and the power of nationalism. Responsible
Statecraft. https:/ /responsiblestatecraft.org/2022/05/23/ukraine-and-the-power-of-nationalism/ / / Lieven, A. (2023).
The rise and role of Ukranian ethnic nationalism. The Nation. https:/ /www.thenation.com/article/world/ukraine-russia-
nationalism-war/ / /Ramos Membrive, A. L. (2023). De umbral en umbral (Apuntes sobre los orígenes, el presente y el
desenlace de la guerra en Ucrania). Global Square. https:/ /www.globalsquaremagazine.com/2023/06/20/de-umbral-
en-umbralapuntes-sobre-los-origenes-el-presente-y-el-desenlace-de-la-guerra-en-ucrania/
115 EEAS (2022). A Strategic Compass for Security and Defence. https:/ /www.eeas.europa.eu/eeas/strategic-compass-
security-and-defence-0_en

===== PDF_PAGE 132 =====
123
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
116 Nye, J. (1990). Bound to lead : the changing nature of American power. Basic Books.
117 Ibid.
118 Deriglazova, L. (2021). The Soviet Union’s Demise As Seen by Today’s Russia. The Wilson Center: https:/ /www.
wilsoncenter.org/blog-post/soviet-unions-demise-seen-todays-russians
119 Villiers Negroponte, D. (2019). Would the Soviet Union have collapsed without Mikhail Gorbachev? Brookings. https:/ /
www.brookings.edu/articles/would-the-soviet-union-have-collapsed-without-mikhail-gorbachev/
120 Nowaki, R. (2015). American Idol: American Pop Culture and Soft Power in Cold War Europe. University of Hawai’i at
Hilo. https:/ /hilo.hawaii.edu/campuscenter/hohonu/volumes/documents/AmericanIdol-AmericanPopCultureandSoftP
owerinColdWarEuropeRochelleNowaki.pdf
121 Nathan, A. (2019). What Lessons Have China’s Leaders Learned from Tiananmen? Freedom House. https:/ /
freedomhouse.org/article/what-lessons-have-chinas-leaders-learned-tiananmen
122 Smirnov, V. A., Malenko, S. A., & Nekita, A. G. (2021). “Soft Power” Of The West In The “Cold War” With Soviet
Mythologemes. In D. Y. Krapchunov, S. A. Malenko, V. O. Shipulin, E. F. Zhukova, A. G. Nekita, & O. A. Fikhtner (Eds.),
Perishable And Eternal: Mythologies and Social Technologies of Digital Civilization, vol 120. European Proceedings of
Social and Behavioural Sciences (pp. 161-167). European Publisher. https:/ /doi.org/10.15405/epsbs.2021.12.03.21
123 Waller, J.M. (2009). Strategic Influence: Public Diplomacy, Counterpropaganda, and Political Warfare. Institute of
World Politics Press. https:/ /www.academia.edu/11035809/Strategic_Influence_Public_Diplomacy_Propaganda_and_
Political_Warfare_2009_
124 Kaiser, K. (2018). Human Rights: A Western Policy Tool? Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs.: https:/ /
www.belfercenter.org/publication/human-rights-western-policy-tool
125 Ignatius, D. (2023). “Chechen separatist attack marked when Putin turned from the West”, The Washington Post.
Available at: https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/03/09/putin-bush-chechnya-ukraine-war/
David Ignatius continued his reasoning. “Did Putin have any grounds for his claim afterward that America was aiding
the Chechen separatists? According to a careful review of the evidence by the Belfer Center at the Harvard Kennedy
School, Putin was “partially correct.” The Belfer report noted that the United States in 2004 granted asylum to Ilyas
Akhmadov, who was foreign minister of a Chechen separatist government in exile. The Bush administration initially
opposed Akhmadov’s asylum request but then changed position. Chechen separatism was a popular cause among
some conservatives. Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) met with Akhmadov at least three times. The National Endowment for
Democracy awarded him a federally funded fellowship. Chechen separatists also raised money in the United States to
support their cause, Graham recalled. The Belfer Center report found ‘no evidence of US government’s direct support
for armed groups operating in Chechnya and/or other parts of the North Caucasus’.
126 The concession of a sensitive asylum, the meetings of a Senator (later presidential candidate), the concession of a
federally funded fellowship…all relatively frequent events in liberal democracies, where governments can’t effectively
control every sensitive matter and, often, need to balance their external objectives with the internal requirements of
the law and the judiciary, and the pressures of the press, interest groups, the democratic opposition or even members
of the same ruling party.
127 Putin, V. (2021). The Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians. President of Russia. http:/ /en.kremlin.ru/events/
president/news/66181
128 Wang, Y. (2020). In China, the ‘Great Firewall’ Is Changing a Generation. Politico. https:/ /www.politico.com/news/
magazine/2020/09/01/china-great-firewall-generation-405385 I
129 Fabbrini, S. (2010). After Globalisation: Western Power in a Post-Western World. Global Policy. https:/ /www.
globalpolicyjournal.com/articles/global-governance/after-globalization-western-power-post-western-world
130 Oren, I. (2023). Democratic Peace. Britannica. https:/ /www.britannica.com/topic/democratic-peace
131 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China (2023). US Hegemony and Its Peril. https:/ /www.fmprc.
gov.cn/mfa_eng/wjbxw/202302/t20230220_11027664.html
Meyskens, C. (2023). China Is Pushing Disengagement With the United States Hard. Foreign Policy. https:/ /
foreignpolicy.com/2023/03/08/china-disengagement-america-cold-war/
132 Lee Myers, S. and Barry, E. (2014). Putin Reclaims Crimea for Russia and Bitterly Denounces the West. New York
Times. https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2014/03/19/world/europe/ukraine.html
Beaumont, P. (2023). The invasion of Iraq was a turning point on to a path that led towards Ukraine. The Guardian.
https:/ /www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2023/mar/19/2003-iraq-invasion-legacy-west-international-law-
ukraine
133 Rampe, W. (2023). What Is Russia’s Wagner Group Doing in Africa?. Council on Foreign Relations. https:/ /www.cfr.
org/in-brief/what-russias-wagner-group-doing-africa
Associated Press (2023). What to know about Russia’s Wagner mercenaries as they threaten to leave Ukraine’s front
line. PBS News Hour. https:/ /www.pbs.org/newshour/politics/what-to-know-about-russias-wagner-mercenaries-as-
they-threaten-to-leave-ukraines-front-line
It is yet uncertain what will result of Wagner’s presence in Africa since Prigozhin’s failed insurrection against Putin in
June 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 133 =====
124
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
134 Gang, Q. and Antonov, A. (2021). Joint Article by Chinese and Russian Ambassadors: Respecting People’s Democratic
Rights. The National Interest. http:/ /us.china-embassy.gov.cn/eng/dshd/202111/t20211127_10454275.htm
135 Gong, X. (2023). The Belt and Road Initiative Is Still China’s “Gala” but Without as Much Luster. Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace. https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/2023/03/03/belt-and-road-initiative-is-still-china-s-gala-
but-without-as-much-luster-pub-89207
136 Kagan, R. (2017). The twilight of the liberal world order. Brookings. https:/ /www.brookings.edu/research/the-twilight-
of-the-liberal-world-order/
137 Applemaum, A. (2022). THERE IS NO LIBERAL WORLD ORDER: Unless democracies defend themselves, the forces of
autocracy will destroy them. The Atlantic. https:/ /www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2022/05/autocracy-could-
destroy-democracy-russia-ukraine/629363/
138 Clark, M. (2022). RUSSIAN HYBRID WARFARE. Institute for the Study of War.
Chivvis, C. (2017). Understanding Russian “Hybrid Warfare” And What Can Be Done About it. RAND Corporation.
https:/ /www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/testimonies/CT400/CT468/RAND_CT468.pdf
Thomas, M. (2022). The Chinese Roots of Hybrid Warfare. CEPA. https:/ /cepa.org/article/the-chinese-roots-of-hybrid-
warfare/
Yu Lin, Y. (2018). China’s Hybrid Warfare and Taiwan: How China could use “fake news” and digital warfare in its
preparations for engagement with Taiwan. The Diplomat: https:/ /thediplomat.com/2018/01/chinas-hybrid-warfare-
and-taiwan/
139 FBI (2023). Case: RUSSIAN INTERFERENCE IN 2016 U.S. ELECTIONS. https:/ /www.fbi.gov/wanted/cyber/russian-
interference-in-2016-u-s-elections
Kaiser, K. (2019). Impeachment and U.S. Foreign Policy. Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. https:/ /
www.belfercenter.org/publication/impeachment-and-us-foreign-policy
140 Gewirtz, J. (2020). China Thinks America Is Losing: Washington Must Show Beijing It’s Wrong. Foreign Affairs. https:/ /
www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2020-10-13/china-thinks-america-losing
EU vs. DisInfo (2020). DISINFO: THE WEST IS MORALLY DECAYING. https:/ /euvsdisinfo.eu/report/the-west-is-morally-
decaying
141 Troianovski, A., Nechepurenko, I., and Nagourney, R. (2022). Russia-Ukraine War: Putin Rails Against ‘Western Elites’
in Speech Aimed at U.S. Conservatives. New York Times. https:/ /www.nytimes.com/live/2022/10/27/world/russia-
ukraine-war-news
142 Reuters Staff (2007). I’m the world’s only true democrat, says Putin. Reuters. https:/ /www.reuters.com/article/us-
russia-putin-democracy-idUSL0454405820070604
143 Wrighton, S. (2022). Trust in international relations, public diplomacy and soft power. British Council. https:/ /www.
britishcouncil.org/research-policy-insight/policy-reports/trust-international-relations-soft-power
144 Gutierrez, D., Vera Botello, I., and Ahmed, I. (2021). Trust in Diplomacy––Secretary of State George Shultz. ADST.:
https:/ /adst.org/2021/02/trust-in-diplomacy-secretary-of-state-george-shultz/
Brown, K. (2020). FACE-TIME: BUILDING TRUST IN INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS. USC Center on Public Diplomacy. https:/ /
uscpublicdiplomacy.org/blog/face-time-building-trust-international-affairs
145 Toosi, N. (2021). Biden disliked Putin before it was cool. Politico. https:/ /www.politico.com/news/2021/06/09/biden-
russia-putin-love-story-492195
146 Kagan, R. (2018). The United States and Russia aren’t allies. But Trump and Putin are. Brookings. https:/ /www.
brookings.edu/articles/the-united-states-and-russia-arent-allies-but-trump-and-putin-are/
McFaul, M. (2019). Trump’s Gift to Putin: The President’s Privatized Foreign Policy Is a Boon for Russia. Foreign Affairs.
https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/russian-federation/2019-10-23/trumps-gift-putin
147 Haass, R. (2023). How Biden could “thaw” US relations with China. Brookings. https:/ /www.brookings.edu/articles/
how-biden-could-thaw-us-relations-with-china/
Demirjian, K. (2023). Republicans Attack Blinken for China Trip, Threatening Subpoena. New York Times. https:/ /www.
nytimes.com/2023/06/16/us/politics/republicans-blinken-china.html
148 Tip O’ Neil is most closely associated with the expression, but he did not originate it. Variations of this phrase date
back to 1932  “All politics is local”. Barry Popik. Retrieved September 15, 2021.
149 Lincoln, A., & NetLibrary, Inc. (1990). “House divided” speech. Project Gutenberg; NetLibrary.
150 In pronouncing these words, Lincoln was following a thread that included Thomas Paine, Hobbes and Saint Augustine
-amongst others-, that can be traced back to the Gospels.
151 Dodds, Klaus, Geopolitics: A Very Short Introduction, 1st edn, Very Short Introductions (Oxford, 2007; online
edn, Oxford Academic, 24 Sept. 2013), https:/ /doi.org/10.1093/actrade/9780199206582.001.0001
Chaudoin, S., Milner, H., & Pang, X. (2015). International Systems and Domestic Politics: Linking Complex
Interactions with Empirical Models in International Relations. International Organization, 69(2), 275-309. doi:10.1017/
S0020818314000356
152 Ikenson, D. (2020). Biden’s Trade Policy Options Constrained by Domestic Politics and Geopolitics. CATO Institute.
https:/ /www.cato.org/blog/bidens-trade-policy-options-constrained-domestic-politics-geopolitics

===== PDF_PAGE 134 =====
125
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Kaiser, K. (2019). Impeachment and U.S. Foreign Policy. Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. https:/ /
www.belfercenter.org/publication/impeachment-and-us-foreign-policy
153 France under Napoleon III seized the opportunity to overthrow the government of Benito Juarez and install
Maximilian I of Mexico as a puppet ruler. This was a direct challenge to the Monroe doctrine, aimed at negating
American influence in Mexico. The French effort failed once the US Civil war came to an end and Washington
recovered its capacity to enforce the Monroe doctrine and assist Juarez’s forces.
154 Abecassis, A., Alexander, D., Burns, N., Ashbrook, C.C., Howorth, J., Kaiser, K., Renedo, A., Rickets, P. and Sloat, A.
(2020). Impacts of Brexit on the UK, EU, and the World. Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. https:/ /
www.belfercenter.org/publication/impacts-brexit-uk-eu-and-world
Kaiser, K. (2020). The Future of NATO. Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. https:/ /www.belfercenter.
org/publication/future-nato
Kaiser, K. (2019). America’s Domestic Strife and Foreign Policy. Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs.
https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/publication/americas-domestic-strife-and-foreign-policy
155 Kaiser, K. (2019). What Brexit Means to the World. Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. https:/ /www.
belfercenter.org/publication/what-brexit-means-world
156 V-Dem Institute (2023). DEMOCRACY REPORT 2023: Defiance in the Face of Autocratization. University of
Gothenburg. https:/ /v-dem.net/documents/29/V-dem_democracyreport2023_lowres.pdf
157 Brooks, D. (2022). This is Why Autocracies Fail. New York Times. https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2022/03/17/opinion/why-
autocracies-fail.html
158 Farrell, H., Schneier, B. (2018). Information attacks on democracies.. Lawfare. https:/ /www.lawfaremedia.org/article/
information-attacks-democracies
159 Farrell, H., Schneier, B. (2018). Information attacks on democracies. Lawfare. https:/ /www.lawfaremedia.org/article/
information-attacks-democracies
160 Ignatius, D. (2023). Putin Looked into the Abyss Saturday – and Blinked. The Washington Post. https:/ /www.
washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/06/24/putin-prigozhin-russia-wagner-group-coup/
161 Schmennan, S. (2023). Prigozhin and the Long and Infamous History of Failed Russian Rebellions. The New York
Times. https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2023/06/26/opinion/international-world/putin-russia-uprising.html
162 Navalny, A. (2022). Alexei Navalny: This is what a post-Putin Russia should look like. The Washington Post. https:/ /
www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/09/30/alexei-navalny-parliamentary-republic-russia-ukraine/
163 Nye, J. (2023). Peak China?, Project Syndicate.: https:/ /www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/peak-china-debate-
calls-for-careful-assessment-by-joseph-s-nye-2023-01
164 Karolewski, I. P., & Benedikter, R. (2018). Europe’s refugee and migrant crisis. Politique Européenne, N° 60(2), 98–132.
https:/ /doi.org/10.3917/poeu.060.0098
165 Graham, T. (2022). Gorbachev: Conflicted Catalyst of Cold War’s End. Council on Foreign Relations. https:/ /www.cfr.
org/article/mikhail-gorbachev-death-conflicted-catalyst-cold-wars-end
166 White House (2022). Remarks by President Biden on the Continued Battle for the Soul of the Nation. https:/ /www.
whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/09/01/remarks-by-president-bidenon-the-continued-battle-
for-the-soul-of-the-nation/
167 V-Dem Institute (2023). DEMOCRACY REPORT 2023: Defiance in the Face of Autocratization. University of
Gothenburg. https:/ /v-dem.net/documents/29/V-dem_democracyreport2023_lowres.pdf
168 Ibid.
169 Walter, B. (2022). Why we should worry about U.S. becoming an anocracy again? Because of the threat of a civil war.
The Washington Post. https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/01/24/why-should-we-worry-that-us-could-
become-an-anocracy-again-because-threat-civil-war/
The CSP ranking, called the “Polity Score” — well regarded partly because of its historical and geographic scope —
uses various criteria to place governments on a scale ranging from -10 (most autocratic) to +10 (most democratic).
Anocracies are in the middle, between -5 and +5. Barbara F. Walter. GlobalReport (systemicpeace.org)
170 Walter, B. F., & ProQuest. (2022). How civil wars start : and how to stop them. Viking.
171 Brown, W. (2019). In the Ruins of Neoliberalism: The Rise of Antidemocratic Politics in the West. Columbia University
Press.
172 Roth, K. (2021). With Autocrats on the Defensive, Can Democrats Rise to the Occasion? Human Rights Watch. https:/ /
www.hrw.org/world-report/2022/autocrats-on-defensive-can-democrats-rise-to-occasion
Camacho, G. (2022). The connections between corruption, autocracy and human rights in Latin America. Transparency
International. https:/ /knowledgehub.transparency.org/assets/uploads/kproducts/Connections-between-corruption-
autocracy-and-human-rights-in-Latin-America_Final.pdf
173 Sheftalovich, Z. (2023). EU to Steve Bannon: You don’t scare us … anymore. Politico. https:/ /www.politico.eu/article/
donald-trump-eu-vera-jourova-steve-bannon-you-dont-scare-us-any-more/

===== PDF_PAGE 135 =====
126
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Cameron, C. (2023). The attack on Brazil’s seat of government resembles the storming of the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6,
2021. The New York Times. https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2023/01/08/world/americas/brazil-jan-6-riots.html
174 Karlsen, G.H. Divide and rule: ten lessons about Russian political influence activities in Europe. Palgrave Commun 5, 19
(2019). https:/ /doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0227-8
175 Ibid.
Kurlantzick, J. (2022). China’ s growing interference in domestic politics: globally and in the U.S. CFR. https://www.cfr.org/
blog/chinas-growing-interference-domestic-politics-globally-and-united-states
176 Galston, W. (2023). Polls show Americans are divided on the significance of January 6. Brookings. https:/ /www.
brookings.edu/articles/polls-show-americans-are-divided-on-the-significance-of-january-6/
177 Putnam, R. D., Garrett, S. R. (2020). The upswing: how America came together a century ago and how we can do it
again (First Simon & Schuster hardcover edition.). Simon & Schuster.
178 Trump could act this way if reelected, to claim, as he is promising, that his election brought peace and stopped U.S.
involvement in Ukraine. He could also seek to distance Moscow from Beijing, to let the U.S. focus exclusively on the
competition with China. Finally, it would be his way of returning Putin’s favor, if he again interfered in the 2024 U.S.
elections in his favor. President Biden and Putin do not trust each other but is seems that Trump and Putin do trust
each other.
179 Walter, B.F. (2022). How Civil Wars start. And how to stop them (Crown New York hardcover edition).
180 Vallier, K. (2022). Political Trust. BYU Law Review. https:/ /digitalcommons.law.byu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=3372&context=lawreview
When people mistrust government, they will resent government more and support and obey it less. They will also
refuse to believe important governmental messages. They will see those messages as lies or as based on a desire to
control the populace. Those who support the government, by contrast, will act more cooperatively. This will create
cleavages between different political groups. Unfortunately, COVID-19 has made failures of political trust palpable
and tragic.” Kevin Vallier. Vallier, K. (2022). Political Trust. BYU Law Review. https:/ /digitalcommons.law.byu.edu/cgi/
viewcontent.cgi?article=3372&context=lawreview
181 Vallier, K. (2020). Trust in a Polarized Age. New York; online edn, Oxford Academic https:/ /doi.org/10.1093/
oso/9780190887223.001.0001
Klutsey, B. (2021). Social and Political Trust. Discourse. https:/ /www.discoursemagazine.com/culture-and-
society/2021/03/26/social-and-political-trust/
182 Oxtoby, D. W., Brady, H. E., Meares, T. L., Rainie, L., & Schlozman, K. L. (2023). Distrust, Political Polarization, and
America’s Challenged Institutions. Bulletin - American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 76(3), 42–64.
183 Ibid.
184 Ibid.
185 Ibid.
186 Coleman, P.T. (2021). The way out. How to overcome toxic polarization. Columbia University Press.
187 Ibid.
Political polarization has been found to be associated with higher levels of out-group hostility, aggressiveness, and
more intensive conflicts, but also with more active political engagement. Coleman, P.T. (2021). The way out. How to
overcome toxic polarization. Columbia University Press.
188 Coleman, P.T. (2021). The way out. How to overcome toxic polarization. Columbia University Press.
189 Ibid.
190 Ibid.
191 Ibid.
The notion of complex cloud problems becoming attractors and forming coherent patterns that draw us in partly
inspired the use in this paper of the metaphor of the ‘maelstrom’ (term which Peter T. Coleman also employs).
192 Coleman, P.T. (2021). The way out. How to overcome toxic polarization. Columbia University Press
193 Putnam, R. D., Garrett, S. R. (2020). The upswing: how America came together a century ago and how we can do it
again (First Simon & Schuster hardcover edition.). Simon & Schuster.
194 The first “I” period took place after industrialization had left its footprint in a society that, decades before, had been
described by Tocqueville as remarkably egalitarian.
195 Putnam, R. D., Garrett, S. R. (2020). The upswing: how America came together a century ago and how we can do it
again (First Simon & Schuster hardcover edition.). Simon & Schuster.
196 Ibid.
197 A note on “individualism” and “comity” or “community”: this paper aims to follow Tocqueville’s conception
concerning individualism (a term he coined). As explained by Professor Putnam, Tocqueville, “keenly aware of the
dangers of individualism, was inspired by what he saw in America: its citizens were profoundly protective of their

===== PDF_PAGE 136 =====
127
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
independence, but through associating widely and deeply, they were able to overcome selfish desires, engage
in collective problem solving, and work together to build a vibrant and -by comparison to Europe at that time-
surprisingly egalitarian society by what he called ‘self-interest, rightly understood”. Putnam, R. D., Garrett, S. R.
(2020). The upswing: how America came together a century ago and how we can do it again (First Simon & Schuster
hardcover edition.). Simon & Schuster. Hence, individualism in this paper is not represented as a development that
aspires to better protect individual freedoms and human rights, but rather as a tendency to raise the individual
against the community, and in opposition to it, as is often the case with libertarian doctrines. Furthermore, this
paper is based on the consideration that the protection of the rights and freedoms of all individuals requires an
egalitarian approach towards all of them. Therefore, in a highly individualistic society, a communitarian re-balancing
is necessary to better protect the individual rights and freedoms of all citizens. Individual and community need to
find an Aristotelian balance and engage in a dialogue to find themselves. Too much individualism, in detriment of
community, damages the community and individuals. Too much communitarianism, in detriment of individuality,
damages individuals and the community.
198 It is only logical, as democracy, comity, cooperation and civic dialogue are synonyms. ‘The government of the People,
for the People and by the People’, even in the shape of a representative democracy, can only be a community that
cooperates through a civic dialogue. Absent the elements of civic dialogue, cooperation, and community, democracy
ceases to exist and representative democracy cannot work.
199 McCoy J.L, Somer M., (2021). Political Parties, Elections and Pernicious Polarization in the Rise of Illiberalism.
Routledge Handbook of Illiberalism. Routledge.
200 Ibid
201 Zakaria, F., (1997). The rise of illiberal democracy. Foreign Affairs, Vol. 76, No. 6 (Nov. - Dec., 1997), pp. 22-43 https:/ /
doi.org/10.2307/20048274
202 Dokoupil, T. (2022). Democratic and Republican voters share a mistrust in the electoral process. CBS News. https:/ /
www.cbsnews.com/news/democratic-and-republican-voters-share-their-mistrust-in-the-electoral-process/
203 Brown, W. (2019). In the Ruins of Neoliberalism: The Rise of Antidemocratic Politics in the West. Columbia University
Press.
204 Dryzek, J. S., Bächtiger, A., Chambers, S., Cohen, J., Druckman, J. N., Felicetti, A., Fishkin, J. S., Farrell, D. M., Fung, A.,
Gutmann, A., Landemore, H., Mansbridge, J., Marien, S., Neblo, M. A., Niemeyer, S., Setälä, M., Slothuus, R., Suiter, J.,
Thompson, D., & Warren, M. E. (2019). The crisis of democracy and the science of deliberation. Science (American
Association for the Advancement of Science), 363(6432), 1144–1146. https:/ /doi.org/10.1126/science.aaw2694
205 Scartascini, C. (2021). Testing the Impact of Social Media on Trust. IDB. https:/ /blogs.iadb.org/ideas-matter/en/
testing-the-impact-of-social-media-on-trust/
206 See note 240 on this paper’s notion on individualism.
207 Habermas, J. (1962). The structural transformation of the public sphere: an inquiry into a category of bourgeois
society. MIT press.
Soules, M. (2023). JÜRGEN HABERMAS AND THE PUBLIC SPHERE. Media Studies. https:/ /www.media-studies.ca/
articles/habermas.htm
The ‘private sphere’ is a smaller, typically enclosed realm (like a home), that is only open to those who have
permission to enter it.
208 Habermas, J. (1962). The structural transformation of the public sphere: an inquiry into a category of bourgeois
society. MIT press.
209 Ibid.
Habermas discerns the extrication of a public social sphere that operated between private autonomy and state
authority. Stanley, T. (2015). Utopia and the Public sphere. Philarchive. https://philarchive.org/archive/STAUAT
210 Nancy Fraser offered a feminist revision of Habermas’ historic revision of the public sphere, arguing that the
‘bourgeois public sphere’ was constituted by a number of significant exclusions (women and other marginalized
groups). More information available at: Fraser, N. (1990). Rethinking the Public Sphere. Social Text, 8(3), 56.
211 Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press.
212 Ibid.
213 Butsch, R. (2007). Media and Public Spheres (1st ed. 2007.). Palgrave Macmillan UK : Imprint: Palgrave Macmillan.
It is worth noting that anthropologists Graeber and Wengrow, in “the Dawn of Everything: A New History of Humanity”,
critique the traditional narratives of history’s linear development from primitivism to civilization. Instead, The Dawn
of Everything posits that humans have lived in large, complex, but decentralized polities for millennia. It relies on
archaeological evidence to show that early societies were diverse and developed numerous political structures. These
often included different forms of collective deliberation or, so to say, ‘public spheres’.
214 Butsch, R. (2007). Media and Public Spheres (1st ed. 2007.). Palgrave Macmillan UK : Imprint: Palgrave Macmillan.
Habermas primary focus on the origins of the public sphere was the bourgeois public sphere in the 18th century social
institutions and political philosophy.

===== PDF_PAGE 137 =====
128
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Habermas conceived the public sphere as an arena of discourse that took shape in the 17th and 18th centuries. It brought about
the Enlightenment, and ultimately modern liberal democracy. “With the rise of mercantilist classes at this time, a new
social sphere began to emerge that existed between official and private interactions — fostering a culture of public
discussion that had never been previously seen. These interactions took place between regular citizens in public spaces
such as cafes, public squares, and salons, and were an opportunity for citizens to discuss intellectual matters. The
new forum of interaction that the public sphere represented, and the increased engagement that resulted, allowed
for a small yet significant rebalance of power amongst bourgeois citizens and the traditional authorities of church
and state.” Marston, B. (2020). Dissecting the Utopia and realities of the digital public sphere. SearchMedium. https:/ /
brookemarston.medium.com/dissecting-the-utopia-and-realities-of-the-digital-public-sphere-f1f2aaff1e5b
215 Fraser, N. (1990), Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to the Critique of Actually Existing Democracy”.
Robert, A. (1999). Toward a Normative Conception of Difference in Public Deliberation. Argumentation and
Advocacy. doi:10.1080/00028533.1999.11951626.
216 Ibid.
217 Habermas, J. (1964). The Public Sphere: an Encyclopedia Article. New German Critique. No. 3 (Autumn, 1974), pp. 49-
55 (7 pages). Published By: Duke University Press
218 McLuhan, M. (1967). The medium is the massage: an inventory of effects. Gingko Press. More information https:/ /
obtaineudaimonia.medium.com/the-medium-is-the-message-by-marshall-mcluhan-8b5d0a9d426b#:~:text=The%20
book%20is%20actually%20called,to%20behave%20in%20particular%20ways.
219 Habermas still is a prolific author and influential philosopher, but first wrote about the public sphere in the 1960s.
220 Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2023). Democratic responsibility in the digital public sphere. Constellations (Oxford, England),
30(1), 92–97. https:/ /doi.org/10.1111/1467-8675.12670
221 United Nations, (2023). World Press Freedom Day 3 May. UN. https:/ /www.un.org/en/observances/press-freedom-
day
222 International Federation of Journalists. (2019). Global Charter of Ethics for Journalists. IFJ. https:/ /www.ifj.org/who/
rules-and-policy/global-charter-of-ethics-for-journalists.html /
223 Butsch, R. (2007). Media and Public Spheres (1st ed. 2007.). Palgrave Macmillan UK : Imprint: Palgrave Macmillan
224 Ortega y Gasset, J. (1932). The revolt of the masses : authorized translation from the Spanish. W. W. Norton &
company, inc.
225 Ibid.
226 Ibid.
227 Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press.
228 Romm Livermore, C. (2011). The Role that Electronic Media Played in Psychological Warfare During the Second World
War. International Journal of e-Politics, 2(4), 61–66. https:/ /doi.org/10.4018/jep.2011100105
229 FDR4freedoms. https:/ /fdr4freedoms.org/wp-content/themes/fdf4fdr/DownloadablePDFs/II_
HopeRecoveryReform/21_TalkingtothePeople.pdf
230 Huard, M. (2012) The BBC and the Shaping of British Identity from 1922 to 1945. The Gettysburg Historical Journal:
Vol. 11 , Article 3. https:/ /cupola.gettysburg.edu/ghj/vol11/iss1/3
231 Bates, S. (2020). An aristocracy of critics. Luce, Hutchins, Niebhur, and the committee that redefined freedom of the
press. Yale University Press.
232 Ibid.
233 Ibid.
234 Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press.
American mass media grew to conform with the Hutchins Commission’s vision and recommendations. Media
corporations fulfilled their public responsibilities— to the extent that they did— through the work of professional
journalists and editors, while acknowledging, at least in principle, the desirability of separating reporting, editorial, and
commercial imperatives. Content was produced by professional journalists and editors who were guided by five norms:
getting (and presenting) the truth, providing a representative picture of social groups, providing a forum for comment
and criticism, clarifying public values, and offering comprehensive coverage. Professional journalists contributed to
public discussion by bringing current events, political analysis, and investigative reporting to mass audiences. These
journalists and media organizations were part of an epistemically coherent public sphere, professionalized and
mutually correcting, with broadly shared standards of evidence, argument, and salience. This was a world in which
Pizzagates and QAnons were not publicly visible. Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic
theory. The University of Chicago Press.
235 Ibid.
236 Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press.

===== PDF_PAGE 138 =====
129
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
237 The ‘narrow aperture’ acted as a constraint, but also allowed the application of the norms and standards of
professional journalism. As argued by Archon Fung and Joshua Cohen: “the shared sensibilities of journalists and
editors, as well as professional norms, all narrowed the aperture of information and explanations that reached mass
audiences”. Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press.
238 Avery, J. M. (2009). Videomalaise or Virtuous Circle? The International Journal of Press/politics, 14(4), 410–433.
https:/ /doi.org/10.1177/1940161209336224
239 Norris, P. (2000). A Virtuous Circle? In A Virtuous Circle (pp. 309–320). https:/ /doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511609343.015
240 Brenan, M. (2022). Americans’ Trust In Media Remains Near Record Low. Gallup. https:/ /news.gallup.com/
poll/403166/americans-trust-media-remains-near-record-low.aspx
241 As Marty Baron explains, “(…) President Richard Nixon, along with his aides and allies, portrayed The Post’s
journalists as liars and political opponents. In the end, their reporting was vindicated, and ultimately the Nixon
administration was held to account for abuse of power, criminal behavior and obstruction of justice”. Baron, M.
(2023). The truth is always necessary. But ‘objectivity’ is a trap, The Washington Post. https:/ /www.washingtonpost.
com/opinions/2023/03/24/journalism-objectivity-trump-misinformation-marty-baron/
The publication of ‘the Pentagon Papers by the New York Times, revealing the secret official story of the Vietnam
war, or, more recently, the exposure of Trump’s lies and scandals throughout his Presidency, would be other clear
examples of an independent press acting as ‘watchdog of democracy’. There can be no liberal democracy without a
free and independent press.
242 The Dominion lawsuit against FOX News, and the 787,5M USD settlement, is a clear example of this problem.
243 Kellner, D. (1992). The Persian Gulf TV War. Westview Press.
Wikipedia (2023). Media coverage of the Gulf War. https:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Media_coverage_of_the_Gulf_
War#:~:text=The%20war%20was%20covered%20live,were%20anchoring%20their%20evening%20newscasts.
The Dominion lawsuit against FOX News, and the 787,5M USD settlement, is a clear example of this problem.
244 Warner, J. ‘The New Refeudalization of the Public Sphere’, in The Routledge Companion to Advertising and
Promotional Culture, edited by Matthew P. McAllister and Emily West (New York: Routledge, 2013).
Habermas argued that the role of mass media was part of a broader evolution of large private interest groups
(corporations, lobbies, etc) that displaced regular citizens from the public sphere. The illusion of the public sphere
has been preserved for purposes of political legitimization, but true public opinion does not matter anymore.
Habermas, J. (1962). The structural transformation of the public sphere: an inquiry into a category of bourgeois society.
MIT press.
245 Kull, S.; Ramsay, C.; Subias, S.; Lewis, E.; and Warf, P. (2003). Press attitudes towards the Iraq War: Press/Institute for
Public Accuracy/ RoperASW Survey. https:/ /web.archive.org/web/20070403153921/http:/65.109.167.118/pipa/pdf/
oct03/IraqMedia_Oct03_rpt.pdf / World Public Opinion (2003). Misperceptions, the media and the Iraq War. WPO.
https:/ /web.archive.org/web/20061008020042/http:/www.worldpublicopinion.org/pipa/articles/international_
security_bt/102.php?nid=&id=&pnt=102&lb=brusc
246 Oxtoby, D. W., Brady, H. E., Meares, T. L., Rainie, L., & Schlozman, K. L. (2023). Distrust, Political Polarization, and
America’s Challenged Institutions. Bulletin - American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 76(3), 42–64.
247 Martin Heidegger. The question concerning Technology and Other Essays. (New York: Harper & Row, 1977).
248 Pew Research Center (2020). Trends in U.S. income and wealth inequality. Pew Research Center. https:/ /www.
pewresearch.org/social-trends/2020/01/09/trends-in-income-and-wealth-inequality/
249 Rothstein, B. (2018). How the trust trap perpetuates inequality. Scientific American. https:/ /www.scientificamerican.
com/article/how-the-trust-trap-perpetuates-inequality/
Levy, B. (2022). How inequality and polarization interact: America’s challenges through a south African Lens. Carnegie
Endowment. https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/2022/04/27/how-inequality-and-polarization-interact-america-s-
challenges-through-south-african-lens-pub-86935
250 Ibid.
251 Putnam, R. D., Garrett, S. R. (2020). The upswing: how America came together a century ago and how we can do it
again (First Simon & Schuster hardcover edition.). Simon & Schuster.
252 Pew Research Center (2022). Public Trust in Government: 1958-2022. https:/ /www.pewresearch.org/
politics/2022/06/06/public-trust-in-government-1958-2022/
253 Pew Research (2022). The polarization in today’s Congress has roots that go back decades. https:/ /www.
pewresearch.org/short-reads/2022/03/10/the-polarization-in-todays-congress-has-roots-that-go-back-decades/
254 The social and political changes of the 1960’s had a profound impact in the U.S., but citizens’ perceptions of these
developments were framed by a rapidly changing mass media landscape (‘the medium is the message’).
255 See note 240 for this paper’s notion on individualism and comity.
256 Ibid.
257 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 139 =====
130
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
258 Ibid.
259 Roberts, M.J., (2009). Trade Unions, Participation, and the Proletarian Public sphere. Palgrave MacMillan.
260 Carr, N. G. (2010). The shallows : what the Internet is doing to our brains (1st ed.). W.W. Norton.
261 Curtis, A. (2002). The Century of the Self. Documentary. Youtube. https:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=eJ3RzGoQC4s
262 Adam Curtis, Director of the documentary, argued that, as a result of media manipulation, “although we feel we are
free, in reality, we—like the politicians—have become the slaves of our own desires”.
263 Paek, H.-J., & Pan, Z. (2004). Spreading Global Consumerism: Effects of Mass Media and Advertising on Consumerist
Values in China. Mass Communication & Society, 7(4), 491–515. https:/ /doi.org/10.1207/s15327825mcs0704_7
Sklair, L. (2012). Culture-ideology of consumerism. Wiley Online library. https:/ /onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
full/10.1002/9780470670590.wbeog099
Higgs, K. A brief history of consumer culture. The MIT Press reader. https:/ /thereader.mitpress.mit.edu/a-brief-history-
of-consumer-culture/
Habermas himself argued that the development of consumerism contributed to the refeudalization of the public
sphere. Habermas, J. (1962). The structural transformation of the public sphere: an inquiry into a category of bourgeois
society. MIT press.
264 Vyse, S. (2007). Going broke. Why Americans (still) can’t hold on to their money. Oxford University Press.
265 Gregory, J. (2023). Tucker Carlson said he hates Trump ‘passionately, lawsuit reveals. BBC News. https:/ /www.bbc.
com/news/world-us-canada-64886188
266 Putnam, R. D., Garrett, S. R. (2020). The upswing: how America came together a century ago and how we can do it
again (First Simon & Schuster hardcover edition.). Simon & Schuster.
267 As was mentioned earlier, a recent example, central to this paper, is how “a long-term bipartisan consensus on
U.S.-Russian relations was rapidly converted to mass polarization after 2016, as President Trump, in effect, signaled
to his base that sympathy for Russia was now the appropriate policy view”. Putnam, R. D., Garrett, S. R. (2020). The
upswing: how America came together a century ago and how we can do it again (First Simon & Schuster hardcover
edition.). Simon & Schuster.
268 Ibid.
269 The Overton window is an approach to identifying the ideas that define the spectrum of acceptability of
governmental policies. “A Brief Explanation of the Overton Window.”(2019). Mackinac Center for Public Policy.
270 Derek, R. (2019). How an Obscure Conservative Theory Became the Trump Era’s Go-to Nerd Phrase”. Politico. https:/ /
www.politico.com/magazine/story/2018/02/25/overton-window-explained-definition-meaning-217010/
271 TV celebrities turned politicians have been particularly able to push or redefine these limits, as in the case of Italy’s
Silvio Berlusconi or America’s Trump.
272 Habermas, J. (1962). The structural transformation of the public sphere: an inquiry into a category of bourgeois
society. MIT press.
273 Sandel, M. (2020). The tyranny of merit. What’s become of the common good. (MacMillan).
274 Patberg, M. (2023). Digital transformation. Habermas and the new structural transformation of the public
sphere. RevDem. https:/ /revdem.ceu.edu/2023/02/02/digital-fragmentation-habermas-on-the-new-structural-
transformation-of-the-public-sphere/
275 Jung, C. and Jaffe, A. (1962). Memories, Dreams, Reflections. Pantheon Books.
276 Putnam, R. D., Garrett, S. R. (2020). The upswing: how America came together a century ago and how we can do it
again (First Simon & Schuster hardcover edition.). Simon & Schuster.
277 Ibid.
278 True, this has never worked perfectly, not even close. But this only means that on this occasion democratic societies
need to learn how to ‘weave back better’.
279 Applebaum, A. (2021). The Bad Guys Are Winning. The Atlantic. https:/ /www.theatlantic.com/magazine/
archive/2021/12/the-autocrats-are-winning/620526/
280 Farrell, H., Schneier, B. (2018). Information attacks on democracies. Lawfare. https:/ /www.lawfaremedia.org/article/
information-attacks-democracies
281 Jones, O. (2023). The far right is rising. That it seems normal is all the more terrifying. The Guardian. https:/ /www.
theguardian.com/commentisfree/2023/may/31/across-europe-the-far-right-is-rising-that-it-seems-normal-is-all-the-
more-terrifying
Kotsokousta, E. (2023). Why the far-right is increasingly getting into power across Europe Euronews. https:/ /www.
euronews.com/my-europe/2023/06/19/why-the-far-right-is-increasingly-getting-into-power-across-europe
Ware, J. (2023). The violent far-right terrorist threat to the Republican party and American conservatism. CFR. https:/ /
www.cfr.org/blog/violent-far-right-terrorist-threat-republican-party-and-american-conservatism
282 Müller, Jan-Werner (2006). On the Origins of Constitutional Patriotism. Contemporary Political Theory. 5 (3):
278–296. https:/ /link.springer.com/article/10.1057/palgrave.cpt.9300235 .

===== PDF_PAGE 140 =====
131
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
283 Habermas, J. (1962). The structural transformation of the public sphere: an inquiry into a category of bourgeois
society. MIT press.
284 Popper, K. (1945). The Open Society and its enemies. Princeton University Press.
285 O’Malley, J.P. (2013). Michael Sandel interview: the marketization of everything is undermining democracy. The
Spectator. https:/ /www.spectator.co.uk/article/michael-sandel-interview-the-marketization-of-everything-is-
undermining-democracy/
286 “ Conservative and Liberal Attitudes Drive Polarized Neural Responses to Political Content,” Willer, Yuan Chang
Leong of the University of Chicago, Janice Chen of Johns Hopkins and Jamil Zaki of Stanford.
287 The Knight Commission on Trust, Media and Democracy. (2019). Crisis in Democracy: Renewing Trust in America.
Knight Foundation. Available at: https:/ /knightfoundation.org/reports/crisis-in-democracy-renewing-trust-in-
america/
288 Bates, S. (2020). An aristocracy of critics. Luce, Hutchins, Niebhur, and the committee that redefined freedom of the
press. Yale University Press.
289 Pew Research. (2022) Public Trust in Government: 1958-2022. Pew Research Center. https:/ /www.pewresearch.org/
politics/2022/06/06/public-trust-in-government-1958-2022/
Pew Research (2022). The polarization in today’s Congress has roots that go back decades. https:/ /www.pewresearch.
org/short-reads/2022/03/10/the-polarization-in-todays-congress-has-roots-that-go-back-decades/
290 Coleman, P.T. (2021). The way out. How to overcome toxic polarization. Columbia University Press
291 Ibid.
Further considerations on this paper’s theory of change will be addressed in the next section of the paper containing
a policy proposal.
292 Roose, K. (2023). AI poses risk of extinction, industry leaders warn. New York Times. https:/ /www.nytimes.
com/2023/05/30/technology/ai-threat-warning.html
Gates, B. (2023). The Age of AI has begun. Gates Notes. https:/ /www.gatesnotes.com/The-Age-of-AI-Has-Begun
293 The White House (2022). FACT SHEET: CHIPS and Science Act Will Lower Costs, Create Jobs, Strengthen Supply
Chains, and Counter China. https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/08/09/fact-sheet-
chips-and-science-act-will-lower-costs-create-jobs-strengthen-supply-chains-and-counter-china/
294 Habermas, J. (1962). The structural transformation of the public sphere: an inquiry into a category of bourgeois
society. MIT press.
295 Ibid.
296 Statista, (2023). Number of active monthly Facebook users worldwide. https:/ /www.statista.com/statistics/264810/
number-of-monthly-active-facebook-users-worldwide/
297 Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2023). Democratic responsibility in the digital public sphere. Constellations (Oxford, England),
30(1), 92–97. https:/ /doi.org/10.1111/1467-8675.12670
298 Schaefer, M.S. (2015). Digital Public sphere. Mazzoleni, Gianpetro et al: The International Encyclopedia of Political
Communication. London.Wiley Blackwell. Pp 322-328.
299 Ibid.
300 Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press.
301 Taneja, H. (2019). The Era of “Move Fast and Break Things is Over. Harvard Business Review. https:/ /hbr.org/2019/01/
the-era-of-move-fast-and-break-things-is-over
302 Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press.
303 Ibid
304 Ibid.
305 Section 230 (c) (1) of the US Telecommunications Act of 1996 states: “No provider or user of an interactive computer
service shall be treated as the publisher or speaker of any information provided by another information content
provider”. Section 230 (c) (2) further provides “Good Samaritan” protection from civil liability for operators of
interactive computer services in the good faith removal or moderation of third-party material they deem “obscene,
lewd, lascivious, filthy, excessively violent, harassing, or otherwise objectionable, whether or not such material is
constitutionally protected.
306 Lorenz-Spreen, P., Oswald, L., Lewandowsky, S., and Hertwig, R. (2023). A systematic review of worldwide causal
and correlational evidence on digital media and democracy. Nature Human Behaviour, 7(1), 74–101. https:/ /doi.
org/10.1038/s41562-022-01460-1
307 Democracy and Internet Governance Initiative. (2023). Towards digital platforms and public purpose. Harvard
Kennedy School. https:/ /shorensteincenter.org/towards-digital-platforms-and-public-purpose/
308 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 141 =====
132
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
309 Ibid.
The findings of the 2023 systematic review on the effects of social media on democracy include both positive and
negative effects, even if the conclusion points to ‘clear evidence of serious threats to democracy’: Our results also
highlight that digital media are a double-edged sword, with both beneficial and detrimental effects on democracy.
What is considered beneficial or detrimental will, at least partly, hinge on the political system in question: intensifying
populism and network homophily may benefit a populist regime or a populist politician but undermine a pluralistic
democracy. For democratic countries, evidence clearly indicates that digital media increase political participation. Less
clear but still suggestive are the findings that digital media have positive effects on political knowledge and exposure
to diverse viewpoints in news. On the negative side, however, digital media use is associated with eroding the ‘glue
that keeps democracies together’: trust in political institutions. The results indicating this danger converge across
methods. Furthermore, our results also suggest that digital media use is associated with increases in hate, populism
and polarization. Again, the findings converge across causal and correlational articles. Lorenz-Spreen, P., Oswald,
L., Lewandowsky, S., and Hertwig, R. (2023). A systematic review of worldwide causal and correlational evidence on
digital media and democracy. Nature Human Behaviour, 7(1), 74–101. https:/ /doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01460-1
310 Ibid.
311 Haidt, J., & Bail, C. (ongoing). Social media and political dysfunction: A collaborative review. Unpublished manuscript,
New York University. https:/ /docs.google.com/document/d/1vVAtMCQnz8WVxtSNQev_e1cGmY9rnY96ecYuAj6C548/
editSocial Media and Political Dysfunction - Documentos de Google
312 Lorenz-Spreen, P., Oswald, L., Lewandowsky, S., and Hertwig, R. (2023). A systematic review of worldwide causal
and correlational evidence on digital media and democracy. Nature Human Behaviour, 7(1), 74–101. https:/ /doi.
org/10.1038/s41562-022-01460-1
313 Ibid.
314 Patberg, M. (2023). Digital transformation. Habermas and the new structural transformation of the public
sphere. RevDem. https:/ /revdem.ceu.edu/2023/02/02/digital-fragmentation-habermas-on-the-new-structural-
transformation-of-the-public-sphere/
315 Ibid.
316 The Washington Post (2023). What the Jan. 6 probe found out about social media, but didn’t report. https:/ /www.
washingtonpost.com/technology/2023/01/17/jan6-committee-report-social-media/
317 Future of Life Institute (2023). Pause Giant AI Experiments: An Open Letter - Future of Life Institute. https:/ /
futureoflife.org/open-letter/pause-giant-ai-experiments/
318 Gates, B. (2023). The Age of AI has begun. Gates Notes. https:/ /www.gatesnotes.com/The-Age-of-AI-Has-Begun
319 Center for AI Satefy. (2023). Statement on AI Risk. https:/ /www.safe.ai/statement-on-ai-risk
Roose, K. (2023). AI poses risk of extinction, industry leaders warn. New York Times. https:/ /www.nytimes.
com/2023/05/30/technology/ai-threat-warning.html
320 Harari, Y. (2023). On Threats to Humanity Posed by AI. New York Times. https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2023/03/24/
opinion/yuval-harari-ai-chatgpt.html
321 Ibid.
322 Habermas, J. (1962). The structural transformation of the public sphere: an inquiry into a category of bourgeois
society. MIT press.
323 Schaake, M. (2023). We need to keep CEOs away from AI regulation. FT. https:/ /www.ft.com/content/5f8b74f7-68b1-
4a6c-88bf-d0dd03579149
324 Bremmer, I. (2023). How the world must respond to the AI revolution. Time. https:/ /time.com/6283716/world-must-
respond-to-the-ai-revolution/
325 Ibid.
326 Ibid.
327 “But if Americans and Soviets could build a working arms control infrastructure in the 1970s and 80s, the U.S. and
China can build an equivalent for the 21st century. Let’s hope they realize they have no choice before a catastrophe
makes it unavoidably obvious.” Bremmer, I. (2023). How the world must respond to the AI revolution. Time. https:/ /
time.com/6283716/world-must-respond-to-the-ai-revolution/
328 Pearlstein, S. (2023). Here’s the Inside story of how Congress failed to rein on Big Tech” The Washington Post. https:/ /
www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/07/06/congress-facebook-google-amazon-apple-regulation-failure/
329 The US DoD requested a dialogue on the matter with the PLA, to promote transparency and risk reduction, but the
PLA has so far declined. Allen, G.C. (2022). One Key Challenge for Diplomacy on AI: China’s Military Does Not Want
to Talk. CSIS. https:/ /www.csis.org/analysis/one-key-challenge-diplomacy-ai-chinas-military-does-not-want-talk
330 Toner, H., Xiao, J., Ding, J. (2023). The Illusion of China’s AI prowess. Foreign Affairs. https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/
china/illusion-chinas-ai-prowess-regulation

===== PDF_PAGE 142 =====
133
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
331 Schwartz, W. (2023). The EU’s Digital Services Act Confronts Silicon Valley. Wilson Center. https:/ /www.wilsoncenter.
org/article/eus-digital-services-act-confronts-silicon-valley
332 Engler, A. (2023). The EU and U.S. diverge on AI regulation: A transatlantic comparison and steps to alignment.
Brookings. https:/ /www.brookings.edu/research/the-eu-and-us-diverge-on-ai-regulation-a-transatlantic-comparison-
and-steps-to-alignment/
333 Pearlstein, S. (2023). Here’s the Inside story of how Congress failed to rein on Big Tech. The Washington Post. https:/ /
www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/07/06/congress-facebook-google-amazon-apple-regulation-failure/
334 Cotton, T., Schatz, B., Murphy, C., and Britt, K.B. (2023). Protect kids on social media. The Washington Post. https:/ /
www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/05/11/social-media-cotton-schatz-murphy-britt/
335 Democracy and Internet Governance Initiative. (2023). Towards digital platforms and public purpose. Harvard
Kennedy School. https:/ /shorensteincenter.org/towards-digital-platforms-and-public-purpose/
336 Rozen, C. (2023). AI leaders are calling for more regulation of the Tech. Here’s what that may mean in the US. The
Washington Post. https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/business/2023/05/31/regulate-ai-here-s-what-that-might-mean-
in-the-us/770b9208-ffd0-11ed-9eb0-6c94dcb16fcf_story.html
Candelon, F., Di Carlo, R.C., De Bondt, M, and Evgeniou, T. (2023). AI regulation is coming. Harvard Business Review. AI
Regulation Is Coming (hbr.org)
337 Turner Lee, N.; and Malamud, J. (2022). Opportunities and blind spots in the White House’s blueprint for an AI Bill of
Rights. https:/ /www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2022/12/19/opportunities-and-blind-spots-in-the-white-houses-
blueprint-for-an-ai-bill-of-rights/
New York Times. (2023). Pressured by Biden, AI companies agree to guardrails on new tools. https:/ /www.nytimes.
com/2023/07/21/us/politics/ai-regulation-biden.html
338 Toner, H., Xiao, J., Ding, J. (2023). The Illusion of China’s AI prowess. Foreign Affairs. https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/
china/illusion-chinas-ai-prowess-regulation
339 Transatlantic relations have greatly improved since the arrival of the Biden Administration and the Russian invasion of
Ukraine, but domestic priorities, like the adoption of the IRA by the U.S., are generating turmoil in the relationship. A
Trump election in 2024 could turn the digital and AI transatlantic regulatory rift and the extensive Brussels effect on
U.S. companies into a serious bone of contention between the U.S. and the EU.
340 Future of Life Institute (2023). Pause Giant AI Experiments: An Open Letter - Future of Life Institute. https:/ /
futureoflife.org/open-letter/pause-giant-ai-experiments/
341 “The European Court of Justice annulled two previous agreements — Privacy Shield and a 2000 deal called Safe
Harbor — over fears of U.S. intelligence agencies’ snooping, exposed by Edward Snowden and others.” The European
Parliament has opposed the new pact, arguing it still allowed some bulk-collection of personal data and included
insufficient protections for Europeans’ privacy (but its opinion is non-binding). Politico. https:/ /www.politico.eu/
article/eu-signs-off-on-data-transfers-deal-with-us/
342 Stanley, T. (2015). Utopia and the Public sphere. Philarchive. https:/ /philarchive.org/archive/STAUAT
343 This paper follows the notion of digital public sphere as described by Archon Fung and Joshua Coen on Democratic
responsibility in the digital public sphere. Constellations. 30 March 2023. By “the digital public sphere,” we mean a
public sphere in which discussion about matters of potentially shared concern is shaped in part by communication on
online platforms (intermediaries that store users’ information and enable its public dissemination). Thus, the digital
public sphere is neither everything that happens online or on online platforms (much of which is not discussion of
matters of shared concern), nor is it only online. It is a public sphere in which communication on platforms plays an
important role in shaping public discussion.
344 Thus, it is also the way to empower those who face more barriers to the process of shaping public opinion, so their
voices can be heard, and their needs taken into account, when shaping public policies.
345 Stanley, T. (2015). Utopia and the Public sphere. Philarchive. https:/ /philarchive.org/archive/STAUAT
346 Habermas, J. (1972). Knowledge and human interests. Beacon Press.
347 This quote comes from a taped recording of Viktor Frankl from the 1970’s. https:/ /youtube/loay2imHq5E
348 While improvements to the rate of AI innovation have promise for expanding horizontal AI capabilities, the direction
of innovation highlights how some technological trajectories come to dominate. Policymakers can track these
trajectories and leverage them to organise social and democratic agency in a way that promotes desirable directions
of innovation and deters undesirable methods. Mazzucato, M., Schaake, M., Krier, S. and Entsminger, J. (2022).
Governing artificial intelligence in the public interest. UCL Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose, Working Paper
Series (IIPP WP 2020-12). https:/ /www.ucl.ac.uk/bartlett/public-purpose/wp2022-12
349 “Walker, there is no path to follow, you make the path by walking”. Machado, A. (1912). Campos de Castilla. Alianza
Editorial.
350 Schneier, B. and Sanders, N. (2023). AI could shore up democracy-Here’s one way: Schneier on Security. https:/ /www.
schneier.com/essays/archives/2023/06/ai-could-shore-up-democracy-heres-one-way.html

===== PDF_PAGE 143 =====
134
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
351 It will apply at the earliest in 2025. Mayer Brown (2023). The European Parliament reaches agreement on its version
of the proposed EU AI Act.: https:/ /www.mayerbrown.com/en/perspectives-events/publications/2023/06/european-
parliament-reaches-agreement-on-its-version-of-the-proposed--eu-artificial-intelligence-act
352 Pearlstein, S. (2023). Here’s the Inside story of how Congress failed to rein on Big Tech. The Washington Post. https:/ /
www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/07/06/congress-facebook-google-amazon-apple-regulation-failure/
Schaake, M. (2023). US regulatory action on the tech sector may come too late, or not al all. FT. https:/ /www.ft.com/
content/3892776e-ec6f-4551-947f-5aafd01e41b6
353 Clayton, J., and Cohn, G.D. (2023). The Microsoft-Activision Mess is a Blow to American Sovereignty. The New York
Times. https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2023/04/27/opinion/microsoft-activision-ftc-antitrust-grail-eu.html
354 Goujard, C. and Scott, M. (2023). EU hits Meta with record 1.2B€ privacy fine. POLITICO. https:/ /www.politico.eu/
article/eu-hits-meta-with-record-e1-2b-privacy-fine/
355 “The European Court of Justice annulled two previous agreements — Privacy Shield and a 2000 deal called Safe
Harbor — over fears of U.S. intelligence agencies’ snooping, exposed by Edward Snowden and others.” The European
Parliament has opposed the new pact, arguing it still allowed some bulk-collection of personal data and included
insufficient protections for Europeans’ privacy (but its opinion is non-binding).  Politico. https:/ /www.politico.eu/
article/eu-signs-off-on-data-transfers-deal-with-us/
356 Ibid.
357 Eaton, S., Fuchs, D., Triolo, P. (2022). The EU-US Trade and Technology Council reaches a crossroads. Internationale
Politik quarterly. https:/ /ip-quarterly.com/en/eu-us-trade-and-technology-council-reaches-crossroads
358 Donahoe, E., and Polyakova, A. (2021). Heal the Transatlantic Technology Policy Rift to Combat China’s Digital
Authoritarian Model. Stanford Cyber Policy Center. https:/ /cyber.fsi.stanford.edu/news/heal-transatlantic-technology-
policy-rift-combat-chinas-digital-authoritarian-model
359 This could happen, if innovative, creative proposals manage to gain bipartisan support. Harvard’s DIGI recently
published report on digital platforms and public purpose constitutes a very interesting proposal in this regard.
Democracy and Internet Governance Initiative. (2023). Towards digital platforms and public purposs. Harvard
Kennedy School. https:/ /shorensteincenter.org/towards-digital-platforms-and-public-purpose/
360 To be clear: regulation is not opposed to innovation. It may hinder or slow a certain kind of innovation, but foster
another one, socially more desirable. Democracies have the responsibility to steer innovation towards the common
good. The direction of innovation is crucial. Mazzucato, M., Schaake, M., Krier, S. and Entsminger, J. (2022). Governing
artificial intelligence in the public interest. UCL Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose, Working Paper Series
(IIPP WP 2020-12). https:/ /www.ucl.ac.uk/bartlett/public-purpose/wp2022-12
361 Schneier, B., Farrell, H., Sanders, N.E. (2023). How Artificial Intelligence can Aid Democracy. https:/ /slate.com/
technology/2023/04/ai-public-option.html
362 Public LLMs could also become explainers and educators (…), and facilitate radical democracy at scale, by managing
massive political conversations in chat rooms, on social networking sites, and elsewhere: identifying common
positions and summarizing them, surfacing unusual arguments that seem compelling to those who have heard them,
and keeping attacks and insults to a minimum (…). A.I. chatbots could run national electronic town hall meetings
and automatically summarize the perspectives of diverse participants (…).Looking further into the future, these
technologies could help groups reach consensus and make decisions (…).Schneier, B., Farrell, H., Sanders, N.E. (2023).
How Artificial Intelligence can Aid Democracy. https:/ /slate.com/technology/2023/04/ai-public-option.html
363 Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press.
The Knight Commission on Trust, Media and Democracy. (2019). Crisis in Democracy: Renewing Trust in America.
Knight Foundation. https:/ /knightfoundation.org/reports/crisis-in-democracy-renewing-trust-in-america/
364 UNESCO (2023). Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. https:/ /www.unesco.org/en/artificial-intelligence/recommendation-
ethics
365 Future of Life Institute (2023). Pause Giant AI Experiments: An Open Letter - Future of Life Institute. https:/ /
futureoflife.org/open-letter/pause-giant-ai-experiments/
366 Tufekci, Zeynup (17 February 2010). The corporation of social commons. https:/ /technosociology.org/?p=102
367 Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press.
368 Ovayda, A. (2021). Towards platform democracy: policymaking beyond corporate CEOs and partisan pressure. Belfer
Center for Science and International Affairs. Harvard Kennedy School. https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/publication/
towards-platform-democracy-policymaking-beyond-corporate-ceos-and-partisan-pressure
369 Ibid.
370 Ibid.
371 Ibid.
372 Pariser, E. (2022). Musk’s Twitter Will Not Be the Town Square the World Needs. Wired. https:/ /www.wired.com/story/
elon-musk-twitter-town-square/

===== PDF_PAGE 144 =====
135
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
373 It gained a lot of international media attention on the occasion of a petition urging the U.S. government to create a
‘Death Star’ as an economic stimulus (this does not seem to be the reason for the webpage no longer being active).
https:/ /elpais.com/elpais/2013/01/12/gente/1357980653_284794.html
374 Schneier, B., Farrell, H., and Sanders, N.E. (2023). How Artificial Intelligence Can Aid Democracy. Slate. https:/ /slate.
com/technology/2023/04/ai-public-option.html
375 Pethokoukis, J. (2018). ‘Why we should have a public option version of Google and Facebook’. AEI. Available at:
https:/ /www.aei.org/economics/why-we-should-have-a-public-option-version-of-google-and-facebook/
Schaake, M. (2023). ‘Tech lay-offs are a golden opportunity for the public sector’. FT. Available at: https:/ /www.
ft.com/content/28a22e7a-9ac7-4814-ad0f-aba5426fe388
376 McConnell, M.W. (2023). ‘Why are government social media takedown secret? Make them public’. The Washington
Post. Available at: https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/07/07/government-social-media-takedown-
requests-public/
377 NASA’s success in bringing humankind to the moon being a case in point. The political organization of modern liberal
democracies itself is a much larger prowess than engineering a digital platform.
378 Meta has recently been fined by the Irish Data Protection Commission with a record 1,2 billion euro fine for not
complying with the EU GDPR. This means that its practices in violation of EU citizens privacy rights have continued
despite the existence of a regulatory framework. TikTok is suspected to be or potentially become a tool of digital
surveillance of the PRC, and there is an ongoing debate on the appropriate response by the US. The US has banned
the use of TikTok by some federal employees and the EU has done the same across its three main institutions
(Commission, Council and Parliament). Montana has banned TikTok last May, and TikTok has sued back, arguing that
the ban is unconstitutional. The protections granted by the First Amendment of the US Constitution may complicate
this or wider bans.
379 Most information nowadays flows through the Internet, which is as useful as it is chaotic. Gatekeepers find their
added value in organizing information and activities in single platforms or points of entry. Most citizens browse to
the fastest and most credited search engines, the largest e-commerce platforms, and the largest and most interactive
social media, for their daily activities in the web. This reality is why some successful tech companies have evolved
into Big Tech. They have become massive digital hubs. One service of Big Tech, though, has proven to be especially
problematic. This is the case of social media. Governments can facilitate the creation of large-scale civic digital hubs.
380 Tufekci, Zeynup (17 February 2010). The corporation of social commons. https:/ /technosociology.org/?p=102 .
Coyle, D. (2018). We need a publicly funded rival to Facebook and Google. FT. https:/ /www.ft.com/content/d56744a0-
835c-11e8-9199-c2a4754b5a0e
381 Few countries have the capacities necessary to build such digital platforms within their own bureaucracies or
agencies. Administrations, though, could outsource the technological development of the platforms to foundations
or non-profits through public tenders. Given the economies of scale that operate in digital platforms, in many cases
these could better work at supra-national level. The U.S., for instance, would find little problem to develop its own
PCPs, given its size, capacities and resources. In Europe, though, the exercise might be better coordinated at EU
level. The procurement and development of PCPs would most likely be the smallest challenge. Absent an ad revenue
and an attention-extraction system, the software of a digital platform should be simpler than the market models.
The main objectives would be to ensure an adequate user experience and all required cybersecurity protocols,
particularly with regards to the ID verification systems.
382 Patberg, M. (2023). Digital transformation. Habermas and the new structural transformation of the public
sphere. RevDem. https:/ /revdem.ceu.edu/2023/02/02/digital-fragmentation-habermas-on-the-new-structural-
transformation-of-the-public-sphere/
383 Cui, W. (2018). The Digital Services Tax: A conceptual defense. University of British Columbia. SSRN. https:/ /papers.
ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3273641
Coyle, D. (2018). We need a publicly funded rival to Facebook and Google. FT. https:/ /www.ft.com/content/d56744a0-
835c-11e8-9199-c2a4754b5a0e
Milne, C. (2020). Public option social media. Medium. https:/ /medium.com/@milne_christopher/public-option-social-
media-d14b5433b579
384 This could happen, first at local level.
385 The DCCs to be constituted would proactively develop the role of broadcasters, community organizers, institutions
and mediators within PCPs. DCCs would bring in the institutional and human dimension at scale (The role of DCCs
will be further analyzed in the next chapter).
386 The EU is already working on a European Digital Identity. https:/ /commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/
priorities-2019-2024/europe-fit-digital-age/european-digital-identity_en
387 Legal provisions and democratic and judicial oversight would cement trust on the model.
This would make PCPs safer and less prone to hacking than other digital media, as they would have a relatively small
amount of data to protect. It would also make them much more economic than mainstream digital platforms, as the
bulk of the engineering and operations of Big Tech social media is focused on the attention-extraction system and
revenue model. Public services depend on adequate government funding, not on attracting citizens’ attention, and
PCPs would essentially be a public service. As happens with other services, the public option can be more economic.
As mentioned, it could be funded by taxes or by digital service taxes (DSTs) imposed on large for-profit platforms.

===== PDF_PAGE 145 =====
136
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
388 Petri, A. (2023). ‘Not another social media network!’. The Washington Post. https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/
opinions/2023/07/12/twitter-threads-social-media-nightmare-apocalypse-satire/
389 If this redirection was established, citizens would have two ways to access PCPs: either directly, or as a result of a
redirection from social media platforms.
390 From the perspective of social media, PCPs would work as ‘bad banks’ of problematic or sensitive political
information and discussions, which they cannot effectively manage.
The application of open, decentralized, social networking protocols, such as ActivityPub, could facilitate this.
391 Venkataraman, B. (2023). A better kind of social media is possible – if we want it. The Washington Post. https:/ /www.
washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/03/06/social-media-future-regulation-imagination/
392 DeJohn, S. (2017). Beyond Protest: Examining the Decide Madrid Platform for Public Engagement. TheGovLab.
https:/ /blog.thegovlab.org/post/beyond-protest-examining-the-decide-madrid-platform-for-public-engagement
393 Centre for Public Impact (2016). Building world-beating e-government in South Korea. https:/ /www.
centreforpublicimpact.org/case-study/building-a-world-leading-e-government
394 Courant, D. (2021). Citizens’ Assemblies for Referendums and Constitutional Reforms: Is There an “Irish Model” for
Deliberative Democracy? Frontiers in Political Science, 2. https:/ /doi.org/10.3389/fpos.2020.591983
395 Participedia: EuroPolis: Deliberative Polling on the EU. https:/ /participedia.net/case/4136
396 EuroPolis. A deliberative polity-making project. https:/ /cordis.europa.eu/project/id/225314/fr
397 Fishkin, J.S., Luskin, R.C., Siu, A. Europolis and the European Public sphere: empirical explorations of a counterfactual
ideal. EUP. https:/ /drive.google.com/file/d/1DmQBI2yTKiONaRiID0EsGPMNzJCi-xGT/view?pli=1
398 Wolf, M., & ProQuest. (2023). The crisis of democratic capitalism. Penguin Press.
399 The Knight Commission on Trust, Media and Democracy. (2019). Crisis in Democracy: Renewing Trust in America.
Knight Foundation. https:/ /knightfoundation.org/reports/crisis-in-democracy-renewing-trust-in-america/
400 CNN (2023). “We do not know how to control these things” Geoffrey Hinton, often called the ‘godfather’ of Artificial
Intelligence, is now warning about its…” Facebook. https:/ /www.facebook.com/watch/?v=573499221277846
401 As has been repeatedly stated, the technology is not the problem, its governance is. Ensuring an adequate
democratic governance is the key problem to solve.
402 Aside from trust, a central issue would be to achieve citizen’s involvement. The zeitgeist of the 2020’s may not
be anymore to ‘move fast and break things’, but citizen’s mental frameworks are still often attached to short, fast
bits of entertainment and polarizing emotions. Therein lies to a big extent the success of TikTok. Moving towards a
system that aims to ‘move slow and build trust’ will be a daunting endeavor. It could be possible, if PCPs, aside from
providing civic functionality, also do so in an easy, accessible, pedagogic way. PCPs cannot and should not compete
with social media on ‘entertainment’, but engagement in these platforms needs to be extremely accessible.
403 Venkataraman, B. (2023). A better kind of social media is possible – if we want it. The Washington Post. https:/ /www.
washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/03/06/social-media-future-regulation-imagination/
404 The social media ownership -and often their CEOs- are the basic gatekeepers of social platforms. CEOs have
the latest word in organizing the inner governance of the platforms, deciding the format of publishing by users,
establishing certain limits and -eventually- enforcing them, in the knowledge that they face -in the US and most of
the world- little to zero accountability, as they are protected by Section 230 of the US Telecommunications Act. The
inner governance structure of social media is too loose and ineffective.
405 McConnell, M.W. (2023). Why are government social media takedown secret? Make them public. The Washington
Post. https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/07/07/government-social-media-takedown-requests-public/
Urban, D. (2022). Government-hosted social media-how to avoid First Amendment claims. LCW. https:/ /www.lcwlegal.
com/news/government-hosted-social-media-how-to-avoid-first-amendment-claims/
Considerations on the First Amendment have historically affected most debates on media regulation in the U.S. The
committee that ‘redefined freedom of the press’ and produced the 1947 Hutchins report had it in mind during its
deliberations. As explained by Stephen Bates, the committee ended up ‘reconceiving’ the First Amendment: “they
decided that, properly interpreted, ‘Congress shall make no law… abridging the freedom of speech’ sometimes means
‘Congress shall make law enhancing the freedom of speech”. Bates, S. (2020). An aristocracy of critics. Luce, Hutchins,
Niebhur, and the committee that redefined freedom of the press. Yale University Press.
406 Ibid.
407 Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2023). Democratic responsibility in the digital public sphere. Constellations (Oxford, England),
30(1), 92–97. https:/ /doi.org/10.1111/1467-8675.12670
408 Only well-regulated, independent public broadcasters, that comply with the standards adopted by the IACAID, could
fulfil this role. Public broadcasters of backsliding democracies or anocracies would most likely not qualify.
Major media outlets can provide news but, to remain profitable in a very competitive market, such as cable TV, they cannot
avoid caring about ratings. This means that private media corporations need the news to be either entertaining or -in
the worst cases- tailored to the political preferences of their ‘customers’. Public broadcasters must not compromise
their standards to report effectively, they must just abide by the law, their statutes, and apply the ethical norms and
principles of independent journalism.

===== PDF_PAGE 146 =====
137
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
409 “Obtaining reliable information in the digital public sphere may thus require considerable effort to distinguish reliable
and instructive information from propaganda, screeds, and bullshit.” Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology
and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press. “The responsibility for vigilance in policing the supply of news
is easiest to see for platforms like Apple News that are both formally and functionally in the news business. Formally,
because they are in the business of curating content, thus certifying to users that they are concerned with veracity in
the sources they provide access to. Functionally, because they drive very substantial traffic to professional journalism.”
Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press. Informative
DCCs would assume the responsibility of vigilance within PCPs.
410 Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press.
411 Ibid.
412 The 1947 Hutchins report could be a model for the U.S. Information on the Hutchins committee and report can be
found in: Bates, S. (2020). An aristocracy of critics. Luce, Hutchins, Niebhur, and the committee that redefined
freedom of the press. Yale University Press. “The responsibility for vigilance in policing the supply of news is easiest to
see for platforms like Apple News that are both formally and functionally in the news business. Formally, because they
are in the business of curating content, thus certifying to users that they are concerned with veracity in the sources
they provide access to. Functionally, because they drive very substantial traffic to professional journalism.” Cohen, J.,
& Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press. Informative DCCs would
assume the responsibility of vigilance within PCPs.
413 Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press.
414 If partnerships under the guidance of public broadcasters could not ensure an adequate structure of inner
coordination within DCCs, participating media could agree on alternative mechanisms, such as rotational
chairpersonships or lotteries.
415 The Knight Commission on Trust, Media and Democracy. (2019). Crisis in Democracy: Renewing Trust in America.
Knight Foundation. https:/ /knightfoundation.org/reports/crisis-in-democracy-renewing-trust-in-america/
416 Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press.
417 Collaboration between competing media outlets could seem unworkable, but this model aims to provide a system of
incentives that could make it possible within PCPs: a public financing contribution to journalism that complies with
well-accepted norms and standards. Media outlets would still compete amongst each other ‘out in the market’, but
they could find incentives to develop a measure of collaboration within PCPs: the public service perspective should
enable this cooperation.
418 It can be questioned whether it is necessary to make any efforts to mobilize media, journalists and academia to
establish a complex system to ensure the provision of trustworthy information to society within digital safe havens,
when the development of generative tools such as GPT4 -and future systems to come- might soon make these
human organizations and processes obsolete. Why, rely on the human and fallible job of journalism, when AI systems
can provide us all the information we need, instantly? If the absolutely essential role of informing a society is fully
outsourced to AI systems -and those who own them and control them-, what is to be expected of humanity’s
empowerment and freedom? The issue is philosophically profound, but it must be emphasized that an essential
component of democratic rule is ensuring an equal distribution of political power amongst citizens. The usurpation of
citizen’s power by foreign regimes, single parties, economic monopolies, or machines, is intolerable for democracies.
Keeping human control of information and AI is absolutely essential, and it is necessary to maintain and support the
institution of human independent journalism, which for centuries has allowed democracy to grow and flourish, even if
it has a financial cost. The alternative, which might mean the disappearance of independent journalism as we know it,
might make short-term financial sense, but the economic, social, cultural and human costs would be unbearable.
419 Many countries have Associations or Coordinating Platforms of CSOs. One example of such organizations is
“Coordinadora de ONGDs”, a platform to coordinate NGOs focused on development in Spain. La Coordinadora de
Organizaciones Para el Desarrollo (2023). Qué hacemos. https:/ /coordinadoraongd.org/nuestro-trabajo/
420 As with media, collaboration between a broad spectrum of often competing CSOs, unions, cooperatives, charities,
etc, can seem challenging. However, as was explained, this model aims to provide a system of incentives that could
make it possible within PCPs: a public financing contribution to communities that facilitate civic engagement could
be considered (numerous CSOs already receive public funds, given the social and ecological value of their work).
Aside from this, for many organizations, an access to a large public platform and the visibility it could provide would
already represent an incentive, together with the possibility of promoting coalitions and alliances to further their civic
goals. The public service perspective should enable this cooperation.
421 Sortition was a core practice of Athenian democracy. The institution of the jury brought it into contemporary
administration of justice. Tocqueville mentioned the importance of the jury as a way for people to act as responsible
citizens in his study of American democracy.
422 In the same way as track 1 DCCs, track 2 DCCs would organize themselves internally with great autonomy, with
the only limitation of having to abide by the general framework of governance and code of conduct approved by
the IACAID and the laws and rules applicable in the different countries. PCPs, with the assistance of their LLMs,
could help Deliberative DCCs organize their own structure of internal deliberation and decision making. DCCs could
form their own platforms for internal coordination within PCPs -possible through DAOs-, choosing the model of
governance that would suit them best.

===== PDF_PAGE 147 =====
138
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
423 Hawken, P. (2007). Blessed unrest : how the largest movement in the world came into being and why no one saw it
coming. Viking.
424 Earth Day, for instance, would not mobilize millions of citizens worldwide every year if it was not for the impulse
provided by CSOs and community leaders and organizers. It might have not been a success in the first place, if the
year when it started, in 1970, it had not been supported by non-environmentally focused partners, such as the United
Auto Workers (UAW).
425 Academia and CSOs usually have adequate expertise to organize collective deliberations, yet they may lack the
incentives or capacities to do so systematically and at large scale. Gathering citizen’s attention and support to better
pursue their goals would be one important incentive. Governments, in consultation with CSOs, could consider others.
Shortage of capacities can be compensated through adequate training: academia could rely on the work of students
and include their participation in DCCs as part of their curriculum. CSOs could rely on the work of volunteers.
426 Patberg, M. (2023). Digital transformation. Habermas and the new structural transformation of the public
sphere. RevDem. https:/ /revdem.ceu.edu/2023/02/02/digital-fragmentation-habermas-on-the-new-structural-
transformation-of-the-public-sphere/
427 If collective deliberations resulted on the adoption of concrete policy proposals, Deliberative DCCs would pass the
baton to Facilitating DCCs, established to assist citizens to participate in democratic processes, under ‘track 3’ of the
PCP system. If collective deliberations resulted on disputes or conflicts, Deliberative DCCs would pass the baton to
Mediating DCCs, established for dispute setting and conflict resolution, under ‘track 4’ of the PCP system.
428 Schneier, B. (2023). AI could shore up democracy; Here’s one way. Schneier on Security. https:/ /www.schneier.com/
essays/archives/2023/06/ai-could-shore-up-democracy-heres-one-way.html
429 Schneier, B., Farrell, H., and Sanders, N.E. (2023). How Artificial Intelligence Can Aid Democracy. Slate. https:/ /slate.
com/technology/2023/04/ai-public-option.html
Venkataraman, B. (2023). A better kind of social media is possible – if we want it. The Washington Post. https:/ /www.
washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/03/06/social-media-future-regulation-imagination/
430 Patberg, M. (2023). Digital transformation. Habermas and the new structural transformation of the public
sphere. RevDem. https:/ /revdem.ceu.edu/2023/02/02/digital-fragmentation-habermas-on-the-new-structural-
transformation-of-the-public-sphere/
431 Internet companies should help users behave as citizens by designing their platforms to foster participants’
democratic orientation. Platforms themselves can take responsibility for enhancing digital literacy by more explicitly
recognizing that some sources are negligent about truth, by spreading habits of checking, and by encouraging users
to encounter diverse perspectives. But design is not enough; we will also need bottom- up efforts that elicit the
right kind of engagement and content generation from users.” Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and
democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press. Deliberative DCCs, assisted by LLMs, would help ‘users behave as
citizens’ by providing guidance and moderation within PCPs.
432 “[A] pure democracy, by which I mean a society consisting of a small number of citizens, who assemble and
administer the government in person, can admit no cure for the mischiefs of faction.” Madison. Federalist No. 10.
433 The development of track 2 DCCs would not undermine the authority of the bodies of representative democracy.
These would retain all their constitutional and legal prerogatives; in the same way they have done since the creation
of social media. Deliberative DCCs could inform their institutional deliberations and assist them constructively, in
a way that social media cannot do. Democratic representatives could work in a more civic and better-informed
environment than they do now, if citizens moved at least a significant part of their digital conversation, the one that
concerns matters of common interest, to PCPs.
434 Another set of deliberations could refer to the development and regulation of digital technologies, and particularly
generative AI and AR/VR systems. Global health and nutrition, poverty, migrations, the protection of biodiversity, etc,
could all be systematically debated within PCPs.
435 The social media dimension of the January 6th insurrection in the US, or the more recent one in Brazil, should act as
reminders. Rather than allowing the risks of this system to continue growing through the development of increasingly
powerful AI, democracies could create PCPs and empower their civil societies to recover control of their data,
thoughts and conversations.
436 The most striking case is the US, where some limitations are being established at the state level. Eg: about
900.000 Floridians with felony convictions remain unable to vote because of unpaid court fines or fees. Mower,
L. (2022) “Florida leads nation in voter disenfranchisement, criminal justice group says”. Tampa Bay Times. Times
Publishing Company.
Track 3 DCCs could assist voters that may face difficulties to vote, by keeping them well informed of their rights and
the procedures they need to comply with through a reliable channel of communication.
437 One of the main exceptions is sometimes the institution of the referendum, which can be problematic in its
conception -as there is often only a binary choice presented to the public-, but especially in its application -due to
informational distortions and a lack of appropriate deliberation-. The Brexit referendum being a notorious example,
but also other major referenda in large EU countries, such as the French referendum on the European Constitution of
2005.

===== PDF_PAGE 148 =====
139
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
438 Tang, A. (2022). What the World Can Learn from Taiwan’s Digital Democracy. Wired. https:/ /www.wired.co.uk/article/
global-neighbourhoods-digital-democracy
439 Robbins, S. (2022). Let’s Stop Calling Taiwan a Digital Democracy (and Start Telling Better Digital Stories). Taiwan
Insight: The online magazine of the Taiwan Studies Programme, University of Nottingham. https:/ /taiwaninsight.
org/2022/05/12/lets-stop-calling-taiwan-a-digital-democracy-and-start-telling-better-digital-stories/
440 This assembly in Ireland was formed by one hundred people, made up of one appointed chairperson and ninety-
nine ordinary citizens chosen by lot. The reason why this example is mentioned under track 3 DCCs, and not under
track 2 DCCs, is that Ireland had the initiative to create this body to advise on an issue and committed itself to study
the advice. Under the PCP model, track 2 DCCs are owned by civil society entirely and public institutions may or
may not follow the advice. Track 3 DCCs, though, are led by public institutions, which implies a much higher level of
commitment to their deliberations and proposals.
441 For example minors, citizens with disabilities, crime victims, unemployed, minorities, refugees, migrants, homeless,
elders, citizens with health problems, including mental health issues and facing addictions, uneducated or illiterate
citizens, etc. Navigating the Internet and accessing the right governments’ and institutions’ websites and digital tools
can often be too complicated and burdensome, particularly for more vulnerable sectors of society.
442 Estonia would be a leading example in this field: https:/ /e-estonia.com/
443 As a public service, institutional communication could flow directly to citizens through track 3 DCCs, but also with the
mediation of public broadcasters and media through track 1 DCCs. PCPs would hence become important instruments
to enhance democracies resilience in face of unexpected or extreme challenges.
444 The model of the ICRC could be helpful to develop an adequate framework for track 4 DCCs.
445 Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2023). Democratic responsibility in the digital public sphere. Constellations (Oxford, England),
30(1), 92–97. https:/ /doi.org/10.1111/1467-8675.12670
446 Yu, L., Qiao, J., Ming, W.-K., & Wu, Y. (2023). Megastudies: A New Approach to Reducing Vaccine Hesitation
Worldwide. Vaccines (Basel), 11(1), 133. https:/ /doi.org/10.3390/vaccines11010133
447 De Witte, M. (2022). How to strengthen democracy, according to a new mega-study. Phys.Org. https:/ /phys.org/
news/2022-08-democracy-mega-study.html
448 PBS (2023). Understanding America’s partisan divide and how to fix it. PBS. https:/ /www.pbs.org/video/america-at-
a-crossroads-1685565513/
449 The Knight Commission on Trust, Media and Democracy. (2019). Crisis in Democracy: Renewing Trust in America.
Knight Foundation. https:/ /knightfoundation.org/reports/crisis-in-democracy-renewing-trust-in-america/
450 Coleman, P.T. (2021). The way out: how to overcome toxic polarization. Columbia University Press.
451 “Even with more high- quality information and broadly improved access, the digital public sphere will never generate
convergence on the truth or broadly agreed- on facts, evidentiary standards, and reasonable perspectives. But
convergence is an unreasonable expectation.” Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory.
The University of Chicago Press.
452 Disputes could involve radicalized individuals. DCCs would need to distinguish situations and organize the process
of dialogue as is required. Citizens with extreme views or patterns of behavior could be offered adequate guidance
for rehabilitation and social integration. In many cases, undetected cases of mental illness can hide behind. Track 4
processes could help detect such cases, to be able to react accordingly.
453 Verdi, G. (2022). The Case for an EU AI Agency. European Digital SME Alliance. https:/ /www.digitalsme.eu/the-case-
for-an-eu-ai-agency/
Wheeler, T. (2023). Artificial Intelligence is another reason for a new digital agency. Brookings. https:/ /www.brookings.
edu/blog/techtank/2023/04/28/artificial-intelligence-is-another-reason-for-a-new-digital-agency/
454 If created, the IACAID could have a broader mandate than the promotion and oversight of the PCP-DCC process. The
AI4D system could facilitate any kind of cooperation on AI and digital technologies between democracies.
455 There would certainly be many challenges to face. Amongst others, as was mentioned before, the fact that
democratic backsliding has already eroded democracy in two EU Member States: Hungary and Poland. The system,
though, could first be gradually implemented within a small group of volunteering countries. It could also include
opt-out clauses for those who do not want to participate or who lack the conditions to do so.
456 OECD AI Policy Observatory (2023). International co-operation for trustworthy AI (Principle 2.5). https:/ /oecd.ai/en/
dashboards/ai-principles/P14
457 Fundación Carolina (2021). Latinobarómetro 2021 y el “momento de la verdad” para la democracia. https:/ /www.
fundacioncarolina.es/latinobarometro-2021-y-el-momento-de-la-verdad-para-la-democracia/
458 For instance, as was analyzed in the paper, Putin did not invade Ukraine only or mainly as a response to its future
potential accession into NATO, and the hypothetical military threat to Russia that this could suppose, but as a
consequence of the ideological threat that a democratic and western-oriented Ukraine would represent for his regime
and for Russian nationalism. Ukrainian domestic politics and its willingness to move towards the West, coupled with
Russian autocratic nationalism, are at the core of the current war. Conversely, the West is supporting Ukraine to
protect European security, democracy, the principles of the UN Charter and the liberal world order. Domestic and
geopolitical factors are intertwined.

===== PDF_PAGE 149 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 150 =====
141
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Bibliography
Abecassis, A., Alexander, D., Burns, N., Ashbrook, C.C., Howorth, J., Kaiser, K., Renedo, A., Rickets, P. and Sloat, A. (2020).
Impacts of Brexit on the UK, EU, and the World. Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. Available at:
https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/publication/impacts-brexit-uk-eu-and-world
Abrams, E. (2022). “The New Cold War”. Council on Foreign Relations. Available at: https:/ /www.cfr.org/blog/new-cold-
war-0
Allen, G.C. (2022). “One Key Challenge for Diplomacy on AI: China’s Military Does Not Want to Talk”, CSIS. Available at:
https:/ /www.csis.org/analysis/one-key-challenge-diplomacy-ai-chinas-military-does-not-want-talk
Allison, G. (2023). Can two great powers cooperate to build a safer world? It has happened before. Available at: https:/ /
www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/06/14/china-war-taiwan-partnership/
Allison, G. (2023). US-China Relations: An Interview with Graham Allison. Belfer Center. Available: https:/ /www.belfercenter.
org/publication/us-china-relations-interview-graham-allison
Allison, G. (2017). “Graham Allison: Avoiding A Sino-American War”, Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs.
Available at: https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/publication/graham-allison-avoiding-sino-american-war
Andersen, R. (2020). “China’s Artificial Intelligence Surveillance State Goes Global”, The Atlantic. Available at: https:/ /www.
theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2020/09/china-ai-surveillance/614197/
Applebaum, A. (2022). THERE IS NO LIBERAL WORLD ORDER: Unless democracies defend themselves, the forces of au-
tocracy will destroy them. Available at: https:/ /www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2022/05/autocracy-could-de-
stroy-democracy-russia-ukraine/629363/
Applebaum, A. (2021). ‘The Bad Guys Are Winning’. The Atlantic. Available at: https:/ /www.theatlantic.com/magazine/ar-
chive/2021/12/the-autocrats-are-winning/620526/
Associated Press (2023). Putin tells WWII event West is waging a ‘real war’ on Russia. Available at: https:/ /apnews.com/
article/russia-ukraine-war-parade-victory-day-3bc68ae74f7343d679bbb05ab3aec98d
Associated Press (2023). What to know about Russia’s Wagner mercenaries as they threaten to leave Ukraine’s front line.
PBS News Hour. Available at: https:/ /www.pbs.org/newshour/politics/what-to-know-about-russias-wagner-mercenar-
ies-as-they-threaten-to-leave-ukraines-front-line
Baker, P., & Sanger, D. E. (2023). Biden Sees Coming ‘Thaw’ With China, Even as He Rallies Allies Against Beijing. The New
York Times. Available at: https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2023/05/22/us/politics/biden-china-g7.html
Ball, J. (2020). The real story of Cambridge Analytica and Brexit, The Spectator. Available at: https:/ /www.spectator.co.uk/
article/were-there-any-links-between-cambridge-analytica-russia-and-brexit/?zephr_sso_ott=WbIwV8
Baron, M. (2023). “The truth is always necessary. But ‘objectivity’ is a trap”, The Washington Post. Available at: https:/ /
www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/03/24/journalism-objectivity-trump-misinformation-marty-baron/
Barrett, B. (2018). “DNC Lawsuit Against Russia Reveals New Details About 2016 Hack, Wired. Available at: https:/ /www.
wired.com/story/dnc-lawsuit-reveals-key-details-2016-hack/
Baschuk, B. (2022). What ‘Friend-Shoring’ Means for Trade in a Less-Friendly World. The Washington Post. Avail-
able at: https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/business/what-friend-shoringmeans-for-trade-in-a-less-friendly-
world/2022/12/06/539fc8e6-75a8-11ed-a199-927b334b939f_story.html

===== PDF_PAGE 151 =====
142
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Baunov, A. (2023). Russia, “The West” and Germany - Taking stock and looking ahead. Carnegie Endowment for Interna-
tional Peace. Available at: https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/politika/89905
Beaumont, P. (2023). The invasion of Iraq was a turning point on to a path that led towards Ukraine. The Guardian. Avail-
able at: https:/ /www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2023/mar/19/2003-iraq-invasion-legacy-west-internation-
al-law-ukraine
Bhalla, J. (2016). “Adam Smith Was A Behavioral Economist And No Fan of Greed”, Big Think. Available at: https:/ /bigthink.
com/culture-religion/adam-smith-was-a-behavioral-economist-and-no-fan-of-greed/#:~:text=Adam%20Smith%20
hated%20greed.,Smith%20called%20his%20best%20work.&text=Adam%20Smith%20was%20no%20fan%20of%20
greed
Borrell, J. (2022). EU Ambassadors Annual Conference 2022: Opening speech by High Representative Josep Borrell.
Available at: https:/ /www.eeas.europa.eu/eeas/eu-ambassadors-annual-conference-2022-opening-speech-high-rep-
resentative-josep-borrell_en
Bouie, J. (2023). “Marjorie Taylor Greene Has a Dream”, New York Times. Available at: https:/ /www.nytimes.
com/2023/02/24/opinion/marjorie-taylor-greene-national-divorce.html
Bradford, A. (2020). “When it comes to power, Europe is no fading power”, Foreign Affairs. Available at: https:/ /www.
foreignaffairs.com/articles/europe/2020-02-03/when-it-comes-markets-europe-no-fading-power .
Bremmer, I. (2023). ‘How the world must respond to the AI revolution’. Time. Available at: https:/ /time.com/6283716/world-
must-respond-to-the-ai-revolution/
Bremmer, I. (2023). The Next Global Superpower Isn’t Who You Think. Foreign Policy. Available at: https:/ /foreignpolicy.
com/2023/06/17/china-russia-us-multipolar-world-technology/
Bremmer I. and Roubini, N. (2011). A G-Zero World: The New Economic Club Will Produce Conflict, Not Cooperation. Avail-
able at: https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/world/g-zero-world
Brenan, M. (2022). “Americans’ Trust In Media Remains Near Record Low”, Gallup. Available at: https:/ /news.gallup.com/
poll/403166/americans-trust-media-remains-near-record-low.aspx
Brooks, D. (2022). This is Why Autocracies Fail. New York Times. Available at: https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2022/03/17/opin-
ion/why-autocracies-fail.html
Brown, H., Guskin, E., and Mitchell, A. (2012). The Role of Social Media in the Arab Uprisings. Pew Research Center. Avail-
able at: https:/ /www.pewresearch.org/journalism/2012/11/28/role-social-media-arab-uprisings/
Brown, K. (2020). FACE-TIME: BUILDING TRUST IN INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS. USC Center on Public Diplomacy. Available
at: https:/ /uscpublicdiplomacy.org/blog/face-time-building-trust-international-affairs
Bunn, M. (2022). Pathways to Disaster: How Might a Nuclear War Start? Available at: https:/ /scholar.harvard.edu/files/mat-
thew_bunn/files/pathwaystodisaster-2022.pdf
Camacho, G. (2022). The connections between corruption, autocracy and human rights in Latin America. Transparency
International. Available at: https:/ /knowledgehub.transparency.org/assets/uploads/kproducts/Connections-be-
tween-corruption-autocracy-and-human-rights-in-Latin-America_Final.pdf
Cameron, C. (2023). The attack on Brazil’s seat of government resembles the storming of the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021.
The New York Times. Available at: https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2023/01/08/world/americas/brazil-jan-6-riots.html
Cambridge Dictionary (2023). Trust. Available at: https:/ /dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/trust

===== PDF_PAGE 152 =====
143
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Campbell, C. (2023). “U.S. General’s Prediction of War With China ‘in 2025’ Risks Turning Worst Fears Into Reality”, Time.
Available at: https:/ /time.com/6251419/us-china-general-war-2025/
Cancian, M.F., Cancian, M., and Heginbotham, E. (2023). “The First Battle of the Next War: Wargaming a Chinese Invasion
of Taiwan”, Center for Strategic and International Studies. Available at: https:/ /www.csis.org/analysis/first-bat-
tle-next-war-wargaming-chinese-invasion-taiwan
Candelon, F., Di Carlo, R.C., De Bondt, M, and Evgeniou, T. (2023). “AI regulation is coming”. Harvard Business Review.
Available at: AI Regulation Is Coming (hbr.org)
Center for AI Satefy. (2023). Statement on AI Risk. Available at: https:/ /www.safe.ai/statement-on-ai-risk
Centre for Public Impact (2016). Building world-beating e-government in South Korea. Available at: https:/ /www.centrefor-
publicimpact.org/case-study/building-a-world-leading-e-government
CGTN (2021). A reality check: The lighthouse of democracy dies down. Available at: https:/ /news.cgtn.com/news/2021-12-
10/A-reality-check-The-lighthouse-of-democracy-dies-down-15SeM1af1Nm/index.html
Chang Leong, Y., Chen, J., Zaki, J., and Willer, R. (2020). “Conservative and Liberal Attitudes Drive Polarised Neural Re-
sponses to Political Content”, PNAS. Available at: https:/ /www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.2008530117
Chivvis, C. (2017). Understanding Russian “Hybrid Warfare” And What Can Be Done About it. RAND Corporation. Available
at: https:/ /www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/testimonies/CT400/CT468/RAND_CT468.pdf
Clayton, J., and Cohn, G.D. (2023). “The Microsoft-Activision Mess is a Blow to American Sovereignty”. The New York
Times. Available at: https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2023/04/27/opinion/microsoft-activision-ftc-antitrust-grail-eu.html
CNN (2023). “We do not know how to control these things” Geoffrey Hinton, often called the ‘godfather’ of Artificial Intelli-
gence, is now warning about its…” Facebook. Available at: https:/ /www.facebook.com/watch/?v=573499221277846
Coleman, P.T. (2022). “Can We Trust the Arbiters of Our Trust?”, Medium. Available at: https:/ /pc84.medium.com/can-we-
trust-the-arbiters-of-our-trust-9cae888128d9
Coleman, P.T. (2021). The way out. How to overcome toxic polarization. Columbia University Press.
Confessore, N. (2018). Cambridge Analytica and Facebook: The Scandal and the Fallout So Far. Available at: https:/ /www.
nytimes.com/2018/04/04/us/politics/cambridge-analytica-scandal-fallout.html
Costigliola, F. (2023). “Kennan’s Warning on Ukraine: Ambition, Insecurity, and the Perils of Independence”, Foreign Affairs.
Available at: https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/ukraine/george-kennan-warning-on-ukraine
Cooley, A. and Nexon, D. (2022). The Real Crisis of Global Order: Illiberalism on the Rise. Foreign Affairs: https:/ /www.
foreignaffairs.com/articles/world/2021-12-14/illiberalism-real-crisis-global-order
Cotton, T., Schatz, B., Murphy, C., and Britt, K.B. (2023). “Protect kids on social media”. The Washington Post. Available at:
https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/05/11/social-media-cotton-schatz-murphy-britt/
Coyle, D. (2018). ‘We need a publicly funded rival to Facebook and Google.’. FT. Available at:
https:/ /www.ft.com/content/d56744a0-835c-11e8-9199-c2a4754b5a0e
Cui, W. (2018). ‘The Digital Services Tax: A conceptual defense’. University of British Columbia. SSRN. Available at: https:/ /
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3273641

===== PDF_PAGE 153 =====
144
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Curtis, A. (2002). “The Century of the Self” Documentary. Youtube. Available at: https:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=eJ3R-
zGoQC4s
Davies, D. (2023). Social media’s role in Jan. 6 was left out of the final report. Available at: https:/ /www.npr.
org/2023/01/26/1151360750/social-medias-role-in-jan-6-was-left-out-of-the-final-report
Dean, C. (2006). “Truth and the Media”, Strathmore University 4th Ethics Conference on “Media and the Common Good”.
Available at: https:/ /web.archive.org/web/20120330092247/http:/www.strathmore.edu/research/truth_media.pdf
DeJohn, S. (2017). “Beyond Protest: Examining the Decide Madrid Platform for Public Engagement”. TheGovLab. Available
at: https:/ /blog.thegovlab.org/post/beyond-protest-examining-the-decide-madrid-platform-for-public-engagement
Delano Roosevelt, F. (1940). “Speaking About Cancer of Nazis and Aid to Britain”. Youtube. Available at: https:/ /www.
youtube.com/watch?v=AIJm8Hp4Xe0
Demirjian, K. (2023). Republicans Attack Blinken for China Trip, Threatening Subpoena. New York Times. Available at:
https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2023/06/16/us/politics/republicans-blinken-china.html
Democracy and Internet Governance Initiative. (2023). “Towards digital platforms and public purpose”. Harvard Kennedy
School. Available at: https:/ /shorensteincenter.org/towards-digital-platforms-and-public-purpose/
Derek, R. (2019). “How an Obscure Conservative Theory Became the Trump Era’s Go-to Nerd Phrase”. Politico. Available at:
https:/ /www.politico.com/magazine/story/2018/02/25/overton-window-explained-definition-meaning-217010/
Deriglazova, L. (2021). The Soviet Union’s Demise As Seen by Today’s Russia. The Wilson Center: https:/ /www.wilsoncenter.
org/blog-post/soviet-unions-demise-seen-todays-russians
Dickinson, P. (2021). The 2008 Russo-Georgian War: Putin’s green light. Atlantic Council. Available at: https:/ /www.atlantic-
council.org/blogs/ukrainealert/the-2008-russo-georgian-war-putins-green-light/
Dobbins, J., Shatz, H. J., & Wyne, A. (2019). Russia Is a Rogue, Not a Peer; China Is a Peer, Not a Rogue: Different Challeng-
es, Different Responses. In Policy File. RAND Corporation.
Dokoupil, T. (2022). ‘Democratic and Republican voters share a mistrust in the electoral process”. CBS News. Available at:
https:/ /www.cbsnews.com/news/democratic-and-republican-voters-share-their-mistrust-in-the-electoral-process/
Donahoe, E., and Polyakova, A. (2021). “Heal the Transatlantic Technology Policy Rift to Combat China’s Digital Authoritari-
an Model”. Stanford Cyber Policy Center. Available at: https:/ /cyber.fsi.stanford.edu/news/heal-transatlantic-technolo-
gy-policy-rift-combat-chinas-digital-authoritarian-model
De Witte, M. (2022). “How to strengthen democracy, according to a new mega-study”. Phys.Org. Available at: https:/ /phys.
org/news/2022-08-democracy-mega-study.html
Devine, D., Gaskell, J., Jennings, W., and Stoker, G. (2020). Exploring Trust, Mistrust and Distrust. University of South-
ampton Discussion Paper for the 1st Digital Workshop of the ESRC. Available at: https:/ /static1.squarespace.com/
static/5c21090f8f5130d0f2e4dc24/t/5e995ec3f866cd1282cf57b1/1587109577707/TrustGov+-+Trust+mistrust+dis-
trust+-+20.04.2020.pdf
Doxsee, C., Jones, S. G., Halstead, K., Hwang, G., and Thompson, J. (2022). Pushed to Extremes: Domestic Terrorism amid
Polarization and Protest. In Policy File. Center for Strategic and International Studies. Available at: https:/ /www.csis.
org/analysis/pushed-extremes-domestic-terrorism-amid-polarization-and-protest
Eaton, S., Fuchs, D., Triolo, P. (2022). ‘The EU-US Trade and Technology Council reaches a crossroads’. Internationale Politik
quarterly. Available at: https:/ /ip-quarterly.com/en/eu-us-trade-and-technology-council-reaches-crossroads

===== PDF_PAGE 154 =====
145
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Edelman (2022). Edelman Trust Barometer. Available at: https:/ /www.edelman.com/trust/2022-trust-barometer
Edsall,T. (2023). “Opinion | Do You Live in a ‘Tight’ State or a ‘Loose’ One? Turns Out It Matters Quite a Bit”, The New York
Times. Available at: https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2023/03/29/opinion/red-blue-tight-loose-state.html
Edsall, T. (2022). We’re Staring at Our Phones, Full of Rage for ‘the Other Side’, The New York Times. Available at: https:/ /
www.nytimes.com/2022/06/15/opinion/social-media-polarization-democracy.html
EEAS (2022). A Strategic Compass for Security and Defence. Available at: https:/ /www.eeas.europa.eu/eeas/strategic-com-
pass-security-and-defence-0_en
Encyclopedia Britannica (2023). Political System. Available at: https:/ /www.britannica.com/topic/political-system
Engler, A. (2023). “The EU and U.S. diverge on AI regulation: A transatlantic comparison and steps to alignment”, Brook-
ings. Available at: https:/ /www.brookings.edu/research/the-eu-and-us-diverge-on-ai-regulation-a-transatlantic-com-
parison-and-steps-to-alignment/
Engler, A. (2022). “The Declaration for the Future of the Internet is for wavering democracies, not China and Russia”,
Brookings. Available at: https:/ /www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2022/05/09/the-declaration-for-the-future-of-
the-internet-is-for-wavering-democracies-not-china-and-russia/
Erlangen, S. (2008). Putin, at NATO Meeting, Curbs Combative Rhetoric. The New York Times. Available at: https:/ /www.
nytimes.com/2008/04/05/world/europe/05nato.html
European Commission (2023). The Digital Services Act package | Shaping Europe’s digital future. Available at: https:/ /digi-
tal-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/digital-services-act-package
European Commission (2021). Proposal for a REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL LAY-
ING DOWN HARMONISED RULES ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACT) AND AMENDING
CERTAIN UNION LEGISLATIVE ACTS. Available at: https:/ /eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex-
%3A52021PC0206
European Council (2023). Ukraine. Available at: https:/ /www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/enlargement/ukraine/
EuroPolis. A deliberative polity-making project. Available at: https:/ /cordis.europa.eu/project/id/225314/fr
EU vs. DisInfo (2020). DISINFO: THE WEST IS MORALLY DECAYING. Available at: https:/ /euvsdisinfo.eu/report/
the-west-is-morally-decaying
Fabbrini, S. (2010). After Globalisation: Western Power in a Post-Western World. Global Policy. Available at: https:/ /www.
globalpolicyjournal.com/articles/global-governance/after-globalization-western-power-post-western-world
Farrell, H., Schneier, B. (2018). ‘Information attacks on democracies’. Lawfare. Available at: https:/ /www.lawfaremedia.org/
article/information-attacks-democracies
Farivar, M. (2021). “Who Were the U.S. Capitol Rioters?”, Voa News. Available at: https:/ /www.voanews.com/a/usa_
who-were-us-capitol-rioters/6201956.html
FBI (2023). Case: RUSSIAN INTERFERENCE IN 2016 U.S. ELECTIONS. Available at: https:/ /www.fbi.gov/wanted/cyber/rus-
sian-interference-in-2016-u-s-elections
FDR4freedoms. (2023). Talking to the People: FDR, Radio, and the Press. Available at: https:/ /fdr4freedoms.org/wp-con-
tent/themes/fdf4fdr/DownloadablePDFs/II_HopeRecoveryReform/21_TalkingtothePeople.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 155 =====
146
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Franklin Delano Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum (2023). FDR and the Four Freedoms speech. Available at:
www.fdrlibrary.org/four-freedoms.
Fried, D. and Volker, K. (2022). Opinion - The Speech In Which Putin Told Us Who He Was. Politico. Available at:
https:/ /www.politico.com/news/magazine/2022/02/18/putin-speech-wake-up-call-post-cold-war-order-liber-
al-2007-00009918
Friedler, S., Venkatasubramanian, S., and Engler, A. (2023). “How California and other states are tackling AI legisla-
tion”, Brookings. Available at: https:/ /www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2023/03/22/how-california-and-oth-
er-states-are-tackling-ai-legislation/#:~:text=AI%20regulation%20in%20the%20United,so%20far%20been%20large-
ly%20ineffectual
Fundación Carolina (2021). Latinobarómetro 2021 y el “momento de la verdad” para la democracia. Available at: https:/ /
www.fundacioncarolina.es/latinobarometro-2021-y-el-momento-de-la-verdad-para-la-democracia/
Future of Life Institute (2023). Pause Giant AI Experiments: An Open Letter - Future of Life Institute. Available at: https:/ /
futureoflife.org/open-letter/pause-giant-ai-experiments/
Gabbatt, A. (2022). From colonialism to Putin: what did Tucker Carlson defend in 2022?, The Guardian. Available at:
https:/ /www.theguardian.com/media/2022/dec/28/tucker-carlson-fox-news-2022-russia-putin-testosterone
Galston, W. A. (2023) Polls show Americans are divided on the significance of January 6. Brookings. Available at: https:/ /
www.brookings.edu/blog/fixgov/2023/01/06/polls-show-americans-are-divided-on-the-significance-of-january-6/
Ganesh, J. (2022). The Ukraine war is not about democracy versus autocracy. Financial times. Available at: https:/ /www.
ft.com/content/182adfa1-daae-449a-bdd9-8fe4265c20ed
Gang, Q. and Antonov, A. (2021). Joint Article by Chinese and Russian Ambassadors: Respecting People’s Democratic
Rights. The National Interest. Available at: http:/ /us.china-embassy.gov.cn/eng/dshd/202111/t20211127_10454275.htm
Garamone, J. (2022). U.S. Intel Officials Detail Threats From China, Russia. U.S. Department of Defense. Available at:
https:/ /www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/Article/2960113/us-intel-officials-detail-threats-from-china-
russia/
Gates, B. (2023). “The Age of AI has begun”, Gates Notes. Available at: https:/ /www.gatesnotes.com/The-Age-of-AI-Has-
Begun
Gewirtz, P. (2023). Words and policies: “De-risking” and China Policy. Brookings. Available at: https:/ /www.brookings.
edu/articles/words-and-policies-de-risking-and-china-policy/#:~:text=The%20G%2D7%20communiques%20fo-
cus,chains%2C%20and%20resist%20economic%20coercion.
Gill, B., Haley, N., Liu, Z.Z., Mazza, M., Browne, A., Wood, C., and La Bruyère, E. (2023). Biden wants a ‘thaw’ with China.
What would that take? Available at: https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/06/16/china-blinken-visit-
thaw-experts/
Global Digital Insights (2023). The Latest Facebook Statistics: Everything You Need to Know, DataReportal. Available at:
https:/ /datareportal.com/essential-facebook-stats#:~:text=Number%20of%20Facebook%20users%20in,)%3A%20
2.963%20billion%20(January%202023)&text=Number%20of%20people%20who%20use,)%3A%202.000%20bil-
lion%20(January%202023)
Goldgeier, J. (2019). PROMISES MADE, PROMISES BROKEN? WHAT YELTSIN WAS TOLD ABOUT NATO IN 1993 AND WHY
IT MATTERS. War on the Rocks. Available at: https:/ /warontherocks.com/2019/11/promises-made-promises-broken-
what-yeltsin-was-told-about-nato-in-1993-and-why-it-matters-2/

===== PDF_PAGE 156 =====
147
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Gong, X. (2023). The Belt and Road Initiative Is Still China’s “Gala” but Without as Much Luster. Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace. Available at: https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/2023/03/03/belt-and-road-initiative-is-still-china-
s-gala-but-without-as-much-luster-pub-89207
Gore, A. (1994). “Remarks as Delivered by Vice President Al Gore to The Superhighway Summit Royce Hall, UCLA. Available
at: http:/ /artcontext.com/calendar/1997/superhig.html
Gorokhovskaia, Y.; Shahbaz, A.; Slipowitz, A. (2023). Marking 50 Years in the Struggle for Democracy. Freedom House.
Available at: https:/ /freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/2023/marking-50-years
Goujard, C. and Scott, M. (2023). “EU hits Meta with record 1.2B€ privacy fine.” POLITICO. Available at: https:/ /www.politi-
co.eu/article/eu-hits-meta-with-record-e1-2b-privacy-fine/
Graham, T. (2022). Gorbachev: Conflicted Catalyst of Cold War’s End. Council on Foreign Relations. Available at: https:/ /
www.cfr.org/article/mikhail-gorbachev-death-conflicted-catalyst-cold-wars-end
Green, M. A. (2023). The BRICS Rivalry. Wilson Center. Available at: https:/ /www.wilsoncenter.org/blog-post/brics-rivalry
Gregory, J. (2023). ‘Tucker Carlson said he hates Trump ‘passionately, lawsuit reveals’. BBC News. Available at: https:/ /
www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-64886188
Gutierrez, D., Vera Botello, I., and Ahmed, I. (2021). Trust in Diplomacy––Secretary of State George Shultz. ADST. Available
at: https:/ /adst.org/2021/02/trust-in-diplomacy-secretary-of-state-george-shultz/
Haddad, M. (2023). “Where does your country stand on the Russia-Ukraine war?”, AlJazeera. Available at: https:/ /www.
aljazeera.com/news/2023/2/16/mapping-where-every-country-stands-on-the-russia-ukraine-war
Haenle, P., Sher, N. (2022). “How Pelosi’s Taiwan Visit has set a new status quo for US-China Tensions”. Carnegie Endow-
ment for International Peace. Available at: https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/2022/08/17/how-pelosi-s-taiwan-visit-
has-set-new-status-quo-for-u.s-china-tensions-pub-87696
Haenle, P., and Wyone, A. (2022). The Paradox of the Russia-China Relationship. Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace. Available at: https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/2022/08/18/paradox-of-russia-china-relationship-pub-87695
Haidt, J., & Bail, C. (ongoing). Social media and political dysfunction: A collaborative review. Unpublished manuscript, New
York University. Available at: https:/ /docs.google.com/document/d/1vVAtMCQnz8WVxtSNQev_e1cGmY9rnY96ecYu-
Aj6C548/edit
Harari, Y. (2023). ‘On Threats to Humanity Posed by AI’. New York Times. Available at:
https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2023/03/24/opinion/yuval-harari-ai-chatgpt.html
Hass, R. (2023). How Biden could “thaw” US relations with China. Brookings. Available at: https:/ /www.brookings.edu/
articles/how-biden-could-thaw-us-relations-with-china/
Haas, R. (2018). Liberal World Order, R.I.P. Project Syndicate. Available at: https:/ /www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/
end-of-liberal-world-order-by-richard-n--haass-2018-03?barrier=accesspaylog
Higgs, K. (2021). “A brief history of consumer culture”. The MIT Press reader. Available at: https:/ /thereader.mitpress.mit.
edu/a-brief-history-of-consumer-culture/
Hirsh, M. (2022). “We Are Now in a Global Cold War”. Foreign Policy. Available at: https:/ /foreignpolicy.com/2022/06/27/
new-cold-war-nato-summit-united-states-russia-ukraine-china/

===== PDF_PAGE 157 =====
148
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Hobbs, C. (2020). “The EU as a digital regulatory superpower: Implications for the United States”, European Council on
Foreign Relations. Available at: https:/ /ecfr.eu/article/commentary_the_eu_as_a_digital_regulatory_superpower_im-
plications_for_the_u/
Holder, J., Leatherby, L., Troianovski, A., and Cai, W. (2023). “The West Tried to Isolate Russia. It Didn’t Work.” New York
Times. Available at: https:/ /www.nytimes.com/interactive/2023/02/23/world/russia-ukraine-geopolitics.html
Howarth, J. (2023). Alarming Average Screen Time Statistics. Explodingtopics. Available at: https:/ /explodingtopics.com/
blog/screen-time-stats
Hurt, S.R. (2023). “Washington Consensus”, Britannica. Available at: https:/ /www.britannica.com/topic/Washington-con-
sensus
Ignatius, D. (2023). “Opinion | Chechen separatist attack marked when Putin turned from the West”, The Washington Post.
Available at: https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/03/09/putin-bush-chechnya-ukraine-war/
Ignatius, D. (2023). Putin Looked into the Abyss Saturday – and Blinked. The Washington Post. Available at: https:/ /www.
washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/06/24/putin-prigozhin-russia-wagner-group-coup/
Ikenberry, G. J. (2005). Power and liberal order: America’s postwar world order in transition. International Relations of the
Asia-Pacific, 5(2), 133–152. https:/ /doi.org/10.1093/irap/lci112
Ikenson, D. (2020). Biden’s Trade Policy Options Constrained by Domestic Politics and Geopolitics. CATO Institute. Avail-
able at: https:/ /www.cato.org/blog/bidens-trade-policy-options-constrained-domestic-politics-geopolitics
International Federation of Journalists. (2019). Global Charter of Ethics for Journalists. Available at: https:/ /www.ifj.org/
who/rules-and-policy/global-charter-of-ethics-for-journalists.html /
Jinping, X. (2021). Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping President of the People’s Republic of China at the Conference Marking the
50th Anniversary of the Restoration of the Lawful Seat of the People’s Republic of China in the United Nations.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China. Available at: https:/ /www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/
zxxx_662805/202110/t20211025_9982254.html
Jones, O. (2023). ‘The far right is rising. That it seems normal is all the more terrifying’. The Guardian. Available at: https:/ /
www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2023/may/31/across-europe-the-far-right-is-rising-that-it-seems-normal-is-
all-the-more-terrifying
Kagan, R. (2018). The United States and Russia aren’t allies. But Trump and Putin are. Brookings. Available at: https:/ /www.
brookings.edu/articles/the-united-states-and-russia-arent-allies-but-trump-and-putin-are/
Kagan, R. (2017). The twilight of the liberal world order. Brookings. Available at: https:/ /www.brookings.edu/research/the-
twilight-of-the-liberal-world-order/
Kaiser, K. (2020). The Future of NATO. Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. Available at: https:/ /www.belfer-
center.org/publication/future-nato
Kaiser, K. (2019). America’s Domestic Strife and Foreign Policy. Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. Available
at: https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/publication/americas-domestic-strife-and-foreign-policy
Kaiser, K. (2019). What Brexit Means to the World. Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. Available at: https:/ /
www.belfercenter.org/publication/what-brexit-means-world

===== PDF_PAGE 158 =====
149
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Kaiser, K. (2019). China’s Role in World Affairs: How it Matters. Available at: https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/publication/chi-
nas-role-world-affairs-how-it-matters
Kaiser, K. (2019). Impeachment and U.S. Foreign Policy. Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. Available at:
https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/publication/impeachment-and-us-foreign-policy
Kaiser, K. (2018). Human Rights: A Western Policy Tool? Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. Available at:
https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/publication/human-rights-western-policy-tool
Kant, I., & Humphrey, T. (2003). To perpetual peace : a philosophical sketch. Hackett Pub.
Kaplan, R. (2017). The Quiet Rivalry Between China and Russia. Available at: https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2017/11/03/opinion/
china-russia-rivalry.html
Kharpal, A. (2023). “Google had a ‘Kodak moment’ as Microsoft takes lead in AI: Strategist says”, CNBC. Available at:
https:/ /www.cnbc.com/2023/04/26/google-had-a-kodak-moment-as-microsoft-takes-lead-in-ai-strategist.html
The Kiel Institute (2023). Ukraine Support Tracker. Available at: https:/ /www.ifw-kiel.de/topics/war-against-ukraine/
ukraine-support-tracker/?cookieLevel=not-set#:~:text=The%20Ukraine%20Support%20Tracker%20lists%20and%20
quantifies%20military%2C%20financial%2C%20and,%2C%20China%2C%20Taiwan%20and%20India
Klutsey, B. (2021). Social and Political Trust. Discourse. Available at: https:/ /www.discoursemagazine.com/culture-and-soci-
ety/2021/03/26/social-and-political-trust/
Knight Commission on Trust, Media and Democracy. (2019). “Crisis in Democracy: Renewing Trust in America”. Knight
Foundation. Available at: https:/ /knightfoundation.org/reports/crisis-in-democracy-renewing-trust-in-america/
Kotsokousta, E. (2023). Why the far-right is increasingly getting into power across Europe Euronews. Available at: https:/ /
www.euronews.com/my-europe/2023/06/19/why-the-far-right-is-increasingly-getting-into-power-across-europe
Kull, S.; Ramsay, C.; Subias, S.; Lewis, E.; and Warf, P. (2003). Press attitudes towards the Iraq War: Press/Institute for Public
Accuracy/ RoperASW Survey. Available at: https:/ /web.archive.org/web/20070403153921/http:/65.109.167.118/pipa/
pdf/oct03/IraqMedia_Oct03_rpt.pdf
Kundnani, H. (2023). The War in Ukraine, Democracy, and the Global South: We Have a Problem. International Centre for
Defence and Security. Available at: https:/ /icds.ee/en/the-war-in-ukraine-democracy-and-the-global-south-we-have-
a-problem/
Kundnani, H. (2017). What is the Liberal International Order? GMF. Available at: https:/ /www.gmfus.org/news/what-liber-
al-international-order
Kupchan, C. (2022). Bipolarity is Back: Why It Matters. Eurasia Group. Available at: https:/ /www.eurasiagroup.net/live-post/
bipolarity-is-back-why-it-matters
Kurlantzick, J. (2022). ‘China’s growing interference in domestic politics: globally and in the U.S”. CFR. Available at: https:/ /
www.cfr.org/blog/chinas-growing-interference-domestic-politics-globally-and-united-states
La Coordinadora de Organizaciones Para el Desarrollo (2023). Qué hacemos. Available at: https:/ /coordinadoraongd.org/
nuestro-trabajo/
Lee Myers, S. and Barry, E. (2014). Putin Reclaims Crimea for Russia and Bitterly Denounces the West. New York Times.
Available at: https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2014/03/19/world/europe/ukraine.html

===== PDF_PAGE 159 =====
150
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Lehr, D. (2022). Trust in China. Edelman. Available at: https:/ /www.edelman.com/trust/2022-trust-barometer/trust-china
Leonard, M. (2023). China Is Ready for a World of Disorder. Foreign Affairs. Available at: https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.
com/united-states/china-ready-world-disorder?utm_medium=promo_email&utm_source=promo_1&utm_cam-
paign=PROM_jun23-camp1-promall-panel-a&utm_content=20230621&utm_term=EPPAZ003U3
Levada-Center (2022). Indicators. Available at: https:/ /www.levada.ru/en/ratings/
Levy, B. (2022). ‘How inequality and polarization interact: America’s challenges through a south African Lens’. Carnegie En-
dowment. Available at: https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/2022/04/27/how-inequality-and-polarization-interact-ameri-
ca-s-challenges-through-south-african-lens-pub-86935
Lieven, A. (2023). ‘The rise and role of Ukranian ethnic nationalism’. The Nation. Available at: https:/ /www.thenation.com/
article/world/ukraine-russia-nationalism-war/
Liik, K. (2021). It’s complicated: Russia’s tricky relationship with China. European Council on Foreign Relations. Available at:
https:/ /ecfr.eu/publication/its-complicated-russias-tricky-relationship-with-china/
Lincoln, A., & NetLibrary, Inc. (1990). “House divided” speech. Project Gutenberg; NetLibrary.
Lindberg, S. (2019). “Are Increasing Inequalities Threatening Democracy in Europe?”, Carnegie Europe. Available at: https:/ /
carnegieeurope.eu/2019/02/04/are-increasing-inequalities-threatening-democracy-in-europe-pub-78270
Lobell, E. (2010). Structural Realism/Offensive and Defensive Realism. International Studies. Available at: https:/ /oxfordre.
com/internationalstudies/display/10.1093/acrefore/9780190846626.001.0001/acrefore-9780190846626-e-304;j-
sessionid=9824D0755308829B637119200DD249A0?rskey=UetDHT&result=51#:~:text=On%20the%20one%20
hand%2C%20offensive,reserved%20policies%20to%20attain%20security.
Long, K. (2023). Meet China’s ‘junior partner’. Politico. Available at: https:/ /www.politico.com/newsletters/politico-night-
ly/2023/03/21/chinas-new-era-with-its-junior-partner-00088193
Madison, J. (1787). The Federalist No. 10 – The Utility of the Union as a Safeguard Against Domestic Faction and Insurrec-
tion – Daily Advertiser. Available at: https:/ /founders.archives.gov/documents/Madison/01-10-02-0178
Maizland, L. (2023). Why China-Taiwan Relations Are So Tense. Council on Foreign Relations. Available at: https:/ /www.cfr.
org/backgrounder/china-taiwan-relations-tension-us-policy-biden
Maizland, L. (2022). China and Russia: Exploring Ties Between Two Authoritarian Powers. Available at: https:/ /www.cfr.org/
backgrounder/china-russia-relationship-xi-putin-taiwan-ukraine
Marist Poll (2022). The January 6th Hearings, July 2022. Available at: https:/ /maristpoll.marist.edu/polls/npr-pbs-news-
hour-marist-national-poll-the-january-6th-hearings-july-2022/
Market Business News (2023). What is Media? Definition and Meaning. Available at: https:/ /marketbusinessnews.com/
financial-glossary/media-definition-meaning/#:~:text=The%20term%20media%2C%20which%20is,the%20Inter-
net%2C%20fax%20and%20billboards
Markets and Markets (2022). Big Data Market Size, Share, Growth Drivers & Opportunities. Available at: https:/ /www.mar-
ketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/big-data-market-1068.html
Marston, B. (2020). “Dissecting the Utopia and realities of the digital public sphere”. SearchMedium. Available at: https:/ /
brookemarston.medium.com/dissecting-the-utopia-and-realities-of-the-digital-public-sphere-f1f2aaff1e5b

===== PDF_PAGE 160 =====
151
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Mayer Brown (2023). ‘The European Parliament reaches agreement on its version of the proposed EU AI Act’. Available at:
https:/ /www.mayerbrown.com/en/perspectives-events/publications/2023/06/european-parliament-reaches-agree-
ment-on-its-version-of-the-proposed--eu-artificial-intelligence-act
McBride, J., Berman, N. and Chatzky, A. (2023). China’s Massive Belt and Road Initiative. Council on Foreign Relations.
Available at: https:/ /www.cfr.org/backgrounder/chinas-massive-belt-and-road-initiative
McConnell, M.W. (2023). ‘Why are government social media takedown secret? Make them public’. The Washington Post.
Available at: https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/07/07/government-social-media-takedown-re-
quests-public/
McFaul, M. (2019). Trump’s Gift to Putin: The President’s Privatized Foreign Policy Is a Boon for Russia. Foreign Affairs.
Available at: https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/russian-federation/2019-10-23/trumps-gift-putin
McLuhan Galaxy (2023). “We shape our tools and thereafter our tools shape us”. Available at: https:/ /mcluhangalaxy.word-
press.com/2013/04/01/we-shape-our-tools-and-thereafter-our-tools-shape-us/
McLuhan, M. (1969). “Interview”, Playboy. Available at: https:/ /web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~rogaway/classes/188/spring07/mcluhan.
pdf
McLuhan, M. (1967). “McLuhan: Now The Medium Is The Massage”. New York Times. Available at: https:/ /timesmachine.
nytimes.com/timesmachine/1967/03/19/107185353.
html?action=click&contentCollection=Archives&module=LedeAsset&region=ArchiveBody&pgtype=article&pageNum-
ber=179
McLuhan, M. (1967). “The medium is the massage: an inventory of effects”. Gingko Press. Available at: https:/ /obtaineu-
daimonia.medium.com/the-medium-is-the-message-by-marshall-mcluhan-8b5d0a9d426b#:~:text=The%20book%20
is%20actually%20called,to%20behave%20in%20particular%20ways.
Mearsheimer, J. (2023). “World War is on our doorstep”, Youtube. Available at: https:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=G-d4Q-
FysznY
Merrill, N., and Komaitis, K. (2020). “The consequences of a fragmenting, less global internet”, Brookings. Available at:
https:/ /www.brookings.edu/techstream/the-consequences-of-a-fragmenting-less-global-internet/
Merriam-Webster (2023). “Meritocracy”. Available at: https:/ /www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/meritocracy
Meyskens, C. (2023). China Is Pushing Disengagement With the United States Hard. Foreign Policy. Available at: https:/ /
foreignpolicy.com/2023/03/08/china-disengagement-america-cold-war/
Mikelsaar, A. (2022). Between Ostpolitik and Zeitenwende—Germany’s Dual Dependence on China and Russia. International
Centre for Defence and Security. Available at: https:/ /icds.ee/en/between-ostpolitik-and-zeitenwende-germanys-du-
al-dependence-on-china-and-russia/
Milne, C. (2020). ‘Public option social media’. Medium. Available at: https:/ /medium.com/@milne_christopher/public-op-
tion-social-media-d14b5433b579
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China (2023). US Hegemony and Its Peril. Available at: https:/ /www.
fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/wjbxw/202302/t20230220_11027664.html
More in Common (2021). Two Stories of In America. Available at: https:/ /www.moreincommon.com/media/yfcbfmmp/
mic_two-stories-of-distrust.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 161 =====
152
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Moskowitz, K. (2023). Did NATO Expansion Really Cause Putin’s Invasion? Available at: https:/ /afsa.org/did-nato-expan-
sion-really-cause-putins-invasion
Mozur, P. (2018). A Genocide Incited on Facebook, With Posts From Myanmar’s Military, The New York Times. Available at:
https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2018/10/15/technology/myanmar-facebook-genocide.html
Müller, Jan-Werner (2006). “On the Origins of Constitutional Patriotism”. Contemporary Political Theory. 5 (3): 278–
296. doi:10.1057/palgrave.cpt.9300235.
Nathan, A. (2019). What Lessons Have China’s Leaders Learned from Tiananmen? Freedom House. Available at: https:/ /
freedomhouse.org/article/what-lessons-have-chinas-leaders-learned-tiananmen
NATO (2022). Strategic Concept. Available at: https:/ /www.nato.int/strategic-concept/
Navalny, A. (2022). Alexei Navalny: This is what a post-Putin Russia should look like. The Washington Post. Available at:
https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/09/30/alexei-navalny-parliamentary-republic-russia-ukraine/
Neuhard, R. (2022). “The new US National Security Strategy: Four Takeaways for Asia policy”, FPRI. Available at: https:/ /
www.fpri.org/article/2022/10/the-new-us-national-security-strategy-four-takeaways-for-asia-policy/
The New York Times (2022). Full Transcript of Zelensky’s Speech Before Congress. Available at: https:/ /www.nytimes.
com/2022/12/21/us/politics/zelensky-speech-transcript.html
The New York Times. (2023). “Pressured by Biden, AI companies agree to guardrails on new tools”. Available at: https:/ /
www.nytimes.com/2023/07/21/us/politics/ai-regulation-biden.html
Nowaki, R. (2015). American Idol: American Pop Culture and Soft Power in Cold War Europe. University of Hawai’i at Hilo.
Available at: https:/ /hilo.hawaii.edu/campuscenter/hohonu/volumes/documents/AmericanIdol-AmericanPopCulture-
andSoftPowerinColdWarEuropeRochelleNowaki.pdf
NPR, PBS NewsHour, and Marist National Poll (2023). “The January 6th Hearings”, Marist Poll. Available at: https:/ /marist-
poll.marist.edu/polls/npr-pbs-newshour-marist-national-poll-the-january-6th-hearings-july-2022/
Nye, J. (2023). “Peak China?”, Project Syndicate. Available at: https:/ /www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/peak-china-
debate-calls-for-careful-assessment-by-joseph-s-nye-2023-01
OECD AI Policy Observatory (2023). International co-operation for trustworthy AI (Principle 2.5). Available at: https:/ /oecd.
ai/en/dashboards/ai-principles/P14
OECD (2022). Building Trust to Reinforce Democracy Summary brief presenting the main findings from the OECD Trust
Survey. Available at: https:/ /www.oecd.org/governance/trust-in-government/oecd-trust-survey-main-findings-en.pdf
Office of the Historian (2023). The League of Nations, 1920. Available at: https:/ /history.state.gov/milestones/1914-1920/
league
O’Malley, J.P. (2013). “Michael Sandel interview: the marketization of everything is undermining democracy”. The Spectator.
Available at: https:/ /www.spectator.co.uk/article/michael-sandel-interview-the-marketization-of-everything-is-under-
mining-democracy/
Oren, I. (2023). Democratic Peace. Britannica. Available at: https:/ /www.britannica.com/topic/democratic-peace

===== PDF_PAGE 162 =====
153
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Ortiz-Ospina, E. and Roser, M. (2023). Trust. Our World in Data. Available at: https:/ /ourworldindata.org/trust
OSCE (2023). OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media. Available at: https:/ /www.osce.org/representative-on-free-
dom-of-media
Osnos, E. (2023). “Sliding Toward a New Cold War”. The New Yorker. Available at: https:/ /www.newyorker.com/maga-
zine/2023/03/06/sliding-toward-a-new-cold-war
Ovayda, A. (2021). ‘Towards platform democracy: policymaking beyond corporate CEOs and partisan pressure’. Belfer
Center for Science and International Affairs. Harvard Kennedy School. Available at: https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/
publication/towards-platform-democracy-policymaking-beyond-corporate-ceos-and-partisan-pressure
Oxford Languages (2023). “Ideology”. Available at: https:/ /languages.oup.com/
Pape, R.A., and Ruby. K. (2021). “The Face of American Insurrection”, PowerPoint Presentation. Chicago Project on Security
and Threats. Available at: https:/ /d3qi0qp55mx5f5.cloudfront.net/cpost/i/docs/americas_insurrectionists_on-
line_2021_02_05.pdf?mtime=1612585947
Pariser, E. (2022). “Musk’s Twitter Will Not Be the Town Square the World Needs”. Wired. Available at: https:/ /www.wired.
com/story/elon-musk-twitter-town-square/
Participedia: “EuroPolis: Deliberative Polling on the EU”. Available at: https:/ /participedia.net/case/4136
Patberg, M. (2023). ‘Digital transformation. Habermas and the new structural transformation of the public sphere’.
RevDem. Available at: https:/ /revdem.ceu.edu/2023/02/02/digital-fragmentation-habermas-on-the-new-structur-
al-transformation-of-the-public-sphere/
PBS (2023). Understanding America’s partisan divide and how to fix it. Available at: https:/ /www.pbs.org/video/ameri-
ca-at-a-crossroads-1685565513/
PBS News Hour (2004). Barack Obama’s Keynote Address at the 2004 Democratic National Convention. Available at:
https:/ /www.pbs.org/newshour/show/barack-obamas-keynote-address-at-the-2004-democratic-national-convention
PBS. (1999). Crucible of Empire. Available at: https:/ /www.pbs.org/crucible/journalism.html
Pearlstein, S. (2023). “Here’s the Inside story of how Congress failed to rein on Big Tech”. The Washington Post. Available
at: https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/07/06/congress-facebook-google-amazon-apple-regula-
tion-failure/
Pelley, S. (2023). “Is artificial intelligence advancing too quickly? What AI leaders at Google say”, CBS News. Available at:
https:/ /www.cbsnews.com/news/google-artificial-intelligence-future-60-minutes-transcript-2023-04-16/
Pethokoukis, J. (2018). ‘Why we should have a public option version of Google and Facebook’. AEI. Available at: https:/ /
www.aei.org/economics/why-we-should-have-a-public-option-version-of-google-and-facebook/
Petri, A. (2023). ‘Not another social media network!’. The Washington Post. Available at:
 https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/07/12/twitter-threads-social-media-nightmare-apocalypse-satire/
Pew Research Center (2022). Americans and Social Trust: Who, Where and Why. Available at: https:/ /www.pewresearch.
org/social-trends/2007/02/22/americans-and-social-trust-who-where-and-why/#:~:text=Social%20trust%20is%20
a%20belief,out%20who%20trusts%2C%20or%20why

===== PDF_PAGE 163 =====
154
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Pew Research Center (2022). Public Trust in Government: 1958-2022. Available at: https:/ /www.pewresearch.org/poli-
tics/2022/06/06/public-trust-in-government-1958-2022/
Pew Research Center (2022). The polarization in today’s Congress has roots that go back decades. Available at: https:/ /
www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2022/03/10/the-polarization-in-todays-congress-has-roots-that-go-back-de-
cades/
Pew Research Center (2020). ‘Trends in U.S. income and wealth inequality’. Available at: https:/ /www.pewresearch.org/
social-trends/2020/01/09/trends-in-income-and-wealth-inequality/
Pifer, S. (2021). “Russia’s draft agreements with NATO and the United States: Intended for rejection?”, Brookings. Available
at: https:/ /www.brookings.edu/blog/order-from-chaos/2021/12/21/russias-draft-agreements-with-nato-and-the-unit-
ed-states-intended-for-rejection/
Pillar. P.R. (2022). ‘Ukraine and the power of nationalism’. Responsible Statecraft. Available at: https:/ /responsiblestatecraft.
org/2022/05/23/ukraine-and-the-power-of-nationalism/
Poast, P. (2022). A World of Power and Fear - What Critics of Realism Get Wrong. Foreign Affairs. Available at: https:/ /
www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/ukraine/2022-06-15/world-power-and-fear
Poe, E.A. (1845). A descent into the maelstrom. Available at: https:/ /poestories.com/read/descent
PubAffairs Bruxxelles (2022). Eurobarometer: Trust in the EU on the rise, amid strong support for the EU’s response to
Russia invasion of Ukraine and energy policies. Available at: https:/ /www.pubaffairsbruxelles.eu/eu-institution-news/
eurobarometer-trust-in-the-eu-on-the-rise-amid-strong-support-for-the-eus-response-to-russia-invasion-of-ukraine-
and-energy-policies/
Putin, V. (2021). “The Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians”, President of Russia. Available at: http:/ /en.kremlin.ru/
events/president/news/66181
Quinlivan, J. T. (2022). “The Art of Sitting on Bayonets”, The RAND Blog. Available at: https:/ /www.rand.org/blog/2022/03/
the-art-of-sitting-on-bayonets.html
Quinville, R.S. (2022). Germany’s Zeitenwende: New Era, New Language. Wilson Center. Available at: https:/ /www.wilson-
center.org/article/germanys-zeitenwende-new-era-new-language
Qvortrup, M. (2021). “The Secret to Making Democracy More Civil and Less Polarised”, Zocalo Public Square. Available at:
https:/ /www.zocalopublicsquare.org/2021/08/18/direct-democracy-more-civil-less-polarized/ideas/essay/
RadioFreeEurope (2007). Russia Suspends Participation In CFE Treaty. Available at: https:/ /www.rferl.org/a/1079256.html
Ramos Membrive, A. L. (2023). De umbral en umbral (Apuntes sobre los orígenes, el presente y el desenlace de la guerra
en Ucrania). Global Square. Available at: https:/ /www.globalsquaremagazine.com/2023/06/20/de-umbral-en-um-
bralapuntes-sobre-los-origenes-el-presente-y-el-desenlace-de-la-guerra-en-ucrania/
Ramos Membrive, A.L. (2018). ‘Gerorge Kennan and the Hispanic-Lusitanian world’. Global Square Magazine. Available at:
https:/ /www.globalsquaremagazine.com/2018/10/16/george-kennan-and-the-hispanic-lusitanian-world/
Rampe, W. (2023). What Is Russia’s Wagner Group Doing in Africa?. Council on Foreign Relations. Available at: https:/ /
www.cfr.org/in-brief/what-russias-wagner-group-doing-africa

===== PDF_PAGE 164 =====
155
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Rennison, J. (2023). “How the S&P 500 is Dominated by Apple and Microsoft”, The New York Times. Available at: https:/ /
www.nytimes.com/2023/03/31/business/tech-stocks-sp-500.html
Reuters Staff (2007). “I’m the world’s only true democrat, says Putin”, Reuters. Available at: https:/ /www.reuters.com/
article/us-russia-putin-democracy-idUSL0454405820070604
Roa, C. (2023). Can We Please Stop Comparing Russia’s Economy to Italy’s? The National Interest. Available at: https:/ /na-
tionalinterest.org/feature/can-we-please-stop-comparing-russia%E2%80%99s-economy-italy%E2%80%99s-206404
Robbins, S. (2022). “Let’s Stop Calling Taiwan a Digital Democracy (and Start Telling Better Digital Stories). Taiwan Insight:
The online magazine of the Taiwan Studies Programme, University of Nottingham. Available at: https:/ /taiwaninsight.
org/2022/05/12/lets-stop-calling-taiwan-a-digital-democracy-and-start-telling-better-digital-stories/
Roose, K. (2023). AI poses risk of extinction, industry leaders warn. New York Times. Available at: https:/ /www.nytimes.
com/2023/05/30/technology/ai-threat-warning.html
Roth, K. (2022). How Democracy Can Defeat Autocracy. Foreign Affairs. Available at: https:/ /foreignpolicy.
com/2022/01/13/how-democracy-can-defeat-autocracy/
Roth, K. (2021). With Autocrats on the Defensive, Can Democrats Rise to the Occasion? Human Rights Watch. Available at:
https:/ /www.hrw.org/world-report/2022/autocrats-on-defensive-can-democrats-rise-to-occasion
Rothstein, B. (2018). ‘How the trust trap perpetuates inequality’. Scientific American. Available at: https:/ /www.scientifi-
camerican.com/article/how-the-trust-trap-perpetuates-inequality/
Rozen, C. (2023). “AI leaders are calling for more regulation of the Tech. Here’s what that may mean in the US”. The
Washington Post. Available at: https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/business/2023/05/31/regulate-ai-here-s-what-that-
might-mean-in-the-us/770b9208-ffd0-11ed-9eb0-6c94dcb16fcf_story.html
Rudd, K. (2022). The World According to Xi Jinping: What China’s Ideologue in Chief Really Believes. Foreign Affairs. Avail-
able at: https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/china/world-according-xi-jinping-china-ideologue-kevin-rudd
Rutenberg, J. (2003, April 16). “A nation at war: The news media; Cable’s War Coverage Suggests a New ‘Fox Effect’ on
Television Journalism”, The New York Times. Available at: https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2003/04/16/us/nation-war-me-
dia-cable-s-war-coverage-suggests-new-fox-effect-television.html
Saad, L. (2022). “US Political Ideology steady; Conservatives, Moderates Tie”, Gallup News. Available at: https:/ /news.
gallup.com/poll/388988/political-ideology-steady-conservatives-moderates-tie.aspx
Sacks, D. (2022). “While Pledging to Defend Taiwan from China, Biden Shifted on Taiwan Independence. Here’s Why That
Matters.” Council on Foreign Relations. Available at: https:/ /www.cfr.org/blog/while-pledging-defend-taiwan-chi-
na-biden-shifted-taiwan-independence-heres-why-matters
Sarkar, S. (2023). “V-Dem denigrates India once again, ranks it 108th on Democracy Index”, First Post. Available at: https:/ /
www.firstpost.com/world/v-dem-denigrates-india-once-again-ranks-it-108th-on-democracy-index-12234612.html
Scartascini, C. (2021). Testing the Impact of Social Media on Trust. IDB. Available at: https:/ /blogs.iadb.org/ideas-matter/
en/testing-the-impact-of-social-media-on-trust/
Schaake, M. (2023). ‘Tech lay-offs are a golden opportunity for the public sector’. FT. Available at: https:/ /www.ft.com/con-
tent/28a22e7a-9ac7-4814-ad0f-aba5426fe388
Schaake, M. (2023). ‘US regulatory action on the tech sector may come too late, or not al all.’ FT. Available at: https:/ /www.
ft.com/content/3892776e-ec6f-4551-947f-5aafd01e41b6

===== PDF_PAGE 165 =====
156
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Schaake, M. (2023). ‘We need to keep CEOs away from AI regulation’. FT. Available at: https:/ /www.ft.com/con-
tent/5f8b74f7-68b1-4a6c-88bf-d0dd03579149
Schmennan, S. (2023). Prigozhin and the Long and Infamous History of Failed Russian Rebellions. The New York Times.
Available at: https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2023/06/26/opinion/international-world/putin-russia-uprising.html
Schneier, B. and Sanders, N. (2023). “AI could shore up democracy-Here’s one way: Schneier on Security. Available at:
https:/ /www.schneier.com/essays/archives/2023/06/ai-could-shore-up-democracy-heres-one-way.html
Schneier, B., Farrell, H., and Sanders, N.E. (2023). “How A.I. could help democracy”, Slate. Available at: https:/ /slate.com/
technology/2023/04/ai-public-option.html
Schwartz, W. (2023). “The EU’s Digital Services Act Confronts Silicon Valley“. Wilson Center. Available at: https:/ /www.
wilsoncenter.org/article/eus-digital-services-act-confronts-silicon-valley
Shairani, K., and Baig, R. (2022). “Is the West responsible for floods in Pakistan?”, DW. Available at: https:/ /www.dw.com/
en/fact-check-is-the-west-responsible-for-floods-in-pakistan/a-63152661
Shea, J. (2022). Autocracies versus democracies: 7-3 at halftime, but a lot can still happen in the second half. Friends of
Europe. Available at: https:/ /www.friendsofeurope.org/insights/autocracies-versus-democracies-7-3-at-halftime-but-
a-lot-can-still-happen-in-the-second-half/
Sheftalovich, Z. (2023). EU to Steve Bannon: You don’t scare us … anymore. Politico. Available at: https:/ /www.politico.eu/
article/donald-trump-eu-vera-jourova-steve-bannon-you-dont-scare-us-any-more/
Sklair, L. (2012). “Culture-ideology of consumerism”. Wiley Online library. Available at: https:/ /onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
full/10.1002/9780470670590.wbeog099
Smirnov, V. A., Malenko, S. A., & Nekita, A. G. (2021). “Soft Power” Of The West In The “Cold War” With Soviet Mythologe-
mes. In D. Y. Krapchunov, S. A. Malenko, V. O. Shipulin, E. F. Zhukova, A. G. Nekita, & O. A. Fikhtner (Eds.), Perishable
And Eternal: Mythologies and Social Technologies of Digital Civilization, vol 120. European Proceedings of Social and
Behavioural Sciences (pp. 161-167). European Publisher. https:/ /doi.org/10.15405/epsbs.2021.12.03.21
Solís, M. (2021). China moves to join the CPTPP, but don’t expect a fast pass. Brookings. Available at: https:/ /www.brook-
ings.edu/blog/order-from-chaos/2021/09/23/china-moves-to-join-the-cptpp-but-dont-expect-a-fast-pass/
Soules, M. (2023). JÜRGEN HABERMAS AND THE PUBLIC SPHERE. Available at: https:/ /www.media-studies.ca/articles/
habermas.htm
Statista (2023). Trust Level in Government in China: 2016-2022. Available at: https:/ /www.statista.com/statistics/1116013/
china-trust-in-government-2020/#:~:text=According%20to%20a%20global%20survey,place%20among%2028%20
surveyed%20countries.
Statista, (2023). Number of active monthly Facebook users worldwide. Available at: https:/ /www.statista.com/statis-
tics/264810/number-of-monthly-active-facebook-users-worldwide/
Stanley, T. (2015). “Utopia and the Public sphere”. Philarchive. Available at: pal-stanley-all.indd (philarchive.org)
Stent, A. (2021). The impact of September 11 on US-Russian relations. Brookings. Available at: https:/ /www.brookings.edu/
blog/order-from-chaos/2021/09/08/the-impact-of-september-11-on-us-russian-relations/
Steven Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt: “How wobbly is our Democracy”. New York Times, January 27, 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 166 =====
157
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Strickland, J. (2008). “Who owns the Internet?”, How Stuff Works. Available at: https:/ /web.archive.org/
web/20140619070159/http:/computer.howstuffworks.com/internet/basics/who-owns-internet.htm
Taneja, H. (2019). The Era of “Move Fast and Break Things is Over”. Harvard Business Review. Available at: https:/ /hbr.
org/2019/01/the-era-of-move-fast-and-break-things-is-over
Taylor, A. (2019). “Trump and Putin have had 16 or more private conversations. Here’s what we know”, The Washington
Post. Available at: https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/world/2019/10/04/trump-has-spoken-privately-with-putin-
least-times-heres-what-we-know-about-conversations/
Taylor, D. Garth (1982). “Pluralistic Ignorance and the Spiral of Silence: A Formal Analysis”. Public Opinion Quarterly. 46 (3):
311. doi:10.1086/268729. ISSN 0033-362X.
Tang, A. (2022). “What the World Can Learn from Taiwan’s Digital Democracy”. Wired. Available at: https:/ /www.wired.
co.uk/article/global-neighbourhoods-digital-democracy
Thagard, P. (2018). What is Trust. Psychology Today. Available at: https:/ /www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/hot-
thought/201810/what-is-trust#:~:text=Trust%20is%20a%20belief%20in,security%20that%20a%20partner%20cares.
The AI Act (2023). The Artificial Intelligence Act. Available at: https:/ /artificialintelligenceact.eu/
The Atlantic (2023). “The New Anarchy” - In The Atlantic’s Cover Story, Adrienne LaFrance Reports That America Is Facing
an Extremist Violence It Does Not Know How to Stop. Available at: https:/ /www.theatlantic.com/press-releases/ar-
chive/2023/03/adrienne-lafrances-april-cover-story/673281/
Thomas, M. (2022). The Chinese Roots of Hybrid Warfare. CEPA. Available at: https:/ /cepa.org/article/the-chinese-roots-of-
hybrid-warfare/
Toner, H., Xiao, J., Ding, J. (2023). “The Illusion of China’s AI prowess”. Foreign Affairs. Available at:
https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/china/illusion-chinas-ai-prowess-regulation
Toosi, N. (2021). Biden disliked Putin before it was cool. Politico. Available at: https:/ /www.politico.com/news/2021/06/09/
biden-russia-putin-love-story-492195
Transparency International (2021). Corruption Perception Index. Available at: https:/ /www.transparency.org/en/cpi/2021?g-
clid=Cj0KCQiA0p2QBhDvARIsAACSOONN4qwy8bbHghDdPxM9HcKMDxDXq6XKHRE22--nXO17hswweQDsihwaAue-
PEALw_wcB
Troianovski, A., Nechepurenko, I., and Nagourney, R. (2022). “Russia-Ukraine War: Putin Rails Against ‘Western Elites’ in
Speech Aimed at U.S. Conservatives”, New York Times. Available at: https:/ /www.nytimes.com/live/2022/10/27/
world/russia-ukraine-war-news
Tsuruoka, M. (2022). Why the War in Ukraine is not about Democracy versus Authoritarianism. RUSI. Available at: https:/ /
www.rusi.org/explore-our-research/publications/commentary/why-war-ukraine-not-about-democracy-versus-au-
thoritarianism
Tufekci, Zeynup (17 February 2010). ‘The corporation of social commons. Available at: https:/ /technosociology.org/?p=102 .
Turner Lee, N.; and Malamud, J. (2022). “Opportunities and blind spots in the White House’s blueprint for an AI Bill of
Rights. Available at: https:/ /www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2022/12/19/opportunities-and-blind-spots-in-the-
white-houses-blueprint-for-an-ai-bill-of-rights/
United Nations (2023). “World Press Freedom Day 3 May”. Available at: https:/ /www.un.org/en/observances/press-free-
dom-day

===== PDF_PAGE 167 =====
158
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
UNESCO (2023). Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. Available at: https:/ /www.unesco.org/en/artificial-intelligence/recommen-
dation-ethics
UNODC. (2021). The Need for Independent Judges and a Free Press in a Democracy. Doha Declaration Global Programme.
Available at: https:/ /www.unodc.org/dohadeclaration/en/news/2021/05/the-need-for-independent-judges-and-a-
free-press-in-a-democracy.html
Urban, D. (2022). ‘Government-hosted social media-how to avoid First Amendment claims’. LCW. Available at: https:/ /
www.lcwlegal.com/news/government-hosted-social-media-how-to-avoid-first-amendment-claims/
US-China Economic and Security Review Commission (2023). China’s Position on Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine. Available at:
https:/ /www.uscc.gov/research/chinas-position-russias-invasion-ukraine
U.S. Department of Defense (2023). AUKUS: The Trilateral Security Partnership Between Australia, U.K. and U.S. Available
at: https:/ /www.defense.gov/Spotlights/AUKUS/
U.S. Government Publishing Office (2021). “Examining the Domestic Terrorism Threat in the Wake of the Attack on the U.S.
Capitol”, Library of Congress. Available at: https:/ /www.congress.gov/event/117th-congress/house-event/LC65965/
text
Vallier, K. (2019). SOCIAL AND POLITICAL TRUST Concepts, Causes, and Consequences. Available at: https:/ /www.ni-
skanencenter.org/wp-content/uploads/old_uploads/2019/05/Vallier-Social-and-Political-Trust-Niskanen.pdf
Venkataraman, B. (2023). “A better kind of social media is possible – if we want it”. The Washington Post. Available at:
https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/03/06/social-media-future-regulation-imagination/
Verdi, G. (2022). “The Case for an EU AI Agency”. European Digital SME Alliance. Available at: https:/ /www.digitalsme.eu/
the-case-for-an-eu-ai-agency/
Villiers Negroponte, D. (2019). Would the Soviet Union have collapsed without Mikhail Gorbachev? Brookings. Available at:
https:/ /www.brookings.edu/articles/would-the-soviet-union-have-collapsed-without-mikhail-gorbachev/
V-Dem Institute (2023). “Defiance in the face of Autocratization”. Available at: https:/ /www.v-dem.net/docu-
ments/29/V-dem_democracyreport2023_lowres.pdf
V-Dem Institute (2023). DEMOCRACY REPORT 2023: Defiance in the Face of Autocratization. University of Gothenburg.
Available at: https:/ /v-dem.net/documents/29/V-dem_democracyreport2023_lowres.pdf
Walt, S.M. (1998). “International relations. One World, many theories”. Foreign Policy, 110, 29–46. https:/ /doi.
org/10.2307/1149275
Walter, B. (2022). Why we should worry about U.S. becoming an anocracy again? Because of the threat of a civil war. The
Washington Post. Available at: https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/01/24/why-should-we-worry-that-
us-could-become-an-anocracy-again-because-threat-civil-war/
Walter, B. F., & ProQuest. (2022). How civil wars start : and how to stop them. Viking.
Wang, Y. (2020). In China, the ‘Great Firewall’ Is Changing a Generation. Politico. Available at: https:/ /www.politico.com/
news/magazine/2020/09/01/china-great-firewall-generation-405385
Ware, J. (2023). The violent far-right terrorist threat to the Republican party and American conservatism. CFR. Available at:
https:/ /www.cfr.org/blog/violent-far-right-terrorist-threat-republican-party-and-american-conservatism

===== PDF_PAGE 168 =====
159
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Washington Post. Social Media & the January 6th Attack on the U.S. Capitol Summary of Investigative Findings. Available
at: https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/documents/5bfed332-d350-47c0-8562-0137a4435c68.pdf?itid=lk_inline_man-
ual_3
The Washington Post (2023). What the Jan. 6 probe found out about social media, but didn’t report. Available at: https:/ /
www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2023/01/17/jan6-committee-report-social-media/
Wheeler, T. (2023). “Artificial Intelligence is another reason for a new digital agency”. Brookings. Available at: https:/ /www.
brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2023/04/28/artificial-intelligence-is-another-reason-for-a-new-digital-agency/
White House (2023). FACT SHEET: Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment at the G7 Summit. Available at:
https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/05/20/fact-sheet-partnership-for-global-in-
frastructure-and-investment-at-the-g7-summit/
White House (2022). A Declaration for the Future for the Internet. Available at: https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2022/04/Declaration-for-the-Future-for-the-Internet_Launch-Event-Signing-Version_FINAL.pdf
White House (2022). Remarks by President Biden on the Continued Battle for the Soul of the Nation. Available at: https:/ /
www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/09/01/remarks-by-president-bidenon-the-continued-
battle-for-the-soul-of-the-nation/
White House (2022). Remarks by President Biden on the United Efforts of the Free World to Support the People of
Ukraine. Available at: https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/03/26/remarks-by-presi-
dent-biden-on-the-united-efforts-of-the-free-world-to-support-the-people-of-ukraine/
White House (2022). Remarks by President Biden on the United Efforts of the Free World to Support the People of
Ukraine. Available at: https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/03/26/remarks-by-presi-
dent-biden-on-the-united-efforts-of-the-free-world-to-support-the-people-of-ukraine/
White House (2022). FACT SHEET: CHIPS and Science Act Will Lower Costs, Create Jobs, Strengthen Supply Chains, and
Counter China. Available at: https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/08/09/fact-
sheet-chips-and-science-act-will-lower-costs-create-jobs-strengthen-supply-chains-and-counter-china/
Wikipedia (2023). Media coverage of the Gulf War. Available at: https:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Media_coverage_of_the_
Gulf_War#:~:text=The%20war%20was%20covered%20live,were%20anchoring%20their%20evening%20newscasts.
World Public Opinion (2003). Misperceptions, the media and the Iraq War. Available at: https:/ /web.archive.org/
web/20061008020042/http:/www.worldpublicopinion.org/pipa/articles/international_security_bt/102.
php?nid=&id=&pnt=102&lb=brusc
Wrighton, S. (2022). Trust in international relations, public diplomacy and soft power. British Council. Available at: https:/ /
www.britishcouncil.org/research-policy-insight/policy-reports/trust-international-relations-soft-power
WSJ Opinion (1979). “Milton Friedman, in an interview with talk-show host Phil Donahue”. Available: https:/ /www.wsj.com/
articles/notable-quotable-milton-friedman-1434318595
Wikiversity (2023). International Relations / Structural Realism. Available at: https:/ /en.wikiversity.org/wiki/Internation-
al_Relations/Structural_Realism
Xinhua (2021). Xi stresses enhancing whole-process people’s democracy. The State Council of the People’s Republic of
China. Available at: http:/ /english.www.gov.cn/news/topnews/202110/14/content_WS61682fa5c6d0df57f98e1aab.html
Xu, X., and Jin, X. (2018). The autocratic roots of social distrust. Journal of Comparative Economics, 46(1), 362–380. https:/ /
doi.org/10.1016/j.jce.2017.12.002

===== PDF_PAGE 169 =====
160
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
York, D. (2022). “What Is the Splinternet? And Why You Should Be Paying Attention”, Internet Society. Available at: https:/ /
www.internetsociety.org/blog/2022/03/what-is-the-splinternet-and-why-you-should-be-paying-attention/
Yu Lin, Y. (2018). China’s Hybrid Warfare and Taiwan: How China could use “fake news” and digital warfare in its prepara-
tions for engagement with Taiwan. The Diplomat: https:/ /thediplomat.com/2018/01/chinas-hybrid-warfare-and-tai-
wan/
Zakaria, F. (2023). TikTok is dangerous to teens’ mental health and should be regulated, The Washington Post. Available at:
https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/04/14/tiktok-teens-mental-health-regulation/
Zakaria, F., (1997). “The rise of illiberal democracy”. Foreign Affairs, Vol. 76, No. 6 (Nov. - Dec., 1997), pp. 22-43 https:/ /doi.
org/10.2307/20048274
Secondary Literature
Allison, G.T. (2017) Destined for war: Can America and China escape Thucydide’s trap? Melbourne: Scribe.
Avery, J. M. (2009). Videomalaise or Virtuous Circle? The International Journal of Press/politics, 14(4), 410–433. https:/ /doi.
org/10.1177/1940161209336224
Bates, S. (2020). “An aristocracy of critics. Luce, Hutchins, Niebhur, and the committee that redefined freedom of the
press”. Yale University Press.
Brady, H. E., & Kent, T. B. (2022). Fifty Years of Declining Confidence & Increasing Polarization in Trust in American Institu-
tions. Daedalus (Cambridge, Mass.), 151(4), 43–66. https:/ /doi.org/10.1162/daed_a_01943
Brady, M. E. (2018). “Adam Smith Was Consistent in Both the Theory of Moral Sentiments and the Wealth of Nations on the
Role of the Concept of Self Interest: Das Utilitarian Economist View Is the Problem”. SSRN Electronic Journal. https:/ /
doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3156013
Brown, W. (2019). In the Ruins of Neoliberalism: The Rise of Antidemocratic Politics in the West. Columbia University Press.
Butsch, R. (2007). Media and Public Spheres (1st ed. 2007.). Palgrave Macmillan UK : Imprint: Palgrave Macmillan
Campbell, R. J. (2000). “Descending into the Maelstrom of the 21st Century with Marshall McLuhan”, Educational Technolo-
gy, 40(5), 18–27. http:/ /www.jstor.org/stable/44428609
Carr, N. G. (2010). The shallows : what the Internet is doing to our brains (1st ed.). W.W. Norton
Chaudoin, S., Milner, H., & Pang, X. (2015). International Systems and Domestic Politics: Linking Complex Interac-
tions with Empirical Models in International Relations. International Organization, 69(2), 275-309. doi:10.1017/
S0020818314000356
Cinpoeş, R. (2010). Nationalism and identity in Romania: a history of extreme politics from the birth of the state to EU
accession. Tauris Academic Studies
Clark, M. (2022). RUSSIAN HYBRID WARFARE. Institute for the Study of War.
Codevilla, A. (2008). “Political Warfare: A Set of Means for Achieving Political Ends,” in Waller, ed., Strategic Influence:
Public Diplomacy, Counterpropaganda and Political Warfare. IWP Press.

===== PDF_PAGE 170 =====
161
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2023). Democratic responsibility in the digital public sphere. Constellations (Oxford, England), 30(1),
92–97. https:/ /doi.org/10.1111/1467-8675.12670
Cohen, J., & Fung, A. (2021). Digital technology and democratic theory. The University of Chicago Press.
Courant, D. (2021). Citizens’ Assemblies for Referendums and Constitutional Reforms: Is There an “Irish Model” for Deliber-
ative Democracy? Frontiers in Political Science, 2. https:/ /doi.org/10.3389/fpos.2020.591983
Dahlberg, L. (2004). The Habermasian Public Sphere: A Specification of the Idealized Conditions of Democratic Communi-
cation, Issue 10. Available at: https:/ /citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=32b637f33480ca70f-
3ba8a1908b3a3dea9071830
Descartes, R. (1649). The passions of the soul. Cambridge University Press.
Dodds, Klaus, Geopolitics: A Very Short Introduction, 1st edn, Very Short Introductions (Oxford, 2007; online edn, Oxford
Academic, 24 Sept. 2013), https:/ /doi.org/10.1093/actrade/9780199206582.001.0001
Dryzek, J. S., Bächtiger, A., Chambers, S., Cohen, J., Druckman, J. N., Felicetti, A., Fishkin, J. S., Farrell, D. M., Fung, A.,
Gutmann, A., Landemore, H., Mansbridge, J., Marien, S., Neblo, M. A., Niemeyer, S., Setälä, M., Slothuus, R., Suiter, J.,
Thompson, D., & Warren, M. E. (2019). The crisis of democracy and the science of deliberation. Science (American
Association for the Advancement of Science), 363(6432), 1144–1146. https:/ /doi.org/10.1126/science.aaw2694
Fishkin, J.S., Luskin, R.C., Siu, A. ‘Europolis and the European Public sphere: empirical explorations of a counterfactual
ideal’. EUP. Available at: https:/ /drive.google.com/file/d/1DmQBI2yTKiONaRiID0EsGPMNzJCi-xGT/view?pli=1
Fraser, N. (1990). Rethinking the Public Sphere. Social Text, 8(3), 56.
Fromm, E. (1941). Escape from freedom. Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Habermas, J. (1962). “The structural transformation of the public sphere: an inquiry into a category of bourgeois society”.
MIT press.
Harari, Y. N. (2014). Sapiens: a brief history of humankind. Harvill Secker.
Harari, Y. N. (2016). Homo deus : a brief history of tomorrow. Harvill Secker
Hawken, P. (2007). Blessed unrest : how the largest movement in the world came into being and why no one saw it com-
ing. Viking.
Heidegger, M., and Lovitt, W. (1977). The question concerning technology, and other essays (1st ed.). Harper & Row.
Herranz de Rafael, G., and Fernández-Prados, J. S. (2022). “The Security Versus Freedom Dilemma. An Empirical Study of
the Spanish Case”, Frontiers in Sociology, 7, 774485–774485. https:/ /doi.org/10.3389/fsoc.2022.774485
Huard, M. (2012) “The BBC and the Shaping of British Identity from 1922 to 1945,” The Gettysburg Historical Journal: Vol. 11
, Article 3. Available at: https:/ /cupola.gettysburg.edu/ghj/vol11/iss1/3
Jung, C. G., & Hull, R. F. C. (1969). The archetypes and the collective unconscious (2d ed.). Princeton University Press.
Jung, C. and Jaffe, A. (1962). ‘Memories, Dreams, Reflections’. Pantheon Books.

===== PDF_PAGE 171 =====
162
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Karlsen, G.H. Divide and rule: ten lessons about Russian political influence activities in Europe. Palgrave Commun 5, 19
(2019). https:/ /doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0227-8
Karolewski, I. P., & Benedikter, R. (2018). Europe’s refugee and migrant crisis. Politique Européenne, N° 60(2), 98–132.
https:/ /doi.org/10.3917/poeu.060.0098
Kellner, D. (1992). The Persian Gulf TV War. Westview Press.
Kleinfeld, R. (2021). “The Rise of Political Violence in the United States”, Journal of Democracy. Available at: https:/ /www.
journalofdemocracy.org/articles/the-rise-of-political-violence-in-the-united-states/
Kupchan, C. (2021). “Bipolarity is Back: Why It Matters”, The Washington Quarterly, 44:4, 123-139, DOI:
10.1080/0163660X.2021.2020457
Kydd, A. H. (2018). Trust and Mistrust in International Relations. Princeton University Press.
Leong, Y. C., Chen, J., Willer, R., and Zaki, J. (2020). Conservative and liberal attitudes drive polarized neural responses
to political content. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences - PNAS, 117(44), 27731–27739. https:/ /doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.2008530117
Lorenz-Spreen, P., Lewandowsky, S., Sustein, C.R., and Hertwig, R. (2020). “How Behavioural Sciences Can Promote Truth,
Autonomy, and Democratic Discourse Online”, Nature Human Behaviour. Available at: https:/ /www.nature.com/arti-
cles/s41562-020-0889-7
Lorenz-Spreen, P., Oswald, L., Lewandowsky, S., and Hertwig, R. (2023). A systematic review of worldwide causal and cor-
relational evidence on digital media and democracy. Nature Human Behaviour, 7(1), 74–101. https:/ /doi.org/10.1038/
s41562-022-01460-1
Linz, J. J. (2000). Totalitarian and authoritarian regimes. Lynne Rienner Publishers
Machado, A. (1912). ‘Campos de Castilla’. Alianza Editorial.
McCoy J.L, Somer M., (2021). “Political Parties, Elections and Pernicious Polarization in the Rise of Illiberalism”. Routledge
Handbook of Illiberalism. Routledge.
McLuhan, M. (2001). Understanding media: the extensions of man. Routledge.
McLuhan, M. (1962). The Gutenberg galaxy: the making of typographic man. University of Toronto Press.
McLean, I. and McMillan, A. (2009). “Liberalism”, Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics, Third edition, 2009.
Müller, Jan-Werner (2006). “On the Origins of Constitutional Patriotism”. Contemporary Political Theory. 5 (3): 278–
296. https:/ /link.springer.com/article/10.1057/palgrave.cpt.9300235 .
Norris, P. (2000). A Virtuous Circle? In A Virtuous Circle (pp. 309–320). https:/ /doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511609343.015
Nye, J. S. (2019). Do morals matter?: presidents and foreign policy from FDR to Trump. Oxford University Press.
Nye, J. S. (2011). The future of power (1st ed.). PublicAffairs.

===== PDF_PAGE 172 =====
163
Democracy and the Liberal World Order Amid the Rise of Authoritarianism
Nye, J. (1990). Bound to lead : the changing nature of American power. Basic Books.
Olson, M. (1993). Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development. American Political Science Review, 87(03), 567-576.
Ortega y Gasset, J. (1932). The revolt of the masses : authorized translation from the Spanish. W. W. Norton & company, inc.
Oxtoby, D. W., Brady, H. E., Meares, T. L., Rainie, L., & Schlozman, K. L. (2023). Distrust, Political Polarization, and America’s
Challenged Institutions. Bulletin - American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 76(3), 42–64.
Paek, H.-J., & Pan, Z. (2004). Spreading Global Consumerism: Effects of Mass Media and Advertising on Consumerist Val-
ues in China. Mass Communication & Society, 7(4), 491–515. https:/ /doi.org/10.1207/s15327825mcs0704_7
Patberg, M. (2023). ‘Digital transformation. Habermas and the new structural transformation of the public sphere’.
RevDem. Available at: https:/ /revdem.ceu.edu/2023/02/02/digital-fragmentation-habermas-on-the-new-structur-
al-transformation-of-the-public-sphere/
Popper, K. (1945). “The Open Society and its enemies”. Princeton University Press.
Putnam, R. D., Garrett, S. R. (2020). The upswing: how America came together a century ago and how we can do it again
(First Simon & Schuster hardcover edition.). Simon & Schuster.
Reiter, D. (2012), “Democratic Peace Theory”, Political Science, Oxford University Press, doi:10.1093/obo/9780199756223-
0014, ISBN 978-0-19-975622-3
Roberts, M.J., (2009). ‘Trade Unions, Participation, and the Proletarian Public sphere’. Palgrave MacMillan.
Romero Campos, D. (2002). Mater Dolorosa. La idea de España en el siglo XIX. Sancho el Sabio, 16, 203–204.
Romm Livermore, C. (2011). The Role that Electronic Media Played in Psychological Warfare During the Second World War.
International Journal of e-Politics, 2(4), 61–66. https:/ /doi.org/10.4018/jep.2011100105
Sandel, M. J. (2010). Justice: what’s the right thing to do? (First paperback edition.). Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Seneca, L. A., & Campbell, R. (1974). Letters from a Stoic. Epistulae morales ad Lucilium. Penguin Books.
Schaefer, M.S. (2015). “Digital Public sphere”. Mazzoleni, Gianpetro et al: The International Encyclopedia of Political Com-
munication. London.Wiley Blackwell. Pp 322-328.
Schilke, O., Reimann, M., & Cook, K. S. (2021). Trust in Social Relations. Annual Review of Sociology, 47(1), 239–259. https:/ /
doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-082120-082850
Thagard, P. (2019). Mind-society : from brains to social sciences and professions. Oxford University Press.
Vallier, K. (2022). Political Trust. BYU Law Review. Available at: https:/ /digitalcommons.law.byu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?ar-
ticle=3372&context=lawreview
Vallier, K. (2020). Trust in a Polarized Age. New York; online edn, Oxford Academic https:/ /doi.org/10.1093/
oso/9780190887223.001.0001

===== PDF_PAGE 173 =====
164
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Vyse, S. (2007). “Going broke. Why Americans (still) can’t hold on to their money”. Oxford University Press
Waller, J.M. (2009). Strategic Influence: Public Diplomacy, Counterpropaganda, and Political Warfare. Institute of World
Politics Press.
Wendt, A. (1999). ‘Social Theory of International Politics’, First Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wendt, A. (1992). ‘Anarchy is What States Make of It: The Social Construction of Power Politics’. International Organiza-
tion,  2, 391-425 and Wendt, A. (1999). ‘Social Theory of International Politics’, First Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Wilde, O., Morris, W., & Owen, W. C. (1891). The soul of man under socialism; The socialist ideal--art ; and The coming
solidarity. Humboldt.
Wilson, E. O. (2017). The origins of creativity (First edition.). Liveright Publishing Corporation, a division of W.W. Norton &
Company
Wolf, M., & ProQuest. (2023). The crisis of democratic capitalism. Penguin Press.
Yu, L., Qiao, J., Ming, W.-K., & Wu, Y. (2023). Megastudies: A New Approach to Reducing Vaccine Hesitation Worldwide.
Vaccines (Basel), 11(1), 133. https:/ /doi.org/10.3390/vaccines11010133
Zagarri, R. (2010). The Politics of Size: Representation in the United States, 1776–1850. Cornell University Press.

===== PDF_PAGE 174 =====
Project on Europe and the Transatlantic Relationship
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
www.belfercenter.org/
Copyright 2023, President and Fellows of Harvard College
Printed in the United States of America
