/
Home
/
Publications
Working paper
Instruments of economic security
The challenge of improving European economic security has grown in importance, with various relevant policy measures introduced at EU level
Publishing date
23 May 2024
Issue number
12/2024
Authors
Conor McCaffrey
Niclas Poitiers
Download
Cite
Recommended citation:
McCaffrey, C. and N. Poitiers (2024) ‘Instruments of economic security’, Working Paper 12/2024, Bruegel
Copy to clipboard
Share
Share this page:
Bluesky
Linkedin
Email
Geopolitical and economic developments, including Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and trade disruptions during the COVID-19 pandemic, have raised concerns about the European Union’s exposure to hostile countries. The challenge of improving European economic security (which we narrowly treat here as exposure to foreign trade or production shocks) has grown in importance, with various relevant policy measures introduced at EU level.
Focusing in particular on the threat posed by economic coercion, this paper begins by assessing the nature of this threat, before outlining two lessons that can be drawn from two recent instances of this coercion in action: China’s actions against Lithuania and Australia respectively. First, while much of the policy debate has focused on imports, the threat to EU exporters should not be ignored. Second, while coercion may not cause any macroeconomically significant harm, this may mask severe impacts on the targeted industries, which should be considered in any policy responses.
The EU has significantly added to its policy tools in this area, though some of the instruments introduced under the umbrella of economic security go beyond the definition we consider. An effective response should be built around: building a deeper understanding of the risks facing the EU; improving diversification of both exports and imports; using targeted industrial policy in the limited sectors where the risks warrant intervention; and managing and limiting the fallout of any shocks using ex-post instruments.
This working paper is based on McCaffrey, C and N. Poitiers (2024) ‘Instruments of economic security’, chapter 6 in
Europe’s Economic Security
, Paris Report 2, CEPR and Bruegel. We would like to thank Alicia García-Herrero, André Sapir, Beatrice Weder di Mauro, Chad Bown, Heather Grabbe, Guntram Wolff, Jean Pisani-Ferry and Jeromin Zettelmeyer for their comments and discussion and Luca Léry Moffat for excellent research assistance.
Authors
Conor McCaffrey
Niclas Poitiers
Theme
Global economy and trade
Keyword
trade policy
industrial policy
innovation
multilateralism
Language
English
Related content
Dataset
Russian foreign trade tracker
Tracking Russian trade using data from the EU, China, the US, South Korea, Japan, India, the UK, Turkey, Switzerland, Norway, Brazil and Kazakhstan
Anna Bahí,
        Madalena Barata da Rocha,
        Nicolas Boivin,
        Zsolt Darvas,
        Marie-Sophie Lappe,
        Luca Léry Moffat,
        Catarina Martins and
        Conor McCaffrey
03 July 2026
trade policy
active dataset
Analysis
Less focus on poverty reduction? An evaluation of the EU 2028-2034 development aid plan
European Union development aid is emphasising poverty reduction less and directing attention to other geopolitical priorities
Costanza Greppi Maturana and
        Niclas Poitiers
25 June 2026
emerging economies
EU budget
...
geopolitics
multilateralism
Newsletter
How can Europe lead a ‘coalition of the middle powers’?
Niclas Poitiers
18 May 2026
global governance
trade policy
...
geopolitics
Why Axis newsletter
Working paper
Between values and interests: drivers of EU aid
EU aid is still more poverty-focused than peers, but external policy drivers are growing and reshaping development cooperation after Global Gateway
Anna Bahí,
        Roel Dom,
        Niclas Poitiers and
        Camille Reverdy
08 June 2026
emerging economies
investment
...
fiscal policy
