/
Home
/
Publications
Working paper
Making industrial policy work: a case study on the European Battery Alliance Academy
Efforts to address skilled-labour shortages in the battery sector can provide lessons to other areas of EU industrial policy.
Publishing date
16 January 2024
Issue number
01/2024
Authors
Conor McCaffrey
Niclas Poitiers
Download
Cite
Recommended citation:
McCaffrey, C. and N. Poitiers (2024) ‘Making industrial policy work: a case study on the European Battery Alliance Academy’, Working Paper 01/2024, Bruegel
Copy to clipboard
Share
Share this page:
Bluesky
Linkedin
Email
The transition from cars powered by the internal combustion engine to vehicles powered by electric batteries implies a fundamental shift in the types of skills required by the automotive industry. However, the industry faces significant problems in finding suitable workers. Surveys show that the lack of skilled labour is seen by firms as a problem of similar magnitude to high energy costs. Against the background a general skills shortage in the European Union, the shortage of skilled labour represents a major impediment to the development of a European battery industry.
The European Battery Alliance Academy is the main component of the EU’s strategy for tackling this problem. It develops training courses and materials to assist local training providers, and serves as a blueprint for skills policies in other industries. However, given the scale of the challenge, it represents more a symbolic than a substantive answer to the challenge.
More should be done. The limited powers of the EU in labour market policies hold up a union-wide solution. In the short term, the training programmes developed by the European Battery Alliance Academy* could more explicitly target demographics that are underserved by private training providers. In the medium term, the EU should rethink its labour market competences in order to develop a social pillar to underpin the European green transition.
*The academy was rebranded in early 2023 to become the storage component of the wider InnoEnergy Skills Institute. For clarity and ease, we refer to it as the EBA Academy in this paper.
This was produced within the project "
Future of Work and Inclusive Growth in Europe
" with the financial support of the Mastercard Center for Inclusive Growth.
Authors
Conor McCaffrey
Niclas Poitiers
Project
Future of Work and Inclusive Growth in Europe
Theme
Energy and climate policy
Microeconomic policies
Keyword
industrial policy
European Green Deal
Language
English
Related content
Podcast
Skills anticipation for the green transition
How do we build a workforce that has the skills needed for the future and how do we ensure the process works for everybody?
Rebecca Christie,
        Duygu Güner and
        Francesca Rosso
07 February 2024
future of work
European Green Deal
Newsletter
What will shape the debate on ETS reform?
Flora Marchioro
20 July 2026
energy
European Green Deal
...
decarbonisation
climate change
industrial policy
Why Axis newsletter
Dataset
ETS Tracker
This tracker maps the EU ETS through data on emissions, compliance, allowances, auction revenues, prices and installations
Jan Abrell,
        Marie Jugé,
        Flora Marchioro,
        Ben McWilliams,
        Thomas Mramor,
        Roberto Rossini,
        Simone Tagliapietra and
        Georg Zachmann
15 July 2026
energy
European Green Deal
...
decarbonisation
climate change
industrial policy
active dataset
Analysis
Inclusive digital economy:  a round-up of project research
The rise of automation, remote employment and a diversifying workforce will necessitate a shift in how we interact with new technology
Rebecca Christie
08 April 2024
Covid-19
artificial intelligence
