/
Home
/
Publications
Working paper
The competitive relationship between cloud computing and generative AI
Merger control and antitrust laws can address some of the competition risks arising from the relationship between generative AI and cloud computing.
Publishing date
11 December 2023
Issue number
19/2023
Authors
Christophe Carugati
Download
Share
Share this page:
Bluesky
Linkedin
Email
Cloud computing providers and generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) providers nurture a close, interdependent relationship: GenAI providers need cloud providers to train, run and deploy their GenAI solutions, while cloud providers see GenAI providers as a business driver to grow their market shares in cloud and related markets, such as productivity software or search engines. The cloud/GenAI relationship takes various forms, including exclusive and strategic partnerships, especially between large cloud providers and GenAI providers across all parts of the cloud market, including infrastructure, platforms and software.
Competition benefits and risks are likely to result from the relationships. Competition benefits arise from increased competition and innovation in the cloud and GenAI sectors. Risks relate to potential concentrations arising from the partnerships between cloud and GenAI providers, and from anticompetitive practices, including discrimination in the
supply of IT equipment by dominant IT providers, interoperability obstacles to switching, use of business-user data, self-preferencing of cloud services over third parties, tying and pure bundling.
Merger control and antitrust laws can address some of the competition risks, while laws, including the European Union’s Digital Markets Act and Data Act, can deal with competition issues in digital markets and the cloud sector. Nevertheless there are gaps. The European Commission should amend existing EU instruments, including by changing the definition of a concentration under merger control, and should specify interoperability requirements for cloud providers under the Data Act. The Commission should also closely monitor developments in and outside Europe through market investigations, including with international counterparts, and should intervene to tackle imminent competition risks using fast procedural tools, such as interim measures.
Authors
Christophe Carugati
Theme
Microeconomic policies
Keyword
digital economy
Language
English
Related content
Policy Brief
Compliance principles for the Digital Markets Act
This paper proposes an original set of five compliance principles derived from the DMA list of obligations.
Christophe Carugati
16 November 2023
digital economy
digital single market
Analysis
The Digital Markets Act is about enabling rights, not obliging changes in market conditions
Compliance with the DMA will be about ensuring that users are empowered with rights to challenge gatekeepers
Christophe Carugati
06 September 2023
digital economy
Opinion piece
Preparing for the virtual AI revolution: EU’s flexible principles imperative
Legislators and regulators should adopt flexible principles to promote technological innovations while minimising risks.
Christophe Carugati
09 October 2023
artificial intelligence
innovation
Conference
Bruegel Annual Meetings | 2-3 September 2026
As Europe faces defining choices, the Bruegel Annual Meetings 2026 will explore the trade-offs shaping its future
02 September 2026
artificial intelligence
capital markets
...
climate change
competition policy
competitiveness
decarbonisation
digital economy
EU budget
EU governance
EU-China relations
