Skip to Content
Congress
Media
Account
Donate
About
Experts
Programs
Publications
Topics
Events
Brief
The Indo-Pacific and the Challenge of Multilateral AI Governance

by Renan Araujo
May 12, 2026

Renan Araujo examines how Indo-Pacific countries have been pioneers in multilateral AI governance. He argues that in a challenging landscape, there are still opportunities for AI cooperation between Indo-Pacific countries in security and economic domains and considers how these nations should face the governance issues at the multilateral and domestic levels.

Indo-Pacific countries have been among the most active shapers of international AI governance. Japan led the G-7 Hiroshima AI Process, and four of the five founding members of the International Network for Advanced AI Measurement, Evaluation and Science came from the region. Singapore led a global consensus on safety research priorities, and India hosted the largest global AI summit to date. These and other initiatives have laid important foundations for international cooperation on governing frontier AI.

Yet this multilateral momentum now faces serious headwinds. The United States has withdrawn from most multilateral institutions, including rejecting international AI efforts at the United Nations, and instead has prioritized bilateral agreements with key allies.[1] At the other end of the geopolitical spectrum, China has attempted to fill the gap by offering numerous multilateral AI governance proposals through the United Nations, BRICS, and a new organization for AI governance centered in Shanghai.[2] But the Chinese initiatives have lacked widespread participation, as many countries are rightfully hesitant to commit to a centralized governance model that risks preventing them from accessing the AI frontier on both software and hardware, which remains in the U.S. AI ecosystem.

In this challenging landscape, there are still opportunities for AI cooperation between Indo-Pacific countries in security and economic domains. While widespread multilateral cooperation remains out of reach, existing security partnerships such as the Quad (Australia, India, Japan, and the United States) and AUKUS (Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States) and economic organizations such as Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) could productively incorporate AI-related initiatives into their existing work.

To complement what multilateral progress is possible, Indo-Pacific nations should also use this period to build the domestic technical capacity and institutional infrastructure that will prepare them for the radical transformations AI will bring. Many countries in the region are well-positioned to leverage their access to the semiconductor supply chain, critical minerals, and data center infrastructure. They can also strengthen state capacity and resilience by boosting government adoption and industrial applications. These efforts will better prepare individual countries and the broader region for the transformational changes ahead.

The Building Blocks Set by Indo-Pacific Initiatives

The Indo-Pacific has been a uniquely active region in multilateral AI governance, rivaled only by Europe. In its first stage, international AI governance revolved around high-level guiding principles. A pioneering milestone was the adoption of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) AI Principles in 2019, which Japan took to the G-20 when presiding over it that same year through the Osaka Leaders’ Declaration. Another landmark was the UNESCO Recommendation on the Ethics of AI in 2021, adopted by acclamation by all 193 UNESCO member states at the general conference after two years in the making. Japan also led the G-7 Hiroshima AI Process in 2023, which was one of the first initiatives to focus more specifically on advanced AI systems. Unlike the OECD and UNESCO frameworks, which addressed AI broadly, the Hiroshima Process was developer-facing, asking frontier AI companies to voluntarily commit to measures such as pre-deployment testing, vulnerability disclosure, and incident reporting.[3] This narrower focus made it more operationally relevant, though the principles had quite limited adoption.

The second stage of international AI governance doubled down on advanced AI. In 2023 the United Kingdom started a series of summits, with the first held in Bletchley Park and the second in Seoul. These two summits convened governments and AI companies around a shared recognition that the most advanced AI systems posed large-scale risks requiring international coordination, as described by the Bletchley and Seoul declarations. They advanced more concrete governance innovations that led to stronger adoption among companies and governments, such as the Frontier AI Safety Commitments signed by twenty companies from all over the world, and the creation of a network of AI Safety Institutes (AISIs), which are technical government institutions focused on the safety of advanced AI systems.

While the UK played the leading role in this second phase, Indo-Pacific countries played an important role in expanding this stage of AI governance around the globe. South Korea hosted the second summit, which furthered the goals of the Bletchley summit. The first wave of AISIs saw Singapore and Japan quickly follow the UK and United States and establish counterparts. Since then, the international network of AISIs has become the International Network for Advanced AI Measurement, Evaluation and Science and has played a key role in international cooperation on AI safety, such as by conducting joint testing exercises with active contributions from AISIs in Australia, Japan, Singapore, and South Korea. The network also published an essay concerning the “international consensus and open questions in AI evaluations.”[4]

The model of cooperation between AISIs has been conducive to international-facing AI governance work, and Singapore’s, South Korea’s, and Japan’s AISIs have been particularly active, leading to a third stage of international AI governance defined by a narrower prioritization of scientific initiatives focused on testing and risk management. In 2025, Singapore organized the International Scientific Exchange on AI Safety and published the “Singapore Consensus on Global AI Safety Research Priorities.” Singapore has also conducted joint testing with the South Korean AISI on data leakage risks and signed collaborations on AI safety with the European Union and the UK in 2024. South Korea’s AISI has presented itself as a hub for the Asia-Pacific and framed its work on safety assessments and research as part of a global discussion. Japan’s AISI has signed a memorandum of cooperation with Anthropic and conducted joint research with Singapore and France. Recently, after actively participating in the international network, Australia also established an AISI focused on testing models and identifying future risks.

Notably, even within the third stage’s restricted scope of collaboration, the majority of efforts have been conducted through bilateral projects rather than widely coordinated groups.

The broadest international conversation on AI has taken place at the summits. After Seoul, France hosted a summit in Paris in February 2025, and India hosted the most recent summit in February 2026. At both summits, the emphasis on safety in the previous Seoul and Bletchley Park summits gave way to an enhanced focus on AI development and deployment, especially from the perspective of countries outside the frontier that seek expanded access.[5] More countries have participated each year, starting with 100 representatives and 29 signatories to the Bletchley Declaration before rising to over 1,000 representatives from over 100 nations and 61 signatories to the Paris Declaration and to over 200,000 registered attendees and over 90 signatories to the Delhi Declaration. As participation scaled, governance ambition shrank.[6]

Despite broad participation and ambitions, the two recent summits have arguably not succeeded in advancing concrete developments or cooperation on AI governance.[7] The United States, in particular, has used the forum to make the case against governance efforts at the international level. But this sentiment is shared by many countries that hope for access to advanced AI without seeking regulation. As a result, the summits have begun to resemble trade fairs focused on potential business opportunities rather than governance issues. Most of the governance discussions have retreated to technical, minilateral, or bilateral spaces.

How Should Indo-Pacific Nations Face the Challenge?

The multilateral level. While grand multilateral consensus on AI governance is unlikely in the near term, two windows of opportunity for multilateral or minilateral cooperation are expanding as AI’s impact deepens worldwide, and Indo-Pacific countries are well-positioned to make the most of them.

The first potential window is security driven. As AI becomes central to intelligence analysis, threat detection, and cyberdefense, existing security partnerships could proactively extend to cover AI-specific cooperation. Forums such as the Five Eyes, AUKUS (through Pillar 2), the Quad, and NATO-AP4 (NATO countries plus Australia, Japan, New Zealand, and South Korea) could advance the following initiatives:[8]

Joint operational testbeds and wargaming. Allied nations could develop shared environments to trial AI-enabled defense systems under realistic Indo-Pacific conditions across intelligence, logistics, cyber, and command and control.
Defense-oriented testing and evaluation of AI systems. Joint testing would make it more likely that nations could have pre-deployment access to evaluate the security of AI systems, building on joint work that is already happening as part of the International Network for Advanced AI Measurement, Evaluation and Science.
Early-warning incident reporting. A structured mechanism for sharing depoliticized information about AI failures, near misses, and unexpected behavior would build a shared knowledge base across the region without requiring any country to surrender sovereignty over its AI sector.

Besides their relevance for regional stability and national security, security-focused efforts are important to prevent potentially catastrophic risks from advanced AI systems. Chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN), cyber, and loss-of-control risks are transnational in nature and too large to be tackled by any single country. The Indo-Pacific is one of the few regions that have not only meaningful exposure to these risks but also the infrastructure to help tackle them.[9]

The second potential window is economic in nature. Advanced AI systems are likely to transform regional economies through automation and technological breakthroughs, and preparing for these shifts will require countries to proactively attract investment and talent for the right sectors. Forums such as APEC and ASEAN could work toward measures that would more effectively attract investment and increase the region’s bargaining power:

Shared AI procurement and standards. Harmonization would make it easier to invest in and partner with local governments in the region, including on mutual recognition of AI security requirements so that products approved in one market do not require entirely separate processes in each country.
A regional compute hub. Expanding AI data center investments in the region is a key strategic goal, diversifying global compute beyond its current concentration in North America, China, and increasingly the Gulf states, and giving more Indo-Pacific countries more direct access and control over infrastructure and assets essential to advanced AI development in leading countries.
Joint talent retention and circulation programs. This would better equip the other countries in the region to compete with Silicon Valley and Shenzhen in attracting and reshoring highly skilled workers, especially for public-sector roles, through streamlined visa arrangements and competitive compensation. The UK has pursued this approach with considerable success.[10]

The domestic level. Considering the challenges for international cooperation on AI governance, numerous actions need to be taken at the domestic level as well. Outside of the frontier AI race between the United States and China, many Indo-Pacific nations are “middle powers,” countries with significant institutional and industrial capacity but without frontier AI development capability.[11] Although middle powers may be behind the United States and China in the development of frontier AI, they can potentially leverage existing resources to deal with the externalities related to how transformative AI is deployed.[12]

The first aim for countries in the region should be securing access to or building up AI-relevant infrastructure. Taiwan, home to TSMC, is at the most critical bottleneck in the semiconductor supply chain. But other Indo-Pacific nations are also well-positioned. Japan and South Korea are home to key companies, such as Tokyo Electron and Samsung. Singapore and Malaysia play less central roles in the supply chain but still house relevant companies for assembly and packaging. Indonesia might be strategically placed to leverage its access to critical minerals, especially amid U.S.-China tensions in the sector. Outside the supply chain, building up data centers is another way to strengthen a country’s international position. Nations with access to land and energy, such as Malaysia and Australia, have been working on attracting investment in data center construction and should consider doubling down on this approach.

The second goal should be accelerating adoption and strengthening institutional resilience. Governments are typically slow in adopting new technologies, but the rapid incorporation of advances in AI into government work will be essential to prevent obsolescence and replacement by private-sector alternatives that might undermine state capacity. Several Indo-Pacific governments are already strained, ranging from India’s court backlog of over 50 million pending cases to Indonesia’s decades-long struggle with tens of millions of unregistered land parcels.[13] However, private alternatives such as automated dispute resolution or AI-assisted information processing might endanger the state’s legitimacy. On the other hand, AI naturally poses opportunities for savvy governments that adopt it in a timely manner. Striking a balance between limiting regulation to attract investments and bolstering government adoption will be essential.

Looking Ahead

Indo-Pacific countries have been pioneers in multilateral AI governance, and the foundations they laid remain useful even as the geopolitical landscape shifts. There are still important areas of cooperation to pursue that would help equip countries for the radical transformations that will come soon. The work ahead is less about creating fundamentally new institutions than about using the ones that exist: deepening security and defense AI collaboration through smaller minilateral groupings, pursuing shared procurement and evaluation standards through regional mechanisms, securing broader access to critical inputs such as compute and skilled labor, and building domestic technical capacity. Countries that act now will be better prepared regardless of how the geopolitical landscape evolves.

Renan Araujo is the Director of Programs at the Institute for AI Policy and Strategy (IAPS), where he leads the AI Policy Fellowship, the Alexandria Forum, and IAPS’s portfolio of talent and field-building projects. He is also a research affiliate at the Oxford AI Governance Initiative.

ENDNOTES

[1] “The United States Signs Technology Prosperity Deals with Japan and Korea,” White House, Press Release, October 29, 2025, https://www.whitehouse.gov/releases/2025/10/the-united-states-signs-technology-prosperity-deals-with-japan-and-korea.

[2] “UNGA Adopts China-Proposed Resolution to Enhance Int’l Cooperation an AI Capacity-Building,” Xinhua, July 2, 2024, https://english.www.gov.cn/news/202407/02/content_WS668394a7c6d0868f4e8e8c58.html; “BRICS Leaders’ Statement on the Global Governance of Artificial Intelligence,” BRICS, July 6 2025, http://www.brics.utoronto.ca/docs/250706-ai.html; and Brenda Goh, “China Proposes New Global AI Cooperation Organisation,” Reuters, July 26, 2025, https://www.reuters.com/world/china/china-proposes-new-global-ai-cooperation-organisation-2025-07-26.

[3] “Hiroshima Process International Guiding Principles for Organizations Developing Advanced AI System,” available at https://www.mofa.go.jp/files/100573471.pdf.

[4] “International Consensus and Open Questions in AI Evaluations,” AI Security Institute, February 12, 2026, https://www.aisi.gov.uk/blog/international-ai-network-consensus-and-open-questions.

[5] John Tasioulas, Ignacio Cofone, and Caroline Green, “The Paris AI Summit: A Missed Opportunity for Global AI Governance,” AI Ethics at Oxford Blog, February 13, 2025, https://www.oxford-aiethics.ox.ac.uk/blog/paris-ai-summit-missed-opportunity-global-ai-governance.

[6] Ibid.; and Jennifer Jett and Jared Perlo, “India’s AI Summit Draws Global Leaders, Big Pledges and Some Chaos,” NBC News, February 20, 2026, https://www.nbcnews.com/world/asia/indias-ai-summit-draws-global-leaders-big-pledges-chaos-rcna259855.

[7] Isabella Wilkinson, “Do AI Summits Work?” Chatham House, February 18, 2026, https://www.chathamhouse.org/2026/02/do-ai-summits-work.

[8] For a more detailed discussion, see Broderick McDonald, Connor Attridge, and Alexandra MacEachern, “Middle Powers Must Win the AI Deployment Race,” Royal United Services Institute (RUSI), Commentary, February 25, 2026, https://www.rusi.org/explore-our-research/publications/commentary/middle-powers-must-win-ai-deployment-race.

[9] Shaun Ee and Jam Kraprayoon, “AI Safety Needs Southeast Asia’s Expertise and Engagement,” Brookings Institution, February 14, 2025, https://www.brookings.edu/articles/ai-safety-needs-southeast-asias-expertise-and-engagement.

[10] “UK Launches Global Talent Drive to Attract World-Leading Researchers and Innovators,” Department for Science, Innovation and Technology, Press Release, June 22, 2025, https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-launches-global-talent-drive-to-attract-world-leading-researchers-and-innovators.

[11] Anton Leicht and Dean Ball, “The Race Worth Winning: Middle Powers in the Age of Machine Intelligence,” Foundation for American Innovation, February 13, 2026, https://www.thefai.org/posts/the-race-worth-winning-middle-powers-in-the-age-of-machine-intelligence.

[12] Ross Gruetzemacher and Jess Whittlestone, “The Transformative Potential of Artificial Intelligence: Author Links Open Overlay Panel,” Futures 135 (2022), https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0016328721001932.

[13] Umang Poddar, “Justice on Hold: India Court Crippled by a Million-Case Backlog,” BBC Hindi, September 28, 2025, https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c4gz4y4p80po; and Charlene Chin, “How Can Indonesia Solve Its Massive Backlog of Land Certificates?” GovInsider, October 18, 2016, https://govinsider.asia/intl-en/article/how-can-indonesia-solve-its-land-certification-problem.



PROGRAMS
The Evolution of AI Governance and Regulation in the Indo-Pacific
SEARCH
AI governance
artificial intelligence
Quad
AUKUS
OECD
UNESCO
Hiroshima Process
Australia
Japan
Singapore
South Korea
AISI
Five Eyes
APEC
ASEAN
Malaysia
BRICS
Kenneth B. and Anne H.H. Pyle Center for Northeast Asia Studies
John M. Shalikashvili Chair in National Security Studies
Center for Innovation, Trade, and Strategy
Slade Gorton Policy Center
Facebook

Twitter

LinkedIn
and follow us on Youtube
Sign up for updates
ACCOUNT SUBSCRIBE
©2026 The National Bureau of Asian Research
Privacy Policy

Site Map

Terms of Use

Contact Us
This site uses cookies. Please read our Privacy Policy to learn how and why we use cookies. Close