
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
E
ssential ingredients of a globalized economy with integrated supply
chains are the free movement of goods, services, capital, and data
across national borders. As backlashes against globalization persist and
geopolitical competition escalates, more and more barriers have been erected
by many governments, making world trade more costly and less efficient. These
measures include tariffs and other controls of trade flows, heightened screening of
investment flows, and tightened immigration policies. The barriers are spreading
to the realm of data flows, which are increasingly important in society and the
economy. In 2019, for example, global digital trade, including e-commerce and
digitally delivered services, was valued at $5.5 to $6 trillion, about 25 percent of
total world exports.1 “The world’s most valuable resource is no longer oil, but data,”
declared The Economist in 2017.2
Consequently, debates are growing among citizens, businesses, and policymakers
about the need for a governance framework for data, and for such frameworks
to be coordinated internationally if possible. Indeed, the Third United Nations
World Data Forum (October 3-6, 2021, in Bern, Switzerland) has emphasized the
indispensable role of data and sharing data in solving problems facing the world,
and advocated ways of enhancing trust in data by protecting data security and
privacy, helping to preserve the free flow of information.3
1 Ingo Borchert et al., G7 Leaders Should Discuss International Trade (Seriously), UK Trade Policy
Observatory, Briefing Paper 59, June 2021, https://blogs.sussex.ac.uk/uktpo/files/2021/06/BP59.
pdf.
2 “The World’s Most Valuable Resource Is No Longer Oil, But Data,” The Economist, May 6, 2017,
https://www.economist.com/leaders/2017/05/06/the-worlds-most-valuable-resource-is-no-longer-
oil-but-data.
3 International Institute of Sustainable Development, UN World Data Forum 2021, Earth Negotiations
Bulletin (IISD reporting unit), October 3, 2021, https://enb.iisd.org/un-world-data-forum-2021-
3Oct2021.
Competing Data-
Governance Models
Threaten the Free Flow
of Information and
Hamper World Trade
ISSUE BRIEF
NOVEMBER 2021 HUNG TRAN
The GeoEconomics Center works at the
nexus of economics, finance, and foreign
policy with the goal of helping shape a
better global economic future. The Center
is organized around three pillars - Future
of Capitalism, Future of Money, and the
Economic Statecraft Initiative.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF COMPETING DATA-GOVERNANCE MODELS THREATEN THE FREE FLOW OF INFORMATION AND HAMPER WORLD TRADE
There are several dimensions of a data-governance
framework. One looks at the stages in the data supply chain:
the generation of data (including posting personal data
online and consummating transactions online, which become
data points), their collection, management (including quality
control), usage (including marketing, research, political, and
military), and transfer (both domestically and cross-border).
Another dimension refers to the actors in the data ecosystem:
Who owns the personal data? Who benefits from data? Who
decides what to collect and how to use data points? Who
controls them? Furthermore, the digital platforms that allow
data to be exchanged and collected also need to be looked
at, mainly due to the oligopolistic character of huge platform
operators who can reap the benefits of network effects and
incumbency—not only in terms of profits but also in terms of
social and political influences.
Three different data-governance approaches have emerged.
The European Union (EU) has put forward a fairly comprehensive
framework to regulate various aspects of generating and
using personal data—emphasizing the protection of personal
data security and privacy. By contrast, China has recently
promulgated a series of laws, formalizing its vision of data
sovereignty (also referred to as digital or cyber sovereignty)
and claiming that personal data concerning its citizens are
under the authority of the government to safeguard economic
development, social stability, and national security.4 The United
States has always insisted on the free flow of information and
data, both domestically and internationally. It also focuses on
protecting personal privacy against the government—except
in cases of national security concerns. However, there is no
federal law comprehensively protecting personal privacy vis-
a-vis private-sector companies, especially on the Internet—
except in specific areas such as personal health information.
As these regional/national data-governance frameworks are
being formalized into laws, in many cases with extraterritorial
overreach, the global marketplace for ideas, information, and
data will be fragmented, raising the costs of compliance in doing
cross-border business as well as limiting the potential to share
data widely, which, among other things, has been crucial for
fostering collaborative scientific research leading to innovation.
4 Bertrand de La Chapelle and Lorrayne Porciuncula, We Need to Talk about Data: Framing the Debate around the Free Flow of Data and Data Sovereignty,
Internet & Jurisdiction Policy Network, March 31, 2021, https://www.internetjurisdiction.net/uploads/pdfs/We-Need-to-Talk-About-Data-Framing-the-Debate-
Around-the-Free-Flow-of-Data-and-Data-Sovereignty-Report-2021.pdf.
5 “What is GDPR, the EU’s New Data Protection Law?,” GDPR EU, https://gdpr.eu/what-is-gdpr/.
6 Joshua P. Meltzer, The Court of Justice of the European Union in Schrems II: The Impact of the GDPR on Data Flows and National Security, Brookings Institution,
August 5, 2020, https://www.brookings.edu/research/the-court-of-justice-of-the-european-union-in-schrems-ii-the-impact-of-gdpr-on-data-flows-and-national-
security/.
7 U.S. Chamber of Commerce, “Transatlantic Data Flows: Moving Data with Confidence,” September 20, 2021, https://www.uschamber.com/technology/data-
privacy/transatlantic-dataflows.
THE EU APPROACH
The EU has developed a comprehensive framework to regulate
various aspects of data—including a person’s rights to his or her
data being collected, used, and transferred; noncompetitive
behaviors of data intermediaries and platform companies; these
entities’ responsibilities for the content of their online services;
as well as the taxation of their activities in an EU country even
when the entities are headquartered in a third country.
Built on EU Privacy Directives, the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) became effective on May 25, 2018. The
GDPR seeks to protect the fundamental rights of citizens
regarding their personal data. 5 Basically, data intermediaries
have to obtain consent from a person before sending
information to or collecting data about the person. A person
also has the right to request to see the content of the person’s
data, to ask for the ways such data have been used, to request
corrections to the data, and deletion of the data altogether.
The GDPR has significant extraterritorial reach as it applies to
all data intermediaries, no matter where headquartered, if the
data involve persons living in the EU.
The GDPR also stipulates that data concerning an EU citizen can
only be transferred to entities in a non-EU country if that country
is deemed by the European Commission to have a privacy
protection regime functionally equivalent to that of the EU. This
has led to a serious rupture in US-EU commercial relations: in
July 2020, the Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU) ruled that the
United States doesn’t have a functionally equivalent protection
regime as the EU—basically on the issues of the “government
access to personal data for national security purposes and
the rights of EU citizens in the United States to judicial review
and redress.” 6 It has therefore invalidated the European
Commission’s finding of US equivalency which underpins the
EU-US Data Privacy Shield designed to facilitate free data flows
between the two jurisdictions. As a consequence, a transatlantic
data-transfer relationship valued at is being jeopardized, with
businesses in both jurisdictions facing huge uncertainty—
and therefore demanding a timely resolution. 7 Otherwise, if
the dispute persists, it will make data localization a de facto
condition for international companies doing online business in

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF COMPETING DATA-GOVERNANCE MODELS THREATEN THE FREE FLOW OF INFORMATION AND HAMPER WORLD TRADE
and with the EU: it may be simpler to build data servers and
processing facilities within the EU than deal with the legal
uncertainty. Efforts to resolve this dispute are ongoing, with no
clear prospects of conclusion anytime soon.
While the European Commission has recognized thirteen
countries and territories as having adequate data-privacy
protection, it is important to note that the CJEU ruling on the
US regulatory framework could raise doubts about whether
many of the other twelve countries, least of all China, could
be deemed equivalent without being challenged by the
CJEU.8 If this uncertainty persists, the CJEU stance on foreign
equivalency, as manifested in the case of the United States,
risks restricting the flow of data from and to the EU, with
possible negative implications for online businesses as well as
for innovation, especially in data-intensive industries such as
artificial intelligence (AI).
The CJEU has significantly strengthened the enforcement of
8 “Adequacy Decisions: How the EU Determines if a Non-EU Country Has an Adequate Level of Data Protection,” European Commission, https://ec.europa.eu/
info/law/law-topic/data-protection/international-dimension-data-protection/adequacy-decisions_en.
9 “EU Court Allows Data Protection Authorities to Sue Big Tech Companies,” Statecraft, June 16, 2021, https://www.statecraft.co.in/article/eu-court-allows-data-
protection-authorities-to-sue-big-tech-companies.
10 “The Digital Markets Act: Ensuring Fair and Open Digital Markets,” European Commission, accessed November 2, 2021, https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/
priorities-2019-2024/europe-fit-digital-age/digital-markets-act-ensuring-fair-and-open-digital-markets_en.
the GDPR by allowing national privacy commissions (of member
states) to take offending data companies to court, instead of
having to rely on the EU lead privacy protection authority to file
injunctions against cross-border data complaints. 9 However,
this risks increasing national divergences in the interpretation
and application of the GDPR, making compliance more difficult
across the member states.
The Digital Markets Act (DMA) was proposed by the European
Commission in December 2020 and currently is moving
through the EU legislative process involving the European
Parliament and member states.10 The DMA aims to address the
concentration of market power by big digital companies (so-
called gatekeepers), essentially requiring them to grant access
to their platforms to other businesses in certain situations; and
to stop exclusionary and unfair practices vis-a-vis business
users and customers to gain undue advantages. This initiative
is expected to lead to more competition and a level playing
field in the digital services market.
European Commissioner for Values and Transparency Vera Jourova and European Commissioner for Justice Didier Reynders (R) give a
news conference on EU rules on data protection (GDPR) and the new EU Strategy on victims’ rights, in Brussels, Belgium, June 24, 2020.
Source: Olivier Hoslet/Pool via REUTERS

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF COMPETING DATA-GOVERNANCE MODELS THREATEN THE FREE FLOW OF INFORMATION AND HAMPER WORLD TRADE
The Digital Services Act (DSA), launched at the same time as the
DMA, is also going through the same legislative process. The
DSA aims to improve the mechanism to ensure online-platform
users’ fundamental rights, including freedom of speech and the
removal of illegal content. It is intended to strengthen public
oversight of these platforms, especially the big ones reaching
more than 10 percent of the EU population. In particular,
citizens and watchdog organizations—including independent
entities known as trusted flaggers that would theoretically
be approved by (national) digital services coordinators—
would help identify and alert the online platform operators to
misinformation or other illegal content, which they would have
to address including by removing that content according to
a transparent and user-friendly procedure, which has not yet
been established.11
Last but not least, a digital services tax (DST) was in place or
proposed in eleven EU member countries (as of March 2021), and
others inside and outside the EU were considering the approach.12
Essentially, the DST is for multinational digital services companies
whose global revenues exceed a certain threshold and in-country
revenues exceed a lower threshold. For example, the United
Kingdom’s DST applies a 2 percent tax on the revenues of search
engines, social media platforms, and online market places—but
only on those whose global digital services revenues surpass
£500 million ($674.5 million) and digital services revenues within
the UK surpass £25 million.13 The DST is being justified as a way to
deal with the problem of tax evasion by multinational companies
establishing their offices in low tax jurisdictions. This measure is,
however, controversial, especially from the US perspective, as it
deviates from the traditional concept of tax bases being the physical
locations of companies’ offices, not the location of the users, as
well as being discriminatory against US-owned, multinational
tech behemoths. The United States has threatened retaliatory
measures against countries unilaterally implementing the DST, but
some approved measures have been held in abeyance pending
the outcomes of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) corporate-taxation negotiations.
11 “European Commission Plan to Reform Europe’s Digital Space–Part 2–Drafting Digital Service Act,” O’Melveny & Myers LLP , December 23, 2020, https://www.
omm.com/resources/alerts-and-publications/alerts/european-commission-plan-to-reform-europes-digital-space-part-2/.
12 Elke Asen, “What European OECD Countries Are Doing About Digital Service Taxes,” Tax Foundation, March 25, 2021, https://taxfoundation.org/digital-tax-
europe-2020/.
13 Office of the United States Trade Representative, Section 301 Investigation: Report on the United Kingdom’s Digital Service Tax, January 13, 2021, 6, https://ustr.
gov/sites/default/files/files/Press/Releases/UKDSTSection301Report.pdf.
14 “130 Countries and Jurisdictions Join Bold New Framework for International Tax Reform,” OECD, July 1, 2021, https://www.oecd.org/newsroom/130-countries-
and-jurisdictions-join-bold-new-framework-for-international-tax-reform.htm.
15 “US Reaches Agreement to End European Digital Services Taxes,” Deutsche Welle (DW), October 22, 2021, https://p.dw.com/p/420jb. 
16 Jack Wagner, “China’s Cybersecurity Law: What Y ou Need to Know,” The Diplomat, June 02, 2017, https://thediplomat.com/2017/06/chinas-cybersecurity-law-
what-you-need-to-know/.
17 Murray Scot Tanner, “Beijing’s New International Intelligence Law: From Defense to Offense,” Lawfare (blog), Lawfare Institute in Cooperation with the Brookings
Institution, July 20, 2017, https://www.lawfareblog.com/beijings-new-national-intelligence-law-defense-offense.
The DST is a key part of the OECD-sponsored 130-country
negotiations to reform the framework for international corporate
tax reform—the other issue being agreeing to a minimum
corporate income tax rate. 14 The OECD talks are expected
to conclude soon, having just reached an agreement on a 15
percent minimum corporate income tax —which was endorsed
by the Group of Twenty Summit in Rome on October 30-31,
2021. As part of the compromise , France, Austria, Italy, Spain,
and the UK agreed to withdraw their DST measures in 2023
when the agreed global corporate tax regime takes effect; and
the United States will drop its retaliatory punitive tariffs.15
While at different stages of enactment and implementation,
the various components described above give the EU a
comprehensive legal and regulatory framework to deal with the
whole nexus of data and digital services. Basically, the thrust of
the EU approach is to protect individuals against both corporate
and government intrusion into, and possible abuse of, their
personal data; trying to maintain a competitive environment for
digital companies; and holding them responsible for dealing
with complaints about the content of the data transmitted over
their networks.
THE CHINESE APPROACH
The Chinese approach can be gleaned from a series of recently
passed laws, together with the statements and actions of the
Communist Party of China (CPC) and government leaders. The
basic law is the 2017 Cybersecurity Law, which articulates the
concept of data sovereignty, and details the obligations of
Internet products and services providers and operators in data
gathering, localization (with servers located in China), usage,
and transmission, especially overseas—all in the interest of
national security.16 The law also specifies that Internet operators
have to cooperate and turn over user data to public and national
security organs when requested: this reinforces a key article
of the National Intelligence Law of 2017.17 The companies also

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF COMPETING DATA-GOVERNANCE MODELS THREATEN THE FREE FLOW OF INFORMATION AND HAMPER WORLD TRADE
are responsible for the content transmitted over their networks.
The privacy of individual users is mentioned.
Next is the Data Security Law (passed in September 2021),
which tightens restrictions on data transfer outside of China
and imposes wide-ranging data security obligations on
companies.18 In particular, the law appends a new “national
core data” category which includes data affecting national
security, the domestic economy, people’s livelihoods, and the
public interest at large. Such a vague definition allows ample
room for government officials to interpret and implement the
law, increasing uncertainty for companies.
Complementing those laws are the Personal Information
Protection Laws (PIPL), effective November 1, 2021. 19 The PIPL
applies to personal information processing entities (PIPEs),
imposing strict requirements on cross-border transmission
of personal information, including informing the persons,
obtaining their consent, and ensuring that data recipients,
18 National Law Review, “China Passes New Data Privacy and Security Laws,” The National Law Review, August 23, 2021, https://www.natlawreview.com/article/
china-passes-new-data-privacy-and-security-laws.
19 “China Passes the Personal Information Protection Law to Take Effect on November 1,” Gibson Dunn, September 10, 2021.
including those outside China, satisfy the standards of PIPL—
meaning the law applies extraterritorially. The law gives the
Chinese government broad authority in processing personal
information. However, the PIPL also defines the legal rights of
persons vis-a-vis companies, which have to obtain consent,
and to provide ways for such consent to be withdrawn, before
collecting personal information. As a result, the PIPL shares
some similarities with the GDPR in this respect.
Basically, China’s aim is to regulate the use of data to protect its
national security, not only with regard to the outward transfers
of data but also inward dissemination of information (by erecting
what’s been dubbed the Great Firewall to exclude what Beijing
regards as undesirable information from coming in). China
has also built out the hardware (such as ubiquitous cameras
in public spaces that are enhanced with facial recognition
algorithms) and systems (such as its social credit scoring
system, which is in development) to more effectively use data
to monitor and control its population, including censorship
A staff member introduces Tencent’s Internet Data Center (IDC) cloud computing service during a government-organized media tour to
Tencent headquarters in Shenzhen, Guangdong province China September 27, 2020. Picture taken September 27, 2020.
Source: REUTERS/David Kirton

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF COMPETING DATA-GOVERNANCE MODELS THREATEN THE FREE FLOW OF INFORMATION AND HAMPER WORLD TRADE
of information and suppression of online activities deemed
undesirable by the government. As a result, many observers
have referred to China’s data sovereignty as data or digital
authoritarianism. These laws were recently used to rein in major
Chinese platforms, social media, and transportation companies
by Chinese authorities for what is deemed oligopolistic
behaviors or failure to establish adequate safeguards against
unauthorized transfers of data to foreign entities.
China has been active in pushing for recognition of key
features of its data sovereignty vision in setting international
technological standards. For example, at the International
Telecommunications Union (ITU), China has proposed
New Internet Protocols enabling government control of
developments and activities on the Internet, to replace the
current global, open, and decentralized protocols. 20 Moreover,
20 Madhumita Murgia and Anna Gross, “Inside China’s Controversial Mission to Reinvent the Internet,” Financial Times, March 27, 2020, https://on.ft.com/3eMzGoJ.
21 Mathew S. Erie and Thomas Streinz, Understanding China’s Growing Influence in Global Data Governance, US-Asia Law Institute, April 1, 2021, https://usali.org/
usali-perspectives-blog/understanding-chinas-growing-influence-in-global-data-governance.
22 Susan Ariel Aaronson, Data is Disruptive: How Data Sovereignty Is Challenging Data Governance, Hinrich Foundation, August 2021,
https://research.hinrichfoundation.com/hubfs/White%20Paper%20PDFs/How%20data%20sovereignty%20is%20challenging%20
data%20governance%20(Susan%20A.%20Aaronson)/Data%20is%20disruptive%20-%20Hinrich%20Foundation%20white%20
paper%20-%20Susan%20Aaronson%20-%20August%202021.pdf?__hsfp=113833972&__hssc=251652889.46.1633422472083&__
hstc=251652889.54c0a874246e53cd709fc884517b5784.1632828376093.1632828376093.1632828376093.1.
China has been able to export its concept of data sovereignty
and enabling hardware and systems to other countries, mainly
but not exclusively in Asia and Africa.21
However, it is important to note that China is not the only
inspirational source of data sovereignty. India, a populous
democratic country, opposes China on many fronts, but has
adopted almost the same approach as China, with the exception
of practices such as censorship of online information. India
claims data sovereignty and uses social stability, human rights,
national security, and the need to fight “data colonialism” of
Western companies as justifications to control personal data,
including requiring data localization. 22 Indeed, India has
banned fifty-nine Chinese Internet apps including TikTok,
WeChat, and an Alibaba unit’s UC Browser because they were
“prejudicial to [the] sovereignty and integrity of India, defense
A woman checks data of Alibaba Group’s Singles’ Day global shopping festival at a media center in Hangzhou, Zhejiang province, China
November 11, 2020. Source: REUTERS/Aly Song

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF COMPETING DATA-GOVERNANCE MODELS THREATEN THE FREE FLOW OF INFORMATION AND HAMPER WORLD TRADE
of India, security of state, and public order.” 23 Specifically, the
Information Technology Act (of 2011) and other rules regulate
the collection and disclosure of personal data to safeguard
data security and privacy—but the government is not subject to
those rules (like in China).
THE US APPROACH
The United States does not have a comprehensive federal
law for data protection similar to the GDPR. Instead, it has a
collection of specific federal laws and some state consumer
privacy laws. The main law aims to protect personal data from
the government, not private-sector companies. The US Privacy
Act of 1974 prescribed restrictions on the use of personal data
held by government agencies and affirmed the right of citizens
to access, copy, and correct their data held by the government.
However, the Clarifying Lawful Overseas Use of Data Act (the
CLOUD Act of 2018) “allows US law enforcement agencies to
issue warrants to gain access to data held by organizations
under US jurisdiction, even if such data is held outside the US
and such data involves individuals other than US citizens.”24
Specific laws have been passed to protect the security and
privacy of specific types of personal data. For example, the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (1996)
institutes national standards for the protection of certain
health information, including that being stored or transferred
electronically.25 Furthermore, it sets confidentiality requirements
for the use and sharing of protected health information (PHI).
The Children Online Privacy Protection Act (2000) prohibits
online companies from collecting personal information from
minors—especially those below twelve years of age, unless
there is verifiable parental consent. 26 The landmark financial-
sector reform act, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (1999), contains
sections protecting nonpublic personal information arising
from financial transactions with services providers.
More importantly, there is no comprehensive federal law
concerning data privacy on the Internet similar to the GDPR.
In that vacuum, several US states have proposed legislation
23 “India Permanently Bans Tiktok and 58 Other Chinese Apps,” Nikkei Asia, January 26, 2021, https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Technology/India-permanently-
bans-TikTok-and-58-other-Chinese-apps.
24 Matthias Artzt and Walter Delacruz, “How to Comply with Both GDPR and the CLOUD Act,” International Association of Privacy Professionals, January 29, 2019,
https://iapp.org/news/a/questions-to-ask-for-compliance-with-the-eu-gdpr-and-the-u-s-cloud-act/.
25 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, “Summary of the HIPPA Security Rule,” accessed November 2, 2021, https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-
professionals/security/laws-regulations/index.html.
26 Federal Trade Commission, “Children’s Online Privacy Protection Rule: A Six-Step Compliance Plan for Y our Business,” accessed November 2, 2021, https://
www.ftc.gov/tips-advice/business-center/guidance/childrens-online-privacy-protection-rule-six-step-compliance.
27 International Association of Privacy Professionals, “US State Privacy Legislation Tracker,” last updated May 26, 2021, https://iapp.org/media/pdf/resource_center/
State_Comp_Privacy_Law.pdf.
to protect consumer data privacy .27 As of this writing, the
California Consumer Privacy Act became effective on January 1,
2021; the Virginia Consumer Data Protection Act has a delayed
effective date in 2023; and six other states have bills in the
works. Basically, these state laws share some similarities with
the GDPR in affirming a person’s rights of access, rectification,
and deletion of the personal data collected by companies that
have to meet their obligations in data usage.
SUMMING UP—KEY DIFFERENCES
Broadly speaking, the key difference is between the EU and
Chinese models, with the US model landing somewhere
in between but closer to the EU framework. The EU model
emphasizes citizen rights to personal data privacy, offering
protection from both private companies and governments. This
model aims to regulate the concentration of market power by
big platform companies; holds them responsible for content in
Sheila Colclasure, global chief digital responsibility and public
policy officer at IPG Kinesso, and Charlotte Slaiman, competition
policy director at Public Knowledge, swear in during Senate
Judiciary Competition Policy, Antitrust, and Consumer Rights
Subcommittee hearing on “Big Data, Big Questions: Implications
for Competition and Consumers” in Washington, D.C., U.S.,
September 21, 2021. Source: Ting Shen/Pool via REUTERS

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF COMPETING DATA-GOVERNANCE MODELS THREATEN THE FREE FLOW OF INFORMATION AND HAMPER WORLD TRADE
general, including in particular misinformation and malicious
activities; and sets out to tax multinational platform companies
for activities in their jurisdictions. One particular component
of the European framework—the GDPR—has attracted much
international compliance by non-EU companies doing business
with EU residents (a manifestation of the “Brussels effect”); and
it has been used by many countries as a template to develop
their own data-privacy laws (so far sixteen countries have
enacted national legislation modeled on the GDPR.) 28
By contrast, the Chinese model focuses on defending
China’s sovereignty and security, giving broad authority to
the government to access and process data collected by
companies, which are required to protect the security and
privacy of the data vis-a-vis other companies. It also strictly
controls the transfer of data to entities outside of China
(including via data localization) as well as inward transfer of
data to China (especially information deemed undesirable,
using the Great Fire Wall). China has developed a high-tech
infrastructure to implement the data control regime. Many
countries, especially in the developing world, have adopted
features of China’s model, in particular asserting their data
sovereignty and importing the hardware and software to
implement it.
US federal laws aim to protect citizen privacy against the
government but not against private companies, except in
the case of health and financial information and data on
children. The US Congress is currently considering antitrust
measures against big platform and social media companies;
strengthening online privacy protection for minors; and
more generally, narrowing or repealing Section 230 of the
Communication Decency Act (1996), which has protected
social media companies from being held liable for the content
of users’ posts.29 Moreover, several states have taken initiatives
to propose and pass data-privacy protection laws regarding
companies along the lines of the GDPR. If more and more US
states move in this direction, the federal government may feel
it necessary to take actions to ensure uniformity across states.
The federal nature of the US political system makes it difficult
for other countries to adopt its mixed data-governance model.
28 Mike Woodard, “16 Countries with GDPR-like Data Privacy Laws,” Security Scorecard (company website), July 8, 2021, https://securityscorecard.com/blog/
countries-with-gdpr-like-data-privacy-laws.
29 Marcy Gordon, “After the Facebook Papers, How Will Congress Regular Social Media?,” Associated Press story in Christian Science Monitor, November 1, 2021,
https://www.csmonitor.com/Technology/2021/1101/After-Facebook-Papers-how-will-Congress-regulate-social-media.
DATA GOVERNANCE AND
TRADE AGREEMENTS
Among the three major data-governance models and their
variations, the main fault line is between the free flow of
data across borders versus requirements of data localization
and government access to companies’ algorithm and source
code. The United States has been the main driving force in
insisting on the unconstrained flow of data and banning data
localization and government access to algorithm and source
code in trade talks—in particular during the Trans Pacific
Partnership (TPP) negotiations. After the US withdrawal, the
remaining TPP partners finished the deal under the name
Comprehensive and Progressive Trans Pacific Partnership
(CPTPP), and retained much of the free flow of data provisions.
The Trump administration then negotiated tougher language
promoting the free flow of data in the US-Mexico-Canada
Agreement (USMCA), the US-Japan Digital Trade Agreement,
and US-South Korea trade deal. A few recent deals such as
the Digital Economy Agreement (DEA) between Australia and
Singapore moved further by agreeing to collaborate on data
standards and regulatory coherence, promoting interoperable
data-governance rules among the signatories.
However, most of those trade agreements include exceptions
to the ban on data localization and sharing of algorithm and
source code with the government, when justified by public
policy. In many agreements, the exception has been worded
very broadly and loosely, basically allowing member countries
to invoke privacy protection, social stability, or national
security to require data localization. In particular, the Regional
and Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) permits
member countries to make use of the exceptions without
being challenged by other signatories. Basically, the fact that
a country like China, with clear data-localization requirements
and other restrictions, is a founding member of RCEP suggests
that its provision against data localization is meaningless.
At present, it appears that more and more countries are
moving toward data-localization requirements, either de
jure as parts of their claims of data sovereignty or de facto

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF COMPETING DATA-GOVERNANCE MODELS THREATEN THE FREE FLOW OF INFORMATION AND HAMPER WORLD TRADE
when they insist that data can only be transferred freely to
countries deemed to have adequate privacy protection. In
fact, the number of countries having enacted data-localization
legislation has increased from thirty-five in 2017 to sixty-four
in 2021 .30 The tendency of many countries to require data
localization is becoming a difficult obstacle to making progress
in negotiating digital trade deals. For example, since 2019 the
World Trade Organization (WTO) has tried to negotiate rules
covering cross-border data flows in a plurilateral (as opposed
to multilateral) effort involving eighty-six members, with
seventy-eight developing countries refusing to participate. 31
The WTO negotiations have finalized texts on spam, electronic
signatures, and authorization. However, the sticking points
remain the language governing cross-border data flows and
rules covering new services based on data such as AI.
Data-localization requirements act as nontariff barriers to
digital services trade and promote an unlevel playing field
favoring domestic companies at the expense of foreign ones.
Consequently, these requirements will reduce the efficiency of
digital data trade and the chance of using trade agreements to
seek internationally agreed rules on cross-border data flows.
Even the United States and the EU, which share many
democratic values, continue to differ on several data-
governance issues, making a complete alignment between the
two difficult. These issues include how to police the content
of online information; the liabilities of platform companies
regarding content; data localization; the US demand to have
access to personal data on national security grounds; and
the subject of digital services taxation. The joint statement
issued on September 29, 2021, after the inaugural meeting of
the EU-US Technology and Trade Council mentioned (among
the meeting’s outcomes) tasking the Data Governance
and Platform Governance Working Group with exchanging
information on respective approaches, “seeking consistency
and interoperability where feasible”—meaning the differences
on data governance between the two remain. 32
30 Nigel Cory and Luke Dascoli, How Barriers to Cross-Border Data Are Spreading Globally, What They Cost, and How to Address Them, Information Technology
& Innovation Foundation, July 19, 2021, https://itif.org/publications/2021/07/19/how-barriers-cross-border-data-flows-are-spreading-globally-what-they-cost.
31 Aaronson, Data is Disruptive.
32 European Commission, EU-US Trade and Technology Council Inaugural Joint Statement, EU (Press Corner website), September 29, 2021, https://ec.europa.eu/
commission/presscorner/detail/en/STATEMENT_21_4951.
33 U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Transatlantic Data Flows.
CONCLUSION
Overall, there is a clear opposition between China’s model of
data sovereignty/authoritarianism (which is being followed by
a growing number of developing countries) and the Western
model focusing on protecting personal rights to data security
and privacy. The latter has been typified by the EU approach,
in particular its GDPR, which many countries have used as a
template for their own legislation, albeit with some variations.
Beyond the fundamental fault line between these two systems,
data-localization requirements—de jure or de facto—have
spread more widely despite support from the United States
and others for the free flow of data. These requirements will
have serious implications for the world economy. First of all,
the different legal and regulatory regimes will serve as nontariff
barriers to trade—not only in data services but eventually in
telecom and computing hardware and software, including
for cloud services, which are critical backbones for the
flow of data. Secondly, they will restrict the free flow of data
and information, which has contributed significantly to the
functioning of the world economy, and in particular, fostered
scientific and medical research collaboration and innovation
that can spur growth. The global flow of data now contributes
more to global growth than trade in goods, according to the US
Chamber of Commerce.33 Without the free flow of data, global
trade would be hampered and growth potential weakened.
More ominously, it would deepen the division of the world into
competing systems.
Hung Q. Tran is a nonresident senior fellow at the Atlantic
Council’s Geoeconomics Center. Mr. Tran is an accomplished
economist, with broad experience across the private sector,
international organizations and research institutions.  From
2007 till retirement in 2018, Mr. Tran was at the Institute
of International Finance (IIF). Since 2012 he served as IIF’s
Executive Managing Director while simultaneously leading its
Global Capital Markets Department. Prior to his work at the
IIF, Mr. Tran served for six years at the International Monetary
Fund as Deputy Director for the Monetary and Capital Markets
Department.  In the previous two decades, he was in senior
positions managing economic and investment research at
Rabobank, Deutsche Bank, Merrill Lynch and Salomon Brothers.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF COMPETING DATA-GOVERNANCE MODELS THREATEN THE FREE FLOW OF INFORMATION AND HAMPER WORLD TRADE
ATLANTIC COUNCIL BOARD OF DIRECTORS
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*Richard W. Edelman
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
*John J. Studzinski
TREASURER
*George Lund
DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
*Peter Ackerman
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
*Rafic A. Bizri
*Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
R. Nicholas Burns
*Richard R. Burt
Teresa Carlson
James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
Ralph D. Crosby, Jr.
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Thomas R. Eldridge
Mark T. Esper
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Courtney Geduldig
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
Amir A. Handjani
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Andrew Hove
Mary L. Howell
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Henry A. Kissinger
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
*Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Dambisa F. Moyo
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
W. DeVier Pierson
Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell McCormick
Ashraf Qazi
Robert Rangel
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
Olin Wethington
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster*Executive
Committee Members
List as of November 15, 2021

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and engagement in international
 affairs based on the central role of the Atlantic community in
 meeting today’s global challenges.
© 2021 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means without permission
in writing from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of brief
quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please
direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
