
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
I
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE
INNOVATION ADOPTION
Interim Report
REPORT AUTHORS
Eric Lofgren*, Whitney M. McNamara, and Peter Modigliani
COMMISSION CO-CHAIRS
The Hon. Mark T. Esper, PhD, and The Hon. Deborah Lee James

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
II
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
Cover: The artwork is an artificial-intelligence generated image, created
by Atlantic Council staff on Dall-E2. The prompt entered was “defense
innovation ecosystem,” and Dall-E2 generated the image, which was then
edited in Adobe Photoshop. Source: openai.com/product/dall-e-2.
April 2023
© 2023 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights reserved. No
part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means without permission in writing from the Atlantic Council,
except in the case of brief quotations in news articles, critical articles, or
reviews. Please direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council, 1030 15th Street NW, 12th Floor, Washington, DC 20005

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
III
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE
INNOVATION ADOPTION
Interim Report
REPORT AUTHORS
Eric Lofgren*, Whitney M. McNamara,
and Peter Modigliani
CO-CHAIRS
The Hon. Mark T. Esper, PhD, and
The Hon. Deborah Lee James
COMMISSION DIRECTOR: Stephen Rodriguez
PROGRAM DIRECTOR: Clementine G. Starling
COMMISSION STAFF
Mark J. Massa, Delharty M. Manson II, and Jacob Mezey
* Eric Lofgren served as a project author until February 2023, when he transitioned to a position in
government service. All of his contributions were made before his transition to that role.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
IV
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
The Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security works to develop
sustainable, nonpartisan strategies to address the most important
security challenges facing the United States and the world. The Center
honors General Brent Scowcroft’s legacy of service and embodies his
ethos of nonpartisan commitment to the cause of security, support for
US leadership in cooperation with allies and partners, and dedication to
the mentorship of the next generation of leaders.
The
Forward Defense (FD) program generates ideas and connects
stakeholders in the defense ecosystem to promote an enduring military
advantage for the United States, its allies, and partners. Our work
identifies the defense strategies, capabilities, and resources the United
States needs to deter and, if necessary, prevail in future conflict.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
V
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
COMMISSIONERS
The Hon. Mark T. Esper, PhD, Board Director, Atlantic
Council; 27th Secretary of Defense, US Department of
Defense; Co-Chair, Atlantic Council Commission on Defense
Innovation Adoption
The Hon. Deborah Lee James, Board Director, Atlantic
Council; 23rd Secretary of the Air Force, US Department of
Defense; Co-Chair, Atlantic Council Commission on Defense
Innovation Adoption
Ambassador Barbara Barrett, Board Director, Atlantic
Council; 25th Secretary of the Air Force, US Department of
Defense
General James E. Cartwright, USMC (ret.), Board Director,
Atlantic Council; 8th Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, US Department of Defense
Frank A. Finelli, Managing Director, The Carlyle Group
The Hon. Michèle Flournoy, Co-founder and Managing
Partner, WestExec Advisors; 9th Under Secretary of Defense
for Policy, US Department of Defense
Scott Frederick, Managing Partner, Sands Capital
The Hon. James “Hondo” Geurts, Distinguished Fellow,
Business Executives for National Security; 11th Assistant
Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development, and
Acquisition, US Department of Defense
Peter Levine, Senior Research Fellow, Institute for Defense
Analyses; 12th Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
Readiness, US Department of Defense
The Hon. Ellen M. Lord, 15th Under Secretary of Defense for
Acquisition and Sustainment, US Department of Defense
Major General Arnold L. Punaro, USMC (ret.), CEO, The
Punaro Group; Member, Advisory Council, Scowcroft Center
for Strategy and Security, Atlantic Council
Nick Sinai, Senior Advisor, Insight Partners; Senior Fellow,
Belfer Center for Science & International Affairs and Adjunct
Lecturer in Public Policy, Harvard Kennedy School
Josh Wolfe, Co-founder and Managing Partner, Lux Capital
The Hon. Robert O. Work, Senior Counselor for Defense
and Distinguished Senior Fellow for Defense and National
Security, Center for a New American Security; 32nd US
Deputy Secretary of Defense, US Department of Defense
INDUSTRY COMMISSIONERS
Steven Escaravage, Executive Vice President and AI Lead,
Booz Allen Hamilton
Wendy R. Anderson, Senior Vice President, Palantir
Technologies
Prashant Bhuyan, Founder and CEO, Accrete AI
Mark Brunner, President, Primer Federal, Primer AI
Colin Carroll, Director of Government Relations, Applied
Intuition
Adam Hammer, Counselor, Schmidt Futures
Chris Lynch, CEO, Rebellion Defense
Mara Motherway, Senior Vice President, Peraton
Michael Niggel, CEO, ACT1 Federal
Doug Philippone, Co-founder, Snowpoint Ventures

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
VI
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
VII
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 Foreword ..........................................................................................................................................................
Overview..........................................................................................................................................................3
Recommendation 1: Introduce a new capability portfolio model .......................................................5
Recommendation 2: Consolidate program elements ...........................................................................6
Recommendation 3: Reset reprogramming authorities........................................................................ 7
Recommendation 4: Modernize the DoD to align with the twenty-first century industrial base .8
Recommendation 5: Strengthen alignment of capital markets to defense outcomes ..................9
Recommendation 6: Incentivize tech companies to do business with the DoD ............................11
Recommendation 7: Modernize budget documents ...........................................................................12
Recommendation 8: Establish bridge fund for successfully demonstrated technologies.......... 13
Recommendation 9: Scale the Space Development Agency model ...............................................14
Recommendation 10: Modernize the DoD’s requirements system ..................................................14
Conclusions and Next Steps .................................................................................................................... 16
Biographies ....................................................................................................................................................17
List of Acronyms ...........................................................................................................................................
20Acknowledgments ......................................................................................................................................
21

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
VIII
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
1
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
T
he US Department of Defense (DoD) needs to
accelerate the adoption of cutting-edge technology
from the leading edge of the commercial and defense
sectors. Doing so will enable the Pentagon to deliver high-
impact operational solutions to the Warfighter in a much
timelier manner. That is why we are co-chairing the Atlantic
Council’s Commission on Defense Innovation Adoption,
which has released this interim report.
In our time serving in the Defense Department, we have
found that the United States does not have an innovation
problem, but rather an innovation adoption problem. That
is to say, our Nation leads in many emerging technologies
relevant to defense and security—from artificial intelligence
and directed energy to quantum information technology and
beyond. But the DoD struggles to identify, adopt, integrate,
and field these technologies into military applications.
The persistence of this challenge is not for lack of trying.
The Air Force’s Rapid Capabilities Office has cut through
bureaucratic constraints to accelerate even the most
complicated major acquisitions. The Defense Innovation Unit
(DIU) stands out for expanding the range of firms involved
in innovation for national security purposes. Army Futures
Command has accelerated modernization in ground forces
through its cross-functional team model. The new Office of
Strategic Capital has a promising new approach to engaging
capital markets in support of national security goals.
But the growing national security challenges facing our
country and the threat they pose to the rules-based
international order require actionable reform across the
DoD. We and a group of distinguished Commissioners, with
decades of service between us in government, the private
sector, and capital markets, believe that time is running out to
do so. The United States faces simultaneous competition with
two nuclear-armed, autocratic great-power rivals. Russia’s
ongoing war against Ukraine and China’s revanchism not
only spur urgent geopolitical considerations, but also cast
into sharp relief the US industrial base’s ability to produce
and field innovative technologies at scale.
To address the DoD’s innovation adoption challenge in light
of the urgency of the geopolitical environment we face, this
interim report advances ten policy recommendations for
Congress and the Pentagon, focusing on the three key areas
of reforming acquisition; overcoming barriers to innovation;
and revising specific Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and
Execution structures.
To that end, the DoD should adapt the way it conducts its
acquisition programs to provide additional flexibility in the
year of execution, and Congress can authorize that flexibility.
We recommend that five DoD program executive offices be
empowered to operate in a portfolio model so that they can
more easily shift funding among possible products that meet
their mission needs. Congress should appropriate money to
DoD with fewer but larger discrete budget line items and reset
reprogramming authorities so that acquisition professionals
have greater flexibility.
To better leverage innovation in the commercial sector,
Congress should restore at least the traditional ratio of
procurement funding to other defense spending, and the
DoD should more intentionally engage a much broader
innovation base. Allocating a higher percentage of the DoD’s
budget to procurement will clearly signal a larger market to
nontraditional defense firms.
FOREWORD

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
Additionally, the deputy secretary of defense, with the DIU as
a direct report, should take a leadership role in aligning and
harnessing stakeholders within the Pentagon and the existing
defense industrial base for the twenty-first century. The DIU
should be resourced and empowered to broaden the defense
ecosystem by robustly engaging start-ups, nontraditional
vendors, and capital market players.
The DoD must develop approaches to more rapidly validate
its needs for commercial capabilities, rather than waiting
years after identifying a key capability to write a requirement
and submit a budget request. The DoD should both reform
the Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System
(JCIDS) to operate more swiftly and develop a military need
validation system outside of JCIDS for mature commercial
capabilities. Congress and the DoD should expand both
eligibility for, and the award size of, Small Business Innovation
Research grants. To provide additional mechanisms for
rapidly matching key capabilities with funding, they should
also provide funds to procure capabilities successfully
demonstrated in exercises.
As the 2022 National Security Strategy states, we are living
through a “decisive decade,” a sentiment shared by the
previous administration as well. Congress and the DoD must
seize this opportunity to enact near-term changes that will
help get our service members the capabilities they need to
defend our country and its interests.
The Hon. Mark T. Esper, PhD
27th US Secretary of Defense
The Hon. Deborah Lee James
23rd US Secretary of the Air Force

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
MISSION STATEMENT
Accelerate the DoD’s ability to adopt cutting-edge tech -
nology from commercial and defense sectors and deliver
high-impact operational solutions to the Warfighters.
ENTERPRISE CHALLENGES
The DoD faces the following enterprise challenges in adopt-
ing defense innovations:
1 Outdated R&D Model The DoD’s requirements and
acquisition processes were designed for a time when
the DoD was the largest funder of global research and
development (R&D). By 2020, however, the federal gov-
ernment’s share of national R&D had fallen below 20
percent, and yet its processes have not adapted to this
new leader-to-follower reality. Today, while the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), Federally
Funded Research and Development Centers (FFRDCs),
national and service laboratories, and universities con -
tinue to innovate, many of the most critical technologies
are driven by the commercial sector. The DoD struggles
to adopt commercial technology at a relevant speed.
Innovations from noncommercial R&D organizations are
infrequently tied to a commercialization and adoption
pipeline. Traditional prime contractors orient their inde -
pendent R&D (IRAD) toward near-term defense require-
ments that are prescriptive relative to solutions rather
than broadly defining warfighter gaps that allow appli -
cations of advanced technologies. As a result, the DoD
is unable to effectively apply leading technologies to its
weapon systems.
2 Long Timelines and Inflexible Execution Too often, the
DoD delivers systems to meet requirements defined
more than a decade earlier. It is difficult to insert new
technology to effectively respond to dynamic adversary
threats, technological opportunities, advances in
warfighting concepts, or macroeconomic and supply-
chain disruptions, especially within fiscal years.
Hardware-centric models ineffectively integrate rapid
software updates.
3 Fewer Companies Providing Defense Solutions The
DoD’s industrial base has shrunk by 40 percent over the
past decade, due to both consolidation and exit. This
decline stems from multiple causes, including a pivot to
fewer more-complex major systems, long timelines, com-
plex regulations, and the high compliance cost of doing
business with the DoD. Many start-up, commercial, and
international businesses are unable or unwilling to enter
the DoD ecosystem. As a result, reduced competitive
pressure has increased costs and decreased adoption
of innovation.
4 Valleys of Death The DoD spends billions annually on
research and prototypes, yet only a small percentage
transitions to production contracts with revenue to sus -
tain operations and scale output. Consequently, one
must question why the DoD continues to fund so many
defense research organizations when most technology
innovation comes from the commercial sector. Long
timelines for contracts and funding, program constraints,
and a disconnected ecosystem are among the transition
challenges for companies that have developed viable
products or services.
5 Hamstrung Workforce The DoD acquisition workforce is
subject to a bureaucratic culture of excessive compliance
and oversight, a challenging environment for innovation.
Creative problem-solving and measured risk-taking are
not often rewarded, and too few individuals with an
industry background agree to take senior leadership
roles at the DoD.
6 Program-centric Acquisition Defining requirements,
securing budgets, and acquiring capabilities are done
for hundreds of individual programs. The DoD invests
a significant percentage of its funds in complex major
systems for which prime contractors offer closed,
propriety solutions. This impedes interoperability
and responsiveness to changes in operations,
threats, and technologies. Open-system architectures
with well-defined interface control documents are
rarely adopted, which constrains the ability to insert
innovative technology.
OVERVIEW
OVERVIEW

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
7 Cumbersome Reporting from DoD to Congress Budget
justification documents run dozens of volumes and tens
of thousands of pages. Document format, detail, and
supporting information is inconsistent among military
services and agencies. This impedes Congress’s ability
to understand program objectives in a timely manner. In
turn, Congress does not trust that delegated decisions will
consistently result in more rapid technology adoption.
8 Limited Understanding of Emerging Technology The
DoD struggles to effectively leverage critical emerging
technologies (like biotechnology and quantum informa -
tion technology) due to a lack of understanding of their
state-of-the-art applications among those who generate
requirements and draft requests for proposals. As these
technologies mature, the DoD is challenged to have
meaningful conversations about how to adopt, leverage,
and defend against these technologies.
TOP RECOMMENDATIONS
To address these challenges, the Commission recommends
that DoD leaders, congressional defense committees, and
other executive branch agencies take the following ten
high-priority actions to accelerate DoD innovation adoption:
1 Introduce a new capability portfolio
model
2 Consolidate program elements
3 Reset reprogramming authorities
4 Modernize the DoD to align with the
twenty-first century industrial base
5 Strengthen alignment of capital
markets to defense outcomes
6 Incentivize tech companies to do
business with the DoD
7 Modernize budget documents
8 Establish bridge fund for successfully
demonstrated technologies
9 Scale the Space Development Agency
model
10 Modernize the DoD’s requirements
system

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
RECOMMENDATION 1:
The DoD and Congress empower and resource five Program Executive Officers (PEOs) to operate via a new capability
portfolio model in 2024.
Addresses challenges 2, 4, 5, and 6.
• Congress authorizes in the Fiscal Y ear (FY) 24 National
Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) and/or the Under
Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment
(USD(A&S)) implements via a memo empowering five PEO
portfolios to operate via a new capability portfolio model.
Component acquisition executives from the Departments of
the Army, Navy, Air Force, Special Operations Command, and
a defense agency will each select a PEO portfolio.
• Service requirements organizations capture portfolio
requirements in a concise, high-level document that provides
overarching, joint, enduring capability needs and key mission
impact measures that focus on warfighter-informed needs
and mission outcomes. The Joint Staff validates the portfolio
requirements within thirty days. The portfolio requirements
document enables leaner program requirements and shapes
future research and prototypes.
• Selected PEOs negotiate with congressional defense
appropriations staff the consolidation of at least 20 percent
of the smallest budget line items within their portfolios.
This enables reprogramming flexibility to meet evolving,
warfighter-informed requirements. These merged budget
accounts must provide Congress with sufficient visibility of
major elements within each.
• Selected PEOs develop a set of portfolio strategies,
processes, road maps, contracts, infrastructure, and
architectures to enable programs to leverage for greater
speed and success. Portfolio contracting strategies will
look beyond individual contracts or programs to promote a
robust industrial base by enabling continuous competition,
iterative development, supply chain risk mitigation, greater
participation of nontraditional companies, commercial
service acquisition, and economies of scale.
• Selected PEOs may lay out plans to decompose large
programs into modular acquisitions; leverage common
platforms, components, and services; and maximize use
of commercial solutions and DoD research. Portfolios
will scale and align prototyping, experimentation, and
testing infrastructure. They will invest in a common suite
of engineering tools, platforms, and strategies to enable
interoperability, cybersecurity, and resiliency.
• PEOs require portfolio leaders to actively engage the DoD’s
R&D community, industry, and academia to communicate
joint-warfighter portfolio needs and business opportunities,
scout technologies, engage companies, and drive novel
solutions to address portfolio needs.
• Congress appropriates at least $20 million to each portfolio
per year for three years to enable PEOs to implement
the new model with appropriate staff, analytic tools, and
strategies. The five PEOs work out the details for others
to adopt. In time, the department will realize savings and
return on investment through greater program efficiencies
and mission impact.
• PEOs provide the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD)
and Congress a short annual report to share insight into the
new portfolio model progress, including issues, successes,
and inputs to scale adoption.
Success Measure: By the end of 2023, five PEO portfolios are
identified to operate via the new portfolio model. By the end
of 2024, these portfolios begin operating with clear direction,
leadership support, and initial implementation plans.
Notional Example: A command-and-control PEO shapes a
portfolio strategy that invests in a software factory and enterprise
services as a common infrastructure, with smaller programs
tapping a diverse vendor base to regularly and iteratively deliver
a suite of applications that work together seamlessly.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
Addresses challenges 2, 6, and 7.
• The deputy secretary of defense (DepSecDef) directs ac -
quisition executives to propose a list of program elements
(PEs) and budget line items (BLIs) to consolidate. This will
simplify budget submissions and enable greater flexibility
within the year of execution to respond to rapid changes in
warfighter needs and technology advancement within ca -
pability or mission portfolios.
• Determine criteria for consolidation, such as BLIs and
PEs under $20 million, software-defined technolo -
gies, and supply chain-affected efforts.
• Determine constructs for consolidation, such as capabil-
ity areas, mission areas, and organizational alignment.
• Reduce BLI and PE count from more than 1,700 today in
the investment accounts by at least 200 BLI and PEs each
year, starting with the FY 2024 markup, for three years to
enable cost-schedule-performance trade-offs, including the
prototyping and fielding of novel systems that meet defined
capability or mission areas.
• Allow PEOs, warfighters, and other DoD stakeholders to
provide input to acquisition executives. Senior leadership
in the resourcing process should propose the items to
be consolidated and negotiate with congressional staff in
advance of FY 2024 appropriations.
• Identify line items that enable opportunistic efforts to insert
technologies into existing weapons programs without
requiring a new start. Identify best practices for broadly
justifying activities within a capability set.
Success Measure: The number of BLIs in the investment
accounts is reduced by at least 200 in time for the passage of
regular appropriations in FY 2024.
Notional Example: A PEO identifies a novel technology from
DARPA or industry to integrate into one of its programs to im-
prove performance and accelerate capability delivery. With
investment funds spread across fewer budget accounts, the
PEO is able to reprogram funds from a lower-priority develop-
ment within the year of execution.
RECOMMENDATION 2:
Acquisition executives propose consolidated program elements to congressional staff and negotiate what can be
included in the Fiscal Y ear (FY) 2024 Appropriations Act joint explanatory statement.
This chart shows the number of line items, its median size, and the
percentage under 20 million dollars in the FY23 budget request. Out of
more than 1,700 investment budget line items today, nearly 700 are under
$20 million. Micromanaging these small stovepipes reduces flexibility,
preventing adjustments in the year of execution. Credit: Eric Lofgren
Special Operations Command (SOCOM) provides an example for how the
number of budget line items can be incrementally reduced in coordination
with Congress. This resource flexibility allows SOCOM to take advantage of
their close relationship with the warfighter by making integrated decisions
that speed up fielding cycle times. Credit: Eric Lofgren
FY 2023 President’s Budget Request (DoD Total)
MILPERSO&MProcurementRDT&E
Line Items
Median ($M)
# Under $20M
956
$35,262
390 (41%)
845
$42,707
298 (35%)
347
$243,631
49 (14%)
270
$87,564
88 (33%)
Line Items
Mean ($M)
Procurement
38
$58.3
37
$49.9
27
$54.3
24
$65.8
26
$71.6
FY12 FY13 FY14 FY15 FY16 [...] FY23
25
$93.7
Line Items
Mean ($M)
RDT&E
29
$17.1
28
$15.4
15
$24.8
15
$34.3
15
$35.9
FY12 FY13 FY14 FY15 FY16 [...] FY23
13
$63.3
Example of Program Element Consolidation - SOCOM

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
RECOMMENDATION 3:
Congressional appropriations committees reset reprogramming authorities to historical norms in their FY 2024 joint
explanatory statements.
Total Above Threshold Reprogramming as a Percentage of the DoD Budget
This graph charts above threshold reprogramming (ATR) as a percentage of the defense budget according to research by various budget analysts.
Modern control of reprogramming was implemented in FY 1963, and management has tightened severely since that time, including the expansion
of prior approval requirements. As a result, many resource trades, including the adoption of new innovations, are foregone because of severe
administrative burdens. Credit: Eric Lofgren
Addresses challenges 2 and 7.
• Appropriations committees write into FY 2024 joint explan-
atory statements the following changes:
• Current reprogramming thresholds will be main -
tained, but above-threshold actions will revert from
congressional prior approval to the historical norm
of congressional notification with a thirty-day win -
dow for briefing or rejection. This streamlines the
process and enables greater reprogramming while
still providing Congress “veto authority” to block re -
programming actions they oppose. Prior approval will
remain in place for items omitted, deleted, or specif -
ically reduced; general transfer authorities; or above
threshold new starts.
• An alternative approach: Raise reprogramming thresh-
olds from the lesser of $10 million or 20 percent to at
least $40 million for Research, Development, Testing,
and Evaluation (RDT&E) and $100 million for procurement
appropriation titles. Historical norms for reprogramming
thresholds were $15 million for RDT&E and $40 million
for procurement yet were progressively lowered to this
historically low threshold. This change would revert
thresholds to account for decades of inflation.
• Letter notifications for new starts will be “for the fiscal
year,” not “for the entire effort.” This enables programs
greater flexibility to start small programs while Congress
retains the right to veto any new starts it opposes.
Success Measure: Recommended language is included in the
FY 2024 Appropriations Act joint explanatory statement by the
time regular appropriations are passed.
Notional Example: An acquisition program is “early to need”
for procurement funds due to delays in finalizing development.
Another program desperately seeks additional funds to ac -
celerate and scale production of its weapon system. Service
leadership decides to reprogram $50M in procurement funds
between the programs to optimize investments.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
RECOMMENDATION 4:
Congress directs the DoD to elevate the DIU to a direct report to DepSecDef and resource it effectively to align and
harness the nontraditional defense industrial base for the twenty-first century no later than six months of the enactment
of this act.
Addresses challenges 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 8.
• Re-align DIU as a direct report to DepSecDef with the
necessary staffing and resources to engage start-ups,
nontraditional vendors, and capital market players in align-
ing capability requirements to harness solutions from the
twenty-first-century industrial base per the 2022 National
Defense Strategy.
• DIU’s expanded role should complement existing
efforts in USD(R&E) and USD(A&S) in terms of traditional
industrial policy and technology scouting, respectively,
by better connecting the nontraditional industry and its
resources, intelligence, and technologies to the needs
of the warfighter.
• DIU, USD(R&E), USD(A&S), and service partners should
regularly integrate their efforts, in communicating to
the industrial base the department’s needs, planned in-
vestments, and business opportunities. In addition, they
should share among themselves what is being discovered
in industry that aligns with the department’s missions.
• In its expanded role, DIU should be resourced to reg -
ularly engage with acquisition organizations (PEOs,
program offices), science and technology (S&T) orga -
nizations (labs, DARPA), and combatant commands to
share the insights it gets from nontraditional industry
players throughout the DoD. Additionally, DIU will com-
municate back to industry where it can align its technol-
ogies to the needs of the warfighter as communicated
by acquisition organizations and combatant commands.
• Prioritization for expanded staffing for DIU should be for
new billets from the services over funding for contractors.
The billets would be priority assignments, selected from
relevant PEOs and service acquisition executives (SAEs).
• DIU should track the intelligence, insights, and inputs it
receives from industry trade associations, venture cap-
italists (VCs), private equity firms, primes, nontraditional
defense companies (NDCs), Other Transaction (OT)
Consortia, and innovation hubs. This information should
be interoperable with USD(R&E)’s existing repository of
research and intelligence for the department’s needs.
• DIU, USD(A&S), and SAEs charter a team, including joint war-
fighter perspectives, to streamline processes, reviews, and
documents for acquiring commercial solutions. The team
will reinforce “buy before build” commercial practices in the
early phases of programs by baking it into acquisition strat-
egy templates and program reviews. It will also collaborate
with defense industry, capital markets, and Congress to de-
velop a broader set of rapid funding tools and approaches
to demand signals consistent with the speed of commercial
innovation cycles. It will publish an initial commercial path -
way or guide by December 2023, with a comprehensive
version in 2024.
• Joint Staff and service requirements organizations
develop a rapid “military need validation” process,
involving feedback from the warfighter, for commer -
cial solutions in lieu of traditional Joint Capabilities
Integration and Development System (JCIDS) require -
ments documents. This new process will enable hun -
dreds or even thousands of commercial solutions to be
validated by empowered, distributed officials, and not
subject to the JCIDS process managed by the Joint Staff
and the Joint Requirements Oversight Council (JROC).
• The Defense Acquisition University and related orga -
nizations should modernize guidance and training for
commercial acquisition, to include:
• • Collaborating with industry, traditional and other -
wise, in the early phases of an acquisition program
to inform concepts, alternatives, and designs. The
focus should be on feeding into mission objectives,
not market research for system specifications.
• • Contracting strategies focused on commercial solu-
tions (e.g., Commercial Solutions Openings, Other
Transactions, Federal Acquisition Regulation Parts
12 and 13).
• • Testing, experimentation, exercises, rapid deliveries,
and iteration.
• • Scaling programs like DIU’s Immersive Commercial
Acquisition Program.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
Success Measures: Higher number of DIU projects that tran -
sition to a program of record; increased number of vendors
entering the federal market and competing for contracts; bet-
ter alignment of capital market investment and lending to DoD
missions; alignment of DoD R&D and prime IRAD funds to help a
wider number of entrants across the Valley of Death; increased
transparency with the industrial base on DoD’s priorities; a com-
mercial pathway, guidance, and training enabling workforce
to rapidly and successfully acquire commercial solutions; in -
creased transparency and collaboration within the department
on tech-related initiatives and intelligence; resources saved
and efficiencies gained from central repository information
from traditional and nontraditional industrial base like market
intelligence, technology landscape analysis and due diligence
on vendors.
Notional Examples: Expanded engagement with nontraditional
industrial base helps DIU identify the commercial sector’s leader
in autonomous software for ground vehicles and, through the
streamlined, well-defined process for rapid acquisition, the Army
begins adopting it across its fleet of logistics vehicles on conti-
nental United States bases.
In their quarterly engagement, the US Marine Corps Warfighting
Laboratory (MCWL) talks to DIU about its desire to procure
better mission planning tools at the edge. DIU identifies and
provides three viable commercial options for demonstrations.
Before presenting them to MCWL, DIU leverages VC firm rela-
tionships to get existing due diligence on the potential vendors
and discovers one of them draws components of its chips from
China. DIU finds an alternative.
In its engagements with capital market players, DIU discovers
there are several critical bottlenecks in the quantum computing
supply chain due to either a severe lack of redundancy or rout-
ing through adversary nations. DIU flags this to R&E, Office of
Strategic Capital (OSC), and A&S Industrial Policy to determine
how to address this. As part of this, DIU and OSC engage with
capital market players to inform them this is now a department
priority, helping to direct capital market funding toward these
enabling technologies critical to the US broader tech competi-
tion vis-à-vis China.
RECOMMENDATION 5:
Strengthen existing capital market programs and create new pathways for mission-critical technologies.
Addresses challenges 1, 3, 4, and 8.
US capital markets represent a critical yet underutilized
strategic advantage for the DoD. To better leverage vast
capital market resources for defense innovation and mission
outcomes, the DoD should broaden programs through which
capital market-backed companies can participate and create
new pathways for DoD program offices to leverage capital
market funding for mission-critical technologies.
Congress directs in legislation the Small Business Agency
(SBA), in coordination with the General Services Administration
(GSA), to enhance the Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) grants program no later than six months after enactment.
To better scale SBIRs, the SBA should:
• Generate direct to Phase III SBIR grants in which early
successful performers in Phase I can be fast-tracked to
more-flexible contract vehicles, for which performers have
exemptions from SBA size standards for procurement; no
limits on dollar size of procurement; the right to receive
sole-source funding agreements; and the ability to pursue
flexible ways to add value to an end user, whether that be
research, R&D, services, products, production, or any com-
bination thereof.
• Direct the SBIR offices of the Army, Navy, and Marine Corps
to pilot a Strategic Funding Increase (STRATFI) program to
help bridge the Valley of Death between Phase II and Phase
III SBIR grants, no later than twelve months after designated.
Service pilots would replicate the STRATFI program in that
SBIR funding ($15 million) would receive matched funding
from customers ($15 million) and private funding (up to $30
million).
To increase competition and widen the aperture of firms com-
peting for SBIR grants, the SBA should:
• Remove the barrier preventing companies with more than
50 percent backing by VCs or other capital market players
to compete for SBIR grants. Small businesses often rely on

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
VC funding to cover the costs of operating as they work to
commercialize their products and generate sufficient rev -
enue to sustain their business. This is particularly true in
the case of software development, for which highly skilled
software engineers are the single most expensive operating
cost. Placing strict limitations on the ability of these small
businesses to compete for SBIR grants is contrary to the
SBIR program goal of supporting scientific excellence and
technological innovation.
• Remove the barrier preventing companies that meet the
requirements of being a small business, but are publicly
traded, to compete for SBIR grants. Small, high-tech R&D
firms go public to continue their ability to raise funds for
their capital-intensive technologies. By disallowing them
from competing for SBIR grants, the DoD is limiting technol-
ogy competition among some of the most technology-profi-
cient corners of the industrial base.
To drive deep tech adoption, the OSC should develop tools
for leveraging external capital market funding for pilot proj -
ects to service R&D organizations in FY 2024, with a for -
malization plan in conjunction with the president’s FY 2025
budget request.
• OSC to be given expanded authorities to access capital
markets to develop revenue, investment, and credit
approaches for defense programs contracting with small-,
mid-, and large-cap companies. As an initial step, direct
$15 million of external capital market funding to the R&D
organization of each military branch to pilot projects that
identify two novel use cases in one or more of R&E’s deep-
tech priority areas of quantum technology, biotechnology,
or advanced materials that could be leveraged to achieve
service-specific missions. The period of performance
would be eighteen months. Service end users would
provide matched funding of up to 25 percent of total
outside funding to pilot these projects.
• This would assist in directing capital market funding to the
DoD’s mission, providing additional R&D funding and in -
centives for deep-tech companies to commercialize their
technologies, and creating optimization loops that con -
nect technology to warfighter use cases that can help turn
basic research into relevant products and services. Lastly,
exposure to deep-tech applications would allow service
end users to better understand emerging technologies’
applications to future defense requirements. This will help
accelerate the well-aligned adoption of these capabilities to
meet services’ unique missions at the speed of relevance.
• R&D leads will report to DIU’s director and USD(R&E) no
more than 180 days past the period of performance on the
pilot’s utility, lessons learned, and challenges DoD would
face if technology were to be adopted at scale.
Success Measures: Meaningful increase in capital market
funding for defense-related companies; increased number of
companies crossing Valley of Death and program offices in -
tegrating commercially developed technology to speed inno-
vation milestones; increased number of production contracts
from nontraditional vendors, with more vendors competing for
each contract; increased touchpoints between cutting-edge
tech and the warfighter/end users; and the identification of
specific tech adoption challenges that can be addressed
ahead of requirements process for more-seamless tech adop-
tion and integration.
Notional Examples: A majority VC-backed company demon -
strates a novel capability that provides an advantage over
a near-peer adversary and is fast-tracked to SBIR Phase III,
through which the firm begins production at scale and crosses
the Valley of Death.
A publicly traded deep-tech company that qualifies as a
small business, now allowed to compete for SBIR grants,
begins to develop the foundation of a quantum network for
the US military.
The Army discovers through a biotech pilot project that an
advanced material it hoped to put into a program of record
does not provide meaningful benefit for the cost and pursues
another alternative.
The Navy uses its OSC pilot to buy hours of time on a quan -
tum computer provided over the cloud, through which the
Navy discovers the quantum computer’s utility in improv -
ing logistics and maintenance. However, the Navy does not
know how to manage the data being generated and needs
an extra data scientist to oversee the process. The Navy
begins to generate a data governance process, forms a
new billet to manage it, and begins determining the best
acquisition pathway in anticipation of purchasing quantum
computing as a service.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
11
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
BIOGRAPHIES
RECOMMENDATION 6:
Congress, OSD, and SAEs increase incentives and reduce barriers for leading technology companies to do business with
the DoD by September 2024.
Addresses challenges 1 and 3.
• Increase Incentives
• Production Contracts. The DoD and Congress in fu -
ture defense budgets rebalance the ratio of RDT&E
and Procurement funding to historical norms over the
past thirty years. From 1990 to 2019, the ratio was 39
percent to 61 percent, respectively. This would pro -
vide more than $20 billion in additional procurement
funds to acquire production quantities faster, leverage
commercial R&D, and fuel a broader market for leading
technology firms. Increasing production and lowering
barriers to entry will attract venture capital firms and
bring private research and development funding to the
defense market. As most of USD(R&E)’s fourteen critical
technologies are commercially driven, this rebalance
would enable faster fielding of warfighter priorities.
• Set Precedent. USD(A&S) and SAEs report the number
of large contracts (i.e., more than $50 million) awarded
to start-ups and NDCs annually to measure and convey
the trends of the DoD investing in these companies be-
yond small SBIR awards.
• Innovation Funds. USD(R&E) and services include start-
ups and NDCs as part of selection criteria for congres-
sionally directed innovation funds.
• Show Support. USD(A&S) and SAEs scale the direction,
goals, and guidance for working with small and disad -
vantaged businesses to include technology start-ups
and NDCs. Include NDCs as part of the small-business
integration working group being established for FY23
NDAA Section 874.
• Broaden Access to Capital Markets. Congress and
USD(A&S) modernize the use of Defense Production
Act Title III and credit loan authorities available to other
agencies and departments to dynamically access capital,
embrace commercial terms, and strengthen the domestic
industrial base capabilities, based on lessons learned from
COVID and the war in Ukraine. This use could include pur-
chase commitments and loan guarantees, similar to how
the Export-Import Bank works with US companies over-
seas, to increase incentives and reduce risk for companies
seeking to scale production of critical technologies.
• Decrease Barriers
• Congress should raise the Cost Accounting Standards
(CAS) threshold to at least $100 million; revise the com-
mercial item exemption in 48 CFR 9903.201-1(b)(6); and
make related CAS reforms as recommended by the
Section 809 Panel to reduce compliance costs, which
are the biggest barrier to entry in defense.
• DoD, GSA, and Office of Management and Budget in -
vest in modernizing SAM.gov and related DoD websites
that publish contract opportunities to improve user de-
sign, alerts, DoD-industry collaboration, processes, and
status. Many find SAM.gov onerous to use.
• Fully resource and drive the Defense Counter-
intelligence and Security Agency to streamline pro -
cesses, increase staffing, and pursue novel approaches
to reduce the large backlog of individual and facility
security clearances that impose long delays on contrac-
tors to begin work or scale.
• USD(A&S) and SAEs assign visible leaders for
SBIRs, OTs (including OT Consortia), Middle Tier of
Acquisitions, and Commercial Solutions Openings to
champion adoption; set vision; simplify processes;
curate leading strategies; and improve guidance,
training, structures, and direction to continuously
improve adoption. Update policies and guidelines
to ensure efforts conducted under OTs count for
past performance and small disadvantaged business
goals to incentivize industry and government use.
• USD(A&S), USD(R&E), and services establish a team
to map and improve processes to scale successful re -
search and prototypes into new or existing acquisition
programs. This includes requirements, acquisition, bud-
get, contracting, engineering, and testing, among others.
• USD(A&S) and SAEs establish a working group,
to include primes and NDCs, to explore how to
incentivize primes to better leverage technology
start-up companies. The objective is to fuel disruptive
defense innovation from novel tech companies
and leverage the primes to scale integration and
production of weapon systems to create an enduring
battlefield advantage.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
12
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
RECOMMENDATION 7:
USD comptroller proposes streamlined budget justification and chief digital and artificial intelligence officer (CDAO)
modernizes supporting details in congressionally accessible information system for the president’s FY 2026 budget request.
Success Measure: USD(A&S) reports an increase in the
number of new companies in the industrial base by 5 percent,
offsetting the recent trend of 5 percent decrease annually.
At least ten NDCs are awarded contracts of more than $50
million that address validated defense requirements. Defense
primes significantly increase partnerships, subcontracts,
and acquisitions of start-ups and NDCs to integrate their
technologies into weapon systems.
Notional Example: A leading technology company with
viable solutions for defense that historically avoided
defense contracts is now receptive (with board support)
to pursue contracts given the higher CAS thresholds,
reduced unique compliance requirements, and improved
clearance processes.
Budget Justification Not Supporting Congressional Oversight
Current budget justifications are submitted across tens of thousands of pages that often obscure program oversight. The F-35 program, for example,
had total or partial interest in more than fifty investment and military construction line items since 2002, and was spread between sixteen line items in
FY23 alone. This cumbersome system reduces trust and transparency between Congress and the DoD. Credit: Eric Lofgren
RDT&E
956 line items
MILCON
203 line items
Procurement
845 line items
F-35 Program
F-35 (FY23)
RDT&E: 604800M;
0604800N; 0604840F;
0207142F; 0604840M;
0604840N;
Procurement: 0147; 0592;
593; ATA000; F03500;
0152
MILCON: 63042351;
60495429; 00146239;
LSGA21901
Addresses challenge 7.
• USD comptroller proposes a format for streamlining budget
justification documents in the investment accounts, focusing
on cogent six-page program overviews at the BLI/PE level
(R-1 and P-1) with hyperlinks to supporting details.
• Seek implementation for the president’s FY 2026
budget request.
• CDAO leads the effort to create a query tool and dashboard
tied to Advana’s backend data that delivers insight down to
the existing level of justification material, allowing for more
frequent updates.
• This tool should be capable of replicating Financial
Management Regulation Volume 2B, Chapters 4 and
5 presentations.
• Prototype early access to congressional staff with the
president’s FY 2025 budget request, in addition to the
traditional format.
• This tool should seek to incorporate budget execution
data such as quarterly DD1416s and contract obligations
as data integration improves.
Success Measure: Congressional staff use the new information
system for their budgetary and program analysis; staff desires
expansion into other accounts, including Operations and
Maintenance and Military Personnel.
Notional Example: Congressional staff can find up-to-date
information on DoD program activities without having DoD
officials provide the information directly to a committee.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
13
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
RECOMMENDATION 8:
Tying Experimentation to Acquisition Outcomes: Scaling and Accelerating Successful Demonstrations
Addresses challenges 1, 4, and 8.
The DoD and industry invest significant time, funding, and re-
sources to conduct operational exercises that experiment and
demonstrate emerging capabilities and technologies in an op-
erationally relevant environment. Even after a major exercise
in which senior commanders agree on the success of demon-
strated capabilities and demand to acquire these at scale,
there is often a two- to four-year lag time for DoD to formally
define requirements, secure funding, and shape acquisition
and contract strategies. For example, even successful capabil-
ities selected by USD(R&E)’s Rapid Defense Experimentation
Reserve (RDER) still must go through the Program Objective
Memorandum and Deputy Secretary’s Management Action
Group processes to begin scaling.
• Congress to pilot providing $250 million to scale opera -
tionally relevant technologies demonstrated at operational
exercises that address the preeminent challenge of de -
terring the People’s Republic of China, such as RDER. The
funds will facilitate the acceleration and scaling of novel
capabilities into the hands of the warfighter at the speed
of relevance, help vendors cross the Valley of Death, and
incentivize new nontraditional companies to work with the
DoD. This will significantly shorten the traditionally long lag
times for successful vendors to receive funding while the
DoD finalizes requirements, funding, and contracts. The
associated funds would be particularly useful for the tech -
nology needed to integrate military forces that will revolve
around digital tools and other foundational “middleware”
technologies that sometimes fall in the seams of traditional
major hardware-centric acquisition.
The fund should:
• Be allocated in FY 2024 spending bill to specific pro -
grams or initiatives no later than 180 days from comple-
tion of the exercise on discovered solutions.
• Be limited to five or fewer high-potential capabilities
to ensure they are properly resourced to meaningfully
scale.
• Be directly allocated to an acquisition organization,
such as a program executive office, to rapidly acquire
capabilities that have demonstrated success in order
to address priority operational risks or opportunities.
• Use Defense Production Act Title III or adapt authorities
available to other agencies and departments to provide
credit guarantees or other funding approaches in sup -
port of technology and capability providers.
Success Measures: Increased number of technologies and
capabilities demonstrated successfully that are transitioned at
scale to the warfighter; increased number of vendors incentiv-
ized to demonstrate at exercises.
Notional Example: A company demonstrates a swarm of
small undersea intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
drones at the Rim of the Pacific 2024 exercise. The firm is
awarded a low-rate initial production contract within sixty days
and deploys its capability with the Navy in 2025.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
14
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
RECOMMENDATION 9:
USD(A&S) and acquisition executives propose realigning existing organizations to adopt the Space Development Agency
(SDA) model, and Congress grants additional enabling authorities to those organizations in FY25 NDAA.
Addresses challenges 2 and 4.
• USD(A&S) and SAEs charter a small team to build out a
model, structure, key elements, and a framework replicating
the SDA and lessons learned from rapid acquisition.
• SDA provides an early model for preemptive disruption
within the Space Force. The disruptive units should
focus on current technologies from the labs and indus-
try that can be quickly fielded and scaled within exist -
ing rapid acquisition authorities. Mature defense and
commercial capabilities, along with broader portfolio
requirements, can shape a streamlined process. This
model builds upon successful organizations like the Air
Force Rapid Capabilities Office, Big Safari, and Special
Operations Command’s acquisition and SOFWERX
organizations.
• Service leadership identifies priority capability areas that
are ripe for disruption—ones where the current operational
model is outmoded for the digital age and/or where novel
technologies offer radically different operational capabilities
at greater speed and scale to achieve mission priorities.
• Each identified service and defense agency employs an
SDA model to a priority capability area and repurposes or -
ganizations, funding, and resources to implement.
• Identify the right charismatic leader who embodies
these characteristics: high technical acumen, proven
product manager, well-defined vision, extensive per -
sonal network in warfighting and industry communities,
commitment to a five-year tenure, and an intangible
“wild card” quality. Provide statutory protections to ex-
tend top cover beyond the length of time of political
appointees for the new organizations to disrupt en -
trenched mindsets on major systems, operations, and
force structures employed for decades.
• DoD leaders continually discuss and iterate on the new
model with key stakeholder organizations across the DoD
and congressional defense committees.
Success Measure: Congressional buy-in, with a small set of
targeted projects identified for each organization and under -
way in FY 2024 to prepare for rapid scaling in FY 2025 with
capabilities initially fielded by FY 2027.
Notional Example: Navy leadership, in its commitment to
autonomous systems, bundles PEO Unmanned and Small
Combatants, Task Force 59, Unmanned Task Force, and the
director of unmanned systems into a new naval autonomy
organization with authorities and flexibilities similar to SDA and
related rapid-innovation organizations.
RECOMMENDATION 10:
The Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (VCJCS) and services establish a team to collaboratively modernize JCIDS
and service requirements processes by September 2024.
Addresses Challenges 2, 4, and 5
The DoD’s JCIDS is a complex, disjointed bureaucracy across
Joint Staff and the services. The DoD requires a streamlined,
tailored requirements framework and processes that iterate
operational needs and threats with technology solutions, while
also aligning requirements, acquisition, and budget systems.
• VCJCS and services charter a team or multiple teams to
modernize DoD’s requirements enterprise to include:
• Design a requirements framework that better incorpo -
rates bottom-up capability requirements from the warf-
ighter and addresses joint strategic capability concerns.
It must align service/agency and JROC core processes
while allowing some tailoring and flexibility.
• Enable a requirements system that breaks from the
mindset of locking down all requirements up front to
a dynamic model that enables software-intensive com-
mercial solutions and emerging technologies that meet

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
15
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
changing or evolving warfighting needs to iteratively
shape capability developments.
• Overhaul, streamline, and tailor requirements docu -
ments based on capability size, urgency, product vs.
service, and hardware vs. software. Develop new pro -
cess to rapidly validate the military utility of a commer-
cial solution instead of the traditional JCIDS.
• Aggressively streamline capability requirement devel -
opment, coordination, and approval timelines from op-
erational commands, through component commands,
and Joint Staff. Impose tripwires for exceeding six
months for software and twelve months for hardware
to get senior leader involvement.
• Develop enduring overarching requirements for ca -
pability portfolios. Include a set of mission impact
measures to focus investments and acquisitions to
continuously improve.
• Retire the outmoded DoD Architecture Framework
and focus on application programming interfaces per
DepSecDef’s data decree, architectures, and standards
to enable interoperability. Strike the right balance be -
tween enterprise, service, and portfolio orchestration
with flexibility for program and industry solutions.
• Modernize the analysis of alternatives processes to en-
able a more streamlined and iterative approach that val-
ues prototypes, experiments, minimum viable products,
and commercial solutions with warfighter and other
user feedback over lengthy headquarters staff analysis.
• Better integrate threat and technology assessments
early and throughout the process.
• The team must include external change management
experts and collaborate with industry (traditional and
nontraditional) and the DoD S&T community to get their
input and feedback on providing options to inform DoD
requirements.
• Develop a career path, structure, and improved training
for DoD requirements managers.
• Publish new policies, guidance, and templates in dy -
namic online formats instead of five-hundred-page
PDFs.
• Congress directs the Government Accountability Office
to assess the DoD’s requirements management pro -
cesses, policies, and practices to include timelines;
alignment to the DoD budget and acquisition pro -
cesses, mission outcomes, portfolio management; and
harnessing commercial technologies.
• The Senate Armed Services Committee and/or House
Armed Services Committee hold hearings with the
VCJCS and the service chiefs on modernizing DoD
requirements processes to enable greater speed,
agility, and innovation.
Success Measure: Joint Staff and service stakeholder organiza-
tions collaboratively develop a modern approach to managing
defense requirements. The new requirements system integrates
the key elements outlined above by September 2024.
Notional Example: The Air Force establishes an uncrewed
aerial systems (UAS) portfolio requirements document
that aggressively streamlines all future UAS requirements,
bakes in interoperability standards, and enables many novel
commercial solutions.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
16
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
This interim report is focused on providing elected officials
and senior DoD leaders with actionable recommendations
that can be enacted promptly. The Commission discussed
and acknowledged broader, strategic matters that will take
time to flesh out and implement. These include establishing a
more fulsome capital market engagement strategy, harnessing
a modern workforce, and exploring digital transformations of
enterprise systems to enable broader reforms and opportunities.
The Commission’s final report, which is planned for September
2023, will expand upon these ten recommendations to include
a broader set of reforms to strengthen defense innovation
adoption. It will include case studies that highlight successes in
adopting dual-use technologies within short time frames. After
all, living through the “decisive decade” means that Americans
deserve decisive capabilities to provide for the common
defense, in this decade.
CONCLUSIONS AND NEXT STEPS

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
17
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
BIOGRAPHIES
The Hon. Mark T. Esper, PhD
Board Director and Co-Chair of the
Commission, Atlantic Council; 27th US
Secretary of Defense
The Honorable Mark T. Esper is a partner
and board member of the venture capital
firm Red Cell Partners and a board director at the Atlantic
Council. He was sworn in as the 27th Secretary of Defense
on July 23, 2019, and served in that capacity until November
9, 2020. He previously served as acting secretary of defense
from June 24, 2019, to July 15, 2019. Esper was confirmed as
the 23rd secretary of the US Army in November 2017.
In the private sector, Esper was vice president for government
relations at the Raytheon Company. He earlier served con -
currently as executive vice president of the US Chamber of
Commerce’s Global Intellectual Property Center and as vice
president for European and Eurasian affairs from 2008 to
2010. From 2006 to 2007, He was chief operating officer and
executive vice president of defense and international affairs at
the Aerospace Industries Association.
In addition to his work in the private sector, Esper served
in a range of positions on Capitol Hill and in the Defense
Department. He served as legislative director and senior policy
advisor to former Senator Chuck Hagel. He was a senior pro -
fessional staff member on the Senate Foreign Relations and
Senate Governmental Affairs committees, policy director for
the House Armed Services Committee, and national security
advisor for former Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist. During the
President George W. Bush administration, he served as deputy
assistant secretary of defense for negotiations policy at the
Pentagon. He was national policy director to the late Senator
Fred Thompson for his 2008 presidential campaign and was
a Senate-appointed commissioner on the US-China Economic
and Security Review Commission.
Esper began his career in the US Army. He is a 1986 gradu -
ate of the United States Military Academy and received his
commission in the infantry. Upon completion of Ranger and
Pathfinder training, he served in the 101st Airborne Division
and participated in the 1990-91 Gulf War with the “Screaming
Eagles.” He later commanded a rifle company in the 3-325
Airborne Battalion Combat Team in Vicenza, Italy. He retired
from the Army in 2007 after spending ten years on active duty
and eleven years in the National Guard and Army Reserve.
After leaving active duty, he served as chief of staff at the
Heritage Foundation think tank.
He is a recipient of the Department of Defense Medal for
Distinguished Public Service. Among his many military awards
and decorations are the Legion of Merit, a Bronze Star Medal,
the Kuwait Liberation Medal, Kuwait Liberation Medal-Saudi
Arabia, and the Combat Infantryman Badge. Esper holds a PhD
from the George Washington University.
The Hon. Deborah Lee James
Board Director and Co-Chair of the
Commission, Atlantic Council; 23rd US
Secretary of the Air Force
The Honorable Deborah Lee James is chair
of the Defense Business Board and board
director at the Atlantic Council. Previously, she served as the
twenty-third secretary of the US Air Force and was responsible
for the affairs of the Department of the Air Force, including the
organizing, training, equipping, and providing for the welfare
of its nearly 660,000 active-duty, National Guard, Reserve,
and civilian airmen and their families. She also oversaw the
Air Force’s annual budget of more than $139 billion. James has
thirty years of senior homeland and national security experi -
ence in the federal government and the private sector. Prior to
her Air Force position, James served as president of Science
Applications International Corporation’s (SAIC’s) technical and
engineering sector, where she was responsible for 8,700 em-
ployees and more than $2 billion in revenue.
For twelve years, James held a variety of positions with
SAIC, including senior vice president and director of home -
land security. From 2000 to 2001, she was executive vice
president and chief operating officer at Business Executives
for National Security, and from 1998 to 2000 she was vice
president of international operations and marketing at
United Technologies. During the Bill Clinton administration,
from 1993 to 1998, James served in the Pentagon as as -
sistant secretary of defense for reserve affairs. In that po -
sition, she was senior advisor to the secretary of defense
on all matters pertaining to the 1.8 million National Guard
and Reserve personnel worldwide. In addition to working
extensively with Congress, state governors, the business

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
18
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
Eric Lofgren
Professional Staff Member, Seapower
and Acquisition Lead, US Senate
Committee on Armed Services; Author,
Commission on Defense Innovation
Adoption, Atlantic Council
Eric Lofgren is a professional staff member and the seapower
and acquisition lead for the United States Senate Committee on
Armed Services. His work on this Commission was completed
while he was a research fellow at the Center for Government
Contracting in the George Mason University (GMU) School of
Business, where he performed research, wrote, and led initia-
tives on business, policy, regulatory, and other issues in gov -
ernment contracting. He manages the daily blog Acquisition
Talk and produces the Acquisition Talk podcast, on which he
interviews leading experts in the field. Lofgren was an emer -
gent ventures fellow at GMU’s Mercatus Center. Prior to joining
GMU, he was a senior analyst at Technomics Inc., supporting
the Defense Department’s Cost Assessment and Program
Evaluation office. He has also supported government analyses
for the Government Accountability Office, Naval Sea Systems
Command, Canada Public Works, and the Office of the Deputy
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Cost and Economics.
Whitney M. McNamara
Vice President, Beacon Global Strategies;
Author, Commission on Defense Innovation
Adoption, Atlantic Council
Whitney McNamara is a vice president at
Beacon Global Strategies. Prior to that,
McNamara worked in the Office of the Secretary of Defense
for Research and Engineering, where she served as the S&T
portfolio lead at the Defense Innovation Board, whose mis -
sion is to provide the secretary of defense, deputy secretary
of defense, and other senior leaders with recommendations on
emerging technologies and innovative approaches that DoD
should adopt to ensure US technological and military domi -
nance. Before that, McNamara was an emerging technologies
policy subject matter expert supporting the Department of
Defense’s Chief Information Officer (CIO). Prior to that, she was
a senior analyst at national security think tank the Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, focusing on emerging
technologies, future operating concepts, and informationized
warfare in the context of long-term technological and military
competition with great powers.
Peter Modigliani
Defense Acquisition Lead, MITRE
Corporation; Author, Commission
on Defense Innovation Adoption,
Atlantic Council
Peter Modigliani is a defense acquisition
leader within the MITRE Corporation enabling the DoD and
intelligence community to deliver innovative solutions with
greater speed and agility. He works with acquisition and CIO
executives, program managers, the Section 809 Panel, con -
gressional staffs, industry, and academia to shape acquisition
reforms, strategic initiatives, and major program strategies.
Modigliani champions digitally transforming the acquisition en-
terprise to modernize and accelerate operations. He launched
MITRE’s digital acquisition platform, AiDA. Prior to MITRE,
Modigliani was an Air Force program manager for C4ISR pro -
grams and an assistant vice president with Alion Science and
Technology, supporting the Air Force Acquisition Executive’s
Information Dominance division.
Stephen Rodriguez
Senior Advisor and Study Director of
the Commission on Defense Innovation
Adoption, Forward Defense, Scowcroft
Center for Strategy and Security,
Atlantic Council
Stephen Rodriguez is a senior advisor with the Forward
Defense program at the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center for
Strategy and Security and founding partner of One Defense,
a next-generation strategic advisory firm that leverages ma -
chine learning to identify advanced software and hardware
commercial capabilities and accelerate their transition into
community, military associations, and international officials
on National Guard and Reserve component issues, James
oversaw a $10 billion budget and supervised a one-hun -
dred-plus-person staff. Prior to her Senate confirmation in
1993, she served as an assistant to the assistant secretary
of defense for legislative affairs. 
From 1983 to 1993, James worked as a professional staff
member on the House Armed Services Committee, where
she served as a senior advisor to the Military Personnel and
Compensation Subcommittee, the NATO Burden Sharing
Panel, and the chairman’s Member Services team. 
James earned a BA in comparative area studies from Duke
University and an MA in international affairs from Columbia
University School of International and Public Affairs.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
19
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
the defense industrial base. He is also a venture partner at
Refinery Ventures, an early-scale fund investing in dual-use
technologies across the country. Rodriguez began his career at
Booz Allen Hamilton supporting its national security practice.
In his capacity as an expert on game-theoretic applications,
he supported the US intelligence community, Department of
Defense, and Department of Homeland Security as a lead ar -
chitect for wargames. He subsequently was a vice president
at Sentia Group, an artificial intelligence company, and served
as chief marketing officer for NCL Holdings, an international
defense corporation. Rodriguez serves as a board director
or board advisor of ten venture-backed companies—Duco,
Edgybees, Hatch Apps, HighSide, Omelas, Uniken, Ursa Major
Technologies, Vantage Robotics, War on the Rocks, and Zignal
Labs—as well as the nonprofit organizations Public Spend
Forum and Training Leaders International. He is also senior
innovation advisor at the Naval Postgraduate School.
Clementine G. Starling
Director, Forward Defense,
Scowcroft Center for Strategy
and Security, Atlantic Council
Clementine G. Starling is the director of the
Atlantic Council’s Forward Defense program
and a resident fellow within the Scowcroft Center for Strategy
and Security. In her role, she shapes the Center’s US defense
research agenda, leads Forward Defense’s team of nine staff and
forty fellows, and produces thought leadership on US security
strategies and the evolving character of warfare. Her research
focuses on long-term US thinking on issues like China’s and
Russia’s defense strategies, space security, defense industry,
and emerging technology. Prior to launching Forward Defense,
Starling served as deputy director of the Atlantic Council’s
Transatlantic Security team, specializing in European security
policy and NATO. From 2016, she supported NATO’s Public
Diplomacy Division at two NATO summits (Brussels and London)
and organized and managed three senior Atlantic Council task
forces on US force posture in Europe, military mobility, and US
defense innovation adoption. During her time at the Atlantic
Council, Starling has written numerous reports and commentary
on US space strategy, deterrence, operational concepts,
coalition warfare, and US-Europe relations. She regularly serves
as a panelist and moderator at public conferences. Among the
outlets that have featured her analysis and commentary are
Defense One, Defense News, RealClearDefense, the National
Interest, SpaceNews, NATO’s Joint Air and Space Power
Conference, the BBC, National Public Radio, ABC News, and
Government Matters, among others. Starling was named the
2022 Herbert Roback scholar by the US National Academy of
Public Administration. She also served as the 2020 Security and
Defense fellow at Y oung Professionals in Foreign Policy. Originally
from the United Kingdom, Starling previously worked in the UK
Parliament focusing on technology, defense, Middle East security,
and Ukraine. She also supported the Britain Stronger in Europe
campaign, championing for the United Kingdom to remain within
the European Union. She graduated with honors from the London
School of Economics with a BS in international relations and
history and is an MA candidate in security studies at Georgetown
University’s School of Foreign Service.
Mark J. Massa is an associate director in the Forward Defense
program. His work focuses on nuclear deterrence strategy and
policy. He holds an MA in security studies and a BSFS in sci -
ence, technology, and international affairs from Georgetown
University.
Delharty M. Manson II is a program assistant in the Forward
Defense program. His work focuses on defense innovation
and operational concepts. He holds a BA in public policy from
the College of William & Mary.
Jacob Mezey is a program assistant in the Forward Defense
program. His work focuses on nuclear security, space security,
and defense innovation. He holds a BA in history from Yale
University.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
20
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
This interim report was written and prepared with the support
and input of its authors, Commissioners on the Atlantic
Council’s Commission on Defense Innovation Adoption,
and the Forward Defense program of the Atlantic Council’s
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security.
This effort was conducted under the supervision of
Commission Director Stephen Rodriguez, Forward Defense
Director Clementine Starling, and Forward Defense
Associate Director Mark J. Massa. Thank you to Julia Siegel
and Christian Trotti for earlier contributions. Special thanks to
Atlantic Council CEO Fred Kempe and Barry Pavel for their
support of this effort.
This effort has been made possible through the generous
support of Booz Allen Hamilton as the Foundational Sponsor
as well as sponsorship from Accrete AI, ACT1 Federal,
Applied Intuition, Palantir, Peraton, Primer AI, Rebellion
Defense, Schmidt Futures, and Snowpoint Ventures.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FOUNDATIONAL SPONSOR
SPONSORS
To produce this interim report, the authors conducted more than fifty interviews and consultations with current and former
officials in the US Department of Defense, congressional staff members, allied embassies in Washington, DC, and other aca -
demic and think tank organizations. However, the analysis and recommendations presented in this interim report are those of
the authors alone and do not necessarily reflect the views of individuals consulted, Commissioners, Commission sponsors, the
Atlantic Council, or any US government organization. Moreover, the authors, Commissioners, and consulted experts participated
in a personal, not institutional, capacity.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
21
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
LIST OF ACRONYMS
ATR: Above threshold reprogramming
BLI: Budget line item
CAS: Cost Accounting Standards
CDAO: Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer
DARPA: Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DepSecDef: Deputy Secretary of Defense
DIU: Defense Innovation Unit
DoD: US Department of Defense
FFRDC: Federally Funded Research and Development
Center
FY: Fiscal Y ear
GSA: General Services Administration
IRAD: Independent research & development
JCIDS: Joint Capabilities Integration and Development
System
JROC: Joint Requirements Oversight Council
MCWL: US Marine Corps Warfighting Laboratory
MILPERS: Military personnel
NDAA: National Defense Authorization Act
NDC: Nontraditional defense company
O&M: operation and maintenance
OSC: Office of Strategic Capital
OSD: Office of the Secretary of Defense
OT: Other transaction
PE: Program elements
PEO: Program executive officer / office
RDER: Rapid Defense Experimentation Reserve
RDT&E: Research, development, testing, and evaluation
S&T: Science and technology
SAE: Service acquisition executive
SBA: Small Business Agency
SBIR: Small Business Innovation Research program
SDA: Space Development Agency
SOCOM: US Special Operations Command
STRATFI: Strategic Funding Increase
UAS: Uncrewed aerial system
USD(A&S): Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition
and Sustainment
USD(R&E): Under Secretary of Defense for Research
and Engineering
USD: Under Secretary of Defense
VC: Venture capital / venture capitalist
VCJCS: Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
22
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
ATLANTIC COUNCIL BOARD OF DIRECTORS
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
TREASURER
*George Lund
DIRECTORS
Todd Achilles
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
John Bonsell
Philip M. Breedlove
Richard R. Burt
*Teresa Carlson
*James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
Lawrence Di Rita
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Richard Edelman
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Mark T. Esper
*Michael Fisch
Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Jarosław Grzesiak
Murathan Günal
Michael V. Hayden
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Kay Bailey Hutchison
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
*Joia M. Johnson
*Safi Kalo
Andre Kelleners
Brian L. Kelly
Henry A. Kissinger
John E. Klein
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Joseph Konzelmann
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Almar Latour
Yann Le Pallec
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Christian Marrone
Gerardo Mato
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Majida Mourad
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
*Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell MCormick
Michael Punke
Ashraf Qazi
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Jeff Shockey
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
*Gil Tenzer
*Frances F. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
*Al Williams
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster
*Executive Committee
Members
List as of March 6, 2023

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
23
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
24
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMISSION ON DEFENSE INNOVATION ADOPTION
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and engagement in international
 affairs based on the central role of the Atlantic community in
 meeting today’s global challenges.
© 2023 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means without permission
in writing from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of brief
quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please
direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
