
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
1
CHINA PATHFINDER: Q1 2024 UPDATE
China Pathfinder
is a multiyear
initiative from the
Atlantic Council’s
GeoEconomics Center and
Rhodium Group to measure
China’s economic system
relative to advanced market
economies in six areas: financial
system development, market
competition, modern innovation
system, trade openness, direct
investment openness, and
portfolio investment openness.
To explore our data visualization
and read our 2023 annual
report, please visit
https://chinapathfinder.org/.
D
ebate about China’s domestic demand conditions came to a boil during the first
quarter of 2024, as positive messages contrasted rising exports and political
complaints from Europe, Asia, North America and (in the form of anti-dumping
duties) elsewhere. Beijing worked hard to maintain the more constructive economic
narrative that flowed from the November 2023 Biden-Xi meeting on the sidelines of
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) in San Francisco. The positive vibes ema-
nated from climate cooperation and global debt talks, bolstered by relatively restrained
Chinese behavior around Taiwanese elections. However, this warming trend was ten-
uous: economic and financial market headwinds inside China cast a shadow on exter-
nal expectations, as concerns about the trade spillovers resulting from weak Chinese
domestic demand mushroomed. External relations can only be positive if China
demonstrates convergence with market norms. Based on the China Pathfinder frame-
work, the opposite is in evidence, and market economies will discuss how to react at
the coming G7 leader’s summit in Apulia, Italy in June.
China Pathfinder:
Quarter 1 2024 Update
Written by Daniel Rosen, Matt Mingey, Camille Boullenois,
and Laura Gormley
MAY 2024
China’s macro story in the first
quarter of 2024
At the start of the year, Beijing declared that its 2023 gross
domestic product (GDP) growth results came out perfectly as
planned, just above the target floor, at 5.2 percent. That occa-
sioned a growing chorus of debate, discussion and skepticism.
Many of the components said to be growing, including the gov-
ernment fiscal impulse, looked flat or negative to economists
inside and outside China. Despite these questions, Beijing
revealed the same play book for 2024 over the first quarter: the
economy would grow at 5 percent, bolstered by active fiscal
support.
On the positive side, because in our view 2022 and 2023 were
extremely slow or flat growth years (0-1.5 percent), we expect
China did see a modest economic improvement in the first quar-
ter of 2024. After years of property crisis, the sector was more
likely to see cyclical stabilization. In the aggregate property
turned in yet another negative quarter, but some indicators finally
turned positive. And strength in the electric vehicle (EV), battery
and renewable energy sectors was real.
Cyclical improvements and a handful of bright spot industries are
not enough to build a sustainable future on. Outside China, both
advanced and (surprisingly) developing economies stepped up
actions this quarter to address trade spillover concerns in light of
weak domestic demand and anemic support policies for house-
hold and government consumption. The first quarter started with
advanced economy emissaries urging Beijing to build demand
support into its 2024 work plan so it was clear to see, instead of
supporting only suppliers; by the end of the quarter China’s dis-
inclination to do that, and its “overcapacity problem,” dominated
the discussion. The United States, European Union, and Japan
have publicized their systemic concerns about China’s capacity
patterns in upstream areas like steel, midstream areas like leg-
acy chips, and finished downstream goods like electric vehicles,
windmills and much else. They are talking about unilateral, bilat-
eral and (with the G7 leaders summit approaching in mid-June)
plurilateral options to push back.
The most important event on the annual policy calendar, the
National People’s Congress, did not endorse policy measures to
stimulate demand, and in fact implied support for a rising trade
surplus instead. The externally oriented China Development
Forum, an exchange with foreign business leaders occurring
since 2000, offered positive guidance for multinational business.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
CHINA PATHFINDER: Q1 2024 UPDATE
But behind closed doors many foreign firms reported receiv-
ing continuing pressure to export, at a loss if necessary, if they
wanted to maintain their position in the Chinese marketplace.
Official media insisted that President Xi Jinping was the standard
bearer for the same reform and opening imperative that Deng
Xiaoping had enshrined. However, from our Pathfinder perspec-
tive, the official call for balanced growth was not supported by
credible plans to get back to unfinished imperatives. In 2013, Xi
had called for state ownership reform, changes to corporate gov-
ernance, fiscal and tax reforms, and much else, but these were
never carried through.
A look at Q2 trendlines
As we explain in annual China Pathfinder reports, a contestable
Chinese regulatory state, with checks on concentrated one-
party political power, is essential if the nation is to achieve poten-
tial growth. Figure 1 summarizes our impressions of movement
toward or away from the market economy norms that charac-
terize that outcome, in the first quarter of 2024. The measures
Beijing announced or demonstrated (discussed in more detail
in Part 2 just below) were at best stop-gap, and at worst count-
er-productive, because they are delaying the inevitable.
Part 2: January-March 2024 policy
specifics: Putting on a brave face
FINANCIAL SY
STEM
Stability trumped efficiency in China’s financial system this quar-
ter, as state related investment entities (“the national team”)
bought securities in the capital markets to counteract market sen-
timent disappointed by policy and economy signals. Official rhet-
oric on the need to improve growth conditions was not matched
by hoped-for policies. The March National People’s Congress
(NPC) and the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Congress
(CPPCC)—together the “Two Sessions” that mark the apex of the
annual policy cycle—were an important opportunity for Beijing to
signal pro-growth intentions but offered little.
Despite hopes that the NPC would announce major fiscal stimu-
lus, government support in the first quarter of 2024 was weaker
than expected, and even weaker than the equivalent period
in 2023. Beijing presented a range of measures and nominal
increases in deficit targets and bond quotas. But little of this sup-
port will boost consumption. The central government remains
unwilling to use the balance sheet of the People’s Bank of China
(PBOC) to stimulate, instead telling local authorities to once again
be creative in finding resources, as they had for years by sell-
ing land to property developers. Consequently, the grave fis-
cal unease hanging over local government spending remains.
The largest measure that was announced at the NPC—issu -
ance of one trillion RMB in special treasury bonds—is meant not
to relieve credit stress but to finance industrial policy in specific
technology areas.
This fiscal stance contrasted with monetary policy developments
during the period. China is now unable to drive the same pace of
credit and investment growth as in the past, given the massive
existing size of the banking system ($58 trillion in assets, around
55 percent of global GDP), which means that Beijing can no lon-
ger manage the economy by allocating credit growth through
the financial system as it used to. Instead, officials are resort-
ing to unconventional monetary easing measures, using the
PBOC’s balance sheet and targeted liquidity injections, rather
Financial System Development
Market Competition
Modern Innovation System
Trade Openness
Direct Investment Openness
Portfolio Investment Openness
NO CHANGE
MIXED
FIGURE 1
Q1 2024 policy heatmap: Did China move closer to or farther from market economy norms?
Source: China Pathfinder. A “mixed” evaluation means the cluster has seen significant policies that indicate movement closer to and farther from
market economy norms. A “no change” evaluation means the cluster has not seen any policies that significantly impact China’s overall movement
with respect to market economy norms. For a closer breakdown of each cluster, visit https://chinapathfinder.org/
FIGURE 1 reflects the direction of China’s policy activity in the domestic financial system, market competition, and innovation system,
as well as policies that impact trade, direct investment, and portfolio investment openness. This heatmap is derived from in-house pol-
icy tracking that weighs and evaluates the impact of Chinese policies in Q1. Actions are evaluated based on their systemic importance
to China’s development path toward or away from market economy norms. The assessment of a policy’s importance incorporates top-
level political signaling with regard to the government’s priorities, the authority of the issuing and implementing bodies in the Chinese
government hierarchy, and the impact of the policy on China’s economy.
FARTHER
NO CHANGE
MIXED
FARTHER

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
CHINA PATHFINDER: Q1 2024 UPDATE
than interest rate cuts and adjustments to bank required reserve
ratios. The PBOC did cut required reserve ratios in January, but
this was largely an attempt to prop up the equity market.
The balance sheet expansion may improve liquidity conditions,
but it also is spilling back into shadow banking assets as well,
and encouraging speculative positions in China’s bond mar-
ket. All of this is channeling credit to the financial sector rather
than the real economy, as credit demand among private firms
remains weak. Nevertheless, reductions in mortgage rates
may also help to slow the pace of household deleveraging and
improve household consumption, even if few homebuyers are
prepared to jump back into China’s battered housing market.
MARKET COMPETITION
As reflected in the financial system discussion, Beijing’s Q1 pol-
icy focus was squarely on encouraging industrial production
with supply-side measures, rather than balancing that bias with
more demand-side support for household consumption and gov-
ernment transfers. This was at odds with mounting global con-
cerns about rampant Chinese industrial overcapacity. Support
for failing enterprises through subsidies and credit forbear-
ances has raised the share of loss-making industrial enterprises
from 15 percent in 2021 to 22 percent in 2023. The March 2024
Government Work Report showed no sign of changing course,
instead strengthening investment guidance for key sectors
and thus further enhancing the role of government in resource
allocation.
China continued a “charm offensive” in the quarter to revive or
at least stabilize inward foreign direct investment (FDI), which
has been falling. In February, the State Council (the topmost gov-
ernmental administrative body) issued a plan to attract foreign
investment including pledges to improve the business environ-
ment, ease administrative burdens, expand market access in key
industries, and level the playing field for foreign companies. At
the NPC, the Government Work Report amplified this message,
with the usual language that “state-owned enterprises, private
businesses, and foreign-funded companies all play an import-
ant role in China’s modernization drive.” At the end of March, the
China Development Forum was convened for foreign CEOs to
interact with Chinese leaders in Beijing. While the businessmen
(they were entirely men) appreciated the pledges, they generally
communicated a wait and see attitude in private readouts on the
meeting. Market competition depends on transparency, which
remains lacking: emblematically, Premier Li Qiang declined to
hold a press briefing at the annual parliamentary meetings, for
the first time in three decades.

INNOVATION
China ramped up government support for high-tech sectors,
expanding fiscal spending on science and technology (S&T) and
doubling down on industrial policy practices that entail a stronger
state intervention in the economy.
The March Government Work Report identified self-reliance
in science and technology and modernization of the industrial
system as the top priorities for 2024 (up from previous years).
Accordingly, the central S&T budget for this year grew by 10 per-
cent, the largest percentage increase of any major area of gov-
ernment spending. The central government also expects local
officials to prioritize support for innovation despite their shrink-
ing fiscal space.
The central Government ramped up high-tech support through
a mix of conventional and unconventional subsidies, including
grants and tax support. A Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology (MIIT) policy from January outlined the development
of high-tech industrial zones and new infrastructure, dedicated
investment funds, and tighter guidance of bank loans and capital
towards strategic sectors. Local governments quickly adopted
their own support plans to implement those measures.
While the volume of Beijing’s support for innovation programs
is huge, China also faces foreign tech pushback. Policies to limit
technology transfer (in semiconductors), bifurcate data and ICT
services, and block imports of e.g. EVs and renewable energy
goods reached a new high this quarter. China argues that its sup-
port measures are a response to these foreign restrictions, an
argument that foreign governments can also plausibly make.

TRADE
China’s trade surpluses in overcapacity sectors made headlines
this quarter. Support for the industrial sector while neglecting
household and government consumption has driven overcapac-
ity and a spike in exports—especially in volume terms, and partic-
ularly in green technologies like electric vehicles and renewable
energy sectors. The National People’s Congress in March sig-
naled support for trade surplus growth rather than plans for struc-
tural adjustment. Premier Li’s Government Work Report focused
on bolstering industrial production, particularly in manufactur-
ing, and committed Beijing to assist companies in exporting their
accumulating surplus to foreign markets through mechanisms
like export credits and export credit insurance.
Beijing’s unresponsiveness has fueled concerns around the
world. Overcapacity was a key point of discussion during US Trea-
sury Secretary Janet Y ellen’s April China visit. The European Com-
mission opened investigations into Chinese solar and wind subsi-
dies. Brazil, India, Mexico, and  South Africa all took anti-dumping
action in Q1 to respond to China’s surge of cheap exports.
Rather than acknowledge concerns, China chose retaliation and
defensive actions. A few weeks after the European Commission
announced an investigation into Chinese EV subsidies, Beijing
launched an anti-dumping probe into imports of brandy from the
EU. China also initiated a World Trade Organization (WTO) dis-
pute regarding US tax credits for electric vehicles and renewable
energy. China also has offered an indirect response, arguing that
its low-cost exports will reduce global inflation. Until China takes
more effective steps to address the domestic supply/demand

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
CHINA PATHFINDER: Q1 2024 UPDATE
imbalance, however, foreign trade defense actions are likely to
multiply.
DIRECT INVESTMENT
According to Ministry of Commerce (MOFCOM) data, utilized for-
eign direct investment in the period of January-February 2024
was down 19.9 percent on a year-on-year basis. This same period
last year, China was reeling from the rapid spread of COVID-19,
so one could have expected this year’s numbers to improve
based on base effects. In 2023 inward direct investment growth
dropped to lows not seen since 1993, and the trend continues
year to date. Numerous indicators point to continued FDI with-
drawal. We attribute this to a combination of explicit hostility to
foreign and private business interests, lack of policy transpar-
ency, and falling macroeconomic growth expectations. Business
environment challenges are not new; but fears of a long-term
growth slowdown are.
To counter these dynamics, officials worked to revitalize for-
eign investor interest through a series of high-level dialogues
and events in this quarter. In March, an inaugural “Invest in
China” initiative was held, followed with roundtables in France
and Denmark. After weeks of mixed signals about whether they
would be received by high level officials, US business execu-
tives were afforded an hour-plus interaction with Xi, following
the 2024 China Development Forum. Promises of more market
reforms were made in an effort to encourage foreign investment.
Alongside these public and private relations efforts, the State
Council released a twenty-four-point plan in March. These mea-
sures build off a similar 2023 investment promotion plan and fur-
ther develop targets outlined in the March 2024 Government
Work Report. The measures include: reducing the foreign invest-
ment negative list of sectors closed to foreign investment, last
updated in 2021; expanding the Catalogue of Encouraged
Industries for Foreign Investment (aka the “Catalogue”); and
other policies that offer incentives and liberalize restrictions
for foreign-invested enterprises. However, these measures
are generally sector-specific (with emphasis on manufacturing
and a few service industries) rather than general, and imple-
menting rules are a ways off. Additional policy developments
sought to further calm foreign investor nerves. Most notably, the
Cyberspace Administration (CAC) released long-awaited regu-
lations that eased restrictions on most cross-border data flows
Previous data rules were a major source of foreign compliance
anxiety. Additionally, there are signs that implementation of pro-
vincial-level initiatives is underway, such as new MIIT guidance
for easing foreign investor participation in the telecoms sector
of pilot zones. Y et many expect these measures to under-deliver
and are skeptical they will address the core business environ-
ment problems of over-securitization and local protectionism.
The anti-espionage law continues to be cited as a serious bar-
rier, as it fuels anxiety for foreign staff operating in China, sup-
presses market research activities, and makes it harder to obtain
investment approval. Additional restrictions in Hong Kong under
a new security law passed in March 2024 reinforce foreign
investors concerns that they may be swept up in security-related
measures.
Outbound FDI from China’s firms was strong in the first quarter
of 2024. Non-financial outbound direct investment reported by
MOFCOM was up 5.5 percent year-on-year in February, though
this was below the double-digit growth rates of 2023. The Two
Sessions reiterated priorities for consolidating and revitaliz-
ing the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), which includes strength-
ening the role of policy finance. China continues to promote
investment in new energy infrastructure and sectors along
green technology supply chains, such as mining and process-
ing for EV battery inputs, in Southeast Asia, Latin America, the
Middle East, and Africa, and green tech manufacturing in the EU.
PORTFOLIO INVESTMENT OPENNESS
China’s equity bourse interventions this quarter highlight the
pressure authorities are under to stabilize capital markets rat-
tled by disappointing macroeconomic conditions. After start-
ing the year with a precipitous one-month decline that soured
the 2024 outlook, state-linked investors embarked upon a buy-
ing spree to stabilize pricing. In February, state-backed investors
bought more than $50 billion in domestic equities and exchange-
traded funds (ETFs). This was effective in stabilizing prices in the
short term—stocks improved 20 percent in February on both
announced and rumored interventions—but by the end of the
quarter stock values were slipping again. Meanwhile, more
speculative foreign capital sought out China’s bond market in the
quarter to take advantage of unusual pricing for onshore US dol-
lars, causing a marked contrast between portfolio outflows from
equities and inflows into bonds. Even as policymakers looked to
boost domestic ETFs, issuers limited trading in ETFs with foreign
assets that have been deluged by retail investors seeking expo-
sure to Japanese and US equities.
At the micro level, regulators cracked down on quantitative trad-
ing firms, limiting their ability to sell short and summoning many
for mandatory “compliance training” in which they were admon-
ished to avoid trading behavior that might negatively affect the
market. The China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC)
also pledged to improve initial public offering (IPO) and compli-
ance requirements and make it harder for some companies to
list. This was meant to reassure investors, who remain skepti-
cal of market volatility and concerned by allegations of financial
misconduct by public firms, but contrasts sharply with measures
taken last year to facilitate stock market listings of state-owned
enterprises. It also contrasts with declining overseas listings in
the wake of last year’s tighter rules on foreign IPOs.
Monetary policy support during the period has also prioritized
support for the stock market. Besides cuts to mortgage rates in
late February, which aimed to stimulate overall activity via the
housing market, the PBOC moved to make more cash available
in the market by cutting the reserve requirement ratio (RRR) in a
hastily scheduled press conference on January 24, the biggest
RRR cut since the height of the COVID-19 pandemic in China.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
CHINA PATHFINDER: Q1 2024 UPDATE

CROSS-ECONOMY POLICY DIRECTIONS IN Q1 2024
As goes property, so goes China. And after two years of
declines that nothing could offset, stabilization is finally pos-
sible this quarter. But improvement is unlikely temporary.
Beijing’s growth target (5 percent) is above trend potential
under the best of circumstances in today’s China, and is par-
ticularly unlike if structural problems are not addressed. A
modest recovery is unlikely to halt the foreign march towards
“derisking,” whether understood as diversifying from over-re-
liance on a single supplier with monopoly-like market power,
or as implementing economic security measures. The United
States, Europe, Japan, and others are evaluating the potential
shortfall in China demand and concluding it means trade spill-
overs: they plan to confront that. Fixing this macroeconomic
imbalance will entail structural economic reforms, which is why
the heatmap in Figure 1 showing no progress is concerning.

Part 3: Looking ahead to midyear
China’s policies are triggering foreign trade defense responses
more quickly today than in the past. This is because foreign
observers have been watching China carefully since the end of
zero-COVID policies, and did not base their economic and invest-
ment plans solely on China’s rosy official data. During previous
periods when flagging Chinese demand led to overcapacity spill-
overs, China’s official GDP figures went little challenged. This
includes in 2015, when official year-on-year measures of physical
activity went flat, or 2018-19, when they went negative for almost
eighteen months. Conversely, in 2023-24 analysts watched care-
fully for actual policy implementation, especially fiscal support for
household consumption, and local debt restructuring that might
clear the way for renewed government spending. Instead, offi-
cial comments in the International Monetary Fund Article IV report
and March 2024 Government Work Report that Beijing would
under-stimulate consumption and government spending capac-
ity, while encouraging further growth in net exports.
Knowing this export wave is coming creates an obligation to act
for democratically elected leaders in market economies. That is
the driver behind pledges to employ trade defense measures in
advanced economy capitals. Self-protection is likely to be aimed at
manufacturing of electric vehicles, green energy equipment, steel,
chemicals, and other products. This is not just a Group of Seven
(G7) affair: South Africa, India, Brazil, and Turkey have announced
new anti-dumping measures in the past month to address surging
Chinese exports, and even Russia has announced trade measures
to stem imports of Chinese vehicles with internal combustion
engines. Beijing’s response centers on the technical definition
of overcapacity (which is murky), its economies of scale, and its
present comparative advantages in making many of these prod-
ucts (leaving aside whatever past subsidies and mercantile trade
policies brought that about), and the role of foreign firms them-
selves in building up the capacity China now enjoys.
These Chinese arguments were anticipated. US Treasury
Secretary Y ellen was prepared to respond to them when she
focused on overcapacity on her April 2024 China trip. Also
in April, the day after EU Executive Vice President Margrethe
Vestager pledged to improve Europe’s response to systemic
overcapacity, the European Commission released an updated,
700+ page report on Chinese economic distortions that require
trade defense, replete with 3,535 footnotes.
The conversation has gone beyond whether trade defenses are
merited to the question of how to respond, and how to do so
in an appropriate, collective manner. Japan’s trade surpluses in
the 1980s resulted in joint action by the United States, Canada,
Britain, and other European powers to promote adjustment via
coordinated exchange rate revaluations, intended to make for-
eign goods more cost-competitive in Japan and Japanese prod-
ucts more expensive abroad. These were the Plaza and Louvre
Accords of 1985 and 1987 respectively. As observed at the time,
border trade measures only offer stopgap solutions to imbal-
ances; a real fix requires structural economic reforms inside the
problem economy.
G7 leaders convene in Apulia, Italy, June 13-15, 2024, and will dis-
cuss China’s overcapacity. Measures including tariffs and anti-sub-
sidies duties will surely be debated. G7 leaders might also ask if
collective border barriers might compel Beijing to implement vol-
untary export restraints (VERs). In the sectors of greatest G7 con-
cern (such as EVs, clean energy products, and legacy chips),
China’s implementation of export licenses, export taxes, quotas,
or other measures, could forestall the most serious foreign trade
actions. For China to be taken seriously, it likely would need to also
implement tangible policies to support domestic demand. Only
this would address overcapacity from both sides.
But even a combination of VERs and domestic consumer stim-
ulus, as hard as it is to imagine presently, would be just a down
payment on reform. Structural reform in China can only be credi-
bly undertaken time. Unless there are far-reaching reforms of the
financial system, as we have discussed in the Pathfinder annual
reports, piecemeal trade promotion and near-term fiscal policies
in China will not resolve long-term concerns.

Acknowledgements
Written by Daniel Rosen, Matt Mingey, Camille Boullenois, and
Laura Gormley.
The authors wish to acknowledge the members of the China
Pathfinder Advisory Council: Steven Denning, Gary Rieschel,
and Jack Wadsworth, whose partnership has made this project
possible.
Sophia Busch, Charles Lichfield, Josh Lipsky, and Jeremy Mark
were the principal contributors from the Atlantic Council’s
GeoEconomics Center.
