
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Executive summary
The Middle East and North Africa (MENA) has become increasingly
connected to submarine cable networks owned, built, or upgraded by
Chinese firms. Since they entered the market in the late ‘90s, Chinese
companies have constructed, upgraded, or acquired ownership stakes
in thirteen of some sixty-two cables traversing MENA, forging fifty-
seven connections at thirty-nine landing stations. In 2025, another
(SeaMeWe-6) will go online, raising the total to sixty-one connections
at thirty-nine MENA landing stations. 1 Submarine cables are among the
most critical digital infrastructures, serving as conduits for more than 95
percent of international data flows and communications, including an
estimated $10 trillion in financial transfers daily. 2 With China aiming to
capture 60 percent of the cable market by 2025, MENA could become
increasingly reliant on Chinese networks to transmit sensitive data. 3
These cables are strategically important to MENA countries, particularly
those striving to digitize their economies. With bandwidth demand
steadily rising across the region, governments have been increasingly
looking to China for digital infrastructure. MENA countries have also
welcomed these connections as a means to diversify their networks—
reducing dependence on US/Western cables. As home to one of three
critical cable choke points—the Suez Canal-Red Sea-Mandab Strait
passage—the Middle East and North Africa region is of geostrategic
significance to China. These cables form part of the Digital Silk Road
and connect China’s transregional assets (military and civilian), along
1 The term cable landing station is used to describe physical locations where one or
more submarine telecommunication cables make landfall and connect to land-based
power and networking infrastructure.
2 Morcos, P., and C. Wall. “Invisible and Vital: Undersea Cables and Transatlantic Securi-
ty.” Center for Strategic & International Studies 11 (2021). https:/ /www.csis.org/analy-
sis/invisible-and-vital-undersea-cables-and-transatlantic-security
3 J. E. Hillman. “War and PEACE on China’s Digital Silk Road,” Center for Strategic And
International Studies, May 16, 2019, https:/ /www.csis.org/analysis/war-and-peace-chi-
nas-digital-silk-road
CHINA’S SUBSEA-
CABLE POWER PLAY
IN THE MIDDLE EAST
AND NORTH AFRICA
ISSUE BRIEF
Atlantic Council
SCOWCROFT MIDDLE EAST
SECURITY INITIATIVE
MAY 2023 DALE ALUF
The Atlantic Council’s work on
Middle East security honors
the legacy of Brent Scowcroft
and his tireless efforts to build
a new security architecture for
the region. Our work in this
area addresses the full range of
security threats and challenges
including the danger of interstate
warfare, the role of terrorist
groups and other nonstate actors,
and the underlying security
threats facing countries in the
region.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s subsea-cable power play in the Middle East and North Africa
the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). 4 Ensuring high-
speed, low-latency connectivity is vital in optimizing
and maintaining the integrity of supply chains and
other activity that supports economic growth. Chinese
energy imports from MENA, and much of its trade from
the region and Europe, travel through the Suez Canal-
Red Sea-Mandab Strait passage. The Pakistan and East
Africa Connecting Europe (PEACE) fiber-optic cable,
a network funded, owned, and constructed entirely by
Chinese entities, was built specifically to complement
the BRI. It connects Chinese assets (the $62 billion
infrastructure project known as the China Pakistan
Economic Corridor) in Gwadar, Pakistan, to Djibouti,
which hosts a Chinese naval base, and runs through
the Middle East and onward to Europe. PEACE would
harbor immense strategic significance for China even
if it were not commercially viable because it supports
and enhances the People’s Liberation Army’s ability to
project power.
Like other nations, China’s undersea cables are
essential in coordinating military operations. Most
military communications travel along these networks,
making them susceptible to eavesdropping. The
strategic political-economic importance of the MENA
region has made it an attractive place for cable
espionage. The networks that pass through the Suez
are among the busiest in terms of telecommunications
traffic and, therefore, surveillance. As China’s robust
economic presence and modest military presence
both expand, reliable signals intelligence will become
ever more important to Beijing. At the same time,
the development of increasingly advanced military
equipment continues to drive demand for more reliable
and secure bandwidth. China has sought to leverage
underwater cable systems to detect submarines by
fitting them with monitors and sensors. 5 While this
endeavor began with a so-called underwater great
firewall near China’s borders, Beijing has indicated that
its aspirations for the system are global.
These underwater observation systems could
complicate US and MENA countries’ regional naval
operations. These developments concern Israel and
Gulf countries as China could share information gleaned
4 The Digital Silk Road (DSR), first introduced in a whitepaper jointly issued by China’s National Development and Reform Commission
(NDRC), Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Ministry of Commerce in 2015, is a component of the Belt and Road Initiative. Digital projects that
began prior to the DSR’s conception have since been folded under the initiative.
5 C. Wong, “‘Underwater Great Wall’: Chinese firm proposes building network of submarine detectors to boost nation’s defense,” South China
Morning Post, May 19, 2016, https:/ /www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/1947212/underwater-great-wall-chinese-firm-pro-
poses-building.
from these systems with its strategic partner, Iran:
their twenty-five year cooperation agreement includes
commitments to intelligence sharing and allows China
to utilize an Iranian port, Jask, on the Gulf of Oman.
With tensions between China and the West showing
no signs of abating, Chinese cables traversing MENA
could emerge as a contentious issue in the geopolitics
of the internet. Already in recent years, the United
States and Australia have intervened to prevent the
rollout of cables by Chinese companies in the Pacific.
PEACE has not escaped the attention of American
policymakers: it featured prominently in a Senate
Foreign Relations Subcommittee hearing on the Middle
East as recently as August 4, 2022. Senator Bill Hagerty
raised concerns surrounding the Chinese Communist
Party’s ability to cut it, disrupt it, divert it, and monitor
the information of allies and suggested that the US
State Department examine the measures taken by the
previous administration to secure SeaMeWe-6. These
measures included a $3.8M training grant offered by
the US Trade and Development Agency (USTDA) to
five telecom firms on the cable’s route, contingent on
them choosing American SubCom over HMN-Tech,
along with warnings from US diplomats about HMN-
Tech’s security risks and impending sanctions on the
Chinese company that would put the telecom carriers’
cable project investment at risk. The measures worked,
and Subcom was selected over HMN Tech to build
SMW6.
China wants to reduce its dependence on foreign cables
while making other countries more dependent on
Chinese networks. China’s growing presence in MENA’s
cable industry is significant because Beijing has the
power to shape the route of global internet traffic by
determining when, where, and how to build cables. For
a country that seeks to alter the internet’s physical form
and influence digital behavior while exerting supreme
control over information flows, the dominance of the
undersea cable network provides significant strategic
advantages. Until now, the issue of who controls 5G in
MENA has overshadowed other information and other
technologies, with ports sometimes added to the mix.
However, considering the US strategic reorientation
to increase its engagement with the Middle East to

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s subsea-cable power play in the Middle East and North Africa
counter China, particularly in advanced technology,
MENA’s subsea cables are poised to attract more
attention. PEACE, in particular, is poised to emerge as
a flashpoint in the Sino-American internet feud.
Introduction: Chinese industry
growth meets MENA digitization
As an aspiring “cyber superpower,” China recognizes
the vital importance of submarine cables and has
expended considerable resources to expand its
presence in the sector. As host to one of three
critical cable choke points—the Suez Canal-Red
Sea-Mandab Strait passage—the Middle East and
North Africa (MENA) region is important for China’s
digital connectivity strategy. In China’s first foray into
the industry, China Telecom partnered with France
Telecom to install the world’s longest submarine fiber
system, Sea-Me-We 3 (South East Asia-Middle East-
Western Europe). The 39,000 kilometer (km) network
first went online on September 30, 1999. Of Sea-Me-We
3’s thirty-nine cable landing points, two are in Egypt
(Alexandria and Suez), with others landing in Morocco,
Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Djibouti, Oman, and the United
Arab Emirates. Since then, Chinese companies have
constructed, upgraded, or acquired ownership stakes
in thirteen of some sixty-three cables traversing MENA
(see table 1), forging fifty-seven connections at thirty-
nine landing stations. 6 Provided China Unicom and
PCCW remain in the SeaMeWe-6 cable consortium,
it will add another to the list of Chinese companies
with stakes in MENA networks. Slated for completion
in 2025, SeaMeWe-6 will add four links in the region,
6 “Submarine cable map,” TeleGeography, licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0, 2022. Accessed March 07, 2023. https:/ /www.submarinecablemap.
com/.
7 M. van der Stelt and E. Blaauw et al., “The driving forces behind China’s foreign policy—has China become more assertive?,” RaboRe-
search-Economic Research, Rabobank, n.d., https:/ /economics.rabobank.com/publications/2013/october/the-driving-forces-behind-chi-
nas-foreign-policy-has-china-become-more-assertive/.
8 J. Hemmings, “Reconstructing order: The geopolitical risks in China’s Digital Silk Road,” Asia Policy 27, no. 1 (2020): 5-21.
9 L. Burdette, “Leveraging submarine cables for political gain: US responses to Chinese strategy,” Journal of Public & International Affairs, May
5, 2021, https:/ /jpia.princeton.edu/news/leveraging-submarine-cables-political-gain-us-responses-chinese-strategy.
10 Federal Communications Commission, “Process reform for executive branch review of certain FCC applications and petitions involving for-
eign ownership,” 2020, https:/ /docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-20-133A1.pdf.
11 These companies are China Mobile, China Telecom, China Unicom, Citic Telecom International, CTM, and National Grid Corporation of the
Philippines. Source: Aggregated data from SIGNAL’s dataset.
12 China Unicom holds an 18% interest in PCCW. It’s not clear to what degree China Unicom is able to influence PCCW operations and decision
making. However, several high-level executives sit on the PCCW’s board of directors.
13 In November 2019, an internal Filipino government report alleged that the National Grid Corporation of the Philippines, partly owned by a
Chinese state-owned electrical company, was in fact “under the full control” of the Chinese government, according to CNN. Source: James
Griffiths, “China can shut off the Philippines’ power grid at any time, leaked report warns,” CNN, November 26, 2019, https:/ /edition.cnn.
com/2019/11/25/asia/philippines-china-power-grid-intl-hnk/index.html
bringing the total number of connections to sixty-one
at thirty-nine MENA landing stations.
China’s expanding presence in MENA’s subsea cable
network is commensurate with its growth in the sector
globally. Sea-Me-We 3 was a manifestation of a policy
that China’s central government was formulating
during the ’90s under the leadership of President Jiang
Zemin: Going Global. The plan not only gave the green
light for Chinese companies to expand their operations
worldwide but also included robust policy support
and preferential funding to realize this aspiration. 7
Now, under President Xi Jinping, Chinese telecom
companies continue to enjoy strong government
support through initiatives like the Digital Silk Road—
the virtual component of BRI.
Rewind two decades and China was almost absent from
the undersea cable industry and depended mostly on
foreign companies. Today, Chinese firms have emerged
as leading providers of this vital infrastructure. 89
China’s HMN Tech (formerly Huawei Marine) managed
to secure more than one hundred contracts in the
subsea cable sector since its founding in 2008. A 2020
report by the US Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) points out that HMN Tech has “built or repaired
almost a quarter of the world’s cables.” 10 Today, five
Chinese state—controlled entities—China Telecom,
China Unicom, China Mobile, CTM, and National Grid
Corporation of the Philippines—along with Hong Kong
based PCCW enjoy ownership stakes in thirty-three
of the 545 cables globally (at the time of writing). 11
12 13 According to Leiden Asia Center research, China
is a landing point, owner, or supplier for 11.4 percent

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s subsea-cable power play in the Middle East and North Africa
of global submarine cable networks; when including
planned cables that figure increases to 24 percent. 14
These critical components of internet architecture are
of immense strategic significance for the MENA nations
in which they land. Undersea cables link these countries
and the continents of the world together, forming the
“backbone” for international data connectivity. Today’s
global cable networks span roughly 1.3 million km.
These “information superhighways” provide the high-
bandwidth connections needed for a wide range of
activities vital for modern society to function properly.
As nations across MENA digitize their economies,
demand for capacity (speed and bandwidth) has
steadily increased. Moreover, COVID-19 catalyzed a shift
in internet traffic patterns, generating greater volumes
14 Ghiasy, Richard, and Rajeshwari Krishnamurthy. “China’s Digital Silk Road: Strategic Implications for the EU and India.” Special Report 208
(2020). https:/ /leidenasiacentre.nl/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/LAC-IPCS-DSR-Report-Aug-2020.pdf .
15 M. P. Goodman and M. Wayland, “Securing Asia’s subsea network: U.S. interests and strategic options,” Center for Strategic and International
Studies, April 5, 2022, https:/ /www.csis.org/analysis/securing-asias-subsea-network-us-interests-and-strategic-options.
16 A. P. Cusolito et al., The upside of digital for the Middle East and North Africa: How digital technology adoption can accelerate growth and
create jobs, World Bank, 2021, https:/ /openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/37058/9781464816635.pdf?sequence=10&is-
Allowed=y.
of data flows that have further increased demand. 15
MENA’s economies can benefit from a 46 percent rise
in gross domestic product (GDP) per capita over thirty
years if fully digitalized, according to a 2021 World
Bank report; this amounts to a $1.6 trillion benefit over
the long term. 16 The increase in GDP would be more
pronounced in the region’s lower-income countries
(by at least 71 percent), as gains are driven by closing
the access gap to digital technologies. However, these
projections are contingent upon ensuring access to
high-quality, reliable cable connectivity.
The MENA region has experienced the consequences
of disruption to the subsea-cable network firsthand.
In March 2013, two separate instances of politically
motivated sabotage were executed on cables landing
Source: Aggregated data from SIGNAL’s dataset.
Sea-Me-We 3
MedNautilus submarine system
Transworld (TW1)
HANNIBAL System
Tobruk-Emasaed cable system
TE North/TGN-Eurasia/SEACOM/-
Alexandros/Medex
Silphium
Sea-Me-We 5
Asia-Africa-Europe 1 (AAE-1)
Gulf2Africa (G2A)
PEACE Cable
2Africa
SeaMeWe-6
1999
2001
2006
2009
2010
2011
2013
2016
2017
2017
2022
2023
Expected 2025
China Telecom; PCCW (HK);
CTM
HMN Tech
HMN Tech
HMN Tech
HMN Tech
PCCW (HK)
HMN Tech
China Mobile; China Tele-
com; China Unicom;
China Unicom
HMN Tech
Hengtong Group; China-ASE-
AN Information Harbor;
China Construction Bank;
HMN Tech
PCCW Global
China Mobile

China Unicom
PCCW
Part owners,
consortium.
Upgrade
Upgrade
Construction
Construction
Operations (Medex
branch)
Construction
Part owners,
consortium.
Part owner,
consortium
funding.
Upgrade
Owner
Funding
Construction
Equipment
Operation
Part owner,
consortium.
Part owner,
consortium.
Djibouti City, Djibouti; Alexandria and Suez, Egypt; Tétouan, Morocco;
Muscat, Oman; Jeddah, Saudi Arabia; Marmaris, Turkey; Fujairah, United
Arab Emirates (UAE).
Haifa and Tel Aviv, Israel; Istanbul, Turkey.
al-Seeb, Oman; Fujairah, UAE.
Kelibia, Tunisia
el-Quawef and Tobruk, Libya.
Abu Talat, Egypt; Annaba, Algeria.
Derna, Libya.
Haramous, Djibouti; Abu Talat and Zafarana, Egypt; Qalhat, Oman; Yanbu,
Saudi Arabia; Marmaris, Turkey; Fujairah, UAE; al-Hudaydah, Yemen.
Aden, Yemen; Djibouti City, Djibouti; Abu Talat, and Zafarana, Egypt;
Doha, Qatar; Jeddah, Saudi Arabia; Fujairah, UAE; al-Bustan, Oman.
Salalah, Oman; Berbera and Bosaso, Somalia.
Djibouti City, Djibouti; Abu Talat and Zafarana, Egypt; Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia.
[Also lands at Gwadar, Pakistan.]
Manama, Bahrain; Djibouti City, Djibouti; Port Said, Ras Ghareb, Suez, and
Zafarana, Egypt; al-Faw, Iraq; Barka, Oman; Salalah, Oman; Doha, Qatar;
al-Khobar, Duba, Jeddah, and Yanbu, Saudi Arabia; Port Sudan, Sudan;
Abu Dhabi and Kalba, UAE.
Djibouti City, Djibouti; Port Said and Ras Ghareb, Egypt; Yanbu, Saudi
Arabia.
Cable Online Chinese Entity / Entities Involvement MENA Landing Stations
Table 1: Submarine cables owned, financed, constructed or upgraded by Chinese companies in MENA

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s subsea-cable power play in the Middle East and North Africa
in Egypt. Egypt suffered a 60 percent reduction in
internet communications as a result of the first incident,
involving the Seacom cable, which connects Africa and
Europe.17 More recently, a single line that a ship’s anchor
severed off the coast of Yemen in 2020 wiped out 80
percent of the country’s internet capacity. 18 As Helene
Fouquet points out in the US magazine Wired, “though
the country still had that last 20 percent, trying to route
a water main of web traffic through a drinking straw
resulted in near-total connectivity failure.” 19 And the
effects of the more recent incident resonated across
the region, with Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, and
Ethiopia experiencing slowdowns in internet speeds.
More cable connections in the region would add a
17 D. Shama, “Internet cable-cutters caught by Egypt signal new terror threat,” Times of Israel, March 29, 2013, https:/ /www.timesofisrael.com/
internet-cable-cutters-caught-by-egypt-signal-new-terror-threat/.
18 H. Fouquet, “Cut undersea cable plunges Yemen into days-long internet outage,” Wired, 2020, https:/ /www.wired.com/story/yemen-inter-
net-blackout-undersea-cable/.
19 Fouquet, “Cut undersea cable.“
layer of protection against such disruption: if a cable is
damaged or a country with control over a line decides
to choke the network, operators could redirect traffic.
By allowing Chinese cables to land on their shores,
MENA states are diversifying their cable networks,
reducing reliance on Western suppliers that have
traditionally dominated the market. The subject of
such diversification garnered substantial attention
in 2013. As Lane Burdette explains in a 2021 paper
published by the Journal of Public and International
Affairs: “After the 2013 Snowden Disclosures revealed
widespread US and partnered espionage using
submarine cables, many states sought to decrease their
Source: Aggregated data from SIGNAL’s dataset.
15
10
5
0
Touch Points
AlgeriaBahrainDjiboutiEgypt Iraq Israel Libya
Morocco
Oman Qatar
Saudi Arabia
SudanTunisiaTurkey UAEYemen
Figure 1: Touch points at MENA landing stations of cables owned, built, or upgraded by Chinese entities (current
and expected, 2023-25 )

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s subsea-cable power play in the Middle East and North Africa
dependency on US infrastructure or cables landing on
US shores.”20 According to Burdette, “China’s Belt and
Road Initiative (BRI) offered an attractive alternative
for internet infrastructure financing, particularly to the
developing world.” 21 According to Mercator Institute
for China Studies research, Chinese entities provided
$7 billion in loans and foreign direct investment
between 2013 and 2019 for global fiber-optic cable
and telecommunication network projects. 22
Edward Snowden’s leaks of top-secret US National
Security Agency (NSA) information illuminated the
exploitation of submarine cables for intelligence and
political purposes firsthand. 23 Perhaps ironically, the
United States and other Western powers have raised
concerns that China’s growing presence in the undersea
cable industry could threaten their national security
and that of their allies. With industrial policies like Made
in China 2025 setting the goal for Chinese companies
to capture nearly a third of the cable market, MENA
will likely find itself increasingly entangled in Chinese
submarine cable networks. As such, it is important
that countries in the region cultivate a deeper
understanding of Chinese strategic thinking regarding
submarine cables and the potential geopolitical
consequences of Beijing’s growing involvement in their
internet architecture. Examining the Pakistan and East
Africa Connecting Europe fiber-optic cable (PEACE),
which traverses MENA, is instructive.
20 Fouquet, “Cut undersea cable, 5.
21 Burdette, “Leveraging submarine cables for political gain.”
22 S. Eder, R. Arcesati, and J. Mardell, “Networking the ‘Belt and Road’: The future is digital,” Mercator Institute for China Studies, August 28
2019, https:/ /merics.org/en/tracker/networking-belt-and-road-future-digital.
23 O. Khazan, “The Creepy, Long-Standing Practice of Undersea Cable Tapping,” The Atlantic, July 16, 2013, https:/ /www.theatlantic.com/inter-
national/archive/2013/07/the-creepy-long-standing-practice-of-undersea-cable-tapping/277855/
24 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, “Vision and actions on jointly building Belt and Road,” full text version, 2015,
https:/ /www.mfa.gov.cn/ce/cede/det/zt/yidaiyilude/t1250293.htm.
25 PEACE-MED’s cable landings in Cyprus, Abu Talat, Marseille, and Malta were all completed during the course of 2021, while stub branching
units have been reserved for direct landing points to other countries, thereby providing additional access options and opportunities for the
entire Mediterranean region. PEACE-MED, a 3,200 km cable that connects Egypt to France, went online in March 2022. The cable is slated
for completion this year.
26 PeaceCable.net, “PEACE Cable and PCCW Global to leverage Infinera’s ICE6 for high-performance PEACE submarine cable,” n.d., accessed
August 28, 2022, http:/ /www.peacecable.net/News/Detail/16630.
27 J. E. Hillman, The Digital Silk Road: China’s quest to wire the world and win the future (London: Profile Books, 2021).
PEACE buttressing BRI
In a 2015 white paper, China’s National Development
and Reform Commission, Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
and Ministry of Commerce announced: “[China] should
jointly advance the construction of cross-border optical
cables and other communications trunk line networks,
improve international communications connectivity,
and create an Information Silk Road.” The document
calls on Chinese entities to “build bilateral cross-
border optical cable networks at a quicker pace, plan
transcontinental submarine optical cable projects, and
improve spatial (satellite) information passageways
to expand information exchanges and cooperation.” 24
Given that statements by China’s leadership generate
movement, it was little surprise that several months
later, Chinese companies announced their plans to
construct PEACE: a sprawling 25,000 km fiber-optic
network designed to complement Xi’s signature
Belt and Road Initiative. Once complete, 25 PEACE
will provide the shortest length and latency route
connecting Asia, Africa, and Europe. 26
The cable’s creation has been a strictly Chinese-led
venture. In June 2016, China Unicom led the creation
of China-ASEAN Information Harbor Co. Ltd, a State
Council-approved, state-owned enterprise (SOE), with
China Unicom as the majority shareholder (45 percent).
A year later, the newly formed company partnered with
Tropic Science Co. Ltd and secured financing from
China Construction Bank to fund PEACE. Meanwhile,
China’s HMN Tech has provided equipment for 15,000
km of the cable network. PEACE is privately owned
by Hengtong Group—a company that has not been
shy about its close ties to the Chinese Communist
Party and cooperation with the People’s Liberation
Army (PLA). 27 That all entities involved in PEACE’s
construction, funding, ownership, and operation

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s subsea-cable power play in the Middle East and North Africa
are Chinese ensures that Beijing maintains supreme
control over this network.28 Xi himself has outlined the
logic underlying this approach: “The control of core
technology by others is our biggest hidden danger,”
and allowing foreigners to control core technology “is
like building a house on someone else’s foundation.” 29
Viewed through this lens, PEACE is not only an
economic endeavor but a geostrategic one.
In addition to providing high-speed access to
MENA countries, boosting digital connectivity, and
stimulating economic growth, China is seeking to
simultaneously reduce its dependence on foreign
cables while making other countries more dependent
on Chinese networks. 30 As more and more nations
come to rely on Chinese infrastructure, the asymmetry
shifts in Beijing’s favor, affording China more leverage
and influence in the digital realm and beyond.
China can wield this control to favorably shape the
physical form of the internet for its own strategic
purposes.31 For a country that has declared its desire
to become a “cyber superpower,” 32 the ability to
decide when, where, and how to build subsea fiber
optics affords China substantial normative power. As
Xi explained in reference to telecommunications and
cybersecurity, the “game of great powers is not only
a game of technology but also a game of ideas and
discourse power.”33 Xi’s sentiments reveal that China’s
push to gain increasing control over critical digital
infrastructure is crucial in its quest to play a more
prominent role in internet governance and promote
its vision of cyber sovereignty. Xi’s statement also
helps to contextualize China’s move to designate data
as a factor of production, alongside land, labor, and
28 Notably, most Chinese entities, aside from HMN Tech and PCCW, are state owned enterprises. As Sherman 2021 points out “governments
can use that control to undermine Internet security and resilience, and favorably shape the topology of the Internet itself, for their own stra-
tegic purposes.” At the same time, the complex public-private nexus in China suggests that private companies often serve the Communist
Party of China’s goals.
 J. Sherman, “Cyber defense across the ocean floor: The geopolitics of submarine cable security,” Atlantic Council, September 13, 2021,
https:/ /www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/cyber-defense-across-the-ocean-floor-the-geopolitics-of-submarine-ca-
ble-security/
29 习近平 [Xi Jinping], “习近平在网信工作座谈会上的讲话全文发表 [The full text of Xi Jinping’s speech at the Forum on Cybersecurity and Infor-
matization Work],” speech in Beijing, April 25, 2016, http:/ /www.gov.cn/xinwen/2016-04/25/content_5067705.htm
30 This strategy is being employed across the technology stack.
31 J. Sherman, Cyber defense across the ocean floor: The geopolitics of submarine cable security, Atlantic Council, Scowcroft Center for Strate-
gy and Security, September 13, 2021, https:/ /www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/cyber-defense-across-the-ocean-floo
r-the-geopolitics-of-submarine-cable-security/.
32 Also translated as “network great power.”
33 As cited by R. Doshi et al., China as a “cyber great power”: Beijing’s two voices in telecommunications, Brookings Institution, April 2021,
https:/ /www.brookings.edu/research/china-as-a-cyber-great-power-beijings-two-voices-in-telecommunications/.
34 A. Aamir et al., “Road to nowhere: China’s Belt and Road Initiative at tipping point,” South Asia Journal, August 11, 2022, http:/ /southasiajour-
nal.net/road-to-nowhere-chinas-belt-and-road-initiative-at-tipping-point/.
35 Marcelo Duhalde et al., “Belt and Road Initiative: China’s super link to Gwadar Port—A visual explainer,” South China Morning Post, n.d., ac-
cessed August 29, 2022 https:/ /multimedia.scmp.com/news/china/article/One-Belt-One-Road/pakistan.html.
capital: more control over global data flows bolsters
China’s ability to project discursive power and shape
the information environment. Data gleaned from these
networks can also be processed to improve goods and
services to countries participating in the BRI or for
national security purposes.
PEACE also harbors significant value to China because
it connects Chinese assets (both civilian and military)
across the regions it traverses. The cable, running over
land from Kashgar, in the western part of the disputed
Xinjiang region, to the port of Gwadar, Pakistan, is a
critical link in the BRI’s $62 billion China-Pakistan
Economic Corridor (CPEC). Yet some observers, such
as Pakistan-based Adnan Aamir and his co-authors
elsewhere in South and East Asia, paint a less-than-
rosy picture of CPEC. In the South Asia Journal, they
write: “Nearly eight years after China announced a
breathtaking list of development projects in the city
. . . none of these have been completed and what
investment there has done little to create growth or an
economy.”34
However, the long-term advantages of establishing
a presence in the region may be viewed differently
by strategists in Beijing. Pakistan awarded China the
contract for the construction and operation of the
facility back in 2013, and China Overseas Port Holding
Company is expanding the facility, building nine new
berths. From a geostrategic perspective, Gwadar
provides an alternate route to the Strait of Malacca—a
critical maritime choke point which is traversed for
the vast majority (80 percent) of Chinese trade with
the world. 35 The strait is so vital to China that the

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s subsea-cable power play in the Middle East and North Africa
“Malacca dilemma” is a long-labored question in
China’s academic and policy debates. 36 Some pundits
have speculated that Gwadar could become the site of
a PLA Navy and Air Force base. The facility’s proximity
to the Persian Gulf means that China could use it to
support military operations to secure its energy and
36 I. Storey, “The Malacca Dilemma: A hindrance to Chinese ambitions in the 21st century,” Jamestown Foundation, China Brief 6, no. 8 (2006),
https:/ /jamestown.org/program/chinas-malacca-dilemma/.
37 E. Lin-Greenberg, “Dragon boats: assessing China’s anti-piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden,” Defence & Security Analysis 26, no. 2 (2010):
213-230, DOI:10.1080/14751798.2010.488867.
trade transiting the troubled waters that straddle the
MENA region.
The PEACE cable’s first stop in North Africa is Djibouti,
where the PLA built a naval base in 2016 for $590
million. China’s navy has been actively operating in the
Gulf of Aden since 2008. 37 Chinese companies have
Source: “Submarine Cable Map,” TeleGeography, is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0, accessed March 7, 2023, https:/ /www.
submarinecablemap.com/.
Figure 2: The PEACE cable connects the Middle East, East Africa, and Europe

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s subsea-cable power play in the Middle East and North Africa
since upgraded and expanded the Djibouti port to host
aircraft carriers, causing speculation about China’s
intentions. A future in which Chinese carriers like the
newly constructed high-tech Fujian are deployed to
the region to protect Beijing’s regional interests and
project power may not be that far away.38 Additionally,
Djibouti port is close to another crucial maritime choke
point, the Bab al-Mandab Strait, through which crude
oil, condensate, and refined petroleum products were
transported in 2018. 39 The PEACE cable then connects
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, to Abu Talat and Zafarana in
Egypt before arriving in Europe. Each of these touch
points is situated in regions of critical significance
to China: a September 2020 report published by
Refinitive identified Saudi Arabia as China’s second-
largest destination for BRI projects in terms of value,
with 106 projects valued at $195.7 billion. 40 In Jeddah,
specifically, China’s COSCO Shipping Ports acquired a
20 percent stake in a terminal located at the Islamic
Port.41 Regarding Egypt, the importance of ensuring
the free flow of trade through the Suez Canal was
demonstrated vividly in March 2021 when a massive
container ship got wedged in the narrow passage,
holding up an estimated $9.6 billion of trade along the
waterway each day.
China must ensure that all its assets in the region enjoy
undisrupted high-speed, low-latency connectivity.
Doing so is vital for port operators to optimize and
maintain the integrity of supply chains and other
activities that ensure the country’s continued economic
growth.
38 In an interview with SupChina, former Australian intelligence analyst Sam Roggeveen pointed out that aircraft carriers ”are not war-winning
weapons. These are policing weapons, constabulary weapons.” As cited by J. Goldkorn, “China’s new aircraft carrier and espionage in the in-
ternet age—Q&A with former Australian intelligence analyst Sam Roggeveen,” SupChina (platform), 2022, https:/ /supchina.com/2022/07/08/
chinas-new-aircraft-carrier-and-espionage-in-the-internet-age-qa-with-former-australian-intelligence-analyst-sam-roggeveen/.
39 “The Bab el-Mandeb Strait is a strategic route for oil and natural gas,” Today in Energy series, US Energy Information Administration, August
27, 2019, https:/ /www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=41073#:~:text=In percent202018 percent2C percent20an percent20estimated
percent206.2,million percent20b percent2Fd percent20in percent202014.
40 Sayed Husein et al., BRI Connect: An initiative in numbers, third edition, Refinitive, 2020, https:/ /agsiw.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/
belt-and-road-initiative-in-numbers-issue-3.pdf.
41 D. Wainwright, “China’s Cosco takes 20 percent stake in Saudi container terminal,” TradeWinds, DN Media Group, 2021, https:/ /www.
tradewindsnews.com/ports/chinas-cosco-takes-20-stake-in-saudi-container-terminal/2-1-960255.
42 L. Tress, “Chinese group carried out widespread cyber espionage campaign in Israel – report,” The Times of Israel, August 10, 2021, https:/ /
www.timesofisrael.com/chinese-group-carried-out-widespread-cyber-espionage-campaign-in-israel-report/
43 Hillman wrote: “The U.S. military has dedicated undersea connections, often called “black fiber.” But it still relies on privately owned infra-
structure for the vast majority of its communications. See Hillman, The Digital Silk Road.”
44 B. Clark, “Undersea cables and the future of submarine competition,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 72, no. 4 (2016): 234-237, https:/ /www.
tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00963402.2016.1195636.
PEACE in war and espionage
In 2021, cybersecurity company FireEye detected a
two-year hacking operation against entities in Israel, the
UAE, and Iran that the company claimed was executed
by a Chinese espionage group, UNC215. The campaign
targeted government institutions, IT providers, and
telecommunications firms. FireEye did not implicate
the Chinese government. However, the company made
sure to point out that the nature of the operation
coincides with Beijing’s interests. 42 Regardless of
whether or not Beijing was directly involved, China’s
extensive economic interests and growing involvement
in MENA affairs elevate the importance of acquiring
reliable regional intelligence. Submarine cables could
prove useful to China in this regard.
Countries today rely on undersea cables to coordinate
most military operations, according to author Jonathan
Hillman.43 And as Bryan Clark, whose work focuses
on the future of warfare, points out, “Radiofrequency
circuits used by communications satellites have too little
bandwidth to accommodate the terabytes of sensor data
recorded by various devices, or to fill operational orders
needed to support global military operations.” 44 The
deployment of increasingly sophisticated technology
like unmanned vehicles, artificial intelligence, and high-
tech aircraft carriers drives further demand for reliable,
secure bandwidth. However, because most military
communications travel along the same subsea network
as civilian and unclassified data, they are susceptible to
eavesdropping and disruption. Countries had exploited
this vulnerability long before Snowden revealed the
US cable-tapping operations: Britain’s secret service
leveraged the country’s control of global telegram
cables for intelligence purposes back in the nineteenth

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s subsea-cable power play in the Middle East and North Africa
century.45 The Chinese are scholars of history and
understand that expanding the country’s stake in the
subsea cable sector reduces the ability of others to spy
on China while at the same time enhancing Beijing’s
ability to access sensitive information.
Due to its strategic political-economic importance, the
MENA region happens to be an attractive place for cable
espionage. Historically, spy agencies such as America’s
NSA and Britain’s Government Communications
Headquarters intercepted reams of sensitive data from
MENA networks. As Duncan Campbell, an investigative
journalist specializing in surveillance since 1975,
explained, “there is no question that, in the broadest
sense, from Port Said [in Egypt] to Oman is one of
the greatest areas for telecommunications traffic and
therefore surveillance. Everything about the Middle
East goes through that region except for the odd link
through Turkey.”46 In Egypt alone, the fifteen cables
between the Mediterranean and Red Seas transmit 17
percent to 30 percent of the world’s internet traffic—
equivalent to the data of 1.3 billion to 2.3 billion
people. The ability to intercept data traveling along
these networks could provide China with invaluable
information. Beijing has expended considerable
resources improving intelligence gathering by
interception of signals (SIGINT). According to a 2018
estimate, Beijing spent roughly 10 percent of its military
budget on enhancing these capabilities. 47 PEACE and
other cables built, upgraded, or operated by Chinese
companies could prove useful in this regard.
Cable tapping to intercept and decrypt data is a
notoriously difficult endeavor. 48 By acquiring stakes
in undersea cable networks, companies could help
45 Headrick, Daniel R., and Pascal Griset. “Submarine telegraph cables: Business and politics, 1838–1939.” Business History Review 75, no.
3 (2001): 543-578. https:/ /www.cambridge.org/core/journals/business-history-review/article/abs/submarine-telegraph-cables-busi-
ness-and-politics-18381939/3C5C58338F96F235DE13BC88B1A45B5D
46 Duncan Campbell as quoted in P. Cochrane, “Red Sea cables: How UK and US spy agencies listen to the Middle East,” Middle East Eye, March
4, 2021, https:/ /www.middleeasteye.net/news/red-sea-cables-how-us-uk-spy-agencies-listen-middle-east.
47 T. R. McCabe, “Chinese intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance systems,” Journal of Indo-Pacific Affairs, Air University (US Air Force
education), March 8, 2021, https:/ /www.airuniversity.af.edu/JIPA/Display/Article/2528263/chinese-intelligence-surveillance-and-reconnais-
sance-systems/.
48 McCabe, “Chinese intelligence.”
49 Z. Hanhau, “Law expert: Chinese government can’t force Huawei to make backdoors,” Wired, 2019, https:/ /www.wired.com/story/law-expert-
chinese-government-cant-force-huawei-make-backdoors/.
50 As cited by R. Doshi et al., China as a “cyber great power”: Beijing’s two voices in telecommunications, Brookings Institution, April 2021,
https:/ /www.brookings.edu/research/china-as-a-cyber-great-power-beijings-two-voices-in-telecommunications/.
51 C. Wong, “‘Underwater Great Wall’: Chinese firm proposes building network of submarine detectors to boost nation’s defense,” South China
Morning Post, May 19, 2016, https:/ /www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/1947212/underwater-great-wall-chinese-firm-pro-
poses-building.
52 State Oceanic Administration of China, 2015 paper, quoted in Lyle J. Goldstein, “China is building a [sic] ‘Undersea Great Wall’ to take on
America in a war,” National Interest, October 27, 2019, https:/ /nationalinterest.org/blog/buzz/china-building-undersea-great-wall-take-ameri-
ca-war-90601.
alleviate some of these challenges: installing backdoors
during cable manufacturing or construction to siphon
data traveling along the network. While firms like
Huawei Technologies Co. have repeatedly denied
embedding backdoors in their equipment at the
central government’s behest, Chinese policymakers
have been surprisingly open about leveraging such
civilian technology for military purposes. 49 In 2016,
China Institute of Cyberspace Strategy’s director,
Qin An, claimed that “due to the highly monopolistic
nature of information technology systems, it is unlikely
that there will be two different systems for military and
civilian use . . . it is particularly necessary [for China]
to integrate military and civilian resources through a
military-civil fusion system.” 50
Some Chinese firms agreed with Qin’s assessment: that
same year, one of China’s two largest shipbuilders, the
China State Shipbuilding Corporation, revealed details
of a project known as the underwater great wall: a
ship and subsurface sensors’ network fitted to fiber-
optic cables and landing stations designed to improve
its anti-submarine warfare capabilities. 51 While the
project is proximate to China’s shores, the country has
indicated that its subsea monitoring and detection
aspirations are global. A year before the conception
of the project, a paper issued by China’s State Oceanic
Administration called for the deployment of undersea
observation systems in “the near seas, the depths
of the far seas, and around islands bordering the far
seas, as well as in strategic passages.” 52 Considering
that Chinese strategists view it as vital to safeguard
“strategic passages” like the Suez Canal-Red Sea-
Mandab Strait passage, the extension of such systems
to the MENA region makes strategic sense.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s subsea-cable power play in the Middle East and North Africa
Notably, PEACE cable network’s owner, Hengtong
Group, has been investing considerable resources
into improving China’s fiber-optic systems and has
established research partnerships with the PLA Naval
University of Engineering, Zhongtian Technology
Submarine Cable Co. Ltd, and Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications. Meanwhile, several of
Hengtong’s subsidiaries have partnered with Chinese
universities to develop civilian and military applications
for submarine observation networks.53 The underwater
environmental monitoring systems deployed by
Chinese companies allow for real-time location and
tracing of surface and underwater targets. The systems
resemble the US SOSUS network, which employs fixed
sensor arrays to detect Russian submarines. Analysts
have since noted that these Chinese networks could
significantly erode US and Russian undersea warfare
superiority and enhance the PLA’s ability to project
power.
For Israel and the Gulf States, China’s relationship with
Iran deserves greater scrutiny in this context. In 2021,
Beijing and Teheran inked a now infamous quarter-
century strategic partnership agreement that includes
a commitment to enhancing military cooperation and
intelligence sharing. Notably, the deal affords China
access to the Iranian port and naval base at Jask,
located on the Gulf of Oman. 54 Israel’s former chief
of military intelligence, Amos Yadlin, commented:
“One of the most worrying clauses in the agreement
between Iran and China is the intelligence sharing.” 55
In a 2021 study published by the Leiden Asia Center,
researcher and risk analyst Mohammadbagher
Forough highlights that Iran’s minister of information
and communications technology, Mohammad-Javad
Azari Jahromi, has repeatedly called for China and
Iran to establish a united cyber front against Western
hegemony. Forough concludes that “the two countries
are not likely to become full ‘cyber allies’; however, the
strategic partnership is deepening in all fields including
53 US Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, The United States and Europe: A concrete agenda for transatlantic cooperation on China, a
Majority Report (Washington: Government Printing Office, 2020), https:/ /www.foreign.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/SFRC percent20Majority
percent20China-Europe percent20Report percent20FINAL percent20(P&G).pdf.
54 H. A. Cordesman, “China and Iran: A major Chinese gain in ‘white area warfare’ in the Gulf,” commentary, Center for Strategic and Interna-
tional Studies, March 29, 2021, https:/ /www.csis.org/analysis/china-and-iran-major-chinese-gain-white-area-warfare-gulf.
55 “Ex-IDF intel head: Iran-China megadeal includes ‘worrying’ military info-sharing,” Times of Israel, March 29, 2021, https:/ /www.timesofisrael.
com/ex-idf-intel-head-iran-china-megadeal-includes-worrying-military-info-sharing/.
56 Mohammadbagher Forough, “Iran and China along the digital Silk Rroad,” in The Digital Silk Road: Perspectives from affected countries, ed.
Rogier Creemers, Leiden Asia Center, July 2021, 24-32, https:/ /leidenasiacentre.nl/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/Digital-Silk-Road-Perspec-
tives-From-Affected-Countries.pdf.
57 E. Huang, “Taiwan’s Achilles’ heel in a conflict with China is not what you think, National Interest, December 3, 2017, https:/ /nationalinterest.
org/blog/the-buzz/taiwans-achilles percentE2 percent80 percent99-heel-conflict-china-not-what-you-think-23481.
cyber.”56 The quarter-century strategic partnership
agreement creates a framework for China to share
information gleaned from its underwater observation
systems with Teheran—complicating and potentially
compromising the military operations of Israel and
Gulf countries.
There is a caveat regarding leveraging control of
subsea cables for espionage in that landing stations are
particularly vulnerable to tapping. Therefore, cables
landing on their shores could provide MENA countries
with monitoring opportunities. Still, the myriad military,
intelligence, and geostrategic advantages offered
by controlling submarine networks mean that cable
networks like PEACE are strategically significant to the
Chinese Communist Party, even if not commercially
viable. However, it is for these very reasons that
fiber optics with Chinese stakeholders have become
increasingly embroiled in geopolitics.
PEACE: a flashpoint in the
geopolitics of the internet
Like China, other countries understand that protecting
the integrity of undersea cable networks is critical
to safeguarding economic prosperity and national
security. For example, during a 2017 UK parliamentary
hearing, then-National Security Adviser Mark Sedwill
said attacks on undersea cables may have “the same
effect as used to be achieved in, say, World War II by
bombing the London docks or taking out a power
station.” That same year, special assistant to Taiwan’s
former deputy minister of national defense in Taiwan, Eli
Huang, penned an op-ed in The National Interest calling
the undersea cable network “Taiwan’s Achilles’ heel in a
conflict with China.” 57 While concerns surrounding the
security of undersea cables are nothing new, the issue
of who controls this critical architecture has emerged
as a core issue for America and its allies amid rising
tensions with China. Within this context, the activity

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s subsea-cable power play in the Middle East and North Africa
beneath MENA’s waters, particularly PEACE, has not
gone unnoticed.
In his book, The Digital Silk Road: China’s quest to wire
the world and win the future, Jonathan Hillman argues
that China’s growing digital presence in Djibouti, “a
critical choke-point in global communications,” could
compromise America’s regional operations. 58 Since
authoring the book, Hillman has joined the US State
Department as a policy adviser. To illustrate what could
happen in the event of a disruption, the author points
to the severing of three cables linking Egypt and Italy in
2008, when US drone launches in Iraq dwindled “from
hundreds to tens a day.” Despite America’s declared
departure from the Middle East under President
Obama, the United States remains an actively engaged
security guarantor. Thus, the United States must ensure
its assets remain connected, and its communications
are not compromised. A September 2020 report
by the US Senate Committee on Foreign Relations,
titled “The United States and Europe: A concrete
agenda for transatlantic cooperation on China,”
outlined these concerns in detail. 59 Notably, the report
dedicates an entire chapter to the issue of undersea
cables, with PEACE being the primary case study. The
committee declared that the most immediate risk “is
to data and cybersecurity, and the use of cables for
intelligence gathering.” Perhaps ironically, the paper
describes America’s very own multiyear cable-tapping
operations to demonstrate the feasibility of executing
cable espionage. Beyond espionage, the report cites
Hengtong’s close ties to the CCP and the PLA and its
involvement in projects that advance China’s “civil-
military fusion” efforts as cause for concern.
At its core, the current feud over who controls the
world’s internet infrastructure harbors a structural
dimension that relates to the relative decline of
American power. Despite China’s significant strides
into the subsea cable industry, the United States
still dominates the market. Roughly a quarter of the
world’s global data flows today travel via the United
States—including 63 percent of international traffic en
route to China. As Hillman points out, this dominance
58 Huang, “Taiwan’s Achilles’ heel,” 19.
59 US Senate Committee on Foreign Relations,, The United States and Europe: A concrete agenda for transatlantic cooperation on China, 53.
60 Huang, “Taiwan’s Achilles’ heel,” 19.
61 G. Starks, “Statement of Commissioner Geoffrey Starks,” Federal Communications Commission, IB Docket No. 16-155, 2020, https:/ /docs.fcc.
gov/public/attachments/DOC-367238A6.pdf.
62 T. Shields, “FCC adds China Unicom to list of Chinese telecoms banned in U.S. on espionage,” Bloomberg, January 27, 2022, https:/ /www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-01-27/china-unicom-ejected-from-u-s-as-fcc-cites-security-concerns#xj4y7vzkg.
has afforded America invaluable economic and
military advantages that US intelligence officials have
described as a “tremendous home-field advantage.” 60
Washington is therefore concerned about Beijing’s
stated goal of capturing 60 percent of the global fiber-
optic communications market by 2025. For a country
that is often criticized for being opaque, China has
been rather candid about the nature of its expansion
in the subsea cable market. According to one official
Chinese Communist Party outlet, “although undersea
cable laying is a business, it is also a battlefield where
information can be obtained.” 61 Here, “information”
reads “data”—arguably the most significant strategic
asset in the twenty-first century. As the fourth industrial
revolution gains steam, access to data and the ability
to protect its integrity will become increasingly vital
to ensuring national security and economic prosperity.
A March 2021 report by Bloomberg identified PEACE
as “a new flashpoint in the geopolitics of the internet.”
Indeed, the dynamics at play suggest that it could
emerge as precisely that. America and its allies have
not stood idly by as Chinese companies have risen
up the technological value chain and captured an
increasing share of the market: Canberra effectively
blocked a 2016 deal with Huawei Marine to construct
a 4,000 km cable connecting Solomon Islands to
Sydney amid fears that Huawei’s involvement would
compromise Australia’s network. More recently, the
US government intervened to stop the Pacific Light
Cable Network from connecting Hong Kong to Los
Angelis via a cable measuring 12,800 km. The United
States also has fired shots from its economic cannon,
imposing trade restrictions on Huawei and Hengtong.
In January 2022, the US FCC effectively ejected China
Unicom from the US market over security concerns. 62
The European Union has joined the United States in
imposing tariffs on several Chinese entities, including
Hengtong, after an investigation revealed that they
were unfairly undercutting competition: selling cables
to the European market at “artificially low prices.”
Meanwhile, Google and Meta have already stated they
would not utilize PEACE, though the aforementioned

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s subsea-cable power play in the Middle East and North Africa
trade restrictions would make it difficult even if the
companies wanted to. Notably, Google and Meta have
recently entered the cable market, significantly raising
the level of competition. Some have gone as far as to
call US tech giants’ ambitions to construct and own
global data “a tectonic shift in how the internet works
and who controls it.” 63 These geoeconomic effects
are making it harder for China to achieve its goal of
dominating the sector.
While PEACE has certainly not eluded the attention of
policymakers in Washington, it has thus far not faced
any direct pushback from Western powers. Instead,
the United States has spent much of its time pressuring
countries in the region on 5G (with limited success),
neglecting what some have called “the most central
part of the global internet infrastructure,” and how
Beijing is reshaping it. However, US policymakers are
increasingly directing their attention to the action on
MENA’s ocean floor. For example, during an August
2022 Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee meeting,
Senator Bill Hagerty said he is “very concerned about
the undersea cables they are laying [in the Middle East]
with Chinese systems that make them vulnerable to
exploitation.”64 Senator Hagerty, who spent much of his
time in his previous position as ambassador to Japan
working on removing Huawei from Japanese telecoms
networks, singled out PEACE as “a very big concern.”
When asked by Hagerty what steps the administration
is taking to address the PEACE cable, Barbara A. Leaf,
assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern affairs,
replied: “I am not as well versed, frankly, senator, on
this particular technology, dilemma, or threat before
us, and I will get myself schooled on it.” Senator
Hagery suggested that Leaf looks into “the previous
administration’s work on the SeaMeWe-6 cable”, adding
that “a tremendous amount of work went into dealing
with this exact concern on this undersea cable.” The
US Trade and Development Agency (USTDA) offered
a $3.8 million training grant to five telecom companies
in countries on the cable route in return for choosing
American SubCom as the supplier over HMN Tech. At
the same time, American diplomats warned countries
about the potential security risk of involving HMN-
Tech equipment and cautioned participating foreign
63 A. Blum and C. Baraka, “Sea change,” Rest of World, May 10, 2022, https:/ /restofworld.org/2022/google-meta-underwater-cables/.
64 China’s Role in the Middle East: Hearing Before the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on Near East, South Asia, Central Asia, and
Counterterrorism, 117th Cong. (2022) (testimony of Barbara A. Leaf, assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern affairs), https:/ /www.foreign.
senate.gov/hearings/chinas-role-in-the-middle-east080422.
65 T. M. Cronk, “DOD Continues Mission to Stabilize the Middle East,” US Department of Defense, April 5, 2022, https:/ /www.defense.gov/News/
News-Stories/Article/Article/2990349/dod-continues-mission-to-stabilize-the-middle-east/
telecom carriers that Washington planned to impose
severe sanctions on HMN Tech, a development that
could put their investment in the cable project at risk.
Ultimately, China Telecom and China Mobile withdrew
their combined investment of roughly 20 percent from
the $ 500 million SMW 6 project in 2022 after HMN-
Tech lost the bid. Notably, China Unicom and PCCW
remain involved in the project.
Since at least July 2022, the United States has reoriented
its engagement with the MENA region to counter
Beijing’s growing regional influence. Biden’s visit to
the region during July-August 2022, which saw Saudi
Arabia commit to cooperating with the United States
on 5G open radio access network (RAN) technology
and Israel ink an agreement to deepen technology
cooperation with America, is emblematic of this new
approach. These deals also reflect that technology
rests at the core of US concerns regarding China.
Assistant Secretary Leaf made sure to mention that
“more broadly, across the region, we [America] are all
over this issue of untrusted vendors in the information
communications technology sphere.” She added that
the United States has been “working across the region
to inform, illuminate, and educate host governments
on the risks.”
The US Department of Defense has come to view
the Middle East as “a key theater for competing with
China.”65 As tensions between China and the West
continue to simmer, PEACE could become the next
target in the great power competition between the
United States and China. Regardless, with China’s
share of the cable market set to grow, Middle Eastern
countries would do well to direct more attention
and resources to ensuring these “vital arteries” of
information remain secure. Doing so is both a matter
of national security and economic prosperity.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s subsea-cable power play in the Middle East and North Africa
Dale Aluf leads SIGNAL’s interdisciplinary research
team, developing in-depth knowledge and theories for
policy practitioners working in the sphere of Sino-Israeli
relations. He has been a visiting fellow at the Intellisia
Institute in Guangzhou, China, where he researched
China’s Belt & Road Initiative, the Digital Silk Road, and
social science perspectives on artificial intelligence. His
areas of expertise include Chinese foreign policy, China-
Middle East relations, the geopolitics of technology, cross-
cultural analysis, and political psychology. Aluf’s writing
and commentary have appeared in The Diplomat, Asia
Times, Jerusalem Post, Calcalist, Ynet, N12, Times of Israel,
East Asia Forum, Zawya, and Defense Horizon Journal .
Before joining SIGNAL in 2017, he worked as a profiler for
eight years in Israel’s aviation sector, conducting various
security assessments in Africa, Asia, and Europe. While
living in South Africa, he received training in cognitive
neuropsychology and psychodynamic group analysis. Aluf
holds an MSc in Applied Psychology from the University
of Liverpool and is a member of the International Society
of Political Psychology.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Board of DirectorsAtlantic Council Board of Directors
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
TREASURER
*George Lund
DIRECTORS
Todd Achilles
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
John Bonsell
Philip M. Breedlove
Richard R. Burt
*Teresa Carlson
*James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
Lawrence Di Rita
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Richard Edelman
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Mark T. Esper
*Michael Fisch
Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Jarosław Grzesiak
Murathan Günal
Michael V. Hayden
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Kay Bailey Hutchison
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
*Joia M. Johnson
*Safi Kalo
Andre Kelleners
Brian L. Kelly
Henry A. Kissinger
John E. Klein
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Joseph Konzelmann
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Almar Latour
Yann Le Pallec
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Christian Marrone
Gerardo Mato
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Majida Mourad
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
*Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell McCormick
Michael Punke
Ashraf Qazi
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Jeff Shockey
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
*Gil Tenzer
*Frances F. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
*Al Williams
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster
*Executive Committee Members
List as of March 7, 2023

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that
 promotes constructive US leadership and engagement
in international affairs based on the central role of
the Atlantic community in meeting today’s global
 challenges.
© 2021 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All
rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means
without permission in writing from the Atlantic Council,
except in the case of brief quotations in news articles,
critical articles, or reviews. Please direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
