
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
CHINESE
DISCOURSE POWER:
CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
by Kenton Thibaut

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
The mission of the Digital Forensic Research Lab (DFRLab) is to
identify, expose, and explain disinformation where and when it
occurs using open-source research; to promote objective truth as a
foundation of government for and by people; to protect democratic
institutions and norms from those who would seek to undermine
them in the digital engagement space; to create a new model of
expertise adapted for impact and real-world results; and to forge
digital resilience at a time when humans are more interconnected
than at any point in history, by building the world’s leading hub of
digital forensic analysts tracking events in governance, technology,
and security.
ISBN-13: 978-1-61977-485-8
Cover: China’s President Xi Jinping is shown on a screen through digitally
decorated glass during the World Internet Conference (WIC) in Wuzhen,
Zhejiang province, China, November 23, 2020. REUTERS/Aly Song
This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic
Council’s policy on intellectual independence. The authors are solely
responsible for its analysis and recommendations. The Atlantic Council and
its donors do not determine, nor do they necessarily endorse or advocate
for, any of this report’s conclusions.
August 2023
Author
Kenton Thibaut
Editors
Graham Brookie
Iain Robertson

This report was made possible with support from the Smith
Richardson Foundation.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
CHINESE
DISCOURSE POWER:
CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
by Kenton Thibaut

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
4
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary 5
Introduction 8
Channel Expansion, the First Prong of ‘Media Convergence’ 10
Traditional media 10
Social Media 14
Content Innovation, the Second Prong of ‘Media Convergence’ 21
Precise communication 21
Political native advertising 23
Content sharing and applying editorial pressure 23
Governance, the Third Prong of ‘Media Convergence’ 29
Standards 29
Positive Feedback Loop of Diplomacy, Technical Standards, and Chinese Governance Norms 32
Weaponizing Data 37
Conclusion 39
Endnotes 40

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
5
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1 Kenton Thibaut, Chinese Discourse Power: Ambitions and Reality in the Digital Domain, Atlantic Council, August 24, 2022, https://dfrlab.org/2022/08/24/chinese
-discourse-power-ambitions-and-reality-in-the-digital-domain/.
2 The main principles of “media convergence” are laid out in this document issued by the Cyberspace Administration of China. The commentary is a
response to a document issued by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) Central Committee on improving and modernizing national governance systems and
capabilities: Cyberspace Administration of China, “融媒体矩阵如何发挥传播优” (“How the Media Matrix Enable Communication Advantages”), April 10, 2020,
https://web.archive.org/web/20230724155333/http:/www.qstheory.cn/zhuanqu/bkjx/2020-04/21/c_1125885183.htm
3 Xu Guoliang, “提升中国国际话语权的深刻意蕴与重要意义” (“The Profound Connotation and Significance of Improving China’s International Discourse Power”),
Guangming Daily, November 28, 2021, https://archive.ph/Cf1cm#selection-439.100-439.198; Li Jiangjing, “西方国家推行话语霸权的隐蔽性策略及其应对” (“The
Concealed Tactics and Countermeasures of Western Countries in Promoting Discourse Hegemony”), Qiushi, February 9, 2017, https://archive.is/D5NxJ.
4 “ 优秀现实题材剧扬帆’出海’” (“Excellent Reality-Themed Drama Sails ‘Going to Sea’”), Xinhua, May 20, 2022, https://archive.is/D7f5b#selection-1791.2-1791.38.
5 Joshua Kurlantzick, Beijing’s Global Media Offensive: China’s Uneven Campaign to Influence Asia and the World (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2022).
6 “ 新华通讯社2021年度部门决算” (“Xinhua News Agency’s 2021 Departmental Final Accounts”), Xinhua News Agency, 2022, http://203.192.6.89/xhs/20220721
/20220721_2021bmjs.html.
T
his report is part of the Digital Forensic Research Lab’s
(DFRLab’s) “discourse power” series, which outlines the
strategy, capabilities, impacts, and responses to China’s
attempts to shape the global information environment. The series
argues that China’s leaders believe the country can gain the geo-
political power necessary to establish itself as a world leader, to
spread its norms and values, and to decenter US power in the
international system by gaining “discourse power” (话语权). In
concept, discourse power is a narrative agenda-setting ability
focused on reshaping global governance, values, and norms to
legitimize and facilitate the expression of state power.1
Whereas the first report introduced China’s discourse power
strategy, this second report examines its efforts to date. This
report assesses this through a frame of “media convergence”
(融媒体), a Chinese term that refers to the integration of internal
and external Chinese Communist Party (CCP) propaganda, the
online and offline channels for its dissemination, and the mecha-
nisms of oversight on which communications systems rely.2
More specifically, this report examines “media convergence”
across three vectors: channel expansion, content innovation,
and governance of technological infrastructure and digital
connectivity.
The first vector, channel expansion, refers to creating or better
leveraging delivery vehicles for China’s messaging across dif-
ferent media platforms. The aim is to expose a growing interna-
tional audience to Chinese narratives and norms in the hopes
of eroding the global “discourse dominance” of the West.3 This
report examines this trend through both traditional and social
media. As for traditional media, China has spent over $1.5 billion
annually since 2008 on propaganda, with much of that going
toward initiatives in the Global South. This is especially obvious
in the strategies of China’s flagship news organization, Xinhua,
which describes itself as “light cavalry” in China’s global public
opinion war. Xinhua has described its media strategy as using a
combination of “shipbuilding to go out to sea” and “borrowing
a boat to go out to sea” (造船出海”与“借船出海”相结合)—that
is, building up China’s own capacity to effectively disseminate
its message internationally, while using foreign social media
platforms to disseminate propaganda.4 As part of these efforts,
Xinhua has over the years greatly expanded its networks to now
have the largest number of foreign correspondents of any news
agency in the world.5 Other strategies include both coercing
and incentivizing journalists abroad to engage in more favor-
able coverage of China.
Chinese state entities have greatly expanded their presence on
social media as well. As of January 2021, Xinhua distributed on
average seven thousand three hundred articles, photos, videos,
and other media content in fifteen languages daily, garnering
over 200 million overseas social media followers across various
platforms (including Facebook, Twitter, and Y ouTube).6 Indeed,
China-based Twitter account creation skyrocketed by over
6,000 percent over a period of just three months in 2017, fol-
lowing reports on the situation in Xinjiang in the Western press.
At the same time, however, there is a balancing act that the par-
ty-state faces when seeking to portray China as a confident
leader to global audiences while also being subject to popular
nationalism and domestic discontent in its actions.
As an example, tensions between different bureaucratic depart-
ments belie the official sanctioning of the assertive “wolf war-
rior” style of coercive diplomacy. In some instances, it appears
that different elements responsible for external messaging
within the Chinese government have initially contradicted each
other, sometimes going as far as refuting each other’s public
statements, before consolidating around a single message.
One such example occurred between the Central Propaganda
Department and wolf warrior diplomat Zhao Lijian around the
origins of the COVID-19 virus.
Self-censorship can be a nefarious side effect of the editorial
pressures that Chinese state news agencies bring—not just
in China’s favor but also for authoritarian governments with
which it is aligned. With regard to China’s efforts in shaping
public opinion, most studies have found that China’s messag-
ing at a general level is not especially resonant with local audi-
ences; however, some initial studies have shown that Chinese
propaganda can be effective at persuading audiences that the
“China model” is superior to that of democratic political systems

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
6
in delivering growth and stability. On social media platforms,
Chinese officials have often engaged in coordinated influence
and information campaigns, including those spreading disinfor-
mation on the origin of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The second “prong” of China’s strategy of media convergence
is content innovation, which includes tailoring content (and the
narratives baked into it) in a way that best resonates with a par-
ticular audience, otherwise known as “precise communication”
(精准传播). China sees access to public opinion data abroad as
essential to enhancing its ability to tailor content. As the party
secretary and president of the online arm of the CCP’s flagship
People’s Daily stated in a 2022 address, the internet “houses
a vast amount of…data and is able to accurately reflect social
sentiments…. Using big data [analytics] and artificial intelligence
(AI), the internet can be a tool for strengthening the Party’s lead-
ership.”7 To this end, China recently launched four State Key
Laboratories dedicated to using big data to better tailor con -
tent to specific audiences, as well as spread “positive energy”
through digital and social media.
In addition to shaping content, another tactic is to obscure the
fact that the content originates from Chinese state sources.
This is a phenomenon known as “political native advertising,” in
which Chinese state-run media organizations purchase space in
news outlets abroad to publish state-sanctioned content “cam-
ouflaged” as neutral news articles. In a 2020 report, Freedom
House highlighted that, especially in digital versions of local
newspapers, “China Observer”—an English-language column
produced by Chinese state media outlet China Daily—often
goes unlabeled as being state sponsored.
Lastly, a related strategy involves China’s attempts to control
local media environments via content-sharing agreements,
which in some cases end up flooding local media environments
with free or low-cost pro-CCP content. A huge part of this push
is to countries within China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), a
majority of which are in the Global South.
The last frame for examining China’s digital discourse power
strategy is governance. This includes ensuring China-
sponsored standards, norms, and governance protocols in pri-
oritized industries are widely adopted, especially in the Global
South. China has, for instance, been active in shaping infor -
mation and communications technologies standards in the
International Telecommunication Union through a “flooding the
zone” strategy in which all China-affiliated members, be they
from academia, private industry, or government, vote as a bloc.
This ensures that standards proposals from Chinese entities
7 Tuvia Gering, “Discourse Power | August 31, 2022,” Discourse Power, August 31, 2022, https://tuviagering.substack.com/p/discourse-power-august-31-2022; “「聚焦学
理中国」以讲好中国故事为着力点全方位提升国际传播能力” (“[Focus Theory China] Focusing on Telling Chinese Stories Well, Improving International Communication
Capabilities in All Areas”), China Social Sciences Network, June 10, 2022, https://archive.ph/9yodK.
8 Daniel R. Russel and Blake H. Berger, Stacking the Deck: China’s Influence in International Technology Standards Setting, Asia Society Policy Institute, November 30,
2021, https://asiasociety.org/sites/default/files/2021-11/ASPI_StacktheDeckreport_final.pdf.
9 Nebula, “星云纵横与CCTV+签约合作，开启外宣大数据时代” (“Nebula Signed a Contract with CCTV+ to Open a Big Data Era for External Publicity”), Sohu, October 20,
2016, https://web.archive.org/web/20220809202933/https://www.sohu.com/a/116710708_439559.
end up receiving the number of votes needed to be adopted by
the standards-setting body.8
These exchanges serve to spread Chinese cyber norms, such
as “cyber sovereignty” (网络主权), which is China’s vision for
internet governance that upholds a government’s sovereign
right to control the internet within its borders. The party-state
spreads this norm by advising governments on how to shape
laws and policies to govern the technologies (often Chinese-
provided, Chinese-standard-compliant) in their own societies.
This process becomes a positive feedback loop, creating a
degree of both technical and policy lock-in via China-provided
technical infrastructure, the standards through which it oper -
ates, and know-how and data governance fra meworks. At the
same time, China leverages its media relationships to flood local
environments with stories of the benefits of China’s investment
in developing countries’ futures.
…[Diplomatic] relationships allow China to
gain access to vast data resources related
to international public opinion on news
topics related to China…The Chinese state
can then use this data to hone its censorship
and propaganda apparatus…it can also
aid the People’s Liberation Army engage
in targeted information operations and
psychological warfare campaigns against
countries like Taiwan.
These relationships also allow China to gain access to vast data
resources. One Chinese firm outlined in this report, Nebula,
uses its big data and cloud computing technologies to obtain
vast amounts of data related to international public opinion on
news topics related to China. It uses a variety of analysis meth-
ods, including semantics and clustering, to understand public
preferences and “evaluate the difference between this under-
standing and media expectations…helping Chinese media
build top international discourse power and influence.” 9 The
Chinese state can then use this data to hone its messages fur-
ther and enhance its censorship and propaganda apparatus.
It can deploy these improved tools and technologies in banal
ways, like helping the tourism bureau craft a compelling narra-
tive of “Beautiful China.” However, it can also use Nebula’s senti-
ment data to help the People’s Liberation Army engage in more

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
7
targeted information operations and psychological warfare
campaigns against countries like Taiwan.
This report finds that, anecdotally, China’s efforts gain larger
ground in countries where civic freedoms are already limited
and where winning the support of a small coalition of political
elites matters over winning public support. In the rather extreme
case of Zimbabwe, China is openly and actively antagonizing
and targeting journalists and civil society activists. These find-
ings cast doubt on assessments of Chinese influence that look
solely at public opinion data. Such research may miss the fact
that in some domestic contexts, China sees elite capture as
much more important than winning hearts and minds.
In short, China’s discourse power efforts are uneven. While the
popularity of its state and traditional media lags behind that of
Western countries, its efforts to shape the environments within
media and information spaces are much more effective—and
are in fact the focus of China’s discourse power strategy. China
is creating an alternative order in the Global South, and any
effort to make meaningful progress on technological gover -
nance will need to stem from an understanding of the ecosys-
tem that China has created, the push and pull factors facing the
countries that engage with it, and on clearly messaging what
the advantages of a democratic approach to such issues offers
to the global majority.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
8
INTRODUCTION
10 Thibaut, Chinese Discourse Power: Ambitions.
11 Ibid.
12 Ibid.
13 Ibid.
14 Cyberspace Administration of China, (“How the Media Matrix Enable”).
I
n the past decade, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) has
embarked on an ambitious strategy to put itself at the heart
of an alternative international order that challenges the cur-
rent Western-dominated one. Previous reports from the Atlantic
Council’s Digital Forensic Research Lab (DFRLab) argue that a
primary way China’s leaders believe they can achieve this is by
gaining “discourse power” (话语权), a type of narrative agen-
da-setting ability focused on reshaping global governance, val-
ues, and norms to legitimize and facilitate the expression of state
power.10 China’s leaders have clearly articulated that they believe
the United States gained and maintained its global leadership in
large part due to its discourse power dominance.11 In short, the
CCP believes that discourse power will assist China in gaining the
geopolitical power necessary to establish itself as a world leader,
to spread its norms and values, and to decenter US power in the
international system.
The party-state has focused on two primary domains in its push
for discourse power. First are the geographic regions of the
Global South, where it has engaged in extensive coalition-build-
ing efforts via propaganda campaigns and through peo -
ple-to-people exchanges. Second is the digital domain. Here,
China has sought to shape international governance mecha -
nisms in favor of its domestic technologies and the CCP’s polit-
ical exigencies; it has also sought to influence local informa -
tion ecosystems so that Chinese official narratives dominate.12
Central to this latter goal is gaining political buy-in for China-
defined norms such as “cyber sovereignty” (also sometimes
translated as “network sovereignty”)—a norm of internet gov-
ernance that privileges state sovereignty over civil liberties and
subordinates human rights to national security.13
The party-state has clearly articulated its ambitions for gaining a
discourse power advantage in these two domains through pol-
icy documents, state-funded academic studies, expert work -
shops, technical blueprints, and in official and social media
spaces. However, there are gaps between the CCP’s stated
goals and to what extent the party has achieved them on the
ground. This report provides an initial overview of China’s efforts
in this vein. This includes both where the party-state is focus-
ing its human and financial resources, as well as the impacts of
Chinese policies in local environments.
This report analyzes China’s discourse power efforts through
a frame of “media convergence” ( 融媒体), a Chinese term
that refers to the integration of internal and external CCP
propaganda, the online and offline channels for its dissemi -
nation, and the mechanisms of oversight on which communi-
cations systems rely.14 More specifically, this report examines
“media convergence” across three vectors: channel expansion
(i.e., expanding the delivery vehicles for China’s messaging via
social media, digital media, etc.), content innovation (i.e., tailor-
ing content to the audience, targeting audiences more effec-
tively, and making content delivery more resonant and effec-
tive), and governance (i.e., ensuring Chinese standards and
norms regarding technological infrastructure and digital con-
nectivity are widely adopted).
China has been active in shaping
information and communications
technologies standards in international
organizations. These standards are crafted
to advantage the technical specifications of
Chinese domestic technologies, including
surveillance tools. Standards developed in
international organizations are adopted at
higher rates in countries in the Global South.
China’s capabilities in these areas have seen significant growth
in recent years, and the effect on shaping digital ecosystems
can be far-reaching. For example, China has been active in
shaping information and communications technologies (ICT)
standards in international organizations. These standards are
crafted to advantage the technical specifications of Chinese
domestic technologies, including surveillance tools. Standards
developed in international organizations are adopted at higher
rates in countries in the Global South. China also provides its
domestic surveillance technologies at favorable price points to
its partners in global majority countries through people-to-peo-
ple exchanges.
These exchanges serve to spread Chinese cyber norms, such
as “cyber sovereignty” ( 网络主权), which is China’s vision
for internet governance that upholds a government’s sover -
eign right to control the internet within a given country’s bor-
ders. It reflects the CCP’s priorities for domestic internet gover-
nance that include controlling the flow of information and ideas,

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
9
increasing cybersecurity, and gaining self-sufficiency in techno-
logical development.15
The party-state spreads this norm by advising governments on
how to shape laws and policies to govern the (often Chinese-
provided, Chinese-standard-compliant) technologies in their
own constituent societies. This process becomes a positive
feedback loop, creating a degree of both technical and policy
lock-in via China-provided technical infrastructure, the stan -
dards under which it operates, and know-how and data gover-
nance frameworks. At the same time, China leverages its media
relationships to flood local environments with stories of the
benefits of China’s investment in developing countries’ digital
futures.
This process becomes a positive feedback
loop, creating a degree of both technical and
policy lock-in via China-provided technical
infrastructure, the standards under which
it operates, and know-how and data
governance frameworks. At the same time,
China leverages its media relationships to
flood local environments with stories of the
benefits of China’s investment in developing
countries’ digital futures.
In the scenario outlined above, there is broad penetration and
representation of Chinese interests across media, political,
social, and economic sectors in host countries. This can have
adverse affects in both democratic and nondemocratic civil
society spaces. For example, China’s presence can constrict the
space for civil society actors to debate the merits of, and in more
restrictive domains, freely report on, China’s deepening involve-
ment in their societies.
The above activities also have significant security implications.
Through the above process of standards setting, tech market-
ing, and policy and governance shaping, China gains access to
diverse data resources, which it can then use to enhance the
effectiveness of the tools and technologies that are part of its
extensive censorship and propaganda apparatus. It can then
weaponize these improved tools to exert more restrictive forms
15 Nadège Rolland, “Introduction” in An Emerging China-Centric Order: China’s Vision for a New World Order in Practice, ed. Nadège Rolland, National Bureau of Asian
Research, NBR Special Report 87, August 2020, https://www.nbr.org/wp-content/uploads/pdfs/publications/sr87_aug2020.pdf.
16 Josh Chin and Liza Lin, Surveillance State: Inside China’s Quest to Launch a New Era of Social Control (New Y ork, NY: St. Martin’s Press, 2022).
17 David Bandurski, “Chinese Propaganda, In a Local Paper Near Y ou,” China Media Project, January 19, 2023, https://chinamediaproject.org/2023/01/19/chinese
-propaganda-coming-to-a-local-paper-near-you/.
18 Shannon Vavra, “Research outs poorly constructed disinfo campaign aimed at Hong Kong protests,” CyberScoop, September 26, 2019, https://cyberscoop.com/hong
-kong-disinfo-campaign-graphika/.
19 Framing China’s Belt and Road Initiative: The Unexpected Power of Local Narratives, Global Voices, December 5, 2022, https://globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads
/2022/12/BRI-CMO-Report.V2-FINAL_sm.pdf.
20 Maria Repnikova, Chinese Soft Power (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2022), 22; Louisa Lim and Julia Bergin, “Inside China’s audacious global propaganda
campaign,” Guardian, December 7, 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/dec/07/china-plan-for-global-media-dominance-propaganda-xi-jinping.
of social control over its own population, to craft more compel-
ling external propaganda narratives that expound the benefits
of Chinese involvement in local societies, or in psychological
warfare campaigns against geopolitical adversaries.16
At the same time, China’s successes are uneven. For the billions
of dollars the state spends on “strategic communication” each
year, multiple studies indicate that the resonance of its messag-
ing across the globe is mixed at best.17 Efforts on global social
media platforms have at times been clumsily executed by large
numbers of inauthentic accounts, resulting in very little organic
engagement.18 And in international fora, regional organiza -
tions, and in local media environments, civil society actors have
proven adept at developing strategies to counter and mitigate
nefarious impacts on their domestic digital spaces.19
This report provides granularity to areas of contestation and
investigates the gap between China’s stated intentions and
where its strategy is bearing fruit; it aims to provide potential
indicators of where priorities, successes, and obstacles lie in
China’s pursuit of its aims. As such, it is divided into three sec-
tions, assessing China’s efforts in channel expansion, in content
innovation, and, finally, in its discourse power efforts vis-à-vis
digital governance.
As a final note, while other regions and countries apart from the
Global South are featured throughout this report, many of the
examples in this report feature countries located in sub-Saha-
ran Africa. This is for three reasons: first, highlighting a particu-
lar region provides a more illustrative snapshot of both the vari-
ations and continuities within China’s discourse power efforts.
Second, China’s activities across all three lines of effort—chan-
nel expansion, content innovation, and governance—are par-
ticularly salient in the region and help to establish a more direct
connection between discourse power capabilities and effects.
Third, the region has a special place in China’s discourse power
efforts. As China and Russia scholar Maria Repnikova writes, “a
special focus of the Chinese media going-out push has been in
Africa, which some see as a testing ground of its larger global
initiatives.”20

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
10
CHANNEL EXPANSION, THE FIRST
PRONG OF ‘MEDIA CONVERGENCE’
21 Xu, (“The Profound Connotation”); Li, (“The Concealed Tactics”).
22 Hu Zhengrong and Wang Runjue, “中国传媒文化软实力的建构” (“The Construction of Chinese Media Cultural Soft Power”), Research on Cultural Soft Power 18, 22
(2016).
23 Clyde Yicheng Wang, “Changing Strategies and Mixed Agendas: Contradiction and Fragmentation within China’s External Propaganda,” Journal of Contemporary China
31 (2022), https://doi.org/10.1080/10670564.2022.2109808.
24 Kenton Thibaut, China’s Discourse Power Operations in the Global South, Atlantic Council, April 20, 2022, https://dfrlab.org/2022/04/20/chinas-discourse-power
-operations-in-the-global-south/.
25 Thibaut, Chinese Discourse Power: Ambitions.
26 Ibid.
27 Ibid.
28 Wang, “Changing Strategies.”
29 Paul Charon and Jean-Baptiste Jeangène Vilmer, Chinese Influence Operations: A Machiavellian Moment, Institute for Strategic Research, Ministry for the Armed
Forces, Paris, October 2021, 172, https://www.irsem.fr/report.html.
30 David Shambaugh, China Goes Global: The Partial Power (New Y ork, NY: Oxford University Press, 2013), 227; Shixin Ivy Zhang and Xiaoling Zhang, “Foreign
Correspondents: A case study of China in the digital and globalization age,” Journalism Studies 19, 12 (2018): 1804-1824, https://doi.org/10.1080/1461670X.2017.1305913.
Note: Since 2018, China Central T elevision (CCTV) has been housed under the China Media Group, which sits under the Central Propaganda Department. CGTN, or
China Global T elevision Network, is its international broadcasting arm.
31 Repnikova, Chinese Soft Power, 22.
32 Ibid.
T
he first prong in the “converged media” framework is
channel expansion. In terms of China’s discourse power
strategy, this refers to expanding lines of communication
for disseminating “external propaganda” (外宣), also referred to
as “international communication” (国际传播).
The aim is to grow the international audience that is exposed
to Chinese narratives and norms, intending to erode the global
“discourse dominance” of the West. 21 As one state-funded
research center report pointed out, “relying on the support of
hard power, Western countries spread their cultural values to
the world through various communication channels, and con-
stantly strengthen their so-called superiority over cultural val-
ues, thus placing the entire international media landscape in
the Western narrative…. [In doing so, it has] long occupied the
dominant position of world public opinion and grasped the dis-
course power of world public opinion.”22
An increasing proportion of the resources provided for interna-
tional channel expansion are aimed at extending China’s reach
in the Global South, especially in Africa and Latin America. 23
China sees these regions as more amenable to its vision for
the global order, which emphasizes state-to-state relations
and de-emphasizes Western “universal values” such as human
rights and freedom of speech.24 Criticism of the United States
and other Western countries is a pervasive theme in Chinese
external propaganda. Indeed, in service of its goal to win
over Global South countries, China often positions itself as a
defender of the rights and interests of developing countries,
in contrast to the countries of the West. 25 These narratives
often draw on the real grievances of local communities regard-
ing the harmful legacies of Western colonialism and political
interference.26
The below assesses China’s efforts at channel expansion
through the lenses of both traditional and social media. The
sheer scale of China’s expansion across these domains illus-
trates that, at least in terms of exposure, China’s media pres-
ence on the world stage has vastly increased.
Traditional media
China has placed considerable emphasis on state media as
a primary actor in its discourse power efforts.27 As discourse
power-related organs are tasked with “telling China’s stories
well” (讲好中文故事), the party-state has granted these bodies
increasing human and financial resources.28
China has reportedly invested around $1.5 billion annu -
ally since 2008 to expand its international media presence,
though this figure is likely a conservative estimate.29 In 2009,
China announced it would invest around $7.25 billion to sup-
port its state media outlets in “going global,” including the out-
lets Xinhua, People’s Daily, China Central Television (CCTV),
China Radio International (CRI), and English-language paper
China Daily.30 Xinhua received almost a third of this budget,
the bulk of which went to support expanding its international
bureaus and to launching an English-language news channel,
CNC World News.31 Also in 2009, China Daily launched its US
edition, and the People’s Daily’s tabloid newspaper the Global
Times launched its English-language edition.32
State media outlets receive content directives from the
Central Propaganda Department (CPD), one of the most cen-
tral organizations in China’s discourse power strategy respon-
sible for developing the overall “ideological orientation” of

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
11
external propaganda.33 The CPD sits under the CCP’s Central
Committee, which has seen increasing control over nearly all
aspects of the party-state’s policy apparatus since Xi Jinping
began his tenure as chair of the CCP and president of the state.
While Central Committee financial data is rarely published pub-
licly, one of the most recent, complete, and publicly available
sources of budget data is from 2015. The data shows that that
the CPD received 2.5 billion RMB, or $370 million, a 433 per-
cent increase from the year prior.34 While the jump in budget
can be partly attributed to a change in how public expenditures
were calculated from 2014 to 2015, it is still striking that the
CPD’s budget increased this substantially compared to either
decreased or stable budgets for other Central Committee orga-
nizations and functions.35
By 2015, Xinhua had almost doubled its number of overseas
branches from 2009.36 In the years following, Xinhua rapidly
33 Thibaut, Chinese Discourse Power: Ambitions.
34 Y ang Zhijin, “学习党部预算：五部门公共预算支出37.68亿” (“Learning the Budget of the Party Department: The Public Budget Expenditure of the Five Departments Is
3.768 Billion”), 21st Century Business Herald, March 18, 2015, https://archive.ph/Oqqzm.
35 Ibid.
36 Anne-Marie Brady, “Authoritarianism Goes Global (II): China’s Foreign Propaganda Machine,” Journal of Democracy 26, 4 (2015), https://www.journalofdemocracy.org
/articles/authoritarianism-goes-global-ii-chinas-foreign-propaganda-machine/.
37 “ 新华通讯社2022年部门预算” (“Xinhua News Agency’s 2022 Departmental Budget”), Xinhua News Agency, 2022, http://203.192.6.89/xhs/20220324/20220324
_xhsbmys_v1.html.
38 “ 新华通讯社2020年度部门决算” (“Xinhua News Agency’s 2020 Departmental Final Accounts”), Xinhua News Agency, 2021, http://203.192.6.89/xhs/20210708
/20210708_2020bmjs.html.
39 (“Xinhua News Agency’s 2021 Departmental”), Xinhua News Agency.
built up its diplomatic capabilities, signing cooperation agree-
ments with news agencies in over one hundred countries and
regions and establishing ties with over twenty multilateral orga-
nizations.37 In addition to these channels, the outlet also sought
to scale up its online presence. In 2020, Xinhua platforms
received 58 million views from 21 million users daily among
WeChat, Weibo, and its home page. 38 As of January 2021,
Xinhua distributed on average seven thousand three hundred
articles, photos, videos, and other media content in fifteen lan-
guages daily, garnering over 200 million overseas social media
followers across various platforms (including Facebook, Twitter,
and Y ouTube).39
A large part of this expansion has to do with Xinhua’s role in
China’s broader discourse power strategy. To this end, the
organization outlined a global information operations strat -
egy in a 2021 report. Defining itself as “light cavalry” in China’s
The most recent publicly available and relatively complete budget data for Chinese Central Committee departments. The Central
Propaganda Department’s budget showed a 433 percent increase from 2014 to 2015.A
3,000,000
2,250,000
1,500,00
750,000
0
500%
375%
250%
125%
0%
-125%
2015 General Public Budgeted Expenditures
2014 General Public Budgeted Expenditures 2015 Budgeted Expenditures Increase
2015 Housing Reform Budgeted Expenditures Increase
Expenditures (Thousands RMB)
Percent Change (%)
1 2 3 4 5
Party Department Budget

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
12
global “public opinion war,”40 one of Xinhua’s goals for 2022
included channel expansion so as to “strengthen international
broadcasting capacity” and to become “[China’s] flagship of for-
eign propaganda.”
A core “channel” in Xinhua’s strategy includes expanding the
number of its foreign correspondents, who work closely with
Chinese embassies to coordinate messaging and propaganda
priorities. Embassies relay messages and instructions on edi-
torial content from the Propaganda Department’s External
Information Bureau ( 对外新闻局) to state media outposts.
Editors of overseas bureaus are responsible for ensuring that
all external content adheres to government guidelines.41
Foreign correspondents are also tasked with gathering infor-
mation on local politics and on prominent figures, working
with the embassy and affiliated United Front Work Department
(UFWD) bodies.42 As some of the primary organizations tasked
with carrying out external propaganda related work, UFWD
organizations abroad are also tasked with developing a net-
work of “international influencers” who can serve as local advo-
cates for Chinese interests and who provide information about
local conditions of interest to the party-state.43 The information
gathered by foreign correspondents is often included in “inter-
nal reference” memos (内参), which are sent back to Beijing for
internal distribution to CCP leadership.44
Complementing this expansion of foreign correspondents,
China has also engaged in a strategy of “localization” ( 本土
化), which involves recruiting and hiring journalists and media
professionals in target countries to work for Chinese state enti-
ties and report on local conditions with a pro-China angle. One
of the more problematic aspects of “localization” is its poten-
tial impact on civil society, especially in countries with already
limited civic freedoms. An example of this is the prevalence
of state narratives that support authoritarian leaders friendly
to China’s interests. For example, stories in Chinese state-
owned CGTN Africa penned by African journalists working for
the organization have sought to legitimize the government of
Ugandan President Y oweri Museveni, which has a long history
of using state-led intimidation tactics to suppress dissidents
and to manipulate local election outcomes in its favor.45
Journalists working for Chinese media organizations abroad
also have reported facing strict editorial guidelines and bureau-
cratic intimidation. In a 2020 survey of African journalists
40 “ 新华网：新华网股份有限公司2021年年度报告” (“Xinhuanet: Xinhuanet Co., Ltd. 2021 Annual Report”), Sina Finance, April 26, 2022, https://archive.ph/qCviw#selection
-481.0-481.22.
41 Zhang and Zhang, “Foreign Correspondents.”
42 Ibid.
43 Thibaut, Chinese Discourse Power: Ambitions.
44 Zhang and Zhang, “Foreign Correspondents.”
45 “Uganda’s Presidential Election: Voting for an Autocrat,” Australian Institute of International Affairs, February 19, 2022, https://www.internationalaffairs.org.au/ugandas
-presidential-election-voting-for-an-autocrat/.
46 Emeka Umejei, Chinese Media in Africa: Perception, Performance, and Paradox (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2020).
47 Winston Mano, “Geopolitics of China’s Rising Media and Soft Power in Africa: Eating and Being Eaten,” Communicatio 47, 3 (2021): 1-25, https://doi.org/10.1080/02500167
.2021.2001554.
working for Chinese state media bureaus, respondents stated
that there was a “zero tolerance” editorial policy for news items
that promoted Western-style democracy; the survey also found
that African journalists who cross “official [propaganda] redlines
are likely to face sanctions.”46
In a 2020 survey of African journalists
working for Chinese state media bureaus,
respondents stated that there was a “zero
tolerance” editorial policy for news items
that promoted Western-style democracy;
the survey also found that African
journalists who cross “official [propaganda]
redlines are likely to face sanctions.”
At the same time, however, there can be powerful incentives for
journalists to self-censor and adhere to Chinese editorial guide-
lines. In a survey of journalists working for Chinese state media
bureaus in Zimbabwe, respondents reported that, compared
to independent journalists, they gain increased access to their
own government officials and often get first access to govern-
ment developments and announcements, among other things.
One reporter stated that “it was far easier for [local employees
of CCTV] than for local Zimbabwean journalists to hold inter-
views with Zimbabwean politicians” because the CCTV journal-
ists “knew not to cross the line.”47
In addition to increasing the presence of foreign and local cor-
respondents, traditional state media outlets have also sought to
gain exposure for their content by expanding the platforms on
which it is disseminated. Organizations are increasingly using
mobile, web-based, and digital television platforms. Recent
studies suggest that China’s recent investment in such channel
expansion has, at minimum, increased the exposure of inter-
national audiences to Chinese sources. For example, a recent
survey conducted by a Chinese communications university out-
lined the inroads of China’s channel expansion in sub-Saharan
Africa, finding that, in a survey of 266 participants across thir-
ty-seven African countries, over 60 percent of those surveyed
first came into contact with Chinese media either “over the past
year” (i.e., 2019 to 2020) or “over the past five years” (i.e., 2015
to 2020). The same survey found that 74 percent accessed

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
13
Chinese media through their mobile phones, 45 percent
through the web, 41 percent through television, and 16 percent
through traditional newspapers.48
The statistics for mobile phones are notable, as Chinese firms
already hold the majority of market share in Africa’s smartphone
market and thus provide an important channel for engaging
consumers. For example, as of 2019, the Chinese firm Transsion
held almost two-thirds of the feature phone market and over 40
percent of the smartphone market in the continent.49 The com-
pany came under fire in 2020 after pre-installed malware was
discovered on thousands of African users’ phones.50
At the same time that exposure has increased, assessments
are mixed regarding the dividends of this investment in improv-
ing public perceptions of China. One assessment compar -
ing China’s French-language propaganda in African coun -
tries found that Russian news content was reproduced seven
times more frequently in local outlets.51 The authors found that
Chinese propaganda lacked resonance in the sampled French-
speaking countries because its narratives focused more on
promoting China rather than reporting stories on African issues.
The authors also found that outlets reproducing Chinese con-
tent did so largely because it was “freely available.”52
A 2016 study of China’s English-language engagement in
Kenya found similar results. The authors found that despite “tre-
mendous efforts” to increase soft power by expanding media
presence, “public awareness and influence of the Chinese
media in Kenya [is] limited compared to the dominance of
Western media.” A 2016 study of the relatively independent
South African media environment also found that “the ‘China
story’ only enters local news agendas if it satisfies news values
as they are conceived in local practices and routines,” and that
“Chinese media do not yet seem able to present their content
such that it is either credible or appealing to local journalists.”53
48 Li Huailiang and Gong Yuhua, “中国媒体‘走出去’非洲受众调查及思考” (“Survey and Reflections on Chinese Media’s ‘Going Out’ in Africa”), International
Communications 5 (2021).
49 For more on Transsion, see: “Transsion: a Chinese Prodigy in Africa?” Net Politics, Council on Foreign Relations, October 21, 2020, https://www.cfr.org/blog/transsion
-chinese-prodigy-africa; Andrew Deck, “Africa’s phone phenom: Y our guide to Transsion,” Rest of World, June 23, 2020, https://restofworld.org/2020/transsion-from
-china-to-africa/; “传音控股下一站：扩展一带一路沿线国家新市场” (“Transsion’s Next Stop: Expanding New Markets in Countries Along the Belt and Road”), Sohu, May
19, 2020, https://archive.md/b YDMe; “Africa’s Top Handset Vendor Transsion Hit by Pre-installed Malware Incident - Security Vendor Also Spotted Two Other Similar
Incidents with Other Handset Vendors,” AllAfrica, August 28, 2020, https://allafrica.com/stories/202009010216.html.
50 “Africa’s Top Handset Vendor Transsion,” AllAfrica.
51 Frédérick Douzet et al., “Mapping the spread of Russian and Chinese contents on the French-speaking African web,” Journal of Cyber Policy 6, 1 (2021): 50-67, https://
doi.org/10.1080/23738871.2021.1943477.
52 Ibid.
53 Herman Wasserman, “China’s ‘soft power’ and its influence on editorial agendas in South Africa,” Chinese Journal of Communication 9, 1 (2016): 8-20, https://doi.org/10
.1080/17544750.2015.1049953.
54 In SRF translations: Zhai Huixia, “2019年度中国企业海外形象调查分析报告-以拉美五国为调查对象” (“2019 Survey and Analysis Report on Chinese Enterprises’
Overseas Image-the Case of Five Latin American Countries”), International Communications 1 (2020).
55 Ibid.
56 Daniel Mattingly et al., “Chinese Propaganda Persuades a Global Audience That the ‘China Model’ is Superior: Evidence From A 19-Country Experiment,” OSF Preprints
(January 18, 2023), https://osf.io/5cafd/. The authors note that “we survey citizens of 19 countries that represent a diverse range of contexts, from low-income countries
like Kenya to high-income countries like Singapore, from democracies like Canada to authoritarian regimes like Saudi Arabia, and from countries where China’s
leadership is popular, like Nigeria, to places where China’s leadership is unpopular, like Australia.”
An August 2022 study released by
researchers from Yale University showed
that, across nineteen countries, Chinese
propaganda was effective at persuading
audiences that the “China model” is
superior to that of democratic political
systems in delivering growth and stability.
A Chinese state-funded assessment from 2019 reported simi-
lar findings among Latin American countries. The report found
that Latin American audiences primarily turn to domestic media
for their understanding of relations with China, followed by—
in descending order—media from other Latin American coun-
tries, Western media (including the BBC and CNN), and, finally,
Chinese media.54 The assessment found that “among the five
Latin American countries [surveyed], only the Brazilian respon-
dents chose Chinese media over Western media [for reporting
on China-related issues].”55 The study urged the government to
“better tailor propaganda messages to local public opinion so
as to garner more views of Chinese state sponsored content.”
While findings regarding the impacts of China’s overall messag-
ing are mixed, more recent assessments indicate that its narra-
tives may be gaining resonance among global audiences on
specific issues.
An August 2022 study released by researchers from Yale
University showed that, across nineteen countries,56 Chinese
propaganda was effective at persuading audiences that the
“China model” is superior to that of democratic political sys -
tems in delivering growth and stability. The authors noted that
“exposure to a representative set of Chinese [propaganda nar-
ratives] strengthens perceptions that the CCP delivers growth,
stability, and competent leadership. It also triples the proportion

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
14
of respondents who think the Chinese system is superior to the
American system, from 16 to 54 percent.”57
The authors found that exposure to real Chinese propaganda
“doubles support for China’s political and economic models
[from baseline levels],” noting that in “head-to-head match-ups
with American state messages, global audiences move toward
China.”58 The findings showed that improvement in favorability
of China’s governance model makes “especially striking gains”
in regions of the Global South, in particular among countries in
Latin America and Africa.
With regard to channel expansion via traditional media, China
has spent billions annually, with much of that resourcing going
toward initiatives in the Global South. This is especially obvious
in the strategies of China’s flagship news organization, Xinhua,
which over the years has greatly expanded its network of for-
eign correspondents; other strategies include both coercing
and incentivizing journalists abroad to engage in more favor-
able coverage of China. At the same time, traditional media
organizations have expanded the platforms on which state nar-
ratives appear, most notably via optimizing content for mobile
devices, in which Chinese companies dominate the market.
Most studies have found that China’s messaging at a general
level is not especially resonant with local audiences; however,
some studies have shown that Chinese narratives, specifically
regarding the superiority of the “China model” of governance,
consistently outperformed US narratives.
Social Media
As part of its discourse power push, China has also sought to
expand channels of international communication via social
media, especially in the expanded presence of Chinese state
media, officials, and even state-owned companies on overseas
social media platforms.
Some of the first reported social media information opera -
tions attributable to Beijing can be traced to 2014, when jour-
nalists discovered a network of fake Twitter accounts ampli-
fying Chinese narratives attacking the Tibetan independence
movement.59 A series of external reports from 2015 to 2017
revealed an uptick in suspected Chinese state-sponsored
57 Mattingly et al., “Chinese Propaganda Persuades.”
58 Ibid.
59 Jonathan Kaiman, “Free Tibet exposes fake Twitter accounts by China propagandists,” Guardian, July 22, 2014, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/22/free
-tibet-fake-twitter-accounts-china-propagandists.
60 Nicholas Confessore et al., “The Follower Factory,” New Y ork Times, January 27, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2018/01/27/technology/social-media
-bots.html; Tom Grundy, “Did China’s state-run news agency purchase Twitter followers?” Hong Kong Free Press, April 14, 2015, https://hongkongfp.com/2015/04/14
/did-chinas-state-run-news-agency-purchase-twitter-followers/; Alexa Olesen, “Where Did Chinese State Media Get All Those Facebook Followers?” Foreign Policy,
July 7, 2015, https://foreignpolicy.com/2015/07/07/china-facebook-peoples-daily-media-soft-power/.
61 “German spy agency warns of Chinese LinkedIn espionage,” BBC, December 10, 2017, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-42304297.
62 J. Michael Cole, “Fake News at Work: President Tsai ‘Persecutes Religion’ in Taiwan,” Taiwan Sentinel, July 20, 2017, https://sentinel.tw/fake-news-tsai-persecutes
-religion/.
63 Nick Monaco, “Spamouflage Survives: CCP-aligned Disinformation Campaign Spreads on Facebook, Twitter, and Y ouTube,” Miburo, December 22, 2021, https://miburo
.substack.com/p/spamouflage-survives.
activity on Western social media platforms. These include
reports that state media accounts were purchasing large num-
bers of Twitter followers,60 that Chinese operatives were using
LinkedIn to conduct espionage operations,61 and that China-
linked actors had conducted disinformation campaigns against
the then-newly elected Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen.62
More recent examples include a December 2021 investigation
by threat analysis firm Miburo that detected a massive cam -
paign of more than two thousand accounts across Facebook,
Twitter, and Y ouTube spreading CCP-aligned disinforma -
tion.63 Similarly, a recent investigation by the intelligence firm
Mandiant showed that, in June 2022, thousands of inauthen-
tic pro-CCP social media accounts promoted negative stories
about Australian, Canadian, and US rare earths companies as
Screencap of a text message from a suspected China-
linked disinformation campaign directed at Taiwanese
President Tsai Ing-wen. In 2017, residents in southern
Taiwan received text messages warning that the Tsai
administration would force temples to adhere to strict
new registration requirements as well as new tax and
operational regulations.B

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
15
a strategy to help protect China’s market dominance in the
sector.64
China scaled up and extended its information operations
abroad in response to a number of major foreign policy events.
These included a July 2016 decision by a tribunal in the
Permanent Court of Arbitration of The Hague, which ruled that
China’s ongoing claims in the South China Sea were illegal.65
China’s English-language versions of its state media reacted
strongly to the news, spreading narratives aimed at nullifying
the legal authority of the tribunal by demoting its role as sim-
ply a “political tool.”66 According to a 2019 dataset released by
Twitter that tracked almost twenty-three thousand accounts
originating in China, a major spike in English-language account
creation occurred after the ruling (with forty-nine accounts cre-
ated in a single month, whereas the year prior had averaged
one to four per month).67
Similarly, China engaged in widespread media and social
media activity in 2017 following Western media reports about
detentions of Uyghur Muslims in China’s western province
64 “Pro-PRC DRAGONBRIDGE Influence Campaign Targets Rare Earths Mining Companies in Attempt to Thwart Rivalry to PRC Market Dominance,” Mandiant,
 June 28, 2022, https://www.mandiant.com/resources/blog/dragonbridge-targets-rare-earths-mining-companies.
65 Jane Perlez, “Tribunal Rejects Beijing’s Claims in South China Sea,” New Y ork Times, July 12, 2016, https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/13/world/asia/south-china-sea
-hague-ruling-philippines.html.
66 China Xinhua News (@XHNews), “#BREAKING: Law-abusing tribunal issues ill-founded award on #SouthChinaSea arbitration: Source,” Twitter, July 12, 2016, 4:45 a.m.,
https://archive.ph/4F3mq; “People’s Daily slams South China Sea arbitration tribunal for being political tool,” People’s Daily, July 14, 2016, https://archive.ph/zmryw; Chen
Yue, “China refuses South China Sea arbitration award,” CCTV, July 12, 2016, https://archive.ph/wN9b3.
67 “China,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute, September 19, 2019, https://infoops.aspi.org.au/country/china/.
68 “China: Free Xinjiang ‘Political Education’ Detainees,” Human Rights Watch, September 10, 2017, https://www.hrw.org/news/2017/09/10/china-free-xinjiang-political
-education-detainees.
69 “China,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute.
of Xinjiang.68 In August 2017, for example, just 761 Chinese-
language tweets were sent from the China-based accounts
identified in the Twitter dataset; this number skyrocketed to
37,935 in October and 47,041 in November of that year, follow-
ing increasing international attention on Xinjiang. 69 The two
main languages used by these accounts from 2017 onward
were English and simplified Chinese, suggesting the target
audience was mainly diaspora Chinese and international users.
The Chinese party-state has in recent years invested signifi -
cantly in human resources allocated to operating foreign social
media accounts, both to spread positive China news and to
engage in what it terms “foreign public opinion monitoring.”
Such activities include government-funded software that col-
lects data from Twitter, Facebook, and other social media plat-
forms that deal with China-related topics. For example, a 2021
Washington Post article detailed several projects outlined in
government bidding documents related to foreign public opin-
ion monitoring, including a $320,000 software program that
mines Twitter and Facebook data to develop a database of
foreign journalists, and a $216,000 program from the Beijing
Graph generated from dataset downloaded from the China country page of the Project on Understanding Global Disinformation and
Information Operations of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute’s International Cyber Policy Centre.C

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
16
municipal police that examines narratives on Hong Kong and
Xinjiang on Western platforms. 70 Operators are tasked with
gathering comments and reactions from foreign citizens on
news related to China. 71 The findings are then written into
reports that are sent to CPD leadership.
Xinhua has described its media strategy as using a combina-
tion of “shipbuilding to go out to sea” and “borrowing a boat to
go out to sea” (造船出海”与“借船出海”相结合)—that is, build-
ing up China’s own capacity to effectively disseminate its mes-
sage internationally while using foreign social media platforms
to disseminate propaganda.72 As of March 2023, the Xinhua
News page had over 94 million followers on Facebook, CGTN
had over 119 million, China Daily had 107 million, and People’s
Daily had over 84 million. To compare, Reuters had about
6.7 million followers, BBC News had 59 million, and the New
Y ork Times had around 18 million followers on their respective
Facebook pages.73 On Twitter, Xinhua News Agency had 12
70 Cate Cadell, “China harvests masses of data on Western targets, documents show,” Washington Post, December 31, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/national
-security/china-harvests-masses-of-data-on-western-targets-documents-show/2021/12/31/3981ce9c-538e-11ec-8927-c396fa861a71_story.html.
71 Wang, “Changing Strategies.”
72 “Excellent Reality-Themed Drama,” Xinhua.
73 Author’s count.
74 Author’s count.
million followers, CGTN had 13.1 million, China Daily had 4.1 mil-
lion, and People’s Daily had 6.7 million. In comparison, Reuters
had 25.7 million, BBC News (World) had 39.5 million, and the
New Y ork Times had 54.9 million followers on Twitter. 74 As
Chinese citizens do not have access to Western social media
without the use of a virtual private network (more commonly
known as a VPN), these numbers very likely comprise a vast
majority non-China-based followers.
Cumulatively, using the numbers above, China’s state media
outlets have a potential reach of over 400 million accounts
on Facebook and about 36 million on Twitter. However, reach
does not necessarily correlate with resonance among audi -
ences, a fact that is further obfuscated by the possibility that
many of the follower accounts could be inauthentic (i.e., bots) or
duplicated across platforms. Similarly, while Chinese messag-
ing on social media garners more engagement, engagement
Bar charts showing the number of followers on Facebook and Twitter for the pages or accounts of Chinese and Western news organizations.D
Chinese and Western News’ Follower Counts on Social Media
120
100
80
60
40
20
0 CGTN China Daily Xinhua People’s Daily
Facebook
Number of Followers (Millions)
120
100
80
60
40
20
0 CGTN China Daily Xinhua People’s Daily
Twittter
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Twitter
120
100
80
60
40
20
0 BBC News New York Times Reuters
BBC News New York Times Reuters
Facebook

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
17
alone is not a perfect proxy for success given the ease at which
it can be fabricated or manipulated.75
An analysis of eight hundred posts from Chinese state media
sources across platforms on both Twitter and Facebook reveals
an average “like” count of 1,026, seventy-one shares, and twen-
ty-one comments.76 The ratio of followers to likes, shares, and
comments on posts from state media accounts indicates, on
average, a very a low level of engagement from user accounts.
Of the Chinese news organizations, the People’s Daily had
the highest level of engagement, with its posts being 138 per-
cent more likely to be shared than other state media plat -
forms, and 83 percent more likely to generate comments. The
People’s Daily content makes heavy use of short videos, and
its headlines tend to use dramatic language to capture users’
attention.77
Though the above may provide insight into which posting tac-
tics may yield greater resonance among audience members,
such analyses yield imperfect results.
Network analysis may be used to shed light on understand -
ing how state media information travels within platforms, which
may provide clearer insights into its potential reach. For exam-
ple, a DFRLab network analysis shed light on how official
Chinese government accounts can serve as loci for disinforma-
tion narratives on Twitter.
As context, Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) officials
have rapidly expanded their presence on Twitter since the
outbreak of COVID-19. In October 2018, the MFA operated
75 Julia Carrie Wong, “How Facebook let fake engagement distort global politics: a whistleblower’s account,” Guardian, April 12, 2021, https://www.theguardian.com
/technology/2021/apr/12/facebook-fake-engagement-whistleblower-sophie-zhang.
76 Qingjiang Y ao, “The News as International Soft Power: An Analysis of the Posting Techniques of China’s News Media on Facebook and Twitter” in Engaging Social
Media in China: Platforms, Publics, and Production, eds. Guobin Y ang and Wei Wang (East Lansing, Michigan: Michigan State University Press, 2021), https://doi.org/10
.14321/j.ctv1h9dg1n.
77 Ibid
78 Zhao Alexandre Huang and Rui Wang, “‘Panda engagement’ in China’s digital public diplomacy,” Asian Journal of Communication 30, 2 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1080
/01292986.2020.1725075.
only thirteen Twitter accounts; this number grew to eighty by
January 2020, at the start of the pandemic.78
The DFRLab examined the spread of a China-sponsored
COVID-19 conspiracy theory on Twitter from May 1, 2020,
through November 20, 2021, in which Chinese officials claimed
that a US biolab at Fort Detrick was the actual site of the pan-
demic outbreak, rather than Wuhan, China. Findings showed
that the official account of Zhang Heqing, the cultural counselor
at the Chinese Embassy in Pakistan (@zhang_heqing), served
as a top disseminator of hashtags related to the disinformation
campaign across the entire Twitter platform. Specifically, his
account served as a “cut point”—an account which, if removed,
would most severely affect the spread of the narratives associ-
ated with the hashtags on Twitter.
In addition to spreading China-linked conspiracy theories,
embassy accounts on Twitter have also shown increasing
sophistication in targeting their messaging at local audiences
and increasingly appear to synchronize their messages. For
example, between August 18 and 25, 2021, Chinese diplo -
matic Twitter and Facebook accounts in Africa posted similar
narratives in English, French, Arabic, and Portuguese promot-
ing China-Africa partnerships, with five of the ten most popular
Network map of #Detrick-related hashtags on Twitter
from May 1, 2020, through November 20, 2021. Each dot
represents an account that used the hashtag during the
query period. Lines indicate retweets, mentions, or quote
tweets between accounts. The labeled @zhang_heqing
account is a primary “cut point” in the network.F
Screencap of the People’s Daily Facebook page featuring
dramatic headlines and short videos.E

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
18
posts by engagement (likes, comments, and reposts) promot-
ing technological development.79
Around this same timeframe, between August 11 and 28,
2021, official diplomatic accounts targeting the Middle East in
North Africa posted in Arabic, Turkish, and Urdu mocking the
United States and its Afghanistan policies, using political car-
toons, and attempting to tarnish the international reputation
of the United States. Three out of the ten most popular posts
(by likes, comments, and retweets) featured criticisms of US
policies in Afghanistan, while three of the top five most pop-
ular posts were political cartoons criticizing US involvement in
Afghanistan.80
Similarly, in June 2022, China launched a global campaign both
in advance and shortly after the Group of Seven (G7) meeting
highlighting this messaging criticizing the United States for its
“hypocrisy.” In the lead-up to the event, Chinese state-affiliated
accounts posted almost one thousand seven hundred posts on
China’s Weibo and eight hundred eighty posts on Twitter that
highlighted the inclusiveness of the BRICS forum (which brings
together the developing economies of Brazil, Russia, India,
China, and South Africa) and China’s role in establishing a more
equitable international environment.81
Following the G7, the same accounts posted almost four hun-
dred posts on Weibo and over two hundred on Twitter with
79 Analysis of data provided by Two Six T echnologies.
80 Ibid.
81 Ibid.
82 Ibid.
83 Ibid.
84 Ibid.
messaging that G7 initiatives only serve the interests of the
wealthy West, while China-led initiatives like BRICS served the
entire globe.82 Across global social media platforms, Chinese
government organizations, officials, and state media outlets
located in at least sixty-two countries promoted BRICS-related
propaganda.
Similarly, in December 2021, after Nicaragua switched dip -
lomatic recognition away from Taiwan, Chinese diplomatic
accounts and state media engaged in a series of coordinated
Spanish-language campaigns in over thirty countries, includ-
ing in more than sixty Spanish- or Portuguese-language posts
on Twitter. The campaign was designed to illustrate growing
global support for China’s position on Taiwan. The campaign
also took place on the second day of the Biden administra -
tion’s “Summit for Democracy,” to which Taiwan was an invited
participant.83
Despite the appearance of a united front with regard to China’s
assertive messaging, however, reactions to such tactics—com-
monly referred to as “wolf warriorism”—within China itself is
mixed. China’s censors have previously removed discussions
on Weibo criticizing “wolf warrior” tactics.84
On March 31, 2021, for example, users on Weibo engaged in
heavy criticism of a Twitter post by Li Yang, the Chinese con-
sul general to Brazil, that accused Canadian Prime Minister
Justin Trudeau of turning Canada into a “running dog” of the
A former Chinese diplomat to Iraq and Lebanon posted the
above anti-US cartoon on social media. This post had the
most engagements from the period of August 11-28, 2021,
at 1,140.G
Screencaps of Chinese state media accounts on Twitter
posting similar narratives about the G7.H

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
19
United States.85 Most criticisms revolved around the poten -
tial blowback on China of such a “vulgar” ( 难听) approach.
Chinese censors removed 46 percent of posts mentioning Li,
with the removed posts having garnered over forty thousand
interactions.86
Tensions between different bureaucratic departments also
belie the official sanctioning of the “wolf warrior” approach. In
March 2020, MFA spokesperson and “wolf warrior” diplomat
Zhao Lijian initiated the first Twitter post claiming that COVID-
19 originated in the biological laboratory at US Army base
Fort Detrick in Maryland.87 Reportedly, the CPD had not been
informed in advance of the tweets, and initially, state media
outlets were directed to avoid addressing Zhao’s posts—with
the People’s Daily actually issuing a tweet refuting his com -
ments.88 The People’s Daily Twitter account in March 2020 also
promoted an Axios interview with China’s ambassador to the
United States, Cui Tiankai, in which he states that it is “crazy” to
85 Li Y ang (@Li_Y ang_China), “Boy, your greatest achievement is to have ruined the friendly relations between China and Canada, and have turned Canada into a running
dog of the US…,” Twitter, March 28, 2021, 11:51 p.m., https://archive.ph/dUlwM.
86 Analysis from data provided by Two Six T echnologies.
87 “Wuhan lab leak theory: How Fort Detrick became a centre for Chinese conspiracies,” BBC, August 23, 2021, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-58273322.
88 Wang, “Changing Strategies.”
89 People’s Daily, China (@PDChina), “Chinese Ambassador to the United States Cui Tiankai answered questions regarding FM spokesperson Zhao Lijian’s opinion on
tweets in an interview with Axios on...,” Twitter, March 23, 2020, 3:30 p.m., https://archive.ph/bC0Lz; Jonathan Swan and Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian, “Top Chinese Official
Disowns U.S. Military Lab Coronavirus Conspiracy,” Axios, March 22, 2020, https://www.axios.com/2020/03/22/china-coronavirus-ambassador-cui-tiankai.
90 Wang, “Changing Strategies.”
91 Shi Anbin and T ong Tong, “‘乌卡时代’战略传播的转型与升维” (“‘VUCA Times’ Transformation and Upgrading of Strategic Communication”), International
Communications 6 (2022).
92 Ibid.
93 L. Ceci, “Number of monthly active users (MAU) of TikTok worldwide from January 2018 to September 2021,” Statista, July 29, 2022, https://www.statista.com/statistics
/1267892/tiktok-global-mau/.
spread rumors about the coronavirus originating in the United
States.89
However, as Zhao’s message gained popularity among China’s
domestic population, the CPD changed tack, with state media
throwing its full support behind the conspiracy theory by May
2020.90 Such dynamics illustrate the balancing act that the par-
ty-state faces when seeking to portray China as a confident
leader to global audiences, while also being subject to popular
nationalism and domestic discontent in its actions.
Indeed, such sensitivities can also limit the effectiveness of
Chinese social media activities abroad. A Chinese govern -
ment-funded assessment of propaganda activities on global
social media platforms outlined the constraints social media
posed for expanding China’s discourse power. First, core plat-
forms such as Twitter, Facebook, and Y ouTube are all operated
by Western internet companies, and accounts are “subject to
the regulations of the platform,” such that “the state will take
stricter or even extreme measures to control Chinese media
accounts.”91 Additionally, the study stated that many of the
“internet celebrities and talents” who are active on overseas
media platforms are labeled as “Chinese official media” by
Twitter and Facebook, and “the visibility of social media influ-
encers from China in the international communication field is
still low.”92
However, at the same time, China has identified certain regions
as being potentially more amenable to social media penetra-
tion. Chinese scholars have written on the popularity of TikTok
[the international version of China’s Douyin (抖音)], which as of
September 2021 reported over 1 billion global monthly active
users (MAUs)—a 45 percent increase from July 2020.93 A 2020
assessment by the Guangxi Social Science Think Tank high-
lighted the potential for China’s growth in the Southeast Asian
market in particular and emphasized the potential popularity
of not just TikTok, but also of Chinese social media platforms
WeChat and Weibo, due to linguistic similarities and the “rela-
tive underdevelopment of the domestic platform environment.”
The same article outlined how expansion into the market would
allow China to “localize content production and dissemination
adapted to local conditions” to improve its discourse power
Screencap of a Twitter post celebrating Nicaragua’s removal
of diplomatic recognition of Taiwan by the Portuguese-
language version of the People’s Daily.I

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
20
among the countries in the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN).94
Similarly, a Chinese-funded survey of social media users in
sub-Saharan Africa found that Facebook and Y ouTube are the
most commonly used social media platforms at 68 percent of
audiences (combined, both platforms), followed by WeChat at
50 percent, and Twitter at 35 percent. The study concluded
that “the three platforms of Facebook, Y ouTube, and WeChat
are the main battlefields for Chinese media to ‘go global’ in the
region.”95 Expanding the use of WeChat among African audi-
ences could be an appealing proposition for the Chinese par-
ty-state, as it exerts control over the content and data on the
platform.
Such studies illustrate the synergies between the commercial
incentives of Chinese technology companies and the political
goals of the CCP. As an illustration, Xinhua’s All-Media Service,
established in 2014, monitors public sentiment on domestic
and global social media platforms like Y ouTube, Facebook, and
Twitter using big-data-driven social-listening tools, using this
information to shape editorial guidance.96
With regard to channel expansion vis-à-vis social media, the
past several years have seen a dramatic increase in the visibility
and presence of state media on global social media platforms.
This was driven in large part by the need to respond to foreign
policy events and perceived strategic communication crises,
such as accusations against China regarding forced labor in
Xinjiang. China-based Twitter account creation skyrocketed by
over 6,000 percent over a period of just three months in 2017
following reports on Xinjiang in the Western press. On social
94 Ding Yusen, “‘四全媒体’视域下中国对东盟传播的思考” (“China’s Reflections on ASEAN Communication from the Perspective of ‘Four Media’”), International
Communications 10 (2020).
95 Li and Gong, (“Survey and Reflections on Chinese”).
96 Gerry Shih and Aritz Parra, “Chinese propaganda machine places hopes in cartoon rappers,” AP, March 4, 2016, https://apnews.com/article/5b56df1c8b5e4a908b803fe
dd796d714.
media platforms, Chinese officials have often engaged in coor-
dinated influence and information campaigns, including those
spreading disinformation on the origin of COVID-19.
Alongside an increased social media presence, China has also
been investing resources in public opinion monitoring and
developing new ways to deliver more resonant content, includ-
ing through short videos. In doing so, companies have come to
understand that the data gathered from these platforms is also
valuable for developing more tailored messaging. Such dynam-
ics illustrate the overlap of commercial and political incentives
with discourse power priorities, as discussed below in the sec-
tion on weaponizing data.
Screencap of a tweet from the People’s Daily promoting an Axios interview with Cui Tiankai, China’s ambassador to the United States,
alongside a screencap of the headline on Axios. In that tweet, Cui states that it is “crazy” to spread rumors about the coronavirus
originating in the United States.J

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
21
CONTENT INNOVATION, THE SECOND
PRONG OF ‘MEDIA CONVERGENCE’
97 Hu Bangsheng, “我国对外宣传如何实现精准传播” (“External Propaganda Realizes Precise Communication”), Chinese Cadres Tribune 7 (2017); Insikt Group, 1 Key for
1 Lock: The Chinese Communist Party’s Strategy for T argeted Propaganda, Recorded Future, September 28, 2022, https://www.recordedfuture.com/1-key-for-1-lock
-chinese-communist-party-strategy-targeted-propaganda.
98 Repnikova, Chinese Soft Power, 22.
99 Huo Na, “人类命运共同体理念的对外传播及相关策略 ——以中阿命运共同体为例” (“External Communication Strategies of the Concept of a Community with a Shared
Future for Mankind – the Case of China and the Arabic World”), Central Party History and Literature Research Institute, February 19, 2021, https://web.archive.org/web
/20220809194603/https://theory.gmw.cn/2021-02/19/content_34627341.htm.
100 Zhang Hongying, “1949-2019：新中国对外传播的变迁与发展” (“1949-2019: Changes and Development of China’s International Communication”), International
Communications 1, 2020; Wang Jingxuan, Liu Qi, and Pan Yue, “‘一带一路’对外传播话语体系建构初探” (“A Preliminary Study on the External Communication Discourse
System of ‘the Belt and Road Initiative’”), International Communications 5, 2020; Wang Jingxuan, Pan Yue, and Liu Qi, “‘一带一路’主题图书海内外出版现状对比及海
外出版启示——基于当当网中国站点与亚马逊美国站点的实证分析” (“Comparisons and Inspirations from the Foreign and Domestic Publication of ‘the Belt and Road
Initiative’ Books – Based on Analysis of China’s Dangdang and America’s Amazon”), State Information Center of China, September 11, 2020, https://archive.ph/9E5ur.
101 Analysis of Weibo from data provided by Two Six T echnologies tracking amplification and censorship of Weibo social media posts.
W
hile China has made headway in its goals for channel
expansion, it has also engaged in a strategy of con-
tent innovation to enhance the resonance of its exter-
nal propaganda to foreign audiences.
Three tactics guide China’s actions under this strategy. The first
is “precise communication” (精准传播), which, when applied
to external propaganda, involves tailoring content in a way that
resonates with target audiences—such as elites or the public
en masse—in third countries.97
Second, in addition to shaping content itself, another tactic is
to obscure the fact that the content originates from Chinese
state sources. This is a phenomenon known as “political native
advertising,” a non-China specific term adapted from market-
ing studies. “Political native advertising” involves foreign gov-
ernments purchasing space in news outlets abroad to publish
content “camouflaged” as neutral news items.
Lastly, a related tactic involves China’s attempts to control local
media environments via content-sharing agreements, which
can flood local media environments with free or low-cost pro-
CCP content. China often promotes media agreements under
the auspices of other cooperation frameworks, including the
Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), and through regional organiza-
tions, with content-sharing agreements included as part of
these larger frameworks.98 As part of these efforts, state media
outlets also engage in economic coercion to control editorial
agendas, further warping the information space.
Precise communication
China’s embrace of “precise communication” resulted from
a growing understanding that existing external propaganda
strategies were failing to resonate with audiences abroad. A
range of government-funded internal assessments and aca -
demic papers in recent years found that Chinese narratives
had low salience among target populations; for example, one
2021 report outlined that, despite China’s attempts to spread
its narrative of a “community of common destiny” in Arab coun-
tries, the common impression among most of them were still
that of China as an exporter of cheap, low-quality goods. 99
These assessments found that stilted, propagandistic language
used by Chinese state-funded media was a primary barrier to
the resonance of pro-China stories.100
Censorship of domestic Chinese social media reveals the sen-
sitivity of the CCP to these critiques. For example, on December
1, 2021, China engaged in extensive censorship on Weibo,
removing 99 percent of the posts that discussed how a British
columnist had claimed that he had been banned from publish-
ing with CGTN after he penned a piece for RT describing how
China’s propaganda was ineffective.101
China has begun to embrace new media
and marketing techniques to increase
its appeal…Xinhua President He Ping
referred to this kind of content innovation
in a 2021 editorial, writing that the news
organization would “expand from broad-
spectrum propaganda to individual
expression,” reflecting this focus on precise
communication.
Despite—or perhaps because of—criticism of its propaganda
as stale, China has begun to embrace new media and market-
ing techniques to increase its appeal. Think tanks, experts, poli-
cymakers, and media staff are all actively innovating the propa-
ganda apparatus to appeal to a younger, more digitally literate
and global audience. Xinhua President He Ping referred to
this kind of content innovation in a 2021 editorial, writing that
the news organization would “expand from broad-spectrum

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
22
propaganda to individual expression,” reflecting this focus on
precise communication.102
China sees access to public opinion data abroad as essential to
enhancing its ability tailor content. To this end, China recently
launched four State Key Laboratories dedicated to “media
convergence and communication,” housed in the Ministry of
Education, the People’s Daily, Xinhua News Agency, and CCTV,
respectively. The Xinhua-run State Key Laboratory of Media
Convergence Production Technologies and Systems launched
under the CPD’s guidance, which tasked the lab with focusing
on “the applications of artificial intelligence to news production
and dissemination.”103
Xu Zhengzhong, chairman of the Academic Committee of the
State Key Laboratory of Communication Content Cognition
under the People’s Daily, described the lab’s role as using big
data to better tailor content to specific audiences, as well as
spread “positive energy” through digital and social media. The
lab’s guidance includes “building a mainstream public opinion
pattern that integrates online and offline, internal and external
propaganda” using big data as the support.104
At the 2022 Internet Civilization Conference, Y e Zhenzhen,
the People’s Daily online president and party secretary, under-
scored the utility of big data access to shaping more tailored
communications, thus furthering China’s discourse power
goals. He stated, “the internet houses a vast amount of eco-
nomic and social data and is able to accurately reflect social
sentiments and public opinion. With the scientific and techno-
logical support of big data [analytics] and artificial intelligence
(AI), the internet can be a tool for strengthening the Party’s
leadership.”105
“The internet houses a vast amount of
economic and social data and is able to
accurately reflect social sentiments and
public opinion. With the scientific and
technological support of big data [analytics]
and artificial intelligence (AI), the internet
can be a tool for strengthening the Party’s
leadership.” - Y e Zhenzhen
102 He Ping, “坚持守正创新 担当使命任务” (“Adhere to Integrity and Innovation, Take on Missions and Tasks”), Guangming Daily, January 15, 2021, https://archive.ph
/PKWwB.
103 “ 媒体融合生产技术与系统国家重点实验室开放课题管理办法（试行）” [“Management Measures for Open Projects of the State Key Laboratory of Media Integration
Production T echnology and Systems (Trial)”], Xinhua, August 3, 2021, https://archive.ph/eUwCH; “新华社媒体融合国家重点实验室揭牌运行” (“Xinhua News Agency’s
State Key Laboratory of Media Integration Was Inaugurated and Put into Operation”), Xinhua, December 11, 2019, https://archive.ph/2czKy.
104 “ 这为人民日报社推进媒体深度融合以及推进国家重点实验室建设指明了方向” (“This Has Pointed Out the Direction for People’s Daily to Promote the Deep Integration
of Media and Promote the Construction of National Key Laboratories”), China Environmental News, December 9, 2019, https://archive.ph/e7XhL.
105 Gering, “Discourse Power”; [“(Focus Theory China) Focusing on T elling Chinese Stories”], China Social Sciences Network.
106 Author’s CNKI counts; “习近平:坚持正确方向创新方法手段 提高新闻舆论传播力引导力” (“Xi Jinping: Adhere to the Correct Direction, Innovate Methods and Means,
and Improve the Guiding Force of News and Public Opinion Dissemination”), Xinhua, February 19, 2016, https://archive.md/eNTVl.
107 Author’s counts.
108 Author’s counts.
China has also provided increased funding for academic work
on these topics. In 2016, there was a major uptick in publica-
tions exploring the topics of “new media,” “converged media,”
and “media innovation” among Chinese think tanks, experts,
and scholars after Xi, the Chinese president, called for more
innovation in the media environment.106 An analysis of Chinese-
language academic research database CNKI showed that
published academic research on applications of artificial intel-
ligence (AI) on news and media dissemination and content pro-
duction almost quadrupled from 2016 to 2017 (from fifty-eight
to 206), then more than doubled from 2017 to 2018 (from 206
to 447).107 Of the 2,285 articles tracked in the database cover-
ing the topics of AI + News Media, 156 received funding from
China’s National Social Science Fund, which funded thirty-six
studies on the topic in 2021, up from six in 2017.108
In one study, titled “Chinese Enterprises Going Out to Europe,
America, and Chinese Media Communication Strategy and
Tactics,” researchers outlined the utility of access to public sen-
timent data for shaping “precise communication” as follows:
“With regards to external propaganda, after the
optimized content reaches the target audience
Screencap of RT article written by T om Fowdy, who
later claimed that he had been banned from CGTN after
writing the post. His posts on Weibo were deleted, and
discussions of the topic were heavily censored.K

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
23
through expanded communication channels,
if intelligent human-machine dialogue can be
continuously realized or supplemented by customized
interaction in different languages and cultures, the
communication effect will be greatly improved….
However, the effectiveness of relational connection
needs to rely on further dialogue and interaction.
The traditional AI model will inevitably encounter
physical and resource bottlenecks in the face of the
blowout of big data. We must continue to upgrade our
AI capabilities to meet the opportunities [for external
propaganda] in the era of big data.”109
Political native advertising
In addition to “precise communication,” another way that China
has sought to increase the resonance of its messaging is to
obscure the fact that government narratives are originating
from government sources. This is referred to as “political native
advertising,” of which a core strategy involves foreign govern-
ments purchasing advertising space in news outlets abroad
and disguising the origin of the content as being provided by
the state.110 In a study on the effects of such advertising, media
scholars Yaoyao Dai and Luwei Luqiu explain that “those who
engage in this form of propaganda hope to exploit the higher
credibility of the hosting media site to enhance the persuasive-
ness of their message.”111
In their study, Dai and Luqiu came to several troubling con -
clusions: first, that “respondents struggle to distinguish politi-
cal advertisements from standard news stories regardless of
their level of education and media literacy;” second, that “polit-
ical advertisements are more convincing if they appear on and
are perceived as news from an independent hosting media site
than in a government-controlled news outlet;” and third, that
“trust in the hosting media site declines if the political advertise-
ment is detected.”112
China has embraced political native advertising as a core fea-
ture of its external propaganda strategy. One example is the
“China Observer” (also translated as “China Watch”) col -
umn that the English-language state media outlet China Daily
produces. The column highlights achievements of China’s
109 Ma Ning, “人工智能、大数据与对外传播的创新发展” (“Innovative Development of Artificial Intelligence, Big Data and External Communication”), People’s Daily,
April 18, 2019, https://archive.md/Gv9b2. Study: 中国传媒大学,“中国企业走出去欧美华文媒体传播战略与策略,”课题的阶段性成果，项目编号HW17133, 2019 (China
Communications University, “Chinese Enterprises Going Out to Europe, America, and Chinese Media Communication Strategy and Tactics,” Project No. HW17133, 2019).
110 Y aoyao Dai and Luwei Luqiu, “Camouflaged Propaganda: A Survey Experiment on Political Native Advertising,” Research & Politics 7, 3 (2020).
111 Ibid.
112 Ibid.
113 “ China Daily’s global development,” China Daily, https://archive.ph/aYJae.
114 Sarah Cook, Beijing’s Global Megaphone, Freedom House, 2020, https://freedomhouse.org/report/special-report/2020/beijings-global-megaphone.
115 “About Us,” China Daily, accessed March 9, 2023, https://archive.ph/wRY03.
116 Selma Mihoubi, “La Stratégie d’Implantation de Radio Chine Internationale (Rci) en Afrique Sahélienne” [“The Implementation Strategy of Radio China International (RCI)
in Sahelian Africa”], Norois 252, 2019.
117 Douzet et al., “Mapping the spread.”
118 Arthur Kaufman, “China Plays Mediator in the Horn of Africa, Leverages Local Media to Reinforce Narrative of Benevolence,” China Digital Times, June 28, 2022, https://
chinadigitaltimes.net/2022/06/china-plays-mediator-in-the-horn-of-africa-leverages-local-media-to-reinforce-narrative-of-benevolence/.
development model and tells “positive China stories” to the
world. Currently, over forty news outlets in twenty countries
publish the monthly “China Observer” column; China Daily
claims that the column has a circulation of “around 4 million”
readers.113 The column appears in papers in the Global South
but also in Western newspapers, including the Washington
Post (the United States), the Telegraph (the United Kingdom),
Handelsblatt (Germany), Süddeutsche Zeitung (Germany,
though it stopped running the column in 2018), Le Figaro
(France), Le Soir (Belgium), De Standaard (Belgium), and El Pais
(Spain). In a 2020 report, Freedom House highlighted that, in
digital versions of newspapers especially, the “China Observer”
column often goes unlabeled as being state sponsored.114
Content sharing and applying editorial
pressure
In addition to its own media coverage, China has expanded
partnerships and content-sharing agreements with local media
companies to better disseminate propaganda. For example, in
addition to the “China Observer” column, the China Daily also
founded the Asia News Network, which covers twenty-one
news organizations in nineteen Asian countries and provides
free content and journalist exchanges in exchange for pro-
China coverage.115
A huge part of this push is to countries within the BRI, a major-
ity of which are in the Global South. For example, China funds
the Forum of Africa-China Cooperation (FOCAC), which it rou-
tinely uses as a venue for its state media outlets to sign agree-
ments with national press agencies of African participants; the
agreements themselves encourage local press agencies to
distribute China-provided media content,116 which is provided
for free to both public and private local media organizations.117
Illustrating the scope of some of these content agreements,
in June 2022 alone, over 80 percent of China-related articles
published by the state-owned Kenya Broadcasting Corporation
were sourced directly from Chinese state media.118
Another example of how China bakes in content sharing in
its media cooperation activities can be seen in China Media
Group’s November 2019 content-sharing and joint produc -
tion agreement with Brazil’s Band network, the country’s

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
24
third largest media organization by viewership. One program
included in the agreement was Mundo China, which has rep-
licated Chinese narratives refuting accusations of forced labor
and genocide in Xinjiang.119 Similarly, the DFRLab previously
outlined how Xinhua’s content-sharing agreements with news
organizations in South Africa have led to a preponderance of
Chinese narratives in the local information space, including
those spreading disinformation about the origins of COVID-
19.120 One major concern with this is, as a German Marshall
Fund study found, “through content-sharing agreements, these
stories are seen by many citizens on local news websites with
few clear indications they come from Chinese media.”121 Such
examples illustrate how China’s communications strategies,
such as political native advertising and content sharing, can be
mutually reinforcing.
The availability of free content is also represented in China’s
digital TV footprint. The China-funded digital TV company
StarTimes, which provides content to millions of households
across both urban and rural Africa, publishes articles giving
favorable coverage to the Chinese government, with CGTN
channels offered as a part of its cheapest service package
while placing international news channels, such as BBC World
News, in more expensive packages.122
Chinese embassies also pay local newspapers to run
state-sponsored columns and news items.123 A July 2022 study
by the China Global South Project found that nearly every major
newspaper in Kenya ran the same column penned by Chinese
Ambassador to Kenya Zhou Pingjian refuting the narrative that
China engages in “debt trap” diplomacy in Africa. The ambas-
sador also took the opportunity to highlight the advantages of
Chinese versus Western funding, stating that “the fact is, financ-
ing from Western countries mainly focuses on non-manufac-
turing sectors, and often comes with political strings attached,
such as reforms in human rights.”124
119 Nicola Casarini et al., Coercion, Capture, and Censorship: Case Studies on the CCP’s Quest for Global Influence, eds. Caitlin Dearing Scott and Matt Schrader,
International Republican Institute, September 28, 2022, https://www.iri.org/resources/coercion-capture-and-censorship-case-studies-on-the-ccps-quest-for-global
-influence/; Nelson de Sá. “Band fecha acordo com TV estatal chinesa” (“Band closes deal with Chinese state TV”), Folha de S.Paulo, November 6, 2019, https://www1
.folha.uol.com.br/mercado/2019/11/band-fecha-acordo-com-tv-estatal-chinesa.shtml; Mundo China (@mundo_china), “Opinião popular em #Xinjiang. @LiuXininBeijing
tem conversado com as pessoas lá e isso é o que elas falam sobre sua vida naquela bela terra com as alegações...” (“Popular opinion in #Xinjiang. @LiuXininBeijing
has been talking to people there and this is what they say about their life in that beautiful land with allegations of ‘genocide’ and ‘forced labor’”), Twitter, April 8, 2021,
9:51 a.m., https://archive.ph/DW7IS.
120 Kenton Thibaut, “China’s COVID-19 messaging makes its way to South Africa,” DFRlab (@DFRLab), December 22, 2021, https://dfrlab.org/2021/12/22/chinas-covid-19
-messaging-makes-its-way-to-south-africa/.
121 Bryce Barros, Nathan Kohlenberg, and Etienne Soula, China and the Digital Information Stack in the Global South, ed. Kristine Berzina, Alliance for Securing
Democracy, German Marshall Fund of the United States, June 15, 2022, https://securingdemocracy.gmfus.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/China-Digital-Stack.pdf.
122 “China is broadening its efforts to win over African audiences,” Economist, October 20, 2018, https://www.economist.com/middle-east-and-africa/2018/10/20/china-is
-broadening-its-efforts-to-win-over-african-audiences; “‘China has conquered Kenya’: Inside Beijing’s new strategy to win African hearts and minds,” Los Angeles Times,
August 7, 2017, https://www.latimes.com/world/asia/la-fg-china-africa-kenya-20170807-htmlstory.html.
123 Eric Olander, “Almost Every Major Kenyan Newspaper Published Column by Chinese Ambassador That Refutes Debt Trap Accusation,” China Global South Project,
July 5, 2022, https://chinaglobalsouth.com/2022/07/05/almost-every-major-kenyan-newspaper-published-column-by-chinese-ambassador-that-refutes-debt-trap
-accusation/.
124 Zhou Pingjian, “Is China Kenya’s largest creditor? No way! ‘debt trap’ claim is misleading,” Standard, July 2, 2022, https://www.standardmedia.co.ke/business/opinion
/article/2001449406/is-china-kenyas-largest-creditor-no-way-debt-trap-claim-is-misleading.
125 “Expanding Engagement: Perspectives on the Africa-China Relationship,” Asia Policy 17, 3 (2022), https://www.nbr.org/publication/expanding-engagement-perspectives
-on-the-africa-china-relationship/.
In several African countries, reporters
working with state-owned news
organizations that hold cooperation
agreements with China face pressure to
publish pro-China stories or to otherwise
censor themselves from writing content
that would contravene China’s state
media’s editorial guidelines.
China also uses its economic leverage to actively shape edi-
torial agendas. Recent scholarship has noted how, in several
African countries, reporters working with state-owned news
organizations that hold cooperation agreements with China
face pressure to publish pro-China stories or to otherwise cen-
sor themselves from writing content that would contravene
China’s state media’s editorial guidelines.
Recent scholarship has also pointed out the existence of a pos-
itive relationship between Chinese training and support for
local media organizations and the presence of pro-China pro-
paganda in domestic state-affiliated news organizations.125 One
study on China’s media influence in Mauritius found that:
“The state broadcaster covers government-to-
government news items at great length, often
emphasizes China as a friendly country, and devotes
extended coverage to the key development projects
China finances. Notably, several journalists working
at the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation have
trained at Chinese universities. In addition, the
broadcaster’s building was constructed using an
interest-free loan from China. On the other hand,
private media is more cautious in balancing coverage
between China and other foreign entities. Journalists
from private media have been more willing to write

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
25
critical pieces pertaining to China’s real estate
development, infrastructure campaigns, and Safe City
project, among other activities.”126
Other research reveals similar trends. A China Digital Times
analysis of the state-owned Somali National News Agency
(SONNA) found that, in August 2022 alone, the site pub -
lished an article praising China’s policies in Xinjiang, ran arti-
cles by Chinese Ambassador to Somalia Fei Shengchao pro-
moting China’s Global Security Initiative, and published two
articles defending China’s claims over Taiwan. Lastly, SONNA
published an editorialized version of the Chinese ambassa -
dor’s original article defending the One China policy without
indicating that the origin of the article was a Chinese state
source.127 The Xinjiang article was written by a journalist who
at the time was attending China’s Forum of China-Africa Media
Cooperation in Beijing.
126 “Expanding Engagement”; Roukaya Kasenally, “China in Mauritius: The T elling of the Chinese Story,” Asia Policy 29, 3 (2022), https://muse.jhu.edu/article/861925.
127 See China Digital Times write-up and broader analysis of China-Africa media cooperation here: Arthur Kaufman, “Media Forums Promote Journalist Collaboration and
Position Chinese Narratives in African News Agencies,” China Digital Times, August 30, 2022, https://chinadigitaltimes.net/2022/08/media-forums-promote-journalist
-collaboration-and-position-chinese-narratives-in-african-news-agencies/.
128 Bereket Sisay, “Ethio-China Cooperation Gaining Momentum,” ENA, https://www.ena.et/en/?p=37893.
129 “Africa, China Media Synergy Crucial to Foil Disinformation, Says Ethiopian Amb. Teshome,” ENA, https://www.ena.et/en/?p=38050.
130 Kaufman, “Media Forums.”
131 Blake Johnson, “How the Chinese Communist Party is spreading lies in Solomon Islands,” Strategist, Australian Strategic Policy Institute, October 5, 2022, https://www
.aspistrategist.org.au/how-the-chinese-communist-party-is-spreading-lies-in-solomon-islands/.
132 Ibid.
133 “The price of friendship,” Economist, May 20, 2022, https://www.economist.com/special-report/2022/05/20/the-price-of-friendship; Kwasi Gyamfi Asiedu, “How a lone
Ghanaian cartoonist stood up to China,” Quartz, November 25, 2017, https://qz.com/africa/1137709/how-a-lone-ghanaian-cartoonist-stood-up-to-china/.
The state-owned Ethiopian News Agency (ENA) also publishes
a large number of pro-China pieces. An August 2022 article,
written by an Ethiopian journalist who at the time was partici-
pating in a media training program in Beijing, featured effusive
praise of China’s model of “South-South cooperation,” describ-
ing its engagement through the BRI as “surely…a more solid
foundation for building a strong thrust for the rise of developing
countries as a whole.”128
An interview in ENA with Ethiopian Ambassador to China
Teshome Toga highlighted the “distorted and too often mis-
leading narratives peddled by outside interest groups regard-
ing Africa-China Cooperation;” in verbatim repetition of
Chinese phrasing, the ambassador noted that “China and
African countries are a community with a shared future” and
that media outlets “should strive to enhance mutual trust and
cooperation.”129 According to a count by China Digital Times,
“all eight of the articles about China in ENA [in August 2022]
praise China-Ethiopia cooperation: affirming China’s Taiwan
policy, praising Chinese projects in Ethiopia and Africa, and par-
roting Chinese embassy press releases.”130
 A recent ASPI blogpost identified similar trends in the Solomon
Islands where articles pushed by the CCP in domestic media
outlets were able to penetrate and resonate with local audi -
ences more effectively.131 The analysis showed that negative
China sentiment declined in correlation to real-world efforts
by CCP officials to influence public sentiment, largely through
these domestic media channels.132
At the same time as it actively promotes pro-China stories in
local outlets, Beijing has also used its political and economic
leverage to censor negative coverage. An Economist investi-
gation found that, in response to a political cartoon drawn by a
local journalist criticizing its mining activities in the country for
the environmental issues it has caused, the Chinese Embassy
in Ghana had urged a Ghanaian government minister to help
bilateral ties between the two countries by “guiding the media
to report more objectively” on its gold-mining activities.133
In one well-publicized account from Zimbabwe, the ruling
Zimbabwe African National Union–Patriotic Front (ZANU–PF)
party leveraged its control over domestic media to launch a
national campaign against several journalists and nongovern-
mental organizations (NGOs) critical of Chinese mining activ-
ities. The state-controlled Zimpapers operates one of the
Screencap of Chinese Ambassador to Kenya Zhou
Pengjian’s article in Kenyan newspaper the Standard,
refuting the “debt trap diplomacy” narrative surrounding
China’s engagements in Africa.L

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
26
country’s leading newspapers by circulation numbers, the
Zimbabwe Herald. Using the Herald as a mouthpiece, ZANU-PF
accused these actors, as well as independent newspaper the
Standard, of being part of a US government-funded operation
to weaken China-Zimbabwe ties by sowing domestic division
over China’s mining presence in the country.134
The Twitter account for the Chinese Embassy in Zimbabwe
amplified these narratives. The account launched a campaign
using the hashtag #Mr1k (referring to the unsubstantiated
claims that the United States pays $1,000 per pitch for nega-
tive China stories) to attack Zimbabwe-based NGOs and jour-
nalists, claiming they are paid agents of the United States. The
#Mr1k hashtag reached a peak on Twitter on May 6, 2022, the
same day that the Crisis in Zimbabwe Coalition, a conglomera-
tion of around seventy-five civil society organizations focused
on promoting democracy in the country, issued a letter criti -
cizing what it described as China’s exploitative business prac-
tices in the country.135 Between August 2021 and August 2022,
the hashtag garnered 5.91 million impressions and a reach of
2.62 million.136 The majority of hashtag uses were retweets, an
134 “Chinese Embassy dismisses newspaper report,” Herald, July 11, 2022, https://web.archive.org/web/20220712153857/https://www.herald.co.zw/chinese-embassy
-dismisses-newspaper-report/.
135 “Zanu PF mortgaging country to China,” NewsDay, May 6, 2022, https://www.newsday.co.zw/2022/05/zanu-pf-mortgaging-country-to-china/.
136 As calculated using Meltwater Explore. Impressions refer to the total number of times a tweet has appeared in users’ feeds. Reach is an estimation of the de-duplicated
follower count for all unique Twitter handles. It is an estimate of the potential total audience of the tweets.
137 Monaco, “Spamouflage Survives.”
138 “Zimbabwe journalist Hopewell Chin’ono arrested for third time in six months,” Guardian, January 8, 2021, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/jan/08/zimbabwe
-journalist-hopewell-chinono-arrested-for-third-time-in-six-months.
139 Kenton Thibaut, “China spearheads social media campaign to attack civil society in Zimbabwe,” DFRLab (@DFRLab), November 9, 2022, https://dfrlab.org/2022/11/09
/china-spearheads-social-media-campaign-to-attack-civil-society-in-zimbabwe/.
140 James Sundquist, “T elling Chinese Stories Well: Two New Mechanisms of Chinese Influence on Foreign Media,” GCI Working Paper 022, Global China Initiative, Global
Development Policy Center, Boston University, August 2022, https://www.bu.edu/gdp/files/2022/08/GCI_WP_022_FIN.pdf.
indication of potential inauthentic manipulation, as a dispro -
portionately high volume of retweets can be a sign of potential
inauthentic amplification by inorganic accounts, a tactic previ-
ously used by China on the Twitter platform.137
A May 6, 2022, tweet from the Chinese Embassy in Zimbabwe’s
official Twitter handle containing the #Mr1k hashtag received
the highest number of engagements (one thousand one hun-
dred). The tweet directly targeted two prominent Zimbabwean
opposition figures, both of whom had been previously arrested
by police for “spreading falsehoods” after reporting on gov -
ernment corruption by ZANU-PF members and for organiz -
ing protests against the previous administration.138 By lending
credence to the narrative that civil society actors in Zimbabwe
are US-government funded, the Chinese Embassy continues
to provide a veneer of political legitimacy to ZANU-PF’s long-
standing practice of targeting and cracking down on critics of
the ruling regime.139
Chinese involvement in local media can also
constrict the space for members of local
communities to debate the merits of and—
in more restrictive domains—freely report
on China’s deepening involvement in their
societies. Specifically, Chinese ownership
in local media companies has been found to
have a positive and significant relationship
to pro-China media coverage.
In addition to providing political cover for crackdowns on civil
society, Chinese involvement in local media can also constrict
the space for members of local communities to debate the mer-
its of and—in more restrictive domains—freely report on China’s
deepening involvement in their societies. Specifically, Chinese
ownership in local media companies has been found to have
a positive and significant relationship to pro-China media
coverage.140
For example, South Africa’s Independent Media is a private
media company of which 20 percent is owned by Chinese
state entities. Previous DFRLab research found that its affiliated
Screencap of an article in SONNA by Chinese Ambassador
to Somalia Fei Shengchao defending China’s claims over
Taiwan. The title reads, “We will not change the One China
policy and will return Taiwan to the Motherland.” Machine
translated by Google.M

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
27
news media site Independent Online (IOL) had published pro-
China conspiracy theories on COVID-19’s origins and that its
editorial team has a close relationship with Chinese state enti-
ties.141 A recent content analysis of China-related articles run in
Cape Times, one of the newspapers owned by IOL, showed
that coverage of China became “dramatically more favorable”
following its 2013 investment in IOL. Coverage of human rights
issues in China had fallen by around 85 percent between 2013
and 2020 when compared to articles published between 2004
and 2013, before China’s investment in Cape Times.142
Aside from China’s direct efforts to influence editorial agen -
das, there are also significant economic incentives that encour-
age pro-China coverage. A 2021 survey conducted with the
141 Thibaut, “China’s COVID-19 messaging.”
142 Sundquist, “T elling.”
143 Mano, “Geopolitics.”
144 Arthur Kaufman, “Ghana Study Highlights Chinese Drive for Global Media Influence,” China Digital Times, June 8, 2022, https://chinadigitaltimes.net/2022/06/ghana
-study-highlights-chinese-drive-for-global-media-influence/; Emmanuel K. Dogbevi, “China in Africa’s Media: A Case Study of Ghana” in Political Front Lines: China’s
Pursuit of Influence in Africa, Nadège Rolland, ed., NBR Special Report no. 100 (2022).
145 “ 第五届中非媒体合作论坛举行 黄坤明宣读习近平主席贺信并发表主旨演讲” (“Holding the 5th China-Africa Media Cooperation Forum Huang Kunming Read Out the
Congratulatory Letter from President Xi Jinping and Delivered a Keynote Speech”), Xinhua, August 26, 2022, https://archive.ph/kFct5.
146 Kaufman, “Media Forums.”
147 “5th Forum on China-Africa Media Cooperation: 2012 – 2022,” African Union of Broadcasting, https://www.uar-aub.org/single-post/5th-forum-on-china-africa-media
-cooperation-2012-2022.
148 Mo Jingxi, “Xi: T eamwork of China, Africa media crucial,” China Daily, August 26, 2022, https://archive.ph/di2s2.
149 “Senior CPC official stresses enhanced media contribution to Belt and Road construction,” People’s Daily, August 10, 2022, https://archive.ph/aUZni.
Zimbabwe Union of Journalists (ZUJ) indicated that the coun-
try’s journalists often increase positive coverage of China
in order to better position themselves to participate in bilat -
eral exchange programs.143 ZUJ nominates journalists to the
Ministry of Information in Zimbabwe, with the Chinese Embassy
in Harare having the final say on which journalists attend.
A similar study on China’s influence on Ghana’s media envi -
ronment found that underfunded and under-resourced jour -
nalists find China’s offers of free training and equipment highly
appealing. However, these offers rarely come with no strings
attached. In fact, the study found that “not only [are] local jour-
nalists compelled to promote a positive image of China and its
policies, some stations and media outlets are also compelled
to promote Chinese content ahead of local or Ghanaian news
items, adversely affecting the general media environment in
Ghana.”144
These calls for Africa to “tell China’s stories well” are evidenced
at the highest levels of Chinese leadership. At the August 25,
2022, Forum on China-Africa Media Cooperation in Beijing,
CPD head Huang Kunming, on behalf of Xi, urged representa-
tives from forty-two African countries to ensure that their jour-
nalists would be “advocates for development, to tell the stories
of the new era in China-Africa cooperation well, and promote
the common values of all humankind.”145 Sessions at the forum
included those focusing on “media development policy, con-
tent cooperation, new technology applications, and digital con-
vergence.”146 During the event, African Union of Broadcasting
CEO Gregoire Ndjaka highlighted that media training was a par-
ticular strong point in the China-Africa relationship.147 Indeed,
according to a China Daily report, as of August 2022, China
had provided media training for over three thousand African
journalists.148
Huang gave similar remarks at the August 2022 Media
Cooperation Forum on the Belt and Road, which included
more than one hundred twenty media representatives from
forty countries and international organizations in the BRI. In a
speech at this forum, the CPD head emphasized the media’s
“indispensable role in disseminating information, fostering
mutual trust, and building consensus,” urging their “participa-
tion, actions, communication and cooperation in the joint build-
ing of the Belt and Road.”149
Screencap of an article in ENA. The first line of the article
reads, “China’s media synergy is crucial to foil disinformation
peddled by outside interest groups concerning Sino-Africa
cooperation, Ethiopia’s Ambassador to China, T eshome
Toga, said.”N

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
28
Metrics for the #Mr1k hashtag between August 2021 and August 2022 using Meltwater Explore. The hashtag reached a peak on May
6, the day that an NGO coalition issued a public letter criticizing Chinese business practices. The line graph on the top shows the
frequency of the hashtag use over time, while the line graph on the bottom shows the percentage of hashtag responses that were
original tweets, retweets, and quote tweets. The high number of retweets indicates potential inauthentic amplification, as used by
China on Twitter in previous campaigns.O

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
29
GOVERNANCE, THE THIRD PRONG OF
‘MEDIA CONVERGENCE’
150 Paul Triolo, “Why did a Peking University paper on China’s tech deficiencies get deleted?” China Project, February 25, 2022, https://thechinaproject.com/2022/02/25
/why-did-a-peking-university-paper-on-chinas-tech-deficiencies-get-deleted/.
151 Peking University International Strategy Research Group, “技术领域的中美战略竞争：分析与展望” (“Sino-US Strategic Competition in Technology: Analysis and
Prospects”), US-China Perception Monitor, January 30, 2022, https://archive.ph/Xz6VD.
152 Ibid.
153 Thibaut, Chinese Discourse Power: Ambitions.
154 Y ong Deng, “How China Builds the Credibility of the Belt and Road Initiative,” Journal of Contemporary China 30, 131 (2021): 734-750, https://doi.org/10.1080/10670564
.2021.1884958.
155 Ibid.
156 Thibaut, Chinese Discourse Power: Ambitions.
T
he third and final prong of China’s approach to “media
convergence” is governance. In this aspect, China has
embarked on a concerted push to expand its capabilities
and influence over governance of technological infrastructure
and connectivity.
Of the areas surveyed, China’s efforts at standards shaping and
digital governance have the potential to be the most far reach-
ing, for example, in the areas of facial recognition and surveil-
lance technologies. While China still lags behind the United
States in terms of its overall technological prowess, its inroads
are especially visible in the Global South.150
Underscoring this point, in February 2022, Chinese scholar
Wang Jisi assessed that China’s breakthroughs in 5G commu-
nication and ICT standards were more successful relative to
other sectors, including technology and product standards in
sub-sectors such as memory and auto chips.151 The assessment
also outlined that, globally, China was relatively behind the
United States in terms of “soft standards, like core technolog-
ical advantages, market penetration, and user acceptance.”152
However, while on the global stage China may still be behind
the United States, its standards have seen asymmetrically rapid
uptake in the Global South.
Standards
The United Nations is at the center of China’s discourse power
strategy and plays a core role in its vision for the global order.
The CCP sees the UN as one of the primary vehicles for reshap-
ing the international order by institutionalizing Chinese policies
and norms at the global level.153 One of the areas of the UN in
which China has been increasingly active in recent years is in
promoting its technical and digital standards, including norms
of governance. These standards ensure interoperability across
products, network systems, and technologies adopted across
markets. They also can grant incredible market power to first
movers and early adopters.
The UN tends to occupy a place of elevated importance to
global majority countries for several reasons, the most powerful
of which is the principle of sovereign equality of all countries
under the UN system. More specifically, the organization’s
principle of “one country, one vote” allows for less powerful
countries to speak to the concerns of developing nations on
a more equal footing; at the same time, UN mechanisms allow
smaller countries to air grievances and advocate policy posi-
tions to more powerful countries in coalitions or as a group, in a
way that their individual status would not otherwise allow.154 As
such, the UN’s endorsement is particularly valuable for China in
securing acceptance of its norms in the Global South.155
When applied to standards setting, national or regional stan-
dards-setting bodies in the Global South are either nascent, do
not exist, and/or are underfunded. As such, adopting pre-vet-
ted UN standards helps to streamline the process. However,
Chinese-sponsored international standards often mirror those
developed by China’s domestic companies—thus, UN stan -
dards adopted across the globe are often those that are tai -
lored to the end use goals of these firms and, by extension, the
CCP.
China’s engagement in multilateral
standards-setting bodies serves two
complementary goals: (1) promote the
uptake of Chinese domestic technical
standards in international standards-
setting organizations, and (2) encourage
their adoption in third markets via
cooperation agreements, largely with
countries in the Global South.
China has been active in multilateral standards-setting bod -
ies and has strong representation among its domestic indus-
try representatives in the leadership of these organizations.156
China’s engagement in this space serves two complementary
goals: (1) promote the uptake of Chinese domestic technical

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
30
standards in international standards-setting organizations, and
(2) encourage their adoption in third markets via cooperation
agreements, largely with countries in the Global South.
First, China highly encourages its domestic companies to sup-
port the state’s goal of having domestic standards adopted
in global governance bodies. Joint awards from the Central
Cyberspace Administration of China, the relevant departments
of the State Council, the Equipment Development Department
of the Central Military Commission, industry associations, the
State Administration for Market Regulation, and the National
Professional Standardization Technical Committee are also pro-
vided to organizations and individuals who help develop stan-
dards for the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO), International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), and
International Telecommunication Union (ITU). The 2017
Standardization Law specifically outlines incentives for univer-
sities and research centers that contribute to this work, includ-
ing a $155,000 yearly award for firms that work to promote
domestic standards in UN bodies, and bonuses for executives
who earn leadership positions in these organizations.157
Such a strategy is clearly outlined in the national stan -
dards-setting plan, the “National Standardization Development
Framework” ( 国家标准化发展纲要 ), released by the
CCP’s Central Commission in 2021. In the plan, the Central
Commission and the State Council outlined the goal that, by
2025, China’s standardization work would move from strictly
domestically driven to “mutual development and promotion of
domestic and international standards.”158 A review of China’s
2020 standards work boasted that, in that year alone, Chinese
experts had assumed leadership positions in twelve ISO and
IEC technical institutions, covering areas ranging from lab
157 Seconded European Standardization Expert in China, trans., “Standardization Law of the People’s Republic of China (Revised Draft),” https://share.ansi.org/Shared%20
Documents/News%20and%20Publications/Links%20Within%20Stories/China%20Standardization%20Law_English%20translation_SESEC_5.17.2017.pdf; Russel and
Berger, Stacking the Deck.
158 “ 中共中央 国务院印发《国家标准化发展纲要》” (“The Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and the State Council issued the ‘National Standardization
Development Outline’”), Central Government of the People’s Republic of China, October 10, 2021, https://archive.ph/1ysci.
159 “2021 年我国标准化工作回眸” (“Review of China’s 2021 Standardization Work”), Xiaoxiang Morning Herald, January 14, 2022, https://archive.ph/fwuKc.
160 Rogier Creemers, “China’s Conception of Cyber Sovereignty: Rhetoric and Realization” in Governing Cyberspace: Behavior, Power, and Diplomacy, eds. Dennis
Broeders and Bibi van den Berg (London: Rowman & Littlefield, 2020), https://rowman.com/WebDocs/Open_Access_Governing_Cyberspace_Broeders_and_van_den
_Berg.pdf.
design to robotics. It said that China had “transformed 880
international standards and put forward 278 international stan-
dard proposals in the fields of artificial intelligence…biotech-
nology, aerospace, Internet of Things, and semiconductor
devices.”159
As implicated above, China’s interests in organizations like the
ITU span numerous issue areas and recruit involvement from all
sectors of society; these groups are then rallied behind a uni-
fied goal of advancing Chinese-led standards. As China scholar
Rogier Creemers writes:
“China’s internet ecology consists of numerous
industry associations and professional bodies that
fall under the formal authority of state ministries, or
whose senior officials are appointed by the CCP.
Business leaders, too, are often party members. While
that does not mean monolithic acceptance of central
state policy—often quite the opposite—this model
combines a semblance of institutional pluralism
while maintaining a considerable degree of political
control.”160
However, the impact of China’s efforts differs from organiza-
tion to organization. A prioritized forum for engagement is the
ITU. As an example of China’s multi-sectoral collaboration on
promoting standards, on August 4, 2021, the ITU announced it
had published a China-led standard for encryption-based pri-
vacy solutions in computing, dubbed the Technical Framework
for Shared Machine Learning Systems. According to Chinese
media reporting, this standard is aimed at guiding the design
and development of privacy-preserving machine-learning
systems, with the ultimate goal of promoting more expansive
Screencap of a 2020 post on Weibo by the China Academy of Information and Communications Technology (CAICT), a think tank
affiliated with China’s Ministry of Industry and Information T echnology (MIIT). The MIIT plays a major role in developing China’s technical
standards for areas like 5G and telecommunications more broadly. The post reads, “#5G# [The 5G technical solution submitted by
China has successfully become the 5G international standard recognized by the International Telecommunication Union] On the
evening of July 9, 2020, Beijing time, the ITU-R WP5D#35 meeting announced the IMT-2020 (5G) technical solution. China’s wireless
air interface technology solution based on 3GPP technology has successfully become a 5G solution approved by ITU. China’s 5G
wireless air interface technology solution is based on 3GPP new air interface (NR) and narrowband Internet of Things.” P

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
31
data collaboration and data-sharing efforts.161 China Telecom,
a state-owned ICT company, and Zhejiang Laboratory, a uni-
versity-affiliated think tank, jointly developed the standard
using government funding; the standard itself is based on
machine-learning technology provided by Chinese technology
company Ant Group.162
As mentioned above, one element of China’s standards strat-
egy involves embedding representatives in leadership posi -
tions in standards-setting bodies. For example, Zhao Houlin,
who was secretary general of the ITU until early 2023, signed
an agreement on behalf of the organization with China in 2017
to collaborate on ICT projects under the BRI.163
As of September 2022, Zhao also served as an adviser to Xi
and then Chinese premier Li Keqiang on how to best position
Chinese telecom companies with regional telecommunication
cooperation along the BRI.164 Prior to serving as secretary gen-
eral of the ITU, Zhao served two terms as the director of the
ITU’s Telecommunication Standardization Bureau, which devel-
ops technical standards on ICT interoperability. 165 In a 2019
interview, Zhao stated that, upon first joining the ITU, his “heart
was full of sorrow about implementing other [countries’] visions,
but he always hoped to fight for the discourse power of the
motherland.”166
In addition to seeking out leadership positions in standards
organizations, China also leverages its broad presence within
certain standards organizations to engage in bloc voting on
proposals—meaning that all China-affiliated members, includ-
ing those from academia, private industry, or government, coor-
dinate their votes and essentially vote as a unit. This ensures
that standards proposals from Chinese entities receive the
number of votes needed to be adopted by the entire stan -
dards-setting body, a tactic the Asia Society Policy Institute
describes as “flooding the zone.” 167 This tactic is unique to
China, as “the experts and engineers from other countries…
161 Chloe Ma, “国际电信联盟首次发布隐私计算标准 中国机构参与制定” (“The International Telecommunication Union Released the Privacy Computing Standard for the
First Time Chinese Institutions Participated in the Formulation”), Qianzhan, August 5, 2021, https://archive.ph/IZYES.
162 Ibid.
163 Du Mingming, “ITU secretary-general: ICT a foundation for development under Belt and Road Initiative,” People’s Daily Online, May 23, 2017, https://archive.ph/HQP8x.
164 “ 国际电联‘掌门人’赵厚麟：南邮骄子，国之骄子” (“Zhao Houlin, ‘Head of ITU’: The Proud Son of NUPT, the Proud Son of the Country”), Nanjing University of Posts and
Telecommunications Propaganda Department, September 24, 2019, https://archive.ph/IVgCk.
165 “ 赵厚麟简历” (“Houlin Zhao Resume”), Ifeng News, September 10, 2015, https://archive.ph/fUpuS.
166 (“Zhao Houlin, ‘Head of ITU’”), Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications Propaganda Department; the US government’s success in promoting Doreen
Bogdan-Martin to win the September 2022 ITU secretary general election, over her Russian opponent, exemplifies the benefits of direct response. Emma Farge, “U.S.
candidate beats Russian to head U.N. tech agency,” Reuters, September 29, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/business/media-telecom/us-candidate-beats-russia-head
-un-telecoms-agency-2022-09-29/.
167 Russel and Berger, Stacking the Deck.
168 Ibid.
169 “ 中国5G标准获国际电信联盟认可，华为参与，美国也没办法阻止” (“China’s 5G Standard Is Recognized by the International Telecommunication Union, Huawei
Participates, and the United States Has No Way to Stop It”), Gufeng Huiyun, July 16, 2020, https://archive.ph/EowLC.
170 A ‘China Model?’ Beijing’s Promotion of Alternative Global Norms and Standards, US-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 116th Cong. (2020), https://
www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2020-10/March_13_Hearing_and_April_27_Roundtable_Transcript_0.pdf.
171 Ibid.
172 Ibid.; see also: “Who is leading the 5G patent race? – June 2022,” IPlytics, June 2022, https://www.iplytics.com/report/5g-patent-race-june-2022/.
173 Tim Rühlig, “Chinese Influence through T echnical Standardization,” Journal of Contemporary China 32, 139 (2023): 54-72, https://doi.org/10.1080/10670564.2022
.2052439; data: Valentina Pop, Sha Hua, and Daniel Michaels, “From Lightbulbs to 5G, China Battles West for Control of Vital Technology Standards,” Wall Street
Journal, February 8, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/from-lightbulbs-to-5g-china-battles-west-for-control-of-vital-technology-standards-11612722698.
174 (“China’s 5G Standard Is Recognized”), Gufeng Huiyun.
vote according to their own or their company’s best judg -
ment.”168 For example, in 2020, Huawei was the top submitter
for standards for Narrowband Internet of Things technology; its
standards took about four years from the proposal stage until
they were adopted by the ITU in July 2020. In this area specifi-
cally, Huawei submitted over one thousand proposals, account-
ing for over 40 percent of all the proposals received, of which
almost two hundred were approved.169
These initiatives are often explicitly aimed at promoting stan-
dards that seek to institutionalize Chinese norms of internet
governance, one of which is China’s “cyber sovereignty” princi-
ple. As mentioned above, cyber sovereignty is China’s vision for
internet governance that privileges the state’s authority to con-
trol all aspects of internet activity within its borders. A success-
ful example of Beijing’s efforts in this regard is its promotion of
the adoption of global 5G standards through the ITU sub-group
3GPP, or the Third Generation Partnership Project, the leading
global mobile network standardization organization.170
Here, China employed its “flooding the zone” strategy, financ-
ing its top telecommunications firm Huawei to “submit over
19,000 technical contributions and dispatch over 3,000 engi-
neers to participate in the 5G standard-setting process.” 171
This is compared to US firm Qualcomm, which had the larg -
est presence of US companies in the sub-group and made
around six thousand contributions and provided almost one
thousand three hundred engineers to attend 3GPP sub-group
meetings.172 According to one analysis, here China supplied
31.5 percent of 5G technical standards contributions, followed
by Sweden (18.85 percent), Finland (13.4), the United States
(10.95), and South Korea (8.4).173
In July 2020, after the ITU adopted the 5G standards proposed
by Huawei, Chinese media broadly celebrated the event as a
triumph for China’s discourse power.174

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
32
China also has had major success in establishing patents
related to 5G technologies. As of September 2022, Chinese
companies accounted for a third of all patent groupings that
are declared as “standards essential,” which are crucial to the
functioning of highly technical economic sectors. China has
supplied a third of these “standard-essential” 5G patents, while
European and US companies supplied 17 and 14.1 percent,
respectively.175
China-sponsored standards have been
widely adopted in Africa, the Middle East,
and Asia, where China had signed ninety
Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) on
technical standards recognition with fifty-
two countries by 2019. As of April 2022,
China’s National Standards Committee
had directly signed forty-four cooperation
agreements with thirty-six countries along
the BRI.
In addition to promoting the uptake of Chinese domestic stan-
dards internationally, Beijing also works to ensure uptake in
third countries via cooperation agreements, especially along
the BRI. Often, Beijing will initiate agreements under the aus-
pices of the BRI that bind financing for major infrastructure
projects, like railways, to the adoption of China’s technical
standards. As China scholar Tim Rühlig writes, “this incentiv-
izes developing countries in particular, as they have a strong
demand for Chinese funding. Chinese technical standards
result in…lock-in effects…as a political dimension of technical
standardization power.”176
Indeed, China-sponsored standards have been widely adopted
in Africa, the Middle East, and Asia, where China had signed
ninety Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) on technical stan-
dards recognition with fifty-two countries by 2019.177 As of April
2022, China’s National Standards Committee had directly
signed forty-four cooperation agreements with thirty-six coun-
tries along the BRI, including Kazakhstan, Mongolia, Singapore,
Tajikistan, and Armenia.178 At the 2019 Belt and Road Forum,
175 Rühlig, “Chinese Influence.”
176 Ibid.
177 Russel and Berger, Stacking the Deck.
178 “ 我国国际标准化协议大盘点” (“Compiling China’s International Standardization Agreements”), China Standard Bureau, April 25, 2022, https://archive.ph/af3L2.
179 Russel and Berger, Stacking the Deck.
180 “2021 年全国标准化工作要点” (“Key Points for National Standardization Work”), Standardization Administration of China, April 9, 2021, https://archive.ph/Ahhcf.
181 Russel and Berger, Stacking the Deck.
182 Rick Rojas and Jesus Jiménez, “As Officers Beat Tyre Nichols, a Crime-Fighting Camera Watched Over Them,” New Y ork Times, February 1, 2023, https://www.nytimes
.com/2023/02/01/us/skycop-camera-tyre-nichols-memphis.html.
183 Anna Gross, Madhumita Murgia, and Yuan Y ang, “Chinese tech groups shaping UN facial recognition standards,” Financial Times, December 1, 2019, https://www.ft.com
/content/c3555a3c-0d3e-11ea-b2d6-9bf4d1957a67.
184 Ibid.
in partnership with UN standards-setting organizations includ-
ing the ITU, the ISO, and the IEC, China announced the launch
of its Standardization Chinese-English Bilingual Intelligent
Translation Cloud Platform. The platform aims to help update
and translate China-led standards to facilitate their adoption by
BRI countries.179
Similarly, in its “2021 Key Points for National Standardization
Work” (2021 年全国标准化工作要点 ), China’s National
Standardization Committee outlined plans to promote inter -
national cooperation on the issue with Pakistan, Costa Rica,
European and Gulf Arab countries, the African Standards
Organization, the Pacific Regional Standards Conference,
the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation’s Subcommittee
on Standards and Conformity Assessment, the Pan
American Standards Committee, and through the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership, specifically.180
Once standards developed through UN standards-setting
bodies are adopted, they can come to have significant mar -
ket-shaping power and can influence the future trajectory of
technology development.181 However, the impact of interna -
tional adoption of Chinese domestic standards is not limited
to just the technical or economic spheres; there are significant
policy implications as well.
As with standards proposed by other countries, including the
United States,182 Chinese standards proposals also often con-
tain policy recommendations in the form of recommended use
cases. For example, Chinese telecommunications company
ZTE, along with China Telecom, proposed facial recognition
standards with recommended use cases such as police mon-
itoring of public spaces for criminal activity.183 An ITU proposal
that was adopted in June 2019 from ZTE and China Mobile laid
out standards and requirements related to “smart street light
services”; these particular standards are tailored in both back-
end architecture and functionality to the design of ZTE’s Smart
Street 2.0 street light.184 One of the use cases promoted in this
proposal outlined potential public safety applications of the
street lights’ surveillance capabilities.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
33
Positive Feedback Loop of Diplomacy,
Technical Standards, and Chinese
Governance Norms
China’s efforts to strengthen its influence in the digital domain
do not only happen in international forums. China’s discourse
power strategy in the digital domain also includes diplomatic
and media efforts in local settings. In addition to shaping inter-
national standards that conform to domestic technologies that
are then widely adopted in Global South countries, China also
engages in people-to-people exchanges that promote “cyber
sovereignty” norms in governance policies. In parallel to these
diplomatic efforts, China often leverages its deep media pen-
etration to flood local media environments with stories of the
benefits of China’s investment in developing countries’ digital
futures. In other words, people-to-people exchanges serve as
connective tissue between the CCP’s goals for technological
development, and its aims to center China at the heart of the
global digital economy.
China’s efforts to gain discourse power in large part cen -
ter around external propaganda and diplomatic engagement
efforts, particularly in the Global South. 185 China has greatly
ramped up its high-level diplomatic visits and people-to-people
exchanges in these regions. According to a database tracked
by the Central European Institute of Asian Studies, Xi himself
traveled on 103 international trips, mostly to the Global South,
from 2013 to 2020, before the onset of the pandemic.186
China’s efforts here also include hosting thousands of training
workshops for elites and technical staff from countries along
the BRI. Through these trainings, China is able to establish rela-
tionships with high-ranking elites who likely have decision-mak-
ing power in their home countries.187 Seminars can range from
“government-media relations, internet censorship and opposi-
tion monitoring on social media platforms” to introductory sem-
inars on the CCP’s version of China’s relationships with Taiwan
and Hong Kong, among other topics.188
185 Thibaut, China’s Discourse Power Operations; Thibaut, Chinese Discourse Power: Ambitions.
186 “Who, Where, When - International Travel of the PRC Leaders (1949-2020),” Central European Institute of Asian Studies (2020), https://who-where-when.ceias.eu/
#h.wpuvkvj4ca2r.
187 Lina Benabdallah, “Power or Influence? Making Sense of China’s Evolving Party-T o-Party Diplomacy in Africa,” African Studies Quarterly 19, 3-4 (2020), https://asq.africa
.ufl.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/168/V19i3-4a6.pdf.
188 Ibid.
189 Ibid.
190 “Vietnam, China cooperate in holding cyber security training course,” Vietnam+, March 3, 2022, https://en.vietnamplus.vn/vietnam-china-cooperate-in-holding-cyber
-security-training-course/222914.vnp.
191 Nadège Rolland, ed., (In)Roads and Outposts: Critical Infrastructure in China’s Africa Strategy, NBR Special Report 98, May 3, 2022, https://www.nbr.org/wp-content
/uploads/pdfs/publications/sr98_inroadsandoutposts_may2022.pdf.
192 “នគរបាល​ ចិន​ចែក​ ព័ត៌មាន​ សម្ងាត់​ និង​ ផ្ដល់​ បច្ចេកវិទ្យា​ តាមដាន​ ជាមួយ​ កម្ពុជា​ហើយ​ ជួយ​ សង់​ ទីបញ្ជាការ​ កណ្ដាល​ នគរបាល​ ជាតិ” (“Chinese Police Share
Intelligence and Provide Surveillance T echnology with Cambodia and Help Build National Police Headquarters”), Voice of America Cambodia, September 29, 2021,
https://khmer.voanews.com/a/new-deal-sees-china-build-cambodia-s-police-hq-share-police-intels-supply-surveillance-techs/6250478.html.
193 Freedom on the Net 2018, Freedom House, October 2018, https://freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/FOTN_2018_Final.pdf.
194 Yuen Yuen Ang, “The Real China Model: It’s Not What Y ou Think It Is,” Foreign Affairs, June 29, 2018, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/asia/2018-06-29/real-china
-model.
195 Zhang Hongpei, “Chinese facial ID tech to land in Africa,” Global Times, May 17, 2018, https://web.archive.org/web/20210120110945/https://www.globaltimes.cn/content
/1102797.shtml.
China actively encourages its partners to attend these train -
ings. For example, in 2019, South Africa’s ruling African National
Congress party, which traditionally has close ties to Beijing,
sent three hundred of its members to receive training in China
on communication platforms and propaganda diffusion.189 The
CCP has also held trainings for Vietnamese party members
on “guiding online public opinion”190 and for Zimbabwe’s rul-
ing ZANU-PF party on cyber controls and surveillance tech -
niques.191 In September 2021, Cambodian Deputy Prime
Minister Sar Kheng and then Chinese public security minister
Zhao Kezhi signed a work plan in which Chinese police would
provide “crime detection equipment” to Cambodia’s Ministry
of Interior and also provide technical training to the country’s
national police.192 From 2017 to 2018 alone, Freedom House
counted thirty-eight cases of foreign media representatives or
elites participating in China-sponsored trainings on media man-
agement and controls, with a heavy emphasis on BRI countries
located in the Global South.193
These trainings offer Beijing the opportunity to market its sur-
veillance and public opinion monitoring tools and technolo -
gies. For example, a 2018 Foreign Affairs article described how
now-incarcerated South Sudanese military official Anthony
Kpandu reportedly placed orders for surveillance drones that
he first saw in China while leading a delegation.194 Similarly, a
2018 article in Chinese state media outlet Global Times out -
lined how, during a business conference in Harare, the chair-
man of Chinese technology company Dahua pledged to train
local scientists from Zimbabwe on how to manage and operate
China’s “safe city” technologies.195
Huawei is perhaps the Chinese firm most well known for the
benefits it has reaped in terms of its involvement in Africa’s ICT
sector. With heavy government assistance, Huawei has been
successful in expanding its capabilities abroad, especially in the
Global South. In 2016, Huawei joined the Smart Africa Alliance,
becoming the organization’s main ICT consultant and occu -
pying a leadership position on its board of directors. Huawei
has used its position to promote its “Safe City Solutions” in the

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
34
region, which purport to help governments enhance public secu-
rity through big data and AI-enabled surveillance and monitor-
ing.196 As of 2015, Huawei had twenty-four representative offices
in Africa, covering all fifty-four countries in the continent, and
about seven thousand one hundred employees.197
In a write-up on Huawei’s website regarding its “Safe City
Solutions”—ominously titled “Nowhere to hide”—the company
described how the system works, stating:
“When constructing safe cities, different municipal
departments and telcos will be able to pool resources
and build integrated systems that combine street
lamps, mini base stations, and surveillance cameras, so
that all areas with street lighting can be placed under
surveillance…. Control and dispatch centers will use
this information to help carry out unified surveillance,
safety management, and dispatch of public safety
resources…. By analyzing people’s behavior in
video footage, and drawing on other government
data such as identity, economic status, and circle of
acquaintances, AI could quickly detect indications of
crimes and predict potential criminal activity.”198
With the support of the state, Huawei pours considerable
resources into research and development (R&D). In 2021,
Huawei spent RMB 142.7 billion (approximately $20 billion) on
R&D, accounting for almost a quarter of its annual revenue. By
comparison, US firm Qualcomm spent about a fifth of its annual
revenue on R&D for the same year, or around $6.7 billion. 199
From 2011 to 2021, Huawei invested more than RMB 845 billion
(approximately $118 billion) in R&D.200 In addition to funding, the
company also pours considerable resources into its public rela-
tions in the regions where it operates.
China places high importance on ICT investment abroad, even
relative to other core economic sectors. For example, for the
years 2015 and 2017, Chinese investment in ICT infrastructure
in Africa was greater than that from the G7, multilateral lending
organizations, and African governments combined.201 According
196 “ 华为举办平安城市非洲峰会：新ICT让城市更安全” (“Huawei Holds Safe City Africa Summit: New ICT Makes Cities Safer”), Huawei, October 17, 2016, https://archive.ph
/IjtXH.
197 “ 非盟主席祖马参观华为北研所” (“African Union Commission Chairperson Dlamini-Zuma visits Huawei North Research Institute”), Huawei, November 2, 2015, https://
archive.ph/7D5iH.
198 Cao Zhihui, “Nowhere to hide: Building safe cities with technology enablers and AI,” Huawei, July, 2016, https://web.archive.org/web/20230201070930/https://www
.huawei.com/us/huaweitech/publication/winwin/ai/nowhere-to-hide.
199 Thomas Alsop, “Qualcomm research and development costs as a share of revenue worldwide from FY 2016 to FY 2022,” Statista, December 16, 2022, https://www
.statista.com/statistics/980321/research-and-development-intensity-of-qualcomm/; Thomas Alsop, “Qualcomm revenue worldwide from FY 2012 to FY 2022,” Statista,
December 16, 2022, https://www.statista.com/statistics/737780/revenue-of-qualcomm/; Huawei Investment & Holding Co., Ltd.: 2021 Annual Report, Huawei, https://
web.archive.org/web/20230128232346/https://www.huawei.com/en/annual-report/2021.
200 Huawei Investment, Huawei.
201 Rebecca Arcesati, “The Digital Silk Road is a development issue,” Merics, April 28, 2020, https://merics.org/en/short-analysis/digital-silk-road-development-issue;
Infrastructure Financing Trends in Africa – 2017, Infrastructure Consortium for Africa, 2018, https://www.icafrica.org/fileadmin/documents/Annual_Reports/IFT2017.pdf.
202 Jevans Nyabiage, “China slashes African infrastructure loans but ICT funding holds firm,” South China Morning Post, April 27, 2022, https://www.scmp.com/news/china
/diplomacy/article/3175558/china-slashes-african-infrastructure-loans-ict-funding-holds.
203 Ibid.
204 Bulelani Jili, “A T echnological Fix: The Adoption of Chinese Public Security Systems,” Georgetown Journal of International Affairs, January 20, 2023, https://gjia
.georgetown.edu/2023/01/20/a-technological-fix-the-adoption-of-chinese-public-security-systems/.
205 Ibid.
to the Boston University Global Development Policy Center,
which tracks Chinese lending to Africa, lending fell almost 80
percent in 2020, from thirty-three loan agreements worth $8.3
billion in 2019 to just eleven worth almost $2 billion in 2020.202
This trend held true for all but the ICT sector, in which Chinese
lending actually increased. ICT lending alone accounted for
almost $570 million, or a third of total lending in 2020.203
China’s lending abroad is enabled by the major demand in
Global South countries for digital infrastructure and better meth-
ods to deliver public goods, including public safety. As China-
Africa scholar Bulelani Jili writes, the decision by African gov-
ernments to procure “Smart City solutions” is due in large part
to the cost effectiveness of the platforms, and that “local pro -
curement is critically driven by public security ambitions and jus-
tified as a means towards development in African countries.”204
At the same time, however, China also imparts policy guidance
and operational know-how for how to govern these technolo-
gies, which can lead to human rights concerns in environments
with limited governance capacity and where regulatory frame-
works over issues related to cybersecurity and data privacy are
lacking.205
The laws include vague references to
activities and communications that may be
subject to government intervention, should
they offer the “potential to impact national
security.” Such an expansive and unclear
definition is purposeful, as it provides the
government broad discretion in deciding to
intervene in the operations of the country’s
ICT sector.
Particularly, China’s Cyber Security Law (2016), Intelligence
Law (2017), and Data Security Law (2021), among other legal

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
35
frameworks, have reportedly served as inspiration for coun -
tries in the Global South. These laws embody China’s “cyber
sovereignty” principle, which holds that each country has the
right to exert control over their own online media and commu-
nications and which puts state security at the forefront of dig-
ital governance considerations. The laws include vague refer-
ences to activities and communications that may be subject
to government intervention, should they offer the “potential to
impact national security.” Such an expansive and unclear defini-
tion is purposeful, as it provides the government broad discre-
tion in deciding to intervene in the operations of the country’s
ICT sector.
As a concrete example of how the standards, technology,
ICT investment, and diplomacy cycle works to China’s bene -
fit, Zimbabwe’s 2019 Cyber Crime, Cyber Security and Data
Protection Bill—as reported by analysts, activists, and research-
ers—was inspired by the Chinese principle of cyber sovereign-
ty.206 It grants the government broad authority to crack down
on social media use and detain those it deems to have spread
“harmful” information online. 207 Some democracy activists in
Zimbabwe have said they believe the government “will lean
on China for technology and expertise to monitor and regulate
social media data under the new cyber-crime law.”208
206 Tawanda Karombo, “Zimbabwe is clamping down on social media use with a cyber crime bill set to become law,” Quartz, October 9, 2019, https://qz.com/africa/1724542
/zimbabwe-bill-clamps-down-on-social-media-porn-with-china-tech/; Eric Olander, “Zimbabwe Expected to Lean on Chinese Expertise and Technology to Enforce
New Cyber Crime Law,” China Global South Project, October 10, 2019, https://chinaglobalsouth.com/2019/10/10/zimbabwe-expected-to-lean-on-chinese-expertise-and
-technology-to-enforce-new-cyber-crime-law/.
207 Ibid.
208 Ibid.
209 Itai Mushekwe, “China, Russia and Iran helping Zimbabwe to set-up own NSA,” Bulawayo, March 23, 2018, https://bulawayo24.com/index-id-technology-sc-internet-byo
-131135.html.
210 Ignatius Banda, “Zimbabwe Makes First Journalist Arrests Under Cybersecurity Law,” Global Issues, August 10, 2022, https://www.globalissues.org/news/2022/08/10
/31588; Ignatius Banda, “Zimbabwe Makes First Journalist Arrests Under Cybersecurity Law,” AllAfrica, August 10, 2022, https://allafrica.com/stories/202208100404.html.
211 Asterius Banzi, “Tanzania seeks Chinese help in social media,” EastAfrican, August 1, 2017, https://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/Tanzania-seeks-Chinese-help-in
-social-media/2558-4041306-d66m76z/index.html.
212 Nick Bailey, “East African States Adopt China’s Playbook on Internet Censorship,” Freedom House, October 24, 2017, https://freedomhouse.org/article/east-african
-states-adopt-chinas-playbook-internet-censorship; “The Electronic and Postal Communications,” Gazette of the United Republic of Tanzania 29, 101, July 17, 2020,
https://www.tcra.go.tz/uploads/documents/sw-1619088125-The%20Electronic%20and%20Postal%20Communications%20(Online%20Content)%20Regulations,%202020
.pdf.
Supporting this view, a senior ICT official in Zimbabwe confirmed
in 2018 that China was assisting to set up the country’s version of
a National Security Agency, equipped with “world class [surveil-
lance] technology for us to be geared against threats foreign and
domestic.”209 Zimbabwe made its first journalist arrests under the
cybersecurity law in August 2022, ahead of the 2023 election
in which the ZANU-PF is aiming to keep its hold on power. The
journalists were charged with “spreading false data messages”
on social media platforms, in line with the provisions of the law.210
Similar cases can been seen in other countries. For example,
at an August 2017 roundtable jointly hosted by the govern -
ment of Tanzania and the Cyberspace Administration of China,
the Tanzanian deputy minister for transport and communica -
tions endorsed China’s web censorship and set it as a model to
strive for: “Our Chinese friends have managed to block [social]
media [platforms] in their country and replaced them with their
homegrown sites that are safe, constructive and popular. We
aren’t there yet, but while we are still using these platforms we
should guard against their misuse.”211 In 2020, Tanzania devel-
oped its Electronic and Postal Communications (Online Content)
Regulations, which included prohibitions on “content that causes
annoyance.” 212 The government amended the regulations
Screencap of promotional article on Huawei’s website outlining the benefits of its Smart City Solutions for tackling crime.Q

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
36
in 2022 but made no meaningful changes to roll back the
censorship.213
In July 2017, the state-owned China National Electronics Import
& Export Corp. (CEIEC) signed a preliminary agreement with the
Ugandan government to provide a “comprehensive cyber-se-
curity solution, including technical capacity to monitor and pre-
vent social media abuse.” 214 CEIEC helped build the surveil -
lance capacity of the Uganda Communications Commission,
Ugandan Police Force, and Ministry of Internal Affairs. The state-
owned enterprise was later sanctioned by the United States
in November 2020 for its support of the Maduro regime in
Venezuela, claiming that it
“restrict[ed] internet service and conduct[ed] digital
surveillance against political opponents of the regime.
CEIEC has provided software, training, and technical
expertise to the [Maduro] regime’s entities.  It provides
cyber support and technical experts to state-run
telecommunications provider Venezuelan National
Telephone Company (CANTV) which controls 70
percent of internet service in Venezuela and frequently
213 “Ammendment (sic) of Electronic and Postal Communications
 Regulations, 2022,” Tanzania Communications Regulatory Authority, 2022, https://www.tcra.go.tz/uploads/newsdocs/sw-1651236980-Public%20Notice%20-%20
Ammendment%20of%20Electronic%20and%20Postal%20Communications%20Regulations,2022.pdf.
214 “China to help Uganda fight Internet abuse,” Monitor, January 15, 2021, https://www.monitor.co.ug/News/National/China-Uganda-Internet-Evelyn-Anite-Africa-Internet
-Users/688334-4032626-u1l61r/index.html.
215 U.S. Embassy Caracas, U.S. sanctions CEIEC for supporting the illegitimate Maduro regime’s efforts to undermine Venezuelan democracy, press statement, November
30, 2020, https://ve.usembassy.gov/u-s-sanctions-ceiec-for-supporting-the-illegitimate-maduro-regimes-efforts-to-undermine-venezuelan-democracy/.
216 Bailey, “East African States.”
217 “Uganda: Elections Marred by Violence,” Human Rights Watch, January 21, 2021, https://www.hrw.org/news/2021/01/21/uganda-elections-marred-violence.
218 Patpicha Tanakasempipat, “Thailand passes internet security law decried as ‘cyber martial law,’” Reuters, February 28, 2019, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-thailand
-cyber/thailand-passes-internet-security-law-decried-as-cyber-martial-law-idUSKCN1QH1OB.
blocks online independent newspapers and speeches
by opposition members.”215
According to Ugandan civil society organization Unwanted
Witness, which advocates for “open, secure and accessible
internet,” the China-Uganda social media monitoring agree -
ment came during a time when internet users were engaging on
social media platforms to discuss a parliamentary debate on rais-
ing the presidential age limit. Doing so allowed the incumbent
Y oweri Museveni to successfully seek another term in 2021.216
The Uganda Communications Commission—the same entity that
had received assistance from CEIEC—shut down the internet the
day before the election and restricted access to social media
platforms.217
In February 2019, Thailand’s parliament passed an internet
security law that shares strong similarities with China’s cyber-
security law, including provisions requiring that a governmen-
tal body, the Cybersecurity Regulating Committee—similar to
China’s Central Cyberspace Affairs Commission (CAC)—would
have broad access to computer data and information.218 In July
2022, the Thai government signed an MOU with China’s CAC to
Graphic reworking data from the Infrastructure Consortium of Africa’s 2017 annual report depicting Chinese commitments in Africa by
sector between 2012 and 2017. R
22,500
15,000
7,500
0
Other Multi-sector ICT Energy Water Transport
$ Million
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Chinese Commitments by Sector

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
37
cooperate on “cybersecurity and cyberspace stability.”219 A June
2022 report by the Alliance for Securing Democracy outlines
further examples of China-inspired policies and governance
frameworks in Myanmar, which passed a similar cybersecurity
bill “with provisions that directly echo those found in…China.”220
The report also documented similar instances of China-inspired
internet governance and cybersecurity-related policies in
Nigeria, Senegal, and Jamaica.221 Freedom House outlined how
Vietnam’s 2017 cybersecurity law contained similar language
to that of China’s law and linked its development to Beijing’s
cyber-related trainings with high-ranking Vietnamese officials
in 2016 and 2017.222 Other reports have outlined the adoption of
similar China-inspired laws, policies, and approaches in Egypt,
Uganda, and Tanzania, among others.223
Weaponizing Data
While having a market for its products and seeding the spread
of “cyber sovereignty” could be an end in itself in China’s dis-
course power push, expanded access to more diverse pools
of data is a powerful motivator as well. China’s deep and broad
involvement in digital connectivity in the Global South is part of
its broader plan to gain access to data to better refine its mes-
saging and public opinion management capabilities, both at
home and abroad.
A recent example helps to illustrate this point. In 2018, under
the auspices of the BRI, China’s CloudWalk Technology signed
a cooperation agreement with the government of Zimbabwe
on a mass facial recognition project. 224 The agreement is for
CloudWalk to set up a national facial recognition database. In
the project agreement, the system is billed as being able to help
Zimbabwe’s law enforcement with public safety and security.225
In turn, CloudWalk gains access to biometric data of thousands
of African faces, which it will use to enhance the precision of its
technology.226 As of June 2022, CloudWalk has reportedly been
implementing the agreement in stages and will soon roll out its
camera and network infrastructure in Zimbabwe.227
219 “International: China and Thailand Sign MoU on Cybersecurity,” DataGuidance, July 7, 2022, https://www.dataguidance.com/news/international-china-and-thailand-sign
-mou-cybersecurity.
220 Bryce Barros, Nathan Kohlenberg, and Etienne Soula, China and the Digital Information Stack in the Global South, Alliance for Securing Democracy, German Marshall
Fund of the United States, June 15, 2022, https://securingdemocracy.gmfus.org/china-digital-stack/.
221 Ibid.
222 Freedom, Freedom House.
223 Russel and Berger, Stacking the Deck.
224 Chris Burt, “Zimbabwe govt selects CloudWalk for mass facial recognition project,” Biometric Update, April 13, 2018, https://www.biometricupdate.com/201804
/zimbabwe-govt-selects-cloudwalk-for-mass-facial-recognition-project.
225 Chris Burt, “Implementation of CloudWalk facial recognition technology in Zimbabwe progressing in stages,” Biometric Update, May 18, 2018, https://www
.biometricupdate.com/201805/implementation-of-cloudwalk-facial-recognition-technology-in-zimbabwe-progressing-in-stages.
226 “China exports facial ID technology to Zimbabwe,” New Zimbabwe, April 13, 2018, https://www.newzimbabwe.com/china-exports-facial-id-technology-to-zimbabwe/;
Zhang, “Chinese facial ID tech.”
227 Kudzai Chimhangwa, “How Artificial Intelligence could influence Zimbabwe’s 2023 elections,” Global Voices, June 13, 2022, https://globalvoices.org/2022/06/13/how
-artificial-intelligence-could-influence-zimbabwes-2023-elections/.
228 Dahlia Peterson and Samantha Hoffman, Geopolitical Implications of AI and Digital Surveillance Adoption, Brookings Institution, June 2022, https://www.brookings.edu
/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/FP_20220621_surveillance_exports_peterson_hoffman_v2.pdf.
229 Dumisani Ndlela, “Privacy violations fears grow as govt sets surveillance cameras in cities,” Standard, June 21, 2020, https://www.thestandard.co.zw/2020/06/21/privacy
-violations-fears-grow-govt-sets-surveillance-cameras-cities/.
230 Christopher Balding, “Chinese Open Source Data Collection, Big Data, And Private Enterprise Work For State Intelligence and Security: The Case of Shenzhen
Zhenhua,” SSRN, (2020), http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3691999.
Researchers have pointed out the utility of such data in China’s
ongoing repression and persecution of its Uyghur Muslim pop-
ulation. 228 Gaining access to expanded data sources gives
Chinese companies the opportunity to test and develop stan-
dards for detecting physical attributes specific to certain ethnic
populations for targeting purposes. In turn, such technologies
supplied to the government in Harare, civil society actors worry,
will allow for the government to more precisely surveil, identify,
and track down political dissidents.229
The CCP’s ability to gather data has
increased in recent years and has been used
to enhance the capabilities of the external
propaganda system…[data-gathering firms]
use a variety of analysis methods, including
semantics and clustering, to understand
public preferences and “evaluate the
difference between this understanding and
media expectations...helping Chinese media
build top international discourse power and
influence.
China is also co-opting its domestic firms active along the BRI for
data-gathering purposes. A September 2020 report detailed a
massive database gathered by a company in Shenzhen for the
purposes of informing intelligence and influence operations.
Shenzhen Zhenhua Data Information Technology Co. compiled
the Overseas Key Information Database, which contained infor-
mation on 2.4 million individuals and more than six hundred fifty
thousand organizations. The company has close ties with the
Ministry of State Security, China’s main spy organization, and the
People’s Liberation Army (PLA).230

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
38
The CCP’s ability to gather data has increased in recent years
and has been used to enhance the capabilities of the external
propaganda system. In 2016, for example, Nebula (Beijing) Big
Data Information Technology Co., Ltd. signed a contract with
China’s state-run CCTV International to provide its big data
cloud platform service.231 Nebula engages in mass collection of
personal data across digital media (both its own and overseas
media outlets), social media, and other platforms, in dozens of
countries and multiple languages.232 On social media platforms
specifically, Nebula uses its big data and cloud computing tech-
nologies to obtain vast amounts of data related to international
public opinion on news topics related to China.233 It uses a vari-
ety of analysis methods, including semantics and clustering, to
understand public preferences and “evaluate the difference
between this understanding and media expectations…helping
231 Nebula, “Nebula Signed a Contract.”
232 Ibid.
233 “ 中国电视台Y ouTube平台海外中文传播力报告” (“Report of CCTV’s Foreign Broadcasting Metrics on Y ouTube”), Afenxi, June 2, 2016, https://archive.is/PRUay; “星云纵
横申报《关于推动北京文化’走出去’》相关课题成功中标” (“Nebula Won the Bid for the ‘Promoting Beijing Culture “Going Global” Project’”), Nebula, March 28, 2017,
https://archive.md/5AmPU.
234  Ibid.
235 Nebula, “Nebula Signed a Contract”; “【聚焦京交会】星云纵横国际大数据将在‘京交会’上点亮’启明星’” (“[Beijing International Trade Fair] Nebula International Big Data
Will Light up the ‘Venus’ at the ‘Beijing International Trade Fair’”), Shanghai International Service Trade Industry Association, May 23, 2016, https://archive.md/7FGRi.
236 Nebula, “Nebula Signed a Contract.”
237 Ibid.; “星云纵横发布‘国际互联网新媒体传播指数’” (“Nebula Released the ‘Internet New Media Communication Index’”), Sohu, August 31, 2016, https://web.archive.org
/web/20220810140841/https://www.sohu.com/a/113001282_439559.
238 Nebula, “Nebula Signed a Contract.”
239 Samantha Hoffman, Engineering global consent: The Chinese Communist Party’s data-driven power expansion, Australian Strategic Policy Institute, October 14, 2019,
https://www.aspi.org.au/report/engineering-global-consent-chinese-communist-partys-data-driven-power-expansion.
Chinese media build top international discourse power and
influence.”234
Slides from a 2016 presentation given by Nebula, detailing its
capabilities in analyzing social media through big data (top) and
describing how its mission statement overlaps with China’s for-
eign propaganda goals as outlined by Chinese President Xi
Jinping (bottom).
Nebula also specifically outlines its in-country capabilities in
countries along the BRI, claiming it gives Chinese state media
the ability to “accurately judge the cognition, emotion and atti-
tude feedback of local social masses, enterprises and gov -
ernment departments” so that they can engage in “timely
adjustment of propaganda strategies to help the smooth imple-
mentation of national strategy.”235
Nebula feeds the data it gathers into a single consolidated
platform, which is then provided to China’s external propa -
ganda bureaus. 236 Nebula’s clients also include the Chinese
International Education Foundation, which oversees China’s
Confucius Institutes across the globe, several tourism bureaus
and government agencies, enterprises and institutions, and the
PLA.237 During the signing ceremony for the event, the coopera-
tion agreement was touted in state media as “marking the arrival
of the big data era of Chinese media’s foreign propaganda.”238
While Nebula is just one company, other reports show similar
dynamics. A 2019 ASPI report traced how a translation company
under China’s CPD gathers massive amounts of data from its
subsidiaries, including along the BRI, through the language ser-
vices it provides; this data is in turn used to aid government deci-
sion-making through the generation of sentiment analysis.239
Slides from a 2016 presentation given by Nebula,
detailing its capabilities in analyzing social media through
big data (top) and describing how its mission statement
overlaps with China’s foreign propaganda goals as
outlined by Chinese President Xi Jinping (bottom).S

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
39
CONCLUSION
T
his report used the frame of “converged media” to illustrate
the capabilities and impacts of China’s discourse power
efforts in the digital domain. While the effects of China’s
efforts at a global scale are mixed, the most significant conse-
quences can be seen in how the spaces for digital rights and free-
doms in civil societies shrink in countries with less robust govern-
ment protections.
This study found that, anecdotally, China’s efforts can be highly
effective in countries where civic freedoms are already limited
and where winning the support of a small coalition of political
elites matters over winning public support. In the rather extreme
case of Zimbabwe, China is openly and actively antagonizing
and targeting journalists and civil society activists. These find-
ings cast doubt on assessments of Chinese influence that look
solely at public opinion data. Such research may miss the fact
that in some domestic contexts, China sees elite capture as
much more important than winning hearts and minds.
This report also sought to clearly illustrate the connection
between China’s efforts at media and information operations,
its efforts to implement technical standards and norms at the
international level, and changes on the ground in countries in
the Global South, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. Through
people-to-people exchanges, China cultivates elite networks
through media and technical trainings; these elites then return to
their home countries and purchase Chinese technologies, imple-
ment Chinese know-how, and pass Chinese-style laws enshrin-
ing “cyber sovereignty.”
These relationships also allow China to gain access to vast data
resources, which it can then use to further hone its messages
and enhance its censorship and propaganda apparatus. It can
leverage these improved tools and technologies in banal ways,
like helping the tourism bureau craft a compelling narrative of
“Beautiful China.” However, it can also use Nebula’s sentiment
data to help the PLA engage in more targeted information oper-
ations and psychological warfare campaigns against countries
like Taiwan.
This process becomes a positive feedback loop, in which influ-
ence begets influence and deepens lock-in at multiple levels:
through the provided technical infrastructure, the standards
through which it operates, and the penetration of Chinese inter-
ests at the political and policy level, from the UN to Harare.
In short, the impacts of China’s efforts are asymmetric. While the
popularity of its state and traditional media lags behind that of
the West, its efforts to shape the environments within media and
information operations are much more effective and, in actuality,
constitute the focus of China’s discourse power strategy.
In terms of impact, China has gained considerable shaping
power through its discourse power efforts in the digital domain.
China is creating an alternative order in the Global South, one
centered on connectivity. Responding to these developments
requires understanding the ecosystem that China has created,
as well as the push and pull factors facing those engaged within
it. It will also require effectively communicating—and delivering
on—the advantages that a democratic approach to technologi-
cal governance offers to the global majority.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: CAPABILITIES AND IMPACT
40
Endnotes
A. Y ang Zhijin, “学习党部预算：五部门公共预算支出37.68亿” (“Learning the Budget of the Party Department: The Public Budget Expenditure of the
Five Departments Is 3.768 Billion”), 21st Century Business Herald, March 18, 2015, https://archive.ph/Oqqzm.
B. “網路瘋傳「蔡政府迫害宗教」 內政部澄清” (“‘Tsai’s Religious Persecution’ Went Viral, Government Clarified”), Liberty Times Net, July 19, 2017,
https:// news.ltn.com.tw/news/life/breakingnews/2136226.
C. “China,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute, September 19, 2019, https://infoops.aspi.org.au/country/china/.
D. DFRLab-generated graph using data taken from Twitter and Facebook.
E. People’s Daily, China, “‘I’m a Party member!’ A herdsman in Xinjiang, China refused to be paid after helping tourists pull their car out of the mud.”
Facebook video, January 2, 2022, https://www.facebook.com/PeoplesDaily/videos/1247766429048122/.
F. DFRLab-generated network map created using R and data scraped from Twitter’s API.
G. 曹 毅 CAO Yi ميسو وبأ Cao Yi_MFA), “2001 vs 2021,” Twitter, August 18, 2021, 8:48 a.m., https://archive.ph/xi7Oa.
H. Global Times (@globaltimesnews), “#Editorial: It is claimed G7 and NATO summits will showcase ‘unprecedented unity.’ Obviously, that unity is only
among some small circles within the West. As...,” Twitter, June 26, 2022, 4:42 p.m., https://twitter.com/globaltimesnews/status/1541099610491326464;
China Daily (@ChinaDaily), “#ChinaDailyCartoon G7 plans more sanctions against #Russia #G7 #US,” Twitter, June 29, 2022, 1:10 a.m., https://twitter
.com/ChinaDaily/status/1541952321705627648; Xinhua Indonesia (@XHIndonesia), “Konferensi Tingkat Tinggi (KTT) Kelompok Tujuh (Group of Seven/
G7) dibuka di tengah aksi protes dan ekspektasi yang rendah [“The Group of Seven (G7) Summit opens amid protests and low expectations”]” https://
bit.ly/3bvTvT," Twitter, June 27, 2022, 8:00 a.m., https://twitter.com/XHIndonesia/status/1541330497183404034; Lijian Zhao 赵立坚 (@zlj517), “A year
later, G7’s great ‘achievement’: having renamed last year’s plan,” Twitter, June 27, 2022, 1:22 p.m., https://twitter.com/zlj517/status/1541411561763635201.
For more, see: Richard C. Bush and Ryan Hass, “The Biden administration is right to include Taiwan in the Summit for Democracy,” Brookings
Institution, December 1, 2021, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/order-from-chaos/2021/12/01/the-biden-administration-is-right-to-include-taiwan-in-
the-summit -for-democracy/.
I. Diário do Povo (@DiarioPovo), “O ministro das Relações Exteriores da China, Wang Yi, saudou a decisão da #Nicarágua de cortar os laços com
a região de #Taiwan e retomar os laços diplomáticos…” (“Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi welcomed #Nicaragua’s decision to cut ties with the
#Taiwan region and resume diplomatic ties with the People’s Republic of China on Friday”), Twitter, December 10, 2021, 8:04 a.m., https://archive
.ph/cRGv5.
J. People’s Daily, China (@PDChina), “Chinese Ambassador to the United States Cui Tiankai answered questions regarding FM spokesperson Zhao
Lijian’s opinion on tweets in an interview with Axios on...,” Twitter, March 23, 2020, 3:30 p.m., https://archive.ph/bC0Lz; Jonathan Swan and Bethany
Allen-Ebrahimian, “Top Chinese Official Disowns U.S. Military Lab Coronavirus Conspiracy,” Axios, March 22, 2020, https://www.axios.com/2020/03
/22/china-coronavirus-ambassador-cui-tiankai.
K. Tom Fowdy, “Why China Is Losing the War of Words with the West,” RT, November 18, 2021, https://archive.ph/wLnc4.
L. Zhou Pingjian, “Is China Kenya’s largest creditor? No way! ‘debt trap’ claim is misleading,” Standard, July 2, 2022, https://www.standardmedia.co.ke
/business/opinion/article/2001449406/is-china-kenyas-largest-creditor-no-way-debt-trap-claim-is-misleading.
M. “Isma badali doono Shiinaha oo mid ah iyo dib ugu soo noqoshada Taiwan ee Dhulka hooyo” (“We will not change to one China and return to Taiwan
as Motherland,” SONNA, August 7, 2022, https://web.archive.org/web/20221001120432/https://sonna.so/so/isma-badali-doono-shiinaha-oo-mid-ah
-iyo-dib-ugu-soo-noqoshada-taiwan-ee-dhulka-hooyo/.
N. “Africa, China Media Synergy Crucial to Foil Disinformation, Says Ethiopian Amb. Teshome,” ENA, https://www.ena.et/en/?p=38050.
O. DFRLab-generated graphs using Meltwater’s social media monitoring tool Explore.
P. The China Academy of Information and Communications Technology (@中国信息通信研究院), “#5G#【我国提交的5G技术方案顺利成为国际电信
联盟认可的5G国际标准】北京时间2020年7月9日晚间，ITU-R WP5D#35会议宣布了IMT-2020（5G）技术方案的诞生。我国基于3GPP技术
的无线空口技术方案顺利成为ITU认可的5G方案。中国的5G无线空口技术方案基于3GPP新空口（NR）和窄带物联网,” (“#5G# [The 5G technical
solution submitted by China has successfully become the 5G international standard recognized by the International Telecommunication Union]
On the evening of July 9, 2020, Beijing time, the ITU-R WP5D#35 meeting announced the IMT-2020 (5G) technical solution. China’s wireless air
interface technology solution based on 3GPP technology has successfully become a 5G solution approved by ITU. China’s 5G wireless air interface
technology solution is based on 3GPP new air interface (NR) and narrowband Internet of Things”), Weibo, July 10, 2020, https://archive.is/1Y3UT.
Q. Cao Zhihui, “Nowhere to hide: Building safe cities with technology enablers and AI,” Huawei, July, 2016, https://web.archive.org/web/20230201070930
/https://www.huawei.com/us/huaweitech/publication/winwin/ai/nowhere-to-hide.
R. Infrastructure Financing Trends in Africa - 2017 , Infrastructure Consortium for Africa, 2018, https://www.iafrica.org/fileadmin/documents/Annual_
Reports/IFT2017.pdf.
S. “【星云发布】第十六期《2016年社交平台新闻大数据》” (“[Nebula Release] Issue 16 ‘2016 Social Platform News Big Data’”), Nebula, October 28,
2016, https://archive.is/dbwjP.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Atlantic Council Board of Directors
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
TREASURER
*George Lund
DIRECTORS
Stephen Achilles
Gina F. Adams
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Sarah E. Beshar
Stephen Biegun
Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
John Bonsell
Philip M. Breedlove
Richard R. Burt
*Teresa Carlson
*James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
Lawrence Di Rita
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Richard Edelman
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Mark T. Esper
*Michael Fisch
Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Marcel Grisnigt
Jarosław Grzesiak
Murathan Günal
Michael V. Hayden
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Kay Bailey Hutchison
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
*Joia M. Johnson
*Safi Kalo
Andre Kelleners
Brian L. Kelly
Henry A. Kissinger
John E. Klein
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Joseph Konzelmann
Keith Krach
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Almar Latour
Yann Le Pallec
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Gerardo Mato
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Majida Mourad
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Julia Nesheiwat
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
*Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell
 McCormick
Michael Punke
Ashraf Qazi
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Jeff Shockey
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Varun Sivaram
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
Nader Tavakoli
*Gil Tenzer
*Frances F. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
*Al Williams
Ben Wilson
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster
*Executive Committee Members
List as of July 5, 2023

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that
 promotes constructive US leadership and engagement
in international affairs based on the central role of
the Atlantic community in meeting today’s global
 challenges.
© 2023 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All
rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means
without permission in writing from the Atlantic Council,
except in the case of brief quotations in news articles,
critical articles, or reviews. Please direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
