
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Atlantic Council
GEOTECH CENTER
Smart Partnerships amid
Great Power Competition
AI, China, and the Global Quest
for Digital Sovereignty
Mathew Burrows, PhD and Julian Mueller-Kaler

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
The Atlantic Council GeoTech Center works to shape
the global future of data and technology together.
Atlantic Council
GEOTECH CENTER

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
ISBN-13: 978-1-61977-151-2
Cover: Das gekrümmte Schachbrett (The Warped Chessboard) ©Sandro Del-Prete/sandrodelprete.com. “For all intents
and purposes, the chess board is seen to curve or warp in the middle, since on one side, the pieces are placed under
the board, while on the other, they are placed on the board. However, all of the lines are perfectly straight and parallel.”
— Sandro Del-Prete
This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic Council Policy on Intellectual Independence. The
authors are solely responsible for its analysis and recommendations. The Atlantic Council and its donors do not determine,
nor do they necessarily endorse or advocate for, any of this report’s conclusions.
January 2021
Smart Partnerships amid
Great Power Competition:
AI, China, and the Global Quest
for Digital Sovereignty
Mathew Burrows, PhD and Julian Mueller-Kaler

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
II
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Table of Contents
Preface 1
A Broken Global Order 2
 Third Parties Don’t Want to Choose Sides 3
 Europe’s Hurdles 4
 Cooperation in a Bipolar World 5
 China’s Ambiguity 5
 Worries About AI Externalities 6
 India’s Quest for Digital Sovereignty 7
 Technology for Good 7
 Smart Partnerships for Global Challenges 8
Scenarios for a Future Tech World 10
 An Unequal World 10
 A Bipolar World 1 1
 A Multilateral Resurgence 1 1
A Justified Worry 13
Acknowledgements 13
About the Authors 14

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
1
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Preface
1 Edward Luce, “Trump is serious about US divorce from China,” Financial Times, September 19, 2019, https://www.ft.com/content/27b0a5e2-dab6-
11e9-8f9b-77216ebe1f17.
Turning and turning in the widening gyre
The falcon cannot hear the falconer;
Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;
Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world
The Second Coming, William Butler Yates
A
rtificial intelligence (AI) and other emerging
technologies are developing at an exponential
pace, and the discussion about their use as well
as their implications for society and international
relations is shaped by uncertainty. Whether it is the future
of work, the collection and application of data, or new
means for surveillance and social manipulation—AI will
most likely influence every aspect of modern life. Change
that is coming no matter whether people like it or not, and
decision makers are under pressure to prepare for a new
world in the digital age.
In order to establish forums, enable discussions about
opportunities and challenges of modern technologies,
and evaluate their implications for US-China relations, the
Atlantic Council was awarded a Rockefeller Foundation
grant that helped lay the groundwork for a new GeoTech
Center, launched on March 11, 2020. Over the course of
one year, we organized meetings in Paris, Brussels, and
Berlin; traveled to Beijing and Shanghai; and held virtual
conferences with India and Africa, all the while trying to
answer one question: How can countries successfully
collaborate on big data, AI, and other modern technologies
amid the widening political gyre?
The following report captures key takeaways from these
roundtable conversations, identifies the challenges and
opportunities that different regions of the world face when
dealing with emerging technologies, and evaluates China’s
role as a global citizen. In times of economic decoupling and
rising geopolitical bipolarity, it highlights opportunities for
smart partnerships, describes how data and AI applications
can be harnessed for good, and develops scenarios on
where an AI-powered world might be headed. Given the
experimental nature of emerging technologies, it will come
as no surprise that the emphasis is thereby put on the need
for regulatory cooperation, even as we recognize that AI
development has become a new playing field for great
power competition.
As a matter of fact, during the conversations, it often seemed
as if the political winds have changed so dramatically that
America’s win-win approach towards China and international
cooperation has turned into a lose-lose situation, with
globalization being the prime casualty, as Ed Luce wrote so
eloquently in the Financial Times about the Paris meeting
last year.1 In worrying about the growing Sino-US rivalry and
being reluctant about picking sides, countries and state
conglomerates around the world have started to pursue
their own digital sovereignty.
Y et optimism prevails in many places. Throughout all of the
workshops, there was universal agreement that AI and other
emerging technologies are critical for social progress. While
advanced economies may have seen the greatest gains so
far from integrating modern technologies, poorer societies
won’t be able to leapfrog into much more advanced stages
of development without using them. Within societies, no
ethnic, racial, or minority group should be disadvantaged,
and ideally, new tech should be a tool for reducing class
divisions instead of intensifying them. Paving the way for
such an uplifting process, cooperation within and among
countries at a global, national, and sub-national level is
necessary. Despite everyone allegedly sharing the same
positive goals and principles, international cooperation on
mutually agreed regulatory AI-frameworks remains unlikely,
not least because the global governance system is under
immense pressure.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A Broken Global Order
2 Mike Pompeo, “Communist China and the Free World’s Future,” US Department of State, July 23, 2020, https://www.state.gov/communist-china-and-the-
free-worlds-future/.
3 Robert O’Brien, “How China Threatens American Democracy,” Foreign Affairs, October 21, 2020, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/
china/2020-10-21/how-china-threatens-american-democracy.
4 Richard Haass, “How a World Order Ends,” Foreign Affairs, January /February 2019, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/2018-12-11/how-world-order-
ends.
S
kepticism and distrust in emerging technologies are
both a cause and an effect of a world in disarray.
Popular hostility in the United States towards China
has grown significantly, with influential voices citing
Beijing’s use of intellectual property (IP) theft or forced
handover of technology from US companies as the means
by which the People’s Republic of China (PRC) has caught
up with the West.2 Furthermore, many decision makers in
Washington believe that China’s rapid progress threatens
the United States’ traditional leadership role.3 Resentment
that is partly fueled by the fact that globalization and China’s
growing economic role has coincided with a decline of
American middle-class living standards and a public fatigue
with the US’ global engagement.4
On the other hand, Chinese interlocutors hold the opinion
that the United States is using the allegations to push down
China and deny the country its rightful place in the world.
At the Berlin workshop, one Chinese expert explained that
decision makers in Beijing, as well as many in the public,
never refer to the “rise” of China, but rather see it as a
“restoration.” Metaphorically speaking, the PRC might have
Vintage globe close up. Source: Unsplash/Artem Beliaikin (https://unsplash.com/photos/FWzxSkTS7v0)

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
been able to play at the high table, but it has always been
reminded who owns the casino. From Beijing’s perspective,
however, China deserves to be a rule maker, not just a rule
taker.5
Even though the East Asian country is not close to eclipsing
US dominance yet, any sort of cooperation is difficult
to implement as long as the legitimacy of China’s rise
is in dispute in Washington and other Western capitals.
Ideological questions as well as different narratives further
complicate the situation. Beijing sees AI and other emerging
technologies primarily as a critical tool for preserving
domestic stability and improving its defense capabilities,
while US decision makers feel increasingly pressured to get
tough on Beijing “before it is too late.” US State Department
officials at the Paris meeting, for instance, explained that
as long as China remains undemocratic and expands its
authoritarian control, the United States won’t pursue any
kind of cooperation on AI and other emerging technologies.
Furthermore, they called on other democratic countries in
Europe not to engage with China on tech either—leaving
European participants not just in disbelief but in fear of a
great power competition that can easily spiral out of control.
Despite the subsequent Sino-US trade talks and settlements,
tensions over AI and other emerging technologies have
grown worse over the course of last year—particularly in
light of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. In response to
the PRC’s decision to impose a national security law on a
semi-autonomous Hong Kong, the Trump administration
announced retaliatory measures, including the restrictions
on Chinese students and researchers to study certain
disciplines at American universities.6 Furthermore, the United
States has been battling Huawei, China’s telecommunication
heavyweight, and continues to threaten friends and foes
alike with countermeasures if they allow Chinese tech firms
help build respective 5G networks. Beyond the restrictions
on Huawei, the Trump administration has outright banned
some Chinese companies to operate in the US market.7
Unsurprisingly, China’s current and former high-ranking
officials strongly object the US position and, at various
roundtables, pointed to America’s “imperfect record on
human rights” as well as ongoing “illegal interferences”
in other countries’ domestic affairs, including China. 8
As a matter of fact, most Chinese officials we talked to
5 Julian Mueller-Kaler, “The price of great power politics,” Smart Partnerships Series, Atlantic Council, March 14, 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/
content-series/smart-partnerships/the-price-of-great-power-politics/.
6 Edward Wong and Julian E. Barnes, “U.S. to Expel Chinese Graduate Students With Ties to China’s Military Schools,” New York Times, May 28, 2020,
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/28/us/politics/china-hong-kong-trump-student-visas.html.
7 Nicolás Rivero, “Trump banned TikTok and WeChat—what now?,” Quartz, September 18, 2020, https://qz.com/1905706/trump-banned-tiktok-and-wechat-
what-now/.
8 Julian Mueller-Kaler, “Tech cooperation at a precarious junction,” Smart Partnerships Series, Atlantic Council, March 14, 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.
org/content-series/smart-partnerships/tech-cooperation-at-a-precarious-junction/.
9 Christiane Hoffmann et al., “Merkel and the EU Trapped between China and the U.S.,” Der Spiegel, June 4, 2020, https://www.spiegel.de/international/
europe/a-foreign-policy-conundrum-merkel-and-the-eu-trapped-between-china-and-the-u-s-a-cd315338-7268-4786-8cf7-dc302c192e5d.
stressed that they did not favor economic decoupling with
the United States and the West, even though some in the
circles of Chinese decision making allegedly welcome
the decoupling efforts, as it helps Beijing to identify the
weaknesses in their domestic systems and the need for
remedial action.
Third Parties Don’t Want to Choose Sides
Shocked by the warm dispute, particularly at the Paris
meeting, international scientists, academics, business,
and think tank representatives not only stressed the
importance of cooperation when it comes to AI, but also
worried about the negative externalities of wide-ranging
competition. German experts at the Berlin workshop , for
instance, went so far as to almost agree with the Chinese
view that, for the last four years, unpredictability in the
global system did not come from China, but more from the
United States and the highly erratic Trump administration.
For Europe, a continent that has benefited from the liberal
international order like no other, the trajectory of economic
decoupling could not be more concerning. Germany in
particular exhibits a growing panic in its decision-making
circles about being put in a position where the country is
forced to choose sides.9 Already today, China is starting to
create guidelines that are incompatible with international
standards. European-made computers sold to the Chinese
market, for example, have to include Chinese produced
control programs (CPM), which exemplifies the difficult
trade-offs between national security concerns and a desire
for market access.
Furthermore, many worried about what could follow Pax
Americana, especially since providing global security has
always been a costly endeavor. A European Union (EU)
approach talked about in detail at the Brussels and Berlin
roundtables was that Europe could serve as a bridge
between the United States and China, somehow mitigating
the ever-intensifying rivalry. The perceived success of the
EU’s privacy law, also known as the GDPR, encouraged
some to believe that Brussels could use Europe’s market
power to set norms that others would have to follow, if
they were to continue doing business in the world’s largest
and wealthiest marketplace. Additionally, the countries on
the continent have the expertise and infrastructure (talent,

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
universities, and regulations) to develop what many call
“a Third Way,” separate from China’s state-focused and the
US’ free market development of technologies.10
Experts indicated that the PRC was a complex partner for
Europe, which has encountered cooperation, competition,
and sometimes confrontation in dealing with China. Not too
long ago, the EU named the People’s Republic a “systemic
rival”11 and, similar to the United States, European member
states worry about IP theft as well as Chinese acquisitions
of Western firms with sensitive technology. But there is
no black-and-white approach, particularly due to some
member states’ economic dependence. Europe’s default
would always be cooperation, even if some restrictions
on economic ties need to be put in place. China might be
destined to become the largest economic power in the
world, and it continues to hold sway over export-oriented
economies, but the majority of discussants still saw Germany
and the EU fully embedded in the Western system. In order
10 Julian Mueller-Kaler, “Europe’s Third Way,” Smart Partnerships Series, Atlantic Council, March 14, 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/content-series/
smart-partnerships/europes-third-way/.
11 Andrew Small, “The meaning of systemic rivalry: Europe and China beyond the pandemic,” European Council on Foreign Relations, May 13, 2020, https://
ecfr.eu/publication/the_meaning_of_systemic_rivalry_europe_and_china_beyond_the_pandemic/.
12 Mueller-Kaler, “Europe’s Third Way.”
to manage that difficult balancing act, some supported the
notion of a three “M-approach” for Europe in dealing with
China: multilateral, non-militaristic, and Machiavellian.12
Europe’s Hurdles
There was little disagreement over the fact that the
systematic collection of data is more difficult for private
companies in the West than for China’s tech giants. For
that reason, economists and technologists worried about
Europe’s ability to reconcile privacy restrictions with a
thriving tech economy. The logic is simple: In order to
keep up, companies must be able to train AI systems with
accessible data, which is why the EU has become more
attuned to the need to facilitate data flows, as exemplified
by its recent free trade and investment treaty with Japan.
At the Berlin roundtable , which included more private
sector representation, there was even greater concern that
European Flag. Source: Unsplash/Waldemar Brandt (https://unsplash.com/photos/wRAHbIziQfg)

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Europe is falling behind in the global AI race. For German
entrepreneurs in Europe’s leading economy, the lack of
essential EU funding, nonexistent unity among member
states, and a difficult environment for the collection and
application of data are all indications that Europe is not
living up to its full potential. Examining proficiency in
emerging technologies from a foreign policy perspective
has, unlike in the United States, never had strong traction
in Europe, and it is only slowly starting to change. But many
agreed that the EU risks becoming even more dependent
on external players if it does not develop a stronger policy
stance on emerging technologies altogether.
Divisions among EU member states, however, make this a
very difficult endeavor, with regards to both a coordinated
tech and China policy. It is no surprise that southern and
eastern EU member states want to be more accommodating
to the PRC, given the fact that their economies have
benefitted greatly from Chinese investments, adding to
their recovery from the 2008 financial crisis. Alongside the
geographical splits, there’s an ideological one, too. While
some believe that Europe should look at China through
more cooperative lenses, understanding the relationship as
a healthy competition; others were more critical and urged
caution, highlighting the importance of infusing algorithms
with democratic and liberal norms.13
Cooperation in a Bipolar World
Taking into account China’s growing influence around
the world, discussions often alluded to an uncomfortable
truth: In order to avoid catastrophe, even rivals must
cooperate, which is why participants, particularly at
roundtables in Europe, were keen to identify a number of
areas that could lower the tensions and help build trust
among antagonistic stakeholders. By emphasizing the
global nature of the challenges at hand, French leaders
pointed to lessons learned from the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
process. Allegedly, consultations at the expert level
could help establish a universally agreed baseline on the
harms versus the benefits of the AI revolution. Such an
acknowledged picture of the total effects from modern
technologies might then inform policy makers as to the
needed regulatory steps to minimize negative externalities,
while maximizing potential benefits. Individual countries
and multilateral organizations such as the Group of Twenty
(G20), the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World
Bank, or regional organizations like the European Union
could then all start from the same set of agreed facts
13 Ibid.
14 Lorand Laskai and Graham Webster, “Translation: Chinese Expert Group Offers ‘Governance Principles’ for ‘Responsible AI,’” New America, June 17, 2019,
https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/translation-chinese-expert-group-offers-governance-principles-responsible-ai/.
15 G20 Ministerial Statement on Trade and Digital Economy, June 2019, https://www.mofa.go.jp/files/000486596.pdf.
concerning AI and the various aspects of the emergence of
modern technologies—and coordinate on needed social,
economic, data, and ethical protections.
Cooperation, however, needs to begin at the domestic
level by building trust and confidence first between
governments, companies, and consumers on AI and
related technologies. In many cases, the public trust does
not exist, due to concerns over job insecurity, privacy,
and the future of work. To avoid such negative public
perceptions, governments and private companies should
share their failures as much as their successes in employing
AI. Regulatory efforts to build public trust will require
experimentation, and lessons learned would certainly
benefit from comparisons with attempts elsewhere. Such
sharing, across multiple efforts, could then help establish
international guidelines to define the rules of the game,
prevent escalating conflicts, and enable reconciling social
needs with uses of the new technologies.
With the enactment of binding rules for all players,
collaboration could further help erase fears of falling behind
in the global AI race. Such an approach was advocated
particularly by European roundtable participants, while
Chinese and US discussants highlighted a level playing field
as more important for tempering the ongoing competition.
Interestingly enough, Chinese officials that contributed to
this project were open to developing regulatory frameworks,
though many Western counterparts believed that they could
stifle innovation and hamper economic growth.
China’s Ambiguity
Speaking more broadly, interlocutors in Beijing emphasized
that international cooperation has always been important
to China’s economic development, alluding to the fact
that the most successful innovations and AI advances
often come from international research collaborations. At
least on paper, the PRC’s eight AI principles emphasize
collaboration, knowledge sharing, and a reliance on open
source methods.14 One might question the sincerity of such
proclamations, but the issuance of similar AI statements
by the United States, the EU, and other countries are a
sign of hope that a potential baseline could one day be
established. In that regard, the Chinese viewed the G20
meeting in 2019 as a milestone, since it at least signaled
global agreement on the guiding principles for AI.15
Pre-pandemic, Chinese experts suggested that irrespective
of the growing bilateral tensions, there are indeed shared

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
views between the United States and China that could
enable cooperation. Allegedly, both countries put emphasis
on talent and research, which is why contributors to this
project thought that both governments could undertake
joint investments in digital infrastructure and/or develop
binding political guidelines for the use of AI in order to
ensure the improvement of applications for the general
public.16 People in the tech world continue to emphasize
the importance of an open source community and many
Chinese organizations remain keen on cooperating with
international and American entities such as think tanks
or universities—channels that must be kept open to lay
the groundwork for government-to-government talks
in the future. Many agreed that dialogue between civil
organizations can enable government cooperation in the
long run, as decentralized governance will be key anyway,
given the fact that modern technologies have already
surpassed the regulatory capacity of most national and
international entities. Even though no governance needs
to be mutually exclusive, good and reliable frameworks
16 Julian Mueller-Kaler, “The dangers of decoupling,” Smart Partnerships Series, March 14, 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/content-series/smart-
partnerships/the-dangers-of-decoupling/.
are getting more complicated from year to year, due to
the growing dual-use capabilities of the new technologies
and the chaotic state of global cyber regulations. To put it
bluntly, the world is running out of time.
Worries About AI Externalities
There is no doubt that emerging technologies have gained
significant importance over the last couple of years, but a
sense of caution is required when it comes to the hype
surrounding AI. Technologies have so far remained a tool
and their applications won’t be solving all of humanity’s
problems anytime soon. Of course, underestimating
the tech revolution is not the right way forward either,
as speakers at roundtables in China suggested that AI
applications will have very similar effects to the internet—
disrupting societies on the one hand, but creating huge
markets on the other. Mitigating risks along with efforts to
exploit opportunities will be the challenge of the coming
decades because it is only a question of time until social
Financial District in Shanghai, China. Source: Unsplash/Li Yang (https://unsplash.com/photos/5h_dMuX_7RE)

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
tensions arise. The Chinese government already creates
around 16 million jobs annually—many of them without
commercial purpose. In order to keep the social peace,
that number will likely have to grow as unskilled labor
becomes automated.17
Irrespective of social externalities, the greater accessibility
of big data, which is needed to train smart algorithms, puts
China at an important advantage. In the West, the publics’
desire for privacy, democratic accountability, and a clear
differentiation between the private and public sectors
hamper the availability of big data for tech entrepreneurs.
Due to the lack of infrastructure and data regulation in
India, for example, software engineers have to train their
algorithms with European or American data sets, making it
rather difficult to adapt AI applications to local conditions.18
Health experts at the India roundtable also talked about
the lack of financial incentives for AI development and use
in their sector. In advanced economies, market conditions,
such as the high cost of labor, have been a spur to develop
automated systems using AI. In developing countries
where labor is cheap and widely available, the same
incentives don’t apply and lead to different effects. Without
the market pull, Indian state authorities need to find ways
to boost AI in order to improve services and ensure India’s
ability to plug its extensive software industry into the global
economy.19
India’s Quest for Digital Sovereignty
Similar to Europe’s “Third Way Approach,” and in order to
navigate between the US and the Chinese models, India is
also trying to develop a concept of digital sovereignty , all
the while mitigating negative externalities of great power
competition. While some argued that the time is right to
take sides in the geopolitical contest, many Indian experts
dislike the idea that investment decisions are going to be
binary choices in the future.20 Skepticism towards the PRC,
however, is rising: while Chinese money was welcomed
until recently, there are growing security concerns in light
of increased Indo-Chinese tensions, as well as worry over
too much influence from India’s biggest neighbor. Chinese
companies already have a large say in India’s digital space,
and the balance between security and economic interests
17 Ibid.
18 Abhinav Verma et al., “Building a collaborative ecosystem for AI in healthcare in Low and Middle Income Economies,” GeoTech Cues, Atlantic Council,
August 27, 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/content-series/smart-partnerships/building-a-collaborative-ecosystem-for-ai-in-healthcare-in-low-and-
middle-income-economies/.
19 Julian Mueller-Kaler, “AI, an accelerator of change?,” Smart Partnerships Series, Atlantic Council, June 16, 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/
commentary/ai-an-accelerator-of-change/.
20 Ibid.
21 Julian Mueller-Kaler, “Can AI and emerging tech boost African development?,” Smart Partnerships Series, Atlantic Council, July 1, 2020, https://www.
atlanticcouncil.org/content-series/smart-partnerships/can-ai-and-emerging-tech-boost-african-development/.
has yet to be struck—a similar situation to other places in
the world.
Another thought-provoking concept brought forward by
participants at the India roundtable, was the suggestion to
alter international law and adjust respective jurisdictions
for private data ownership. Similar to the EU’s GDPR,
Indian participants spoke about the desirability of the
universal individual right to privacy being upheld, with
secondary data ownership still allowed—irrespective of the
data’s geographical location and a country’s sovereignty
and jurisdiction. It would guarantee that consumers have
primary ownership of their personal information, while
acknowledging the respective government’s secondary
ownership.
Technology for Good
By focusing on healthcare, food security and agriculture,
education, or infrastructure, global AI competition could be
given a very different spin, mitigating the rivalry aspect of
politics. How modern technologies should be centered on
serving those broader global interests was at the core of the
discussions in the roundtable focused on Africa. Participants
underlined that AI applications are not yet constrained by
extensive legal systems, presenting many opportunities,
but also raising challenges. The fact that African countries
provide a good testing bed for AI applications is exactly the
reason why governments need to be careful. If there’s no
framework, digital infrastructure, or laws and regulations,
it is an open playing field without security measures and
necessary consumer protections.21
Missing regulatory frameworks are already a challenge in
Western countries, which highlights the fact that African states
are experiencing even further difficulties with developing
laws and regulations. Similar to the lessons learned from
India, capacity building will be essential for the development
of modern technologies and their potential application to
developmental challenges. Across the continent, Africa will
need to invest much more to educate tech practitioners for
the dynamic environment and the future of broader AI usage.
There is overall confidence, however, that African societies
are well-positioned to leverage their strengths, taking into

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
consideration favorable demographics and the fact that the
consequences of the ongoing pandemic do not seem to be
as devastating in Africa as they are elsewhere.
Smart Partnerships for Global Challenges
Smart partnerships on the international and domestic levels,
particularly between governments and private sectors,
could play an essential role in ensuring AI is geared
towards solving global challenges. African scientists in
the field of AI, for instance, use game theory models to
help stakeholders find contextual policies for dealing with
emerging technologies. Other attempts include efforts to
localize or regionalize data collections. African contributors
were proud to point to examples of modern technologies
already working hand-in-hand with infrastructure and
human capital investments. Together with Zipline, 22 the
22 Zipline is a drone delivery company that specializes in providing access to vital medical supplies.
23 Africa’s digital solutions to tackle COVID-19, European Investment Bank, July 2020, https://www.eib.org/attachments/country/africa_s_digital_solutions_
to_tackle_covid_19_en.pdf.
Rwandan government, for instance, administers drug and
blood testing through drones; Zindi, the first data science
competition platform in Africa, offers opportunities to solve
specific challenges identified by companies, civil society
organizations, and governments, based on best practices;
a company named Lydia bridges the credit gap in many
African markets by helping small businesses access credit
within short periods of time, using trained algorithms
instead of traditionally onerous financial screening; and
all over the continent, modern technologies are also used
in the fight against the novel Coronavirus. 23 Closing the
gap between expectation and reality, of course, remains
the biggest challenge but there is reason to be hopeful
that with the right incentives and government policies,
African countries can move quickly to exploit emerging
technologies, accelerate economic development, and host
an increasing number of tech hubs in the future.
Taj Mahal in India. Source: Unsplash/Sylwia Bartyzel (https://unsplash.com/photos/eU4pipU_8HA)

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Key Areas for Cooperation
1) Governments must establish universally agreed
baselines on the harms versus the benefits of the
AI revolution, which could inform multilateral and
national institutions as to the needed regulatory steps
to minimize negative externalities, while maximizing
potential benefits. An effort that could be modeled on
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) process that is broadly recognized
as providing the objective and factual basis for
considering necessary climate change policies. Using
the broad agreements on AI principles completed by
the United States, the European Union, China, and
others can be a first step towards developing such
common guidelines on AI implementation.
2) We call for a mechanism for sharing failures as
much as successes in the employment of AI. Such
sharing across multiple efforts could help establish
international guidelines to define the rules of the
game, prevent escalating conflicts, and enable the
reconciliation of social needs with new technologies.
International organizations and non-governmental
bodies could help develop such platforms of exchange
while simultaneously providing for a regional emphasis.
Some African and Indian technologists thought they
could learn more from other developing countries and
their experiences in employing technologies than they
would from advanced economies.
3) With countries at odds with one another, non-
governmental track-two exchanges, particularly
between the United States and China, on governing
approaches towards emerging technologies are key
for building trust, developing effective policies, and
laying the groundwork for future government-to-
government negotiations.
4) Bringing together multi-stakeholder groups within
countries to lay the groundwork for governments to
develop capacity-enabling regulations is essential,
too, as technologies develop faster than governments
can absorb. Hence, decision makers are slow every-
where to help in optimizing the benefits of emerging
technologies and leave populations vulnerable to
negative externalities.
5) In order to give the global AI competition a different spin
and emphasize the “technology for good” approach, it
would be wise to highlight organizations that focus on
AI applications in healthcare, education, food security
and agriculture, or infrastructure endeavors, particularly
in a post-Covid-19 recovery.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Scenarios for a Future AI World
D
ecision makers, non-government actors, and
private companies are constantly being tasked
with anticipating the next crisis and exploiting
future opportunities, which is why scenario
analysis can be a key tool. It helps those involved think
through possible futures and the respective policies that
help shift trajectories one way or the other. Based on
the key trends, observed by the discussion groups and
highlighted in this report, the following three scenarios
discuss different futures; distinguish between the good, the
bad, and the ugly; and help us think about what lies ahead.
1) An Unequal World is probably the base case, exacerbated
by the social and economic effects of the ongoing
pandemic. In this future, emerging technologies have
deepened divisions and inequalities instead of leveling
the playing field domestically and internationally. With
governments struggling to understand the social impacts
of the new technologies, there have not been enough
initiatives to counter the invidious effects of technological
advances. The economic slowdown due to Covid-19 is likely
to have further incapacitated governmental efforts, as they
are starved of the resources needed to invest in raising
education and skill levels, for example. With opportunities
drying up at home, more of India’s AI developers have
emigrated to the United States and Europe, where there
is increased demand for their expertise, irrespective of
tightening immigration policies. Those that remain at home
build applications for Western firms, have only their wealthy
customers in mind, and create a two-level economy and
society. Given the aftermath of combined health and
economic crises, governments do not have the bandwidth
to move ahead on data-sharing regulations that would
boost responsible AI use and development.
Vintage globes. Source: Unsplash/LB (https://unsplash.com/photos/mluSdDeOksc)

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
11
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
With Covid-19, low-skilled workers have been hit the
hardest and their overall wealth has declined as income
inequality worsens and businesses try to automate further
to recapture profit margins. At the same time, AI-based
automation is moving up the value chain and more skilled
professions see increasing disruption and fears of job
insecurity. For the lucky ones, comprehensive algorithms
will add to human-machine partnerships, but many will see
their professions disappear—a process accelerated with
increased digitalization efforts due to the pandemic.
In this world, the United States and China are still in an AI
race, but not to the point of eliminating all cooperation with
each other. Consumed by growing domestic instabilities,
there’s an incentive for both to cooperate minimally.
There is more norm-setting led by the European Union,
which builds on its privacy standards (GDPR), and the EU
Commission and member states push for international
regulation of dual-use AI-based technologies, such as
autonomous weapons. The G20 develops benchmarks
for AI safety and security at the front end, with the hope
of preventing future cybersecurity problems that occurred
in earlier internet days. Because of the provisions for
norm-setting, standards on e-commerce, and increasingly
AI-based technologies, more countries, even outside of
the Pacific region, are joining the Comprehensive and
Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnerships
(CPTPP). There remains competition nevertheless and the
United States and Europe worry about the expansion of
Chinese 5G technology to Belt and Road countries. Once
the US-developed ORAN software becomes competitive,
Huawei’s attractiveness is diminished for many countries
outside of the Chinese orbit and the United States further
increases its investments in AI technologies, consolidating
its traditional leadership role.
2) A Bipolar World is where Sino-US competition edges
out any possibility of cooperation—not just on data and AI.
Countries in Europe and Asia are forced to choose between
Washington and Beijing while desperately trying to develop
their own digital sovereignty. The United States announces
publicly, as well as behind closed doors, that the adoption
of Chinese 5G by other countries means a loss not only of
US intelligence assistance but also potentially economic
or security partnerships. European, Japanese, South
Korean, Middle Eastern, and Indian tech firms are further
threatened with (secondary) sanctions if they do not end
their collaboration with Chinese and Russian counterparts.
For economic reasons, Southeast Asian countries refuse
US strictures and lean more towards Beijing, while the EU
tries to push back but has mixed success in protecting
its businesses from US punitive measures. As the Gulf
countries now export the bulk of their oil to East Asia, they
are also pushing back against Washington, despite their
reliance on US security protection. A Biden administration
continues the United States’ decoupling efforts and tries
to isolate China on the global stage—the consequence of
which is an intensification of great power competition.
The PRC boosts its tech and other assistance to Belt-and-
Road countries, and most remain loyal to Beijing. Others
want to be neutral and stay out of the Sino-US fight, but
risk falling behind technologically if they cannot get tech
assistance from either the United States or China. The
free flow of knowledge is hampered by new firewalls
erected not only by the PRC but also by the United States.
Amongst growing security concerns, Chinese students are
pushed out of Western universities and innovation slows
down globally. AI development becomes more focused
on military uses and quantum, and each side vows to be
first. Multilateral institutions lose even more power, and
a sophisticated tech reform remains a distant hope in a
divided world. De-globalization is the new normal and the
likelihood of conflict increases significantly over time.
3) A Multilateral Resurgence is a world that evolves after
significant Sino-US confrontations occur on the scale of the
1963 Cuban Missile Crisis. Post-pandemic, both the United
States and China step back from the precipice, realizing
that their unrestrained, full-spectrum competition with one
another could lead to disaster and mutual destruction.
Technology becomes an area for gradually increased
cooperation, and trust is developed with the help of
confidence-building measures such as mutual high-level
delegation visits. Multilateral agreements are renegotiated,
the United States and China cooperate on sophisticated
World Trade Organization (WTO) reform, and international
frameworks for AI regulations are passed. There is
increased transparency between the two superpowers
on technology development. Chinese researchers are
welcomed back into the United States, and China allows
US academics to work in some of their institutes, too.
Similar to arms control agreements with the Soviets,
Washington and Beijing enter into negotiations with each
other on standards for autonomous weapon systems plus
ethical, safety, and privacy guidelines for the deployment
of modern tech—later, additional partners also ascribe
to them. These agreed rules and regulation standards
boost research and development and the diffusion of new
technologies, including to the developing world.
The years of protectionism, competition, and confrontation
following the pandemic have taken a toll, ushering in
a long economic recession for the developing world,
an era of the impoverishment of the middle classes,
and widespread political upheaval. A new phase of
globalization begins slowly, yet thoroughly. Rules and fair
regulations increase global trade, and the taxation of big
multinational corporations enables growing state capacity.
China and the United States back an effort for ensuring

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
12
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
universal 5G for the whole world, enabling developing
countries to leapfrog into a new age, sharing in the
advantages of the Internet of Things (IoT). Steps are taken
to mitigate resource scarcities, all the while engendering
safer and more secure urbanization. Green technology
becomes more the norm and biological breakthroughs,
enabled by AI, facilitate increased food supplies and
better healthcare, including protections against diseases.
Tech researchers in emerging markets have access to
international data and expertise, allowing them to develop
applications that are tailored to their countries’ special
needs and contexts.
6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%
Pr ot o-Globaliza tion
(1820– 18 7 0)
Globaliza tion 1 . 0
(18 7 0– 1913)
Deglobliza tion 1 . 0
(1913– 19 50)
Globaliza tion 2. 0
(19 50– 20 10)
Deglobaliza tion 2. 0
(20 10–?)
GDP Gr o wth (A dv anc ed E c onomics )
GDP Gr o wth ( Global)
T r ade
SOURCE: Bob S w arup , Macr o Ma tt ers, Camdor Global A dvisors, July 20 15.
The Cycle of Globalization and Deglobalization
 Percentage

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
13
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A Justified Worry
24 Gideon Rachman, “A new cold war: Trump, Xi and the escalating US-China confrontation,” Financial Times, October 5, 2020, https://www.ft.com/
content/7b809c6a-f733-46f5-a312-9152aed28172.
“Everything we see can be seen in another way.
Therefore, I ask myself; isn’t everything an illusion
anyway? Reality is but a question of perception, and
perception inevitably varies according to one’s viewpoint.
Different viewpoints lead to different dimensions.”
Sandro Del-Prete
O
ne would think that the magnitude of potential
disruptions for society and the speed at which
modern technologies are developing incentivizes
governments to cooperate, somehow trying to
mitigate negative externalities, maximize opportunities,
and achieve a multilateral resurgence. However, reality
appears to be moving towards quite the opposite and
roundtable participants warned of a new Cold War on tech.
With tensions rising and collaborative efforts declining, the
world is headed toward geopolitical bipolarity and conflict
might only be a question of time. 24 In a globalized world
where economies have become intertwined, decoupling
efforts will not only be painful for businesses, particularly
in export-oriented countries, they will also hamper the
benefits of scientific exchange—putting decades of progress
at risk.
Businesses, philanthropies, or other non-government actors
might want to step in and lead the way toward technological
cooperation, but braving political storms at the same time
will be a difficult endeavor. Particularly concerning is the
potential ideologization as well as securitization of the
debate. Once decision makers see the tech issue primarily
through lenses of national security and political supremacy,
any sort of collaboration will be much harder to incentivize,
let alone implement. Though time is running out—AI
and other emerging technologies are developing at an
exponential pace. Many interlocutors worried that it might
take a catastrophe for humanity to realize the potentially
disruptive effects and see the need for international
regulation. The future, of course, is uncertain and foresight
remains an art rather than a science, but building smart
partnerships might help navigate global challenges and
lay the groundwork for a multilateral resurgence, so that
technologies can be a force for good, help societies
progress, and lead the world toward a better future.
Acknowledgements
T
he authors are grateful to The Rockefeller
Foundation and to the many local partner
organizations around the world. Without their
support, this project would not have been made
possible. For the Paris conference, we thank the BOAO
Forum for Asia, the Fondation pour la Prospective et
Innovation (FPI), and Lennar International. In Brussels, our
local partner was the European Parliamentary Research
Service (EPRS), while in Berlin, the German Council on
Foreign Relations (DGAP) generously hosted the Atlantic
Council’s roundtable. We greatly appreciate their support
and hospitality. For China, significant help was provided
by Lanxin Xiang, professor of international relations at
the Graduate Institute in Geneva. Despite the inability to
travel due to Covid-19, the International Innovation Corps
(University of Chicago Trust) and the Observer Research
Foundation (ORF) helped organize the digital India
roundtables. The relationships and networks developed
over the last year will outlast this project and continue
to inform future studies on the subject at hand. Lastly,
special thanks to the Atlantic Council’s GeoTech Center
and Foresight, Strategy, and Risks Initiative.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
14
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
About the Authors
Mathew Burrows, PhD serves as Director of the Atlantic Council’s Foresight, Strategy and
Risks Initiative (FSR) and is one of the leading experts on strategic foresight and global trend
analysis. In 2013 he retired from a 28-year long career in the State Department and the Central
Intelligence Agency (CIA), the last 10 years of which he spent at the National Intelligence
Council (NIC), the premier analytic unit in the US Intelligence Community. In 2007, he was
appointed Counselor, the number three position in the NIC, and was the principal drafter for
the NIC publication Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds, which received widespread praise
in the international media. Other positions included assignments as special assistant to the UN
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke (1999-2001) and deputy national security advisor to Treasury
Secretary Paul O’Neill (2001-02). He received a BA in American and European history from
Wesleyan University and a PhD in European history from the University of Cambridge.
Julian Mueller-Kaler is a Resident Fellow in the Atlantic Council’s Foresight, Strategy, and
Risks Initiative and at the GeoTech Center where he researches global trends, studies the
implications of emerging technologies on society & politics, and leads the GeoTech Center’s
efforts to evaluate China’s role as a global citizen. He is furthermore working toward his
doctorate at the Geschwister Scholl Institute for Political Science at LMU Munich, graduated
as a Fulbright-Schuman scholar from Georgetown University’s School of Foreign Service with
an MA in Diplomatic Studies, and holds a BA in Politics & International Relations from Zeppelin
University. During his tenure at Georgetown, Julian focused on US politics, the rise of populism,
and its implications on international relations. He acted as co-chair for the 2019 Transatlantic
Policy Symposium and worked as a consultant in the office of the German Executive Director
at the World Bank Group.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Board of Directors
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*Richard W. Edelman
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
*John J. Studzinski
TREASURER
*George Lund
DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
*Peter Ackerman
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Colleen Bell
*Rafic A. Bizri
*Linden P. Blue
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
R. Nicholas Burns
*Richard R. Burt
Michael Calvey
Teresa Carlson
James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
Ralph D. Crosby, Jr.
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Thomas R. Eldridge
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Courtney Geduldig
Robert S. Gelbard
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
Amir A. Handjani
Katie Harbath
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Amos Hochstein
*Karl V. Hopkins
Andrew Hove
Mary L. Howell
Ian Ihnatowycz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Astri Kimball Van Dyke
Henry A. Kissinger
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Neil Masterson
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
H.R. McMaster
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
*Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Thomas R. Nides
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
W. DeVier Pierson
Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell McCormick
Robert Rangel
Thomas J. Ridge
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Rajiv Shah
Wendy Sherman
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Gine Wang-Reese
Ronald Weiser
Olin Wethington
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Colin L. Powell
Condoleezza Rice
George P. Shultz
Horst Teltschik
John W. Warner
William H. Webster
*Executive Committee
Members
List as of December 16, 2020

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition: AI, China, and the Global Quest for Digital Sovereignty
C4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and engagement in international
 affairs based on the central role of the Atlantic community in
 meeting today’s global challenges.
© 2021 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means without permission
in writing from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of brief
quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please
direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor, Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
