
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
By Clete Willems & Niels Graham
TTC, IPEF, and the Road to
an Indo-Pacific Trade Deal
A New Model

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Frankfurt Forum
This paper is one of four publications launched at the inaugural Frankfurt Forum on US-European
GeoEconomics held in Germany from September 27 – 29, 2022. Co-hosted by the Atlantic Council
GeoEconomics Center and Atlantik-Brücke, the Frankfurt Forum anchors critical work on transatlantic
economic cooperation. The war in Ukraine, and the G7 response, reminded the world of the impact of
transatlantic coordination. As part of the Frankfurt Forum, this new research aims to advance transatlantic
dialogue from crisis response to addressing the key economic issues that will underpin the US-EU part-
nership over the next decade. The goal of the Frankfurt Forum is to deliver a blueprint for cooperation in
four key areas: digital currencies, monetary policy, international trade, and economic statecraft.
Atlantic Council’s GeoEconomics Center
Launched in 2020, the Atlantic Council’s GeoEconomics Center has become the go-to place at the
intersection of economics, finance, and foreign policy. The Center bridges the divide between these
oft-siloed sectors and helps shape a better global economic future for the US and its allies. The Center is
organized around three pillars: 1) The Future of Capitalism; 2) The Future of Money; and 3) The Economic
Statecraft Initiative.
Atlantik-Brücke
Founded in 1952, Atlantik-Brücke is a non-profit and non-partisan association committed to deepen-
ing cooperation between Germany, Europe and America. Transatlantic cooperation remains pivotal for
global order and stability, now more than ever. With nationalist tendencies gaining popularity worldwide,
Atlantik-Brücke has doubled down on its mission to solidifying relations across the Atlantic among pol-
icymakers, industry leaders, journalists, academics, and civil society by offering a platform for different
perspectives and lively debate. Atlantik-Brücke also fosters ties between young professionals and repre-
sentatives of civil society through annual conferences and exchanges. The approximately 500 members
of Atlantik-Brücke are decision-makers from business, politics, science and the media on both sides of
the Atlantic.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Clete Willems & Niels Graham l 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 Introduction 2
1. The Current Trading Landscape 3
 Going Backward by Standing Still 4
 Domestic Constraints 7
 The United States’ New Approach to Trade 7
 Winning Over Partners 8
 What is the US-EU Trade and Technology Council and what has it achieved? 8
 What is the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework and what has it achieved? 9
 Overlap between the IPEF and the TTC 10
2. Friendshoring Will Take More than the TTC and the IPEF in Their Current Form 12
 Improving the TTC 12
 The TTC and China 12
 An expanded mandate 12
 Improving the IPEF 13
 The IPEF as a strategic initiative 13
 Trade facilitation 14
 Investing in the Indopacific 15
 Aligning the IPEF and the TTC 16
3. Recommendations for an Ambitious Trade Policy 17
 Tariff Reductions Should Not Be Ruled Out from the IPEF 18
 A Transpacific Regulators’ Forum Modeled After the TTC 20
 A Robust Implementation Structure 21
 An Indo-Pacific Regulatory Framework 21
 Conclusion 22
 Annex 23
 Glossary 23
 Endnotes 24

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
2 l The TTC, the IPEF, and the Road to an Indo-Pacific Trade Deal - A New Model
INTRODUCTION
After nearly two years of uncertainty and speculation, the Biden administration’s “trade policy for the
middle class” is taking shape. The administration has set up numerous trade dialogues and economic
framework agreements with allies and partners around the world, including the US-EU Trade and
Technology Council (TTC), the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity (IPEF), and the US-Taiwan
Initiative on 21st Century Trade (USTI). The administration has also announced the Americas Partnership
for Economic Prosperity for the Western Hemisphere, which is in the early stages of development.
In the next few months, the Biden administration is expected to provide substantial new details on the
purpose and scope of these various arrangements. Currently, their central thrust appears to be “beyond-
the-border” issues, such as regulatory alignment and standard setting (especially on digital issues and
emerging technologies), attempts to improve supply chain resilience, and efforts to promote high labor
and environmental standards. On the other hand, the administration’s approach assiduously avoids
elements contained in traditional free trade agreements (FTAs), such as the pursuit of new market access
in the form of tariff reduction.
The Biden administration should be applauded for an agenda that seeks to work with an unprecedented
number of allies and partners and includes novel flexibilities to accommodate varying levels of
development. This approach has the potential to allow the United States to link its economy with more
countries than ever before. As it develops these various initiatives, the administration must carefully
consider how to coordinate them to ensure they are as complementary as possible and not working at
cross purposes.
More fundamentally, the Biden administration should also raise the level of ambition within the individual
agreements and seriously consider adding traditional market access components. Market access is
critical to provide new opportunities for US businesses and workers as well as to create an incentive
for other countries to “trade off” substantial economic reforms as part of the agreement. Ultimately,
the administration will find it difficult to fulfill many of its priority objectives—linking supply chains with
partners and allies, encouraging partners to open their markets and commit to US-level standards, and
positioning the United States to better compete with China—without market access. But even if the
administration is not willing to embrace market access in the short term, it should include design features
in these frameworks to enable them to serve as steppingstones to true FTAs with market access in the
future.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Clete Willems & Niels Graham l 3
A cargo ship sits off the coast of Huntington Beach waiting for
access to the Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach in Huntington
Beach, California, U.S., January 3, 2022. REUTERS/Mike Blake.
1. THE CURRENT TRADING LANDSCAPE
The past decade has seen a dramatic shift in the Washington’s approach to trade. Both the Trump
and Biden administrations largely abandoned the traditional approach, which includes robust market
access and enforceable rules negotiations pursued vigorously through bilateral and plurilateral trade
agreements.
Looking at the United States’ progress in free trade agreement (FTA) negotiations over the last two decades
helps illustrate this point with remarkable clarity. Between 2003 and 2012, new US FTAs entered into force
with sixteen different countries. By contrast, from 2013 to 2022, the United States did not acquire a single new
FTA partner. The United States signed the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) in early 2016 but backed away from
the deal the following year. Indeed, the only other major FTA negotiation that the United States concluded in
the last ten years, the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), is not a new agreement with new
market access but a North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) reboot. The Trump administration started
FTA negotiations with the United Kingdom and Kenya, but neither was close to conclusion before being
shelved by the Biden administration. And the agreement that the Trump administration concluded with Japan
was a “mini deal” that only focused on limited market access and rule setting.
Not only has the United States failed to acquire new FTA partners, it has also failed to update most
of its existing agreements. With respect to the Indo-Pacific region, US FTAs with Australia, Singapore,
and South Korea are all more than ten years old and fairly outdated as a result. For example, none of
these agreements meaningfully works toward alignment on emerging trade and regulatory issues, most
notably around digital trade and services. This is a significant missed opportunity. Both digital trade and
services make up an increasingly substantial part of the US and global economy. Services now account
for 71 percent of US employment and 69 percent of its gross domestic product (GDP).1 In addition,
these FTAs do not reflect the Biden administration’s current priorities on labor and environment, do not
confront competition issues around Chinese state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and related non-market
issues, and do not address supply chain challenges that have taken on paramount importance following
the COVID-19 pandemic and the overarching bipartisan interest in reducing reliance on China.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
4 l The TTC, the IPEF, and the Road to an Indo-Pacific Trade Deal - A New Model
At the same time as the United States has backed away from bilateral and plurilateral FTAs, the World
Trade Organization (WTO) has struggled to conclude meaningful international agreements. Both market
access and negotiations on new rules have stagnated. In fact, the only two major agreements that the
WTO has concluded in recent years—the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) in 2013 and the Agreement
on Fisheries Subsidies in 2022—cover a limited subset of issues.
Going Backward by Standing Still
Without major new deals either bilaterally or multilaterally, US businesses and workers have not gotten
substantial new market access and the US government has not helped set international standards in
recent years. This has undermined US competitiveness and eroded the United States’ role as a global
rule maker. However, the rest of the world has not sat idle. China and others have been vigorously
pursuing new trading arrangements around the world. This is exemplified in the Indo-Pacific, where
two megadeals have emerged and helped reduce barriers between countries in the region: the
Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) and the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP).
Timeline of US and Chinese FTAs
US-South Korea FTA
March 2012 US-Colombia TPA
May 2021
China-Iceland FTA
June 2014
China-Switzerland FTA
June 2014
Upgraded China-ASEAN FTA
November 2015
China-South Korea FTA
December 2015
China-Australia FTA
December 2015
China-Maldives FTA
December 2017 China-Georgia FTA
January 2018
US-Japan Trade Agreement
January 2020
China-Pakistan FTA 2nd Phase
December 2019
USMCA
July 2020
US-Panama FTA
October 2012
China-Mauritius FTA
January 2021
RCEP
January 2022
China-Cambodia FTA
January 2022
Jan 2018
Jan 2020
Jan 2022
Jan 2016
Jan 2014
US
China
Source: USTR, Ministry of Commerce of the PRC

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Clete Willems & Niels Graham l 5
IPEF
RCEP-15
Fiji India United States
Indonesia Phillippines South Korea Thailand
Australia Brunei Japan Malaysia
New Zealand Singapore Vietnam
Cambodia China Laos Myanmar
CPTPP
Mexico Peru
Canada Chile
Figure 1. Membership of Major Indopacific Trading Arrangements
Source: Atlantic Council GeoEconomcis Center
RCEP is particularly notable as it links China with fourteen other regional economies and displaces
the USMCA as the world’s largest trading bloc, accounting for 31 percent of global GDP.2 Although its
provisions are less ambitious than the CPTPP’s, RCEP provides China with market access to Indo-Pacific
economies that the United States lacks. Among the most notable is the new market access RCEP
facilitates between China and Japan as well as the increased tariff liberalization between China and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), building on the preexisting China-ASEAN FTA.
On average, the United States still provides ASEAN with lower tariffs than China (the average US tariff
for ASEAN economies is 3.6 percent versus China’s 9.7 percent), but RCEP enhances China’s tariff
advantages over the United States in a few key sectors. Notably, in the context of US efforts to move
supply chains for certain critical goods out of China, it is easier for ASEAN producers to export certain
strategic goods to China that fall under the following tariff chapters:
• 84 - Nuclear reactors, boilers, machinery, and mechanical appliances; parts thereof
• 85 - Electrical machinery and equipment and parts thereof; sound recorders and reproducers,
television image and sound recorders and reproducers, and parts and accessories of such articles
• 87 - Vehicles other than railway or tramway rolling stock, and parts and accessories thereof
• 90 - Optical, photographic, cinematographic, measuring, checking, precision, medical or surgical
instruments and apparatus; parts and accessories thereof
In other words, it is cheaper for ASEAN manufacturers producing these crucial goods to deepen their
supply chains with China than with the United States. The United States is attempting to combat this
by invoking the importance of friendshoring—relying on a group of countries with shared values for
manufacturing and sourcing of critical components and raw materials. While this could send an important
signal to friendly manufacturers to enhance their engagements with the US market, exporters are far less
likely to consider the US market until the United States matches or undercuts China’s preferential tariffs
for critical goods.
RCEP has also given China preferential access to the Japanese market. Although some US producers
can rely on the US-Japan Trade Agreement (USJTA), the tariff concessions within it were very limited and

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
6 l The TTC, the IPEF, and the Road to an Indo-Pacific Trade Deal - A New Model
Table 1. Difference in Tariff Faced by US and Chinese Exporters to the Japanese Market
 HS Tariff Code Chapter Average Chinese Tariff
Advantage
16 - Preparations of meat, of fish or of crustaceans, molluscs or
other aquatic invertebrates
8.76%
27 - Mineral fuels, mineral oils and products of their distillation;
bituminous substances; mineral waxes
3.62%
28 - Inorganic chemicals; organic or inorganic compounds of
precious metals, of rare-earth metals, of radioactive elements or
of isotopes
3.58%
29 - Organic chemicals 3.43%
30 - Pharmaceutical products 3.90%
39 - Plastics and articles thereof 3.75%
42 - Articles of leather; saddlery and harness; travel goods,
handbags and similar containers; articles of animal gut (other than
silkworm gut)
10.89%
61 - Articles of apparel and clothing accessories, knitted or
crocheted
9.09%
62 - Articles of apparel and clothing accessories, not knitted or
crocheted
9.46%
63 - Other made up textile articles; sets; worn clothing and worn
textile articles; rags
6.34%
73 - Articles of iron or steel 3.00%
83 - Miscellaneous articles of base metal 2.84%
93 - Arms and ammunition; parts and accessories thereof 8.20%
Source: Atlantic Council GeoEconomcis Center
focused on a few agricultural goods. RCEP is far more comprehensive and puts US producers across
a range of sectors at a disadvantage. Table 1 below breaks down key sectors in which China now has
preferential access to the Japanese market.
Given the size and importance of the Japanese market to US producers, this relative loss in
competitiveness will have an especially detrimental impact on US exports. If allowed to persist, this tariff
differential will cede US market share to Chinese competitors and further integrate Japan’s economy
with China’s, thereby increasing China’s coercive economic influence on a key US ally. For other
countries in the region, the tariff differential is even higher

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Clete Willems & Niels Graham l 7
British International Trade Secretary Anne-Marie Trevelyan and U.S. Trade
Representative Katherine Tai meet during a G7 trade summit at Mansion
House, in London, Britain October 22, 2021. REUTERS/Henry Nicholls/Pool
Domestic Constraints
The US public’s wary perception of trade has filtered into US trade policy and has played a key role in
US stagnation. In the past decade, political support for traditional FTAs with expansive market access
provisions has suffered, largely driven by concerns from the labor community about job loss and
concerns across the political spectrum about competing with an increasingly economically powerful and
assertive China. In the 2016 US presidential election campaign, this anti-trade bent led both the then
Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton, and the eventual Republican president, Donald J. Trump, to publicly
oppose the TPP even though this agreement was specifically designed to help better compete with
China and reduce supply chain reliance on that country. And still today, despite growing anti-China views
in the United States, US President Joseph R. Biden Jr. has said he does not support joining the CPTPP
due to continued concerns about the agreement from the labor community, among others.3
The failed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), a proposed trade agreement between
the European Union and the United States with aspirations like the TPP’s, ran into similar concerns
in Europe about the prospect of adopting US-style regulation and increased US imports. This helps
illustrate that although the anti-trade phenomenon may be most pronounced in the United States in
recent years, it is certainly not unique.
The United States’ New Approach to Trade
Considering current domestic political dynamics, the Biden administration has made clear that it plans to
chart a new way forward on trade policy. US Trade Representative Katherine Tai explained in a speech
at the Technical University of Munich on April 26 that events such as Brexit, the election of Trump and
his “America First” trade policy, the rise of China, COVID-19 and its related supply chain shock, and, most
recently, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine have all forced the Biden administration to rethink the strategies
and goals that guide US trade policy.4 The result is a negotiating philosophy—sometimes referred to by
the administration as Globalization 2.0—that has sidelined the unfettered pursuit of free trade for a more
“holistic economic engagement in which trade is an important part, but not the only part.”5 In practice, this
means a trade policy that is less interested in expanding market access and instead aims to emphasize

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
8 l The TTC, the IPEF, and the Road to an Indo-Pacific Trade Deal - A New Model
agreement around issues of labor, the environment, taxation and anti-corruption, and supply chain
resilience.
China’s rise, COVID-19-induced supply chain disruptions, and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine have made
supply chain resilience an urgent focus of US policy makers. Although concerns about China’s attempts to
dominate critical supply chains were already gaining attention in the United States prior to the COVID-19
pandemic, Chinese protectionism around personal protective equipment (PPE) at the start of the pandemic,
as well as the escalating risk of a Chinese invasion of Taiwan, have turbocharged questions about China’s
role as a reliable supplier of critical goods and components. This, in conjunction with disruptions in just-in-
time manufacturing following an uneven opening of the global economy during the pandemic recovery, has
made supply chain resilience a paramount goal within the US international economic policy community. US
policy makers see friendshoring as a solution to some of these concerns.6
Winning Over Partners
While the Globalization 2.0 strategy is intended to be holistic and encompass reforms in multilateral
institutions like the WTO, the United States has also invested considerable capital in two plurilateral
“arrangements” with the EU and the Indo-Pacific region—the US-EU Trade and T echnology Council
(TTC) and the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity (IPEF). These are not traditional trade
deals. They include certain items not typically included in FTAs, such as supply chain resilience, but omit
things that typically are, such as market access through tariff negotiation or a mechanism to enforce the
agreement.
What is the US-EU Trade and Technology Council and what has it achieved?
Originally proposed by the EU, the TTC is a diplomatic forum aimed at harmonizing the US-EU approach
to trade and technology policy, including by developing a common approach to supply chain issues and
emerging technology areas where regulation is sparse. The focus on novel areas is intended to prevent
the group from becoming bogged down by longstanding trade disagreements and instead focus on
key policies around artificial intelligence (AI), biotechnology, and semiconductors, among others. The
TTC is structured around ten issue-oriented working groups with semiannual ministerial meetings and
participation from key regulatory stakeholders.7
To date, the TTC has focused on creating new mechanisms to seek alignment on emerging technology
policy without major breakthroughs. However, the TTC has proven successful in facilitating close
coordination on unexpected challenges, including the economic response to Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine. In fact, through the TTC, the US and EU were able to achieve including unprecedented
coordination on sanctions, export controls, and trade restrictions. Certain working groups have also
progressed their work. For example, during the TTC’s May 2022 meeting, the technology standards
working group announced the creation of a Strategic Standardization Information (SSI) mechanism that
will facilitate cooperation on emerging technology regulations through information sharing.8 Such a
mechanism will help the United States and the EU ensure they can respond to technological changes in
a timely fashion, which is crucial to retaining a regulatory first-mover advantage.9 Other working groups
have struggled to deliver tangible deliverables and many observers have expressed concern that much
of the effort could devolve into a “talk shop” that is short of true outcomes and coordination.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Clete Willems & Niels Graham l 9
What is the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework and what has it achieved?
Since the Trump administration’s withdrawal from the TPP in 2017, the United States struggled to
articulate a coherent economic policy toward the Indo-Pacific region. Instead, the United States’ regional
relationships were mostly defined in terms of security. Through the IPEF, the Biden administration is
seeking to change this. Launched in T okyo in May 2022, the IPEF is a compact led by the United States
with thirteen regional partners representing around 40 percent of the global GDP.10 The framework is the
Biden administration’s first attempt to create a large-scale, multilateral, Asia-focused economic strategy
in lieu of joining the CPTPP. Embodying the administration’s vision of Globalization 2.0, the IPEF is jointly
managed by the Office of the US Trade Representative (USTR) and the Department of Commerce and
organized into four pillars:
1. Connected Economy, led by USTR, covers trade and trade facilitation, digital trade, labor, climate
and the environment, agriculture, good regulatory practices, and competition policy.
2. Resident Economy, led by the Department of Commerce, covers supply chain coordination and
resilience.
3. Clear Economy, also led by the Department of Commerce, covers decarbonization, clean energy,
and green infrastructure.
4. Fair Economy, also led by the Department of Commerce, covers taxation and anti-corruption.
According to the structure proposed by the United States, the IPEF negotiating partners can join any
number of the four pillars but are expected to commit to all aspects of each pillar they join. This flexibility
and openness are a net asset for the IPEF. Emerging economies which are not traditional US trade
partners, such as India, Indonesia, and Thailand, have been able to participate despite concerns that
they may not be ready for a full-fledged FTA with the United States. Securing their buy-in will be key if the
IPEF is to have a chance of setting regional rules and standards, especially on cutting-edge technology.
On the other hand, the IPEF suffers from notable limitations. Foremost among these is the lack of market
access provisions and the corresponding decision by the Biden administration not to seek congressional
U.S. President Joe Biden, India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Japan’s Prime Minister
Fumio Kishida attend the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity (IPEF) launch
event at Izumi Garden Gallery in Tokyo, Japan, May 23, 2022. REUTERS/Jonathan Ernst

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
10 l The TTC, the IPEF, and the Road to an Indo-Pacific Trade Deal - A New Model
Table 2. Overlap between the IPEF and the TTC
Indo-Pacific Economic
Framework for Prosperity
US-EU Trade and Technology Council
Pillar 1 Connected Economy:
Labor requirements,
environmental and climate
considerations, digital economy,
agriculture, transparent regulatory
practices, competition policy, and
trade facilitation
Working Group 1 – Technology Standards: Coordination
and cooperation on AI standards; supporting SME
participation in emerging technology
Working Group 4 – Information and Communication
Technology and Services (ICTS) Security and
Competitiveness: Interoperability and resilience for data
infrastructure, such as 5G, undersea cables, data centers, and
cloud infrastructure; data security
Working Group 5 – Data Governance and Technology
Platforms: Data governance
Working Group 9 – Promoting Small - and Medium-sized
Enterprises’ (SME) Access to and Use of Digital Tools: SME
engagement with the digital economy
Pillar 2 Resilient Economy:
Supply chain resilience; mapping
of critical mineral supply
chains; improving traceability
in key sectors; coordinating on
diversification efforts
Working Group 3 – Secure Supply Chains: Supply
chain resilience; securing supply chains for clean energy,
pharmaceuticals, and critical materials; map existing US
and EU sectoral capabilities; cooperate on supply chain
diversification
approval. Without the promise of enhanced access to the US market, many IPEF partners may be loath
to make any reforms to bring themselves in line with new rules and standards. The administration’s
decision is difficult to understand given the fact that US tariffs are much lower than most IPEF nations’
and, therefore, the United States would be giving away less to get more. Failing to lower tariffs between
IPEF participants also embeds supply chain dependencies on China instead of the United States due to
RCEP’s tariff cuts.
The decision to avoid congressional approval also calls into question the permanence and overall
political acceptance of the final agreement, which could also limit the types of commitments that other
countries are willing to make. Finally, there could also be some drawbacks to the IPEF’s expansive
country list. Inclusivity prevents the arrangement from becoming too deep. The standards the United
States may push on labor, the environment, and competition policy may be more challenging for
developing nations to implement, and already India has backed away from the trade pillar.
Overlap between the IPEF and the TTC
The IPEF and the TTC have the same basic goal. Both aim to strengthen US economic ties with allies
and key trading partners and make progress on rules for the digital economy, technology, labor, and
environmental standards, as well as supply chain resilience. The table below highlights some of the
common themes and differences between the two.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Clete Willems & Niels Graham l 11
Source: Atlantic Council GeoEconomcis Center
Indo-Pacific Economic
Framework for Prosperity
US-EU Trade and Technology Council
Pillar 3 Clean Economy: Clean
energy and decarbonization;
green infrastructure; carbon
removal; energy efficiency
standards; measures to combat
methane emissions
Working Group 2 – Climate and Clean Tech: Green
technology development; trade and investment in climate-
neutral technologies
Pillar 4 Fair Economy:
Commitments to enact and
enforce effective tax measures;
improve anti-money laundering
measures; build anti-bribery
regimes
No analogous body
No analogous body Working Group 6 – Misuse of Technology Threatening
Security & Human Rights: Addressing cyber threats,
technology, and disinformation campaigns used to violate
human rights
No analogous body Working Group 7 – Export Controls Cooperation: Aligning
US and EU export controls; facilitating information sharing on
emerging technologies that could impact human rights
No analogous body Working Group 8 – Investment Screening Cooperation:
Information sharing for screening of inbound foreign
investment
No analogous body Working Group 10 – Global Trade Challenges: Aligning
trade policies toward non-market economies; avoiding
additional technical barriers to trade; coordinating around
labor policy as it relates to trade
Table 2. Overlap between the IPEF and the TTC (cont.)
This substantial overlap in issue coverage illustrates how these and other Biden administration trade
initiatives, such as engagements with Taiwan and the Americas, work in the service of the same basic
goals of linking the United States’ economy with its allies and partners for both economic as well as
strategic advantages. As such, the United States should take every opportunity to transfer agreements
reached in one forum to the others to amplify their impact as well as influence on other countries not
party to the IPEF or the TTC.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
12 l The TTC, the IPEF, and the Road to an Indo-Pacific Trade Deal - A New Model
2. FRIENDSHORING WILL TAKE MORE THAN THE
TTC AND THE IPEF IN THEIR CURRENT FORM
Washington will need to be audacious with the proposals it emphasizes in the IPEF and the TTC if it
wants to use them as effective tools to implement friendshoring. In practice, this means raising the
strategic ambitions of both initiatives; elevating initiatives focused on linking current supply chains and
building new, innovative value chains; and aligning accepted proposals across both agreements to
maximize their interoperability.
Improving the TTC
To ensure that the TTC continues to be a success after its role organizing the transatlantic economic
response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine ends, the United States and the EU should raise their level of
ambition.
The TTC and China
In particular, the United States and the EU should not be shy about building toward applying this same
level of cooperation vis-à-vis China. When the TTC was first conceived, the EU pushed for the body to
avoid explicit discussion of issues related to China, even if Beijing’s policies and goals were the subtext
driving many of the focus areas of the TTC. This was because, at the time, the United States and the
EU had diverging views and approaches toward dealing with China. Since then, China’s tacit support
of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, as well as its economic coercion of Lithuania, an EU member state,
has hardened the EU’s perceptions of China. Both sides should capitalize on this shared orientation to
expand the TTC’s mandate to better address shared concerns over China’s coercive trade practices as
well as to plan for and deter a possible Chinese invasion of Taiwan.
U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken and U.S. Secretary of Commerce Gina Raimondo speak with
France’s Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian ahead of a dinner at the U.S.-European Union Trade
and Technology Council summit in Paris, France, May 15, 2022. REUTERS/Kevin Lamarque/POOL

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Clete Willems & Niels Graham l 13
An expanded mandate
Additionally, the United States and the EU should also look to find middle ground between the possibly
overly ambitious TTIP and the TTC’s current reluctance to address any outstanding irritants. TTIP
negotiations attempted to do too much before allowing regulators on both sides of the Atlantic sufficient
time to build trust with each other.11 But not even trying to resolve regulatory differences doesn’t build
trust either. Therefore, even if it may not be realistic to totally align US and EU regulatory approaches,
as the TTIP attempted to do, the TTC’s value will be inherently limited if it doesn’t seek to address
bilateral irritants at all. Therefore, the TTC should attempt to manage with current points of tension. T o
start, the TTC can look to areas in which the US and EU achieved substantial alignment during the TTIP
negotiations. Specific areas include:
• Updating the US-EU mutual recognition agreement on good manufacturing practices for
pharmaceutical products.
• Alignment of regulations around the medical device sector.
• Alignment of automotive safety regulations.
• Cooperation on textile fiber names and labelling, safety requirements, and conformity assessment
procedures in the textiles sector.
• Approaches to reduce unnecessary regulatory differences in cosmetics, pesticides, chemicals,
information and communications technology, and engineering.
The TTC should also look to areas that have emerged since the collapse of the TTIP such as the EU’s
potentially discriminatory digital agenda, or misguided US policies, such as poorly designed electric
vehicle tax credits. Serious conversations about data and data privacy, as well as carbon border
adjustment mechanisms, would also be welcome as these are issues that threaten to cause serious rifts
in the transatlantic relationship in the years to come.
Improving the IPEF
The IPEF’s primary shortcoming is its lack of market access, which could ultimately prevent it from
providing a real alternative to China-based supply chains in the region. As such, the most significant
change the Biden administration could make to improve the initiative is to add this component. Barring
that change, which will be discussed in greater detail in the context of a regional FTA in chapter four,
there are other less substantial changes for the administration to consider.
The IPEF as a strategic initiative
To the extent possible, the IPEF should seek to cover as many countries in the region as possible. This
is crucial given China’s comprehensive efforts to link its economy with its neighbors and otherwise
influence their economic policymaking, through both coercive and non-coercive means. In other words,
to take full advantage of the IPEF’s strategic potential, the United States should maintain an open-door
policy in which any Indo-Pacific nation that has pledged to meet the base benchmarks of any IPEF
pillar should be allowed to join. This would differ from most FTA negotiations in which the United States
requires both comprehensive and deep commitments, but as long as the United States is unwilling to
convert the IPEF into an actual FTA, this design element should be exploited. Among others, ASEAN
members Cambodia and Laos should be offered membership. Both countries are heavily influenced by
China, and it is critical to start taking action to bring them into the US orbit.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
14 l The TTC, the IPEF, and the Road to an Indo-Pacific Trade Deal - A New Model
Trade facilitation
In lieu of market access negotiations, the United States should explore utilizing trade facilitation
measures to help increase market access opportunities for businesses in both the Indo-Pacific and the
United States. Trade facilitation targets the operational hurdles to trade and reduces the compliance
costs traders shoulder when they engage with governments. If done effectively, this reduced compliance
cost can be equivalent to sizable tariff line reductions. For example, the implementation of the WTO’s
2017 TFA is forecasted to slash members’ trade costs by an average of 14.3 percent.12 To accomplish this,
the United States should assist its partners implement the commitments they made under the WTO’s
TFA, such as the creation of Authorized Economic Operator (AEO) programs, and go beyond those
commitments by exploring new programs, such as National Single Window (NSW) connectivity.
AEO programs certify market participants in a nation’s customs administration as trustworthy and
maintains adequate levels of supply chain security. This then allows for expedited customs screenings. In
the Indo-Pacific, many AEO programs are limited in scope or have not responded to new changes in the
global trading landscape, such as the rise of e-commerce. The United States can work with IPEF partners
to expand AEO programs to incorporate digital economy participants.
The United States should also prioritize the expansion of AEO Mutual Recognition Arrangements (MRAs)
that help unify AEO programs across different nations such that participants in one nation’s program
can seamlessly access the benefits associated with accreditation under the other nation’s program. The
United States currently has agreements with Japan, New Zealand, South Korea, and Singapore, but the
IPEF can facilitate agreements between the United States and its remaining regional partners, such as
Malaysia, Thailand, Vietnam, and the Philippines.
Through the IPEF, the United States should also work toward the creation of a multilateral MRA that links
all IPEF members who meet the necessary security standards. It would more seamlessly link the United
States and the region with any member of an AEO program and provide a counterweight to the rules of
origin changes found with the RCEP.
The United States should also focus on providing support to operationalize or enhance regional NSWs.
An NSW is a trade facilitation platform that allows international traders to submit all information needed in
A container ship arrives in a port in Singapore June 28, 2017.
Picture taken June 28, 2017. REUTERS/Darren Whiteside

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Clete Willems & Niels Graham l 15
a standardized format to one government agency to obtain the required papers, permits, and clearances
to complete their import or export processes. NSWs are a key bureaucratic innovation. Prior to their
implementation, traders would often have to deal with multiple agencies across government which each
have separate, but sometimes overlapping, requirements, making the import and export process both
convoluted and time-consuming. The successful implementation of an NSW has tangible impacts on
that country’s trade regime. The United States, for example, estimated that its own NSW, the Automated
Commercial Environment, generated nearly $1.8 billion in processing efficiencies in FY2020.
The United States should work with partners in the region to build the capacity to explore and implement
Single Window connectivity wherein participating nations integrate their respective NSWs to further unify,
streamline, and automate cross-border trade administrative processes. The US Customs and Border
Protection and Singapore Customs are already exploring Single Window connectivity through a letter of
intent signed in late 2020.13 This, in conjunction with a regional MRA, would be the best way to solidify
supply chains through partner countries short of increased market access.
Investing in the Indopacific
The IPEF should also strive to create an environment conducive to US investment in the region by
integrating existing investment facilitation initiatives, most importantly the Partnership on Global
Infrastructure and Investment (PGII), under the framework. The PGII is a collaborative effort created
by the G7 and led by the US and EU which have committed $200B and $300B respectively to fund
infrastructure projects in developing nations from 2022 until at least 2027. By linking the PGII’s
implementation architecture to the IPEF, Washington can enhance the credibility of its long-term
commitment to the IPEF, support US goals around friendshoring, and create a new economic incentive
for partners to encourage their agreement with other aspects of the framework.
In service of these goals, Washington should create a regional PGII implementation body managed
through the IPEF. The PGII body could be tasked with facilitating dialogues among IPEF partners and PGII
funders Japan and Australia; providing technical assistance around project preparation; coordinating and
connecting US private sector capital to regional projects; and disseminating best practices for creating
investment environments supportive of US private sector capital requirements. This should be done
in coordination with standing efforts from the US Trade and Development Agency, USAID, the Export
Import Bank, and other US Government agencies. The US should also consider how to also allow for EU
participation in this body to substantiate their engagement with the framework.
The near-term focus of the PGII body should be projects that are less capital intensive and can be
completed quickly such as investments in digital, e-health, education, and decarbonization. As the body
accumulates short-term successes, the initiative can expand and shift more towards roads, railways,
ports, airports, electricity access, and digital communication systems that can handle heavy data traffic.
Such investments in hard infrastructure should be aligned with US goals around friendshoring and would
complement the trade facilitation suggestions above by scaling trade capacity in regional partners to
make their transportation sectors and port security systems more efficient. This would incentivize firms
to join IPEF efforts to diversify their production and distribution systems and enhance ties between US
businesses and the region.
By combining the IPEF and the PGII the US can demonstrate its long-term commitment to the framework,
encourage its partners to do the same, and provide tangible benefits to economies that accept
American-proposed rules and standards. Though preferential investment will not replace the tariff

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
16 l The TTC, the IPEF, and the Road to an Indo-Pacific Trade Deal - A New Model
concessions the US traditionally offers, it can keep partners engaged in good faith with the framework
and could serve as a holdover while the US primes itself and the region for an expanded agreement
which includes tariff reductions.
Aligning the IPEF and the TTC
The IPEF and the TTC have heavy issue overlap. Another way that both agreements can be improved is
by utilizing any crossover to their advantage by coordinating and unifying the outcomes of both bodies.
Two key areas that the IPEF lacks that are a part of the TTC are export controls and mechanisms to
respond to unfair trade practices, including the challenges posed by non-market economies. Although
the United States will have to be careful about making the IPEF appear too anti-China in character, it also
cannot credibly achieve its goals vis-à-vis China without including IPEF members like Australia, Japan,
South Korea, and Singapore in these efforts. Considering the IPEF’s flexible nature, other countries would
have no obligation to take on commitments in this area, but that should not stop the United States from
working with allies under the IPEF umbrella to make progress on these issues in the same way that it is
seeking to do so with the EU under the TTC.
Another area where the IPEF and the TTC can be better linked is around technology-based acquisition
strategies and standard setting. More specifically, the IPEF should try to integrate the TTC’s promising
SSI mechanism such that the United States’ Indo-Pacific partners can also be brought in on transatlantic
information sharing on international standards development.
Another area of clear overlap between the IPEF and the TTC is on supply chain resilience. Under
working group 10 of the TTC, the United States and the EU have agreed to establish early warning and
monitoring mechanisms to prevent and prepare for possible supply chain disruptions. Policy makers
have signaled that the IPEF will establish a similar early warning system around supply disruptions,
support the mapping of critical mineral supply chains, aim to improve traceability in key sectors, and
European Council President Charles Michel shakes hands
with Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida while European
Commission President Ursula von der Leyen looks on prior to
their talks at the prime minister’s official residence, in Tokyo,
Japan May 12, 2022. Y oshikazu Tsuno/Pool via REUTERS

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Clete Willems & Niels Graham l 17
coordinate supply chain diversification efforts. IPEF negotiators should coordinate with their counterparts
participating in the TTC to ensure such efforts are complementary.
Efforts to address supply chain coercion should also form a part of both the IPEF and the TTC’s
negotiating agendas given that this issue affects countries in both regions. A few prominent examples
of this kind of behavior in recent years include the export restrictions Beijing imposed on Australia in an
attempt to coerce Canberra to terminate a call for an independent inquiry into the origins of COVID-19;14
Beijing’s boycott of South Korean goods, tourism, and entertainment following the Korean government’s
deployment of the US-made T erminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) anti-ballistic missile defense
system;15 and Beijing’s removal of Lithuania from its customs system following exchanges between
Lithuania and Taiwan.16 One way to help integrate concerns about these issues across both bodies is
to include interested IPEF partners such as Japan, South Korea, and Australia into the TTC’s dialogue
on shared trade concerns regarding third countries’ measures or initiatives. This expanded group could
become an effective forum to discuss and organize unified responses to coercive trade measures,
especially those coming out of China.
Similarly, both the IPEF and the TTC should go further when it comes to initiatives around friendshoring.
For example, in key critical sectors, both bodies could allow for limited market access commitments or
trade facilitation measures (such as easier regulatory approval) for countries that agree to a joint set of
commitments to uphold certain standards in that sector that admonish non-market economic practices.
At the same time, the United States should work with both IPEF and TTC members to ensure that they
are coordinating their subsidies practices in a way that avoids a race to the bottom.17 The TTC has
already started to serve such a function by helping the United States and the EU avoid a subsidy race
around semiconductors. Although the United States already has an Asia-focused semiconductor subsidy
coordination body—the so-called Chips 4 Alliance—which brings together the United States, Japan,
South Korea, and Taiwan,18 it still needs a coordination body around other smaller, but still substantial,
subsidy programs for other critical components such as advanced batteries for electric vehicles, which
the United States and Japan are both beginning to subsidize.19
3. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR AN AMBITIOUS
TRADE POLICY
As discussed above, the United States should seek to improve both the TTC and the IPEF on their own
merits as well as better align their objectives. This will yield more coherent formats to address and
achieve friendshoring through regulatory alignment, trusted trader schemes, supply chain resilience, and
countering Chinese economic coercion.
But the United States can and should go further. If the Biden administration is serious about actually
changing Indo-Pacific supply chain policy and moving countries in the region into the United States’
regulatory orbit, it should pursue market access negotiations as part of the IPEF. If the IPEF also grants
regulatory harmonization and access to the best innovations from the TTC, it will become too attractive
to ignore.
China’s intensifying economic engagement and increasingly evident regional ambitions provide a
possible domestic opening for the Biden administration to garner congressional support for an ambitious
FTA with robust market access. China has shown an increasing determination to pursue regional trade

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
18 l The TTC, the IPEF, and the Road to an Indo-Pacific Trade Deal - A New Model
deals, most recently through RCEP, Beijing’s application to join the CPTPP, and its advancing negotiations
for a new FTA with South Korea.20 The United States’ previous strategy of sporadic and shallow
engagement cannot counterbalance this. Instead, the United States and its allies must show a desire to
be a willing and active Pacific trading partner, and the principal way to do this is through a new regional
FTA. This, coupled with new urgency around resilient and reliable supply chains and US partners and
allies’ hardening views on China, provide possible motivation for a breakthrough around trade and
specifically market access.
The arguments for market access are compelling. But even if the United States is unwilling to add
market access now, it should configure the IPEF in a way that it can be the first step toward a larger,
comprehensive deal that uses market access to build a resilient trading bloc and further align partners
and allies on a shared series of rules.
Figure 2. ASEAN’s Key Trading Partners
2020
2010
2018
2016
2014
2012
2008
2006
2004
$0B
$500B
$400B
$300B
$200B
$100B
US
China
Total Trade between ASEAN and Partner Countries, USD Billion
Source: Bloomberg
Tariff Reductions Should Not Be Ruled Out from the IPEF
Implicit within both the TTC and the IPEF is an execution of the US policy of friendshoring. This is visible
through a combination of fiscal efforts, such as funding provided by the United States and the EU to build
semiconductor production capacity, and regulatory alignment, such as efforts in the IPEF’s connected
economy pillar and the TTC’s working group on technology standards to remove beyond-the-border
trade barriers. But relying only on fiscal and regulatory mechanisms will not result in the substantial

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Clete Willems & Niels Graham l 19
supply chain shifts Washington desires. Changes to tariffs are the most impactful and cost-effective way
for the United States to achieve its objectives around friendshoring and decrease regional and global
reliance on China.
Though Chinese manufacturing costs are rising, a cheap labor pool and prevailing integration in global
supply chains mean it is often cheaper for a business to import from China than a US regional partner
such as Japan or South Korea. Table 3 provides a starting point for possible goods and materials to focus
tariff reductions on. For all the goods listed, China makes up at least 10 percent of US imports for that
specific product category with it going as high as 40 percent for products that fall under the electrical
accumulator tariff code.
Reducing US inbound tariffs on these and other critical goods would be the most effective way the
United States can friendshore existing production capacity to IPEF partners and take market share from
their Chinese competitors. Tariff liberalization for these areas can be used in negotiations to obtain tariff
reductions in areas where US exporters face a tariff disadvantage as compared to Chinese exporters.
Tariff reductions can also help diminish the impact of Chinese economic coercion. Chinese coercion
is effective due to the size of China’s imports and exports to its neighbors. RCEP’s tariff code amplifies
this by reducing the trade costs of developing value chains that further tie the Chinese economy to the
region. The United States should combat this by negotiating reciprocal market access for its imports to
ASEAN countries and Japan in line with what China receives under RCEP. To be clear, changes in the
US tariff schedule will not lead to a general decoupling of Chinese and IPEF economies nor should that
be the goal. Nevertheless, US tariff reductions can reduce the expansion of Chinese value chains in the
region by building trading connections between Washington and other Indo-Pacific economies.
Table 3. US Tariff Rates for Strategic Goods
Product Name Alternative IPEF Member Suppliers Current Tariff Rate
Electrical control and distribution
boards, <1kV
Japan, Malaysia, South Korea, Vietnam,
and Singapore 2.7%
Taps, cocks, valves, and similar
appliances Japan, South Korea, and India 5.6%
Electric accumulators Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, and
Vietnam 3.4%
Articles of iron or steel India, Japan, South Korea, and Thailand 8.6%
Plastics and rubber Japan, South Korea, and Malaysia 6.5%
Parts and accessories of bodies for
motor vehicles South Korea and Japan 2.5%
Brake system parts, except linings Japan, South Korea, and India 2.5%
 Source: WITS

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
20 l The TTC, the IPEF, and the Road to an Indo-Pacific Trade Deal - A New Model
A Transpacific Regulators’ Forum Modeled After the TTC
Regulatory alignment is a long-term exercise that requires a learning and socialization process before
shared rules can be established. Therefore, to pave the way for a potential FTA with IPEF members in
the future, the United States should immediately begin socialization efforts around regulations with IPEF
members. In particular, the IPEF should facilitate considerable institution and administrative capacity
building, supported by technical assistance, funding, and an exchange of experts.
As demonstrated during the TTIP negotiations, rushing or skipping this process can be especially
detrimental as effective regulatory alignment needs buy-in and trust from the regulators as well
as a detailed and nuanced understanding of the counterparty’s regulatory system. Without these
prerequisites, it’s unlikely negotiators will be able to see eye to eye and come to an agreement that
works for all parties.
To preempt this, the IPEF should create a Transpacific Regulators’ Forum modeled after the TTC. To be
effective, the forum would need buy-in from senior-level officials to identify areas for cooperation and
should be made up of working groups of regulators from all IPEF nations. The EU should also be given
observer status to better prime it for an eventual engagement on a more comprehensive FTA. The forum
would:
• Support the building of technical expertise to make regulations more compatible with each other;
• enable cooperation through regulator exchanges designed to enhance the understanding of each
country’s regulatory approach as well as promote direct connections between regulators with
similar mandates across countries;
• acilitate good regulatory practices, such as publication of regulatory agendas; provide early in-
formation on regulatory direction; and encourage public consultations, impact assessments, and
retrospective evaluations; and
• encourage partners to take each other’s regulatory approaches into account before regulating.
In addition to regulatory socialization, the Transpacific Regulators’ Forum should strive to achieve low-
hanging regulatory alignment (when appropriate) by reducing unnecessary regulatory differences and
A second shipment of infant formula, brought to the United States under “Operation
Fly Formula” in response to supply chain shortages, is seen at Dulles International
Airport, in Dulles, Virginia, U.S., May 25, 2022. REUTERS/Elizabeth Frantz

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Clete Willems & Niels Graham l 21
eliminating duplicate administrative requirements. Similar to the TTC, emphasis should be placed on
forward-looking cooperation on new measures being formulated.
A Robust Implementation Structure
Approaching the IPEF with a long-term mentality will also bring about structural enhancements that will be
especially important if the administration plans to use the IPEF as a starting point for negotiations around a
comprehensive FTA but could still be advantageous if Washington sees it as an end within itself. Such an
approach would allow negotiations to be structured with dual tracks such that countries that are interested
in certain pillars but are uncertain if they can meet the implementation requirements can still engage with
them instead of being kicked out. This will allow IPEF pillars to both produce agreements that can be
implemented as soon as consensus is achieved among advanced economy negotiating partners and still
maintain participation from developing economies that would need longer implementation timelines. The
secondary track could also allow for capacity building via technical assistance to take place.
A standing Secretariat with a mandate to improve the framework, further link and smooth trade flows
between its members, and monitor implementation should also be implemented within the IPEF. Such
a Secretariat would affirm that the IPEF is a starting point for more robust regional economic integration
efforts. The Secretariat would be a body dedicated to thinking through further economic integration
under the IPEF. This is important as country trade negotiators often have many competing priorities and
mandates which could distract them from further IPEF integration and slow down the work around a more
comprehensive FTA. The Secretariat could help manage the longer transition periods in the dual tracks
and ensure nations are sticking to their implementation timelines. Finally, the Secretariat could monitor and
work on similar issues as the TTC and position developing economies within the IPEF to adopt the high
standards agreed upon within the TTC.
An Indo-Pacific Regulatory Framework
In addition to a realignment of supply chains, a comprehensive FTA that builds on the regulatory
socialization conducted through the TTC and the IPEF would be the best conduit for proliferating the
United States’ preferred rules and standards throughout the Indo-Pacific region. Doing so would advance
both US economic and strategic interests. An aligned regulatory framework overseeing key sectors that
link high-skill and low-cost areas of production would hold immense economic promise. Strategically,
regulatory alignment can proliferate US preferred rules and standards around emerging technologies
wherein regional and global rules have not been calcified and, similar to the aspirations of the TPP,
address standing issues such as the role of the state in the economy through agreement around rules
concerning SOEs and market competition.
The regulatory socialization and trust-building exercises undertaken in the IPEF and through the TTC
should provide negotiators and regulators a nuanced understanding of counterpart regulatory regimes.
As a result, negotiators should be able to identify areas wherein regulations can immediately be
standardized following the signing of the agreement. The negotiations should also identify areas wherein
prompt alignment may be too ambitious and time-consuming, but progress can be made after the
arrangement is signed as regulators continue to work together.
To ensure there is follow-through on these identified areas, the FTA should create a Regulatory
Cooperation Council (RCC) overseen and organized by the Secretariat. Similar to the TTC, the RCC

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
22 l The TTC, the IPEF, and the Road to an Indo-Pacific Trade Deal - A New Model
would be comprised of senior regulators and policy makers from the Departments of Commerce,
Treasury, State, and Energy; the USTR; the White House; and their counterparts from partner countries.
The RCC would ensure partners implement their commitments, provide a forum in which regulators can
attempt to align new regulations before they are enacted, and identify existing regulations that might be
brought into greater alignment. Because regulatory alignment becomes increasingly complex as partners
are added, the council should operate through “minilateralism” for emerging issues wherein proposals
are socialized and discussed but are not mandated and compliance is done at will.
 CONCLUSION
The Biden administration should be commended for its ongoing attempt to reconstruct the playbook for
Washington’s international economic engagement. It is an ambitious attempt to meet the new economic
challenges of an increasingly multipolar, post-COVID-19 world. However, as the Chinese economy
continues to rise, the flexibility and timeline afforded to the United States continues to diminish. As a result,
Washington must be goal-oriented and consider the best possible tools it has at its disposal to realize its
aspirations. For objectives surrounding supply chain resilience, friendshoring, and countering Chinese
economic coercion, enhanced market access remains the best tool Washington has at its disposal.
Ideally, the final FTA would also include the EU, the United Kingdom, and others, but if these countries
are only able to join some of the commitments that still would be a major positive step.
Clete R. Willems is a nonresident senior fellow with the Atlantic Council GeoEconomics
Center. Mr. Willems is a partner at Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld, where he advises
multinational companies, investors, and trade associations on international economic
law and policy matters. Until April 2019, Mr. Willems was Deputy Assistant to the
President for International Economics and Deputy Director of the National Economic
Council. In this role, he was a key negotiator with foreign governments, including China
and the European Union, and the President’s lead negotiator at the G-7, G-20, and Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC) Forum. Prior to joining the White House, Mr. Willems was a trade negotiator and
WTO litigator at the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR). He also worked as Legislative
Director for Congressman Paul Ryan (R-WI). Mr. Willems graduated from the University of Notre Dame
(BA) and Georgetown University Law Center (JD).
Niels R. Graham is an assistant director for the Atlantic Council GeoEconomics Center
where he supports the center’s work on Chinese economics, trade, and Central Bank
Digital Currencies. Prior to joining the Atlantic Council, Mr. Graham worked at McLarty
Associates where he supported the firm’s clients as they engaged with the UN and
other international government organizations. Mr. Graham has also worked at the
Albright Stonebridge Group’s Global Practice, as well the Office of the President at the
Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) where he was awarded the Pearce Prize. Mr. Graham
holds a BA from the Elliott School of International Affairs at George Washington University.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Clete Willems & Niels Graham l 23
AEO Authorized Economic Operator
AI artificial intelligence
ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations
CPTPP Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership
EU European Union
FTA free trade agreement
GDP gross domestic product
IPEF Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity
MRA Mutual Recognition Arrangement
NAFTA North American Free Trade Agreement
NSW National Single Window
PGII Partnership on Global Infrastructure and Investment
PPE personal protective equipment
RCC Regulatory Cooperation Council
RCEP Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership
SOE state-owned enterprise
SSI Strategic Standardization Information
TFA World Trade Organization’s Trade Facilitation Agreement
THAAD Terminal High Altitude Area Defense
TPP Trans-Pacific Partnership
TTC US-EU Trade and Technology Council
TTIP Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership
USJTA US-Japan Trade Agreement
USMCA United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement
USTI US-Taiwan Initiative on 21st Century Trade
USTR Office of the US Trade Representative
WTO World Trade Organization
ANNEX
Glossary

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
24 l The TTC, the IPEF, and the Road to an Indo-Pacific Trade Deal - A New Model
ENDNOTES
1 Fefer, Rachel. “U.S. Trade in Services: Trends and Policy Issues.” Congressional Research Service, January 22, 2020. https://
sgp.fas.org/crs/misc/R43291.pdf.
2 Schott, Jeffrey. “Which Countries Are in the CPTPP and RCEP Trade Agreements and Which Want in? | PIIE.” The Peterson
Institute for International Economy, January 3, 2022. https://www.piie.com/research/piie-charts/which-countries-are-cptpp-
and-rcep-trade-agreements-and-which-want.
3 “The Presidential Candidates on the Trans-Pacific Partnership,” July 30, 2019, https://www.cfr.org/article/presidential-
candidates-trans-pacific-partnership.
4 Tai, Katherine. The Trade Off: Economics versus the Environment. Video Recording, April 26, 2022. https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=TXbeNh6Mr8M.
5 Cutler, Wendy, and Katherine Tai. Ambassador Katherine Tai on the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework and the
Administration’s Trade Agenda. Other. Washington International Trade Association . Asian Society Policy Institute , June 6,
2022. https://www.wita.org/event-videos/tai-ipef-video/.
6 Y ellen, Janet. Transcript: US Treasury Secretary Janet Y ellen on the next steps for Russia sanctions and “friend-shoring” supply
chains. Interview by Rana Foroohar. Video, April 13, 2022. https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/news/transcripts/transcript-us-
treasury-secretary-janet-yellen-on-the-next-steps-for-russia-sanctions-and-friend-shoring-supply-chains/.
7 United States Department of State. “U.S.-EU Trade and T echnology Council (TTC).” Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs.
Accessed September 12, 2022. https://www.state.gov/u-s-eu-trade-and-technology-council-ttc/.
8 The White House. “FACT SHEET: U.S.-EU Trade and Technology Council Establishes Economic and T echnology Policies
& Initiatives.” The White House Briefing Room, May 16, 2022. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2022/05/16/fact-sheet-u-s-eu-trade-and-technology-council-establishes-economic-and-technology-policies-
initiatives/.
9 Reinsch, William Alan, and Emily Benson. “Assessing Progress within the TTC.” The Center for Strategic and International
Studies, May 18, 2022. https://www.csis.org/analysis/assessing-progress-within-ttc.
10 The White House. “FACT SHEET: In Asia, President Biden and a Dozen Indo-Pacific Partners Launch the Indo-Pacific Economic
Framework for Prosperity.” The White House Briefing Room, May 23, 2022. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
statements-releases/2022/05/23/fact-sheet-in-asia-president-biden-and-a-dozen-indo-pacific-partners-launch-the-indo-
pacific-economic-framework-for-prosperity/.
11 Golberg, Elizabeth. “Regulatory Cooperation – A Reality Check.” M-RCBG Associate Working Paper Series. Cambridge:
Mossavar-Rahmani Centre for Business and Government Harvard Kennedy School, April 2019. https://www.hks.harvard.edu/
sites/default/files/centers/mrcbg/img/115_final.pdf.
12 The World Trade Organization. “World Trade Report 2015. Speeding up Trade: Benefits and Challenges of Implementing the
WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement,” 2015. https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/booksp_e/world_trade_report15_e.pdf.
13 U.S. Customs and Border Protection. “CBP and Singapore Customs Sign Historic Letter of Intent to Explore Single Window
Connectivity ,” November 10, 2020. https://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/national-media-release/cbp-and-singapore-customs-
sign-historic-letter-intent-explore-single.
14 Wilson, Jeffrey. “Australia Shows the World What Decoupling From China Looks Like.” Foreign Policy, November 9, 2021.
https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/11/09/australia-china-decoupling-trade-sanctions-coronavirus-geopolitics/.
15 Lim, Darren J. “Chinese Economic Coercion during the THAAD Dispute.” The Asan Forum, December 28, 2019. https://
theasanforum.org/chinese-economic-coercion-during-the-thaad-dispute/.
16 Reynolds, Matthew, and Matthew P. Goodman. “China’s Economic Coercion: Lessons from Lithuania.” The Center for Strategic
and International Studies, May 6, 2022. https://www.csis.org/analysis/chinas-economic-coercion-lessons-lithuania.
17 Robinson, Dan. “Joint US-EU Council to Coordinate on T ech Supply Chains.” The Register, May 16, 2022. https://www.
theregister.com/2022/05/16/ttc_paris_meeting/.
18 The World Trade Online. “U.S.-Proposed ‘Chips 4 Alliance’ Could Coordinate Industrial Policy, Export Controls | InsideTrade.
Com.” Insider U.S. Trade. Accessed September 12, 2022. https://insidetrade.com/daily-news/us-proposed-%E2%80%98chips-
4-alliance%E2%80%99-could-coordinate-industrial-policy-export-controls.
19 The U.S. Department of Energy. “Biden Administration, DOE to Invest $3 Billion to Strengthen U.S. Supply Chain for Advanced
Batteries for Vehicles and Energy Storage,” February 11, 2022. https://www.energy.gov/articles/biden-administration-doe-
invest-3-billion-strengthen-us-supply-chain-advanced-batteries.
20 The Ministry of Commerce, The People’s Republic of China. “China FTA Network.” The FTA Network, July 13, 2022. http://fta.
mofcom.gov.cn/enarticle/chinakoreatwoen/chinakoreatwoennews/202207/49259_1.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Clete Willems & Niels Graham l 25
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the leadership and staff of the Atlantic Council GeoEconomics Center
and Atlantik-Brücke including Mrugank Bhusari, Sophia Busch, Kathy Butterfield, Katharina Draheim,
Franka Ellman, Robin Fehrenbach, Julia Friedlander, Cate Hansberry, Ananya Kumar, Josh Lipsky, Ole
Moehr, and Maia Nikoladze. The authors also wish to thank Miles Munkacy for the research support and
Charles Lichfield for the invaluable comments and suggestions.
This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic Council Policy on Intellectual Inde-
pendence. The authors are solely responsible for its analysis and recommendations. The Atlantic Council
and its donors do not determine, nor do they necessarily endorse or advocate for, any of this report’s
conclusions.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that promotes constructive US
leadership and engagement in international affairs based on the central role of the
Atlantic community in meeting today’s global challenges.
© 2022 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights reserved. No part of this
publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means without
permission in writing from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of brief quotations in
news articles, critical articles, or reviews.
Please direct inquiries to: Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor Washington, DC 20005
(202) 778-4952
www.AtlanticCouncil.org
