
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy
Strengthening US Diplomacy for the Challenges of Today and Tomorrow
By: Jeffrey Cimmino and Amanda Rothschild
The Scowcroft Center’s Project on Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy
Earlier this year, the Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security launched a project on twenty-
first-century diplomacy to address how US diplomacy should adapt to meet twenty-first-century
challenges. T o begin this project, the center hosted a workshop that brought together diplomats,
scholars, technologists, and other experts to share their insights on this important topic. This
paper benefited greatly from the insights of participants in that workshop, and summarizes the key
conclusions.
ISSUE BRIEF
U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken delivers remarks at the National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence (NSCAI) Global
Emerging T echnology Summit in Washington, DC, July 13, 2021. Jim Watson/Pool via REUTERS
special thanks to our sponsor

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Atlantic Council
2 l Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy, Strengthening US Diplomacy for the Challenges of
Today and Tomorrow
Introduction and Executive Summary
How should US diplomacy adapt for the twenty-first century? The practice of diplomacy has
changed drastically over the past several decades, with the return of great power rivalry, the
emergence of the new technologies of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR), and the rise of other
important developments. Y et, while scholars and strategists have devoted enormous attention
to how these new developments affect other domains, such as the future of warfare, they
have devoted scant attention to the changing nature of diplomacy. If we believe, however, that
diplomacy is a—if not the—most important tool of American statecraft, then twenty-first-century
diplomacy deserves the same level of sustained attention. This paper will seek to characterize
the changing nature of diplomacy with the objective of helping US and allied diplomats more
effectively practice strategy and statecraft.
This issue brief considers two key questions.
1. How is the context of twenty-first-century diplomacy different from that of the past?
2. How can US diplomacy begin to adapt for the twenty-first century?
In answering the first question, this issue brief will focus on the most salient change in the
international balance of power—the rise of China—in addition to the current technological
revolution. After outlining how these changes have affected the context in which the United States
conducts diplomacy, this issue brief will suggest several proposals to adapt US diplomacy to the
twenty-first century. These suggestions will address both how changes in the global context—
especially technology—have affected the conduct of US diplomacy and how US diplomacy can
best respond to China’s rise and the 4IR.
We will argue that US diplomacy must do the following.
• Get smart on tech at the US State Department, including through cultivating a creative
workforce with diverse skills, improving training on technology and science, and investing
in the potential of new technologies for diplomacy.
• Reinvigorate engagement with institutions, countries, and individuals, including by
reasserting US leadership in multilateral bodies to ensure they advance US interests,
especially on shaping norms for new technologies and challenging China’s authoritarian
influence; redoubling efforts to engage frequently and personally with those countries and
regions where China is attempting to increase its influence; and reinvesting in strategic
communications, information statecraft, and public diplomacy.
• Advance partnerships with likeminded nations to lead in the digital age, including by
leveraging smaller, less formal pacts, such as the Quad, and potentially creating a new,
formal alliance centered on technology leadership.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Atlantic Council
3 l Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy, Strengthening US Diplomacy for the Challenges of
Today and Tomorrow
In short, the twin hallmarks of twenty-first-century diplomacy are effectiveness operating in—and
shaping—the digital world, complemented by widespread, sustained, and personal efforts to
reinforce global recognition that US values-based leadership is needed to compete with China’s
authoritarian model.
A New World for Diplomacy
The Rise of China
Senior US and allied diplomats learned their craft in an era of US and western dominance, but that
period of history has come to an end. They need to adjust to a world of great power rivalry. The
past thirty years witnessed dramatic shifts in the global balance of power. In economic terms alone,
significant changes are under way. In the 1990s, at the height of the unipolar moment, around
70 percent of global economic activity took place in Europe and the Americas. In the next few
decades, that number is likely to drop to about 40 percent, with Asia projected to account for the
majority of global gross domestic product (GDP) by mid-century.1 A key part of this shift has been
the rise of China, which has experienced rapid economic growth in recent decades.
In the early 2000s, many leaders in the United States and around the world hoped that China
would become a responsible stakeholder in the international system. Instead, China has refused
to play by the rules, and has only grown more assertive. President Xi Jinping has launched
the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) on a revisionist course that directly challenges US power,
Photo courtesy of: shutterstock

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Atlantic Council
4 l Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy, Strengthening US Diplomacy for the Challenges of
Today and Tomorrow
prosperity, and values. The last two presidential administrations have acknowledged this challenge
in major strategy documents. The Donald Trump administration characterized “long-term, strategic
competition” by “revisionist powers” as the “central challenge to U.S. prosperity and security,”
while the Joe Biden administration described China as “the only competitor potentially capable
of combining its economic, diplomatic, military, and technological power to mount a sustained
challenge to a stable and open international system.”2
China’s growing influence has extended into the diplomatic and Political domains. China has
attempted to dominate international institutions, including by winning elections to key leadership
positions—often turning them away from their intended purpose and coercing multilateral
bodies to avoid or soften criticism of China.3 For example, in 2020, China persuaded dozens of
countries to back its crackdown on Hong Kong’s democracy at the United Nations (UN) Human
Rights Council. As one commentator observed at the time, “Beijing has effectively leveraged the
UN Human Rights Council to endorse the very activities it was created to oppose.”4 Multilateral
forums are now a contested space in which the United States will have to reassert leadership and
influence.
China has expanded its global megaphone and engaged in
efforts to influence narratives about the CCP. Beijing pursues
these efforts through multiple means, such as support for
Confucius Institutes at universities around the world. These
bodies are known to proffer materials that whitewash the CCP’s
history and to curtail any discussion of Taiwan.5 US diplomacy will
need to redouble efforts to engage with publics and challenge
the propaganda machines of adversaries.
Through efforts such as the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), China
has combined its economic power and diplomatic engagement to develop partnerships around
the world. BRI participants include much of Africa, the Middle East, and Central and Southeast Asia,
along with some in Latin America and Eastern and Southern Europe. The United States cannot
afford to de-prioritize these regions while Beijing increases its influence.
China is employing all the tools of statecraft, including diplomacy, “to shape a world consistent with
[its] authoritarian model.”6 The CCP trains officials from other countries on China’s governance and
economic model.7 In the technological space, Beijing has pushed for authoritarian norms, such
as greater national sovereignty over the Internet, via mechanisms such as the BRI’s “Digital Silk
Road” initiative. It has also worked with other governments on controlling information flows, and
has exported advanced surveillance technology.8 As one report observed, “Loans from Beijing
have made surveillance technology available to governments that could not previously afford it,
while China’s authoritarian system has diminished the transparency and accountability of its use.”9
China has combined
its economic power
and diplomatic
engagement to
develop partnerships
around the world.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Atlantic Council
5 l Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy, Strengthening US Diplomacy for the Challenges of
Today and Tomorrow
US diplomacy must support a whole-of-government effort to lead the 4IR and shape the rules and
norms governing twenty-first century technology.
Before turning to the next major trend that has reshaped the context for US diplomacy, two
qualifying notes are in order. First, China is not the only state-based challenge to international
peace and stability. Russia remains a nuclear-armed power that, despite its economic weakness
vis-à-vis the United States and China, has demonstrated a willingness to employ force to achieve
its ends. In addition, rogue states, such as North Korea and Iran, have the capacity to disrupt US
interests in their respective regions and threaten American lives. The United States cannot afford
to ignore Russia or the threats from rogue states, but China’s power and influence across different
domains make it a more significant long-term challenge for the United States.
Still, this is not to say that US and allied diplomats are operating from a position of weakness.
Despite shifts in the global balance of power, the United States remains the world’s largest
economy according to nominal GDP, and it possesses a top-notch military. Unlike China and
other adversaries, the United States benefits from a vast network of alliances and partnerships
that strengthen its ability to project power throughout the world. The US share of global GDP
has remained fairly stable over the past few decades. Combined, the United States and its treaty
allies make up around 60 percent of global GDP, far more than what China and other revisionist
autocracies can muster.10 In short, while US diplomacy must navigate the challenge of a new great-
power rivalry, it is not doing so from a position of weakness.
The Fourth Industrial Revolution and the Digitalized World
Alongside the rise of China, the past few decades witnessed a new industrial revolution with
increasing digitalization and technological development. This means that US and allied diplomats
must be prepared to operate in a digitalized world and effectively wield digital tools to their
advantage.
First, the fast flow of information through nondiplomatic channels has resulted in several changes.
Non-state actors now have greater access to data and information, increasing their influence.
The rapid dissemination of information has also, in many cases, shortened the window for senior
diplomats to respond and get ahead of events on the ground. The public is also better able to
scrutinize government actions; however, governments also have a more diverse set of tools for
engaging with the public and crafting messaging to improve perception of their performance.11
Digitalization has also created openings for increased freedom in some respects, as digital tools
can be used to organize movements and circumvent censorship. On the other hand, authoritarian
actors can harness digital tools for nefarious ends, as China has done in Xinjiang, implementing
a regional mass-surveillance network replete with facial-recognition technology and biometric-

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Atlantic Council
6 l Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy, Strengthening US Diplomacy for the Challenges of
Today and Tomorrow
data collection. Moreover, autocratic adversaries have taken advantage of social media and other
communication tools to spread disinformation.
Additionally, the 4IR is marked by the development of various technologies, ranging from artificial
intelligence to additive manufacturing. The technologies of the 4IR will reshape economies and
militaries. T o name just a few examples, artificial intelligence is essential for driverless cars and can
rapidly synthesize large pools of information; hypersonic weaponry could be used to evade missile
defenses; and fifth-generation (5G) wireless technology (and future generations) will facilitate
further digitalization at faster speeds.
The United States must understand and address the consequences of these developments
over the next few decades. We know technological leadership in the early industrial revolutions
helped solidify the global dominance of Western Europe, and US innovation leadership since the
time of Thomas Edison has been critical for sustaining US power. The countries that lead in the
development of the technologies of the 4IR will be well positioned to prosper in this era, and to
shape the norms that guide the use of these technologies.
China is already trying to dominate the commanding heights of twenty-first-century technology.
Unlike the United States and its allies and partners, China wants authoritarian norms to govern
the digital world and emerging technologies. Winning the twenty-first-century tech race would put
China in prime position to surpass the United States as the world’s premier economic and military
power. US diplomacy will need to adapt urgently to prevent this outcome.
Adapting to a Changing Context
US and allied diplomats must adapt to the challenges of twenty-first
century statecraft.
Indeed, they are already moving in this direction. Just this spring, the State Department launched
a new Bureau of Cyberspace and Digital Policy, which is a noteworthy measure in streamlining
the department’s approach to cyber and technology issues. However, a new State Department
office is not nearly enough to confront the myriad challenges of this new era and seize upon the
opportunities to promote US security and prosperity.
Indeed, in its current form, the State Department is still too much of a nineteenth-century institution
in a modern world. The current generation of diplomats came of age in the unipolar moment
and post-9/11 era. This generational challenge, in conjunction with an organizational culture that
discourages unconventional thinking, impedes effective twenty-first-century diplomacy. With a
changing global landscape, US diplomats need to think creatively, with fresh approaches.
The State Department—the principal diplomatic arm of the US government—will need to become
tech savvy at home, reinvigorate personal diplomacy and engage with publics abroad, and work
with allies and partners to harness the 4IR and excel in a digital world.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Atlantic Council
7 l Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy, Strengthening US Diplomacy for the Challenges of
Today and Tomorrow
Get Smart on Tech at Home
Twenty-first-century diplomacy starts at home, with a concerted effort to make the State
Department more technologically capable.
Create a Tech-Smart Workforce
The State Department needs a creative, entrepreneurial, and innovative workforce that can
readily identify and incorporate new technologies into its daily work. To do this, the department
needs hiring practices that actively seek out tech-smart staff to serve as the backbone of a more
innovation-minded department. Some progress is already being made toward this end: the Bureau
of Conflict and Stabilization Operations (CSO), for example, has established a job category for data
scientists. The State Department should also consider tech knowledge as part of its assessment
of Foreign Service Officers and other hires throughout the department. In addition, it should
incentivize tech training by making professional development in this space a consideration for
promotions.12 A fundamental degree of tech literacy is critical for effective twenty-first century
statecraft.
Furthermore, US diplomats need technical training on technology that helps them understand how
technology relates to their Portfolios, particularly in the context of competition with China, Russia,
and other rivals and adversaries. Issues related to digital infrastructure, privacy, intelligence,
digital currency, quantum computing, and artificial intelligence must be studied in connection to
defending vital US interests abroad. The State Department should explore collaborating with other
institutions, including universities and think tanks, to educate staff and solicit fresh perspectives on
the intersection of tech and US interests.
Photo courtesy of: shutterstock

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Atlantic Council
8 l Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy, Strengthening US Diplomacy for the Challenges of
Today and Tomorrow
Congress should ensure that the State Department uses its resources efficiently and effectively
to hire and train a workforce with technological skills. The department—a large agency—should
identify current areas of duplication, waste, or outdated processes, and replace these with
streamlined efforts to update the department’s approach.
Invest in Emerging Tech
Emerging technology also provides opportunities to augment and improve the processing and
dissemination of information within the State Department.
When used by the United States, artificial intelligence has the ability to rapidly sift through data
and make predictions based on patterns in a way that exceeds the speed and accuracy of human
processing. For example, new applications and technologies can sort through data points from
social media and other open-source content in key countries, and produce summaries that distill
the most vital information. These capabilities create great efficiencies in that they save diplomats
from spending their valuable time scrolling through social media themselves and more time for the
practice of diplomacy. At the same time, experience and expertise remain important in the conduct
of diplomacy, and the implementation of artificial intelligence in processing information must be
matched with skilled practitioners who possess the necessary context to put these vital data into
practice. In short, new technologies will serve mostly to enhance, not replace, the work of human
diplomats.
Reinvigorate Engagement with Institutions, Countries,
and Individuals
Incorporating new technology is vital to the State Department’s work, but it is not a silver bullet.
Despite technological advances, face-to-face diplomacy remains the gold standard of US
diplomacy. Personal demarches, letters, in-person summits, and meetings remain among the most
important diplomatic tools.
These traditional methods of diplomacy are essential to countering China’s influence in particular.
Around the world, China seeks to displace the United States as the preeminent power—and, in
certain cases, the chosen partner. In order to counter China’s efforts, US diplomats must maintain a
forward and active presence in all regions of the world. They cannot hide behind the convenience
of technology. In this regard, the State Department, and the US government broadly, should be
prudent in adapting to the technological revolution. Time-tested methods of diplomacy are still an
essential component of furthering US interests abroad.
Reassert Leadership in Multilateral Institutions
In recent decades, overwhelming US influence incentivized American diplomats to perceive
international institutions as neutral bodies, or worse, to neglect them altogether. In this new era

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Atlantic Council
9 l Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy, Strengthening US Diplomacy for the Challenges of
Today and Tomorrow
of great power competition, however, US and allied diplomats will need to relearn how to use
multilateral institutions as an instrument of American power and statecraft.
The United States played a critical role in establishing many of these institutions after the Second
World War. However, China has now engaged in competitive multilateralism to undermine US
interests and increase its own influence within bodies such as the World Health Organization
(WHO), World Trade Organization (WTO), and UN Human Rights Council, deliberately weakening
the organizations’ founding missions.
International standard-setting organizations will shape future technologies and determine how
artificial intelligence (AI) and 5G, for example, are implemented worldwide. China has aimed to
infiltrate these organizations as well, by placing Chinese nationals in senior leadership positions,
increasing the representation of Chinese tech companies within them, and garnering support for
Chinese-state backed initiatives.13 The United States, its allies, and its partners should leverage
their collective power and influence to push back against China and autocratic rivals, and ensure
these institutions advance US and allied interests. T ogether, working with likeminded partners,
the United States should utilize all available tools, including
redoubling efforts to win leadership elections and, where
appropriate, withholding or increasing funding and participation to
ensure that these institutions fulfill their founding missions.
Focus on Personal Diplomacy and Relationship Building
In an era of overwhelming power, US diplomacy tended to
prioritize key regions and often engaged in benign neglect
in other regions. In this new era of great power rivalry, China
has filled the vacuum to the detriment of American interests.
Diplomats must once again relearn the Cold War era skills of
viewing the entire world as the setting of a contest for influence
and power.
China is actively combining its military, economic, political, and diplomatic power to cultivate
partnerships throughout the world, from traditionally nonaligned countries in Africa to NATO
members in Eastern Europe. China is especially good at personal engagement, approaching
countries with a robust on-the-ground presence to strengthen ties and leverage them to Beijing’s
advantage. Through debt diplomacy, a favored tool of the CCP, China has gained control of a port
in Sri Lanka. It is also reportedly constructing a naval base in Cambodia, and has concluded a pact
with the Solomon Islands. These are just a few examples of China’s reach.
US diplomacy needs to counter Chinese influence by recommitting to personal diplomacy and
frequent engagement with countries throughout the world, to draw them away from China’s orbit.
China is actively
combining its
military, economic,
political, and
diplomatic power to
cultivate partnerships
throughout the
world...

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Atlantic Council
10 l Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy, Strengthening US Diplomacy for the Challenges of
Today and Tomorrow
US diplomacy must be predicated on steady, sustained, and personal engagement to nourish
relationships and remind countries of the benefits of ties with the United States. The United
States needs to approach countries with a clear understanding of their interests and needs.
It needs to compete with China across all areas of engagement. In the technology realm, the
United States must be tireless in its efforts to persuade allies and partners to reject Huawei-built
5G digital infrastructure, which invites a severe security threat into US alliances and partnerships,
and exposes recipient nations to coercion, espionage, and sabotage in the future. US diplomats
must make this case to allies and partners around the world. Accepting money, technology,
or other resources from Beijing—no matter how attractive—makes a state vulnerable to CCP
coercion. Washington must also offer a positive alternative that plays to its strengths. While the
US government will not make large loans with no strings attached, it can offer higher quality,
transparent, and environmentally friendly development aid and other assistance that the CCP
cannot match.
Bolster Public Diplomacy
The United States must also compete in the communications and public-diplomacy domains.
Its rivals have taken advantage of the communications potential of the digital age to proliferate
disinformation through social media and other venues. Moreover, China and other adversaries use
a global media network to advance narratives favorable to authoritarianism.
The United States needs to invest in information statecraft, strategic communications, and
public diplomacy to challenge disinformation, promote truthful narratives about authoritarians,
engage with the people living in repressive regimes, contrast the US way of life with the perils
of authoritarianism, and cultivate support for US values and freedom. Information warfare was a
critical component of the US Cold War strategy, and it should remain a vital tool of statecraft.
• The United States can, and should, support an economy of independent media
organizations in foreign nations focused on fair and accurate reporting.
• Congress should ensure that information statecraft is conducted efficiently, effectively,
and vigorously by various government agencies, such as the Global Engagement Center
(GEC) and US Agency for Global Media (USAGM). Importantly, USAGM includes Radio Free
Europe/Radio Liberty and Voice of America, which must remain strong and proud voices
for US exceptionalism and freedom.14
• The US government should also work with NATO allies and other European partners to
develop joint-funding mechanisms.15 Priority should be given to media entities in countries
operating in regions particularly vulnerable to disinformation.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Atlantic Council
11 l Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy, Strengthening US Diplomacy for the Challenges of
Today and Tomorrow
Advance Partnerships with Likeminded Nations to Lead
in the Digital Age
The United States must also forge strong alliances and partnerships with likeminded nations in
the technology domain in order to compete effectively, achieve tech dominance, and further US
security, political, and economic interests in all regions of the world.
Leverage Ad Hoc Coalitions and Pursue Formal Partnerships
US diplomats should work to strengthen ad hoc or less formal arrangements with allies and
partners to maintain their traditional technological leadership position. Momentum toward greater
democratic cooperation on the technologies of the 4IR is already under way. Despite US and
European Union (EU) differences concerning regulation, the new US-EU Trade and Technology
Council suggests a mutual desire to overcome obstacles and forge a common transatlantic path
forward on emerging technology.
Moreover, the last two administrations elevated the importance of the Quad, and Quad leaders
met in person for the first time in 2021. Quad member states appear poised to increase
cooperation on technological development, with Shinji Inoue, Japan’s science and technology
minister, saying in 2021, “It is very important for the Quad countries…which share common values,
to cooperate in emerging technologies so that sustainable, inclusive, resilient economic growth
can be promoted in the Indo-Pacific region.”16 Quad members agreed to establish a task force on
advanced technologies and develop standards for AI and 5G.
Furthermore, the AUKUS pact between Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States,
announced in 2021, is also prioritizing emerging technology, especially in a defense context. In
November, then Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison said the pact would “enhance our joint
capabilities and interoperability, with an initial focus on cyber capabilities, artificial intelligence,
quantum technologies and undersea capabilities,” adding that the three countries would boost
cooperation “in advanced and critical technologies and capabilities.”17
The development of new technologies may also lend itself to additional diplomatic initiatives in
the years ahead. T o best utilize AI, for example, countries will need to cooperate to share data,
while maintaining respect for privacy. In order to capitalize on the potential benefits of AI, the
United States should work to establish a data-sharing arrangement with allies and partners. The
agreement should ensure data are shared in a safe and secure manner that respects privacy, but
also allow the United States and its allies and partners to advance technological innovation.
This progress is welcome, and US diplomats might also consider building on these initiatives to
work toward formal technology-alliance structures with likeminded partners. A recent article by Ash

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Atlantic Council
12 l Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy, Strengthening US Diplomacy for the Challenges of
Today and Tomorrow
Jain and Matthew Kroenig outlines how these initial steps could also lead to a broader democratic
technology alliance.18
US diplomacy has a vital role to play in cultivating a coordinated front on technology. Winning the
twenty-first-century tech race will be a boon to US and allied military and economic interests, and
allow these countries to establish the rules and norms that will govern the digital age for years to
come.
Export Digital-Information Infrastructure with Democratic Values
Whereas China and other adversaries have sought to use technology to export autocracy
and repression, the United States should seek to export digital information infrastructure that
promotes freedom, privacy, and the rule of law. As Ambassador Eileen Donahoe has written,
AI has been a “game changer in favor of authoritarian states,” particularly China.19 The CCP has
exported its domestic-surveillance software around the world. As of 2019, eighteen countries are
using Chinese-made intelligent monitoring systems.20 The spread of these technology systems
allows China to export repression, control, and coercion, undermining freedom and shaping the
international system to Beijing’s benefit.
Countering China’s efforts in this space will be challenging. In Africa, China provides more funds for
information and communication technologies than all multilateral development agencies and the
world’s leading democracies combined.21 The United States should build on efforts started at last
year’s Summit for Democracy, including the United States Agency for International Development’s
(USAID) digital-democracy work and funding for “democracy affirming” technologies—alongside
the Export Controls and Human Rights Initiative, which aims to limit the flow of technology to
authoritarian countries.22 The United States can also work through mechanisms such as the Blue
Dot Network, which certifies infrastructure projects, to promote secure, democratically-aligned
digital infrastructure.
While these efforts are important, the United States will also need to work to convince countries
outside of its traditional allies and partners to turn away from authoritarian technologies. These
efforts will be challenging, but the United States must use its substantial economic and diplomatic
power to encourage nations to adopt US and partnered technologies by offering them at a
reduced price (e.g., through tax incentives to the private sector), guaranteeing technical support for
these systems, or providing them in return for other benefits that the United States or its allies can
give to recipient nations. The United States and its allies can also leverage the superior capability
and quality of their technology to make the case that partnership with them is a better option.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Atlantic Council
13 l Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy, Strengthening US Diplomacy for the Challenges of
Today and Tomorrow
Conclusion
This issue brief has outlined both the challenges and opportunities of this new era and made
several recommendations for how US diplomacy can be strengthened for the twenty-first century.
We recommended improving training for American diplomats, reasserting American leadership and
engagement abroad, and advancing partnerships with likeminded nations to lead in the digital age.
These steps are necessary, but not sufficient. Significant work remains to be done to fully update
US diplomacy to the challenges of our time.
America’s tradition of diplomacy has long been vital to advancing American security and
prosperity, and, if adapted appropriately along the lines suggested in this brief, it will be equally
essential to advancing US and allied interests in the twenty-first century.
The Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security works to develop sustainable,
nonpartisan strategies to address the most important security challenges facing
the United States and the world. The Center honors General Brent Scowcroft’s
legacy of service and embodies his ethos of nonpartisan commitment to the cause
of security, support for US leadership in cooperation with allies and partners, and
dedication to the mentorship of the next generation of leaders.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Atlantic Council
14 l Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy, Strengthening US Diplomacy for the Challenges of
Today and Tomorrow
Endnotes
1 Ash Jain and Matthew Kroenig, Present at the Re-Creation: A Global Strategy for Revitalizing, Adapting, and
Defending a Rules-Based International System, Atlantic Council, October 30, 2019, 17, https://www.atlanticcouncil.
org/in-depth-research-reports/report/present-at-the-re-creation/.
2 “Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America: Sharpening the American
Military’s Competitive Edge,” US Department of Defense, 2018, 2, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/
pubs/2018-National-Defense-Strategy-Summary.pdf; “Interim National Security Strategic Guidance,” White House,
March 2021, 8, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/NSC-1v2.pdf.
3 Hinnerk Feldwisch-Drentrup, “How WHO Became China’s Coronavirus Accomplice,” Foreign Policy, April 2, 2020,
https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/04/02/china-coronavirus-who-health-soft-power/; “How China Blocked WHO and
Chinese Scientists Early in Coronavirus Outbreak,” NBC News, June 2, 2020, https://www.nbcnews.com/health/
health-news/how-china-blocked-who-chinese-scientists-early-coronavirus-outbreak-n1222246; “Dozens of NGOs
Call on UN Rights Chief to Resign After China’s Visit,” News24, June 8, 2022, https://www.news24.com/news24/
world/news/dozens-of-ngos-call-on-un-rights-chief-to-resign-after-china-visit-20220608.
4 Dave Lawler, “The 53 Countries Supporting China’s Crackdown on Hong Kong,” Axios, July 2, 2020, https://www.
axios.com/2020/07/02/countries-supporting-china-hong-kong-law.
5 Matthew Kroenig and Jeffrey Cimmino, Global Strategy 2021: An Allied Strategy for China, Atlantic Council,
December 2020, 23–24, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/Global-Strategy-2021-
An-Allied-Strategy-for-China.pdf; Sarah Cook, Beijing’s Global Megaphone, Freedom House, 2020, https://
freedomhouse.org/report/special-report/2020/beijings-global-megaphone.
6 “Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy,” 2.
7 Elizabeth Economy, “Y es, Virginia, China is Exporting its Model,” Council on Foreign Relations, December 11, 2019,
https://www.cfr.org/blog/yes-virginia-china-exporting-its-model.
8 Kroenig and Cimmino, Global Strategy 2021: An Allied Strategy for China, 27.
9 Paul Mozur, Jonah M. Kessel, and Melissa Chan, “Made in China, Exported to the World: The Surveillance State,”
New Y ork Times, April 24, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/24/technology/ecuador-surveillance-cameras-
police-government.html.
10 Jain and Kroenig, Present at Re-Creation, 18.
11 Volker Stanzel, ed., “New Realities in Foreign Affairs: Diplomacy in the 21st Century,” German Institute for
International and Security Affairs, 2018, 8–9, https://www.swp-berlin.org/en/publication/new-realities-in-foreign-
affairs-diplomacy-in-the-21st-century.
12 Training the Department of State’s Workforce for 21st Century Diplomacy, US Senate Committee on Foreign
Relations, Subcommittee on State Department and USAID Management, International Operations, and Bilateral
International Development, 117th Cong. (2021) (Statement of The Hon. David Miller, Jr., President – US Diplomatic
Studies Foundation), 31, https://www.foreign.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/11%2002%2021%20Training%20the%20
Department%20of%20State’s%20Workforce%20for%2021st%20Century%20Diplomacy5.pdf.
13 Daniel R. Russel and Blake H. Berger, “Stacking the Deck: China’s Influence in International Technology
Standards Setting,” Asia Society Policy Institute, 2021, 9, https://asiasociety.org/sites/default/files/2021-11/ASPI_
StacktheDeckreport_final.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Atlantic Council
15 l Twenty-First-Century Diplomacy, Strengthening US Diplomacy for the Challenges of
Today and Tomorrow
14 Nina Jankowicz, How the US Can Fight Russian Disinformation for Real, UkraineAlert, July 11, 2019, https://www.
atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/ukrainealert/how-the-us-can-fight-russian-disinformation-for-real/.
15 For more on countering disinformation, see: Daniel Fried and Alina Polyakova, Democratic Defense Against
Disinformation 2.0, Atlantic Council, June 13, 2019, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/
democratic-defense-against-disinformation-2-0/.
16 “‘Quad’ Nations Agree to Strengthen Cooperation over Advanced Tech,” Japan Times, July 14, 2021, https://www.
japantimes.co.jp/news/2021/07/14/national/quad-tech-cooperation/.
17 Brendan Nicholson, “Morrison Says AUKUS Will Strengthen Cooperation on Critical Technologies,” Australian
Strategic Policy Institute, November 17, 2021, https://www.aspistrategist.org.au/morrison-says-aukus-will-strengthen-
cooperation-on-critical-technologies/.
18 Ash Jain and Matthew Kroenig, Strategic Decoupling: Building a Democratic Trade and Economic Partnership,
Atlantic Council, June 2022, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/strategic-decoupling-
building-a-democratic-trade-and-economic-partnership-d-tep/.
19 Eileen Donahoe, “System Rivalry: How Democracies Must Compete with Digital Authoritarians,” Just Security,
September 27, 2021, https://www.justsecurity.org/78381/system-rivalry-how-democracies-must-compete-with-digital-
authoritarians/.
20 Paul Mozur, Jonah M. Kessel, and Melissa Chan, “Made in China, Exported to the World: The Surveillance State,”
New Y ork Times, April 24, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/24/technology/ecuador-surveillance-cameras-
police-government.html.
21 Laetitia Garriott de Cayeux, “T ech Diplomacy: An Urgent Imperative as China Strengthens,” Techonomy, January 25,
2021, https://techonomy.com/tech-diplomacy-an-urgent-imperative-as-china-strengthens/.
22 Ana Swanson, “U.S. and Others Pledge Export Controls Tied to Human Rights,” New Y ork Times, December 10,
2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/12/10/business/economy/human-rights-export-controls.html.
