
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
1
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
MATTHEW KROENIG
Deputy Director, Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security
DETERRING
CHINESE
STRATEGIC
ATTACK:
Grappling
with the
Implications
of China’s
Strategic
Forces
Buildup

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security
The Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security works to develop sustainable, nonpartisan
strategies to address the most important security challenges facing the United States and the
world. The Center honors General Brent Scowcroft’s legacy of service and embodies his ethos of
nonpartisan commitment to the cause of security, support for US leadership in cooperation with
allies and partners, and dedication to the mentorship of the next generation of leaders.
Forward Defense
Forward Defense (FD) helps the United States and its allies and partners contend with great-
power competitors and maintain favorable balances of power. This new practice area in the
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security produces Forward-looking analyses of the trends,
technologies, and concepts that will define the future of warfare, and the alliances needed for
the 21st century. Through the futures we forecast, the scenarios we wargame, and the analyses
we produce, Forward Defense develops actionable strategies and policies for deterrence and
defense, while shaping US and allied operational concepts and the role of defense industry in
addressing the most significant military challenges at the heart of great-power competition.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank the Atlantic Council’s Mark J. Massa, Raphael J. Piliero, and
Alyxandra Marine for their contributions to the research, writing, and editing of this report.
The Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security’s work on nuclear and strategic forces has been
made possible by support from our partners, including Los Alamos National Laboratory, Northrop
Grumman Corporation, the Norwegian Ministry of Defense, the United States Department of
Defense, the United States Department of Energy, as well as general support to the Scowcroft
Center. The partners are not responsible for the content of this report, and the Scowcroft Center
maintains a strict intellectual independence policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
ISBN-13: 978-1-61977-200-7
Cover image: Military vehicles carrying DF-31A long-range missiles drive past the Tiananmen Gate during a military parade
to mark the 70th anniversary of the end of World War Two in Beijing, China, September 3, 2015. REUTERS/Jason Lee.
November 2021
MATTHEW KROENIG
Deputy Director, Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security
DETERRING CHINESE
STRATEGIC ATTACK:
Grappling with the
Implications of China’s
Strategic Forces Buildup

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
II
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 1
Main Themes Of The Recommended Strategy 1
Introduction 2
Assessing China’s Strategic Forces Policy 4
China’s Strategic Forces 6
China’s Strategic Forces’ Expansion And US Defense And Deterrence Goals 9
Maintain A Favorable Regional Balance Of Power 9
Deter Nuclear And Nonnuclear Attack 9
Assure Allies And Partners 11
Achieve Objectives If Deterrence Fails 11
Hedge Against An Uncertain Future 11
Scenarios For Chinese Strategic Attack 13
Chinese Strategic Nuclear Attack 13
Chinese Theater Nuclear Attack 13
Deterring Chinese Nuclear Retaliation 13
Deterring Nonnuclear Strategic Attacks 14
A Strategy For Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack 15
US And Allied Strategy And Policy 15
US And Allied Operations 16
US Nuclear Response To A Chinese Nuclear Attack 16
US Nuclear First Use 17
US Strategic Capabilities 17
Arms Control 20
Conclusion 21
Author Biography 22

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
1
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Executive Summary
T
he United States’ National Security Strategy (NSS)
and National Defense Strategy (NDS) recognize the
return of great-power competition with Russia and
China as the foremost threat to US national secu-
rity. Pressingly, the National Defense Strategy Commission
warns that great-power war is possible and the United
States could lose.
One major concern is China’s growing strategic capabili-
ties and the possibility that China could conduct a nuclear
or nonnuclear strategic attack against the United States or
its allies. Such an attack could inflict devastating damage,
disrupt US warfighting capacity, sap US political will to con-
tinue a conventional military campaign, and constrain US
military freedom of action.
Despite China’s formal No First Use (NFU) policy, scholars
have expressed concern that China could launch a nuclear
attack on the United States in the event of a major war in the
Indo-Pacific. In addition, the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review
(NPR) states that China might conduct limited theater nu-
clear strikes. China may also use space and cyber capabil-
ities to conduct “nonnuclear strategic attacks” against US
space-based assets or US nuclear command, control, and
communications (NC3). Indeed, China has oriented many
of its anti-access/area denial (A2/AD) capabilities to target
critical nodes employed by the US Joint Force, including
space-based assets.
China’s People’s Liberation Army (PLA) possesses an ex-
panding and modernizing strategic force and is opaque
about its intentions. It possesses a triad of strategic deliv-
ery vehicles, including mobile missiles, and will soon begin
(or may have already begun) submarine deterrence patrols.
The US intelligence community estimates that China’s nu-
clear arsenal will double within the decade, increasing US
and allied vulnerability to nuclear attack. The PLA is rapidly
testing and deploying nuclear-capable hypersonic glide
vehicles, which can defeat US and allied missile defenses.
China enjoys a large imbalance in theater nuclear forces
over the United States. Finally, the PLA possesses count-
er-space and cyber capabilities that could be employed in
a nonnuclear strategic attack.
The NPR articulates a “tailored and flexible” deterrence
strategy for China that requires US strategy and capabilities
to adapt to a changing threat environment. Indeed, devel-
opments as of 2021 present many new challenges to US
defense strategy that were not addressed in the 2018 NPR.
The rapid expansion of China’s strategic and nuclear capa-
bilities threatens several major US defense and deterrence
goals articulated in recent US strategy documents. A grow-
ing Chinese nuclear arsenal will make it more difficult for
the United States to maintain a favorable balance of power
in the Indo-Pacific, deter nuclear and nonnuclear strategic
attacks, assure allies, achieve objectives if deterrence fails,
and hedge against an uncertain future. It also means that,
for the first time, the United States will need to contend with
two nuclear-armed major powers (Russia and China), both
with substantial nuclear capabilities.
Main Themes Of The Recommended Strategy
To counter the threat from China’s increasingly assertive
foreign policy and its growing strategic and nuclear capa-
bilities, this report outlines a strategy for Washington and
its allies to reliably deter Chinese strategic attack. It argues
that the United States must make it clear to Beijing that
any strategic attack on the United States, its allies, or its
forces will result in unacceptable costs for China. This strat-
egy must also account for the nuclear posture of Russia,
considering that perhaps Russia and China could work in
collaboration against US interests. To support this strategy,
Washington must maintain a favorable balance of power
over China at each rung of the escalation ladder. This in-
cludes preserving a qualitative and quantitative edge at the
strategic level, developing more flexible nonstrategic nu-
clear capabilities and concepts of operations for their use in
the Indo-Pacific, and maintaining an effective conventional
deterrent. Washington should also prioritize China in nu-
clear arms control efforts.
Pursuing this strategy will not be easy, but the conse-
quences of failing to deter a Chinese strategic attack could
be unacceptable. The United States and its allies should act
now to prevent a potentially catastrophic deterrence failure.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Introduction
1 Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Annual Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community, April 9, 2021, https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/
documents/assessments/ATA-2021-Unclassified-Report.pdf; Ash Jain and Matthew Kroenig, Present at the re-creation: A global strategy for revitalizing,
adapting, and defending a rules-based international system, Atlantic Council, October 30, 2019, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-
reports/report/present-at-the-re-creation/.
2 Matthew Kroenig and Jeffrey Cimmino, Global Strategy 2021: An Allied Strategy for China, Atlantic Council, 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/12/Global-Strategy-2021-An-Allied-Strategy-for-China.pdf.
3 White House Office of Trade and Manufacturing Policy, How China’s Economic Aggression Threatens the Technologies and Intellectual Property of the
United States and the World, June 19, 2018, https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/office-trade-manufacturing-policy-report-chinas-
economic-aggression-threatens-technologies-intellectual-property-united-states-world/.
4 Arjun Kharpal, “In battle with U.S., China to focus on 7 ‘frontier’ technologies from chips to brain-computer fusion,” CNBC, March 5, 2021, https://www.
cnbc.com/2021/03/05/china-to-focus-on-frontier-tech-from-chips-to-quantum-computing.html; David Sacks, “China’s Huawei Is Winning the 5G Race.
Here’s What the United States Should Do To Respond,” Council on Foreign Relations, March 29, 2021, https://www.cfr.org/blog/china-huawei-5g.
5 Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, 2020 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: China (Includes Hong Kong, Macau, and Tibet), US
Department of State, March 30, 2021, https://www.state.gov/reports/2020-country-reports-on-human-rights-practices/china/.
6 David Shullman, ed, Chinese Malign Influence and the Corrosion of Democracy: An Assessment of Chinese Interference in Thirteen Key Countries,
International Republican Institute, 2019, https://www.iri.org/sites/default/files/chinese_malign_influence_report.pdf.
7 Hinnerk Feldwisch-Drentrup, “How WHO Became China’s Coronavirus Accomplice,” Foreign Policy, April 2, 2020, https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/04/02/
china-coronavirus-who-health-soft-power/.
8 Ngo Minh Tri, “China’s A2/AD Challenge in the South China Sea: Securing the Air From the Ground,” Diplomat, May 19, 2017, https://thediplomat.
com/2017/05/chinas-a2ad-challenge-in-the-south-china-sea-securing-the-air-from-the-ground/.
A
ccording to the most recent Annual Threat
Assessment of the US Intelligence Community,
China poses a serious threat to the national se-
curity of the United States. 1 Under Chairman Xi
Jinping, China has pursued a much more assertive foreign
policy that appears aimed to disrupt, or even displace, the
US-led, rules-based international system.
China poses a comprehensive threat to US, allied, and part-
ner interests across the economic, technological, political,
diplomatic, and military domains. 2 The Chinese economy
has grown rapidly in the past several decades, and econ-
omists predict that China could overtake the United States
as the world’s largest economy in the coming years. China
uses its growing economic power to coerce the United
States and its allies. It systematically preys on the interna-
tional economic system, engaging in unfair trade practices,
such as stealing intellectual property, subsidizing domes-
tic firms, and restricting foreign firms’ market access. 3 The
United States has been the world’s leader in technology
since the time of Thomas Edison, but China has a massive,
state-led program to control the commanding heights of the
global economy by dominating the emerging technologies
of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, including artificial intelli-
gence, quantum computing, 5G, and more.4 In the realm of
domestic governance, China is engaging in genocide and
crimes against humanity in Xinjiang, cracking down on tra-
ditional freedoms in Hong Kong, and exporting its authori-
tarian model overseas.5 Diplomatically, China is increasing
its influence in every world region through its Belt and Road
Initiative investments and other means.6 Beijing is acquiring
sway in international institutions, such as the World Health
Organization, to turn these bodies against their intended
purposes.7 China’s diplomats engage in increasingly ag-
gressive “wolf warrior” diplomacy aimed to silence any
criticism of China.
Perhaps the greatest threat posed by China, however, is in
the military domain. For the past several decades, Beijing
has gone to school on the American way of war and formu-
lated a military strategy and capabilities designed to pre-
vent the United States from projecting military power into
the Indo-Pacific.8 It has invested its economic gains in new
military capabilities, and its rapid military buildup has shifted
the balance of power in the Indo-Pacific, leading many de-
fense experts to question whether the United States still
has the ability to protect longstanding allies and partners
in the region. Moreover, China has a number of ongoing
border and maritime disputes with its neighbors, including
with Taiwan, Japan, India, Bhutan, and states that hold in-
terests in the South China Sea. It is engaging in increasingly
aggressive military coercion in these disputes, and all have
the potential to escalate into a major crisis or war that could
involve the United States.
Among the highest-priority concerns for US military plan-
ners is a potential Chinese attack on Taiwan. Beijing views
the island as a renegade province and has not ruled out the
use of force to reincorporate it into mainland China. Given
the geographic location of the island roughly 100 miles from
mainland China, it could be difficult for the US military to
either prevent an attack on the island or liberate it after a
Chinese takeover.
To address the challenge of deterring Chinese strategic at-
tack, this paper will proceed in five parts. First, it will assess

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s contemporary policy and strategy surrounding its
strategic forces, including its growing capabilities. Second,
it will examine how the expansion of Chinese strategic
forces poses a challenge to US defense and deterrence
goals, as articulated in recent US strategy documents.
Third, it will contemplate plausible scenarios for nuclear use
in contingencies with China that a US strategy would have
to address. Fourth, it proposes a tailored US strategy for
deterring Chinese strategic attack, including US and allied
strategy, policy, operations, and capabilities. The strategy
also calls for arms control measures. Finally, the paper of-
fers a brief conclusion and a summary of its key findings
and recommendations.
Protesters attend a demonstration demanding Hong Kong’s leaders step down and withdraw the extradition bill, in Hong Kong, China, June 16, 2019.
Picture taken June 16, 2019. REUTERS/Stringer.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Assessing China’s Strategic Forces
Policy
9 Michael S. Chase, “China’s Transition to a More Credible Nuclear Deterrent: Implications and Challenges for the United States,” Asia Policy No. 16 (July
2013): 69–102, https://www.jstor.org/stable/24905232.
10 Missile Defense Project, “DF-5 (Dong Feng-5 / CSS-4),” Center for Strategic and International Studies, accessed July 2021, https://missilethreat.csis.org/
missile/df-5-ab/; Missile Defense Project, “DF-31 (Dong Feng-31 / CSS-10),” Center for Strategic and International Studies, accessed July 2021, https://
missilethreat.csis.org/missile/df-31/.
11 Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Chinese nuclear forces, 2020,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 76 (6) (2020): 443–457, DOI:
10.1080/00963402.2020.1846432.
12 Matthew Kroenig, Approaching Critical Mass: Asia’s Multipolar Nuclear Future, NBR Special Report No. 58, National Bureau of Asian Research, June 22,
2016.
13 Donald H. Rumsfeld, “Hearing on The Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty,” Committee on Armed Services, US Senate, July 25, 2002, quoted in Amy F.
Woolf, U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues, Congressional Research Service, February 23, 2009, https://apps.dtic.mil/
sti/citations/ADA493137.
14 Author’s conversations with Chinese officials under Chatham House Rule.
15 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, 2018, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-
REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF.
16 Eric Heginbotham, Michael S. Chase, Jacob L. Heim, Bonny Lin, Mark R. Cozad, Lyle J. Morris, Christopher P. Twomey, Forrest E. Morgan, Michael Nixon,
Cristina L. Garafola, and Samuel K. Berkowitz, China’s Evolving Nuclear Deterrent: Major Drivers and Issues for the United States, RAND Corporation,
2017, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1628.html.
F
or the past several years, there has been an appar-
ent mismatch between China’s aggressive foreign
policy and its relatively restrained strategic forc-
es policy, but that might be changing. Since the
time of Mao Zedong, China has sought to develop a “lean
and effective” deterrent aimed at deterring a nuclear at-
tack and defending against perceived nuclear blackmail
by the United States and other Western powers. 9 For de-
cades, however, China’s capabilities fell well short of what
Western analysts would describe as an assured retaliation
posture. China did not field an intercontinental ballistic mis-
sile (ICBM) capable of striking Washington until 1981 and,
without a credible launch-on-warning capacity or regular
ballistic missile submarine (SSBN) patrols, its arsenal was
likely not survivable in the event of a US first strike until the
deployment of its first land-mobile missiles in 2008. 10 With
its formal NFU policy and lean and effective nuclear arsenal
of only a couple hundred nuclear weapons, China aspired
to a nuclear force capable of riding out an enemy nucle-
ar attack and retaliating with a devastating second strike. 11
China was also believed to pursue a pure countervalue tar-
geting strategy, meaning that, in the event of nuclear war, it
would launch large-yield warheads on relatively inaccurate
ICBMs at major US cities with the intent of killing as many
people as possible.
Unlike Washington and Moscow, however, Beijing did not
envision a more expansive role for its nuclear weapons or
desire strategic nuclear parity with the other superpow-
ers. Indeed, just a few years ago, specialists described the
nuclear threat presented by China as the least severe of
the three nuclear-armed adversaries (the other two being
Russia and North Korea) facing the United States.12
For years, US defense officials worried that China might
attempt to “sprint to parity.”13 As it became a superpower in
other domains, US analysts wondered, would Beijing also
demand a superpower nuclear arsenal?
There was always the possibility, of course, that China’s
NFU was mere window dressing. It is easy to promise no
first use in a policy document, but it is doubtful whether that
position would remain in the midst of a heated crisis or war.
In Track 1.5 dialogues, Chinese experts have stated that
China might consider using nuclear weapons first under a
narrow range of circumstances, such as if the United States
conducted conventional strikes on the Chinese mainland
against co-located nuclear and conventionally armed mis-
siles.14 US defense officials increasingly discount China’s
NFU pledge.
US officials have also warned that China (and Russia) would
likely employ cyber and counterspace attacks in the early
stages of any conflict with the United States in an attempt
to disrupt US NC3. The 2018 NPR labeled these types of
attacks “nonnuclear strategic attacks,” and, in a bid to deter
such attacks, left on the table the option of responding with
US nuclear weapons.15
Most importantly, China’s significant nuclear buildup does
not appear to be consistent with the country’s traditional
and longstanding relaxed nuclear posture. Some have ar-
gued that China’s buildup is simply an effort to ensure the
survivability of its force and keep pace with developments
in the United States, such as US missile defense deploy-
ments.16 But the size and scope of the Chinese buildup
may signal a major shift in Chinese nuclear strategy. For

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
example, as China increases the size and accuracy of its
strategic forces and moves to multiple independent reen-
try vehicles (MIRVs), some experts believe Beijing may be
reconsidering countervalue targeting and moving towarda
counterforce strategy designed to target the strategic
forces of its nuclear-armed adversaries, including regional
rivals, such as India, Russia, or even the United States.
Military vehicles carrying DF-31A long-range missiles drive past the Tiananmen Gate during a military parade to mark the 70th anniversary of the end
of World War Two in Beijing, China, September 3, 2015. REUTERS/Jason Lee.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s Strategic Forces
17 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2020, annual report to Congress, 2020,
https://media.defense.gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-MILITARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF.
18 Defense Intelligence Agency Director Lt. Gen. Robert P. Ashley, Jr., “Russian and Chinese Nuclear Modernization Trends,” remarks at the Hudson Institute,
May 29, 2019, https://www.dia.mil/News/Speeches-and-Testimonies/Article-View/Article/1859890/russian-and-chinese-nuclear-modernization-trends/.
19 “To receive testimony on United States Strategic Command and United States Space Command in review of the Defense Authorization Request for
Fiscal Y ear 2022 and the Future Y ears Defense Program,” Senate Armed Services Committee hearing, 117th Cong. (April 20, 2021) (testimony by Adm.
Charles Richard, commander, United States Strategic Command), https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/hearings/to-receive-testimony-on-united-
states-strategic-command-and-united-states-space-command-in-review-of-the-defense-authorization-request-for-fiscal-year-2022-and-the-future-years-
defense-program.
20 Hans Kristensen and Matt Korda, “The Pentagon’s 2020 China Report,” Federation of American Scientists, September 1, 2020, https://fas.org/blogs/
security/2020/09/the-pentagons-2020-china-report/.
21 Kristensen and Korda, “Chinese nuclear forces, 2020.”
22 John T. Watts, Christian Trotti, and Mark J. Massa, Primer on Hypersonic Weapons in the Indo-Pacific Region, Atlantic Council, August 2018, https://www.
atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/Hypersonics-Weapons-Primer-Report.pdf.
23 Hui Zhang, “The defensive nature of China’s ‘underground great wall,’” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, January 16, 2012, https://thebulletin.org/2012/01/
the-defensive-nature-of-chinas-underground-great-wall/.
24 William Wan, “Georgetown students shed light on China’s tunnel system for nuclear weapons,” Washington Post, November 29, 2011, https://www.
washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/georgetown-students-shed-light-on-chinas-tunnel-system-for-nuclear-weapons/2011/11/16/gIQA6AmKAO_
story.html.
25 Rick Joe, “How the Descendants of a 1950s Bomber Transformed China’s Strike Reach,” Diplomat, November 18, 2020, https://thediplomat.com/2020/11/
how-the-descendants-of-a-1950s-bomber-transformed-chinas-strike-reach/; Nuclear Threat Initiative, “China Submarine Capabilities,” February 17, 2021,
https://www.nti.org/analysis/articles/china-submarine-capabilities/.
26 Gregory Kulacki, “Red Guards and Nuclear Missiles,” Union of Concerned Scientists, January 7, 2015, https://allthingsnuclear.org/gkulacki/red-guards-
and-nuclear-missiles.
27 Nuclear Threat Initiative, “China Submarine Capabilities.”
C
hina is engaging in a significant buildup of its
strategic forces. The US Department of Defense
(DoD) assesses that China fields a nuclear arse-
nal numbered in the low two hundreds, and out-
side experts estimate that roughly half of these warheads
are capable of intercontinental delivery. 17 Moreover, the
US government has projected that China will double the
size of its nuclear arsenal in the coming decade. 18 In con-
gressional testimony, Adm. Charles Richard, commander
of US Strategic Command assesses, that China’s arsenal
may even triple or quadruple in that time period. 19 If these
projections are correct, then China could have between
four hundred and eight hundred nuclear weapons in the
2030s, with a large number of these ready for interconti-
nental delivery. While these numbers would not yet place
China at parity with Russia or the United States (the New
START Treaty limits both nuclear superpowers to no more
than 1,550 strategic deployed nuclear warheads), it would
move China closer in that direction. This buildup does not
seem consistent with an intent to maintain a “lean and ef-
fective” deterrent.
China is also greatly expanding its means of delivery. Two
decades ago, China possessed only twenty silo-based
ICBMs capable of delivering nuclear weapons to the con-
tinental United States.20 Since that time, Beijing has been
building and deploying road-mobile ICBMs with MIRVed
warheads. It may now be able to deliver roughly one hun-
dred nuclear weapons to the United States. 21 China is
making progress on hypersonic missiles of both intercon-
tinental and theater ranges that could be used to deliver
either conventional or nuclear warheads.22
China has been improving the survivability of its nuclear
forces, with its road-mobile missiles, a sea-based leg, and
tunneling. “The Underground Great Wall” is an extensive
network of two thousand miles of underground tunnels in
which China can hide and protect its mobile missiles.23 Most
experts assess the purpose of the tunneling is to protect
China’s relatively small nuclear arsenal, but some have
speculated that the true purpose may be to conceal a much
larger nuclear force.24
China is also moving toward the development of a triad. While
China possessed nuclear-capable bombers for decades and
placed its first nuclear-capable submarine in the water in 1986,
it has essentially relied on a monad of missiles for nuclear de-
livery.25 Chinese leaders have not relied on bombers, which
were judged vulnerable to Soviet (later Russian) and US air de-
fenses.26 Its ballistic missile submarines do not conduct regular
deterrence patrols.27 There are current limits to the capacity
of these delivery systems. China’s H-6 bombers lack intercon-
tinental range and will likely be available only for a regional
role. With respect to their sea-based capabilities, Chinese sub-
marines have notable survivability problems. Due to elevated
noise levels, Chinese submarines may be especially vulner-
able to US anti-submarine warfare. An additional challenge
is range, with Chinese submarine-launched ballistic missiles

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
(SLBMs) being unable to hit the continental United States from
port or China’s near seas.28
In recent years, however, China has given strategic bombers
a nuclear mission, and the DoD has estimated that China
will soon begin regular submarine deterrence patrols. 29
China’s new H-20 stealth long-range bomber and new nucle-
ar-armed air-launched ballistic missiles (ALBMs) could give
China an effective strategic air leg. 30 China’s new conven-
tionally armed Shang-class submarines are quieter and per-
haps more survivable than previous generations of Chinese
boats.31 Moreover, over time, as China’s global relationships
expand and deepen, it is possible that Beijing could attempt
to forward-base ballistic missile submarines, placing SLBMs
28 Joe Pappalardo, “What China’s Nuclear Missile Subs Mean for the U.S.,” Popular Mechanics, November 13, 2012, https://www.popularmechanics.com/
military/a8413/what-chinas-nuclear-missile-subs-mean-for-the-us-14726083/.
29 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2020; Office of the Secretary of
Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2019, annual report to Congress, 2019, https://media.defense.
gov/2019/May/02/2002127082/-1/-1/1/2019_CHINA_MILITARY_POWER_REPORT.pdf.
30 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2020.
31 Caleb Larson, “Chinese Submarines Are Becoming Quieter: Here’s What We Know About The New Type 093,” National Interest, September 10, 2020,
https://nationalinterest.org/blog/reboot/chinese-submarines-are-becoming-quieter-heres-what-we-know-about-new-type-093-168647.
32 John Grady, “Chinese Navy Faces Overseas Basing Weakness, Report Says,” USNI News, January 22, 2021, https://news.usni.org/2021/01/22/chinese-
navy-faces-overseas-basing-weakness-report-says.
33 Mike Y eo, “China could lose 95% of ballistic, cruise missiles under strategic arms control pact, says new analysis,” Defense News, June 5, 2020, https://www.
defensenews.com/global/asia-pacific/2020/06/05/china-could-lose-95-of-ballistic-cruise-missiles-under-strategic-arms-control-pact-says-new-analysis/.
34 Grzegorz Kuczynski, The Collapse of the INF Treaty and the US-China Rivalry, Warsaw Institute, January 3, 2020, https://warsawinstitute.org/the-
collapse-of-the-inf-treaty-and-the-us-china-rivalry/.
within range of the continental United States.32
At the theater level, Beijing possesses hundreds—or
perhaps thousands—of short-, medium-, and intermedi-
ate-range nuclear-capable missiles that can hold at risk
US bases, forces, and allies in the region. 33 Until its 2019
withdrwal from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
(INF) Treaty, the United States was prohibited from devel-
oping intermediate-range missiles. In contrast, Beijing was
not part of the agreement, which would have banned 90
percent of its ground-based missile arsenal.34
Turning to nonnuclear strategic forces, China is develop-
ing or already possesses significant offensive cyber and
The Chinese H-6 bomber is nuclear capable. Photo courtesy Ministry of Defense of Japan. http://www.mod.go.jp/js/Press/press2015/press_pdf/
p20151127_02.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
counterspace capabilities. China’s burgeoning counter-
space arsenal includes capabilities and developmental pro-
grams for direct-ascent and co-orbital anti-satellite (ASAT)
weapons capable of ranging all orbital regimes, electronic
warfare, and directed energy weapons.35 In the early stages
of any conflict, US defense experts believe that Beijing
would likely attack US cyber and space-based assets in an
attempt to disrupt and degrade US NC3.
35 Brian Weeden and Victoria Sampson, eds, Global Counterspace Capabilities: An Open Source Assessment, Secure World Foundation, April 2021, https://
swfound.org/counterspace/.
36 Chelsie Boodoo, “China Flight-Tests Missile Interceptors,” Arms Control Today, April 2021, https://www.armscontrol.org/act/2021-04/news-briefs/china-
flight-tests-missile-interceptors.
Despite its persistent complaints about US missile de-
fenses, China is developing its own ballistic missile defense
system. China already fields the HQ-19, S-300, and S-400
defenses, capable of intercepting short- and medium-range
ballistic missiles and is flight testing its own land-based,
exo-atmospheric midcourse defense against ICBMs.36

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China’s Strategic Forces’ Expansion
And US Defense And Deterrence Goals
37 Department of Defense, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America: Sharpening the American Military’s
Competitive Edge, 2018, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/pubs/2018-National-Defense-Strategy-Summary.pdf; Department of Defense,
Nuclear Posture Review, 2018, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF.
38 Department of Defense, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy.
39 William J. Perry, “Why It’s Safe to Scrap America’s ICBMs,” New York Times, September 30, 2016, https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/30/opinion/why-its-
safe-to-scrap-americas-icbms.html.
T
he expansion of China’s strategic forces directly
threatens US defense and deterrence goals, in-
cluding the goal of maintaining a favorable balance
of power in the Indo-Pacific, as articulated in the
2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States (NDS)
and the four goals of the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review
(NPR): 1) deterring nuclear and nonnuclear strategic attack;
2) assuring allies; 3) achieving objectives if deterrence fails;
and 4) hedging against an uncertain future.37
Moreover, China’s nuclear buildup means, that for the first
time in its history, the United States will need to contend
with two nuclear-armed great powers (Russia and China),
each with substantial nuclear capabilities. When China pos-
sessed a relatively small nuclear arsenal, the United States
could develop a nuclear strategy and posture geared to-
ward Russia and largely treat China as a lesser included
case. Going forward, however, the United States will need
to develop a truly tailored strategy and posture that can
meet its various deterrence strategy and policy goals with
regard to Russia and China at the same time and per-
haps against those two countries working in collaboration
against US interests.
Maintain A Favorable Regional Balance Of
Power
The 2018 NDS vowed that the United States and its allies
and partners would maintain a favorable regional balance
of power over China in the Indo-Pacific.38 That is the correct
goal. The US military advantage in Asia has deterred com-
petitors and maintained stability in the region for decades.
But China’s military buildup is threatening the US military
edge. The conventional balance of power is shifting, and
there are questions about Washington’s ability to prevail in
the event of a Chinese assault on Taiwan. Moreover, China
possesses a theater nuclear advantage. It has hundreds
of nonstrategic nuclear weapons that it could use in a re-
gional war. Washington shed most of its nonstrategic nu-
clear weapons at the end of the Cold War, retaining only
several hundred gravity bombs capable of delivery by du-
al-capable fighter aircraft (DCAs). In the event of a Chinese
attack with theater nuclear forces, Washington, with few
nonstrategic nuclear options, might face a choice between
continuing the fight at the conventional level, or escalating
disproportionately to the strategic level. Finally China’s stra-
tegic forces expansion renders the US homeland increas-
ingly vulnerable to Chinese strategic attack. Washington
now finds itself with a conventional balance of power in
question, an inferiority in theater nuclear forces, and mutual
(albeit asymmetric) vulnerability at the strategic level. This
is not a favorable regional balance of power.
Deter Nuclear And Nonnuclear Attack
In order to conduct a disarming nuclear strike on the United
States, China would need to launch a large-scale nuclear
counterforce strike against roughly 450 to 500 strategic
targets, including US ICBM silos, strategic submarine bases,
strategic air bases, and other important sites. Presently,
China does not possess such a capability. As China in-
creases the number and accuracy of its intercontinen-
tal-range missiles, however, and if (as some in Washington
advocate) the United States were to significantly reduce
the size of its strategic forces, or even shed a leg of the
triad, this capability could come within Beijing’s reach. 39 If
China quadruples the size of its nuclear arsenal, for exam-
ple, it will possess roughly eight hundred nuclear warheads
that could be employed in a counterforce strike. While a
Chinese first strike in these conditions might not succeed in
disarming US nuclear forces, it could significantly degrade
them, potentially making it a more attractive option in a
major crisis or war.
Moreover, China’s growing nuclear capabilities could tempt
Beijing to use nuclear weapons in a major theater war, such
as in a conflict over Taiwan. Currently, Chinese leaders likely
see its nuclear forces primarily as a deterrent to US nuclear
weapons and to keep any regional fight at the conventional
level. Still, there are rational reasons why Beijing might re-
consider limited nuclear first use in a major crisis or war.
China could conduct theater nuclear strikes in the region
as part of a war-winning strategy to degrade vulnerable US
and allied bases and forces. If China were losing a major

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
conventional war, it might conduct a limited nuclear strike in
a bid to shock US leaders into halting the conflict. This strike
could be against US forces or bases or in the atmosphere as
a demonstration shot.40 Even though this does not appear
to be China’s current nuclear strategy, the imbalance of non-
strategic nuclear forces in China’s favor makes this a poten-
tially attractive option for Beijing in the fog of an intense crisis
or war. Facing a desperate situation, Beijing might assess
that it possesses a favorable balance of stakes, resolve, and/
or capabilities. It might be willing to gamble, therefore, that
if it escalates a conflict to the nuclear level, Washington will
not have the will or the capabilities to respond in kind. Such
a Chinese approach would be similar to the feared Russian
“escalate-to-de-escalate” strategy.41 Moreover, in the heat of
a major theater war, with the United States conducting strikes
on assets relevant to China’s nuclear mission (such as NC3
and co-located missiles), nuclear weapons could be used
due to miscalculation or inadvertent escalation.42
The most likely cause of a Chinese strategic attack on the
United States would not be a bolt-from-the-blue strike, but
40 Matthew Kroenig, A strategy for deterring Russian de-escalation strikes, Atlantic Council, April 24, 2018, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-
research-reports/report/a-strategy-for-deterring-russian-de-escalation-strikes/.
41 Ibid.
42 Caitlin Talmadge, “Would China Go Nuclear? Assessing the Risk of Chinese Nuclear Escalation in a Conventional War with the United States,”
International Security 41 (4) (Spring 2017): 50–92, https://doi.org/10.1162/ISEC_a_00274.
43 Matthew Kroenig, The Logic of American Nuclear Strategy: Why Strategic Superiority Matters (New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 2018).
44 Nuclear Posture Review, 2018, 56.
rather escalation from a conventional war or crisis. Factors
that contribute to an increased risk of crisis onset or escala-
tion, therefore, also increase the risks of deterrence failure.
A growing nuclear arsenal might strengthen Chinese resolve,
making Beijing more willing to initiate and escalate crises
against the United States and its allies in a way that could
increase the risk of nuclear war.43 China’s growing nuclear
forces might also serve as a backstop to conventional ag-
gression. Beijing may believe (rightly or wrongly) that it has
a free hand to engage in an armed attack against Taiwan or
other US regional allies because it can press a local, conven-
tional advantage and use nuclear threats to deter US inter-
vention or escalation. In the event of such a conflict, there
would be an inherent risk of nuclear escalation. It is likely
that China would also conduct cyber and counterspace at-
tacks against US assets. Beijing might assess that the United
States’ growing vulnerability to China’s nuclear weapons
makes less credible the US threat, articulated in the 2018
NPR, to keep the nuclear option on the table to deter and, if
necessary, respond to Chinese attacks on US NC3.44
US, Australian, and Japanese naval vessels conduct a joint exercise. China’s military rise threatens to upend the balance of power in the Indo-Pacific.
US Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist 2nd Class Codie L. Soule. https://tinyurl.com/2e2yyx3w.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
11
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
These deterrence challenges are exacerbated by the lurk-
ing presence of Russian strategic threats. If the United
States were in a crisis or conflict with Russia, China might
be more tempted to conduct a simultaneous strategic at-
tack on the United States and its allies. Beijing might assess
(perhaps correctly) that the United States lacks the capabil-
ity or the resolve to deal with two simultaneous great-power
military challenges at once. Beijing might believe, therefore,
that a US crisis or conflict with Russia gives China a oppor-
tunity to engage in military aggression in the Indo-Pacific.
Assure Allies And Partners
The second major goal of US nuclear strategy, assur-
ance of allies and partners, might also be complicated by
China’s growing strategic forces. The US ability to extend
deterrence in the Indo-Pacific has been facilitated for de-
cades by the United States’ favorable strategic balance of
power over China. It was only a few years ago that US and
Chinese experts calculated that the United States might
have a splendid first strike capability against China’s stra-
tegic forces. 45 As China’s arsenal has grown, however,
many outside analysts have come to the conclusion that
Washington and Beijing now exist in a situation of “mutual
vulnerability.”46 As China’s arsenal continues to expand, it
will be better able to hold the US homeland at risk and
impose greater and arguably unacceptable costs on the
continental United States. During the Cold War, Charles de
Gaulle famously asked whether Washington would trade
New Y ork for Paris.47 Today the question becomes: Would
Washington trade Los Angeles for Tokyo, Seoul, Canberra,
or Taipei?
Even if Washington is willing to accept some risk of con-
flict in order to extend deterrence over Japan, South Korea,
Australia, and Taiwan, its resolve might weaken in a serious
crisis after it has become more vulnerable. 48 As a nuclear
war becomes more costly, Washington might be less willing
to run risks of such a war and more likely to look for off-
ramps early in a crisis.
Furthermore, regardless of the United States’ true resolve
to extend deterrence to nonnuclear allies in the Indo-
Pacific, what is the perception of Washington’s resolve in
45 Keir A. Lieber and Daryl G. Press, “Superiority Complex,” Atlantic, July/August 2007, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2007/07/superiority-
complex/305989/.
46 Hugh White, “To Reassure U.S. Allies in Asia, Admit Mutual Vulnerability with China,” War on the Rocks, June 8, 2018, https://warontherocks.com/2018/06/
to-reassure-u-s-allies-in-asia-admit-mutual-vulnerability-with-china/.
47 Office of the Historian, 30. Memorandum of Conversation, President’s Visit, Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume XIV, Berlin Crisis,
1961–1962, US/MC/1, Paris, May 31, 1961, 12:30 p.m., https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1961-63v14/d30.
48 See, for example: Kroenig, The Logic of American Nuclear Strategy; Robert Powell, “Nuclear Brinkmanship, Limited War, and Military Power,” International
Organization 69 (3) (Summer 2015): 589–626, https://www.jstor.org/stable/24758314.
49 Mark Fitzpatrick, Asia’s Latent Nuclear Powers: Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, International Institute for Strategic Studies, February 2016, https://www.
iiss.org/publications/adelphi/2015/asia39s-latent-nuclear-powers-japan-south-korea-and-taiwan.
allied capitals? If allies believe that the United States’ grow-
ing vulnerability to a Chinese strategic attack will weaken
Washington’s resolve, then allies might not be assured. This
could have negative consequences for US strategy in the
region, including, in extreme cases, of US allies pursuing
independent nuclear arsenals, weakening the global non-
proliferation regime. Tokyo, Seoul, and Taipei likely possess
the industrial capacity to build nuclear weapons if they de-
cided to do so.49
To be sure, the United States was able to successfully ex-
tend deterrence to Europe during the Cold War, despite
US vulnerability to Soviet strategic forces. But its attempts
to assure allies included failures. London and Paris both
judged that they required independent nuclear arsenals
to protect themselves from the Soviet nuclear threat. It is
possible that capable Asian allies might make a similar cal-
culation in the future.
Achieve Objectives If Deterrence Fails
A longstanding goal of US nuclear strategy is to achieve
national objectives if deterrence fails. If China decides to
use nuclear weapons, the United States will not simply sit
back and accept assured destruction. Rather, it will take a
variety of steps to attempt to limit damage to itself and its
allies. This could include seeking to de-escalate the con-
flict. It could also include using counterforce strikes and
missile defenses to blunt a Chinese nuclear attack. As
China’s strategic forces grow, it will be more difficult for
the United States to cover the relevant Chinese strategic
targets in order to limit damage to itself and its allies. Every
additional Chinese nuclear warhead deployed is a nuclear
warhead that may evade US counterforce strikes or missile
defense interceptors in the event of a nuclear exchange.
Every additional Chinese warhead deployed, therefore, is
also a weapon that could increase US or allied lives lost by
tens or hundreds of thousands.
Hedge Against An Uncertain Future
US nuclear strategy must also be prepared to hedge
against an uncertain future. The United States has plans to

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
12
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
modernize its nuclear forces, and these forces must serve
as the US nuclear deterrent over the coming half-century.
US nuclear posture, therefore, must not only be designed
with today’s security environment in mind, but must also
be able to adapt to changed future circumstances. The
growing Chinese threat presents both technological and
geopolitical risk to US nuclear strategy and posture. China’s
nuclear buildup and investments in new strategic technol-
ogy may upend longstanding assumptions of US nuclear
strategy. For example, Chinese investments in new tech-
nology could make it easier for Beijing to track US nuclear
submarines or to disrupt US NC3, potentially calling into
question the survivability of US nuclear forces.50
Moreover, China’s nuclear buildup will also put upward
pressure on the size of the US nuclear arsenal. The United
States has for decades pursued a counterforce targeting
50 Martin Giles, “The US and China are in a quantum arms race that will transform warfare,” MIT Technology Review, January 3, 2019, https://www.
technologyreview.com/2019/01/03/137969/us-china-quantum-arms-race/.
51 Keir A. Lieber and Daryl G. Press, “The New Era of Counterforce: Technological Change and the Future of Nuclear Deterrence,” International Security 41
(4) (Spring 2017): 9–49, https://www.belfercenter.org/publication/new-era-counterforce-technological-change-and-future-nuclear-deterrence.
strategy that requires the ability to cover the nuclear-re-
lated targets of its principal nuclear-armed adversaries.
Washington requires, therefore, a nuclear arsenal capable
of deterring Russia, China, and North Korea at the same
time. The size of the current US nuclear arsenal was set
in 2010 with the assumption that China possessed a cou-
ple hundred nuclear weapons. As China’s arsenal size in-
creases, however, the number of nuclear-related targets
that the United States must cover also increases, requir-
ing the United States to increase the number of its nuclear
weapons to counter Chinese nuclear capabilities. Analysts
assume that a nuclear-armed state must allocate two offen-
sive warheads for every enemy target.51 If China increases
its arsenal by several hundred, then Washington might also
need to increase its strategic deployed arsenal by nearly
twice that much to maintain its counterforce strategy.
Military vehicles carrying underwater drones travel past Tiananmen Square during the military parade marking the 70th founding anniversary of
People’s Republic of China on its National Day in Beijing, China October 1, 2019. REUTERS/Jason Lee.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
13
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Scenarios For Chinese Strategic Attack
T
he foremost goal of US nuclear strategy is to deter
a nuclear or nonnuclear strategic attack. It is use-
ful to consider, therefore, the conceivable types of
strategic attack that the United States and its allies
might need to deter.
Chinese Strategic Nuclear Attack
China could conduct a countervalue or counterforce strike
on the US mainland. This is the least likely of the scenar-
ios considered in this section but is at least possible in the
event of a major war in the Indo-Pacific. China could con-
duct such an attack, for example, if the Chinese mainland
became the target of large-scale US and allied conventional
strikes due to accident or inadvertent escalation resulting
from US and allied strikes on Chinese NC3 or co-located
missiles, or in retaliation for US nuclear use.
Chinese Theater Nuclear Attack
China could conduct a nuclear attack in the Indo-Pacific
theater against US allies, bases, or forces. Such an attack
could take the form of a countervalue strike on a US ally,
such as Japan, for its participation in any regional conflict,
such as in a dispute over the Senkaku Islands. It could be
part of a war-winning strategy to degrade US capability in
the region by striking US bases, aircraft carriers, or other
major military assets. China might also conduct a limited nu-
clear strike in a bid to force Washington to sue for peace on
terms favorable to Beijing. This would be similar to Russia’s
“escalate-to-de-escalate” strategy. If Beijing were losing a
major war over Taiwan, for example, it might see a limited
nuclear strike as an option to frighten the United States into
halting the conflict to prevent further damage. This strike
could take the form of a limited strike on military or civilian
targets, or as a demonstration shot in the atmosphere.
Deterring Chinese Nuclear Retaliation
Washington might need to deter Chinese nuclear retal-
iation following a US first strike. The United States does
not possess an NFU policy and reserves the right to use
nuclear weapons first. Analysts have written about how
Chinese amphibious transport docks, like the Yimeng Shan, seen here taking part in a naval parade off the eastern port city of Qingdao to mark
the 70th anniversary of the founding of Chinese People’s Liberation Army Navy, would be essential to an invasion of Taiwan. Thus, to credibly deter
strategic attack on Taiwan, the United States may need the ability to target these ships. April 23, 2019. REUTERS/Jason Lee.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
14
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
the United States could rely on nuclear threats to deter,
for example, a Chinese invasion of Taiwan. 52 If that threat
were to fail, Washington could use theater nuclear weapons
against China’s invading forces to prevent a takeover of the
island. As mentioned above, this would be similar to the
US strategy during the Cold War of relying on the threat of
nuclear weapons to offset the Soviet Union’s conventional
superiority in Central Europe.53 This strategy could become
more attractive to Washington if the conventional balance
of power in the Taiwan Strait continues to shift in Beijing’s
favor. If Washington were to use nuclear weapons in this
manner, however, China might seek to retaliate either in a
proportional manner or with a large-scale strategic strike,
and the United States would want to deter such retaliation.
Deterring Nonnuclear Strategic Attacks
Beijing might also conduct a nonnuclear strategic attack on
the United States or its allies. These are attacks that, while
conducted with nonnuclear weapons, would have strategic
effects equivalent to nuclear weapons. This could mean a
large-scale conventional attack on, or invasion of, US allies.
52 Elbridge Colby, “If Y ou Want Peace, Prepare for Nuclear War,” Foreign Affairs, November/December 2018, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/
china/2018-10-15/if-you-want-peace-prepare-nuclear-war.
53 John J. Mearsheimer, “Nuclear Weapons and Deterrence in Europe,” International Security (9) (3) (Winter, 1984–1985): 19-46, https://doi.
org/10.2307/2538586.
Such an attack might be backstopped by nuclear threats.
While such an attack is unlikely, there are many plausible
flashpoints for conventional conflict between Beijing and
Washington, including Taiwan, the Senkaku Islands, the
Korean Peninsula, and the South China Sea.
Washington would also like to deter China from launching
a major cyber or counterspace attack with strategic effect.
This could include a large-scale cyberattack on the United
States and its allies, such as an operation to shut down
the power grid on the Eastern Seaboard of the United
States. Washington would also want to deter China from
conducting a cyberattack on US NC3, or from attacking US
space-based assets, which also serve a strategic role for
the civilian economy, the US military, and US NC3.
Finally, despite its international commitments to the con-
trary, it is possible that China possesses chemical or bio-
logical weapons. In the event of a large-scale war, Beijing
might be tempted to use these weapons against the United
States and its allies, and Washington would want to deter
such an attack.
A US ballistic missile submarine test fires the Trident submarine-launched ballistic missile. The Trident can carry a low-yield W76-2 nuclear warhead,
one option which contributes to US deterrence of nonstrategic nuclear attack. US Navy Photo by Mass Communication Specialist 2nd Class Thomas
Gooley. https://tinyurl.com/5k898zye.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
15
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A Strategy For Deterring Chinese
Strategic Attack
54 Elbridge A. Colby, The Strategy of Denial: American Defense in an Age of Great Power Conflict (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2021).
55 Ibid.
W
hat kind of strategy and posture do the United
States and its allies need to deter a Chinese
strategic attack? Answering that question will
be the subject of this, the second half of the
report. It will begin with issues of strategy and policy, then
turn to operational concepts, before finishing with a discus-
sion of capabilities.
US And Allied Strategy And Policy
Washington should aim to deter nuclear and nonnuclear
strategic attacks on the United States and its allies by mak-
ing it clear to Beijing that any such attack would result in
unacceptable costs for China. Washington should continue
to leave the option of a nuclear response on the table to
a Chinese nonnuclear strategic attack, including in space
or against US NC3. While it might be somewhat incredible
that the United States would launch a nuclear reprisal in re-
sponse to a cyberattack against US NC3 or a US satellite,
there may be some deterrent value to leaving the threat on
the table. Moreover, there is nothing to be gained by the op-
posite policy of reassuring Beijing that it can get away with
such attacks without worrying about US nuclear weapons. In
the cyber and space domains, the United States should also
practice deterrence-by-denial by strengthening the security
and resilience of these capabilities to Chinese attack.
US nuclear forces should support a defense strategy for
China that aims to deny China the ability to invade US allies
and security partners by maintaining a favorable balance of
power in the Indo-Pacific region.54 The US nuclear umbrella
currently extends over several US allies in the Indo-Pacific,
including Japan, South Korea, and Australia. Deterring and,
if necessary, defeating a Chinese attack on Taiwan is also
among the DoD’s highest priorities. A successful Chinese
invasion of Taiwan would weaken the credibility of US
commitments globally and provide China with a platform
from which to more easily threaten US allies and bases in
the region. The greatest risk of war comes from a Chinese
miscalculation. The US commitment to Taiwan is ambigu-
ous, and the conventional balance of power is narrowing. If
Beijing calculates incorrectly that it can invade Taiwan with-
out a US response, then it might be more tempted to do so.
US policy should aim to prevent miscalculation in Beijing.
The United States should clarify its defense commitment
to Taiwan as other experts have recently recommended.
Moreover, as part of the process of clarifying its commit-
ment, the United States should consider clarifying whether
its nuclear umbrella also potentially extends over Taiwan.
The United States should assure allies that it will contribute
to their self-defense and that there is no reason for them to
develop independent nuclear arsenals. While a central goal
of US nuclear policy is to deter strategic attacks, if deter-
rence fails, then Washington must be prepared to achieve
its objectives. Finally, Washington’s strategic forces must be
designed to hedge against an uncertain future.
As discussed above, however, each of these objectives is
threatened by Chinese force developments that are cut-
ting into the US military advantage. To reverse these trends,
the United States should aim to possess a quantitative and
qualitative military advantage at each rung of the escala-
tion ladder, from the conventional to the strategic nuclear
level, such that Beijing does not believe that it can gain an
advantage by escalating a military conflict.
Rather than a radical change in US policy, this would es-
sentially be formalizing the status quo that existed in the
Sino-US balance of power for the past several decades.
This process begins by reinforcing the conventional bal-
ance of power in support of a defense strategy of denial.55
The United States and its allies and partners must be ca-
pable of denying China a successful invasion of US allies
and security partners, especially Taiwan. Beijing can be
deterred if it assesses that such an attack is likely to fail.
As argued above, the most worrisome potential gap in the
escalation ladder currently may be at the theater nuclear
level. The United States and its allies must therefore pos-
sess useable nonstrategic nuclear options to respond to
any limited Chinese nuclear strike. The purpose would not
be to fight a nuclear war but to deter Beijing from going
down this path in the first place. There are questions about
whether the United States currently has sufficient non-
strategic nuclear capabilities, and Washington may need
to strengthen nonstrategic nuclear capabilities to support
a military strategy of denial. Finally, at the strategic level,
the United States should seek to maintain its quantitative
and qualitative edge over China. Some have argued that
the United States is already vulnerable to a strategic ex-
change with China and that, therefore, the United States

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
16
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
should recognize and accept this “mutual vulnerability.”
China’s leaders also desperately want the United States to
explicitly acknowledge this vulnerability. It is true that the
United States is vulnerable to China’s strategic forces and
that recapturing a guaranteed first strike capability would
be impossible and inadvisable. Still, this mutual vulnerabil-
ity remains highly asymmetric, and Washington should aim
to preserve asymmetric vulnerability. Washington should
make it clear that any strategic exchange would result in
unacceptable costs for China, while preserving counter-
force capabilities that can meaningfully limit damage to the
United States and its allies and partners.
The Chinese strategic threat does not exist in isolation. The
United States needs a tailored and flexible strategy and
force that is capable of deterring strategic threats simulta-
neously from China, Russia, North Korea, and Iran.
US And Allied Operations
The United States and its allies should develop new op-
erational concepts for deterring and defeating China at
every level of conflict. The DoD and many outside experts
are developing new concepts of operations for nonnuclear
conflict with China. Concepts for operations at the strategic
level are also relatively straightforward. If strategic deter-
rence fails, Washington should execute its deterrent threat
and conduct a large-scale strategic attack on China’s strate-
gic and military targets to limit damage to the United States
and its allies and to impose unacceptable costs on Beijing.
The most difficult intellectual challenge will be operational
concepts for the use of nuclear weapons in the midst of a
conventional war, or what some are calling “convention-
al-nuclear integration.”56
US Nuclear Response To A Chinese Nuclear Attack
If China uses a nuclear weapon first, how should the United
States and its allies respond? Imagine, for example, that
China uses a nuclear-armed intermediate-range missile
against a US aircraft carrier or allied base in the event of a
major theater war. Some might argue that the United States
should respond with a massive nuclear retaliation, but such
an action would risk prompting Chinese nuclear retaliation
against more valuable targets, including population centers
on the US mainland. Others might argue that the United
56 See, for example: John K. Warden, “Conventional-Nuclear Integration in the Next National Defense Strategy,” Center for a New American Security,
October 26, 2020, https://www.cnas.org/publications/commentary/conventional-nuclear-integration-in-the-next-national-defense-strategy; Justin
Anderson and James R. McCue, “Deterring, Countering, and Defeating Conventional-Nuclear Integration,” Strategic Studies Quarterly 15 (1) (Spring
2021): 28–60, https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/Portals/10/SSQ/documents/Volume-15_Issue-1/Anderson.pdf; Vincent A. Manzo and Aaron R. Miles, “The
Logic of Integrating Conventional and Nuclear Planning,” Arms Control Today, November 2016, https://www.armscontrol.org/act/2016-10/features/logic-
integrating-conventional-nuclear-planning; Al Mauroni, “Tearing Down the Nuclear Firewall,” War on the Rocks, October 15, 2019, https://warontherocks.
com/2019/10/tearing-down-the-nuclear-firewall/.
States should turn the other cheek and continue to fight
at the conventional level. But this could incentivize China
to continue to use nuclear weapons, because its leaders
might conclude that they need not fear US nuclear retali-
ation. Moreover, it would likely weaken US nuclear deter-
rence and assurance policy broadly if enemies and allies
alike perceive US declaratory policy as an elaborate bluff
and the US nuclear weapons arsenal as unusable. The solu-
tion is that Washington needs to cultivate serious options
for limited nuclear strikes.
To conduct these strikes in the midst of a broader conven-
tional conflict, Washington would face a number of difficult
questions, such as: How many nuclear weapons should it
use? Which nuclear weapons should it choose? Should they
be sent from a certain delivery platform or be of a certain
yield? What types of Chinese targets should the United
States strike with these nuclear weapons?
As it contemplates these questions, the United States
should keep the overarching goals of this operation in
mind: to deny successful Chinese aggression and restore
intra-war deterrence. The United States will want to demon-
strate to China that the use of nuclear weapons will be
too costly for Beijing and thus persuade China’s leaders
not to order additional nuclear strikes. At the same time,
Washington will not want its nuclear retaliation to be so
devastating or provocative that Beijing feels it has noth-
ing left to lose or that it faces domestic or international
pressures to launch a larger nuclear counterattack. In sum,
the United States will need to walk the tightrope between
doing too much and doing too little.
The following principles help, therefore, to answer the above
questions about which weapons could be used on which
targets. The United States should aim for a nuclear retali-
ation that is more devastating than China’s initial use, but
that is not wildly disproportionate. A tit-for-tat response might
lead Beijing to believe that it can set the pace of escalation.
Retaliating more forcefully will help to convince Beijing that
it will incur steep and growing costs for any nuclear attack.
This could be achieved by using two warheads in response
to one, selecting larger yield warheads for retaliation, or by
destroying a more sensitive Chinese target. Consistent with
this principle, the Chinese mainland cannot be an absolute
sanctuary from US nuclear retaliation. If China targets the
homeland of the United States, its territories, or its allies and
partners (including Japan, Taiwan, or Guam, for example) in a

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
17
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
limited nuclear strike, then the United States should prioritize
retaliation against the Chinese mainland. Striking purely mili-
tary targets with minimal collateral damage, such as ships at
sea, could be seen as a US de-escalation, which could again
cause Chinese leaders to believe they can control the scale
and pace of escalation.
At the same time, Washington should seek to show restraint
with any nuclear retaliation. It does not want Beijing to con-
clude that Washington is launching a full-scale nuclear attack;
it wants Beijing to have attractive off-ramps from continued
nuclear use. The strike should not be so out of proportion with
China’s initial nuclear first use that Beijing’s leaders choose a
larger nuclear third strike. This means that the United States
should retain low-yield weapons on nonstrategic delivery sys-
tems. It would be difficult for Beijing to misperceive the use of
such a weapon as the prelude to a large-scale, disarming, stra-
tegic attack.57 If Beijing’s initial target is a purely military asset
with minimal collateral damage (such as a ship at sea), then the
United States should seek to retaliate against a similar target
set, but perhaps in larger numbers.
Some critics will almost certainly counter that it is impossi-
ble to signal with nuclear strikes, but they are incorrect. 58
Critics will say that the use of any nuclear weapon against
a Chinese target would be seen as highly escalatory and
that officials in Beijing will not appreciate that the use of a
relatively low-yield nuclear weapon, for example, signaled
restraint. Instead, these critics will argue, Beijing will be out-
raged that it suffered a nuclear attack. This may be true, but
the relevant question is not whether Beijing sees a nuclear
strike as provocative, but would Chinese leadership per-
ceive a different type of nuclear attack (such as employing
multiple megaton warheads against Chinese cities) as more
provocative? Would Chinese officials respond differently to
a low-yield strike against a Chinese military target than to
a high-yield strike on Chinese cities? The answer to these
questions is almost certainly “yes,” meaning that the United
States and its allies can attempt to control escalation by
signaling through nuclear employment.
US Nuclear First Use
The United States might also need to use nuclear weap-
ons first. The United States has always retained the op-
tion of using nuclear weapons first in its declaratory policy.
57 Matthew Kroeing and Mark J. Massa, Are dual-capable weapon systems destabilizing? Questioning nuclear-conventional entanglement and inadvertent
escalation, Atlantic Council, June 16, 2021, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/issue-brief/are-dual-capable-weapon-systems-
destabilizing/.
58 For a summary of arguments against low-yield nuclear weapons, see: Vincent Manzo, “A Closer Look at the Arguments against the Low-Yield SLBM,”
Defense One, June 21, 2019, https://www.defenseone.com/ideas/2019/06/closer-look-arguments-against-low-yield-slbm/157925/.
59 Liu Zhen, “A harder US line? Potential Pentagon chief floated idea to sink China fleet in 72 hours,” South China Morning Post, November 14, 2020, https://
www.scmp.com/news/china/military/article/3109852/harder-us-line-potential-pentagon-chief-floated-idea-sink-china.
60 Colby, “If Y ou Want Peace.”
The most likely scenario for a US nuclear first use against
China would be in the event of a Chinese invasion of
Taiwan that Washington believed it could not repulse using
conventional forces alone. Former senior US government
officials have stated that to stop a Chinese invasion, the
United States and its allies would need the ability to sink
the Chinese navy within 72 hours. 59 Currently, the United
States lacks the conventional firepower for such a mission.
There are efforts to strengthen US strike capabilities in
the region, including through the development of ground-
launched and hypersonic missiles, but it is unclear whether
these and other moves will be sufficient to close the gap.
If, however, the United States were willing to use nonstra-
tegic nuclear weapons against an invading Chinese force,
the United States could almost certainly be guaranteed of
the ability to prevent a Chinese invasion, albeit with all the
attendant risks of nuclear use.
To some, this might be an overly provocative and risky ap-
proach. It is, however, parallel to the US policy of deterring
a Soviet conventional invasion of Western Europe during
the Cold War with the threat of early nuclear retaliation. 60
Nuclear-armed powers facing a conventionally superior op-
ponent have often relied on threats of early nuclear use as
a deterrent. The purpose would not be to fight a nuclear
war, but to deter the Chinese invasion by making it clear
to the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) that it cannot fight
through a US nuclear onslaught to take Taiwan.
This approach would raise many of the same targeting ques-
tions addressed above with many of the same answers.
Washington would want to use low-yield weapons delivered
from platforms positioned in theater against Chinse military
targets as they are making their way across the Taiwan Strait.
The more difficult questions arise when it comes to attacks
on the Chinese mainland to degrade capabilities supporting
the invasion force, such as ports on the Chinese side of the
Taiwan Strait. The tradeoff in such a case would be military
effectiveness versus escalation risks, and the decision could
likely only be made at the highest levels of government
based on the specific circumstances at that time.
US Strategic Capabilities
To support this strategy, the United States will need to
maintain a robust strategic force. At the strategic level, the

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
18
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
United States should continue with the program of record
to modernize its nuclear force. This will require investments
in all three legs of the nuclear triad, including ICBMs, bomb-
ers, the Long Range Stand Off (LRSO) weapon, and subma-
rines. It should also pursue the “supplemental” capabilities
called for in the 2018 NPR. Washington must also make the
necessary investments in the nuclear enterprise and up-
grade NC3.
To maintain a strategic edge over China, additional steps
may be required as China expands the size of its arsenal.
The United States should size its force so that it can cover
the nuclear and strategic targets in its principal nucle-
ar-armed adversaries—Russia, China, and North Korea. The
current US force size of 1,550 strategic deployed warheads
was deemed to be sufficient in 2010 at a time when the nu-
clear threat environment was relatively benign. It is hard to
imagine that this is still the force Washington needs in 2021.
The nuclear threat environment has greatly changed since
2010 and continues to deteriorate. The number of nuclear
and strategic targets in the United States’ principal nucle-
ar-armed adversaries continues to grow, but the US strategic
deployed arsenal has remained constant. Russia is building
and deploying exotic and nonstrategic nuclear weapons not
covered in New START, China is set to increase its nuclear
arsenal by multiples of 2010 levels, and North Korea has doz-
ens of additional warheads capable of reaching the United
States.61 It is increasingly clear that 1,550 nuclear warheads
are, or will soon be, insufficient. The United States must re-
evaluate whether it can meet its deterrence requirements
at current force levels. In the short term, an expansion of
the deployed strategic arsenal can best be achieved by up-
loading additional warheads on US ICBMs and SLBMs. Over
time, the United States might need to consider additional
measures to keep pace with adversaries’ growing arsenals
and it will have the benefit of warm production lines as it
pursues its planned modernization program.
The United States should also include missile defenses as
part of its mix of strategic capabilities for China. Washington
should continue to declare that its homeland missile de-
fenses will be designed to keep pace with the North Korean
threat and will not be sized to meaningfully blunt a Russia
or Chinese attack. It should also declare, however, that, in
the event of a crisis or war with China, it will draw on its
existing missile defenses as needed to protect itself and its
61 Matthew Kroenig, Mark Massa, and Christian Trotti, Russia’s exotic nuclear weapons and implications for the United States and NATO, Atlantic Council,
March 6, 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/issue-brief/russias-exotic-nuclear-weapons-and-implications-for-the-united-
states-and-nato/.
62 Mallory Shelbourne, “Davidson: Aegis Ashore on Guam Would ‘Free Up’ 3 Navy Destroyers,” USNI News, March 4, 2021, https://news.usni.
org/2021/03/04/davidson-aegis-ashore-on-guam-would-free-up-3-navy-destroyers.
63 Nuclear Posture Review, 2018.
64 Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “United States nuclear weapons, 2021,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 77 (1) (2021): 56, https://doi.org/10.1080/009
63402.2020.1859865.
65 White House, Interim National Security Strategic Guidance, March 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/NSC-1v2.pdf.
allies. It should rely on the current system of Ground-Based
Interceptors (GBIs) even as it invests in next-generation
missile defense technology, including directed energy and
space-based sensors. It should also explore new modes for
the deployment of interceptors, including on military aircraft
and in space.
The United States and its allies should also continue
to deploy theater missile defenses in the Indo-Pacific.
Comprehensive protection of the region is not possible,
but they should strive for a point defense of key popula-
tion centers and important military assets, including US and
allied bases and major ports of embarkation and debar-
kation. A near-term priority should be the deployment of
missile defenses on Guam as recommended by Adm. Phil
Davidson, then-commander of US Indo-Pacific Command.62
The greatest US capability gap with China at present may
be in nonstrategic nuclear forces. The 2018 NPR called for
the United States to maintain “flexible” nuclear forces, capa-
ble of deterring a variety of contingencies.63 But, the United
States does not currently have forward-deployed, nonstra-
tegic nuclear weapons in the Indo-Pacific. Nonetheless, it
does have forward “deployable” nuclear weapons. In the
event of a crisis or a war, Washington could bring forward
its stockpile of B61 gravity bombs that could be delivered by
DCAs.64 In practice, however, the United States and its allies
do not often exercise this capability, and many weapons stor-
age areas (WSAs) in the Indo-Pacific need maintenance and
updating. Moreover, gravity bombs require aircraft to arrive
directly over their targets, but US and allied aircraft are po-
tentially vulnerable to existing and planned future Chinese
air defenses. Furthermore, US allies might not want B61s
deployed on their territory as it could make them a more
inviting target for a Chinese nuclear attack.
The United States also has plans, announced in the 2018
NPR, to build a new, nuclear-armed sea-launched cruise
missile (SLCM-N). This capability is still likely years away,
however, and it is possible that the program could be ter-
minated altogether in an effort to make progress toward
the stated US goal of “tak[ing] steps to reduce the role of
nuclear weapons in [US] national security strategy.”65
The 2018 NPR also resulted in a new, low-yield SLBM. Some
nuclear experts have expressed concern, however, that the

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
19
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
use of a strategic platform for nuclear attack could be per-
ceived by adversaries as the prelude to a strategic nuclear
attack and, therefore, poses escalation risks.66
Another option for delivering nuclear weapons in a conflict
in the Indo-Pacific would be by strategic bomber. The United
States could deliver gravity bombs from the B-2 strategic
bomber (and, in the future, the B-21 strategic bomber). The
United States could also use the B-52 strategic bomber to
deliver variable-yield nuclear weapons on an air-launched
cruise missile (ALCM) and, in the future, the LRSO. These
capabilities also come with several downsides. Aircraft may
be vulnerable to enemy air defenses, as pointed out above.
Some will claim that the use of strategic bombers raises
nuclear escalation risks not posed by nonstrategic delivery
platforms. And the reported lowest yield on the W80 war-
head of the nuclear ALCM is still fairly high at 5 kilotons.67
The United States should maintain effective nonstrategic
nuclear capabilities in the Indo-Pacific to ensure a flexible
force capable of deterring Chinese theater nuclear use. At
a minimum, Washington should continue with existing plans
to build the LRSO. It should also continue to build and de-
ploy the SLCM-N and not abandon it in order to achieve
the goal of “reducing the role” of nuclear weapons. Some
will argue that the SLCM-N will detract from the number of
missile-launching tubes available for the conventional mis-
sion or that it will be resisted by the US Navy. But the United
States need not build a large SLCM-N capability. Several
tubes dedicated to this capability may suffice. Moreover,
the United States enjoys civilian oversight of the military. If
civilian policy makers decide that SLCM-N is necessary for
US defense strategy, then the navy will follow orders and
deploy this capability, despite the complications, as it did
during the Cold War.
Following through on existing plans and upgrading exist-
ing capabilities may not be enough, however. In addition,
the DoD should carefully study whether other nonstrate-
gic nuclear capabilities may be appropriate for likely China
conflict scenarios. Options might include, for example,
ground-launched, intermediate-range, nuclear-capable
missiles. China has hundreds of nuclear-capable missiles in
this category, and, with the demise of the INF Treaty, these
capabilities are no longer treaty restricted for the United
States. Some have argued that no country will host these
capabilities in Asia, but this is a shortsighted view. With
careful diplomacy over time, and as the Chinese military
threat grows, several US allies and partners in Asia might
eagerly accept this addition to their defense and regional
66 For example, see: Vipin Narang, “The Discrimination Problem: Why Putting Low-Yield Nuclear Weapons On Submarines Is So Dangerous,” War on the
Rocks, February 8, 2018, https://warontherocks.com/2018/02/discrimination-problem-putting-low-yield-nuclear-weapons-submarines-dangerous/; for a
summary of the counterpoint, see Kroeing and Massa, Are dual-capable weapon systems destabilizing?
67 Hans Kristensen, “W80-1 Warhead Selected for New Nuclear Cruise Missile,” Federation of American Scientists, October 10, 2014, https://fas.org/blogs/
security/2014/10/w80-1_lrso/.
security. Alternatively, these capabilities could be built,
stockpiled, and maintained in the United States ready for
rapid deployment to the theater in the event of crisis or
conflict. Furthermore, the DoD could consider the develop-
ment of a nuclear-capable ALCM that could be delivered by
fighter aircraft, providing DCAs with a standoff capability. If
the United States wishes to use nonstrategic nuclear weap-
ons to deter a Chinese attack on Taiwan, then the develop-
ment of a broader range of capabilities might be required.
These would be nuclear forces optimized to degrade an
invading amphibious Chinese force, such as nuclear-armed
torpedoes or anti-ship missiles.
The Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) satellite provides
the US military with command and control of conventional and nuclear
operations. China may target nodes in the US nuclear command,
control, and communications (NC3) network. Courtesy photo from
Lockheed Martin. https://www.flickr.com/photos/usairforce/9824585713/
in/photolist-fYaz3R.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
20
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
The United States and its allies must also make these ca-
pabilities real by exercising with them in realistic scenarios
for conventional-nuclear integration. This would include, for
example, exercising the use of a small number of nuclear
weapons against Chinese military targets in the context of
a larger conventional warfighting scenario.
To deter attacks on its NC3, space, and cyber capabilities,
the United States should keep the option of nuclear retal-
iation on the table. More importantly, however, the United
States should also develop serious options for other forms
of retaliation, including in-kind. In addition, the United States
should focus on resilience and deterrence-by-denial for its
NC3, space, and cyber capabilities. Critical NC3 space pay-
loads—for missile launch warning, strategic communication,
and nuclear detonation detection—are currently concen-
trated on large, expensive satellites vulnerable to attack. The
United States should leverage the revolution in small satel-
lites (“smallsats”) to distribute the functionality of its strategic
space assets among a constellation of satellites that would
be harder to destroy and easier to replace in a crisis. Further,
the United States should consider the national security ap-
plications of cislunar space (the space between geosynchro-
nous Earth orbit [GEO] and the Moon), an area which current
adversary antisatellite weapons cannot range.68
The cybersecurity of NC3 systems must be a top priority
of the DoD. To that end, the annual reporting of Strategic
Command and Cyber Command to the congressional de-
fense committees will remain critical, especially as DoD
continues to develop the “NC3 Next” architecture, which
builds in cybersecurity measures.69 Incorporating cyber re-
silience into NC3 systems—such as by relying on redundant
digital and analogue communications methods—can serve
to enhance deterrence-by-denial of cyberattacks on NC3
systems.70 Finally, communicating effectively with US allies
will be key to ensuring that prudent recognition of the cyber
threat to NC3 does not unduly degrade allied confidence in
US extended deterrence.71
68 Clementine G. Starling, Mark J. Massa, Christopher P. Mulder, and Julia T. Siegel, The Future of Security in Space: A Thirty-Year US Strategy, Atlantic
Council, April 11, 2021, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/content-series/atlantic-council-strategy-paper-series/the-future-of-security-in-space/.
69 Theresa Hitchens, “Congress Fears DoD Not Prepared for NC3 Cyber Attacks,” Breaking Defense, December 11, 2020, https://breakingdefense.
com/2020/12/congress-fears-dod-not-prepared-for-nc3-cyber-attacks/.
70 Beyza Unal and Patricia Lewis, Cybersecurity of Nuclear Weapons Systems: Threats, Vulnerabilities and Consequences, Chatham House, January 2018,
https://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/default/files/publications/research/2018-01-11-cybersecurity-nuclear-weapons-unal-lewis-final.pdf; Ann E. Hammer,
Trisha H. Miller, and Eva C. Uribe, Cyber Resilience as a Deterrence Strategy, Sandia National Laboratories, September 2020, https://www.osti.gov/
servlets/purl/1668133.
71 Yasmin Afina, Calum Inverarity, and Beyza Unal, Ensuring Cyber Resilience in NATO’s Command, Control and Communication Systems, Chatham House,
July 2020, https://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/default/files/2020-07-17-cyber-resilience-nato-command-control-communication-afina-inverarity-unal_0.
pdf.
72 Thomas G. Mahnken, Secrecy & Stratagem: Understanding Chinese Strategic Culture, Lowy Institute for International Policy, February 2011, https://
archive.lowyinstitute.org/sites/default/files/pubfiles/Mahnken%2C_Secrecy_and_stratagem_1.pdf.
73 Matthew Kroenig and Mark J. Massa, Toward trilateral arms control: Options for bringing China into the fold, Atlantic Council, February 4, 2021, https://
www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/issue-brief/toward-trilateral-arms-control-options-for-bringing-china-into-the-fold/.
Arms Control
China’s growing strategic forces should be a priority for US
arms control efforts. Russia is no longer the United States’
most fearsome strategic competitor, and, if arms control is
to be meaningful for the remainder of the twenty-first cen-
tury, then it must include China.
Convincing Beijing to make effective and verifiable arms con-
trol commitments, however, will be difficult. Unlike the United
States and Russia, China has no history of negotiating con-
straints on its nuclear forces. Chinese strategic culture prizes
secrecy and deception, which is at odds with arms control’s
emphasis on transparency.72 Moreover, it is difficult to imag-
ine what a desirable arms control treaty might look like, given
the asymmetries in US and Chinese forces. Modern strategic
arms control has been based on locking in quantitative parity
between US and Russian forces, but Washington does not
want parity with Chinese forces. Washington would like to
preserve its quantitative and qualitative nuclear advantages,
but Beijing would be loath to sign an unequal treaty.
Despite these challenges, Washington should pursue arms
control with China. There are a number of imaginable arms
control arrangements with China that would advance US
interests and international security.73 In addition, there are
several motivations for Beijing to consider arms control with
Washington (and Moscow), including international prestige
and the opportunity to constrain a likely coming expansion
of Russian and possibly US nonstrategic nuclear forces. That
said, it is difficult to foresee the establishment of binding, ne-
gotiated constraints on China’s nuclear forces in the immedi-
ate future. Washington and its allies should proceed, therefore,
with a number of small steps. They should engage Beijing in
strategic stability talks and invite Chinese officials to partici-
pate in New START verification visits to learn how arms control
is implemented in practice. The US Defense Threat Reduction
Agency should make plans to facilitate such visits. US allies in
Europe concerned about the future state of international arms
control arrangements should place this issue near the top of
the agenda for their bilateral relations with Beijing.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
21
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Conclusion
J
ust a few years ago, China could have plausibly
been described as posing the least significant nucle-
ar threat of the United States’ three nuclear-armed
rivals. That has changed. This report describes how
the rapid projected growth of Chinese strategic forces
threatens to undermine all major US defense and deter-
rence goals. Unfortunately, there are a variety of plausible
scenarios for Chinese nuclear or nonnuclear attack against
the United States, its allies, and its forces.
To counter this threat, this report outlined a strategy for
Washington and its allies to reliably deter Chinese strategic
attack. Washington should strive to maintain a favorable
balance of power at every rung of the escalation ladder.
This will require that the United States strengthens its own
offensive and defensive nuclear and strategic capabilities,
even as it pursues arms control in earnest to constrain the
buildup of Chinese forces.
Pursuing this strategy will not be easy, but the conse-
quences of failing to deter a Chinese strategic attack could
be unacceptable. The United States and its allies should act
now to prevent a potentially catastrophic deterrence failure.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
22
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Author Biography
Dr. Matthew Kroenig is the
deputy director of the Atlantic
Council’s Scowcroft Center
for Strategy and Security and
the director of the Center’s
Scowcroft Strategy Initiative.
In these roles, he leads the
Center’s global strategy unit
and supports the director in
managing a bipartisan team of
over 40 resident staff and an
extensive network of nonresi-
dent experts. His own research
focuses on US national security
policy, great power competition with China and Russia, and
strategic deterrence and weapons nonproliferation.
Dr. Kroenig has served in several positions in the US
Department of Defense and the intelligence community in
the Bush, Obama, and Trump administrations, including in
the Strategy, Middle East, and Nuclear and Missile Defense
offices in the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the
CIA’s Strategic Assessments Group. From 2017-2021, he
was a Special Government Employee (SGE) and Senior
Policy Adviser to the Office of the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Strategy, Plans, and Capability/Nuclear and
Missile Defense Policy. In this role, he provided advice
on matters relating to the formulation, drafting, coordi-
nation, and implementation of nuclear deterrence policy
and strategy in support of the 2018 US Nuclear Posture
Review. He was a major contributor to formulating tailored
deterrence strategies for China, Russia, North Korea, and
Iran. In 2011, he developed strategic options for address-
ing Iran’s nuclear program. In 2005, he was the principal
author of the first-ever, US-government-wide strategy for
deterring terrorist networks. For this work, he received the
Office of the Secretary of Defense’s Award for Outstanding
Achievement. He is a featured character in the New Y ork
Times-bestselling book, Counterstrike: The Untold Story
of America’s Secret Campaign against Al Qaeda, by Eric
Schmitt and Thom Shanker. He was a national security
adviser on the presidential campaigns of Mitt Romney
(2012) and Marco Rubio (2016). He has testified before
Congress and regularly consults with the White House,
State Department, Pentagon, Congress, the intelligence
community, and allied governments.
Dr. Kroenig is also a tenured professor of government and
foreign service at Georgetown University. A 2019 study in
Perspectives on Politics ranked him one of the top 25 most-
cited political scientists of his generation.
He is the author or editor of seven books, including The
Return of Great Power Rivalry: Democracy versus Autocracy
from the Ancient World to the US and China (Oxford
University Press, 2020), which was Amazon’s #1 New
Release in International Relations. The Logic of American
Nuclear Strategy: Why Strategic Superiority Matters (Oxford
University Press, 2018) was selected by the US Air Force for
its professional reading list and was translated into Chinese
and Korean. Exporting the Bomb: Technology Transfer and
the Spread of Nuclear Weapons (Cornell University Press,
2010) was awarded the International Studies Association
Best Book Award, Honorable Mention.
Dr. Kroenig co-authors the bi-monthly “Its Debatable” col-
umn at Foreign Policy. His articles and commentary have
appeared in many other publications, including: American
Political Science Review, Annual Review of Political Science,
Foreign Affairs, Foreign Policy, International Organization,
International Security, Journal of Conflict Resolution,
Journal of Peace Research, Journal of Strategic Studies,
Politico, Security Studies, Strategic Studies Quarterly, the
Atlantic, the New Republic, the New York Times, the Wall
Street Journal, and the Washington Post, among others. He
provides regular commentary for major broadcast media
outlets, including on PBS Newshour, Fareed Zakaria GPS,
CBS, BBC, CNN, Fox News, NPR All Things Considered,
and C-SPAN.
Previously, he was the Stanton Nuclear Security Fellow at
the Council on Foreign Relations, and a research fellow at
the Belfer Center for Science and International Security at
Harvard University, and the Center for International Security
and Cooperation at Stanford University. His work has
been supported by the National Science Foundation, the
Carnegie Corporation of New Y ork, the Smith Richardson
Foundation, the Hertog Foundation, and the Stanton
Foundation. He is a life member of the Council on Foreign
Relations and holds an MA and PhD in political science
from the University of California at Berkeley. Follow him on
Twitter @matthewkroenig.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
C3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*Richard W. Edelman
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
*John J. Studzinski
TREASURER
*George Lund
DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
*Peter Ackerman
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
*Rafic A. Bizri
*Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
R. Nicholas Burns
*Richard R. Burt
Teresa Carlson
James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
Ralph D. Crosby, Jr.
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Thomas R. Eldridge
Mark T. Esper
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Courtney Geduldig
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
Amir A. Handjani
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Andrew Hove
Mary L. Howell
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Henry A. Kissinger
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
*Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Dambisa F. Moyo
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Thomas R. Nides
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
W. DeVier Pierson
Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell McCormick
Ashraf Qazi
Robert Rangel
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
Olin Wethington
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster
*Executive Committee Members
List as of October 20, 2021
Atlantic Council Board of Directors

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Deterring Chinese Strategic Attack: Grappling with the Implications of China’s Strategic Forces Buildup
C4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and engagement in international
 affairs based on the central role of the Atlantic community in
 meeting today’s global challenges.
© 2021 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means without permission
in writing from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of brief
quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please
direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor, Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
