
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Atlantic CouncilAtlantic Council
SCOWCROFT CENTER
FOR STRATEGY AND SECURITY
SMALL SATELLITES:
THE IMPLICATIONS
FOR NATIONAL SECURITY
by Nicholas Eftimiades

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security
The Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security works to develop sustainable,
nonpartisan strategies to address the most important security challenges facing
the United States and its allies and partners. The Center honors General Brent
Scowcroft’s legacy of service and embodies his ethos of nonpartisan commitment
to the cause of security, support for US leadership in cooperation with allies and
partners, and dedication to the mentorship of the next generation of leaders.
Forward Defense
Forward Defense (FD) shapes the debate around the greatest defense
challenges facing the United States and its allies, and creates forward-looking
assessments of the trends, technologies, and concepts that will define the
future of warfare. Through the futures we forecast, the scenarios we wargame,
and the analyses we produce, FD develops actionable strategies to help the
United States navigate major-power conflict and defend forward, alongside
allies and partners. As the character of war rapidly changes, FD assesses the
operational concepts and defense-industrial tools necessary to effectively
deter and defend against emerging military challenges.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
ISBN-13: 978-1-61977-228-1
Cover: Several tiny satellites are featured in this image photographed by an Expedition 33 crew member on the International
Space Station. The satellites were released outside the Kibo laboratory using a Small Satellite Orbital Deployer attached
to the Japanese module’s robotic arm on Oct. 4, 2012. Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency astronaut Aki Hoshide, flight
engineer, set up the satellite deployment gear inside the lab and placed it in the Kibo airlock. The Japanese robotic arm
then grappled the deployment system and its satellites from the airlock for deployment. Earth’s horizon and the blackness
of space provide the backdrop for the scene. Source: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, October 4, 2012,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ISS-33_Several_tiny_satellites_1.jpg.
This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic Council Policy on Intellectual Independence. The au-
thor is solely responsible for its analysis and recommendations. The views in this document are those of the author and
not the National War College, the Department of Defense, or any other US government entity. The Atlantic Council and
its donors do not determine, nor do they necessarily endorse or advocate for, any of this report’s conclusions.
May 2022
by Nicholas Eftimiades
SMALL SATELLITES:
THE IMPLICATIONS
FOR NATIONAL SECURITY

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
II
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
With thanks to Thales for generously supporting this project.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
III
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Contents
List of Acronyms 1
Executive Summary 2
Key Findings 2
Key Recommendations 2
Study Methodology 3
Chapter 1: Strategic Context 4
Background 4
Key Actors, Drivers, and Growth Trends 4
Commercial Space Development: Technology Drivers 7
Commercial Small-Satellite Growth Trends 7
Demographics, Consumer Markets, and Small Satellites 7
Chapter 2: The National Security Impact of the Small-Satellite Revolution 10
Small Satellites as Disruptors 10
Positive Disruptions of Small Satellites 10
Negative Disruptions of Small Satellites 10
Adversarial Capabilities 14
Chapter 3: The DoD and IC Response to Commercial Small-Satellite Advancements 16
US Department of Defense 16
Space Development Agency 16
 Key Technologies for SDA Small-Satellite Development 18
  Laser Communications 18
  Encryption 20
  Ground Storage, Networking, and Processing 20
Space Force 21
The Intelligence Community 22

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
Iv
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Chapter 4: The Civil Space Response: Domestic and International Cooperation 23
Space Traffic Management 23
Regulatory Regimes for Commercial Space Activities 24
On-Orbit Mission Authority 25
Private Missions Beyond Earth’s Orbit 25
New On-Orbit Servicing Activities 26
Space Resource Utilization 26
Space Tourism 26
US Allies and Partners 27
Business Alliances Impacting Small-Satellite Development 28
Standards and Coordination 28
  Standardization—International Standards Organization (ISO/TC 20/SC 14),
 Space systems and operations 28
Space Safety 29
Space Information Sharing and Analysis Center (Space ISAC) 30
Public and Private Coordination 30
Chapter 5: Findings and Recommendations 31
Key Findings 31
Key Recommendations 31
US Military, Government, and Civil Space 31
 Department of Defense and Intelligence Community 31
 Other US Government Actors 32
  Department of Homeland Security 32
  Department of Commerce 32
Commercial Space Actors 33
US Allies and Partners 33
Conclusion 34
About the Author 35
Acknowledgements 36

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
1
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
List of Acronyms
A2/AD—Anti-access/area-denial
AI—Artificial intelligence
ASAT—Anti-satellite
BRI—Belt and Road Initiative
CAGR—Compound annual growth rate
CCP—Chinese Communist Party
CONFERS—Consortium for Execution of Rendezvous and
Servicing Operations
COTS—Commercial off-the-shelf
DASD—Deputy assistant secretary of defense
DHS—US Department of Homeland Security
DoC—US Department of Commerce
DoD—US Department of Defense
DSR—Digital Silk Road
FAA—Federal Aviation Administration
FCC—Federal Communications Commission
GAO—Government Accountability Office
GEO—Geostationary Earth orbit
GPS—Global Positioning System
HBTSS—Hypersonic and Ballistic Tracking Space Sensor
IADC—Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee
IBS—Integrated Broadcast System
IC—US Intelligence Community
ISAC—Information Sharing and Analysis Center
ISO—International Standards Organization
ITU—International Telecommunication Union
JROC—Joint Requirements Oversight Council
LEO—Low-Earth orbit
LINCS—Laser Interconnect and Networking
Communication System
MDA—US Missile Defense Agency
MEV—Mission-Extension vehicle
ML—Machine learning
NASA—US National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NDSA—National Defense Space Architecture
OADR—Open-Architecture Data Repository
OCT—Optical communication terminals
ODNI—Office of the Director of National Intelligence
OISL—Optical Inter-Satellite Links
OPSEC—Operational security
OSAM—On-Orbit Servicing, Assembly, and Manufacturing
OSC—Office of Space Commerce
PDUSD—Principal deputy under secretary of defense
R&D—Research and development
RF—Radio frequency
SDA—US Space Development Agency
SSA—Space situational awareness
STM—Space traffic management
UN—United Nations
UNOOSA—United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Executive Summary
1 For decades, presidential policies directed the executive-branch agencies to buy commercial goods and services before developing government
solutions. Almost all of the government and industry experts interviewed for this study believe DoD and the IC ignore those mandates for commercial
space capabilities.
T
his report examines the relationship between what
is often called the commercial “small-satellite rev-
olution” and US national security. The relationship
is complex and has many dimensions, not the least
of which are organizational behavior, the government’s
lack of understanding of commercial markets, outdated
institutional processes, and a defense bureaucracy unwill-
ing or unable to adapt to the changing environment. It may
be worth noting that several of these same problem areas
brought about the catastrophe of September 11, 2001. This
is not to suggest a “Space Pearl Harbor” event is imminent.
However, the threat to space systems will increase propor-
tionately to the degradation of the United States’ ability to
maintain space superiority; that is, the ability to ensure safe
and secure access to, and in, space.
If the United States is to maintain space superiority, it will
need to make substantive cultural, doctrinal, and opera-
tional changes to its multidimensional relationship with the
commercial space industry. This is because, over the next
decade or so, commercial space activities will increase the
number of operational satellites by nearly a full order of
magnitude, mainly through the development of small sat-
ellites. With the growth in the number of satellites come
increased capabilities in remote sensing, communications,
data processing, and on-orbit operations. A new space
ecosystem is coming into being, with profound implications
for the world’s security and economic development. The
speed at which commercial space companies are putting
thousands—soon to be tens of thousands—of satellites
into orbit presents unique challenges for US security in
space, as well as for deployed armed forces. There will
be increased congestion in certain orbits, competition
for communications bandwidth, new types of space op-
erations, increased transparency, and a changing threat
paradigm. Competing in this changing environment will
require the United States to make substantial changes in
long-established defense acquisition processes, research
and investment strategies, data classification and distribu-
tion, and the commercial space regulatory environment.
Key Findings
This report explores the trends and technological develop-
ments defining the future of the space domain. In doing so,
it arrives at six key conclusions.
1. The United States will most likely lose space superiority
to China within the next decade.
2. The Department of Defense (DoD) and the Intelligence
Community (IC) are trying to take advantage of the
small-satellite revolution. The IC is increasingly invest-
ing in commercial small-satellite data, to increase col-
lection capabilities and provide military support.
3. The DoD does not generally take a “buy commercial
first” approach to space services. Rather, there is an
established culture that ignores legislated “commer-
cial first” mandates, and that behavior has become
increasingly detrimental to national security interests.
Over the last decade, this negative culture has eroded
US space superiority, and will continue to do so as the
world moves toward quickly developed and deployed,
low-cost commercial space systems.1
4. To date, no commercial small-satellite service has
proven itself viable without government support. Y et,
the growth of this industry will dramatically impact US
national security.
5. DoD acquisition processes are designed to reduce
risk and, as a result, are ill prepared for the high-speed
commercial space environment. Senior DoD leaders
are making efforts to speed up acquisition processes
for small satellites and associated technologies. The
results to date are mixed.
6. The US Department of Commerce (DoC) Office of
Space Commerce (OSC) has made little progress over
the last year in executing its responsibilities for Space
Traffic Management (STM) and on-orbit mission author-
ities. Being subordinate to the National Oceanographic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) does not allow
the office to function at the level required to effectively
execute its mission.
Key Recommendations
The following key recommendations address areas of US
space policy, the regulatory environment, coordination and
cooperation with US allies, and support for the commercial
space industry. These recommendations have the same

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
goals: to enhance global space security and advance the
US commercial space industry. Advancing the US commer-
cial space industry is a critical component of maintaining
global space leadership, and ensuring the safety and se-
curity of space systems and national security.
1. Congress and the administration must conduct rigorous
oversight to ensure DoD and IC organizations enforce
policies (including their own) to “buy commercial first.”
2. The secretary of commerce should move the DoC
Office of Space Commerce out from under NOAA.
OSC’s recently expanded responsibilities for STM and
on-orbit mission authorities make it a poor fit for an
entity focused on oceanographic and atmospheric ad-
ministration. Buried in NOAA, the OSC is also in a poor
position to conduct the required interagency and inter-
national coordination.
3. Increasing the resilience of various US space systems
necessitates that the DoD utilize commercial systems,
including proliferated satellite architectures and respon-
sive space-launch capabilities, at all levels of orbit and
across different payloads, and that it considers buying
data from allied and commercial providers.
4. Congress should direct the DoD and the Office of the
Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) to conduct a
study to identify national security missions that can be
accomplished through commercial space. Congress
should then earmark funds for those commercial
services. This action will force a transition to commercial
space services, ensure stable funding for commercial
small-satellite development, and drive space innovation
through competition.
5. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) should
conduct a study to determine if space systems should
be included as one of the national critical-infrastructure
sectors. If so, Congress should designate space sys-
tems as critical infrastructure with the Department of
Commerce as the Sector-Specific Agency.
6. The Department of State, DoD Office of Space Policy,
and Department of Commerce should enhance space
diplomatic efforts, with the goal of establishing global
norms of behavior in space.
Study Methodology
For this study, more than twenty-five interviews were con-
ducted with current and former senior government officials,
academics, and industry leaders. All had significant experi-
ence in the commercial space industry or national security
space. In fact, the collective knowledge reflected more than
two centuries of experience, far longer than the reality of
spaceflight. Some of these senior experts were critical of
the US government’s performance, and a few requested
anonymity. In addition, more than three dozen documents
were reviewed, including government policies, legislation,
space-industry studies, and financial and investment reports.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Chapter 1: Strategic Context
2 For the purposes of this paper, cislunar space is defined as the volume of space between geosynchronous Earth orbit (GEO) and the moon.
3 “Commercial Space Actors: Disruptors or Solid Partners for National Security,” NSI, February 2018, https://nsiteam.com/commercial-space-actors-
disruptors-or-solid-partners/.
4 Ibid.
5 John E. Bradford, “The Small Satellite Revolution: From University Missions to Constellations,” SpaceWorks presentation, September 2, 2021, 8.
6 “UCS Satellite Database,” Union of Concerned Scientists, last visited March 29, 2022, https://www.ucsusa.org/resources/satellite-database.
7 Ibid.
T
his report will begin by identifying the positive and
negative disruptions caused by the emergence of
commercial small satellites. The report will con-
sider commercial-market growth projections, po-
tential national security applications, and the threat posed
by hostile nations with access to the same technology.
Finally, it will offer policy recommendations and a brief
conclusion.
This report identifies the security and policy implications
arising from advancing technology such as artificial intel-
ligence (AI), and the increasing capabilities and commer-
cialization of small satellites. In recent years, new satellite
business models and capabilities have emerged. They are
still largely in the investment and development phase, with
significant players not yet generating substantial revenue.
Large constellations of commercial small satellites, tens or
hundreds of kilograms in size, are providing new global
imagery and communications services. Several companies
and government agencies plan to service on-orbit satel-
lites and remove orbital debris, a process with dual-use
concerns. Some companies have more audacious plans
to operate in the cislunar region of space and develop re-
sources on the moon.2 Expanded value-added applications
relying on advanced data analytics and machine learning
promise to exploit new layers of satellite data to provide
commercial space situational awareness (SSA) and insight
into the terrestrial economy.
It should be noted that, to date, no commercial small-satel-
lite company has proven itself commercially viable without
government support. That said, there is a widespread ex-
pectation among investors and institutions that commercial
small capabilities will continue to advance, and that com-
panies will expand their already considerable customer
base. Commercial small-satellite companies providing re-
mote sensing, communications, on-orbit servicing, and de-
bris mitigation are expected to dominate the space indus-
try in the decades to come.
Over the last two decades, advancements in aerospace
microelectronics and new business models of space
launch have allowed for the launch of tens of thousands
of shoebox and larger-sized satellites, which complement
or replace the more traditional bus-sized, billion-dollar sat-
ellites. Commercial space systems have evolved to show
strong growth potential based on changing demograph-
ics and new technology drivers. These disruptive changes
have positive and negative implications for US national
security. A recent DoD Strategic Multilayer Assessment
defined disruptors as actors “whose behaviors and inno-
vations trigger broad change in a system.” 3 A commer-
cial space disruptor, therefore, is a business practice or
“technology that significantly alters (for good or for bad)
the ability of the United States to achieve its national se-
curity space objectives.”4 The small-satellite revolution has
brought with it multiple challenges and opportunities for
national security.
Background
Key Actors, Drivers, and Growth Trends
The commercial space small-satellite revolution changes
the relationship between the US government and com-
mercial space actors. One could argue that the nature of
an emerging commercial space sector is disruptive and,
therefore, threatens US hegemony in space activity and
technology.
A key component of the small-satellite revolution is
the sheer number of satellites slated to be launched in
the coming years relative to earlier in the space age.
Commercial space companies propose placing more than
twenty thousand satellites in orbit in the next ten years. Up
until 2020, approximately eleven thousand payloads had
been placed in orbit in the entire history of the space age.5
As of 2021, there are more than 7,389 satellites in orbit,
with 4,084 operational and 3,305 inactive.6 From 2020 to
2021, the number of active satellites has already increased
by 27.9 percent. 7 If just half of those commercial space
proposals are successful, the space traffic created would
more than double the number of satellites deployed over
the last sixty years, and create more than six times the
number of active satellites. Small satellites represent 75

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
percent of spacecraft launched from 2011 to 2020, and 94
percent of spacecraft launched in 2020.8
The increased number of commercial satellites will present
extraordinary challenges in SSA, space traffic management
(STM), and threat detection, identification, and character-
ization. New national and commercial space-based com-
munications, Internet, and remote-sensing capabilities will
increase global transparency, presenting new challenges
for US, allied, and partner forces to maintain operational
security (OPSEC). Most countries can meet significant
military support requirements with small satellites. As of
2021, eighty-eight countries are operating satellites, and
forty countries have some space-based remote-sensing
capabilities.9
New technologies, capabilities, and requirements are fu-
eling this growth in the development of commercial space
small satellites. These include the following:
8 “SmallSats by the Numbers,” BryceTech, 2021, 5, https://brycetech.com/reports/report-documents/Bryce_Smallsats_2021.pdf.
9 “Licensing of Private Remote Sensing Space Systems,” Federal Register, May 20, 2020, https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2020/05/20/2020-10703/licensing-of-private-remote-sensing-space-systems.
● Ground-based economic drivers for small satellites
◦ Autonomous vehicles
◦ Precision agriculture
◦ Global Internet penetration and the Internet of
Things
◦ Growth of the global middle class
◦ Infrastructure and environmental management
● Space-related technologies as market drivers
◦ Decreasing launch costs
◦ Mass production of satellites, reduction
of satellite size and cost (miniaturization
technology)
◦ On-orbit processing power
◦ Artificial intelligence
A view of the BIRDS-2 Satellite Deployment during JSSOD-9 operations. The JEM Small Satellite Orbital Deployer (J-SSOD) provides
a novel, safe, small satellite launching capability to the International Space Station (ISS). Source: Serena Aunon-Chancellor, NASA,
August 10, 2018, https://images.nasa.gov/details-iss056e130478.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
The organizational advantages and capacity for innovation
inherent in the commercial sector ensure that it is private
companies that will become dominant across space activ-
ities and technology in the medium to long term. The US
government’s response to such a shift will determine the
extent to which US space security interests are compro-
mised or furthered. Partnering with commercial actors in
the development of small-satellite capabilities would ben-
efit US national security interests.
Unlike European countries and China, the United States
does not have a successful history of promoting govern-
ment-industry sharing and co-development programs. The
United States is comparatively less active in conducting
10 Adam Mann, “Starlink: SpaceX’s Satellite Internet Project,” Space.com, May 28, 2021, https://www.space.com/spacex-starlink-satellites.html.
strategic planning to ensure the success of its commercial
space industry.
While the commercial small-satellite industry is growing at
an astonishing pace, there is also reason to be cautious.
Many startup companies are struggling and, already, a pe-
riod of consolidation appears to be beginning. It is difficult
to determine if there is a substantial market for proposed
services such as space-debris removal. Even if a market
exists, it is unclear who (government or industry) would pay
for those services and how much they would pay. SpaceX
has launched more than sixteen hundred Starlink low-Earth
orbit (LEO) communications satellites, with plans to launch
up to forty-two thousand. 10 The company will operate at
The Key Commercial Small-Satellite Players.*
0–50 kilogram (kg) 50–250 kg 250–1,000 kg
Planet Planet SpaceX
Capella Space OneWeb Iridium
Aerial Maritime Earth i UrtheCast (In bankruptcy)
Hawkeye 360 Iceye SpaceBelt
SpaceQuest Axelspace Globalstar
Satellogic Guowang (National Network) Kuiper Systems (Amazon)
Spire
Astro Digital
Astrocast
*“The Small Satellite Revolution,” 8.
Functions of Satellites in Orbit.*
Number of Satellites Main Purpose
1,832 satellites Communications
906 satellites Earth observation
350 satellites Technology development and demonstration
150 satellites Navigation and positioning
104 satellites Space science and observation
20 satellites Earth science
10 satellites Other
* Nibedita Mohanta, “How Many Satellites are Orbiting the Earth in 2021?” Geospatial World, May 28, 2021, https://www.geospatialworld.net/blogs/how-many-
satellites-are-orbiting-the-earth-in-2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
a loss for years until it builds a market large enough to
support the required launch, space, and ground-based in-
frastructure and operations.
Commercial Space Development: Technology
Drivers
Commercial innovation in space launch is one of three sig-
nificant factors driving the small-satellite revolution. The
others are miniaturization of technology and increasing
computer processing power. Over the last decade, the cost
of launching a kilogram of mass to LEO has decreased by
90 percent.11 SpaceX reduced satellite launch costs from
approximately $200 million (at United Launch Alliance) to
approximately $60 million. SpaceX aims to reduce these
launch costs to about $5 million.12 As the cost of launch is
reduced, many more space missions become profitable.
Advances in several key technology categories are chang-
ing the cost-benefit analysis of the commercial and na-
tional security business case to employ small satellites.
● Mass Production of Satellites: The cost of creating a
satellite could be reduced from its current cost, which
is in the tens of millions of dollars, by approximately
10 percent through integrating mass production, ac-
cording to OneWeb (a proposed network of up to
nine hundred satellites providing Internet services).13
Production time could then be reduced from years to
a single day.14 Advancing miniaturization technology
will continue to reduce satellite size and cost.
● Processing Power: Planet, an Earth-imaging satel-
lite company, recently launched eighty-eight “Dove”
CubeSat satellites, each about the size of a shoebox.15
● Time to Market: Production time is significantly
lower for small-satellite manufacturers. According to
Planet’s website, “the most advanced satellites [are]
launching into orbit every 3-4 months,” compared
to years between viaSat 1 and viaSat 2. 16 (In 2012,
11 Noah Poponak, “Episode 64: Space—The Next Investment Frontier,” Goldman Sachs, May 22, 2017, https://www.goldmansachs.com/insights/podcasts/
episodes/05-22-2017-noah-poponak.html. Poponak is the senior aerospace and defense equity research analyst for Goldman Sachs Research.
12 “Space: Investing in the Final Frontier,” Morgan Stanley, July 24, 2020, https://www.morganstanley.com/ideas/investing-in-space.
13 “About Us,” OneWeb, 2021, https://onewebsatellites.com/about-us/.
14 Ibid.
15 Robbie Schingler, “Planet Launches Satellite Constellation to Image the Whole Planet Daily,” Planet Labs, February 14, 2017, https://www.planet.com/pulse/
planet-launches-satellite-constellation-to-image-the-whole-planet-daily/.
16 “Monitoring the World with Microsatellites and Open Source Data,” Next Big Future, June 22, 2017, https://www.nextbigfuture.com/2017/06/monitoring-
the-world-with-microsatellites-and-open-source-data.html.
17 Applies to all figures in paragraph. “Startup Space: Update on Investment in Commercial Space,” BryceTech, 2021, https://brycetech.com/reports/report-
documents/Bryce_Start_Up_Space_2020.pdf.
18 Online interview with Dr. Brian Weeden, director of program planning, Secure World Foundation, August 24, 2021.
19 “Space: Investing in the Final Frontier,” Morgan Stanley, November 13, 2017, https://www.morganstanley.com/ideas/investing-in-space.
20 “To Infinity and Beyond—Global Space Primer,” Bank of America and Merrill Lynch, October 30, 2017, 1, https://newspaceglobal.com/wp-content/uploads/
imce/u3479/MerrillLynchSpace-Oct2017.pdf.
viaSat-1 was a record holder for highest-capacity Ka-
band satellite in the world, providing broadband cov-
erage to the continental United States.)
Commercial Small-Satellite Growth Trends
Overall, the entire commercial space sector has grown sig-
nificantly in recent years. Startup space companies gar-
nered 1,212 investments between 2000 and 2020. In the
year 2020 alone, three hundred and forty-two companies
and individuals invested in one hundred and twenty-four
startup space companies in more than one hundred and
forty business deals. Total investments in 2020 amounted
to $7.6 billion. New investors continue to enter the ecosys-
tem. Among two hundred and eleven first-time investors
in 2020, one hundred and seventeen were venture-capi-
tal firms, twenty-nine were angel investors, and thirty-eight
were corporations. Investors from the United States ac-
counted for 36 percent of all investors in 2020.17 It should
be noted that not all investors care about advancing the
small-satellite industry. Part of the planning cycle for many
investors in small-satellite startup companies is a prof-
it-bearing exit strategy.18
The global commercial space market is valued annually
at $349 billion. In 2018, Morgan Stanley predicted that
the space industry would triple in size by 2040. Morgan
Stanley’s research identified ninety private companies as
being on “the forefront of space disruption.”19 Launch and
satellite-manufacturing companies make up 39 percent of
Morgan Stanley’s list of the private space economy, by far
the largest segment. In another study, Bank of America
and Merrill Lynch projected that the global space industry
would reach a value of at least $2.7 trillion in the next three
decades (that is, by 2050).20
Demographics, Consumer Markets, and Small
Satellites
Global demographic changes expected over the next de-
cade are creating a large market for small-satellite services,

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Source: John E. Bradford, Ph.D. President & Chief Technical Officer, SpaceWorks Enterprises, Inc., DragonCon Presentation on September 3, 2021, Atlanta,
Georgia.
Satellite Applications (1–100 kg)
52%
5%
32%
11%
Historical
(2013 – 2017)
Technology
EO/RS
Communications
Scientific
51%
21%
15%
10%
3%
Future
(2018 – 2020s)
Technology
EO/RS
Communications
Scientific
Novel
Applications
Earth Observation and Remote Sensing continue to dominate the market, driven primarily by
growth of large commercial constellations.
47%
32%
7%
13%
1%
37%
30%
14%
16%
3%
Future
(2018 – 2020s)
Technology
EO/RS
Communications
Scientific
Navigation
Historical
(2013 – 2017)
Technology
EO/RS
Communications
Scientific
Navigation
Satellite Applications (101–500 kg)
Figure 2
Figure 1

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
including mobile and broadband communications, enter-
tainment, and remote sensing. According to the European
Commission, by 2030:
The global middle class is expected to reach 5.3
billion people. This means an additional 2 billion
people with more purchasing power than the earth
contains today. Most of this growth will be in Asia.
By 2030, China and India together will represent
66% of the global middle-class population and 59%
of middle-class consumption.21
With the rise of the global middle class, Morgan Stanley ex-
pects demands for space-based and associated services
to increase significantly.
We estimate that the ~$350b Global Space Industry
will grow to a $1.1t+ Global Space Economy by
2040. Our Bull Case of ~$1.75t (+400 bps v. Global
GDP) assumes global internet penetration goes to
100% by 2040, while our Bear Case of ~$600b (-60
bps v. Global GDP) assumes that the new satellite
networks fail.22
21 “Growing Consumption,” European Commission, last visited March 29, 2022, https://knowledge4policy.ec.europa.eu/growing-consumerism_en.
22 “Investment Implications of the Final Frontier,” Morgan Stanley, October 12, 2017, https://www.fullertreacymoney.com/system/data/files/PDFs/2017/
October/20th/msspace.pdf.
The services feeding into the global space economy are
consumer television, consumer broadband, mobile satel-
lite services, remote-sensing services, ground equipment,
satellite manufacturing, and space-launch services. In time,
other services, such as on-orbit satellite servicing and
lunar/asteroid mining, may increase the above numbers.
The overall growth of small-satellite services will increase
over the coming decade. However, there will be a shift
in the applications of these spacecraft and the types of
services provided. Figure 1 illustrates a shift primarily in
scientific and communications satellites in the 1–100-kg
class. Earth observation and remote sensing will continue
to dominate the market, driven primarily by the growth of
large commercial constellations.
In the larger (101–500-kg) classes of satellites, there will
be an increase in technology demonstrators and scientific
applications. The changes depicted in Figure 2 reflect per-
centage changes of the thousands of small communica-
tions satellites in orbit, and hundreds of remote-sensing
and Earth-observation satellites.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Chapter 2: The National Security Impact of
the Small-Satellite Revolution
23 Telephone interview with Douglas Loverro, former deputy assistant secretary of defense for space, July 7, 2021.
Small Satellites as Disruptors
Positive Disruptions of Small Satellites
Small satellites are a disruptive technology. Disruptions
can be positive or negative within any industry, including
national security. As a positive disruptor, small satellites
allow the government to field numerous capabilities, such
as communications and remote sensing, at significantly re-
duced costs. The average production and launch costs for
small satellites are up to 90 percent lower than those of
larger satellites. Because production and per-unit launch
costs for small satellites are significantly lower than for
larger satellites, on-orbit systems can be replaced as more
advanced technology becomes available. This technology
refresh rate (as quick as twenty-four months, compared to
ten years for more traditional satellites) allows increased
capabilities to be fielded at minimal cost and risk.
Another benefit of small-satellite disruption is resilience
of space-based assets. Constellations of hundreds of sat-
ellites change the targeting dynamics for US and foreign
counterspace capabilities. It is easier for a foreign anti-
satellite (ASAT) capability to attack one large target than
hundreds of smaller ones. This shift in the operational envi-
ronment could obviate China’s and Russia’s investments in
kinetic anti-satellite systems.23 A LEO constellation can suf-
fer the loss of one satellite, or even multiple satellites, and
still maintain a degraded capability. Additionally, because
those satellites are inexpensive to produce and launch,
they can quickly be replaced.
The increase in numbers of inexpensive small satellites is
a form of resilience, reducing the effectiveness of foreign
direct-ascent anti-satellite and co-orbital satellite capabil-
ities. This resilience is effective whether hostile counter-
space systems are obstructive, kinetic, or space-based
communications downlink jamming. Resilience will be
even stronger if laser communications are employed in
small-satellite constellations, with the benefits of both
eliminating unintentional radiofrequency interference and
denying foreign jamming and communications-signal in-
terception. The use of small satellites will likely force hos-
tile actors to shift tactics to cyberattacks and ground- or
space-based directed energy. Even directed-energy coun-
terspace systems will have limited effectiveness, given the
numbers of small satellites. While adversaries are sure to
change tactics to continue to target orbital assets, mini-
mizing the kinetic threat will allow concentration of invest-
ment in defenses and make adversaries more vulnerable
to counterforce attacks on their remaining offensive ASAT
capabilities.
Another dimension of commercial small satellites that com-
plicates decision-making and national security planning for
space powers is the fact that these systems are nongov-
ernmental by nature. They support a wide range of globally
dispersed customers. Attacks against a commercial com-
pany complicate the decision tree for adversaries, partic-
ularly in times of peace or pre-crisis. There is little public
justification to support attacking a commercial interest in
the absence of outright hostilities.
Commercial small satellites offer the US national security
apparatus cost-effective capabilities, to include commu-
nications and remote sensing. The DoD already uses a
large amount of commercial communications, and most
operational military remote-sensing requirements can be
satisfied by commercial capabilities. Other commercially
provided services could include position, navigation, and
timing (using commercial space communications) and
on-orbit servicing. Over the next decade, the US govern-
ment’s role as a primary consumer for many of these ser-
vices will be reduced as global use rises. The presence
of ubiquitous sensors and communications capabilities on
small satellites will reduce costs to the government.
Another positive disruption of small satellites for the
Department of Defense is the potential to have secondary
payloads added to US or (potentially) allied commercial
spacecraft. Secondary payloads could provide unwarned
sensors to defeat foreign satellite-warning programs and
characterize spacecraft. Small commercial remote-sensing
satellites could even be employed to conduct space sit-
uational awareness by adding additional sensors and/or
changing orientation to look away from Earth.
Negative Disruptions of Small Satellites
Commercial small satellites, new miniaturized technol-
ogies, and the dropping of launch costs offer significant
positive contributions to US national security. However, the
reverse is also true. As other countries employ and exploit
commercial small-satellite capabilities, they can present

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
11
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
significant challenges to US security in space. Small sat-
ellites can be used as undetected weapons or reconnais-
sance platforms.
Space technology has become dual use, given the ex-
panded set of small-satellite missions. Any satellite could
be used as a weapon. This is because satellites must attain
a minimum speed of 17,500 miles per hour (mph) to main-
tain orbit. At that speed, even a small object, such as a bolt,
could destroy a spacecraft if the two collided.
No domestic or international entity can globally regulate
commercial small-satellite technology. Only on-orbit ac-
tions can be regulated, and that has proven extremely dif-
ficult for the international community. This situation leaves
significant challenges for the security of US and allied
space systems, not the least of which will be detecting,
tracking, and characterizing uncontrolled or hostile small
satellites and other objects.24
The increasing trend of small-satellite (CubeSat) launches
failing in early orbit creates a problem of failed identifica-
24 With this increased threat to space systems, diplomatic practices to establish on-orbit behavior are increasingly important.
25 CubeSats are small satellites built around a 10-centimeter (cm) building block (i.e., a one-unit or “1U” CubeSat is 10 cm x 10 cm x 10 cm; a 2U is 20 cm x 10
cm x 10 cm, etc.).
26 Artificial intelligence will be critically needed to correlate and analyze massive data pools, such as satellite ephemeris data, remote sensing, SSA,
positioning, and telemetry.
tion.25 These are typically made by universities or amateur
groups.
As more CubeSats are launched, and the number of
CubeSats contained within a launch cluster increase, more
CubeSats will be “dead on arrival.” Unidentified CubeSats
are nearly impossible to track back to their orbital insertion
point, due to the thousands of possible orbital perturba-
tions. Unidentified spacecraft violate guidelines and best
practices at the US and international levels, adding to the
volume of uncontrolled space debris in orbit.
Even when CubeSats are in their correct orbits, they can
present a threat to US space systems. CubeSats could
serve as a covert foreign collection platform, or could inter-
fere with space systems. Because these spacecraft are so
small, characterizing their onboard capabilities and inde-
pendently determining their missions is nearly impossible.
One can assume some capabilities and missions based
on the observed pattern of life (mid-to-long-term behavior)
of the satellite, but doing this with thousands of potential
threats would be an overwhelming task.26
A batch of 60 Starlink test satellites stacked atop a Falcon 9 rocket to be put in orbit. Source: SpaceX, Wikimedia Commons, May 24,
2019, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Starlink_Mission_(47926144123).jpg

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
12
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Detecting, identifying, tracking, and characterizing small
satellites will be equally challenging. There is currently lit-
tle in the way of a rules-based global system that ensures
countries will provide information to each other about sat-
ellite capabilities and intent. Satellite service providers are
required to register communications capabilities with the
International Telecommunications Union (ITU). However,
there is no way to verify statements about the capabilities
and intent of foreign small satellites. This situation presents
a daunting challenge, due to the tens of thousands of small
satellites that will be deployed over the next decade. Even
if a global requirement to declare all capabilities and intent
existed, there is no way to validate the claims.
Another negative disruption that presents challenges for
US security in space is widespread cybersecurity vulner-
abilities. Space and other mission systems are usually
complex, requiring “serious attention to be paid to their
people, organizational processes, and technologies—three
interdependent elements.”27 Cybersecurity on space sys-
tems will present a large challenge for US commercial and
national security planners. The use of tens of thousands of
small satellites connected to global communications and
27 Simon Handler, et al., Mission Resilience: Adapting Defense Aerospace to Evolving Cybersecurity Challenges, Atlantic Council, May 12, 2021, 2, https://
www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/mission-resilience-adapting-defense-aerospace-to-evolving-cybersecurity-challenges/.
data will exponentially increase the cyberattack surface
area. Space systems are becoming an increasingly large
sector in the US and global economy and global cyber
infrastructure. This increasing attack surface area will pres-
ent two specific challenges: to secure use of commercial
capabilities for national security, and to protect commercial
satellite systems as an element of US critical infrastructure.
The US government will have national security consider-
ations in the use of commercial small satellites, as they
present expansive targets for cyber exploitation. First,
small-satellite communications architectures are complex,
offering numerous opportunities for malicious attacks. The
communications link between a ground station and a sat-
ellite consists of a wireless link between the satellite and
ground station. The link must be encrypted and command
authentication in place to prevent hostile takeover of the
satellite.
The ground station is connected to a control center, which
might be a local link or a link traversing the Internet. The
control center itself will likely consist of industry-stan-
dard commercially available servers, and those will be
US Space Command’s recent Global Lightning exercise tested multi-domain space capabilities at the command’s joint operations
center. Source: Lewis Carlyle, US Space Command, April 2021, https://www.spacecom.mil/MEDIA/IMAGERY/igphoto/2002613932/.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
13
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
connected to each other via a switch. Their entry point to
the Internet is a router with a firewall. The firewall itself may
be based on dedicated hardware, or it can be a commer-
cial off-the-shelf (COTS) server with special-purpose soft-
ware for routing and firewall functions. While the switches
are not very vulnerable to attacks, the COTS computer in-
frastructure is. Attacks against industry-standard servers
have proven successful, both against the server and its
operating system, and against its baseboard management
controller. Attacks against the baseboard management
controller can be used to permanently alter the firmware of
the server, thereby making the attack persistent and nearly
undetectable. In either case, it is possible to take control
of the server—and, by doing that, it is possible to issue
malicious commands to the satellite. If the link between
the ground station and the control center is not secured
via a virtual private network, then attacks could be as sim-
ple as monitoring the traffic and injecting commands. That
is easily done via a switch with port-replication features.
Oftentimes, the control center allows for remote-control
centers to connect and, as such, the remote-control cen-
ters and their links must be protected as well.28
There are a plethora of viable attack scenarios, depending
on which part of the infrastructure is protected. To ensure
safe operation, the following infrastructure must be se-
cured and protected, including:
● ground-station/satellite link;
● control-center/ground-station link;
● control-center server infrastructure;
● control-center link to other remote-control
centers; and
● remote-control centers.29
Second, defending against cyberattacks is closely tied to
supply-chain security as an issue for commercial satellites.
Cost is always a consideration for commercial spacecraft
providers. The supply chain for commercial small satellites
is already global, exposing a potential vulnerability to cyber
intrusions and physical sabotage. This situation is not likely
to change, as companies need to find the best product at
the cheapest cost, regardless of origin. This rule applies
to software development as well. This paradigm presents
a security problem for the commercial space providers, as
well as the US government relying on them.
While national security priorities and “buy American” laws
ensure that the vast majority of the development and
28 Discussions and email exchanges with Axel K. Kloth, president and chief executive officer, Abacus Semiconductor Corporation, multiple occasions August
through September 2021.
29 Ibid.
production of defense systems occurs in the United States,
the same is obviously not true for the production of com-
mercial small satellites. The US government will have to
employ some level of production and security standards
for companies accepting the government as a customer.
However, in the case of identifying and managing sup-
ply-chain security, this process will be difficult and costly.
Primary manufacturers are often unaware of third- and
fourth-tier partners, and electronic subcomponent produc-
tion has largely migrated to China. Depending on how ro-
bust the commercial market becomes, there may be little
incentive to acquiesce to government supply-chain security
standards.
Cybersecurity standards, supply chain, and risk manage-
ment will allow the DoD to work more easily with the pri-
vate sector. However, the United States must not approach
cybersecurity of commercial space systems in a wholly
defensive posture. It will be necessary to develop robust
cyberattack capabilities and declarative policies to deter
hostile state cyber actors. It must be clear to hostile states
that an attack against US satellite systems (commercial or
government) will be met with a proportionate response.
Commercial remote-sensing small-satellite constellations
will present numerous challenges to US national security.
Perhaps one of the greatest challenges will not be in space,
but for US air, ground, and sea forces. As global transpar-
ency increases, so does the risk to operating military forces.
US forces are unlikely to retain the information superiority
on which they have come to rely over the last several de-
cades. Adversarial countries and other hostile actors will
leverage near-real-time space-based remote sensing, in-
creasing their own security and putting US forces at risk.
Near-real-time remote sensing—combined with global
ground sensors, tracking of personal communications de-
vices, and DoD integration into the Internet of Things—will
present extraordinary risks to deployed special operations
and regular forces. The armed services will need to change
operating tactics to fully incorporate OPSEC.
Civil-military coordination is going to become critical to
the protection and resilience of commercial space sys-
tems. There are ongoing efforts by DHS and the private
sector to ensure the cybersecurity of critical infrastructure.
These efforts include the Barack Obama administration’s
Presidential Policy Directive 41, the Cybersecurity National
Action Plan, the 2013 Executive Order (EO) Improving Critical
Infrastructure Cybersecurity, the Donald Trump administra-
tion’s EO 13800 Strengthening the Cybersecurity of Federal
Networks and Critical Infrastructure, the Cybersecurity

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
14
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Information Sharing Act, and numerous Sector-Specific
Plans for critical-infrastructure threat-sharing programs.
More civil-military coordination will be necessary as small
satellites become a bigger part of the US economy, defense,
and critical infrastructure. This coordination will ensure
cyber and supply-chain security standards are uniform (or at
least understood), and that risk management is coordinated
between interlocking critical-infrastructure systems.
Adversarial Capabilities
General David Thompson, the Space Force’s vice chief
of space operations, has stated that the Space Force re-
sponds to “reversible attacks” on US government satellites
“every single day.” Thompson further opined that China
would surpass the United States as the world’s global
space power by the end of the decade.30 This report con-
curs with that assessment.
Any foreign small-satellite service, whether government
owned or commercial, could put secondary payloads on
its satellites to collect against or destroy US systems. For
example, on July 15, 2020, Russia demonstrated anti-sat-
ellite capabilities by detaching a small subject from its sat-
ellite Cosmos 2543 to trail a US National Reconnaissance
Office satellite.31 Russian satellites conducted similar tests
in 2017. These actions threaten US satellites because they
can characterize capabilities, interfere with operations, or
even destroy the US satellites.
Determining capabilities on foreign small satellites would
require exquisite intelligence collection and characteriza-
tion capabilities, which are difficult now and will be much
more so when the numbers of potential threats exponen-
tially increase. The difficulty in determining satellite capa-
bilities was noted as recently as November 2021. The US
Space Force reported China’s Shijian 21 in elliptical geo-
stationary transfer orbit as high as 35,813 kilometers above
Earth, with an inclination of 28.5 degrees to the equator.32
On November 3, a new object with the international des-
ignator 2021-094C was cataloged alongside Shijian (SJ)-21
by Space Force’s 18th Space Control Squadron. The object
30 Josh Rogin, “A Shadow War in Space is Heating up Fast,” Washington Post, November 30, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2021/11/30/
space-race-china-david-thompson/.
31 Caleb Larson, “Space Wars: Meet Russia’s New Anti-Satellite Satellites,” National Interest, July 27, 2020, https://nationalinterest.org/blog/buzz/space-
wars-meet-russia%E2%80%99s-new-anti-satellite-satellites-yes-real-165662; “Russia Conducts Space-Based Anti-Satellite Weapons Test,” US Space
Command Public Affairs, July 23, 2020, https://www.spacecom.mil/MEDIA/NEWS-ARTICLES/Article/2285098/russia-conducts-space-based-anti-satellite-
weapons-test/.
32 “Shijian-21 Satellite Mission,” European Space Agency Earth Observation Portal, 2022, https://directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/s/
shijian-21.
33 Andrew Jones, “An Object Is Now Orbiting Alongside China’s Shijian-21 Debris Mitigation Satellite,” Space News, November 5, 2021, https://spacenews.
com/an-object-is-now-orbiting-alongside-chinas-shijian-21-debris-mitigation-satellite/.
34 Paul Seaburn, “Mystery Object Detected Flying Near Chinese Satellite,” Mysterious Universe, November 7, 2021, https://mysteriousuniverse.org/2021/11/
mystery-object-detected-flying-near-chinese-satellite/.
35 “China’s National Defense in the New Era,” PRC Ministry of Defense, July 24, 2019, http://eng.mod.gov.cn/publications/2019-07/24/content_4846452.htm.
36 Jiang Hui, “The Spatial Information Corridor Contributes to UNISPACE+50,” International Cooperation Department, China National Space Agency, 2018,
https://www.unoosa.org/documents/pdf/copuos/stsc/2018/tech-08E.pdf.
was believed to be an apogee kick motor (AKM) used to
modify its transfer orbit to enter geostationary orbit.
Uncharacteristically, SJ-21 and the AKM flew alongside
each other, which was unusual for a discharged AKM.
Based on the synchronized orbits, the unidentified object
was suspected to be conducting counterspace operational
testing, to include rendezvous and proximity operations or
manipulation using SJ-21’s robotic arm. 33 If the AKM had
performed maneuvers, it would not be the first time China
deployed a small satellite that flew in formation with its
larger host. The Tongxin Jishu Shiyan-3 (TJS-3) satellite
released a payload in 2018 that performed coordinated
maneuvers (perhaps an attempt to confuse space-track -
ing networks).34 In January 2022, the SJ-21 maneuvered
to capture a defunct Chinese satellite (Compass G2) and
towed it to a higher (graveyard) orbit. The SJ-21 then re-
turned to its original geosynchronous orbit.
China’s National Defense in the New Era report stated in
2019 that “outer space is a critical domain in international
strategic competition.” 35 The Chinese Communist Party
(CCP) incorporated its plans for space development in its
foreign and economic policies. For example, the flagship
Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) is a trillion-dollar global in-
frastructure-development program engaging one hundred
and thirty-eight countries. This program is generally con-
sidered the largest of its kind in history.
One component of China’s BRI is the Space Information
Corridor. In addition to supporting all the companies China
has in the BRI, the Space Information Corridor provides
remote sensing, communications, and position, navigation,
and timing data to all nations. 36 The Space Information
Corridor almost certainly supports the newly established
Belt and Road National Security Intelligence System, which
is China’s Ministry of Public Security using private security
companies to provide force-protection information relative
to the global BRI infrastructure.
In 2015, Beijing launched the Digital Silk Road (DSR) as
an integrated part of the BRI and the Space Information

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
15
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Corridor. Chinese telecommunications companies (Huawei,
ZTE, Hikvision, etc.) develop the DSR, which supports BRI
companies operating overseas. The DSR develops coun-
tries’ “telecommunications networks, artificial intelligence
capabilities, cloud computing, e-commerce and mobile
payment systems, surveillance technology, and smart cit-
ies.”37 Some reports assess one third of BRI participants
have contracts for DSR support. 38 Press reports over the
years identified instances in which collected data through
the DSR have been sent to China. China’s cybersecurity
law requires Chinese companies to store all data in the
People’s Republic of China. China’s National Intelligence
Law mandates that Chinese companies assist the govern-
ment when requested.
The BRI includes other space-related initiatives, includ-
ing university collaborations and engineering education
throughout the emerging world. Through BRI, DSR, and
the Space Information Corridor, China has effectively
integrated its space programs, intelligence collection,
economy, and foreign policy. This is being achieved
throughout emerging economies globally by weaving
37 Joshua Kurlantzick and James West, “Assessing China’s Digital Silk Road Initiative: A Transformative Approach to Technology Financing or a Danger to
Freedoms?” Council on Foreign Relations, https://www.cfr.org/china-digital-silk-road/.
38 Ibid.
space capabilities and digital infrastructure into China’s
global strategy for economic growth and development.
If participation continues to grow as expected, China will
democratize space for the world. In so doing, it will also
dominate space information globally.
Adversarial governments are likely to leverage commer-
cial small satellites for military and intelligence purposes.
This threat is difficult to assess, because there is so little
information in the public domain and competitor commer-
cial small-satellite networks are not yet fully deployed. It
is likely that the threat to US space systems will increase
based on:
● Russia’s use of small satellites to surveil US recon-
naissance platforms;
● China’s on-orbit proximity operations (testing); and
● China’s Academy of Military Science writings on the
use of national security space, along with similar
publications like the 2019 Defense White Paper and
Space Science & Technology Plan 2050.
Source: Shinobi Enterprises, LLC 2021, based off information from Jiang Hui, Director of International Cooperation, China National Space Administration,
Presentation to the United Nations Committee for Peace Use of Outer Space.
China’s Space Information Corridor OV-1
Ground Application Layer Cloud
Space Application Layer
Communications Layer
“One Belt & One Road”
Satellite Data Center Platform
Remote Sensing Yaofan, Gaofen, etc.
Stations
Beidou
PNT Solar Power
(Future)
Guo Wang Starnet Constellation
Ultra-Large Capacity Broadband
Multimedia Communication
Broadcasting Satellite
Tianlian Broadband Relay
Composite Communication
Satellite
L-Band Mobile
Communication
Satellite
Distributed Ground SystemDistributed Ground SystemDistributed Ground System
BRI programs — transportation, railway, port, petroleum,
telecommunications, BRI national intelligence program,
ground stations, safe policing, safe cities program
telemedicine, tele-education, peacemaking, disaster mitigation
and emergency response, entertainment wearable devices,
mobile communications, transportation, military uses
BRI — 65 Countries Pay
PRC Investments
Copyright © Shinobi Enterprises, LLC 2021
Figure 3

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
16
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Chapter 3: The DoD and IC Response to
Commercial Small-Satellite Advancements
39 Sandra Erwin, “Space Development Agency lays out five-year plan in $11 billion proposed budget,” Space News, October 6, 2019, https://spacenews.com/
space-development-agency-lays-out-five-year-plan-in-11-billion-proposed-budget/; Telephone interview with Dr. Derek Tournier, director SDA.
40 General John E. Hyten, former vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has, on several occasions, publicly commented on the unacceptably slow
processes of the JROC and is attempting to accelerate processes. Sandra Erwin, “Hyten Blasts ‘Unbelievably’ Slow DoD Bureaucracy as China Advances
Space Weapons,” Space News, October 28, 2021, https://spacenews.com/hyten-blasts-unbelievably-slow-dod-bureaucracy-as-china-advances-space-
weapons/.
41 Ka-band services use the 26.5–40-gigahertz (GHz) segment of the electromagnetic spectrum.
42 Email exchange with SDA, September 20, 2021.
F
or more than a decade, the Defense Department
and Intelligence Community were oblivious to the
dynamic changes emerging in commercial space. In
recent years, the defense establishment has been
moving to take advantage of the capabilities offered by
small commercial satellites in large constellations. Less at-
tention has been paid to countering the growing threat from
large numbers of foreign commercial small satellites and
their collection capabilities. The challenge is complex and
requires changes to national policies, acquisition process-
es, operational doctrine, and international relationships.
US Department of Defense
There are two organizations in the Department of Defense
leading efforts to take advantage of the small-satellite rev-
olution: the Space Development Agency (SDA) and US
Space Force. Each has a role in developing, integrating,
and making operational use of commercial space capabil-
ities and services.
Space Development Agency
The SDA is moving to develop an integrated, distributed
space architecture of small satellites. This architectural
concept seeks to integrate layers of newly developed LEO
small-satellite constellations to provide operational sup-
port to warfighters. The SDA is developing small-satellite
constellations to populate what it calls the National De-
fense Space Architecture (NDSA). The SDA envisions that
the NDSA will be a single, integrated, proliferated space
architecture with seven layers: Transport (Communica-
tions), Tracking, Custody, Battle Management, Navigation,
Deterrence, and Support.
The NDSA integrates these layers of newly developed LEO
small-satellite constellations to provide operational support
to warfighters. This type of support is distinguished from
strategic-level capabilities provided by a variety of national
systems. The SDA has started developing small satellites
and payloads in what it hopes to be two-year cycles, using
commercially available technology as much as possible.39
The NDSA will attempt to integrate capabilities in a mesh
network comprising seven capability layers. The completion
of a high-bandwidth, low-latency constellation is necessary
to achieve the critical priorities for military operations sup-
port identified by the Joint Requirements Oversight Council
(JROC). However, the JROC process can take months, or
even years, thereby ensuring the most immediate and evolv-
ing warfighter requirements will not be met.40 Theoretically,
if the refresh rate on NDSA small satellites is adequate and
maintained, it will be possible to update capabilities on a bi-
annual basis. In numerous telephone interviews conducted
with DoD space officials, former senior leadership, and pri-
vate industry, the JROC process was identified as a major
stumbling block to securing cutting-edge small-satellite ca-
pabilities for operational support to warfighters.
The SDA’s Transport Layer is critically important, provid-
ing global connectivity to warfighters. Final modeling for
this constellation of support satellites varies, from as few
as three hundred to more than five hundred satellites in
750–1,200-km LEO orbit. A fully operational Transport
Layer would provide 95 percent of anywhere on Earth with
at least two satellites in view and 99 percent of Earth with
at least one satellite in view. Such a support architecture
would provide warfighters with connectivity anywhere,
anytime. Optical Inter-Satellite Links (OISLs) will provide
the Transport Layer with significantly enhanced radiofre-
quency (RF) crosslinks. Synchronized communication be-
tween OISLs and satellites in LEO will reduce path loss and
latency, ensuring prosecution in time-sensitive targeting.
The SDA’s Transport Layer is likely to initially operate over
the Ka band, offer stereo coverage, and be networked to
maximize bandwidth and fault tolerance. 41 Other satellite
constellations will have comparatively limited capabilities.
The Tranche 0 constellation (expected in 2022) will con-
sist of just twenty satellites with different configurations
of laser/optical communication terminals, along with RF. 42

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
17
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
SDA announced a space-to-air optical-communications
demonstration in summer 2021.43
Future upgrades would include Link-16 and the Integrated
Broadcast System (IBS), and would improve data-routing
capacities.44 Integrating IBS and Link-16 will ensure the
Transport Layer’s capacity to provide timely threat-warn-
ing and situational-awareness information worldwide.
The Transport Layer constellation will eventually integrate
OISLs, providing an upgrade in performance over initial
RF crosslinks.45
If all planning goals are achieved, SDA’s Transport Layer
will grow to more than two hundred and fifty small satel-
lites by 2025. The satellites would beam communications
43 Sandra Erwin, “DoD Space Agency to Launch Laser Communications Experiments on SpaceX Rideshare,” Space News, June 2, 2021, https://spacenews.
com/dod-space-agency-to-launch-laser-communications-experiments-on-spacex-rideshare.
44 Link 16 is a standardized communications system used by US, NATO, and coalition forces for transmitting and exchanging real-time tactical data using
links between allied military network participants. “On Orbit,” Space Development Agency, https://www.sda.mil/on-orbit. IBS is a program to replace
legacy intelligence broadcast systems with a single worldwide intelligence-dissemination service. “Integrated Broadcast Service (IBS),” Global Security,
https://www.globalsecurity.org/intell/systems/ibs.htm.
45 Telephone interview with Derek Tournier, director, SDA, August 3, 2021; “Transport,” Space Development Agency, https://www.sda.mil/transport.
46 Ibid.
signals to weapons systems on the ground, at sea, and in
the air.46
The Tracking Layer is a shared responsibility between SDA
and the Missile Defense Agency (MDA). SDA’s national de-
fense space architecture will eventually also include MDA’s
Hypersonic and Ballistic Tracking Space Sensor (HBTSS)
system. Successful integration of HBTSS would enable
the Tracking Layer’s network of satellites with medium and
wide field-of-view sensors to identify and track weapons
traveling and maneuvering at speeds faster than sound.
The SDA further aims to incorporate capabilities such as
tracking ballistic missiles with dim upper stages. Space
Force’s next-generation Overhead Infrared missile-warning
constellation (now in development) would be significantly
Distribution A: Approved for public release. Distribution unlimited.Distribution A: Approved for public release. Distribution unlimited.
T
RANCHE
 1 N
ATIONAL
 D
EFENSE
 S
PACE
 A
RCHITECTURE
2
112266XX TT11TTLL BBAASSEELLIINNEE SSVVSS ≤≤1188XX TT11TTLL PP33 SSVVSS
KK
AA
HH
OOSSTTEEDD
PP
AAYYLLOOAADD
LL
IINNKK
 1166
 KK
AA
BBMMCC
33
BBMMCC
33
OO
PPTTIICCAALL
OO
PPTTIICCAALL
DD
IIRREECCTT
 DDOOWWNNLLIINNKKSS
 TTOO
TTHHEEAATTEERR
 TTAARRGGEETTIINNGG
 CCEELLLLSS
EE
MMEERRGGIINNGG
 CC
AAPPAABBIILLIITTYY
DD
EEMMOONNSSTTRRAATTIIOONNSS
 WWIITTHH
 TTHHEE
PP
AARRTTNNEERR
 PP
AAYYLLOOAADD
 PP
RROOGGRRAAMM
BB
EEYYOONNDD
 LLIINNEE
 OOFF
 SSIIGGHHTT
TTAACCTTIICCAALL
 DDAATTAA
 LLIINNKK
CCOONNNNEECCTTIIVVIITTYY
LL
OOWW
--
LLAATTEENNCCYY
 HHIIGGHH
--
VVOOLLUUMMEE
DDAATTAA
 TTRRAANNSSPPOORRTT
 WWIITTHH
OOPPTTIICCAALL
 CCRROOSSSS
--
LLIINNKKSS
SS
EECCUURREE
 MMUULLTTII
--
DDOOMMAAIINN
OOPPTTIICCAALL
 CCOOMMMMUUNNIICCAATTIIOONNSS
WW
IIDDEEBBAANNDD
 MMUULLTTII
--
MMOODDAALL
 DDAATTAA
TTRRAANNSSFFEERR
 WWIITTHH
 DDIISSTTRRIIBBUUTTEEDD
GGRROOUUNNDD
 SSEEGGMMEENNTT
The Space Development Agency is working to establish the foundation for Tranche 1 Transport Layer (T1TL), a mesh network of 126
optically interconnected space vehicles to be launched by 2024. This network of satellites will provide a resilient, low-latency, high
volume data transport communication system. Source: Space Development Agency, SDA Tranche 1 Transport Layer (T1TL) virtual
Industry Day Presentation, August 26, 2021. https://www.sda.mil/special-notice-sda-tranche-1-transport-layer-t1tl-industry-day/. 
Figure 4

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
18
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
abetted by the Tracking Layer. 47 The SDA is targeting
2024 for having operational satellites. The Government
Accountability Office (GAO) found this time estimate overly
optimistic, citing “significant technical and managerial chal-
lenges.”48 In addition, the GAO notes that Space Force did
not provide congressional defense committees accurate
insights into the schedule risks in its recent quarterly re-
ports to congressional defense committees.49
The capability to track ground targets will be accomplished
by a third constellation, the Custody Layer. Development
currently involves an enmeshed series of projects being
carried out by the National Reconnaissance Office, Navy,
Army, and Space Force. The SDA will oversee the deploy-
ment of more than two hundred satellites carrying a mix of
sensors. The Transport Layer and Custody Layer will inter-
act, such that those individuals monitoring and operating
within the capabilities of the Custody Layer can seamlessly
transmit target data to tactical weapons systems.
The Battle Management Layer is a support software (not
another constellation) that will integrate upgrades to task-
ing, mission command and control, data dissemination,
and “sensor to shooter data products.”
The Navigation Layer will supplement the Global Position-
ing System (GPS) with alternate timing, navigation, and po-
sitioning data. This effort is expected to use the Transport
Layer’s communications signals to allow forces to operate
in GPS-denied environments.
The Deterrence Layer will gather information from geo-
stationary orbit, the cislunar space between Earth and
the moon. This information will support space situational
awareness. Current architecture captures data support-
ing situational awareness from low-Earth orbit to twen-
ty-three thousand miles above Earth, in geostationary
orbit. Modern models have been largely limited to the
boundaries of geostationary orbit, and not beyond. 50 In
the United States, the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) and commercial space companies
have shown interest in, and have developed plans for,
travel to the moon. China, Russia, Europe, and other en-
tities have shown similar interest in lunar development.
47 Sandra Erwin, “Congress Reviewing New Request to Reprogram Funds for Next-Generation OPIR Satellites,” Space News, July 29, 2019, https://
spacenews.com/congress-reviewing-new-request-to-reprogram-funds-for-next-generation-opir-satellites/.
48 “Comprehensive Cost and Schedule Information Would Enhance Congressional Oversight,” US Government Accountability Office, September 2021, 12,
https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-21-105249.pdf.
49 Ibid.
50 Stew Magnuson, “Details of the Pentagon’s New Space Architecture Revealed,” National Defense Magazine, September 19, 2019, https://www.
nationaldefensemagazine.org/articles/2019/9/19/details-of-the-pentagon-new-space-architecture-revealed.
51 “National Defense Space Architecture (NDSA), Systems, Technologies, and Emerging Capabilities,” Space Development Agency, January 25, 2021,
https://sam.gov/opp/04658bc6d1884a8f9b67f0cfdc5d6cbe/view?keywords=HQ085021S0002&sort=-relevance&index=&is_active=true&page=1; Sandra
Erwin, “Space Development Agency Lays out Five-Y ear Plan in $11 Billion Proposed Budget,” Space News, October 6, 2019, https://spacenews.com/
space-development-agency-lays-out-five-year-plan-in-11-billion-proposed-budget/.
Satellites positioned in the cislunar region could control
access to the moon, or launch undetected attacks against
space systems.
The final architecture component is the Support Layer,
which is envisioned to provide approximately forty
launches and the required ground infrastructure, including
systems and user terminals.51
Key Technologies for SDA Small-Satellite Development
A few keystone technologies will be critical to SDA plans
for the NDSA. Those technologies will also allow for the
foundation of the DoD and the private sector’s future em-
ployment of small satellites. These technologies include
laser communications, encryption, and ground systems.
Laser Communications
SDA will need to develop laser communications (space-to-
space, space-to-air, and space-to-ground) to be successful
in the NDSA. Laser communications will be necessary to
fully utilize the Transport Layer and meet the time-latency
demands of other architectural components and warfight-
ers. In addition, laser communications (space-to-air and
space-to-ground) will be necessary for operational forces
to defeat anti-access/area-denial (A2/AD) strategies target-
ing RF communications. China employs an extensive A2/
AD capability in the South China Sea to potentially inhibit
movement and deny freedom of action to US and allied
forces. The ability to jam, intercept, or detect communica-
tions has profound consequences, but would be mitigated
with laser communications, which offer comparative com-
munications security with high data rates across ground, air,
and space domains.
Radiofrequency-band systems will not provide the low-la-
tency high throughput necessary to fully support warfight-
ers, particularly for ballistic and hypersonic missile defense.
Optical links (i.e., laser communications) offer data rates of
about one gigabit per second, as well as lower latency be-
tween space, air, and ground assets, when compared with
conventional radiofrequency links, making them a viable
pathway of getting real-time data to warfighters.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
19
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Space-based laser communications are a challenging tech-
nology requiring highly stable attitude control and fine-
grade pointing and tracking.
The idea of satellite laser communications is not new, al-
though their employment on small satellites is quite new.
Several companies and governments are in different
stages of developing this capability. In 2008, the United
States and Germany established the first successful and
stable orbital laser link between two operational satellites
in LEO (the German radar satellite TerraSAR-X and the US
Missile Defense Agency satellite NFIRE).52
SDA, along with the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency and Air Force Research Laboratory, began a laser
communications experiment called Mandrake II. Launched
in June 2021, this experiment will test optical links at in-
creasing ranges, with an expected maximum distance of
twenty-four hundred kilometers, based on orbital limita-
tions.53
52 “Laser Communication,” Airbus, https://airbusus.com/laser-communication.
53 “Mandrake II Overview,” Space Development Agency, https://www.sda.mil/on-orbit.
54 “On Orbit,” Space Development Agency, https://www.sda.mil/on-orbit.
The SDA’s Laser Interconnect and Networking Commu-
nication System (LINCS) experiment consists of two 12U
CubeSats featuring laser communications terminals. The
two LINCS space vehicles were launched in June 2021
to test space-to-space, space-to-air, and space-to-ground
optical communication terminals. As of late September
2021, the two satellites were tumbling and unresponsive
to ground controllers.54
Another key technology that will be required to realize
the business case for the NDSA is medium-field-of-view
sensors. The MDA’s HBTSS will track inbound ballistic hy-
personic missiles from LEO. HBTSS medium-field-of-view
sensors deployed on small satellites will enable the capac-
ity to detect, track, and discriminate among threats. This
capability would exchange data with wide-field-of-view
systems, which have global coverage and can detect and
track fairly dim targets, particularly hypersonic glide sys-
tems. The wide-field-of-view systems would pass informa-
tion to HBTSS, which provides fire-control information to
Mandrake 2 spacecraft Able and Baker pre-launch. Source: Astro Digital, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, July 7, 2021,
https://www.darpa.mil/news-events/2021-07-07.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
20
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
warfighters.55 The MDA is also working with industry to de-
velop and test additional medium-field-of-view, multi-spec-
tral infrared imagers to advance imaging and processing
capabilities. These capabilities also have implications for
weather forecasting and climate monitoring.56
Encryption
As the cyberattack surface grows with small satellites, so
will the requirement to implement encryption capabilities.
Presidential Directive, Space Policy Directive-05 issued in
September 2020, established the following key cyberse-
curity principles of space systems:57
● Space systems and their supporting infrastruc-
ture, including software, should be developed
and operated using risk-based, cybersecurity-in-
formed engineering.
● Space-systems operators should develop or in-
tegrate cybersecurity plans for space systems
that include capabilities to ensure operators or
automated control-center systems can retain or
recover positive control of space vehicles, and
verify the integrity, confidentiality, and availabil-
ity of critical functions and the missions, ser-
vices, and data they provide.
● Space-system cybersecurity requirements and
regulations should leverage widely adopted
best practices and norms of behavior.
● Space-system owners and operators should col-
laborate to promote the development of best
practices and mitigations, to the extent permit-
ted by law and regulation.
● Space-system security requirements should be
designed to be effective, while allowing space
operators to manage appropriate risk tolerances
and minimize undue burden to civil, commer-
cial, and other nongovernment space-system
operators.
55 Sandra Erwin, “Missile Defense Agency Selects Four Companies to Develop Space Sensors,” Space News, October 30, 2019, https://spacenews.com/
missile-defense-agency-selects-four-companies-to-develop-space-sensors.
56 Ibid.
57 The following bullets are from “Trump Administration Launches First Cybersecurity Principles for Space Technologies,” US Department of Homeland
Security, September 4, 2020, https://www.dhs.gov/news/2020/09/04/trump-administration-launches-first-cybersecurity-principles-space-technologies.
58 “China’s Quantum Technology Realizes Industrial Application,” CGTN, September 19, 2021, https://news.cgtn.com/news/2021-09-19/China-s-quantum-
technology-realizes-industrial-application-13G8NZRcY24/index.html; David Nield, “Record-Breaking Chinese Supercomputer Marks New Quantum
Supremacy Milestone,” MSN, July 14, 2021, https://www.msn.com/en-us/news/technology/record-breaking-chinese-supercomputer-marks-new-quantum-
supremacy-milestone/ar-AAM7vFM.
59 Telephone interview, with Kari Bingen, former principal deputy under secretary of defense (PDUSD) for intelligence, July 2, 2021.
60 Nathan Strout, “A Pentagon Experiment to Process the Torrent of Data from Space,” C4ISRNET, September 26, 2019, https://www.c4isrnet.com/battlefield-
tech/space/2019/09/26/a-pentagon-experiment-to-process-to-the-torrent-of-data-from-space/; “The Team Of Ball Aerospace + Microsoft Complete Cloud
Demos That Securely Deliver Actionable Intelligence To Warfighters,” Sat News, May 19, 2021, https://news.satnews.com/2021/05/19/the-team-of-ball-
aerospace-microsoft-complete-cloud-demos-that-securely-deliver-actionable-intelligence-to-warfighters/.
These recommended courses of action are general prin-
ciples, which is probably all that can be pursued by the
Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency. If commercial space sys-
tems are designated critical infrastructure, as proposed
in a recent bipartisan bill—the Space Infrastructure Act—a
Sector-Specific Agency would assist in sharing and inte-
grating best practices in cybersecurity.
Secure encryption is required now, but the need for ca-
pability will increase over the next decade. China recently
established a two-thousand-kilometer communication line
connecting Beijing and Shanghai with the launch of the
world’s first quantum satellite. Further, China unveiled a
super-advanced sixty-six-qubit quantum supercomputer
prototype.58 The rate of advances in quantum computing
suggests the need for quantum encryption for space sys-
tems will grow over the next decade.
Ground Storage, Networking, and Processing
The Defense Department will need to expand data-pro-
cessing capabilities to include advanced analytics, AI, ma-
chine learning (ML), and global distribution if it is to realize
SDA’s vision for using small satellites.59 The SDA LEO archi-
tecture will produce streams of data that, as of yet, the DoD
can neither move nor process in an operationally relevant
timeframe. In the case of ballistic or hypersonic missiles,
that timeframe might be seconds. AI, data management,
and analytics will be key components of DoD’s ability to
support warfighter decision-making through the NDSA.
To develop the required ground infrastructure, the Defense
Innovation Unit contracted Ball Aerospace and Microsoft
to demonstrate how cloud processing could handle the
increased data produced by SDA’s distributed constel-
lation of small satellites. In May 2021, the Commercially
Augmented Space Inter Networked Operations Program
Office successfully demonstrated an initial data-process-
ing capability. This test was accomplished by injecting
simulated data into the cloud, where it was processed.
The processed data were then disseminated to multiple
endpoints.60

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
21
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Space Force
The US Space Force is attempting to incorporate the
speed and capabilities of commercial space companies.
In 2021, Space Force launched a new outreach program,
awarding startups and small businesses with contracts to-
taling as much as $50 million.61 SpaceWERX, Space Force’s
space-focused spinoff of the Air Force’s 2017 AFWERX,
taps into investments available within the private sector
to seed developing technologies pertinent to national
security.
On August 19, 2021, SpaceWERX hosted a virtual Space
Force Pitch Day. Each of the participants had already re-
ceived $50,000 Phase 1 awards for Space Force study
contracts. At the event, companies pitched technologies to
compete for up to $34 million in Small Business Innovation
Research Phase 2 contracts.62
The SpaceWERX program replicates many “industry day”
and similar investment efforts conducted throughout the
DoD. Similar programs have existed at different agencies
in DoD for decades. The program will likely be minimally
effective in moving smaller companies to develop nascent
technologies. There is little evidence to suggest that this
approach will significantly improve the commercialization
of these technologies or the department’s ability to acquire
them in a timely fashion. Even successful companies com-
plain these programs only move them through the initial
stages of research and development (R&D), and do little to
help them advance the technologies or bring them through
to market.
The DoD has at its disposal other prototype-develop-
ment programs that should be utilized for small-satellite
development efforts. Other Transaction Authority (OTA)
is a streamlined contracting mechanism that allows DoD
organizations to avoid certain contract requirements. The
organizations are thereby able to solicit, evaluate, and
award contracts in reduced timeframes. 63 SDA is using
61 Sandra Erwin, “Space Force to Kick off New Program to Attract Small Businesses and Startups,” Space News, August 12, 2021, https://spacenews.com/
space-force-to-kick-off-new-program-to-attract-small-businesses-and-startups/.
62 Sandra Erwin, “A Little Love from the Air Force Can Put a Space Business on the Map,” Space News, March 22, 2021, https://spacenews.com/a-little-love-
from-the-air-force-can-put-a-space-business-on-the-map/.
63 Sandra Erwin, “DoD Space Agency Changes Course on Satellite Procurement in Wake of Maxar’s Protest,” Space News, October 28, 2021, https://
spacenews.com/dod-space-agency-changes-course-on-satellite-procurement-in-wake-of-maxars-protest.
64 Ibid.
65 Doug Berenson, “Three Myths (and Realities) around OTA Contracts,” Avascent, September 22, 2021, https://www.avascent.com/news-insights/avascent-
proving-ground/three-myths-and-realities-around-ota-contracts.
66 “Middle Tier of Acquisition,” AcqNotes, https://acqnotes.com/acqnote/acquisitions/middle-tier-acquisitions.
67 S. 1790 (116th): National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Y ear 2020, US Congress, December 19, 2019, https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/116/
s1790/text.
68 “Middle Tier of Acquisition,” Mitre Corporation, July 2019, 4, https://aida.mitre.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Middle-Tier-of-Acquisition-23-Jul-19.pdf.
69 Telephone interview with Douglas Loverro.
70 “How We Work,” In-Q-Tel, https://www.iqt.org/how-we-work/.
OTA authorities to develop Transport Layer Tranche 1 after
its initial Request for Proposals selection was protested by
Maxar technologies.64 SDA also used OTA to contract to
produce eight missile-tracking Tranche 0 satellites.
Since 2015, the OTA procurement process was used for
commercial space prototyping and technology devel-
opment. DoD awarded SpaceX a $150-million contract,
and Blue Origin $220 million. 65 These are quite small
amounts given that OTA contracts represent less than 3
percent of research, development, test, and evaluation
(RDT&E) spending. Another option for rapid procurement
of proven small-satellite technologies is Middle Tier of
Acquisition under Section 804 of the National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Y ear 2016 (Public Law 114-
92).66 This authority allows the Defense Department “to
rapidly prototype and/or rapidly field capabilities under
a new pathway, distinct from the traditional acquisition
system. Middle Tier of Acquisition is a rapid-acquisition
interim approach that focuses on delivering capability in
a period of two to five years, with rapid prototypes and
rapid fielding with proven technology.” 67 The Middle Tier
allows for rapid prototyping (up to five years) and rapid
fielding (up to five years). 68 However, small-satellite capa -
bilities have a technology refresh rate of approximately
twenty-four months.
Other models in the government have proven successful
in developing and fielding technologies through public-pri-
vate partnerships. For example, the IC, led by the Central
Intelligence Agency, has had extraordinary success cre-
ating and using the company In-Q-Tel to attract investor
funding to develop commercial technologies that would
need little or no modification to support IC requirements.69
In-Q-Tel is a US not-for-profit venture-capital firm that in-
vests in high-tech startup companies with technologies
that could increase US intelligence capabilities. In-Q-Tel
makes one investment per week, and has more than five
hundred investments in its portfolio. “Every $1 invested by
In-Q-Tel leverages $18 in private sector investment.”70 The
technologies are developed at a rapid pace to compete

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
22
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
in commercial markets. In-Q-Tel has invested in thirteen
companies to develop small-satellite space capabilities to
include space-based radar, launch, micro-propulsion, com-
munications, IoT, and the global navigation satellite sys-
tem.71 At least one of those companies (Rocket Lab) went
public on the US stock exchange in 2021.
Other public-private-sector models have proven success -
ful in developing and fielding needed technologies, in-
cluding semiconductor and energy-storage technology.
For example, the US Advanced Battery Consortium directs
electrochemical energy storage R&D relevant to stake-
holders in the automotive industry, energy storage-system
manufacturers, the Department of Energy, national labo-
ratories, universities, and others. 72 NASA’s Commercial
Orbital Transportation Services began investing approx-
imately $800 million toward cargo space transportation
flight demonstrations. That investment was made in two
phases to several companies from 2006 to 2012, and
eventually culminated with Space Act Agreements for
commercial logistical support to the International Space
Station (ISS). The Space Act Agreements provided a NASA
commitment to purchase services to provide logistics sup-
port for the ISS. 73 This program is largely responsible for
the growth and success of SpaceX as a commercial space
disruptor.
The Intelligence Community
The IC has taken advantage of commercial imagery
generated through small satellites. In 2017, the National
Geospatial Intelligence Agency (NGA) gave responsibili-
ties for commercial imagery procurement to the National
Reconnaissance Office (NRO). In 2021, the NRO announced
new initiatives aimed at taking advantage of commercial
space services, including those offered by small-satellites
operators. The NRO announced plans to incorporate com-
mercial imagery in two programs.
71 “In-Q-Tel Portfolio,” In-Q-Tel, https://www.iqt.org/portfolio?&taxonomy=tech_areas&tax_id=220.
72 “U.S. Advanced Battery Consortium LLC,” US Advanced Battery Consortium, 2021, https://www.uscar.org/guest/teams/12/U-S-Advanced-Battery-
Consortium-LLC.
73 “NASA Commercial Orbital Transportation Services,” NASA, last updated March 2, 2012, https://www.nasa.gov/offices/c3po/about/c3po.html; telephone
interview with Dr. John Olds, SpaceWorks, September 23, 2021.
74 “NRO Announces Acquisition to Explore New and Emerging Commercial Capabilities,” National Reconnaissance Office, press release, October 7, 2021,
https://www.nro.gov/Portals/65/documents/news/press/2021/BAA_Press_Release_Oct_7_2021.pdf.
75 “NRO Announces Acquisition for Next Generation of Commercial Imagery,” National Reconnaissance Office, press release, November 3, 2021, https://
www.nro.gov/Portals/65/documents/news/press/2021/EOCL_Press_Release_11032021.pdf.
76 “BlackSky Awarded Five Y ear $30 Million NGA Contract,” BlackSky, press release, September 7, 2021, https://www.blacksky.com/2021/09/07/blacksky-
awarded-five-year-30-million-nga-contract.
1. In October 2021, the NRO announced a new acquisi-
tion strategy to acquire commercial remote-sensing
capabilities. The Broad Agency Announcement (BAA)
Framework for Strategic Commercial Enhancements
focuses on new and emerging phenomenologies, such
as commercial radar, hyperspectral imagery, radiofre-
quency sensing, and emerging and evolving electro-
optical capabilities.74
2. In November 2021, the NRO released a request for
proposal (RFP) for commercial acquisition of an Electro-
Optical Commercial Layer (EOCL). The EOCL will deliver
“the next generation of commercial imagery to meet
the intelligence, defense, and federal civil agency user
communities’ mission needs.”75 The RFP indicates that
the NRO plans to shift from its current single-source
imagery provider to multi-vendor agreements. Recent
NRO study plans have included two small-satellite con-
stellation operators.
NRO’s acquisition of commercial imagery is currently val-
ued at $300 million annually. It is unknown whether the
government expects to increase this amount, and, if so,
by how much. It is likely there will be some increase in the
commercial imagery budget to satisfy military, environmen-
tal, disaster response, and other less-sensitive government
imagery requirements. Multiple imagery suppliers would
spur commercial innovation and enhance the small-satel-
lite remote-sensing industry.
In addition to the NRO acquisitions, the National Geospatial
Intelligence Agency (NGA) awarded a five-year, $30-million
contract to BlackSky to provide real-time geospatial intel-
ligence and global monitoring. According to the project’s
website, “BlackSky will use advanced AI and multi-sensor
analytics to detect and understand objects of significant
economic interest. The project will employ automated
methods to provide analysts and decision makers with in-
sights on relevant global economic indicators.”76

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
23
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Chapter 4: The Civil Space Response:
Domestic and International Cooperation
77 Note: these figures consider all orbital regimes, not just LEO. “Space Debris by the Numbers. Number of Debris Objects Estimated by Statistical Models
to Be in Orbit,” European Space Agency, last updated September 20, 2021, https://www.esa.int/Safety_Security/Space_Debris/Space_debris_by_the_
numbers.
78 “Space Policy Directive-3, National Space Traffic Management Policy,” White House, June 18, 2018, https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/presidential-
actions/space-policy-directive-3-national-space-traffic-management-policy/.
79 “Space Traffic Management: Assessment of the Feasibility, Expected Effectiveness, and Funding Implications of a Transfer of Space Traffic Management
Functions,” National Academy of Public Administration, August 2020, https://napawash.org/academy-studies/united-states-department-of-commerce-
office-of-space-commerce.
80 Don Graves and Rick Spinrad, “Commerce Department, NOAA Ensuring U.S. Remains a World Leader in Space Commerce,” Space News, July 21, 2021,
https://spacenews.com/op-ed-commerce-department-noaa-ensuring-u-s-remains-a-world-leader-in-space-commerce/. Graves is the deputy secretary of
the US Commerce Department, and Spinrad is the NOAA administrator and the under secretary of commerce for oceans and atmosphere.
81 Ibid.
C
ivil space operations (i.e., those not for military or
commercial purposes) are increasingly essential
to national security, and will be revolutionized by
small-satellite applications. Three civil space ap-
plications particularly susceptible to the small-satellite rev-
olution are space traffic management, regulatory regimes,
and on-orbit mission authority.
Space Traffic Management
One of the consistent messages from government and
industry experts interviewed during this study was the
necessity for effective STM. No interviewee believed that
current management practices were adequate. The lack
of an effective system for STM is probably the greatest
threat to small-satellite industry growth and the sustainabil-
ity of space operations. Absent any advances in STM, the
probability of satellite collision will increase significantly
by 2030, potentially rendering orbital regimes less safe
for operations.
To support commercial, civil, and scientific space op-
erations, the commercial United States needs the best
possible data to help track the estimated five hundred
thousand to one million space objects (satellites and de-
bris) in orbit now, and the estimated fifty thousand new
satellites expected to be on orbit by 2030.77 In addition to
the increased number of satellites, rendezvous and prox-
imity operations and orbital transfers will increase the com-
plexity of the operational environment. Space situational
awareness based on accurate data will be an essential
capability for the global space industry.
Space Policy Directive-3 (Space Traffic Management Policy)
of 2018 designated the Department of Commerce’s Office
of Space Commerce as the lead civilian agency for provid-
ing basic SSA data and STM services to space operators.78
This responsibility was affirmed by the 2020 National
Space Policy and a congressionally directed study.79
The US Congress identified $10 million in funding for the
OSC in the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021, of
which $5.9 million is available to begin developing an
STM prototype known as the Open-Architecture Data
Repository (OADR). The OADR demonstration phase was
completed in the late fall of 2021. The OADR demonstra-
tion is being designed to ingest data and services from
commercial and government sources into a prototype
cloud-based data repository. The OADR prototype will
provide data regarding the location of space objects to
improve transparency and promote safety for space assets
and operations.
The OADR is not DoC’s only responsibility in its STM mis-
sion. Another key responsibility is to learn (and then de-
velop) standards and best practices from industry, and
advocate for those for inflight safety, sustainability, and
advancing the US commercial sector.
DoC leadership states that “OADR will create opportuni-
ties for US companies, especially small businesses, to play
an innovative role in the commercial space management
arena.”80 At this point in the development of the OADR,
there is little indication that this is the case. DoC plans to
incorporate “features and source data within the platform
targeted to enable industry innovation and development
of new space technology.” 81 And yet, after three years,
the DoC has only recently produced the prototype OADR,
and no funds have been expended on commercial data.
Competition between industry providers of SSA data pro-
vides opportunities for cost reduction and innovation. To
date, the OSC has not purchased any commercial data,
and industry engagement seems to be limited to one pub-
licly released industry request for information and hosting
an Industry Day. The OSC has requested $88 million in

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
24
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
funding from Congress for FY 2023. If allocated, these
funds will need to be expended expeditiously to commer-
cial SSA providers to ensure the US establishes a lead in
global STM.
OSC is misplaced under NOAA, which does not appear to
have made substantive movements over the last year to
execute the OSC mission, particularly its responsibilities in
STM and on-orbit mission authorities. 82 Subordination to
NOAA does not allow OSC to function at the interagency
level, a requirement to be effective in executing its mission.
Because of the expansion of commercial space, including
dozens of nations and international consortia, the sharing
of SSA data will be a critical element of ensuring safety
on systems and regulating on-orbit operations. So much
information is now available publicly or in private com-
mercial channels that the challenge for the United States
will be providing incentives for private SSA companies to
provide data. To date, the satellite location accuracy of
commercial SSA companies rivals those of the US Space
Force’s Space Surveillance Network—and is available at
a fraction of the cost. The commercial viability of these
companies, and the safety of on-orbit systems, rests on
the DoC commitment to fully integrate commercial data
and make it available globally. The slow movement in en-
gaging the commercial SSA industry is not directly related
to lack of available budget. The OSC continues to spend
its increased budget on studies conducted by federally
funded R&D centers.
The United States will not take a leadership role in providing
STM until DoC moves forward with purchasing commercial
data. Given the lack of progress, it is possible that foreign
governments and satellite owners and operators will pursue
their own solutions outside of the US government. Some are
already doing so. It is in the interest of the US government
to lead in this effort to ensure the growth of the commercial
space industry, operate small satellites in a safe environ-
ment, and maintain its global leadership in space.
Regulatory Regimes for Commercial Space
Activities
The US regulatory environment presents challenges for
commercial small-satellite operations. A number of depart-
ments and agencies share responsibilities for spaceflight,
operations, and exports. The lack of clarity in regulations
and the necessity of coordinating activities among several
82 Ibid., and several interviews with government and industry officials who requested anonymity.
83 Article vI of the 1967 Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies (“Outer Space Treaty”).
84 Diana Stancy Correll and Aaron Mehta, “See the Damage at al-Asad Airbase Following Iranian Missile Strike,” Military Times, January 8, 2020, https://
www.militarytimes.com/news/your-military/2020/01/08/see-the-damage-at-al-asad-airbase-following-iranian-missile-strike/.
government agencies increase cost and risk for commer-
cial satellite operators, and limit opportunities to expand
the industry. The United States has a well-established, if
overly bureaucratic, regulatory system providing oversight
of space transportation, frequency allocation, and select
aspects of remote sensing. The United States and other
countries abide by their obligations under the Outer Space
Treaty—primarily Article vI, which requires state authoriza-
tion and oversight of commercial space activities.
States Parties to the Treaty shall bear international
responsibility for national activities in outer space,
including the Moon and other celestial bodies,
whether such activities are carried on by govern-
mental agencies or by non-governmental entities,
and for assuring that national activities are carried
out in conformity with the provisions set forth in
the present Treaty. The activities of nongovern-
mental entities in outer space, including the Moon
and other celestial bodies, shall require authoriza-
tion and continuing supervision by the appropriate
State Party to the Treaty.83
Almost one hundred countries operate spacecraft, and
many states have almost no experience and little in the
way of space regulatory regimes. Within the US federal
government, there are three primary agencies that reg-
ulate commercial space activities. NOAA regulates com-
mercial remote sensing; the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) allocates radiofrequency spectrum,
and the Department of Transportation, through the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA), regulates commercial launch
and reentry. These are generally well-established missions
and processes. However, those authorities and processes
will not be adequate for future small-satellite and other
space operations.
Even now, with the United States’ well-established regu-
latory system, commercial small-satellite operations have
the potential to damage national security. In early January
2020, Iran launched a missile strike against the US al-Asad
airbase in Iraq, an attack that injured US military person-
nel. The event was captured that same day by Planet Labs’
small-satellite remote-sensing constellation. Planet boasts
a temporal resolution of twenty-four hours for each spot on
the Earth. The images were analyzed by the Middlebury
Institute of International Studies at Monterey, and appeared
widely in the worldwide press. The images were of suffi-
cient quality to provide battle damage assessment for Iran.84
As this example illustrates, the US regulatory processes will

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
25
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
not be able to keep pace as commercial satellites operate
with near-real-time capabilities. In addition, even if Planet
did not publish the images, some other imagery provider
(foreign or domestic) would have done so. The presence
of ubiquitous commercial sensors in space from dozens of
countries and companies has surpassed the point that any
single nation can limit distribution of data.
On-Orbit Mission Authority
Even with the extensive regulatory environment in the
United States, there is no government entity that has on-or-
bit mission authorities—meaning, no government entity
regulates the on-orbit operations of commercial satellites,
other than imaging and communications. Designating
a government agency (e.g., DoC’s Office of Space
Commerce) with this responsibility is one of the most
85 Letter to Congress, Executive Office of the President Office of Science and Technology, April 4, 2016, https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/
files/microsites/ostp/csla_report_4-4-16_final.pdf.
important actions that needs to be completed. The next
decades will bring extraordinary expansion in commercial
small-satellite operations. To date, the United States has
used its existing regulatory frameworks to address com-
mercial space activities. However, it is unlikely to continue
to do so without regulatory and process changes to pro-
vide mechanisms through which the US government can
fulfill its Article vI obligations, while supporting industry in
newly contemplated commercial space activities.
Private Missions Beyond Earth’s Orbit
Several US companies announced plans for commercial
ventures to the Moon. These plans include transportation
of payloads to the lunar surface, commercial lunar habitats,
and technology-demonstration missions involving vehicles
maneuvering on the lunar surface. SpaceX plans commer-
cial missions to Mars.85
SpaceX’s Falcon 9 rocket PSN vI launches from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, FLA., February 21, 2019. The satellite launched
provided communication and internet services for Indonesia and Southeast Asia. Source: Airman 1st Class Dalton Williams, US Air
Force Flickr, February 22, 2019, https://www.flickr.com/photos/usairforce/47228872232.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
26
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
New On-Orbit Servicing Activities
Two companies have already demonstrated on-orbit ser-
vicing activities. Japan-based Astroscale has demonstrated
satellite-capture technology for on-orbit space-debris mitiga-
tion. Several other US companies have announced plans for
debris mitigation and other new on-orbit activities, such as:86
● end-of-life extension modules, which attach to a
satellite to aid in station keeping or transfer to a
graveyard orbit;
● satellite repair utilizing robotic arms;
● satellite refueling, utilizing fuels launched from
Earth;
● satellite refueling, utilizing fuels derived from
space resources; and
● seven companies have announced plans to build
commercial orbital habitats. Another twenty-
eight companies are exploring the business
model for commercial space stations.
Space Resource Utilization
US companies have created plans to extract rare-Earth
minerals from asteroids and the moon for use on Earth.
Companies are also exploring using the mineral resources
on asteroids to support deeper exploration and a lon-
ger-term human presence in space.87
Space Tourism
Space tourists have already visited the International
Space Station, and this market is expanding. In 2021,
virgin Galactic and Blue Origin took tourists to the edge
of space. In September 2021, SpaceX took tourists into
orbit. Japanese billionaire Yusaku Maezawa is tentatively
planning to travel around the Moon on a SpaceX ship in
2023. As human spaceflight for tourists has been safely
achieved, it is very likely the space tourism industry will
expand over the next decade.
The National Space Policy issued in 2020 addressed the
issue of Mission Authorization of Novel Activities.
The Secretary of Commerce, in coordination with
the National Space Council, shall:
86 All bullet points below Ibid.
87 Ibid.
88 “National Space Policy of the United States of America,” White House, December 9, 2020, https://history.nasa.gov/NationalSpacePolicy12-9-20.pdf.
●  Identify whether any planned space activities fall
beyond the scope of existing authorization and
supervision processes necessary to meet inter-
national obligations; and
●  Lead, if necessary, the development of mini-
mally burdensome, responsive, transparent, and
adaptive review, authorization, and supervision
processes for such activities, consistent with na-
tional security and public safety interests, with
a presumption of approval and prompt appeals
process.88
To date, the US government has taken no steps toward
implementing this directive.
There are several international bodies, including govern-
ment organizations, quasi-government organizations, and
industry alliances all attempting to develop and coordinate
standards and policies for the commercial space indus-
try. These bodies have made gains over the years, and
are generally successful over the long term. However, the
growth and deployment of small satellites and new space
capabilities are far outstripping the government and indus-
try coordination processes. Experts interviewed for this
report agreed on the necessity to increase the pace of
governmental-level global space diplomacy, and to expand
Track 2 discussions with secondary institutions.
The United Nations (UN) Office for Outer Space Affairs
(UNOOSA). UNOOSA is the only UN office that addresses
space affairs. UNOOSA responsibilities include creating or
resolving policy, legal, technical, and scientific issues to en-
sure the peaceful use of outer space. UNOOSA engages
with stakeholders from international organizations, re-
gional and national space agencies and a range of private,
public, academic, and civil-society institutions. UNOOSA
is the secretariat for the UN’s Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS).
The Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems.
Several space agencies formed this committee in 1982
to provide a forum for discussion of common problems in
developing and operating space data systems. The com-
mittee comprises eleven member agencies, thirty-two ob-
server agencies, and more than one hundred and nineteen
industry organizations. The committee develops “standards
for data-systems and information-systems to promote in-
teroperability and cross support among cooperating space

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
27
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
agencies, to enable multi-agency spaceflight collaboration,
and new capabilities for future missions.”89
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU). The
ITU is the United Nations’ organization for information and
communication technologies: “ITU allocates global radio
spectrum and satellite orbits in the GEO belt. ITU’s mem-
bership includes 193 Member States as well as some 900
companies, universities, and international and regional
organizations.”90
The Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee
(IADC). The IADC is an international forum for govern-
ments to coordinate activities related to the issues that
result from natural and human-made space debris. The
IADC’s primary purposes are to “exchange information on
space debris research activities between member space
agencies, to facilitate opportunities for cooperation in
space debris research, to review the progress of ongo-
ing cooperative activities, and to identify debris mitigation
options.”91
NATO. NATO identifies space as a “dynamic and rapidly
evolving area essential to the Alliance’s deterrence and
defense.”92 In 2019, NATO adopted a space policy. This
policy recognized space as a new operational domain,
alongside air, land, sea, and cyberspace. This policy guides
NATO to ensure support to the Alliance’s operations and
missions. The NATO policy addresses areas such as navi-
gation, communications, and intelligence.93
To support this policy, NATO created a Space Centre, which
will integrate space-derived data, products, and services,
and will directly liaise with member nations. 94 The United
States, United Kingdom, France, and Italy made significant
force-structure changes to elevate the role of space and
support enhanced space capabilities.95 The newly created
NATO Space Centre could serve as an important body
to deconflict and integrate allied national security space
operations.
89 “About CCSDS,” Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems, 2021, https://public.ccsds.org/about/default.aspx; Online interview with Dr. Brian
Weeden, August 24, 2021.
90 “About International Telecommunication Union (ITU),” International Telecommunication Union, 2021, https://www.itu.int/en/about/Pages/default.aspx.
91 “Welcome to the Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee Website,” Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee, https://iadc-home.
org/what_iadc.
92 “NATO’s Approach to Space,” North Atlantic Treaty Organization, June 17, 2021, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_175419.htm.
93 Kestutis Paulauskas, “Space: NATO’s Latest Frontier,” NATO Review, March 13, 2020, https://www.nato.int/docu/review/articles/2020/03/13/space-natos-
latest-frontier/index.html.
94 Henry Heren, “NATO Space Panel Introduction,” Joint Air & Space Power Conference 2021: NATO’s Fifth Operational Domain, September 7–9, 2021,
https://www.japcc.org/nato-space-panel-introduction/.
95 “Ufficio Generale per lo Spazio,” Ministerio Della Difesa, Aeronautica Militare, http://www.aeronautica.difesa.it/organizzazione/loStatoMaggiore/
organigramma/Pagine/UGS.aspx.
96 United States National Space Priorities Framework, White House, December 2021, 4, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/United-
States-Space-Priorities-Framework-_-December-1-2021.pdf.
97 Ibid., 7.
98 “USSPACECOM Signs 100th Commercial Agreement to Share Space Data, Service,” US Space Command Public Affairs Office, July 21, 2021, https://www.
spacecom.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/2680576/usspacecom-signs-100th-commercial-agreement-to-share-space-data-service/.
US Allies and Partners
In December, the National Space Council published the
United States Space Priorities Framework. High among
the established priorities is to “broaden and deepen” in-
ternational alliances on space. 96 The framework empha-
sizes the need “to [strengthen] global governance of space
activities,” to “bolster space situational awareness sharing
and space traffic coordination,” and to “engage the interna-
tional community to uphold and strengthen a rules-based
international order for space.”97
There are current and projected relationships between
the United States and its allies, partners, and competitors
that support the priorities identified in the framework. In
July 2021, US Space Command signed its one hundredth
Space Situational Awareness Services and Information
Agreement.98 The IC also works with numerous nations
to share space-related intelligence. There are many chal-
lenges to these sharing relationships, including the cost
imposed on smaller nations, data formats and standard-
ization, systems and software integration, third-party in-
telligence-sharing restrictions, and US over-classification
of data. The overall challenge for the United States will
be to develop policies for several consumer groups. For
example, the United States will need to develop domestic
policy for commercial small-satellite operators, including
mission operations, cybersecurity standards, etc. It will
also need to develop policies for government-to-gov-
ernment relationships with allied nations and other like-
minded countries. Lastly, the United States will have to
develop policies and strategy for how it intends to engage
with more competitive or hostile nations and their com-
mercial systems.
SDA recently published a draft optical communication ter-
minals (OCT) standard for Tranche 1, aiming to enable for-
eign participants to interoperate with the Transport Layer
by establishing an industry standard useful for all market
participants. Within the document, SDA identified several

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
28
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
potential paths for international collaboration with US allies
and partners.
Potential allied and partner participants might act on the
following options.
● Fly OCT meeting SDA’s standard on their own sensing
satellites for direct connection to the NDSA.
● Build optical ground terminal site(s) to receive data
from the NDSA based on a negotiated agreement
with SDA. Attendant requirements are currently being
evaluated. Foreign participants with access may also
receive data from SDA via Link 16 and other future
tactical data links.
● Team their industry with US partners already (or po-
tentially) participating in the NDSA. SDA understands
that some foreign participants have already reached
out to companies providing Tranche 0 space vehicles
and are exploring architectural extensions based on
these ongoing efforts. This is of great value to both
US allies and partners and to SDA, in that it represents
one of the quickest means to identify specific partner-
ship opportunities to pursue technologies with high
technology and manufacturing readiness levels.
● Invest in systems, components, and technologies
for proliferated architectures, such as sensing pay-
loads and OCT. As SDA begins to procure Tranche 1,
it fully expects international participation above and
beyond that ongoing within Tranche 0 development
activities. Adherence to SDA-published standards
and demonstrated ability to manufacture at scale will
be central to inclusion within the Tranche 1 provider
enterprise.
Any international partnership would be subject to spe-
cific security and data information-sharing standards. SDA
plans to publish a Security Classification Guide and addi-
tional international participation guidelines to ensure all
allies, partners, and industry participants are aware of op-
portunities and limitations going forward.99
Business Alliances Impacting Small-Satellite
Development
Despite long-standing activities, international business alli-
ances—when used as a mechanism for standardization and
99 Email exchange with SDA.
100 “Inter-Agency Debris Coordination Guidelines,” IADC, March 2020, https://orbitaldebris.jsc.nasa.gov/library/iadc-space-debris-guidelines-revision-2.pdf.
101 “ISO/TC 20/SC 14 Space Systems and Operations,” ISO, 2021, https://www.iso.org/committee/46614.html.
102 Ibid.
coordination—are inadequate. There are many successes,
such as the global coordination on updating standards for
orbital debris management.100 But, the international coor-
dination process moves slowly, and the small-satellite in-
dustry is rapidly growing. As such, suggested international
standards are not necessarily sufficient in light of recent
scenarios that incorporate steep increases in commercial
space activities, such as small-satellite constellations with
larger numbers of spacecraft than those deployed in pre-
vious decades.
Several international efforts led by commercial interests
can be categorized by functions.
Standards and Coordination
Standardization—International Standards Organization
(ISO/TC 20/SC 14), Space Systems and Operations
ISO is an industry group that attempts to establish commer-
cial standards for operations and disposition of space satel-
lites. The Space Systems and Operations group was formed
in 1992 and currently has fifteen members and eleven ob-
serving members, each representing their respective na-
tion. Since 1992, the ISO/TC 20/SC 14 has promulgated one
hundred and eighty-two standards in the areas of:
● terminology;
● design engineering and production;
● system requirements, verification and validation,
interfaces, integration, and test;
● operations and support systems;
● space environment (natural and artificial);
● space-system program management and quality;
● materials and processes; and
● orbital debris disposition.101
Forty-three more standards are in development. Much of
ISO’s current work is focused on supporting UN sustain-
able-development goals.102
Space Safety
There are at least four international groups working to
ensure the safety of space flight. These public-private
membership groups include representatives from multiple
countries. They address issues such as safety and data

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
29
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
standards, information sharing, Space Traffic Management,
guidelines and practices, and best practices.
The Space Data Association states on its website that it is
an “international organization that brings together satellite
operators to support the controlled, reliable and efficient
sharing of data critical to the safety and integrity of the
space environment. SDA membership includes the world’s
major satellite communications companies.”103
The SDA was formed in 2009. Its goal is to enhance
flight safety via operational data sharing and promoting
best practices across the industry. According to its web-
site, the SDA is “also working to improve the accuracy
and timeliness of collision warning notifications, as well
as working with all interested entities to help define the
next generation of Space Traffic Management systems and
capabilities.”104
The Space Safety Coalition describes itself as “an ad hoc
coalition of companies, organizations, and other govern-
ment and industry stakeholders that actively promotes re-
sponsible space safety through the adoption of relevant
international standards, guidelines and practices, and
the development of more effective space safety guide-
lines and best practices.” 105 Its definition of space safety
“includes physical safety, communications safety (radio
frequency interference events), and space weather aware-
ness. Physical safety includes avoiding launch and on-orbit
collisions, minimization of human casualty from spacecraft
or debris reentry, and the long-term sustainability of the
space operations environment.”106
Consortium for Execution of Rendezvous and Servicing
Operations (CONFERS) is a commercial collaboration
started in 2016 with funding from the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA). The startup organiza-
tion is intended to provide a self-sustaining, and indepen-
dent industry forum. The objective is to collaborate with
industry partners and the US government to address policy
and technical issues for on-orbit servicing, assembly, and
manufacturing (OSAM).
There is a concept in the space-launch industry called
“The Tyranny of Launch.” This idea reflects the reality that
the limitations of launch vehicles also constrain that which
103 “Space Data Association,” Space Data Association, https://www.space-data.org/sda/.
104 Ibid.
105 “Space Safety Coalition,” Space Safety Coalition, 2020, https://spacesafety.org/.
106 Ibid.
107 Sara A. Carioscia, Benjamin A. Corbin, and Bhavya Lal, “Roundtable Proceedings: Ways Forward for On-Orbit Servicing, Assembly, and Manufacturing
(OSAM) of Spacecraft,” Institute for Defense Analysis, Science and Technology Institute, July 2018, https://www.ida.org/-/media/feature/publications/r/ro/
roundtable-proceedings-ways-forward-for-on-orbit-servicing/d-10445.ashx.
108 Ibid.
can be deployed in space. OSAM seeks to remove those
limitations.
Launch from Earth imposes significant limitations
on the size, volume, and design of spacecraft:
spacecraft need to be accommodated as a pay-
load in the fairing of a single launch vehicle, the
volume of which may restrict the size and number
of instruments that can be included for science
and national security missions; components must
be ruggedized to withstand the harsh launch en-
vironment, which imposes penalties in terms of
mass and size, limiting payload capabilities and in-
creasing complexity, test time, and cost; and back-
ups and redundancies must be included to provide
contingencies against damage during launch or
failure on orbit. The limitations associated with
spacecraft architectures where components are
fully assembled on Earth can thus constrain the de-
sign, capabilities, lifespan, and products of space
systems. Additionally, once an asset is in space, it
typically cannot be refreshed or improved (e.g., its
sensors cannot be replaced with new technology
to increase its capabilities).107
OSAM technologies, most famously employed in the con-
struction of the ISS and other space stations, could also
benefit the small-satellite sector if regulatory and other
hurdles could be overcome. A wide variety of space mis-
sions could benefit from these technologies. Technical
challenges, a lack of global standards, and the surround-
ing policy framework, however, restrict the growth of these
activities.108
For the small satellite, there are challenges to developing
and implementing OSAM new technologies and opera-
tions. They primarily center around establishing standards
and practices. For example, the value propositions for
OSAM activities are unknown. There is also a culture of sin-
gle-launch, single-use missions, and a need for yet-to-be-
implemented common interfaces, and remote verification
and validation. Effectively implementing OSAM activities
also requires changes in policy and regulations, as well
as a means to meet international obligations. Significant
issues limiting OSAM commercial operations from expand-
ing include:

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
30
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
● the lack of coordination in the United States, within
government and between government and other
stakeholders, and domestically and globally;
● the absence of a timely and effective system to estab-
lish and adopt standards; and
● the lack of a clear regulatory environment for future
technologies and approaches.109
There were two successful OSAM missions (Mission Ex-
tension vehicles) in 2020. Northrop Grumman Corporation
provided life-extension services for commercial commu-
nication satellites. The company’s MEv -1 successfully
docked to the Intelsat 901 satellite in February 2020 and
moved the satellite back into service. MEv-2 docked with
IS-10-02 in its operational geosynchronous orbital location.
The MEv-2 satellite refueled Intelsat’s IS-10-2 communica-
tions vehicle. NGC states its MEvs are compatible with 80
percent of operational satellites.110 Also in 2021, Astroscale
conducted a technology demonstration, validating its mag-
netic-capture system by successfully docking with its own
end-of-life servicing vehicle in LEO.111
Existing DoC regulations impede development of on-orbit
commercial SSA capabilities. Commercial remote-sensing
licenses for non-Earth imaging (e.g., detecting, tracking,
and imaging other space objects) require a license from
the DoC. These licenses include significant restrictions for
non-Earth imaging. Non-Earth imaging capabilities are nec-
essary to service, assemble, and manufacture vehicles and
platforms in space. Foreign governments do not usually
apply these restrictions to their companies, thereby plac-
ing US companies at a disadvantage in the world market as
they compete for business conducting OSAM and orbital
debris-removal operations.112
109 Online interview with Dr. Brian Weeden, August 24, 2021.
110 Chandraveer Mathur, “Northrop Grumman’s MEv-2 Life-Extender Successfully Coupled with an Active Satellite,” NewsBytes, last updated April 19, 2021,
https://www.newsbytesapp.com/news/science/mev-2-life-extending-satellite-successfully-couples-with-active-satellite/story. Note that the 80-percent
figure likely refers to GOE communications satellites.
111 “Astroscale’s Safe Magnetic Catch in Space,” SatNews, September 7, 2021, https://news.satnews.com/2021/09/07/astroscales-safe-magnetic-catch-in-
space; Interview with Chris Blackbery, chief operating oofficer of Astroscale, September 14, 2021.
112 “Space Policy and Sustainability: Issue Briefing for the Biden Administration,” Secure World Foundation, December 2020, 12, https://swfound.org/
media/207084/swf_space_policy_issue_briefing_2020_web.pdf.
113 Telephone interview with Erin Miller, executive director, Space ISAC, July 23, 2021; “About Us,” Space ISAC, 2021, https://s-isac.org/about-us/.
Space Information Sharing and Analysis Center
(Space ISAC)
In 2020, the Space ISAC was established as a public-pri-
vate partnership. Twenty-four companies support this ef-
fort as members, and twenty-five ISACs exist across all
sectors of US critical infrastructure. They are public-pri-
vate partnerships recognized as necessities to ensure the
security of US critical-infrastructure sectors. The Space
ISAC facilitates collaboration across the global space in-
dustry to share information, enhance preparation, mitigate
threats, and increase response capabilities to vulnerabil-
ities, incidents, and threats. The organization dissemi-
nates near-real-time threat data among member entities,
and provides training, certifications, tabletop exercises,
and membership communities of interest to develop best
practices.113
Public and Private Coordination
Government and private mechanisms ensuring global
standards, safety, and long-term sustainability in space
have been somewhat successful. However, the processes
of international coordination take years, if not decades.
Current international space law and treaties do little to
establish a code of conduct or an agreed set of norms
addressing military or international security in space. In
addition, the notification mechanisms used to ensure
on-orbit safety are routinely used between nations and
companies, but have failed on several occasions. The cur -
rent international coordination efforts and national regu-
latory mechanisms cannot be expected to maintain pace
with quickly evolving aspects of the commercial space
industry.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
31
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Chapter 5: Findings and Recommendations
114 For the past two decades, national policies have directed agencies to buy commercial goods and services before considering the development of a
government solution. Almost all of the government and industry experts interviewed for this study believe DoD and the IC ignore those mandates for
commercial space capabilities.
115 “Space Policy and Sustainability,” 15.
Key Findings
This report explores the trends and technological develop-
ments defining the future of the space domain. In doing so,
it arrives at six key conclusions.
1. The United States will most likely lose space superiority
to China within the next decade.
2. The DoD and the IC are rightly taking advantage of the
small-satellite revolution. The IC is increasingly invest-
ing in commercial small-satellite data to increase collec-
tion capabilities and provide military support.
3. The DoD does not generally take a “buy commercial
first” approach to space services. Rather, there is an
established culture that ignores legislated “commer-
cial first” mandates, and that behavior has become
increasingly detrimental to national security interests.
Over the last decade, this negative culture has eroded
US space superiority, and will continue to do so as the
world moves toward quickly developed and deployed,
low-cost commercial space systems.114
4. To date, no commercial small-satellite service has
proven itself viable without government support. Y et,
the growth of this industry will dramatically impact US
national security.
5. DoD acquisition processes are designed to reduce
risk and, as a result, are ill prepared for the high-speed
commercial space environment. Senior DoD leaders
are making efforts to speed up acquisition processes
for small satellites and associated technologies. The
results to date are mixed.
6. The DoC OSC has made little progress over the last
year in executing its responsibilities for STM and on-or-
bit mission authorities. Being subordinate to NOAA
does not allow the office to function at the level re-
quired to be effective in executing its mission.
Key Recommendations
The following recommendations address areas of US
space policy, the regulatory environment, coordination
and cooperation with US allies, and commercial investment
strategies. These recommendations have the same goals:
to enhance global space security and advance the US
commercial space industry. Advancing the US commercial
space industry is a critical component of maintaining global
space leadership and ensuring the safety and security of
space systems and national security.
US Military, Government, and Civil Space
Department of Defense and Intelligence Community
1. The DoD should ensure the resilience of US space sys-
tems by using commercial systems, including responsive
space launch and satellite architectures across multiple
orbits, and incorporating allied space capabilities.115
2. Congress should direct DoD and ODNI to conduct a
study to identify national security missions that can be
accomplished through commercial space, related ser-
vices, space communications, and SSA.
i. Congress should earmark DoD and IC funds for the
purchases of those commercial services. This action
will force compliance with US law and increase com-
mercial space services driving innovation through
competition.
3. Congress and the administration must conduct rigorous
oversight to ensure DoD and Intelligence Community
organizations enforce policies (including their own) to
“buy commercial first.”
4. DoD should prototype and acquire small-satellite and
related cyber capabilities using OTA and Section 804
authorities. Use of other standard acquisition processes
should require a waiver.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
32
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
5. The Joint Chiefs of Staff should establish a program
to ensure OPSEC is integrated into doctrine and op-
erational activities employing current awareness of
commercial space remote-sensing capabilities and
intelligence. This program should include training on
foreign and commercial technical capabilities to defeat
OPSEC. The program should also be integrated with
DoD Perception Management and denial and deception
efforts.
6. To ensure deterrence against hostile nations, DoD
should develop, coordinate, and exercise response
strategies to cyberattacks against US and allied com-
mercial space systems. These CONOPS should be
done with the IC, DHS, allies, and private industry. This
activity could include the National Guard.
7. Protocols, treaties, operating rules, etc. will eventually
be established by commercial companies as well as
governments. The US government (particularly DoD
OSD/Space Policy, Defense Threat Reduction Agency,
and the Intelligence Community) should have a well-de-
veloped, well-thought-out, brilliantly designed plan for
verification and compliance (sensors, networks, analy-
sis standards, communication protocols, etc.). This plan
should recognize that much of the data will necessarily
be shared globally and, therefore, must be unclassified.
The plan will support overall US national security and
commercial space strategies.
Other US Government Actors
Department of Homeland Security
DHS plays an important role in supporting the commer-
cial space industry in developing standards and best
practices. In May 2021, DHS’s Cyber and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA) established a Space Systems
Critical Infrastructure Working Group. The working group
is a mix of government and industry participants devel-
oping strategies to minimize risks to space systems that
support the nation’s critical infrastructure.116 CISA has also
produced several cybersecurity publications and recom-
mended standards relevant to small-satellite systems.
Building upon this progress, DHS should take the follow-
ing next steps:
1. DHS should lead a study to determine if space systems
should be included as one of the national critical in-
frastructure sectors. If so, Congress should designate
116 “Space Systems Critical Infrastructure Working Group,” Cyber and Infrastructure Security Agency, May 13, 2021, https://www.cisa.gov/news/2021/05/13/
cisa-launches-space-systems-critical-infrastructure-working-group.
117 “Budget of the U.S. Government Fiscal Y ear 2023,” US Office of Management and Budget, 2022, 50, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2022/03/budget_fy2023.pdf.
space systems as critical infrastructure, with the DoC
as the Sector-Specific Agency.
2. DHS should continue to strongly advocate private indus-
try’s adoption of the NIST SP 800-37 Risk Management
Framework for Information Systems and Organizations:
A System Life Cycle Approach for Security and Privacy.
This document provides a recommended cybersecurity
risk-management framework for commercial satellite
operators.
3. DHS should work with the Defense Counterintelligence
and Security Agency to develop programs that en-
hance supply-chain security in the commercial space
industry.
i. Programs should include training and information
sharing enabled through the Space ISAC.
Department of Commerce
The DoC plays a significant role in regulating, overseeing,
and advancing the US commercial small-satellite industry. It
also has a critical function in establishing US leadership in
global STM. The DoC should take the following next steps:
1. The DoC should purchase commercial SSA data and
services, to the maximum extent possible, and secure
international data-sharing agreements. DoC should in-
centivize the private sector to develop innovative ana-
lytical tools and advanced services to conduct STM.
2. Move the Office of Space Commerce out from under
NOAA. OSC’s recently expanded responsibilities for
STM and mission authorities make it a poor fit under
an entity focused on oceanographic and atmospheric
administration. Being buried in NOAA puts the OSC in
poor position to conduct the required interagency and
international coordination.
3. Congress should affirm that the DoC Office of Space
Commerce has the requisite on-orbit authorities to
allow it to promulgate regulations for on-orbit mission
operations that fall outside the current licensing and su-
pervision framework.
4. DoC requested $88 million in its fiscal year 2023 (FY23)
budget to conduct the STM mission and develop new data
tools.117 Congress should support this request and ensure
DoC executes it with a “commercial first” approach.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
33
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
5. OSC should fully embrace commercial SSA providers
through contracts. It is imperative that this office live up
to the requirement to “buy commercial first”.
6. The OSC should provide clear, deliberate direction to
acquire, prioritize, implement, and deploy existing com-
mercial SSA and STM services.
Commercial Space Actors
One of the challenges facing the small-satellite industry is
educating and helping to reorient the DoD and IC. For gen-
erations, the US defense and intelligence communities had
little concern for economic security and advancing domes-
tic commercial industries. A hostile and competitive rising
China has altered the global situation, necessitating closer
cooperation between the US national security community
and commercial space providers.
1. Small-satellite and related industry associations should
enhance and coordinate efforts to educate relevant
government departments on capabilities, emerging
technologies, and the market case for commercial
satellites.
US Allies and Partners
The US faces many foreign policy challenges, including
a rising hostile authoritarian China and aggressive mili-
tary actions from Russia. Space security is a foundational
element of ensuring peace with these strategic compet-
itors. The United States must expand its efforts in space
diplomacy to ensure coordinated action with allies and
establish global standards with partners:
1. The Department of State, DoD Office of Space Policy,
and Department of Commerce should enhance space
diplomatic efforts with the following goals:
i. Increase the urgency to establish behavioral norms
for space systems, particularly:
1. rendezvous and proximity operations;
2. notifications and guidelines;
3. orbital debris and guidelines; and
4. cybersecurity standards.
ii. Support commercial space industry efforts to en-
hance Track 2 international collaboration and coor-
dination.
iii. Establish the United States as the global leader and
provider of STM.
1. Develop an interagency process for unclassified
and classified STM and SSA data to be used in
international forums.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
34
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Conclusion
T
his growth of the global commercial small-satellite
industry is quickly changing the paradigm of how
the United States and its allies must act to ensure
space security. If the United States is to guarantee
safety and security in space, then public-private partner-
ships and the use of commercial small-satellite capabili-
ties must evolve to be the cornerstone of national security
space. The traditional DoD technology development and
acquisition processes are simply not capable of maintain-
ing parity with commercial industries that field advanced
software in weeks and satellites in months. The DoC must
also accelerate its processes to field commercial data-driv-
en solutions for STM. DoD will have to act in the immediate
future if the United States is to maintain security and its
global leadership in space.
The commercial space industry is fast and, over the next
decade, will accelerate its technology development and
manufacturing processes even more. These advances will
not be the sole domain of US industry, but will be realized
worldwide. Competitor and hostile nations are empower-
ing their companies to compete with the US commercial
space industry. By providing national-level support and a
friendly regulatory environment, China has already caught
up to, and in some cases surpassed, the United States
in select aspects of space technology. There is no rea-
son that China could not do the same in the commercial
small-satellite market. If the United States is to ensure se-
curity in space, then the US government must adapt to a
new operating environment.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
35
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
About the Author
Nicholas Eftimiades is a nonresident senior fellow at the Forward Defense practice of the Atlantic
Council’s Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security. Eftimiades currently holds an appointment
with the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, National Intelligence Council, and has
held appointments with the Defense Science Board and the Homeland Security Advisory
Council’s Subcommittee on Economic Security. He is also a professor at the Penn State University
Homeland Security Programs and is a member of the graduate faculty teaching homeland security,
intelligence, and national security policy. He conducts research on China’s economic espionage
and emerging space threats.
Eftimiades retired from a thirty-four-year government career, including employment at the US
Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of State, Diplomatic Security Service, and Defense
Intelligence Agency. He is widely regarded for his expertise on China and national security space
issues. As a subject-matter expert, he has testified before congressional committees and briefed
numerous senior US and foreign officials, members of Congress, and staff.
Eftimiades has an MS in strategic intelligence from the National Defense Intelligence College
and a BA in East Asian Studies from George Washington University. He lived and studied in
China and Japan. He was a senior research fellow at the King’s College Department of War
Studies in London. Eftimiades has authored books, reports, and articles on China’s intelligence
methodology, national security space issues, and emerging technology. His book Chinese
Intelligence Operations is an examination of the structure, operations, and methodology of the
Chinese intelligence services. It is widely regarded as the seminal work in the field.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
36
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Acknowledgements
This report was made possible
with the generous support of Thales.
To produce this report, the author conducted a number of interviews and consultations. Listed below are some of the
individuals consulted and whose insights informed this report. The analysis and recommendations presented in this re-
port are those of the author alone and do not necessarily represent the views of the individuals consulted. Moreover, the
named individuals participated in a personal, not institutional, capacity.
● Kari Bingen, chief strategy officer, HawkEye 360
● Miller Belmont, chief innovation officer, 75th Innovation Command, US Army Reserve
● Chris Blackberby, group chief operating officer, Astroscale
● Dr. Nick Cramer, research engineer and project manager, Intelligent Systems Division, Ames Research Center,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
● Dr. Nate Dailey, principal architect, Space Engineering, MITRE
● Dr. Thomas W. Cooley, chief scientist, Space Vehicles Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory
● James Cooper, senior system engineer, SSA Solutions, COMSPOC
● Debra D. Facktor, head of U.S. space systems, Airbus U.S. Space & Defense, Inc.
● Col Eric J. Felt, USAF, commander, Phillips Research Site; director, Space Vehicles Directorate, Air Force Research
Laboratory
● Yasuhito Fukushima, senior research fellow, Policy Studies Department, Japan National Institute for Defense Studies
● Dr. William C. Greenwalt, nonresident senior fellow, American Enterprise Institute
● Dr. Kelly A. Grieco, senior fellow, New American Engagement Initiative, Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security,
Atlantic Council
● Stephen L. Kitay, senior director, Azure Space, Microsoft
● Dr. Fred G. Kennedy, inaugural director, Space Development Agency, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Research and Engineering, US Department of Defense
● Axel Kloth, founder and chief executive officer, Abacus Semiconductor Corporation
● Dr. Jerry Krasner, consultant, Space Situational Awareness, US Department of Defense
● Douglas Loverro, president, Loverro Consulting, LLC
● Erin Miller, executive director, Space Information Sharing and Analysis Center
● Kevin O’Connell, founder and chief executive officer, Space Economy Rising, LLC
● Dr. John Olds, founder and chief executive officer, SpaceWorks Enterprises, Inc.
● Robbie Schlinger, co-founder and chief strategy officer, Planet Labs
● Scott Simmons, former chairman, Sensor Working Group, Open Skies Treaty
● Dr. Derek M. Tournear, director, Space Development Agency, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research
and Engineering, US Department of Defense
● Paula Trimble, policy chief and director of legislative affairs, Space Development Agency, Office of the Under Secretary
of Defense for Research and Engineering, US Department of Defense
● Dr. Brian Weeden, director, program planning, Secure World Foundation

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Board of Directors
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander v. Mirtchev
TREASURER
*George Lund
DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
*Peter Ackerman
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
John Bonsell
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
Richard R. Burt
*Teresa Carlson
*James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Richard Edelman
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Mark T. Esper
*Michael Fisch
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
Frank Haun
Michael v. Hayden
Tim Holt
*Karl v. Hopkins
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
*Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Brian L. Kelly
Henry A. Kissinger
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Yann Le Pallec
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Christian Marrone
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Dambisa F. Moyo
virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
W. Devier Pierson
*Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell McCormick
Michael Punke
Ashraf Qazi
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
Gil Tenzer
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster 
*Executive Committee
Members
List as of April 6, 2022

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security
C4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and engagement in international
 affairs based on the central role of the Atlantic community in
 meeting today’s global challenges.
© 2022 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means without permission
in writing from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of brief
quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please
direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor, Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
