
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
发展中国家治国理政总统顾问部级研讨班项目简介表

项目名称 发展中国家治国理政总统顾问部级研讨班
承办单位 中国社会科学院大学
举办时间 2021年6月2日至6月8日 项目语言 英语
邀请国别 发展中国家 计划人数 25 人
培训目标
进一步向发展中国家推介《习近平谈治国理政》第三卷及前两卷内容、理念和价值，
推动“一带一路”倡议的实践， 加强中国与发展中国家在治国理政能力建设方面交流合作。
该项目旨在帮助发展中国家元首的高级顾问与内阁阁员全面地了解我国治国理政实践与
治理水平的情况，特别是应对新冠肺炎疫情时期社会动员与管理实践以及由疫情带来的
经济发展的挑战，扩大中国治理体系现代化构建的国际影响力。
学员要求
专业背景
——领域或专业：总统府、内阁
——工作岗位：国家元首顾问、内阁成员
——级别、学历学位或其他相关资质要求：部级官员及其助手
——相关领域工作年限：无
——其他：无
年龄 不高于各受援国法定退休年龄；
身体健康 身体健康，能够按时参加线上培训
语言能力 学员应具备英语听、说、读、写能力
其 它 能够下载并使用 ZOOM 会议平台，并全程按日程安排参与研修
班活动
培训内容介绍
1.主要培训课程及内容介绍
（1）中国国情与改革开放历程：主要向学员介绍中国的政治、社会、历史等方面的发展
情况，中国改革开放的概况发展梗概、发展成就。
（2）习近平治国理政思想与中国的政治体制：介绍习近平治国理政思想、中国当前的政
治体制、政治生活和大政方针制定的议程特点
（3）中国抗疫的实践与经验：主要介绍中国对抗新冠肺炎疫情的措施与现状。
（4）中国共产党的建设与执政能力：介绍中国共产党在组织、思想、理论等方面的建设
情况，以及党建对执政能力的促进作用。
（5）一带一路倡议与国际合作：介绍中国“一带一路”倡议的主要内容、价值观以及实
践情况，同时介绍中国的国际合作。
（6）中国的宏观经济发展形势：介绍中国当前宏观经济形势，特别是后疫情时期的发展
特点。

2.专题研讨介绍
（1）与中国社科院治国理政研究领域的专家讨论治理能力建设的路径问题。
（2）与财经领域专家讨论五年发展规划与国家治理问题。
（3）官员内部研讨总结交流会，交流研讨经验和心得体会。

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
3.主讲人整体情况介绍
（1）张斌：中国社会科学院大学副校长，教授，从事经济与财政领域的研究。
（2）贺文萍：中国社会科学院西亚非洲研究所研究员，从事国际政治与习近平治国理政
思想研究。
（3）王永中：中国社会科学院世界经济与政治研究所研究员，从事当代中国宏观经济领
域的研究。
（4）吴波：中国社会科学院马克思主义研究院研究员，从事马克思主义中国化、中国共
产党党建方面的研究。
（5）王玉主：中国社会科学院亚太与全球战略研究院研究员，从事经济与一带一路领域
的研究。
（6）吕鹏：中国社会科学院社会学研究所研究员，从事社会发展、新冠疫情防控领域的
研究。

5.学员需准备的材料
为方便与中国专家的交流，请准备好研修主题相关的交流材料，如：①包括专业和
所在单位的自我介绍；②与中国的合作基础和展望等。

6.评估
 给官员发放和回收评估表，对研讨班整体和授课进行评估。
举办地点 北京市 （云）参观考察
城市 无
备注 1.遵守研修班的相关规定并履行相应的义务。
2.保证研修班进行期间网络情况的稳定，严格遵守研修班日程安排。
承办单位简介
中国社会科学院大学成立于1978 年，是经邓小平、叶剑英亲自批准设立的直属于中
国社会科学院的研究生培养基地。中国社会科学院是我国人文社会科学研究最高学术机
构和综合研究中心，它作为党中央和国务院的“思想库”和“智囊团”为中国社会发展贡献
了巨大的学术及科研助力。中国社会科学院以学科齐全，人才集中，资料丰富的优势，
在中国改革开放和现代化建设的进程中，进行创造性地理论探索和政策研究，肩负着从
整体上提高中国人文社会科学水平的使命。建院40 年来，中国社会科学院大学培养了大
批学有所成的人才，他们毕业后分赴各条战线，并迅速成长为推动经济建设、深化理论
探索、促进学术研究、成为带动社会发展的中坚力量。
学校自2009 年开始承接商务部援外培训项目，共为100 个国家的1495 名部长级、
司处级官员、学者和企业管理者提供培训，举办过多期高端培训项目，如部长级总统顾
问研讨班（2013-2019）、积累了丰富的国际培训项目经验。
承办单位联系
方式
联系人：宋翔、李梅
办公电话：0086-010-84716076
手机：
 （宋）、
 （李）
传真：0086-010-84716076
微信号：
 （宋）、
 （李）
QQ 号：
 （宋）、
 （李）
电子邮件地址：songxiang@cass.org.cn（宋）、 li-mei@cass.org.cn（李）

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Seminar on National Governance for Presidential Advisers
of Developing Countries

Project Name Seminar on National Governance for Presidential Advisers of Developing Countries
Organizer University of Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (UCASS)
Date June 2 - June 8, 2021 Language English
Countries
Invited Developing Countries Number of
Participants 25 in total
Objectives
The project is intended to further introduce the contents, principles and values of “Xi Jinping:
The Governance of China” V olume III and its first two volumes to developing countries, so as
to facilitate practical efforts under the Belt and Road Initiative and strengthen exchanges and
cooperation on national governance and capacity building between China and developing
countries. The project aims to equip head -of-state senior advisers and cabinet members of
developing countries with a comprehensive understanding of China’s national governance
practices and capacities, with a particular focus on practices of social mobilization and
management in response to Covid-19 and development challenges brought by the pandemic. It
will also seek to expand the international influence of the modernized governance system of
China.
Requirements
for Participants
Professional
Backgrounds
-Area of Expertise or Specialty: Presidential Office; Cabinet
-Position: Presidential/Head of State Advisers; Cabinet Members
-Hierarchical Rankings, Educational Backgrounds or Other
Qualifications: Ministerial Officials and their assistants
-Years of Professional Experience: None
-Others: None
Age Under the legal retirement age of the recipient country
Health Status Healthy; Able to participate in online seminar sessions on time
Language Competence The ability to understand, speak, read and write in English
Others Able to download and use the ZOOM platform to fully complete the
project agenda on time
Contents of
Training
1.Overview of Training Courses
（1）China’s National Realities, Reform and Opening-up Process: to offer an introduction on
political, social, and historical development of China, alongside an overview of the
development trajectory and achievements of China’s reform and opening-up.
（2）Xi Jinping ’s Thought on Governance and China’s Political System: to introduce
President Xi Jinping’s thought on national governance, China’s current political system,
political life and the features of decision-making process for fundamental policies.
（3）China’s Practice and Experience in Pandemic Response: to provide an introduction on
measures taken and current state of play of China’s response to Covid-19.
（4）Party Building and Governance Capacity of Communist Party of China (CPC): to

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
introduce CPC’s efforts on organizational, ideological, and theoretical development, alongside
its facilitating role on governance capacity building.
（5）Belt and Road Initiative and International Cooperation : to introduce the main contents,
values and practices of the Belt and Road Initiative proposed by China , as well as China’s
involvement in international cooperation.
（6）China’s Macroeconomic Landscape: to introduce the current status of macro economy in
China, especially the characteristics of its post-pandemic economic development.

2.Overview of Specific Topics for Discussion
（1）To explore pathways for governance capacity building with the experts of national
governance studies from the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS).
（2）To explore five -year development planning and national governance topics with
financial and economic experts.
（3）To share experience and reflections among participants for internal summary and
conclusion of seminar activities.

3. Overview of Speakers
（7）ZHANG Bin: Vice President of UCASS; Professor, who specializes in research on
economics and public finance.
（8）HE Wenping: Research fellow, who specializes in research on international relations and
Xi Jinping’s thought on governance; Institute of West-Asian and African Studies, CASS.
（9）WANG Yongzhong: Research fellow, who specializes in research on China’s
macroeconomics; Institute of World Economics and Politics, CASS.
（10）WU Bo: Research fellow, who specializes in research on sinicization of Marxism
(Chinese Marxism) and CPC party building; Academy of Marxism, CASS.
（11）WANG Yuzhu: Research fellow, who specializes in research on economics and the Belt
and Road Initiative; National Institute of International Strategy, CASS.
（12）LV Peng: R esearch fellow, who specializes in research on social development and
Covid-19 prevention and control; Institute of Sociology, CASS.

4. Materials to be Prepared (by Participants)
To facilitate exchanges with Chinese experts, please prepare relevant materials for discussion:
1) Introduction of one’s area of expertise/specialty and affiliations; 2) Proposed basis and
prospect for cooperation with China; among others.

5. Evaluation
Evaluation forms will be handed out to participants for general assessment of the seminar and
its lectures/training sessions.
Site of Seminar Beijing Sites for Virtual
Tours None
Remarks
1.Please abide by the rules of the seminar and fulfill one’s due obligations.
2.Participants need to ensure stable access to the Internet throughout the seminar and strictly
follow the project schedule.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Introduction of
Organizer
Established in 1978, the University/Graduate School of Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
(UCASS/GSCASS) is the postgraduate institution directly affiliated to the Chinese Academy
of Social Sciences, the prestigious academic institution and comprehensive research center for
humanities and social sciences in China. Approved by the then state leaders Deng Xiaoping
and Ye Jianying, it has the mandate to contribute academically and scientifically to the social
development of China as the think tank for the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the State
Council. By leveraging its well-established strength in complete setup of disciplines, rich pool
of talents and resources, CASS has carried out creative theoretical explorations and policy
studies throughout China's reform, opening up and modernization process, living up to its due
mission of overall improvement on humanities and social sciences in China. During the past
40 years, UCASS has continued to prosper, nurturing a host of accomplished alumni who have
made significant contributions to stimulating Chinese economic growth , deepening theoretical
exploration, and advancing social development as the backbone of society.
The organizer has started to host training seminars under the Foreign Aid Program sponsored
by the Ministry of Commerce of the People’s Republic of China since 2009, resulting in
fruitful outcomes with 1,495 officials (of ministerial, director -general and director levels),
scholars and business managers from 100 countries as beneficiaries of the program. Multiple
advanced and high -end seminars have been successfully held, such as the Ministerial
Workshop on National Governance for Presidential Advisers (2013-2019), contributing to rich
experience in international training projects.
Contact the
Organizer
Contacts: Mr. SONG Xiang, Ms. LI Mei(Nancy Li)
Office Tel.: 0086-010-84716076
Phone:
 (Mr. SONG);
 (Ms. LI)
Fax: 0086-010-84716076
WeChat Account:
 (Mr. SONG);
 (Ms. LI)
QQ Account:
 (Mr. SONG);
 (Ms. LI)
Email: songxiang@cass.org.cn (Mr. SONG); li-mei@cass.org.cn (Ms. LI)
