
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
I
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
Global
Foresight
2036

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
II
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
About the Atlantic Council Strategy Papers series:
The Atlantic Council Strategy Papers series is the Atlantic
Council’s flagship outlet for publishing dynamic, forward
looking strategic thinking. The papers are authored by a range
of established and leading authorities from within and outside
the Atlantic Council.
Launched in 2015, the series, housed in the Scowcroft Center
for Strategy and Security, has covered a wide range of topics,
from strategies for countering the challenges posed by China
and Russia to the future of security in space to preserving US
dollar dominance. It includes the Council’s Global Foresight
series, a yearly assessment of driving forces and various
trends influencing the world in the decade ahead, as well
as the Global Strategy series, which is an annual paper that
provides actionable recommendations for how the United
States and its allies and partners can lead, revitalize, adapt,
and defend a rules-based international system.
As General Brent Scowcroft noted, the concept of strategy
is simple—articulating a goal and a plan to achieve it—but
doing good strategy work in practice is difficult. The Atlantic
Council Strategy Paper embodies his commitment to providing
sustainable, nonpartisan strategies with clear frameworks and
recommendations to help current and future policymakers
rise to the challenges facing the United States, its allies, and
partners and achieve a more peaceful, prosperous, and free
world.
About the Global Foresight series:
Global Foresight is an annual strategic foresight series
produced by the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center for
Strategy and Security. The series aims to generate original and
provocative insights about the world and its future. Although
it is impossible to predict with certainty how the years ahead
will unfold, it is useful to develop a deeper understanding of
how trends and uncertainties—drivers of change—might shape
the future. Global Foresight is designed to assist in identifying
and comprehending these driving forces today and what the
consequences of that change—both positive and negative—
might be for the world writ large over the coming decade.
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
III
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic Council Policy on Intellectual
Independence. The authors are solely responsible for its analysis and recommendations. The Atlantic
Council and its donors do not determine, nor do they necessarily endorse or advocate for, any of this
report’s conclusions.
ISBN-13: 978-1-61977-545-9
COVER: The Guggenheim Museum Bilbao. Jorge Fernández Salas/Unsplash
© 2026 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means without permission in writing from the Atlantic
Council, except in the case of brief quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please direct
inquiries to:
Atlantic Council, 1400 L Street NW, 11th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
ATLANTIC COUNCIL STRATEGY PAPERS
Editorial Board
Executive Editors
Frederick Kempe
Alexander V. Mirtchev
Editor-in-Chief
Matthew Kroenig
Editorial Board Members
James L. Jones
Odeh Aburdence
Paula Dobriansky
Stephen J. Hadley
Jane Holl Lute
Ginny Mulberger
Hon. Stephanie Murphy
Dan Poneman
Arnold Punaro
The Scowcroft Center is grateful to Frederick Kempe and Alexander V. Mirtchev for their
ongoing support of the Atlantic Council Strategy Papers Series in their capacity as executive
editors.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
IV
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
V
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
Table of Contents
Introduction ...............................................................................................................................VI
Welcome to 2036 ........................................................................................................................1
1 China's power .................................................................................................................2
2 Nato's future ..................................................................................................................5
3 The fate of Ukraine–and Russia ...............................................................................7
4 Human-like AI ...............................................................................................................9
5 Nuclear proliferation ...................................................................................................11
6 European autonomy ..................................................................................................13
7 Water wars ....................................................................................................................15
8 Weakening multilateralism and democracy .........................................................17
9 Crypto versus the dollar ...........................................................................................19
10 The view from the Global South ...........................................................................21
Six ‘snow leopards’ to watch for in the decade ahead ...............................................25
The tech companies altering the course of conflicts ...........................................26
The migrants moving in loops, not lines ..................................................................28
The underwater forests helping heal the climate .................................................30
The crumbling human rights order ............................................................................32
The cultural erasure driven by AI ...............................................................................34
The neurotechnology that could read your mind ..................................................36
AI and the future .....................................................................................................................38
Appendix – The Global Foresight 2036 Survey: full results ........................................44

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
VI
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
Introduction
Global Foresight 2036   is the  fifth edition of an annual  series produced by the Atlantic Council’s
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security. Like the previous four editions,  Global Foresight 2036 ’s
central purpose is to provoke deeper thinking about what the future might hold. Provocation is a cen-
tral tenet of the foresight discipline, which also warns that the future is impossible to predict. Instead
of prediction,  the discipline instead  insists that we prepare ourselves for an array of  possible fu -
tures, including futures that may astonish and perplex us. My evergreen hope, therefore, is that this
year’s edition will shed much-needed light on the complexities of 2026 and, in so doing, help us re -
visit our assumptions and expectations about the coming decade.  
Global Foresight 2036 —an Atlantic Council Strategy Paper—contains three main analytical compo -
nents. The first consists of findings from our fourth annual survey of leading geostrategists and fore -
sight practitioners from around the world. These experts, drawn from the Atlantic Council network,
were surveyed about the state of world affairs out to 2036, a decade hence. Although some of the
survey questions differ slightly from year to year, this year’s edition, like the others, asks about the
core drivers of change in the global system: geopolitics and war, peace, and conflict; governance
and institutions; democracy and rights; science and technology; Earth systems, energy, and climate
change; and more.  The report’s  second  component  consists of six “snow leopards,” which  were
first identified in Global Foresight 2022. Then, as now, snow leopards are defined as under-the-radar
phenomena that might have unexpected yet critically important impacts in the future. This year, the
Atlantic Council’s younger staff spotted six snow leopards, ranging from nature-based solutions to
neurotechnology to private firms going to war. (Foresight emphasizes hearing from all corners, includ-
ing youth.) The third component is new to this year’s edition. First launched on the Global Foresight
2036 digital version, this component consists of three videos featuring the Atlantic Council’s tech -
nology experts discussing the future of artificial intelligence (AI). Their insights are captured here in
edited and condensed excerpts from our video conversation.   
Global Foresight 2036 is the latest installment of what has become the Atlantic Council’s most widely
read long-form publication. The series’ popularity underscores that provocative, insightful, creative,
and forward-looking thinking resonates with people around the world. As always, it is my hope that
you, dear reader, find illuminating insights in this fifth edition of Global Foresight , and that the time
you spend perusing it proves of great value to you.  
Peter Engelke  
Senior Fellow for Foresight  
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security  
Atlantic Council

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
1
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
Welcome to 2036
What the world could look like in ten years,
according to nearly 450 experts
C
hina eclipses the United States economically. A diminished Russia’s war in Ukraine becomes a
frozen one, while conflict over Taiwan turns hot and threatens world war. More countries acquire
nuclear weapons. A democratic depression coincides with the decline of today’s multilateral sys -
tem. Cryptocurrencies challenge the dollar. Artificial intelligence matches or even surpasses human
capabilities. NATO endures, but fundamentally changes.
These are just some of the future scenarios that geostrategists and foresight practitioners pointed to
when the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security surveyed them in November
and December 2025 on how they expect the world to change over the next ten years.
We found respondents generally in a dark mood, with 63 percent expecting the world in 2036 to be
worse off than it is now. Just 37 percent think that it will be better off ten years hence—roughly on par
with the results of this temperature-check question in the previous year’s survey.
The 447 survey respondents were citizens of 72 countries—the highest number of countries
represented in the four years we’ve been conducting our annual Global Foresight survey.1 Roughly
half were citizens of the United States, more than one-fifth were from Europe, and just under a
fifth were from countries in the so-called Global South. Respondents skewed male and older
(roughly three-quarters were male and a similar proportion were over 50 years of age) and were
dispersed across the private sector, nonprofits (think tanks, advocacy groups, non-governmental
organizations), government, academic or educational institutions, independent consultancies, and
multilateral institutions.
So what kind of world do these forecasters envision in 2036? Below are the survey’s ten
biggest findings.  
1ATLANTIC COUNCIL
PHOTO: Gustavo Nacht/Unsplash

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
1
MOST RESPONDENTS THINK CHINA WILL SURPASS THE US
ECONOMICALLY, AS CONCERN ABOUT A TAIWAN CONFLICT RISES AND
40 PERCENT FORESEE ANOTHER WORLD WAR
Most survey respondents do not believe that the United States will be the world’s dominant power
in 2036, with only seven percent saying that it will be. And while an even smaller percentage (four
percent) believe that China will be the dominant global power, the great majority of polled experts
(around nine in ten) believe that these powers will compete for supremacy either in a bipolar world
largely divided into China-aligned and US-aligned blocs or in a multipolar one with multiple centers
of power.
The survey results indicate widespread perceptions that China will wield considerable power over
the coming decade. While nearly three-quarters of respondents predict that the United States will
be the world’s leading military power in 2036, most respondents (58 percent) expect China to be the
world’s top economic power within the next decade—with only 33 percent saying the same about
the United States. Similarly sized minorities expect either China or the United States to be the lead -
ing power in technological innovation (47 percent for the United States, 44 percent for China) and
diplomatic influence (38 percent for the United States, 33 percent for China), suggesting they could
be peer competitors in these domains. The message respondents appear to be sending is that, by
2036, the “China rising” era will have given way to a “China risen” one, characterized by a significant
erosion in US power in certain respects and an end to the US-dominated world order. (A deeper dive
into the data reveals that Global South respondents rate China’s future power higher than respon -
dents from other regions do; see finding 10 below.) 
More than two-thirds of respondents (70 percent) believe that China will try to forcibly take Taiwan in
the next decade—up from 65 percent in our previous year’s survey and 50 percent two years ago,
signaling an increasing likelihood of this scenario materializing. 2 The intensity of this concern seems
to be growing as well: Twenty-one percent of respondents “strongly agree” that China will attempt

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
to forcibly retake Taiwan over the next decade, up from 15 percent who felt this way in our previous
two surveys.3
And what starts in Taiwan wouldn’t necessarily end in Taiwan. In keeping with the top finding from
our previous year’s survey, more than 40 percent of respondents envision another world war, involv -
ing a multifront conflict among great powers, erupting over the next decade. 4 And within that group,
43 percent think the likely trigger will be in Taiwan or the East/South China Seas—the most-cited
origin point for such a conflict, with Eastern Europe (25 percent) and the Middle East (13 percent) in
second and third place. This result suggests that growing competition between China and the United
States, if improperly managed, will become a global powder keg. 
EXPERT INSIGHT
DEXTER TIFF ROBERTS: China “could easily be derailed”
It’s clear that most respondents believe that China is poised to unseat the United States as
the global economic superpower over the next ten years, challenging the United States on
multiple fronts from currency to international institutions to political stability.
It’s also obvious that Beijing is feeling a newfound confidence as it leverages the interna -
tional trade chaos wrought by President Donald Trump’s tariffs to position itself as a global
leader advocating for a more open international trading system. Of course, Beijing continues
to use a host of protectionist measures—from industrial subsidies to non-tariff barriers favor -
ing domestic companies—to tilt the field in its favor.
But China’s ascent to economic supremacy could easily be derailed by its limited progress
in shifting from export-driven growth to a more sustainable, consumption-driven economy. 5
China’s present model is facing ever larger challenges as countries push back against a flood
of Chinese electric vehicles, solar panels, and electronics.
DEXTER TIFF ROBERTS , founder and publisher of the newsletter Trade
War on Chinese economics and politics, former China bureau chief and Asia
News Editor at Bloomberg Businessweek, and nonresident senior fellow at
the Atlantic Council’s Global China Hub
MARKUS GARLAUSKAS: Military power alone won’t deter China
The clear majority of respondents who assessed that China will attempt to take Taiwan by
force in the next decade included those respondents who also assessed that the United
States would be the strongest military power at the time—suggesting many respondents
believe overall military power alone is insufficient to deter Beijing.
Given that Beijing has ramped up its aggressive rhetoric and military exercises against
Taiwan, which are starting to look like dress rehearsals for an attack, now is the time for ac -
tion.6 To strengthen deterrence, the United States and its allies should improve intelligence
to provide timely attack warning, posture forces to decisively win a first battle against China,

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
and establish a victory plan to prepare for a long war. 7 Meanwhile, the United States should
encourage Taiwan to further strengthen its defenses and mobilize the whole of its society
to deter China.8
While Taiwan was most commonly cited as the flashpoint for a potential global multifront
war in the coming decade, only one respondent cited the Korean peninsula, which suggests
respondents are underestimating the potential for a larger war to start with North Korean
aggression there. As we explored in a report based on a tabletop exercise, either a conflict
in the Taiwan Strait or on the Korean Peninsula could escalate into a broader war, including
nuclear escalation.9
MARKUS GARLAUSKAS , former national intelligence officer for North
Korea on the US National Intelligence Council and director of the Indo-
Pacific Security Initiative of the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center for
Strategy and Security
JOSH LIPSKY AND JESSIE YIN: A day may come when the United States is not the
world’s largest economy, but it won’t be in 2036
The experts are very likely wrong on this one—or at least, they’re missing crucial context.
This idea that China was on track to take over the United States as the world’s largest econ -
omy was conventional wisdom in Washington (and New York) before the COVID-19 pan -
demic. Before 2020, Bloomberg Economics expected China to surpass US nominal GDP
by the early 2030s. 10 Even during the pandemic, many were impressed by the resilience of
China’s economic growth when other major economies faltered. As late as 2022, Goldman
Sachs predicted that China would overtake the US economy around 2035. 11 But economists
have been re-adjusting their predictions across the board. In 2023, Bloomberg Economics
changed its forecast and projected that it would take until the mid-2040s for China’s econ -
omy to catch up to that of the United States. 12 Simply put, Beijing’s economy in 2026 isn’t
what it was in 2020.
While China’s growth has slowed down from pre-pandemic expectations, the United States
has actually outperformed previous growth projections. In 2019, the International Monetary
Fund projected that China’s GDP growth would hit 5.5 percent in 2024, while the United
States would only grow by 1.6 percent.13 In 2024, however, the United States grew by 2.8 per-
cent, while China grew by 5 percent.14 It’s definitely strong growth coming out of Beijing, but
the United States’ nominal GDP was $10 trillion more than China’s in 2024. This makes it less
likely, as China’s growth slows, that it will surpass the United States in 10 years. Assuming
that 2025 growth rates continue, China would surpass the United States in nominal GDP in
2041. And some experts question the veracity of the growth numbers China releases, with
some suggesting a 2025 growth rate as low as 2.5 percent. 15
Economic forecasting is not a precise science, but there are a few factors to look at when
it comes to forecasting China’s economic growth vis-a-vis the United States. Let’s break
down some of these factors behind China’s economic slowdown. Beijing is dealing with the
sticky negative effects of its prolonged real estate slump—a sector which used to be a major

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
driver of economic growth and investment. 16 As the housing market struggles, consumer
confidence remains low, and local governments are bogged down by debt. The country also
has a population crisis on the horizon. By 2060, it’s projected that there will be around 70 el -
derly dependents for every 100 working-age people. 17 China remains a strong export-driven
economy with a high-tech sector that is continuing to innovate, but Chinese high-tech firms
are only one sliver of its overall economy, and we’re still seeing the vast majority of AI invest-
ments worldwide being directed towards the United States. Indeed, it’s the United States
that is leading the development of the most important technology of the twenty-first century.
None of this is to downplay the strengths of China’s economy or to neglect the headwinds
that are facing the United States, but so far, the data doesn’t suggest that China will overtake
the United States as the world’s largest economy by 2036.
JOSH LIPSKY, chair, international economics at the Atlantic
Council and the senior director of the Atlantic Council’s
GeoEconomics Center
JESSIE YIN, assistant director with the Atlantic Council’s
GeoEconomics Center
2 EXPECT NATO TO ENDURE BUT UNDERGO FUNDAMENTAL CHANGES
Amid major ups and downs for NATO in the first year of the second Trump administration—from
commitments to ramp up defense spending at The Hague summit in 2025 to the standoff between
Denmark and the United States over the status of Greenland—survey respondents are split evenly
on whether the Alliance will grow more influential (35 percent) or less (35 percent) in ten years’
time.18 Behind these equivocal answers about NATO’s future power, however, is a clear and substan -
tial measure of doubt regarding the future of the Alliance itself: Nearly half of respondents (44 per -
cent) believe that NATO will no longer exist in its current form in 2036. Among this group expecting
fundamental change, half (51 percent) anticipate that a reconfigured NATO will be less influential than
the current alliance.
This finding likely relates to the part that the United States is expected to play in the Alliance going
forward. A significant minority of respondents—39 percent—don’t envision the United States, by the
year 2036, still having the central, commanding role in NATO that it has had since the Alliance’s found-
ing, though the majority (61 percent) believe the United States will remain in this position. Among the
group that envisions the United States no longer retaining its dominant role in the Alliance, 65 per -
cent expect a coalition of states to take a leading role in NATO if Washington steps back, with smaller
but still significant percentages citing Germany (33 percent), Poland (20 percent), France (19 percent),
and the United Kingdom (18 percent) as potential Alliance leaders. (Respondents could choose more
than one answer.)

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
Respondents also indicated that several NATO member states without nuclear weapons might
acquire them by 2036. Among the 85 percent of survey respondents who think that at least one
new country or territory will obtain nuclear weapons within the next decade, about 30 percent ex -
pect Turkey to do so, 24 percent Germany, and 15 percent for Poland. This may reflect an assessment
that a possible US withdrawal of its nuclear umbrella from Europe or from its leading role in the
Alliance could prompt these NATO member states to go nuclear.
Notably, of the respondents who believe that the United States will be the world’s leading military
power a decade from now, 70 percent think that the United States will retain its security alliances and
partnerships in Europe, Asia, and the Middle East; among those who think another power will lead
in the military field , that figure drops to 49 percent. Similarly, among those in the camp of the United
States as the leading military power in 2036, 67 percent expect Washington to maintain a central role
in NATO relative to just 39 percent who see another country or bloc leading militarily. These findings
indicate a link between US military leadership and the maintenance of the country’s alliances and
partnerships around the world.
EXPERT INSIGHT
IAN BRZEZINSKI: NATO “will not function” without Washington
The polling serves as a troubling warning sign. It reflects frustration with the long-term failure
of European allies to fulfill their defense obligations and the Alliance’s failure to leverage its
massive overmatch in power over Russia to end Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine on just
and enduring terms. Another factor is surely the Trump administration’s determination to di -
lute US military commitment to and leadership in NATO. The Alliance simply will not function
in the absence of robust leadership from Washington and a demonstrable commitment of
force that inspires confidence in US allies and fear in US adversaries.
The good news for NATO is that the Europeans are now finally increasing their defense
spending with haste, the United States continues to have vital interests in Europe that justify
the aforementioned leadership and commitment, and the American public expect that of
their government. Polls consistently show that some 65 to 75 percent of the American public
believe that the United States should sustain or increase its commitment to NATO. That is
what gives me an optimistic outlook about NATO’s future. 19
IAN BRZEZINSKI , former US deputy assistant secretary of defense for
Europe and NATO policy and resident senior fellow with the Transatlantic
Security Initiative in the Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
3
MANY RESPONDENTS ENVISION A DIMINISHED RUSSIA HEADING TOWARD
A FROZEN CONFLICT IN UKRAINE
A high-profile, US-led push for a final negotiated settlement to the war in Ukraine dominated head -
lines while this year’s survey was in the field. Despite that, respondents shifted in the direction of
anticipating a frozen conflict. Just 34 percent of respondents think that the war will end on terms
largely favorable to Russia, down substantially from the nearly half of respondents (47 percent) who
answered that way in our previous year’s survey. Conversely, slightly more than half of respondents
(52 percent) now think the war ultimately will turn into a frozen conflict, up from 43 percent a year ago. 
Meanwhile, respondents believe that Russia is destined to be a lesser power. By 2036, respondents
expect minimal Russian clout across all five metrics of power tested in the survey. Just 2 percent
of those surveyed believe that Russia will be the world’s leading country in cultural or soft power
by 2036 and 1 percent say the same regarding military power. In all other areas, the figure
rounds down to 0 percent. Respondents also cited Russia more than any other world power as
a candidate to break up internally as a result of developments such as revolution, civil war, or
political disintegration, with 36 percent expecting such an outcome relative to 30 percent in the
previous year’s survey. 20 (The latest figure is only slightly below this question’s high of 40 percent
of respondents forecasting Russia’s breakup a few years ago, shortly before Yevgeny Prigozhin
staged a rebellion against the Kremlin.) 21
Russian weakness, however, doesn’t necessarily reduce the danger it poses in Ukraine and beyond;
in fact, it could increase the threat. Among the minority of respondents (22 percent) who expect a
state or terrorist group to use nuclear weapons in the coming decade, 60 percent believe that Russia
will do so, making it the most-cited actor.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
EXPERT INSIGHT
JOHN HERBST: Only pressure on Putin will lead to durable peace
Contrary to pundit chatter, in 2025 US policy largely did not veer in Putin’s direction. It has
jumped back and forth between criticizing and placing pressure on Ukraine and Russia. It is
fair to say that the US president seems reluctant to hammer Putin for his clear rejection of
numerous American ceasefire and peace proposals, and rarely criticizes Putin without also
hitting Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy. Yet Trump still has sanctioned Rosneft and
Lukoil, Russia’s two largest oil firms. And he continues to provide essential military intelli -
gence to Ukraine that has enhanced the effectiveness of Ukraine’s very successful attacks
on Russia’s hydrocarbon production, with serious impact on Russia’s revenue and its stag -
gering economy.
If the White House policy continues, it is safe to expect another year like 2025—at most
minor gains for Putin on the battlefield, at a terrible cost in casualties, and with no strategic
success and more strain on the Russian economy. The Ukrainians will muddle through be -
cause Western support will be at least adequate, and because they have no other choice if
they want to live freely as Ukrainians.
If Team Trump is able to digest the lessons of the past year, the United States will provide
more support for Ukraine—with the sale of more advanced weapons, including Tomahawks—
and put more pressure on the Kremlin in the form of sanctions. The administration would
also embrace the position some of its members spoke about publicly a year ago and use
its influence to persuade Belgium and other influential players to provide remaining frozen
Russian state assets to Ukraine. This combination of measures, if pursued consistently for
many months, would 1) weaken Moscow’s position on the battlefield and 2) increase the
odds of Putin accepting terms to establish a durable peace, which is Trump’s stated aim and
something Putin would only agree to under duress.
JOHN HERBST, former US ambassador to Ukraine and senior director of
the Atlantic Council’s Eurasia Center

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
4
AI COULD MATCH HUMAN CAPABILITIES WITHIN A DECADE, AS
CONCERNS ABOUT THE TECHNOLOGY’S IMPACT MOUNT
Survey respondents expect artificial intelligence (AI) to progress rapidly over the coming decade. A
clear majority (58 percent) believe that, by 2036, the world will have gone beyond today’s predictive
and generative AI systems to achieve artificial general intelligence (AGI), which is defined in the sur -
vey as “an artificial intelligence system matching or exceeding the cognitive abilities of human beings
across any task”—one of the most ambitious goals AI companies are currently pursuing.
Fifty-six percent expect that AI will have a positive effect on global affairs over the next decade,
relative to 32 percent who do not—overall a substantially more optimistic outlook than, for example,
the general public in the United States has. 22 Although there is a clear gap between positive and
negative expectations, that distance is closing amid increasing concerns about the technology. In
the previous year’s survey, the figures were 58 percent and 29 percent, respectively, meaning that
the gap between positive and negative assessments of AI’s impact has declined from 29 percentage
points to 24 percentage points. 23

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
Similarly, while worries about AI’s economic impact remain low among respondents, they are grow -
ing. Fourteen percent of respondents now see job losses and economic disruption due to advance -
ments in technology such as AI as the single biggest threat to global prosperity in the coming decade.
That’s more than double the previous year’s figure of 6 percent. 24
When it comes to social media, our survey respondents have expressed consistently negative views
about the technology’s impact on the world—perhaps because social media is now a mature technol-
ogy with clear downsides, in contrast with the positive expectations people had for the technology
fifteen or twenty years ago. Views about AI could follow a similar course if its downside impacts
ultimately outweigh its positive ones.
EXPERT INSIGHT
TESS DEBLANC-KNOWLES: We don’t know if we’re on track for AGI
It is not certain that we’re going to get to artificial general intelligence with current trajecto -
ries, and there’s also a tremendous amount of uncertainty about which approaches would
get us to more generalizable and true reasoning capabilities—or whether those capabilities
are even possible to achieve. What we’re seeing with each generation of the current models
is higher performance, but it is not clear that training on larger and larger swaths of data,
using more compute, is necessarily going to get us to that breakthrough capability of true
artificial thinking.
TESS DEBLANC-KNOWLES , senior director of the Atlantic Council
Technology Programs

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
11
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
5
BRACE FOR MORE COUNTRIES WITH NUCLEAR WEAPONS—INCLUDING
IRAN DESPITE THE ISRAEL-IRAN WAR—THOUGH NOT NECESSARILY
NUCLEAR USE
Our respondents overwhelmingly expect greater proliferation of nuclear weapons over the next de -
cade, with 85 percent believing additional countries or territories will acquire these arms during that
timeframe. The most-cited next entrant in the nuclear club is Iran, selected by 66 percent of those an-
ticipating the spread of nuclear weapons—indicating a widespread assumption that the war waged
this past summer by Israel and the United States to destroy Iran’s nuclear program did not definitively
extinguish that program or Tehran’s nuclear ambitions. This finding may also explain why the sec -
ond-most-cited actor to obtain nukes in the next ten years (chosen by 53 percent of those expected
nuclear spread) is Iran’s rival and neighbor Saudi Arabia.
But many surveyed experts also foresee nuclear proliferation beyond the Middle East. Those who
imagine additional nuclear powers emerging also point to East Asia (with 47 percent citing South
Korea, 37 percent Japan, and 11 percent Taiwan) and to non-nuclear NATO members as mentioned
in our second finding above.
Respondents appear to believe that this nuclear proliferation will occur in the absence of global gov -
ernance to curb the spread of these weapons, with only 4 percent expecting the greatest expansion
of global cooperation over the next decade to occur in the realm of nuclear nonproliferation.
Even with this likelihood of proliferation, however, respondents seem less concerned that nuclear
weapons will actually be used over the next ten years, with 78 percent of respondents predicting
no nuclear use relative to 52 percent who said the same in the previous year’s survey. 25 Among the
fifth of respondents who are forecasting nuclear use, 60 percent envision Russia employing such
weapons, with 42 percent pointing to North Korea and, notably, 34 percent citing the United States.
The reduced expectation of nuclear use may stem from assessments that particular actors seem less
likely to take such a drastic step relative to assessments a year earlier. For example, 15 percent of
all respondents expect Russia to use nuclear weapons in the next ten years—down from 26 percent
in the previous year’s survey. For North Korea those numbers dropped from 24 to 10 percent, for

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
12
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
terrorist groups 19 to 8 percent, and for Israel 12 to 5 percent. The only actor registering a notable
increase is the United States, with 8 percent of all respondents foreseeing US nuclear use. That’s up
from 5 percent in the previous year’s survey.
EXPERT INSIGHT
 AMY WOOLF: Growing concern about China’s nuclear arsenal—and US deterrence
The results present a somewhat contradictory picture. More than 80 percent of the partici -
pants expect more nations to acquire nuclear weapons in the coming decade, but nearly the
same percentage (78 percent) expect that nuclear weapons will not be used in conflict. It’s
possible these responses reflect reduced concern about Russia potentially using nuclear
weapons in Ukraine. It does, however, raise questions about why respondents believe more
nations would seek nuclear weapons in the absence of circumstances where they might
need to employ them in a conflict.
The answer to this conundrum may be evident in respondents’ concerns about the potential
for proliferation in Asia, where 47 percent of those anticipating nuclear proliferation expect
South Korea to acquire nuclear weapons and 37 percent expect Japan to do so. These num -
bers likely reflect continuing concerns about a threat environment that includes China’s re -
gional ambitions and the growing nuclear arsenals of both China and North Korea.
They may also reflect concerns about the reliability of US extended nuclear deterrence and
credibility of the US commitment to come to the defense of allies. In Europe, this concern
has led to occasional discussions among US allies about developing an independent nu -
clear deterrent. Respondents may have considered whether the nuclear threat environment
and proliferation risks might evolve in response to ongoing changes in US national security
goals and frequent threats of US military intervention. If the United States is seen as a threat
to stability, it could become a source of nuclear risk rather than the foundation of a stable
nuclear order.
AMY F. WOOLF, former specialist in nuclear weapons policy at the
Congressional Research Service of the US Library of Congress and
nonresident senior fellow with Forward Defense in the Scowcroft Center for
Strategy and Security

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
13
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
6
RESPONDENTS ARE FORECASTING A MORE AUTONOMOUS EUROPE,
BUT ONE THAT STILL LAGS BEHIND CHINA AND THE US ACROSS MOST
MEASURES OF POWER
Our latest survey offers mixed results for Europe and the European Union (EU). Respondents
are bearish on the EU’s prospects for joining the top tier of global powers. No respondents forecast
the EU becoming the world’s foremost military power in 2036, which isn’t surprising given its history
as an economic union. Yet respondents are also pessimistic about the EU’s prospects for becoming
the world’s foremost economic power (only 3 percent expected this) or tech power (5 percent) in ten
years’ time. Just 8 percent of respondents predict that the euro will make the biggest inroads into
the US dollar’s dominance over the next decade. Cryptocurrency, the renminbi, and gold all rated
higher as challengers to the dollar. A significant minority of respondents (22 percent) foresee the EU
breaking apart by 2036.
However, there is another more bullish side to the ledger. A substantial portion of respondents envi -
sion the EU as an important player in the diplomatic arena (17 percent say the EU will be the world’s
foremost diplomatic actor in 2036). Thirty percent believe the EU will be the leading power in cultural
or soft power, just below the percentage that say the same of the United States and nearly twice the
percentage that foresee China occupying this position. For three years now, Global Foresight survey
results have also shown steadily rising  expectations  that Europe—not necessarily defined in this
instance as the EU—will have achieved “strategic autonomy” by 2036 through taking more responsi -
bility for its own security, with 57 percent of respondents answering to that effect in our latest survey.
That’s up from 48 percent in the previous year’s survey and just 31 percent the year before that. 26

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
14
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
EXPERT INSIGHT
JÖRN FLECK: Europe is facing “simultaneous abandonment and entrapment”
The survey results about Europe’s quest for strategic autonomy seem to track the prevailing
sentiment on the continent about its future in a brave new world of power politics.
A year into the Trump administration’s second term, the terms of Europe’s debate about greater
sovereignty have changed under the impression of simultaneous abandonment and entrapment
by the United States. Europeans still remember last year’s disconcerting Oval Office meeting
with the Ukrainian president and the freeze of US military and intelligence support for Kyiv—
even if it was ultimately temporary. That episode accelerated a fundamental shift for Europeans
as they faced up to some deeply uncomfortable and costly realities about the continent’s pos -
ture in a new geopolitical era without predictable US support. French politicians and strategists
could hardly hold back their collective “told you so.” But even among former skeptics of “strate-
gic autonomy” in Central and Northern Europe, there has been a growing realization that Europe
has to rapidly address capability gaps and grow its independent military, economic, and techno-
logical means to confront an aggressive Russia, an exploitative China, and a disruptive America.
In fact, we can see this already happening. In her September 2025 State of the European Union
speech, European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen called for Europe’s “indepen -
dence moment” after launching a slew of defense-related initiatives including the “Rearm
Europe 2030” plan and “Security Action for Europe” to mobilize fresh cash for European de -
fense spending.27
The policy follow-up to this realization has been more mixed. Europe has stepped up financially
and politically to keep Ukraine in the fight against Russia. It has proposed a package for €800
billion in new defense spending. European NATO countries have committed to new spending
and capability targets. 28 Some, like Poland, are already meeting them. Others are obliterating
long-held orthodoxies—for example, Germany with its half-trillion-euro surge in defense invest-
ment. Beyond defense, the EU has sought to address its economic competitiveness, diversify its
trade relations, counter China’s unfair economic practices, boost investment in technology and
research and development through a restructured multi-annual budget, and more. But as so of-
ten happens in Europe, fragmentation, national interests, and pet projects, plus weak leadership
from Brussels to Berlin to Paris, are holding back a more ambitious and concerted drive toward
greater autonomy in any one area.
The survey responses share the contradictions and ambiguities of Europe’s political realities
around strategic autonomy. Over a fifth of respondents believe the EU could break up over the
next decade—not exactly a boost for building up European capacity. Even more strikingly, only
miniscule minorities see the EU becoming the leading global power when it comes to diplomatic
influence, the economy, or technology. Without Europe-wide coordination and leadership in at
least some of these categories, European sovereignty will remain little more than an aspiration.
JÖRN FLECK, senior director of the Atlantic Council’s Europe Center

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
15
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
7
RESPONDENTS SEE WATER WARS COMING, AS GLOBAL WARMING
SURPASSES KEY THRESHOLDS AND CLIMATE COOPERATION COOLS
Our polling results surfaced some warning signs for climate change as a priority item on the global
policy agenda. For the first time in three years of asking this question in Global Foresight surveys,
climate change is not the leading perceived threat to global prosperity over the next decade. In our
latest survey, just 17 percent of respondents cite climate change as the single biggest threat, relative
to the 30 percent who mention war between major powers. That’s roughly half of the percentage of
respondents who identified climate change as the biggest threat in our past two surveys. Moreover,
only 19 percent of respondents now believe that climate change will generate the greatest increase in
international cooperation over the coming decade, just behind technology governance (20 percent)
and well down from the 49 percent of respondents who listed climate change just two years ago.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
16
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
These findings on international climate action contrast with respondents’ forecasts about the chang -
ing climate itself. More than 80 percent of respondents expect the world to become hotter, including
at least one year over the next decade where the global average temperature is 2 degrees Celsius
(or more) warmer than preindustrial levels. The 2-degree increase is a threshold beyond which sci -
entists believe the climate will become less stable; the central goal of the Paris climate accord, ne -
gotiated a decade ago, was to limit warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius—a temperature level that was
passed in 2024.
This pessimism about limiting global warming may be connected to another finding: Only 40 percent
of respondents think that global greenhouse-gas emissions will have peaked and begun to decline
by 2036 (up only slightly from our prior year’s survey). Perhaps because of the expectation of ris -
ing temperatures, 57 percent of respondents think that public support for action to counter climate
change will have increased by 2036. But as our findings indicate, that surge in public support may
not correspond with more cooperation at the global level on these issues.
Likely anticipating this hotter, drier, and more unstable climate, two-thirds of respondents (64 per -
cent) expect a war to be fought, at least in part, over access to fresh water in the next decade.
EXPERT INSIGHT
KATHLEEN EULER: When climate impacts feel “remote,” effective action gets harder
Climate change remains a threat—whether or not it is perceived as an urgent one. This is
clear from the science and the 80 percent of respondents who anticipate a hotter world,
which will mean more deaths, illnesses, and dramatic, untenable changes to our infrastruc -
ture, economies, and way of life. 
Yet climate change is increasingly absent from the global news cycle. Headlines are crowded
with concerns about AI, immigration debates, and extreme weather events that are ironically
often climate-driven but rarely identified as such. Climate change, as a result, feels to some
like an abstract, remote threat rather than an immediate one. We can only process so many
crises each day, but climate change is a constant undercurrent. Unfortunately, deprioritiz -
ing climate change only intensifies its consequences, leading to more costly disasters and
losses in the not-far-off future.
KATHLEEN EULER, deputy director of the Atlantic Council’s Climate
Resilience Center

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
17
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
8
MANY EXPERTS ANTICIPATE INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS DECAYING AS
DEMOCRACY WEAKENS
There’s been a lot of speculation recently about whether the decades-old rules-based international
order is collapsing. Our survey respondents suggest we should prepare for such a reality. They ex -
press little confidence that today’s multilateral architecture will be influential a decade hence.
The international system put in place at the Congress of Vienna in 1815 endured, with modifications,
for nearly a century. The international system associated with the Treaty of Versailles and related
treaties ending World War I lasted a much shorter time. The international infrastructure that arose
after World War II, including the United Nations (UN), regional security arrangements and alliances
such as NATO, and the Bretton Woods economic institutions not only weathered the Cold War but
came through it with enhanced authority.
Eighty years on, respondents seem to assess these bodies as increasingly creaky. An overwhelming
majority of respondents (71 percent) believe that the UN will become less influential in the coming
decade, compared with just 6 percent who say the opposite. For the Security Council, the UN’s most
powerful body, 58 percent expect a decline in influence by 2036 and only 9 percent a rise.
On the economic front, survey participants also are much more likely to expect the post-World War II
global financial institutions to grow less influential by 2036 than they are to anticipate them becom -
ing more influential. A majority of respondents (65 percent) foresee the World Trade Organization
losing influence relative to only 11 percent who imagine it gaining influence. For the World Bank, the
equivalent figures are 50 percent and 14 percent; for the International Monetary Fund, 41 percent and
14 percent. Perhaps even more remarkable, only 5 percent of respondents cite declining trade as a
result of protectionism as the biggest threat to global prosperity over the next ten years—a decline
from the 14 percent who said the same in the previous year’s survey. 29 The fact that this decline oc -
curred after Trump dramatically increased tariffs on countries around the world indicates, apparently,
minimal concern about the decline of free trade as a challenge to global prosperity. 30

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
18
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
This year’s survey also shows that nearly half of respondents (44 percent) believe that over the com -
ing decade the current democratic recession will deepen into a democratic depression. In contrast,
only 24 percent foresee a democratic renaissance during that timeframe. 
Predictions about the decline of the international order intersect with those of global democratic de -
cline. Respondents expecting a democratic depression are more likely to foresee core international
bodies losing influence over the coming decade than those who forecast a democratic renaissance:
from the UN (77 percent vs. 60 percent) and UN Security Council (64 percent vs. 53 percent) to the
World Trade Organization (71 percent vs. 48 percent), International Monetary Fund (50 percent vs. 27
percent), and World Bank (53 percent vs. 44 percent).
Respondents who envision continued democratic decline have less faith that over the coming de -
cade major-power war will be avoided, global cooperation will expand, and minority rights around
the world will be protected. The vast majority of those anticipating a worsening democratic recession
(83 percent) believe that the world overall will be worse off in ten years’ time, whereas 66 percent
of those expecting a democratic renaissance think the world will be better off a decade from now.
EXPERT INSIGHT
MATTHEW KROENIG: US leadership and the strength of democracy worldwide are
intertwined
Many respondents predict democratic decline, decaying international institutions, a risk of
major-power war, and generally fear the world will be worse off in ten years’ time. These
findings make sense given emerging challenges to US global leadership coming from both
without and within.
The US-led, liberal international system has produced unprecedented levels of global peace,
prosperity, and freedom over the past eighty years. In this timeframe, we have witnessed
zero great power wars, a quintupling of per capita gross domestic product in the United
States and dramatic growth in global GDP, and a tenfold increase in the number of people
living in liberal democracies. 31 Contrary to a common perception that US grand strategy went
off the rails in the post-Cold War world, the data show that the world was safest, richest, and
freest during America’s unipolar moment in the 1990s and 2000s.
Unfortunately, these indicators have leveled off and begun to decline in the 2010s and
2020s. Global democracy, for example, has declined in each of the past nineteen years. 32
Our respondents project a continued diminution of US leadership and a corresponding ac -
celeration of these negative trends in the decade to come.
MATTHEW KROENIG , former US official in the Department of Defense and
the intelligence community during the Bush, Obama, and Trump admin -
istrations, and vice president and senior director of the Atlantic Council’s
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
19
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
9
THE DOLLAR IS LIKELY TO REMAIN THE WORLD’S CURRENCY OF CHOICE,
BUT KEEP AN EYE ON CRYPTO
Economists are engaged in an intense debate right now about whether the US dollar can hold on to
its status as the world’s leading reserve currency—a position it’s held since World War II. (The Atlantic
Council’s GeoEconomics Center tracks the dominance of the dollar on an ongoing basis.) 33 Although
the dollar is likely to remain the world’s currency of choice in 2036, our survey results indicate that it
won’t go unchallenged. About 80 percent of respondents expect other currencies, commodities, or
assets to make inroads into the dollar’s dominance over the next ten years.
The most-cited asset expected to make the biggest inroads into the dollar’s dominance is not a na -
tional currency but rather cryptocurrency (34 percent of respondents), with a further 11 percent saying
that a commodity—gold—will pose the greatest challenge (we conducted the survey before Bitcoin
suffered a precipitous decline in value, dimming optimism about crypto’s future prospects—for the
time being at least). 34 Contrast those findings with those for other national currencies besides the
dollar: Twenty-one percent of respondents predict that China’s renminbi will make the biggest gains
relative to the dollar, while just 8 percent say the same for the euro and 5 percent for the Japanese
yen, with no votes for the British pound.
Respondents who foresee China as the world’s leading economic power a decade from now are
more likely to imagine the dollar’s dominance eroding. But they are split on its most formidable chal -
lengers, with higher figures for China’s currency but also the Japanese yen and gold.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
20
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
EXPERT INSIGHT
ALISHA CHHANGANI: Dollar dominance under increasing threat
The dollar has had a turbulent year, down more than 9 percent against major currencies in
2025.35 Against that backdrop, it is interesting that survey respondents see cryptocurrency
as the greatest threat to dollar dominance.
The concern is understandable. Crypto’s volatility and recurring crises have coincided with
the growth of a “grey economy” where crypto-assets increasingly facilitate sanctions eva -
sion, tax avoidance, and illicit trade beyond US oversight. This undermines the effectiveness
of US financial sanctions, a cornerstone of dollar dominance. At the same time, the rise of
dollar-backed stablecoins, alongside the United States’ first stablecoin regulation (the 2025
GENIUS Act), suggests Washington increasingly sees these crypto-assets as a way to pre -
serve dollar dominance and bolster demand for dollar assets such as US Treasuries, even as
the long-term risks and global spillovers are not yet fully understood.
When it comes to China, the survey results align with reality. While Beijing has been discreet
about diversifying away from the dollar, it continues to do so methodically. Its wholesale cen-
tral bank digital currency (CBDC) project has tested transactions in the digital renminbi, and
China’s Cross-Border Interbank Payment System (CIPS) has expanded significantly over the
past five years, reducing reliance on dollar-based payment infrastructure. 36
Still, the dollar’s status remains stable. Data from the Bank for International Settlements
shows the dollar on one side of 89 percent of all foreign-exchange trades. 37 Its liquidity
keeps it embedded in the plumbing of global markets. Ultimately, the foundations of dollar
dominance still lie in trust in US political and legal institutions, including the preservation of
central bank independence, which has come under increasing threat.
ALISHA CHHANGANI, associate director at the Atlantic Council’s
GeoEconomics Center

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
21
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
10 THE GLOBAL SOUTH SEES THE FUTURE DIFFERENTLY
Roughly one-fifth (18 percent) of this year’s survey responses came from citizens of countries located
in what is often called the Global South. Although it’s an inexact and contested term, the Global
South is a useful shorthand to describe countries that are outside the wealthiest group of industrial -
ized nations. While respondents in this category are heavily weighted toward Latin America and the
Caribbean (54 percent of the Global South group), forecasts from geostrategists and foresight prac -
titioners across the Global South countries differ from those in the Global North in significant ways. 
For example, respondents from Global South countries are much more likely to rate Russia’s chances
in its war in Ukraine higher than other survey participants: Forty-six percent say that the outcome
will be on terms favorable to Russia, versus 31 percent who say the same among the rest of the
pool. Those from the Global South are also much more likely to see China as a leader in key fields,
with 76 percent expecting it to be the top economic power by 2036 compared with 54 percent who
feel that way among the rest of the respondents. Global South experts also are more skeptical about
the longevity of US power, with only 60 percent of this group expecting the US to retain military dom-
inance over the next ten years relative to 76 percent of other respondents. Remarkably, 22 percent
of respondents in the Global South expect the United States to break up internally in the next ten
years, compared with 10 percent of other respondents. Those from the Global South are more likely
than respondents from elsewhere to expect a global multifront war in the coming decade (48 percent
relative to 40 percent) as well, with a larger proportion expecting such a conflict to be sparked by
events in the Middle East (35 percent compared with 8 percent).

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
22
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
EXPERT INSIGHT
JAMES MAZZARELLA: Concerns about US stability may reflect Global South history
The percentage of respondents from the Global South who expect the United States to
break up internally in the next ten years is more than twice as high as that of respondents
from outside the Global South. Similarly, 76 percent of Global South respondents expect
China to overtake the United States as the world’s dominant economy, compared with 54
percent for the rest of the respondents.
These expectations may be due to a combination of factors. One is the US withdrawal to a
position of greater economic isolation. Another is the perception that the United States is
pulling back from humanitarian engagement in the Global South, and that it is undergoing a
period of political discord—an assessment that may reflect the Global South’s own experi -
ences with weak institutions.
Perceptions aside, political discord as a factor is measurable, especially when examined
alongside data from the Freedom and Prosperity Indexes.38 Among “high freedom” countries
since 1995, no country has experienced a greater decline in freedom than the United States.
The decline is driven by institutional erosion and executive aggrandizement. Because some
developing countries in the Global South have more recent history with political discord and
breakdown than others, it is very possible that Global South respondents view political de -
velopments in the United States as existential threats to America’s unity, while others living
in countries with stronger institutions have different understandings of and greater faith in
the resilience of American democracy.
JAMES MAZZARELLA , former senior director for global economics and
development at the National Security Council, now senior director of the
Atlantic Council’s Freedom and Prosperity Center.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
23
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
MARY KATE AYLWARD, publications editor, Atlantic Council
Mary Kate Aylward was an editor at War on the Rocks and Army AL&T before join -
ing the Council. She was previously a junior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace.
PETER ENGELKE, senior fellow, GeoStrategy Initiative, Scowcroft Center for
Strategy and Security, Atlantic Council
Peter Engelke is a senior fellow with the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center for
Strategy and Security as well as a senior fellow with its Global Energy Center. Engelke
was on the adjunct faculty at Georgetown University’s School of Continuing Studies,
a member of the World Economic Forum’s Global Future Council on Complex Risks,
an executive-in-residence at the Geneva Centre for Security Policy, and a Bosch
fellow with the Robert Bosch Foundation.
URI FRIEDMAN, senior editorial director, Atlantic Council
Uri Friedman is also a contributing writer at The Atlantic, where he writes a regu -
lar column on international affairs. He was previously a senior staff writer at The
Atlantic covering national security and global affairs, the editor of The Atlantic’s
Global section, and the deputy managing editor of Foreign Policy magazine.
PAUL KIELSTRA, freelance analyst
Paul Kielstra is a freelance author who has published extensively in fields includ -
ing business analysis, healthcare, energy policy, fraud control, international trade,
and international relations. His work regularly includes the drafting and analysis of
large surveys, along with desk research, expert interviews, and scenario building.
His clients have included the Atlantic Council, the Economist Group, the Financial
Times Group, the World Health Organization, and Kroll. Kielstra holds a doctorate
in modern history from the University of Oxford, a graduate diploma in economics
from the London School of Economics, and a bachelor of arts from the University of
Toronto. He is also a published historian.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
24
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
25
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
P
anthera uncia —the snow leopard that inhabits high mountain ranges in Central and South
Asia—is one of nature’s best-camouflaged animals. The majestic cat’s beautiful white coat, with
gray and black spots, blends seamlessly into the rocky and snowy landscape in which it lives. Known
as “the ghost of the mountains,” it seems to appear out of thin air. The reality, of course, is the snow
leopard has been there all along, an unseen sight.
In world affairs, there are numerous under-the-radar phenomena that are difficult to spot but crucial
to understand given their capacity for disruption and transformation. Like the Himalayan cat, these
metaphorical “snow leopards” may appear invisible but in fact are all around us: early-stage technol -
ogies that, if developed and scaled, might yield revolutionary results; social movements that, while
just beginning to gather strength, could have enormous political consequences in the years to come;
demographic trends that only a few experts study but that could overhaul societies in the long run;
ecological changes that are not yet fully understood by scientists but could portend disaster ahead
should they worsen. These phenomena present underrated risks or opportunities. Each of them
could reshape the future. Some already are. We just need to know where to look.
Each year, our Global Foresight series identifies a new set of snow leopards. In this year’s edition, as
in previous editions, this challenging task fell to the Atlantic Council’s younger staff, who are well-po -
sitioned to identify trends, events, technologies, and other forces that their older colleagues might
overlook. They scrutinized the world around them and came up with a list of underappreciated but
potentially world-changing phenomena. 
In the years to come, keep an eye on these six snow leopards. 
Six ‘snow leopards’
to watch for in the
decade ahead
25ATLANTIC COUNCIL
PHOTO: Number One/Shutterstock

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
26
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
The tech companies altering the
course of conflicts
When businesses are first movers on the battlefield
When Russia invaded Ukraine in February 2022, among the first responders were a conglomeration
of cyber and tech companies of all sizes.39 These companies did critical work to ensure that Ukraine’s
cyber defenses held up against an unprecedented onslaught of Russian cyberattacks. Combined
with assistance from allied governments, such efforts helped keep the lights on in Ukraine. 40 But
the companies’ interventions amounted to entering a conflict of their own volition, without a state’s
authorization or direction—which triggered profound geopolitical risks. 41
The private sector participating in conflict is nothing new; governments have contracted with private
companies in war and peacetime for centuries. 42 But three elements are new: First, cybersecurity
companies have begun entering interstate conflicts without the authorization of or at least direction
from states. Second, these companies effectively possess state-grade capabilities—and, with that,
the ability to make world-changing decisions—but without the policy, legal, or risk frameworks states
erect around such capabilities to constrain their use. Third, states, citizens, and businesses are in -
creasingly dependent on these companies’ infrastructure and services in peacetime and for cyber
defense in conflict.43 Microsoft recognized this in a June 2022 reflection on the company’s assistance
to Ukraine, declaring that the technology sector has an “inevitable” role to play in the “cyber defense
of nations.”44
The risks of this kind of private-sector involvement in conflict are already emerging. Civil society has
raised questions about whether cyber and tech companies constitute combatants under international
humanitarian law, particularly where their capabilities intersect with state capabilities—as when,
for example, private firms identify exploitable vulnerabilities (or “zero days”) in other companies’
software code. 45 As states and others increasingly contest privately owned digital infrastructure,
PHOTO: Altum Code/Unsplash

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
27
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
ideologically motivated cyberattacks (“hacktivism”) have also risen—creating heightened risks of
retaliation.46 The whims of tech executives also have geopolitical consequence. In September 2022,
for example, Elon Musk reportedly cut internet access in Ukraine provided via his Starlink satellite
technology, disrupting a key Ukrainian counteroffensive. In response, a British member of parliament
decried the “dangers of concentrated power in unregulated domains.” 47
Where these risks could amount to world-changing impact is during a potential Chinese invasion
of Taiwan, and both Taipei and Beijing are clearly paying attention. Musk’s reported decision to cut
Ukraine’s internet access was one reason Taiwan set up its own satellite internet infrastructure. 48
There is some evidence that the Chinese state also is learning lessons from Russia’s war in Ukraine
about the role of US cyber and tech companies as a source of advantage in conflict. 49 This develop-
ment might not be so concerning were it not for the significant business dependencies that Apple
and other US tech giants have in China, which could muddy decision-making during any period of
conflict.50 The clarity and unity of purpose seen in cyber companies’ efforts to help Ukraine cannot
be guaranteed in the future. 51
This is an issue that the international security community must address through dialogue and policy
development with the private sector. 52 Goals should include firmer guardrails and improved account -
ability mechanisms—or outright deference to states as primary decision-makers. Such dialogue will
prepare states and industry to jointly navigate future conflicts and collective preparedness without
generating unintended consequences when the private sector jumps ahead of states.
NIKITA SHAH, former senior resident fellow, Cyber Statecraft Initiative, Atlantic Council
Shah is a former senior resident fellow at the Cyber Statecraft Initiative. Nikita has ten years’
experience as a national security professional in the UK Government, across the operational
agencies and central policy Departments with a deep specialism in cyber security and the role of
cyber capabilities in conflict.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
28
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
The migrants moving
in loops, not lines
Leave, learn, return—and start a business?
Many countries have experienced migration as a driver of “brain drain”—a one-way outflow of human
capital. But a more dynamic pattern is reshaping global talent flows in some parts of the world. 53 A
growing number of migrants who work or study overseas are returning to their home countries with
new skills—a pattern known as “brain circulation”—or staying closely connected to their home coun -
tries and turning their global experiences into new opportunities there. 54
Brain drain refers to the loss that occurs when a country’s citizens, especially highly skilled and ed -
ucated workers, pursue opportunities abroad. Host countries often gain productivity, tax revenue,
and innovation—except when migrants are pushed into low-skilled work (such as when immigrants
holding master’s degrees work at jobs requiring a high-school diploma), a phenomenon known as
“brain waste.”
Another concept, “brain gain,” captures the positive effects of emigration for sending countries: the
prospect of opportunities abroad motivates more people to pursue higher education, most of whom
remain at home. Those who do leave often continue to contribute through remittances and stronger
trade ties.
But these concepts overlook the circulation of talent that is quietly changing the geography of oppor-
tunity worldwide. “Brain circulation” first became visible in countries such as India and China, where
engineers and entrepreneurs who had lived and worked in the United States returned and used their
US career experience to start businesses at home. 55
What began as a modest trend in the early 2000s is accelerating as travel and digital connectivity
become more accessible. The circulation of skilled, educated workers is now remaking national and
regional economies. Studies show that returning immigrants tend to be more entrepreneurial and
PHOTO: Global Residence Index/Unsplash

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
29
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
resilient than their peers and are significantly more likely to start businesses. 56 Migrants return with
expertise and global exposure they could not have acquired domestically.
Central and Eastern Europe illustrates how transformative this loop can be. After experiencing de -
cades of outward migration, Central and Eastern European countries are now registering rising re -
turn flows.57 Romania, for example, has had three consecutive years of positive net migration driven
by returning citizens. They launch startups, invest in local ecosystems, and open doors to new prac -
tices and global markets, sometimes with the support of government financing programs. 58 Such
ventures are helping power a regional boom. In 2024, startups in the region raised nearly €3.7 billion,
a 56 percent increase from the previous year. 59 Nearly half of that total—more than a billion euros—
came from companies whose founders studied or worked abroad, or worked at big multinational
companies.
At a time when many countries are grappling with aging populations, talent shortages, and relentless
competition, this loop of leaving, learning, and returning is becoming a critical source of national
advantage. Brain circulation offers a replicable model for countries that need to catalyze growth
and sustain innovation. Countries that recognize this opportunity build policies and institutions
that drive people, skills, and capital to move in loops, not lines, so that yesterday’s emigrants
become tomorrow’s nation-builders. 60 The future belongs to dynamic societies that treat mobility
as a renewable resource, turning migration into a story of shared prosperity and, ultimately, into the
backbone of a global innovation system that can respond to challenges and opportunities no country
can tackle alone.
ULIANA CERTAN, assistant director, european engagement, Global Energy Center
and Romania Office, Atlantic Council
Certan is an assistant director for European engagement at the Atlantic Council’s
Global Energy Center and Atlantic Council Romania. She helps advance the
Council’s strategic focus in Central and Eastern Europe, supporting initiatives
that strengthen energy security, infrastructure connectivity, regional stability, and
democratic resilience.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
30
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
The underwater forests
helping heal the climate
Big seaweed could be big business
In the waters off one-third of the world’s coastlines grows a powerhouse plant: kelp. 61 Towering kelp
forests capture twenty times more carbon dioxide (CO2) than do land forests of equivalent size. 62
They promise lower-cost and lower-carbon ways to feed the world’s population, and they protect
coastlines from the effects of more powerful storms. As scientists and policymakers increasingly turn
to nature-based solutions to take on climate change, these colorful stalks of algae may be the next
big thing.63
Kelp forests can remove one ton of carbon emissions from the atmosphere for about $20 to $85. To
do the same with direct-air-capture machines costs $1,000 per ton. Not only is kelp an incredible car-
bon sink, it drives other forms of environmental conservation and protection. 64 The stalks reduce the
size of tidal waves by up to 60 percent, prevent soil erosion, and absorb agricultural runoff. Studies
show that kelp supports the development of the biogenic aerosols that help clouds form, reducing
the temperature of water, soil, and air. 65 Kelp also is an ingredient in biodegradable biopolymers,
which can replace petroleum-based plastics.
In the food and agriculture sectors, kelp is both a nutritional food source and a protective habitat
for hundreds of plant and animal species, including commercial fish such as cod, crab, octopus,
and lobster.
And it doesn’t stop at seafood: Sprinkling seaweed on cattle feed can reduce cows’ methane emis -
sions between 40 and 80 percent. Kelp can be processed into natural, liquid biostimulants for ag -
riculture, which can reduce the need for artificial fertilizers that release greenhouse gases. 66 These
PHOTO: Erick Morales Oyola/Unsplash

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
31
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
kelp-based treatments also could reduce the large amounts of water required by many high-value
cash crops like almonds, avocados, strawberries, and grapes.
Beyond the environment and agri-food industries, kelp generates health and cosmetic products,
attractive tourist destinations for snorkeling, and critical supplies for indigenous communities. 67
Kelp, however, faces an uncertain future due to predators, pollution, and marine heatwaves induced
by climate change.68 Efforts to regrow damaged kelp forests off the coast of California offer a prime
example for other coastal governments. Scientists and conservationists are planting specific kelp
varieties that grow three times faster and absorb double the amount of CO2 compared with other
kelp.69 When this kelp matures, by some calculations it could absorb as much CO2 as the global
aviation sector emits. Kelp could help the state meet its target of reaching net-zero emissions by
2045—five years sooner than the target set in the 2015 Paris Agreement. 70
To help kelp survive in warmer oceans, scientists use remotely operated vehicles and motorized
growing lattices, raising the kelp toward the water’s surface during the day to absorb sunlight and
lowering it into deeper, more nutrient-rich water at night. 71
The effects of climate change on the world’s coral reefs have grabbed headlines. The United Nations
Decade on Environmental Restoration has increased attention on coral-reef, mangrove, and sea -
grass restoration efforts. 72 But so far, there has been limited funding focused specifically on kelp
growth and management. 73
Global cooperation on kelp will be crucial for future climate efforts, as new research proves that oce -
anic carbon sinks are 15 percent larger than land sinks. 74 But even in the absence of such coordina -
tion, expect continued momentum for work on kelp. Kelp and seaweed farming is the fastest-growing
global aquaculture industry, increasing 6.2 percent per year over the last twenty years. 75 Countries
in Asia, particularly China and Indonesia, produce 98 percent of farmed seaweed by volume globally,
but there is enormous potential for growth and applications in Europe, Africa, and the Americas. 76
And with a $500 billion market, kelp has plenty of potential to combat climate change, mitigate the
biodiversity crisis around the world, and develop a more profitable and sustainable “blue economy.”77
GINGER MATCHETT, assistant director, GeoStrategy Initiative, Scowcroft Center
for Strategy and Security, Atlantic Council
Matchett is an assistant director for the GeoStrategy Initiative in the Scowcroft
Center for Strategy and Security. She assesses global trends and future security
threats, working on global environmental, food, and water security, as well as great
power competition. She graduated with a degree in international studies from
American University’s School of International Service with a specialization in global
security, conflict, and governance.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
32
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
The crumbling
human rights order
Are we going back to the bad old days?
In recent years, an alarming number of countries have withdrawn from or defied human rights treaties
and humanitarian conventions. 78 Global norms about how human beings should be treated were a
key part of the international system that arose after World War II, including the 1948 adoption of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 79 Specialists have said for years that this postwar system
is under stress. 80 But the consequences for individuals are underappreciated. If the postwar order
was a bulwark against the horrors of the twentieth century, the idea that ordinary citizens should be
protected from unrestrained state power was a load-bearing pillar. The weakening of that pillar is
ominous and risks a future with fewer human rights than exist today.
The retreat from human rights is happening at two levels: through actors exiting treaties, and through
changes in the societal expectations that those treaties both reflect and reinforce.
Consider the developments of just this past year. In 2025, the United States, Israel, and Nicaragua
withdrew from the United Nations Human Rights Council, reducing the reach and legitimacy of one
of the few multilateral bodies tasked with universal monitoring of rights. 81
That same year, Lithuania, Estonia, Finland, Latvia, and Poland withdrew from the 1997 Anti-
Personnel Mine Ban Treaty, while Lithuania separately pulled out of the 2008 Convention on Cluster
Munitions.82 Proposals for other NATO members to take similar steps further highlight the erosion
PHOTO: Salya T/Unsplash

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
33
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
of norms against weapons that can indiscriminately harm civilians long after conflicts end. 83 These
shifts are coming as countries facing new security pressures increasingly prioritize military flexibility
over humanitarian restrictions. The withdrawing states—all of which border Russia or Belarus—have
cited the dangers they are confronting in the wake of the Kremlin’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine,
which has been rife with human rights abuses. 84 In light of the withdrawing countries’ statements, it
seems unlikely that any would have withdrawn had Russia not invaded Ukraine—which underscores
the snowball effect of diminishing postwar humanitarian norms, and why each violation matters.
Norms may be intangible, but after 1945 countries codified many of them into binding commitments
in an effort to build a better world with such norms at its core. Once these norms are weakened, as
appears to be occurring now, they may never recover. This diminishes international law, emboldens
perpetrators of human rights violations and war crimes, fuels cycles of impunity, and leaves civilians
increasingly vulnerable. The cumulative effect is a weakened global system of accountability at pre -
cisely the moment when conflicts and authoritarian forces are on the rise.
SARAH WALLACE, former program assistant, GeoStrategy Initiative and Adrienne
Arsht National Security Resilience Initiative, Scowcroft Center for Strategy and
Security, Atlantic Council
Wallace is a former program assistant for the GeoStrategy Initiative and Adrienne
Arsht National Security Resilience Initiative in the Scowcroft Center for Strategy and
Security. She specializes in intercultural communication, peacebuilding, international
security, and human rights.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
34
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
Out of the dataset, out of mind
We know who we are because of our memories, our history, and our stories. Today, artificial intelli -
gence (AI) is becoming an important part of how people store information, as generative AI tools are
woven into search engines, social media platforms, and everyday interfaces like virtual assistants.
The material these generative AI tools draw from to answer our questions or summarize our emails
shape how people understand the world.
The current generation of AI, however, is built on Western-centric datasets that are disproportion -
ately produced, curated, and governed in North America and Western Europe, largely in English.
Knowledge that is oral, community-held, locally archived, or produced outside these systems is far
less likely to be captured. Optimized for volume rather than nuance, these systems put cultures that
fall outside dominant data flows at risk.
The phenomenon of cultural erasure can take two forms: omission, where cultures fail to appear
entirely, and simplification, where complex traditions are reduced to stereotypes. 85 The cases of
small and developing states illustrate these risks most vividly. Much of the intangible heritage of the
world’s island states, for instance, remains under-digitized, preserved instead through oral storytell -
ing, music, ritual, and collective memory. When generative AI encounters such cultures, it often only
reflects what can be easily retrieved from training data. For example, AI-generated media depicting
“Caribbean culture” tends to reproduce a narrow canon of beaches, rum, and steelpan. Missing are
the complexities: linguistic diversity and multi-ethnic histories that define the region’s melting-pot
identity. For the people living in these small states, AI-driven “data colonialism” shapes how the
world sees them and, potentially, how they see themselves.
The cultural erasure
driven by AI

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
35
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
If AI advances to a point where it becomes the default lens through which people encounter culture,
then nations and cultures underrepresented in AI training data risk losing authorship of their own
stories. The version that survives may be the one defined by external markets. Indigenous groups,
minority-language speakers, and marginalized communities around the world all face this threat.
But small island states can use their position at the United Nations and elsewhere to elevate con -
cerns around cultural data representation and press for international standards, compelling actors
who can shape the global AI ecosystem to take action. 86 These nations can play a catalytic role in
making cultural representation a priority for technology governance, even if the power to execute
change lies elsewhere.
Preventing cultural erasure means embedding diverse heritage into datasets, creating frameworks
and metrics that assess cultural harm through an interdisciplinary lens, and ensuring AI governance
treats cultural erasure as seriously as issues such as information manipulation or digital privacy. The
question is not just whether AI models are accurate, but also whether they reinforce or erode the
cultural foundations communities rely on. As artificial intelligence increasingly shapes what the world
finds, learns, and imagines, we must confront a pressing question: If a culture isn’t in the dataset, can
it survive the AI era?
DOMINIQUE RAMSAWAK, associate director, communications, Digital Forensic
Research Lab, Atlantic Council
Ramsawak is the associate director of communications at the Atlantic Council’s
Digital Forensic Research Lab, where she develops and implements strategic
communications to highlight research on disinformation, digital policy, and
technology. She holds a master’s in law and diplomacy from The Fletcher School,
specializing in AI policy and technology governance.
PHOTO: Omar Eagle/Unsplash

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
36
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
The neurotechnology
that could read your mind
Whether you want it to or not
The next tech disruption could be the human mind paired with cutting-edge neurotechnology. New
kinds of neurotech create pathways for communications between the human brain and external de -
vices, some implanted in the brain. 87 Recent developments in neurotech that don’t require an im -
plant—and could eventually even be portable—signal a future in which there could be ways to read
someone’s thoughts, with or without their permission.
One such development is a semantic decoder that translates the brain’s electromagnetic waves
into a continuous stream of text capturing what someone is thinking about, with varying degrees of
precision.88 Currently, the decoder works with a trained model—a version of the large language mod-
els powering chatbots—using brain activity measured on a functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) scanner. Earlier versions required a user to lie down in an MRI machine for the better part of a
day to train the system. 89 In 2025, researchers tested a version of the decoder that only requires an
hour of training. Developments like these, coupled with investments expected to surpass four billion
dollars in 2025, indicate the potential for additional advances in the field. 90 And if neurotech follows
the trajectory that computers followed—the first computers took up an entire room; now billions of
people carry one in their pocket—portable systems may be possible in the future.
While the idea of something invading your thoughts might be alarming, there are both positive and
negative potential applications of this technology. Any patient with a medical condition that makes it
difficult or impossible for them to speak—Parkinson’s disease, aphasia, the aftereffects of a stroke—
could benefit. So could patients suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder who find it difficult to
speak about their trauma.
PHOTO: Ecliptic Graphic/Unsplash

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
37
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
Ethical considerations must also be taken into account. While it’s hard to predict exactly how this
technology will evolve, laws protecting neural data privacy will be needed. In November 2025,
UNESCO adopted the first global ethical framework for neurotechnology, seeking to ensure “neuro -
technological innovation benefits those in need without compromising mental privacy.” 91
In 1992, the physicist and theologian Ian Barbour observed that all technological advances are mul -
tifaceted in nature, acting as a liberator, a threat, and an instrument of power. 92 That framework will
hold true for the neurotech transformations we’ll experience in the years ahead.
TATEVIK KHACHATRYAN, assistant director, events, Atlantic Council
Khachatryan is an assistant director for events at the Atlantic Council. She holds
a master’s degree in public diplomacy and global communications from the
Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs. Her work bridges diplomacy and
technology, examining the impact of digital innovation while also maintaining a
distinct focus on the South Caucasus.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
38
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
AI and the future
T
hree years since ChatGPT launched, a combination of hype and fear has made it hard to think
clearly about our new age of artificial intelligence (AI). But AI has the potential to change the
world—from energy to geopolitics to the global economy to the very production and application of
human knowledge. If ever we needed clear-eyed analysis, it’s now.
At the Atlantic Council, our experts in the Atlantic Council Technology Programs spend a lot of their
time thinking about how AI will shape our future—and they have the technical literacy essential to the
task.93 So, as part of our annual Global Foresight report on the decade to come, we asked them our
most pressing questions: How will AI evolve over the next ten years and beyond? 94 How can we use
AI to forecast global affairs? And—let’s be real—will this thing replace us?  
Then our experts put AI chatbots through their paces, presenting them with questions from our Global
Foresight survey of (human) geostrategists and foresight practitioners about what the world will look
like by 2036.95 Check out the results of this experiment and our experts’ broader insights in the short
videos at the QR code, along with edited and condensed highlights from our conversations.   
38 ATLANTIC COUNCIL

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
39
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
“
How good is AI at predicting the future? 
I would not trust  today’s  AI systems to reliably forecast  global affairs. I think that comes
down to the fact that, so often, global events don’t follow predictable patterns. That’s be -
cause so much of global geopolitics is driven by human decisions.  
TESS DEBLANC-KNOWLES, senior director of the Atlantic Council Technology Programs
When  you’re  asking  [AI]  to  predict the future,  you’re  asking  it a big,  unbounded  ques -
tion. What large language models (or LLMs), which is what the current generation of genera -
tive artificial intelligence is built on, are good at doing is next-word or next-token prediction. 96
TREY HERR, senior director of the Atlantic Council’s Cyber Statecraft Initiative
Right now, I think any policymaker would be very poorly served by, say, pulling up an LLM and
asking, “What’s going to happen next?” That’s not really the strength of these modern systems.
EMERSON BROOKING,  director of strategy and resident senior fellow at the Atlantic
Council’s Digital Forensic Research Lab
It is not a crystal ball. In technical terms, AI is probabilistic. It is not predictive or determinis -
tic. A fundamental barrier for artificial intelligence is that it cannot experience the real world.
Some of us may be familiar with Plato’s allegory of the cave. AI is kind of like those cave dwell-
ers experiencing the world as shadows and echoes. They’re not living real experiences, and
so are limited in that sense. We can, however, envision a world where AI models and human
forecasters work together to make better predictions. 
TRISHA RAY, associate director and resident fellow at the Atlantic
Council’s GeoTech Center
If you asked an AI system to predict the outcome of the Super Bowl, you could equip the
model with data from past seasons, the teams, the performance of the players, and the tra-
jectory of those teams over the course of the season. Feed it all of the accurate data of to -
day’s teams and players, and it might come out with some kind of approximation of the top
contenders to win the Super Bowl. But the system is not going to be able to predict that
rogue tackle that creates a season-ending injury for a star player, or the interpersonal dy -
namics among the team that can either supercharge their pathway to the championship or
totally derail it. 
TESS DEBLANC-KNOWLES
AI’s limitation is that it cannot produce new information. It can’t expand the universe of knowl-
edge that we’re currently training on. What it can do is identify novel insights, identify trends
that may have taken humans a lot of time to manually produce or see.  
GRAHAM BROOKIE, Atlantic Council vice president for technology programs and strategy
Today’s  AI systems are well-suited for predictive tasks where there are stable patterns
and there’s a good amount of historical data to train the systems on. So this bears out in
near-term weather prediction, traffic patterns, predicting maintenance needs for an airplane
or some other complex manufacturing system.
TESS DEBLANC-KNOWLES
PHOTO: Ryan Stone/Unsplash

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
40
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
“
How will AI evolve over the next decade? 
The  growth of AI capability over the past few years  has essentially been predictable: It
continues to increase exponentially as we devote exponentially more processing power and
energy to its needs. But that can’t go on indefinitely. I think soon there will be something that
feels like a ceiling. 
EMERSON BROOKING
The bubble that is this market is going to pop, and we’re going to see some of these firms
fail. You’re going to see others rise up and succeed. Now this could have some really harmful
financial consequences for real people, as well as markets in the US, in Western Europe, and
elsewhere. But the side effect of that is likely that there is a lot of infrastructure, a lot of com-
puting resources, a lot of talent that’s suddenly available and looking for work and looking
for ways to be useful. And that kind of thing can be a really powerful driver of innovation.   
TREY HERR
Another very significant risk to the progress of AI is trust. I think this is particularly salient in the
United States, where recent polls have shown that 60 percent of American adults don’t trust
the output of an AI system to be fair and unbiased. I think there’s a scenario where with that
baseline level of distrust, if that’s then followed by, say, a series of accidents that could be
blamed on AI, or destructive news around AI, then consumers will lose confidence in the tech -
nology and businesses will [assume] a higher level of risk in adopting the technology, which
will then lead to a cooling in investment and in markets. 
TESS DEBLANC-KNOWLES
You could imagine in ten years an absolutely fantastical, extremely powerful tool
assisting you in every aspect of daily life and essentially  knowing what you want at all
times. But my greater concern, if that is the future,  is then who will have access to this
tool? Because for AI [tools] to be this capable, they will be immensely energy intensive. They
will be extremely expensive. And the current moment we’re in now—in which there’s been a
real focus on making AI as accessible to as many people as possible—I wonder how much
longer that will last and if we might create these exquisite systems but have them accessible
only to a very few people.  
EMERSON BROOKING
We’re seeing a lot of attention today on building what are called “world models.” Instead of
predicting the next word, these models are predicting the next action in the world. If we’re able
to move in that direction, then we’re really going to see the true impact of AI across society by
breaking AI out of this computer interface into robotics that can take on more tasks. 
TESS DEBLANC-KNOWLES
What is possible is that in the future, we’re going to see a larger application of small lan -
guage models that are built for specific purposes and have that contextual knowledge, or are
hooked up to a very relevant database, so that when you log in, you’re logging into a geo -
political chatbot as opposed to a general purpose tool. [There is] a much higher likelihood
that it’ll be able to give you good answers. We’re a ways off from that, though.  
TREY HERR

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
41
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
“
“
Any predictions for how AI will change over the next
year specifically? 
One of the trends I would look out for in 2026 is countries going all in on sovereign AI. The
principle driving this trend toward sovereign AI is quite simple: It’s governments saying we
need to control AI before it controls us. Now, what is sovereign AI? It is a model of AI develop -
ment, driven by four characteristics: One, adherence to national laws. The second is national
security. The third is economic competitiveness, where there’s a desire for the development
and deployment of these models to benefit the home economies. And then the fourth and
most interesting one is value alignment—the belief that these models have to adhere to a
certain set of ideological and constitutional rules. But here’s a not-so-well-kept secret: It is not
possible for a country to build the entire AI stack indigenously.
TRISHA RAY
There  are  two trends we should look out for. The first  [is]  indicators of the continuing
sophistication of these tools. In particular I would focus on the context window—the amount
of information that  [these tools]  have direct access to at any one time. When ChatGPT
launched, the context window was about 4,000 characters, not very much. A year later,
it was 100,000. Today some of the most popular consumer-grade models have a context
window of up to 2 million. That is still a drop in the bucket next to the information that these
machines will need to actively hold in order to be truly revolutionary and effective. If we
can start to see somehow, through maybe some clever engineering, exponential growth
in that context window, then we might actually be on a path to something we describe as
artificial general intelligence.  
The other  [trend involves]  the financing,  political conditions,  and even the actual energy
costs that are associated with these systems. As these elements begin to shift, some of the
AI companies that so far have been able to have these continuing rounds of open financing
with ever-higher valuations, if they start to reach some sort of ceiling—that will start to send
shocks through this whole system, which may affect AI development in a very different way. 
EMERSON BROOKING
How revolutionary is AI? 
 
AI is changing the way that we interact with things that we touch every single day. In ten
years, I think that you will see more AI in commercial landscapes, in security landscapes, or
even  in  warfare.  I think  it’s  highly likely that we  achieve  general artificial intelligence.
That doesn’t necessarily mean that killer robots are going to govern all of us. 
GRAHAM BROOKIE
What we’re seeing is one of the most significant changes in digital technology easily in the
last fifty years, probably since the creation of the personal computer. Before the PC, you had
to go somewhere to an institution and ask for time on a computer. And then suddenly with

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
42
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
“
personal computers, you had them in your office, in your living room. You didn’t need an
institution. It just inverted the relationship and inverted a huge power dynamic. AI has done
the same thing. It’s put the ability to do complex research and production of knowledge into
every single person’s hands.  
TREY HERR
Artificial intelligence, the way we use it now, is not transformational yet. I would say AI is more a
continuation of the digital revolution. It’s exciting for sure, but not society-shaking as of yet. If
we think about the industrial revolution, it changed the way we live, changed the way we
work, and even changed our politics. It shifted the nexus of economic growth from farms to
cities. And if we just reflect on the role that AI plays in our economy right now, it is not at the
stage to be called an AI revolution. Yet. 
TRISHA RAY
Will AI replace humans? 
Humans can think. Generative artificial intelligence models can’t think. That’s a really, really
crucial distinction. It’s easy to anthropomorphize something that will chat with you.  
TREY HERR
Humans understand context. They understand cause and effect. Humans also have creativity
to think through different scenarios that might not be present in prior events, where an AI sys-
tem is not going to be able to creatively think of a new event. 
TESS DEBLANC-KNOWLES
As more and more time passes and the use of these tools becomes normalized, it may be
that AI is never all that good at predicting the future, but that it feels good enough at doing
it—and predicting the future is so hard anyway—that we turn that task over to AI; that human
beings, with our extraordinarily capable and irreplaceable brains, give up on some of that
higher-order thinking and try to let these machines do more and more of the job. And no
matter how capable AI becomes, I see that as a tragedy. 
We could reach a really strange point where people are using these tools and basically
relying on them to tell them what to do and how to live their lives, and they’ve essentially
outsourced a lot of higher-order and critical thinking to these tools, having forgotten or hav -
ing never known that no matter how omniscient these tools seem to be, they themselves
are creations from limited human-created data sets and human processes designed in a
particular moment in time. 
We could find ourselves trapped in some kind of recursive loop where the future and the
horizon of possibilities keeps getting narrower and narrower, because that is what the ma -
chine is telling us is possible—that machine that was only trained on what humans knew to
be possible. 
EMERSON BROOKING

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
43
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
GRAHAM BROOKIE, vice president and senior director, Atlantic Council
Technology Programs
Brookie is the Atlantic Council’s vice president for Technology Programs and strategy,
as well as the senior director of the Digital Forensic Research Lab. In his role as vice
president, Brookie oversees the Atlantic Council Technology Programs working to
shape an era of increasing geopolitical competition and rapid technological change.
TESS DEBLANC KNOWLES, senior director, Atlantic Council Technology Programs
DeBlanc-Knowles is the senior director of the Atlantic Council Technology Programs.
Prior to joining the Atlantic Council, deBlanc-Knowles served in multiple roles across
government, driving national artificial intelligence (AI) policy. As the National Science
Foundation’s special assistant for AI, she shaped the agency’s AI investment strategy
and oversaw implementation of AI-related executive and legislative directives.
EMERSON BROOKING, director, strategy and resident fellow, Digital Forensic
Research Lab, Atlantic Council
Brooking is director of strategy and resident senior fellow at the Digital Forensic
Research Lab of the Atlantic Council Technology Programs. In this capacity, Brooking
oversees the center’s efforts to identify, expose, and disrupt foreign information
manipulation. He also leads their work to foster information resilience around the world.
TREY HERR, senior director, Cyber Statecraft Initiative, Atlantic Council
Herr is senior director of the Cyber Statecraft Initiative, part of the Atlantic Council
Technology Programs, and assistant professor of global security and policy at
American University’s School of International Service. Previously, Herr was a senior
security strategist with Microsoft handling cybersecurity policy.
TRISHA RAY, associate director and resident fellow, GeoTech Center, Atlantic
Council
Ray is an associate director and resident fellow at the Atlantic Council’s GeoTech
Center. Her research lies at the intersection of geopolitical and security trends in
relation to emerging technologies. Prior to the Atlantic Council, Ray was a fellow
at the Center for Security, Strategy and Technology at the Observer Research
Foundation in India.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
44
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
Appendix – The Global Foresight
2036 Survey: full results
Demographic data
United States 231
Canada 19
United Kingdom 16
Colombia 11
Germany 10
Sweden 10
France 8
Turkey 8
Argentina 6
Australia 6
Italy 6
Guatemala 5
Netherlands 5
Spain 5
Ukraine 5
India 4
Mexico 4
Romania 4
South Africa 4
Venezuela 4
Brazil 3
Chile 3
Israel 3
Poland 3
Switzerland 3
Albania 2
Belgium 2
Bulgaria 2
Costa Rica 2
El Salvador 2
Greece 2
Japan 2
Kosovo 2
Lebanon 2
Nigeria 2
Norway 2
Pakistan 2
Slovenia 2
Taiwan 2
Armenia 1
Austria 1
Bosnia Herzegovina 1
Botswana 1
Chad 1
China 1
Congo (Democratic
Republic) 1
Croatia 1
Cyprus 1
Denmark 1
Dominican Republic 1
Estonia 1
Finland 1
Georgia 1
Ghana 1
Indonesia 1
Iran 1
Ireland (Republic) 1
Jordan 1
Lithuania 1
Nicaragua 1
Panama 1
Portugal 1
Saudi Arabia 1
Serbia 1
Singapore 1
Slovakia 1
Sri Lanka 1
Trinidad & Tobago 1
Tunisia 1
Uganda 1
Uzbekistan 1
Yemen 1
What is your country of citizenship?
Country Country Country CountryNumber Number Number Number
Note: 447 respondents answered this question

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
45
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
46
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
Survey questions

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
47
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
48
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
49
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
50
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
51
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
52
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
53
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
54
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
55
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
56
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
57
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
58
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
59
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
60
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
61
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
Endnotes
1 “Global Foresight,” Atlantic Council, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/programs/scowcroft-center-for-strategy-and-security/
geostrategy-initiative/foresight-geostrategy-initiative-scowcroft-center/global-foresight-atlantic-council/.
2 Mary Kate Aylward, Peter Engelke, Uri Friedman, and Paul Kielstra, “Welcome to 2035: What the world could look like in ten
years, according to more than 350 experts,” Atlantic Council, February 12, 2025, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/content-
series/atlantic-council-strategy-paper-series/welcome-to-2035/#conflict; Mary Kate Aylward, Peter Engelke, Uri Friedman,
and Paul Kielstra, “Welcome to 2034: What the world could look like in ten years, according to nearly 300 experts,” Atlantic
Council, January 12, 2024, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/content-series/atlantic-council-strategy-paper-series/welcome-
to-2034-what-the-world-could-look-like-in-ten-years-according-to-nearly-300-experts/#china.
3 Aylward et al., “Welcome to 2035.”
4 Aylward, “Welcome to 2035.”
5 Daniel H. Rosen, Logan Wright, Oliver Melton, and Jeremy Smith, “China’s Economy: Rightsizing 2025, Looking Ahead to
2026,” Rhodium Group, December 22, 2025, https://rhg.com/wp-content/uploads/2025/12/Chinas-Economy-Rightsizing-
2025-Looking-Ahead-to-2026.pdf.
6 Adam Kozloski, “China is carrying out ‘dress rehearsals’ to take Taiwan. Here’s how the US should respond,“ Atlantic
Council, June 9, 2025, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/china-is-carrying-out-dress-rehearsals-to-take-
taiwan-heres-how-the-us-should-respond/.
7 Scott D. Berrier, “Deterring Chinese aggression takes real-time intelligence,” Atlantic Council, February 13, 2025, https://
www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/issue-brief/deterring-chinese-aggression-takes-real-time-intelligence/;
Bradley T. Gericke, “Win fast or lose big against China,” Atlantic Council, April 10, 2025, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-
depth-research-reports/issue-brief/win-fast-or-lose-big-against-china/; Brian Kerg, “The United States needs a victory plan
for the Indo-Pacific,” Atlantic Council, April 29, 2025, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/issue-brief/
the-united-states-needs-a-victory-plan-for-the-indo-pacific/.
8 Markus Garlauskas, “Dispatch from Taipei: Now is the time to encourage Taiwan’s assertiveness, not hold it back,”
Atlantic Council, November 24, 2025, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/dispatches/dispatch-from-taipei-now-is-the-time-
to-encourage-taiwans-assertiveness/; Marvin J. Park, “Defending Taiwan means mobilizing society, not just the military,”
Atlantic Council, April 24, 2025, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/issue-brief/defending-taiwan-
means-mobilizing-society-not-just-the-military/.
9 Markus Garlauskas, Lauren D. Gilbert, and Kyoko Imai, “A rising nuclear double-threat in East Asia: Insights from our
Guardian Tiger I and II tabletop exercises,” Atlantic Council, May 12, 2025, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-
research-reports/report/a-rising-nuclear-double-threat-in-east-asia-insights-from-our-guardian-tiger-i-and-ii-tabletop-
exercises/; Markus Garlauskas, “Toplines: The United States and its allies must be ready to deter a two-front war and
nuclear attacks in East Asia,” Atlantic Council, February 7, 2025, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/
report/toplines-the-united-states-and-its-allies-must-be-ready-to-deter-a-two-front-war-and-nuclear-attacks-in-east-asia/.
10 ARTICLE IS BEHIND A PAYWALL. I CANNOT ACCESS BIBLIOGRAPHIC INFO. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2023-09-05/china-slowdown-means-it-may-never-overtake-us-economy-be-says?embedded-checkout=true.
11 “The global economy in 2075: growth slows as Asia rises,” Goldman Sachs, December 8, 2022, https://www.goldmansachs.
com/insights/articles/the-global-economy-in-2075-growth-slows-as-asia-rises.
12 SAME BLOOMBERG ARTICLE AS PREVIOUS; CANNOT ACCESS GIVEN PAYWALL. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2023-09-05/china-slowdown-means-it-may-never-overtake-us-economy-be-says?embedded-checkout=true
13 “World Economic Outlook: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery. Statistical Appendix,” International Monetary Fund,
April 2019, https://www.imf.org/-/media/files/publications/weo/2019/april/english/tablea.pdf.
14 “World Economic Outlook: A Critical Juncture amid Policy Shifts,” International Monetary Fund, April 2025, https://www.imf.
org/en/publications/weo/issues/2025/04/22/world-economic-outlook-april-2025.
15 Rosen et al., “Rightsizing.”
16 Jeremy Mark, “China’s property slump deepens—and threatens more than the housing sector,” Atlantic Council, January
28, 2026, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/econographics/chinas-property-slump-deepens-and-threatens-more-than-
the-housing-sector/.
17 “Old-age dependency ratio,” United Nations Population Division / Data portal, accessed February 24, 2026, https://
population.un.org/dataportal/data/indicators/84/locations/156/start/1990/end/2065/table/pivotbylocation?df=abaf491f-b214-
4bb0-babd-ff4a23dd6351.
18 “NATO Defense Spending Tracker,” Atlantic Council, accessed February 24, 2026, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/
commentary/trackers-and-data-visualizations/nato-defense-spending-tracker/; Christian Bjørn Følsgaard, Daniel Fried, and
Rachel Rizzo, “Everything you need to know about Trump’s Greenland gambit,” Atlantic Council, January 8, 2025, https://
www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/everything-you-need-to-know-about-trumps-greenland-gambit/.

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
62
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
19 Dina Smeltz and Craig Kafura, “Americans Endorse US Commitment to NATO, Though GOP Support Has Dipped,” The
Chicago Council on Global Affairs, June 20, 2025, https://globalaffairs.org/research/public-opinion-survey/americans-
endorse-us-commitment-nato-though-gop-support-has-dipped.
20 “The Global Foresight 2025 survey: Full results,” Atlantic Council, February 12, 2025, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/
content-series/atlantic-council-strategy-paper-series/the-global-foresight-2025-survey-full-results/.
21 Mary Kate Aylward, Peter Engelke, Uri Friedman, and Paul Kielstra, “Welcome to 2033: What the world could look like in
ten years, according to more than 160 experts,” Atlantic Council, January 20, 2023, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/content-
series/atlantic-council-strategy-paper-series/welcome-to-2033/.
22 Colleen McClain et al., “How the U.S. Public and AI Experts View Artificial Intelligence,” Pew Research Center, April 3, 2025,
https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2025/04/03/how-the-us-public-and-ai-experts-view-artificial-intelligence/.
23 Atlantic Council, “2025 survey: Full results.”
24 Aylward et al., “Welcome to 2035.”
25 Atlantic Council, “2025 survey: Full results.”
26 Atlantic Council, “2025 survey: Full results”; “The Global Foresight 2024 survey: Full results,” Atlantic Council, January
12, 2024, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/content-series/atlantic-council-strategy-paper-series/the-global-foresight-2024-
survey-full-results/.
27 Ursula von der Leyen, “State of the Union 2025,” European Commission, September 10, 2025, https://commission.europa.
eu/strategy-and-policy/state-union/state-union-2025_en.
28 Atlantic Council, “NATO defense spending tracker.” Accessed February 24, 2026.
29 Aylward et al., “Welcome to 2035.”
30 “Large increase in new tariffs but also measures to ease global trade, WTO report shows,” World Trade Organization,
December 2, 2025, https://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news25_e/trdev_02dec25_225_e.htm.
31 “Real gross domestic product per capita,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, February 20, 2026, https://fred.stlouisfed.
org/series/A939RX0Q048SBEA; “Global GDP over the long run,” Our World in Data, May 16, 2024, https://ourworldindata.
org/grapher/global-gdp-over-the-long-run?time=1950..2024; “People living in democracies and autocracies, World,” Our
World in Data, undated, accessed February 24, 2026, https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/people-living-in-democracies-
autocracies?time=1945..latest.
32 Yana Gorokhovskaia and Cathryn Grothe, “Freedom in the World 2025: The Uphill Battle to Safeguard Rights,” Freedom
House, February 2025, https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/2025/uphill-battle-to-safeguard-rights.
33 “Dollar Dominance Monitor,” Atlantic Council, accessed February 24, 2026, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/programs/
geoeconomics-center/dollar-dominance-monitor/.
34 Gregory Zuckerman and Vicky Ge Huang, “A New Crypto Winter Is Here and Even the Biggest Bulls Aren’t Certain Why,”
The Wall Street Journal, February 6, 2026, https://www.wsj.com/finance/currencies/a-new-crypto-winter-is-here-and-even-
the-biggest-bulls-are-worried-82019de4.
35 Ayesha Rascoe, “Why the dollar fell over 9% in 2025, and what to expect in 2026,” NPR, January 4, 2026, https://www.npr.
org/2026/01/04/nx-s1-5662540/why-the-dollar-fell-over-9-in-2025-and-what-to-expect-in-2026.
36 Alisha Chhangani, “What to watch as China prepares its digital yuan for prime time,” Atlantic Council, January 15, 2026,
https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/econographics/what-to-watch-as-china-prepares-its-digital-yuan-for-prime-time/.
37 “Global FX trading hits $9.6 trillion per day in April 2025 and OTC interest rate derivatives surge to $7.9 trillion: Triennial
Survey,” Bank for International Settlements, September 30, 2025, https://www.bis.org/press/p250930.htm.
38 “Freedom and Prosperity Indexes,” Atlantic Council, accessed February 24, 2026, https://freedom-and-prosperity-indexes.
atlanticcouncil.org/.
39 Matthew Prince, “Steps we’ve taken around Cloudflare’s services in Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia,” The Cloudflare Blog,
July 3, 2022, https://blog.cloudflare.com/steps-taken-around-cloudflares-services-in-ukraine-belarus-and-russia/; “UA Crisis
- ESET Response Center,” ESET, accessed February 24, 2026, https://www.eset.com/us/ua-crisis/; “Ukraine Crisis Resource
Center,” Sophos, accessed February 24, 2026, https://www.sophos.com/en-us/content/ukraine-crisis-resource-center;
“Safeguarding Ukraine’s data to preserve its present and build its future,” Amazon News, June 9, 2022, https://www.
aboutamazon.com/news/aws/safeguarding-ukraines-data-to-preserve-its-present-and-build-its-future; Matt Olney, “Cisco
stands on guard with our customers in Ukraine,” Cisco Blogs, March 3, 2022, https://blogs.cisco.com/news/cisco-stands-on-
guard-with-our-customers-in-ukraine; Michael Hill, “How security vendors are aiding Ukraine,” CSO, March 2, 2022, https://
www.csoonline.com/article/572163/how-security-vendors-are-aiding-ukraine.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
63
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
40 Stephanie Pell, “Private-Sector Cyber Defense in Armed Conflict,” Lawfare, December 1, 2022, https://www.lawfaremedia.
org/article/private-sector-cyber-defense-armed-conflict; Dina Temple-Raston and Sean Powers, “Exclusive: How a defend-
forward operation gave Ukraine’s SBU an edge over Russia,” The Record, October 20, 2023, https://therecord.media/
illia-vitiuk-interview-ukraine-sbu-defend-forward; “UK boosts Ukraine’s cyber defences with £6 million support package,”
Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office of the United Kingdom and The Rt Hon James Cleverly MP, November 1,
2022, https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-boosts-ukraines-cyber-defences-with-6-million-support-package; “U.S.
Support for Connectivity and Cybersecurity in Ukraine,” US Department of State, May 10, 2022, https://2021-2025.state.
gov/u-s-support-for-connectivity-and-cybersecurity-in-ukraine/.
41 Christine H. Fox and Emelia S. Probasco, “Big Tech Goes to War,” Foreign Affairs, October 19, 2022, https://www.
foreignaffairs.com/ukraine/big-tech-goes-war.
42 Steve P. Mulligan, “Letters of Marque and Reprisal (Part 1): Introduction and Historical Context,” Congressional Research
Service, February 26, 2025, https://www.congress.gov/crs-product/LSB11272; Nick Robins, “The corporation that changed
the world: how the East India Company shaped the modern multinational,” Asian Affairs 43(1), 12–26, 2012, https://doi.
org/10.1080/03068374.2012.642512.
43 Emma Schroeder with Sean Dack, “A parallel terrain: Public-private defense of the Ukrainian information environment,”
Atlantic Council, February 27, 2023, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/a-parallel-terrain-
public-private-defense-of-the-ukrainian-information-environment/; Jocelinn Kang and Dr. Jessie Jacob, “Connecting
the Indo-Pacific: The future of subsea cables and opportunities for Australia,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute,
September 2024, https://ad-aspi.s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/2024-09/Connecting%20the%20Indo-Pacific%20
-%20The%20future%20of%20subsea%20cables%20and%20opportunities%20for%20Australia_0.pdf?VersionId=.
LcTT0ZYi0Nab6DeTCLgQ8M1a15m42nD; Felix Richter, “Big Three Hold Dominant Lead in Accelerating Cloud Market,”
Statista, February 9, 2026, https://www.statista.com/chart/18819/worldwide-market-share-of-leading-cloud-infrastructure-
service-providers.
44 “Defending Ukraine: Early Lessons from the Cyber War,” Microsoft, June 22, 2022, https://cdn-dynmedia-1.microsoft.com/is/
content/microsoftcorp/microsoft/msc/documents/presentations/CSR/Defending-Ukraine-Early-Lessons-from-Cyber-War.pdf.
45 Jonathan Horowitz, “The Business of Battle: The Role of Private Tech in Conflict,” Lawfare, September 17, 2024, https://
www.lawfaremedia.org/article/the-business-of-battle--the-role-of-private-tech-in-conflict; Jonathan Horowitz, “Private
Companies in Cyber Operations During Armed Conflict,” Lieber Institute, January 13, 2022, https://lieber.westpoint.edu/
private-companies-cyber-operations-armed-conflict/; Winnona DeSombre Bernsen, “Crash (exploit) and burn: Securing the
offensive cyber supply chain to counter China in cyberspace,” Atlantic Council, June 25, 2025, https://www.atlanticcouncil.
org/in-depth-research-reports/report/crash-exploit-and-burn.
46 Schroeder with Dack, “A parallel terrain”; “Heightened threat of state-aligned groups against western critical national
infrastructure,” National Cyber Security Centre of the United Kingdom, May 1, 2024, https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/news/
heightened-threat-of-state-aligned-groups.
47 Joey Roulette, Cassell Bryan-Low and Tom Balmforth, “Musk ordered shutdown of Starlink satellite service as Ukraine
retook territory from Russia,” Reuters, July 27, 2025, https://www.reuters.com/investigations/musk-ordered-shutdown-
starlink-satellite-service-ukraine-retook-territory-russia-2025-07-25/.
48 FULL BIBLIOGRAPHIC INFO IS BEHIND A PAYWALL. “Why Taiwan Is Building a Satellite Network Without Elon Musk,” The
New Y ork Times
49 Zoe Haver, “China’s Government Is Learning From Russia’s Cyberattacks Against Ukraine,” Insikt Group, March 18, 2022,
https://www.recordedfuture.com/blog/chinas-government-is-learning-from-russias-cyberattacks-against-ukraine.
50 Sam Bresnick, Ngor Luong, and Kathleen Curlee, “Which Ties Will Bind? Big Tech, Lessons from Ukraine, and Implications
for Taiwan,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, February 2024, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/
which-ties-will-bind/; Emma Schroeder, “Building the digital front line: Understanding big tech decision-making in Ukraine,”
Atlantic Council, November 17, 2025, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/building-the-digital-
front-line/.
51 Schroeder, ”Building”; Jon Bateman, Nick Beecroft, and Gavin Wilde, “What the Russian Invasion Reveals About the
Future of Cyber Warfare,” Carnegie Endowment, December 19, 2022, https://carnegieendowment.org/russia-eurasia/
posts/2022/12/what-the-russian-invasion-reveals-about-the-future-of-cyber-warfare.
52 Fox and Prabasco, “Big Tech.”
53 Andrés Solimano, “Talent Circulation Across Countries: A Review of Issues and Experiences,” IMC Working Paper IMC-RP
2025/2, February 2025, https://investmentmigration.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/05/Talent-Circulation-Across-Countries-
A-Review-of-Issues-and-experiences-FR.pdf; Gi-Wook Shin and Kelsi Caywood, “Countering Brain Drain through Circulation
and Linkage: Illustrations and Lessons from China and India,” International Migration Review 0(0), 2025, https://doi.
org/10.1177/01979183251371676.
54 Chen Chen, Aude Bernard, Ryan Rylee, and Guy Abel, “Brain Circulation: The Educational Profile of Return Migrants,”
Population Research and Policy Review 41(1), 387-399, 2022, doi:10.1007/s11113-021-09655-6.

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
64
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
55 AnnaLee Saxenian, “Brain Circulation: How High-Skill Immigration Makes Everyone Better Off,” Brookings, December 1,
2002, https://www.brookings.edu/articles/brain-circulation-how-high-skill-immigration-makes-everyone-better-off/.
56 Anatolie Coşciug, “To Be or Not To Be a Samsar: Motivations for Entrepreneurship among Romanian Returnees Involved
in the Transnational Trade in Used Vehicles,” Central and Eastern European Migration Review 11(2), 85-100, December
7, 2022, https://ceemr.uw.edu.pl/vol-11-no-2-2022/articles/be-or-not-be-samsar-motivations-entrepreneurship-among-
romanian-returnees; Zane Vārpiņa, Marija Krūmiņa, Kata Fredheim, and Anders Paalzow, “Back for business: The link
between foreign experience and entrepreneurship in Latvia,” International Migration, March 23, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1111/
imig.13136.
57 Craig Turp-Balazs, “Geopolitics meets growth: Central and Eastern Europe is no longer Europe’s peripheral backyard,”
reinvantage, February 26, 2025, https://reinvantage.org/emerging-europes-reinvention-is-a-wake-up-call-for-investors/;
Marek Grzegorczyk, “The great reversal: How CEE and the Baltics are luring back talent,” Beyond Emerging Europe,
January 16, 2025, https://emerging-europe.com/the-great-reversal-how-cee-and-the-baltics-are-luring-back-talent/.
58 Elena Ghinita, “Homecoming: The CEE Startup Founders Who Chose To Return,” The Recursive, December 1, 2023, https://
therecursive.com/homecoming-the-cee-startup-founders-who-chose-to-return/; Avni Rudaku, Asdren Toska, Kimberly
Gleason, and Jusuf Zeqiri, “Returned entrepreneurs and ability to generate innovations: Case of Kosovo,” International
Journal of Sustainable Development and Planning 18(9), 2911-2921, https://doi.org/10.18280/ijsdp.180929; Alin Croitoru,
“Diaspora start-up programs and creative industries: Evidence from Romania,” Transylvanian Review of Administrative
Sciences 63E, 2021, https://rtsa.ro/tras/index.php/tras/article/viewFile/661/651.
59 Nicoleta Pirvu and Alexandru Agatinei, “Venture in Eastern Europe: 2024 Report,” How To Web, February 10, 2025, https://
www.howtoweb.co/venture-in-eastern-europe-report-2024/?utm_.
60 Mirel Bran, “Romania seeks to bring back its expatriates trained in high-tech sectors,” Le Monde, November 10, 2024,
https://www.lemonde.fr/en/international/article/2024/11/10/romania-seeks-to-bring-back-its-expatriates-trained-in-high-tech-
sectors_6732281_4.html.
61 Aaron Eger et al., “The Kelp Forest Challenge: A collaborative global movement to protect and restore 4 million hectares of
kelp forests,” Journal of Applied Phycology 36, 951-964, October 9, 2023, https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10811-
023-03103-y.
62 Evan I. Schwartz, “Underwater Forests Return to Life off the Coast of California, and That Might be Good News for the
Entire Planet,” Smithsonian Magazine, December 2025, https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/underwaer-
forests-return-life-coast-california-might-be-good-news-entire-planet-180987639/.
63 Bethan C. O’Leary et al., “Embracing Nature-based Solutions to promote resilient marine and coastal ecosystems,” Nature-
Based Solutions 3, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbsj.2022.100044.
64 Selma Christensen, Maria Potouroglou and Katherine Pedder, “What Is Kelp and Why Is it Vital to People and the Planet?,”
World Resources Institute, May 2, 2023, https://www.wri.org/insights/what-kelp-forests-protect.
65 Schwartz, “Underwater.”
66 Schwartz, “Underwater.”
67 Christensen, Potouroglou and Pedder, “Kelp.”
68 Claire Griffiths, “Kelp forests could suffer massive losses by 2100 as ocean heatwaves intensify,” UCLA Institute of the
Environment and Sustainability, April 3, 2025, https://www.ioes.ucla.edu/article/kelp-forests-could-suffer-massive-losses-by-
2100-as-ocean-heatwaves-intensify/.
69 Raymond Zhong, “How to Revive California’s Underwater Forests? Smash a Spiky, Hungry Foe,” The New Y ork Times,
October 21, 2025, https://www.nytimes.com/2025/10/21/climate/california-kelp-restoration.html?searchResultPosition=1.
70 Schwartz, “Underwater.”
71 Pascal Kwesiga, “Is seaweed the future of flying?,” BBC, November 25, 2021, https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20211119-
can-flying-ever-be-carbon-neutral.
72 ”Global review of marine restoration projects and funding sources,” United Nations Environment Programme, August 2023,
https://www.unep-wcmc.org/en/news/global-review-of-marine-restoration-projects-and-funding-sources.
73 “Into the Blue: Securing a Sustainable Future for Kelp Forests,” United Nations Environment Programme, April 2023, https://
wedocs.unep.org/items/41e38d3f-e98d-45bf-8475-0defbfbc8d9e.
74 Pierre Friedlingstein et al., “Emerging climate impact on carbon sinks in a consolidated carbon budget,” Nature 649, 98-
103, 2026, https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-025-09802-5.
75 United Nations Environment Programme, “Blue.”
76 “Global Seaweed New and Emerging Markets Report 2023,” World Bank Group, August 16, 2023, https://www.worldbank.
org/en/topic/environment/publication/global-seaweed-new-and-emerging-markets-report-2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
65
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
77 Gemma Conroy, “Why Earth’s giant kelp forests are worth $500 billion a year,” Nature, April 18, 2023, https://www.nature.
com/articles/d41586-023-01307-3.
78 “The State of the World’s Human Rights: April 2025,” Amnesty International, April 28, 2025, https://www.amnesty.org/en/
documents/pol10/8515/2025/en/.
79 “Universal Declaration of Human Rights,” United Nations, December 10, 1948, https://www.un.org/en/about-us/universal-
declaration-of-human-rights.
80 G. John Ikenberry, “The Liberal International Order and its Discontents,” European Journal of International Relations 38(3),
May 10, 2010, https://doi.org/10.1177/0305829810366477.
81 “Withdrawing the United States from and ending funding to certain United Nations organizations and reviewing
United States support to all international organizations,” The White House, February 4, 2025, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/presidential-actions/2025/02/withdrawing-the-united-states-from-and-ending-funding-to-certain-united-nations-
organizations-and-reviewing-united-states-support-to-all-international-organizations/; Özge Karsu, “Israel Announces
Withdrawal from UN Human Rights Council,” American Society of International Law, March 7, 2025, https://www.asil.org/
ILIB/israel-announces-withdrawal-un-human-rights-council; “Organisations denounce Nicaragua’s withdrawal from Human
Rights Council, absence from Universal Periodic Review,” International Service for Human Rights, March 26, 2025, https://
ishr.ch/latest-updates/nicaragua-organisations-speak-out-against-the-states-decision-to-withdraw-from-the-human-rights-
council-and-absent-itself-from-the-universal-periodic-review/.
82 “Five European States Withdraw from Mine Ban Treaty,” Human Rights Watch, July 1, 2025, https://www.hrw.org/
news/2025/07/01/five-european-states-withdraw-from-mine-ban-treaty.
83 Dan Rice, "NATO Must Abandon the Cluster Munitions Convention," Center for European Policy Analysis, March 25, 2024,
https://cepa.org/article/nato-must-abandon-the-cluster-munitions-convention/
84 Haroon Siddique, “Russia has committed flagrant human rights abuses in Ukraine since 2014, rules ECHR,” The Guardian,
July 9, 2025, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/09/russia-has-committed-flagrant-human-rights-abuses-in-
ukraine-since-2014-rules-echr.
85 Rida Qadri, Aida M. Davani, Kevin Robinson, and Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, “Risks of Cultural Erasure in Large Language
Models,” arXiv, January 2, 2025, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2501.01056.
86 Erica Simmons, “How Small Island Developing States could shape the protection of culture and creativity in the age of AI,”
UNESCO Global AI Ethics and Governance Observatory, February 22, 2024, https://www.unesco.org/ethics-ai/en/articles/
how-small-island-developing-states-could-shape-protection-culture-and-creativity-age-ai.
87 “What Is Neurotechnology? A Brain-Tech Guide,” Society for Brain Mapping and Therapeutics, accessed February 25,
2026, https://www.worldbrainmapping.org/what-is-neurotechnology-a-brain-tech-guide/.
88 “Brain Activity Decoder Can Reveal Stories in People’s Minds,” University of Texas at Austin News, May 1, 2023, https://
news.utexas.edu/2023/05/01/brain-activity-decoder-can-reveal-stories-in-peoples-minds/.
89 “Improved brain decoder holds promise for communication in people with aphasia,” Science Daily, February 6, 2025,
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2025/02/250206134613.htm.
90 Laura Bernáez Timón and Virginia Mahieu, “Neurotech consumer market atlas: How the sector is making moves into the
mainstream,” Centre for Future Generations, June 16, 2025, https://cfg.eu/neurotech-market-atlas/#ftnt26.
91 “UNESCO adopts first global ethical framework for neurotechnology,” digwatch, November 7, 2025, https://dig.watch/
updates/unesco-adopts-first-global-ethical-framework-for-neurotechnology.
92 Ian G. Barbour, “Views of Technology,” pp. 7-20 in Beyond Computer Ethics, compiled by Philip Rogaway, March 29, 2009,
https://web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~rogaway/classes/188/materials/reader-fall09.pdf.
93 “Atlantic Council Technology Programs,” Atlantic Council, accessed February 25, 2026, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/
programs/actech/.
94 “Global Foresight 2036: The authoritative forecast for the decade ahead,” Atlantic Council, February 10, 2036, https://www.
atlanticcouncil.org/content-series/atlantic-council-strategy-paper-series/global-foresight-2036/.
95 Atlantic Council, “Welcome to 2036.”
96 Xabier Lareo, “Large language models (LLM),” European Data Protection Supervisor, accessed February 25, 2026, https://
www.edps.europa.eu/data-protection/technology-monitoring/techsonar/large-language-models-llm_en.

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
66
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
67
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
68
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
69
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE
CHAIRMAN EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE
CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
TREASURER
*George Lund
DIRECTORS
Stephen Achilles
Elliot Ackerman
*Gina F. Adams
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
Ilker Baburoglu
Alain Bejjani
Colleen Bell
Peter J. Beshar
*Karan Bhatia
Stephen Biegun
Linden P. Blue
Brad Bondi
John Bonsell
Philip M. Breedlove
R. Nicholas Burns
David L. Caplan
Samantha A. Carl-Y oder
*Teresa Carlson
*James E. Cartwright
Christopher Cavoli
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
Kellyanne Conway
*Helima Croft
Ankit N. Desai
*Lawrence Di Rita
Dante A. Disparte
Denelle Dixon
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Joseph Durso
Richard Edelman
Oren Eisner
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Mark T. Esper
Christopher W.K. Fetzer
*Michael Fisch
Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
*Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
Sherri W. Goodman
Marcel Grisnigt
Jarosław Grzesiak
Murathan Günal
Michael V. Hayden
*Robin Hayes
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Kay Bailey Hutchison
Ian Ihnatowycz
Keoki Jackson
Deborah Lee James
*Joia M. Johnson
*Safi Kalo
Karen Karniol-Tambour
*Andre Kelleners
John E. Klein
Ratko Knežević
C. Jeffrey Knittel
Joseph Konzelmann
Keith J. Krach
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Almar Latour
Yann Le Pallec
Diane Leopold
Andrew J.P. Levy
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Roger R. Martella Jr.
Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Majida Mourad
Mary Claire Murphy
Scott Nathan
*Julia Nesheiwat
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Robert O’Brien
*Ahmet M. Ören
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
David H. Petraeus
Elizabeth Frost Pierson
*Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
Robert Portman
Dina H. Powell
dddMcCormick
Michael Punke
Ashraf Qazi
Laura J. Richardson
*Gary Rieschel
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
*Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Wendy R. Sherman
Gregg Sherrill
Kris Singh
Varun Sivaram
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
Nader Tavakoli
*Gil Tenzer
*Frances F. Townsend
Melanne Verveer
Tyson Voelkel
Kemba Walden
Michael F. Walsh
*Peter Weinberg
Ronald Weiser
*Al Williams
Ben Wilson
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
Tod D. Wolters
Jenny Wood
Alan Yang
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY
DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
*Executive Committee
Members
List as of January 1,
2026
Atlantic Council Board of Directors

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
70
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
GLOBAL FORESIGHT 2036
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and engagement in international
 affairs based on the central role of the Atlantic community in
 meeting today’s global challenges.
© 2026 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means without permission
in writing from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of brief
quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please
direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1400 L Street, NW, 11th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
