
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
1
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Atlantic CouncilAtlantic Council
SCOWCROFT CENTER
FOR STRATEGY AND SECURITY
May 2026
Executive summary
Countering adversary command, control, communications,
computers, cyber, intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance,
and targeting (C5ISRT) has emerged as a critical operational
priority, underscored by Admiral Samuel Paparo’s May 2025
congressional posture testimony and Admiral Daryl Caudle’s
2026 US Navy Fighting Instructions. As the US military faces
increasingly sophisticated adversaries who are constantly
conducting hybrid warfare operations across all domains,
countering C5ISRT (C-C5ISRT) during the competition phase
(i.e., prior to engaging in conflict) is essential to gaining an
advantage and deterring war.
The US military is at a critical tipping point. Success will depend
on rapidly acquiring, integrating, training, and operationalizing
C-C5ISRT capabilities before conflict begins. However,
current doctrinal frameworks, organizational structures, and
acquisition processes are not optimized for the requisite
speed, integration, or scale to do so.
This paper offers a comprehensive set of recommendations
for Congress, the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint
Staff, the military services, and the combatant commands.
These recommendations focus on:
 y Accelerating the transition to software-defined warfare.
 y Aligning acquisition processes with operational
timelines.
 y Strengthening interagency and joint integration.
1. “INDOPACOM Commander Underscores Importance of Land Forces, Deterrence, and AI in Indo-Pacific Security,” US Army,
May 14, 2025, https://www.army.mil/article/285494/indopacom_commander_underscores_importance_of_land_forces_de-
terrence_and_ai_in_indo_pacific_security.
2. “CNO Keynote Remarks at AFCEA WEST - as Prepared,” US Navy, accessed April 17, 2026, https://www.navy.mil/Press-Office/
Speeches/display-speech/Article/4406659/cno-keynote-remarks-at-afcea-west-as-prepared/. AFCEA is an information techno-
logy, communications, and electronics association for professionals in international government, industry, and academia world-
wide; AFCEA West was held in San Diego, California.
3. C5ISRT stands for command, control, communications, computers, cyber, intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance, and targeting.
 y Reforming training, doctrine, and organizational
structures to enable the rapid deployment of C-C5ISRT
capabilities.
Together, these recommendations will present a road map
for the United States to deter adversaries in the competition
phase, and to gain and retain a strategic advantage in infor-
mation warfare.
Introduction
“Deterrence is our highest duty,” Admiral Samuel Paparo, com-
mander of US Indo-Pacific Command, declared in May 2025.1
“Deterrence activities dominate the preponderance of what
our forces do day-to-day around the world,” Admiral Daryl
Caudle, the thirty-fourth chief of naval operations, reaffirmed
as he unveiled the US Navy Fighting Instructions at the AF-
CEA WEST 2026 in February.2 This highest duty is challenged
by an often-ambiguous era of competition that is no longer
defined by military mass and capability overmatch, but rather
by persistent “gray zone” actions by our adversaries: These
are below the threshold of armed conflict, conducted through
deniable C5ISRT activities that affect awareness, perceptions,
will, and attitudes before a shot is fired. 3 Compounding this
challenge is the fact that concepts like gray zone, C5ISRT, and
information warfare remain poorly defined and debated.
Issue brief Information fires
Building C-C5ISRT advantage in competition
Martin Zuber, Caleb Eames, Daniel Minnocci, and Amy Cowley

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Information fires: Building C-C5ISRT advantage in competition
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
On the one hand, due to US preeminence in conflict, our
strategic adversaries have turned to asymmetric warfare in
competition. The world is now marked by countless gray zone4
operations such as VOLT TYPHOON, through which People’s
Republic of China (PRC) state-sponsored cyber actors are
prepositioned on US networks to enable disruptive and des-
tructive cyberattacks against US critical infrastructure, or Rus-
sia’s continuous hybrid warfare campaign against Europe and
the United States to sabotage critical infrastructure, sow di-
sinformation, and probe NATO defenses. 5 Expansive internet
accessibility, broad social media use, and the proliferation of
camera-equipped smart devices have increased global inter-
connectedness, while the behaviors that constitute “warfare”
in those connections have become less clear.
On the other hand, success in the West is often still measured
as if we were in a kinetic conflict by measuring what we did,
and not whether it produced the desired effect. The inability
to measure the effectiveness of deterrence leads to ill-defined
responses, costs taxpayer dollars through unoptimized force
posture, and cedes information initiative to adversaries who
operate on a wartime footing while we still treat competition
as peacetime.
This paper asserts that the US military’s ability to optimize the
operations of scarce capital forces6, integrate information, and
effectively message intent will play a decisive role in influen-
cing adversary decision-making and deterring war. It argues
the joint force is not optimized to counter adversary C5ISRT
during the competition phase7 due to our limited ability to mea-
sure effectiveness, inefficient force posturing and employment,
and insufficient technological integration, resulting in subopti-
mal use of resources and reduced influence over adversary
4. Forward Defense Experts, “Today’s Wars Are Fought in the ‘Gray Zone.’ Here’s Everything Y ou Need to Know About It.,” Atlan-
tic Council, December 22, 2022, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/todays-wars-are-fought-in-the-gray-zone-
heres-everything-you-need-to-know-about-it/.
5. “PRC State-sponsored Actors Compromise and Maintain Persistent Access to U.S. Critical Infrastructure,” Cybersecurity and In-
frastructure Security Agency, accessed April 17, 2026, https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/cybersecurity-advisories/aa24-038a;
and Peter Dickinson, “Putin’s Hybrid War against Europe Continues to Escalate,” Atlantic Council, August 25, 2025, https://www.
atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/ukrainealert/putins-hybrid-war-against-europe-continues-to-escalate/.
6. Capital forces in military assets refer to the accumulated, durable, and productive capacity of a defense establishment, including
weapons, infrastructure, and technology that require strategic investment
7. Air Force, Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0, Operations, January 22, 2025, https://www.doctrine.af.mil/Portals/61/documents/
AFDP_3-0/AFDP3-0Operations.pdf.
8. “Statement of Admiral Samuel J. Paparo, Commander, U.S. Indo-Pacific Command on U.S. Indo-Pacific Command Posture,” 2025.
9. Josh Baughman, “The Path to China’s Intelligentized Warfare: Converging on the Metaverse Battlefield,” Cyber Defense Re-
view, December 19, 2024, https://cyberdefensereview.army.mil/CDR-Content/Articles/Article-View/Article/4012231/the-path-to-chi-
nas-intelligentized-warfare-converging-on-the-metaverse-battlefi/.
10. B. A. Friedman, “Finding the Right Model: The Joint Force, the People’s Liberation Army, and Information Warfare,”  Journal of
Indo-Pacific Affairs  6, no. 3 (March–April 2023): 1–17; and Andrew W. Marshall, “Finding the Right Model: The Joint Force, the
People’s Liberation Army, and Information Warfare,” Air University (AU) website, accessed April 17, 2026, https://www.airuniversity.
af.edu/JIPA/Display/Article/3371164/finding-the-right-model-the-joint-force-the-peoples-liberation-army-and-informa/.
decision-making. To be clear, much work has been done to
enable our military to win kinetic conflict, and our adversaries
should fear our ability to close with and destroy the enemy,
but the cognitive and information battles of competition require
different investments to counter C5ISRT. In Paparo’s testimony
before the House Armed Services Committee in April 2025, he
recognized that “the Joint Force must build the link between
desired information effects and physical Operations, Activities,
and Investments (OAIs) to assure adversary cognition of US ca-
pability and will.”8 This paper examines how the joint force, with
particular emphasis on the US Navy, can optimize C-C5ISRT
capabilities in the competition phase to affect adversary will,
awareness, perceptions, attitudes, emotions, and cognition to
create and sustain a joint, allied, and partner advantage and
freedom of action in and through the information environment.
The adversary: PLA information warfare
Understanding the urgency behind optimizing C-C5ISRT capa-
bilities requires examining how the People’s Liberation Army
(PLA), among other adversaries, approaches information war-
fare not as a supporting function but the decisive precondition
for all military action. The PLA categorizes the current stage
of warfare as informatization, with the previous stage being
mechanization, and the next one being intelligentization,
where artificial intelligence (AI) will be the defining compo-
nent.9 According to the PLA’s Academy of Military Sciences—
which reports directly to the Central Military Commission—in-
formatized warfare is characterized by “digital networks that
enable modern precision-guided munitions, platforms, and
Information Related Capabilities (IRCs) such as electronic and
cyber warfare.”10 A RAND report indicates this form of warfare

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Information fires: Building C-C5ISRT advantage in competition
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
“places a central and critical emphasis on information supe-
riority.”11 The Academy of Military Sciences has asserted that
winning the information war is “the fundamental function of our
military, and it is also the basis for the ability to accomplish
diversified military tasks.” 12 For the PLA, the information war
is not something that will begin when crisis or conflict even-
tually erupts. It is already underway and every military task,
activity, and employment serves to advance the narrative of
the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).
So how has this occurred in practice? Many insights can be
drawn from the PLA’s May and October 2024 military exer-
cises around Taiwan.13 These PLA drills were timed to occur
with the inauguration and National Day speech of President
Lai Ching-te. Additionally, a 2025 US Department of Defense
(DOD) Annual Report to Congress on the Military and Security
Development’s Involving the PRC, highlighted the fact that the
exercises coincided with a surge of “official accounts and proxy
accounts impersonating Taiwan citizens to exaggerate the
PLA’s capabilities and spread disinformation narratives about
US-Japan unwillingness to aid Taiwan’s defense,”14 which were
disseminated across social media platforms. The military drills
were not simply training and rehearsal, but a synchronized de-
monstration across all instruments of national power to flood
the information space and to seed malign public sentiment
against the United States and its allies.
The PRC is not alone in this approach. Russia also conducts a
persistent campaign of malign information operations, cyber
intrusions,15 critical infrastructure sabotage, and territorial incur-
sions across Europe and NATO territories.16 Western militaries
and governments discretely maintain traditional delineations
11. Edmund J. Burke et al., People’s Liberation Army Operational Concepts, Report, RAND Corporation, 2020, https://www.rand.org/
pubs/research_reports/RRA394-1.html.
12. In Their Own Words: Science of Military Strategy 2020, trans. China Aerospace Studies Institute (Montgomery, Alabama: Air Uni-
versity, January 26, 2022), 337, https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/CASI/Display/Article/2913216/in-their-own-words-2020-science-
of-military-strategy/; the In Their Own Words series provides translations of Chinese documents.
13. Amrita Jash, “China’s Military Exercises around Taiwan: Trends and Patterns,” Global Taiwan Institute, October 2, 2024, https://
globaltaiwan.org/2024/10/chinas-military-exercises-around-taiwan-trends-and-patterns/.
14. “2025 Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China,” Department of
Defense, 2025, https://media.defense.gov/2025/Dec/23/2003849070/-1/-1/1/annual-report-to-congress-military-and-security-de-
velopments-involving-the-peoples-republic-of-china-2025.pdf.
15. Greg Otto, “Is the US Adopting the Gray Zone Cyber Playbook?,” CyberScoop, January 12, 2026, https://cyberscoop.com/gray-
zone-cyber-operations-state-power-below-threshold-conflict-op-ed/.
16. “Statement of Condemnation by the North Atlantic Council Concerning Russian Malicious Cyber Activities,” NATO, July 18, 2025,
https://www.nato.int/en/about-us/official-texts-and-resources/official-texts/2025/07/18/statement-of-condemnation-by-the-nor-
th-atlantic-council-concerning-russian-malicious-cyber-activities#:~:text=We%20strongly%20condemn%20Russia%27s%20mali-
cious,which%20Russia%20claims%20to%20uphold.
17. Friedman, “Finding the Right Model,” AU, April 24, 2023, https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/JIPA/Display/Article/3371164/finding-the-
right-model-the-joint-force-the-peoples-liberation-army-and-informa/.
18. Air Force, Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0, Operations.
of warfare as either conventional or unconventional, while ad-
versaries have evolved to an inextricably “information-led” 17
hybrid and asymmetric view of modern warfare.
C-C5ISRT capabilities can enable the US military and its al-
lies to combat this evolution throughout the competition conti-
nuum.18 These capabilities target the web of networks adver-
saries depend upon most, from the sensors that detect US
forces, the communications nodes and pathways that relay
targeting data, the command posts that authorize operations,
the sources of information adversary leaders rely on to make
assessments, and perhaps most importantly, the cognitive
processes that drive decision-making. For generations, every
young US Marine has been taught that “fire without movement
is a waste of ammo, and movement without fire is suicide.” This
combat truism must be updated for this new age of informa-
tized warfare: Conventional fires without information maneu-
ver are a waste of taxpayer dollars, and conventional maneu-
ver without information fires is suicide.
The measurement challenge:
Deterrence in competition
Measuring a kinetic effect in conflict is straightforward. Y et,
unlike battle damage assessments, the ability to qualita-
tively measure the informational and cognitive effects that
underpin deterrence remains elusive. Currently, deterrence
is often evaluated through simple quantitative measures of
performance, such as whether specific transit routes were na-
vigated by US or allied ships in adversary-influenced littorals,
or the number of exercises completed in a year near adversa-
ry-contested terrain. Consider a US ship transit of the Taiwan

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Information fires: Building C-C5ISRT advantage in competition
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Strait.19 Does conducting this transit actually deter China from
seeking reunification with Taiwan by force? Is this worth the
real cost; measured in US dollars, Sailor Operational Tempo,
and ship maintenance? Does the same operation encourage
the average Filipino citizen to believe that the United States
stands ready to ensure freedom of navigation in the South
China Sea? Should this operation be timed to coincide with
the annual CCP Plenum for greatest impact? Some research
even suggests that US operations in and around Taiwan are
inadvertently reinforcing Beijing’s narrative of American encir-
clement, providing rationalization for PLA modernization and
aggressive posturing.20
The gap between measuring performance and effectiveness
manifests across the information enterprise. Public affairs
teams can quickly quantify media production and interactions,
such as views or likes, but rarely do those teams possess the
tools to attribute that interaction to specific audiences or to
gauge positive or negative shifts in response to it. Assess-
ments to evaluate the reactions, sentiments, and behavioral
changes surrounding those activities are often slow, frag-
mented across federal agencies, and compartmentalized. This
leaves uncertainty about whether the joint force’s action or
message was perceived as intended by its target audience.
If success in competition means an adversary wakes up each
morning and decides “today is not the day,” warfighters must
be able to assess whether yesterday’s operations contributed
to that decision. Commanders need analytical C-C5ISRT tools
that provide a timely qualitative pulse of deterrence effec-
tiveness to inform tomorrow’s resourcing and force-posturing
decisions. Those tools already exist and are available today.
The United States’ innovative technology sector and broad
network of allies have produced digital capabilities that can
better measure effectiveness, counter malign influence, and
optimize operations in near real time. While authoritarian re-
gimes are constrained by centralized decision-making and
strict information control, open-market entrepreneurial inno-
vation remains a systemic advantage, but only if the United
States moves now to capitalize on it.
19. Aaron-Mathew Lariosa, “Updated: U.S. Destroyer, Survey Vessel Transit Taiwan Strait,” USNI News, US Naval Institute, January
17, 2026, https://news.usni.org/2026/01/17/u-s-destroyer-survey-vessel-conduct-first-taiwan-strait-transit-of-2026-say-chinese-
officials.
20. Scott Fisher et al., “China, Dime, and Innovative Deterrence Methodology: How Authoritarian States React to Deterrence Activities
through Information,” European Journal of International Security, Cambridge Core, November 25, 2025, https://www.cambridge.
org/core/journals/european-journal-of-international-security/article/china-dime-and-innovative-deterrence-methodology-how-au-
thoritarian-states-react-to-deterrence-activities-through-information/131F93C80CA72E9B926F1D5DB5B3947D.
21. Andrea Grillo, “Decoding Deterrence: The Essentials of the Art of Persuasion,” Deep InSecurity, January 24, 2025, https://www.
deepinsecurity.com/decoding-deterrence/.
Tools providing timely qualitative deterrence measurement uti-
lize advanced computing technologies, most notably AI and
machine learning (ML), and they are fundamentally altering
the character of the competition continuum. Central to today’s
computing revolution is the scaling of neural networks, particu-
larly large language models (LLMs) that aggregate and process
vast amounts of data at speeds impossible by human analysts
alone. AI will not replace humans, but it will make them more
efficient and enable clearer insight into target perception, in-
fluence drivers, and decision-making to maximize operational
effects. AI/ML models can provide tailored and contextualized
assessments that have historically relied on teams of humans
to synthesize language proficiency, regional expertise, cultu-
ral knowledge, and advanced psychological, sociological, or
social interpretation of the cognitive and behavioral impacts
of operations in the information environment (OIE). This en-
hanced understanding could enable earlier intervention in
adversary decision cycles, which strengthens deterrence, re-
duces the likelihood of conflict, or shapes an advantage during
escalation. The challenge lies in harnessing these capabilities
faster and more effectively than our adversaries.
Doctrinal and organizational inefficiencies
Technology alone cannot solve the measurement challenge.
Even the most sophisticated AI tools require the right organiza-
tional structures, trained personnel, and operational concepts
to employ them effectively. Before examining where C-C5IS-
RT capabilities should reside organizationally, it’s essential to
define what C-C5ISRT encompasses, how it nests within OIE,
and how the services have approached associated concepts
to this point. At its core, deterrence is the combination of ca-
pability, credibility, and communication. 21 Understanding how
external actors in a specific region perceive the joint force’s
action is essential. Linking information effects with physical
OAIs is one part of a broad category of OIE, which are de-
fined as “military action involving the integrated employment
of multiple forces to affect drivers of behavior by informing au-
diences; influencing foreign relevant actors; attacking and ex-
ploiting relevant actor information, information networks, and
information systems; and protecting friendly information, infor-

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Information fires: Building C-C5ISRT advantage in competition
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
mation networks, and information systems.”22 Such operations,
according to Joint Publication (JP) 3-04: Information in Joint
Operations, were formerly called “information operations.”23
While the services have each made investments in the race to
informational arms, there is not yet a joint understanding. The
Air Force and Army each released service-level doctrine on OIE
in February 2023 24 and November 2023, 25 respectively. The
Marine Corps published its service-level doctrine, “Information
in Marine Corps Operations,” in February 2024. 26 The Navy
22. US Army and Navy, JP 3-04: Information in Joint Ops, September 14, 2022, https://www.scribd.com/document/660170977/JP-3-
04-Information-in-Joint-Operations.
23. US Army and Navy, JP 3-04.
24. US Air Force, Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-13: Information in Air Force Operations, February 1, 2023, https://www.doctrine.
af.mil/Portals/61/documents/AFDP_3-13/3-13-AFDP-INFO-OPS.pdf.
25. Randi Stenson, “Army Publishes First Doctrinal Manual Dedicated to Information,” US Army, November 25, 2024, https://www.army.
mil/article/271932/army_publishes_first_doctrinal_manual_dedicated_to_information.
26. Todd McCarthy , MCWP 8-10: Information in Marine Corps Operations, US Marine Corps, February 29, 2024, https://www.marines.
mil/Portals/1/Publications/MCWP%208-10%20(SECURED).pdf?ver=c4OjkntxdXoXZ9RvGMaIIA%3D%3D.
27. “U.S. Navy Operations in the Information Environment (OIE) Defined,” US Navy, December 10, 2024, https://www.navy.mil/Press-Of-
fice/News-Stories/display-news/Article/3992620/us-navy-operations-in-the-information-environment-oie-defined/.
has likewise promulgated an updated service-level definition
of OIE and established a division for OIE within the Office of
the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (DCNO) for Information
Warfare (OPNAV N2N6),27 before later shifting it to the DCNO
for Operations, Plans, Strategy, and Warfighting Development
(OPNAV N3N5N7).
Many information warfare capabilities and concepts also fit
neatly under OIE and are ubiquitous across combatant com-
mands. Perhaps most prominent among them is the concept
An illustration of a US Navy watchfloor. Graphic by Petty Officer 2nd Class William Sykes/US Navy graphic by Oliver Elijah Wood.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Information fires: Building C-C5ISRT advantage in competition
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
and associated capabilities of C-C5ISRT, which Paparo has
highlighted as his top priority.28 While OIE focuses on shaping
behavior through information effects, C-C5ISRT describes the
kill web network of nodes and connective tissue that feeds
targeting decisions and is about constraining/restraining (or at
times enabling) the adversary’s ability for decision and action.
It includes the cognitive, technical, and organizational systems
through which information is sensed, processed, protected,
and translated into decisions and actions.
These C-C5ISRT capabilities must reside at the operational le-
vel of war under commands like Pacific Fleet (PACFLT), Pacific
Air Forces (PACAF), and their respective maritime and air ope-
rations centers (i.e., MOCs and AOCs). These operations cen-
ters execute the seven joint functions (command and control,
information, intelligence, fires, movement and maneuver,
protection, sustainment), and C-C5ISRT sets the conditions
for all seven. 29 This is where campaigns are planned, where
theater-wide intelligence is fused, and is best positioned to
link physical operations to desired information effects. Future
technological advancement will undoubtedly spur new orga-
nizational shifts, but today, more tactical echelons lack access
to theater-wide intelligence and the authority or capability to
synchronize effects across domains and services. Strategic
echelons are too far removed from execution to respond at
the speed of modern gray-zone warfare. While certain capa-
bilities and concepts of OIE can be, and are, executed at the
tactical, operational, and strategic levels, C-C5ISRT must be
executed from the operational level.
While the joint force currently has no specific structure for
C-C5ISRT, the Navy’s Fleet Information Warfare Center Pacific
(FIWCPAC) model demonstrates what effective operational-le-
vel integration should look like. 30 As an operational Echelon
III command, FIWCPAC can “synchronize, align, and integrate
information related capabilities across the Joint Force, to in-
28. Jon Harper, “Counter-C5isrt Is Top Priority for Nominee to Lead Indo-Pacific Command,” DefenseScoop, February 1, 2024, https://
defensescoop.com/2024/02/01/counter-c5isrt-samuel-paparo-indo-pacific-command-nomination/.
29. Matthew J. Tackett, “The Joint Functions: Theory, Doctrine, and Practice,” National Defense University Press, October 22, 2024,
https://ndupress.ndu.edu/Media/News/News-Article-View/Article/4285985/the-joint-functions-theory-doctrine-and-practice/.
30. Daniel Marciniak, “Fleet Information Warfare Command Pacific Needs the Warfighters of the Future Today,” US Pacific Fleet, April
26, 2024, https://www.cpf.navy.mil/Newsroom/News/Article/3758149/fleet-information-warfare-command-pacific-needs-the-warfi-
ghters-of-the-future-t/.
31. Mark Pomerleau, “Navy’s Pacific Information Warfare Command Coordinating Vast Capability across Region,” DefenseScoop,
July 19, 2023, https://defensescoop.com/2023/07/19/navys-pacific-information-warfare-command-coordinating-vast-capabi-
lity-across-region/.
32. Avery Smith, “Army’s Information Vanguard: 1st Tiad Activation Signals Strategic Shift,” US Army Pacific, November 19, 2025,
https://www.usarpac.army.mil/Our-Story/Our-News/Article-Display/Article/4337704/armys-information-vanguard-1st-tiad-activa-
tion-signals-strategic-shift/#:~:text=FORT%20SHAFTER%2C%20Hawaii%20%E2%80%94%20On%20November,free%20and%20
open%20Indo%2DPacific.
33. Exec. Order No. 14265, 90 Fed. Reg. 15621 (April 9, 2025).
clude U.S. Space Command (SPACECOM), U.S. Cyber Com-
mand (CYBERCOM), the U.S. Indo-Pacific Command (INDOPA-
COM) service components, and others, to enable Joint Force
speed, action, and maneuver across the competition conti-
nuum.”31 This unit that can synchronize at the operational level
of war, directly for and with the service component’s operatio-
nal centers, ensures that C-C5ISRT and information warfare is
a core planning consideration from the outset. INDOPACOM
has already seen success with this model and begun to pro-
liferate it across service component commanders. 32 The joint
force should next expand this construct to other geographic
combatant commands as an immediately scalable approach
to fielding C-C5ISRT capabilities.
Authorities, misperceptions,
and cultural barriers
Misunderstandings surround the authorities to both acquire
capabilities and operate in the information domain. At the tacti-
cal level, a common misperception is that nonspecialized units
are not authorized to acquire or operate systems that could
create a cognitive advantage. Many believe those capabilities
are retained by and conducted at a higher echelon. However,
acquisition and operational experts conclude many authorities
are already available to warfighters, they are simply not used
or well known. It is not a question of having the authority to
either acquire or employ, but rather a mix of misperceptions
and the services’ cultural issues that stifle or restrict their use.
The DOD is making significant reform to its antiquated
acquisition process to streamline the delivery of materiel and
technology to its warfighters.33 So far, this has demonstrated a
willingness to accept more risk in the acquisition processes to
ultimately reduce risk in fielding capabilities. While the reforms
are primarily focused on materiel, they must also include
software acquisitions which can create effects. Unlike materiel

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Information fires: Building C-C5ISRT advantage in competition
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
acquisitions, software must also undergo the added scrutiny of
the authority-to-operate (ATO) process, currently about twelve
months long. This process must also be streamlined to focus on
technical cybersecurity requirements and remove much of the
archaic and unnecessary check-the-box coordination which
creates unnecessary delays to fielding combat capability.
Even after acquiring and fielding capabilities, service culture
barriers seemingly hinder the authority to conduct C-C5ISRT at
echelon. While specific communities have unique authorities,
such as intelligence and special operations, the larger conven-
tional force remains less clear on the bounds, which results
in a risk-averse approach to proactive C-C5ISRT. Today’s glo-
bal prevalence of social media and generative AI tools has
created significant risk in the information domain. Especially
in the competition phase, falling behind adversarial initiative
and failing to minimize this risk puts the joint force at a signi-
ficant disadvantage in shaping perceptions, legitimizing ac-
tions, strengthening alliances, changing behaviors, or altering
decision-making. Ahead of conflict, the joint force and services
must accept increased risk in employing cognitive effects and
appropriately delegate authority to operate. This delegation
of information authorities should coincide with like-delegation
of kinetic authority; the two should be mutually complementa-
ry—and it should never be easier to unleash a bomb or missile
than to send an official social media message. Promulgating
higher headquarters guidance concerning information fires
will assist in mitigating unintended or detrimental second- and
third-order effects, similar to kinetic rules of engagement.
C-C5ISRT authorities and capabilities are not just for games
and exercises; instead, the joint force must encourage their
continual full-spectrum use by warfighters for all real-world
operations. Ensuring inherently information-focused elements,
including public affairs units or personnel, are “read-in” from
the planning phase will enable better integration and synchro-
nization of effects that contribute to an overall information ad-
vantage and mission success.
Operational employment and
rapid implementation
The joint force must wholly shift from a reactive to proactive
posture that prioritizes C-C5ISRT into all operations. Creating
dilemmas for our adversaries through intentional surprise and
uncertainty should be a part of every concept of operations. By
creating an intentional dilemma for our adversary, we can force
34. Brendan Rittenhouse Green and Austin Long, “Conceal or Reveal? Managing Clandestine Military Capabilities in Peacetime Com-
petition,” International Security 44, no. 3 (Winter 2019/20): 48–83, doi.org/10.1162/ISEC_a_00367.
35. Lauren Feiner, “Chinese Hackers Outnumber FBI Cyber Staff 50 to 1, Bureau Director Says,” CNBC, April 28, 2023, https://www.
cnbc.com/2023/04/28/chinese-hackers-outnumber-fbi-cyber-staff-50-to-1-director-wray-says.html.
them to reveal their own tactics, techniques, and procedures
in response. If we plan and conduct C-C5ISRT operations
in competition correctly, we can force the adversary to burn
their capabilities, sources, and methods. Conceal and reveal
operations exemplify this model. The complex decision-making
that determines controlled disclosure versus concealment of
capabilities has been simplified through today’s AI tools, which
enhance our ability to weigh pros and cons, target messaging,
and then evaluate effectiveness. Determining whether to
withhold or reveal capabilities is never an easy decision, but in
protracted long-term strategic competition, revealing can be a
profitable decision for maintaining peace.34
Utilizing deception, decoys, and nontraditional methods of col-
lecting data, feedback, and intelligence into our operational
centers also remain insufficient. The joint force should leve-
rage industry partnerships and new commercial capabilities
such as advertising technologies, dark web scraping, and ad-
vanced social media analysis—all proliferated through AI—as
new avenues to garner immediate messaging feedback and
operational effectiveness. Combatant commands and opera-
tional-level commanders should share unclassified versions
of their commander’s critical information requirements (CCIRs)
and priority information requirements (PIRs) with industry
partners so commercial entities can tailor AI models and re-
fine data collection to support operational needs. This colla-
boration, when paired with official intelligence assessments,
would enable the joint force to understand adversary and al-
lied populations’ sentiment in near real time, better informing
operations.
The scale of this challenge demands this integration. Data
in the competition phase will be as defining as ammunition
is during conflict; therefore, enabling our operational centers
to collect and process data is essential to maintain decision
advantage. The scale of our adversary also demands additio-
nal integration. The PRC can put significantly more personnel
to task simply as a product of population. In the cyber realm,
former FBI Director Christopher Wray called attention to this
overmatch in 2023 by revealing that Chinese hackers outnu-
mber FBI cyber personnel by at least fifty to one. 35 Closing
this gap requires pushing data collection and analysis, along
with intelligence capabilities, closer to the operational and
tactical edge rather than retaining them at strategic echelons.
This is not about replacing strategic intelligence but providing
commanders real-time tools in order to speed and optimize
operations. Integration of intelligence, public affairs, industry,

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Information fires: Building C-C5ISRT advantage in competition
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
data analytics, cyber operations, and traditional kinetic plan-
ning at the operational level enables the synchronized effects
C-C5ISRT requires.
Time is not on our side. Adversaries are fielding capabilities
faster, experimenting more aggressively, and operating proac-
tively. The United States needs to put rapidly adaptable, ea-
sily iterable, software-defined products into warfighters’ hands
now and acknowledge that perfect is the enemy of good
enough. The twenty-year-old on the battlefield will find novel
uses for capabilities that planners never envisioned. Learning
through experimentation, and ensuring that data is collected,
processed, and acted upon is the only path to staying ahead
of adversary adaptation.
Recommendations
Countering adversary C5ISRT is not a single capability
challenge: It requires a system-wide approach including ope-
rational concepts, force structure, and supporting technology.
As adversaries increasingly integrate emerging technologies
into their C5ISRT systems, the US military must adapt how it
detects, disrupts, and degrades these systems, particularly in
the competition phase. The recommendations below identify
near- to medium-term actions—by entity, offices, services, and
commands—that can strengthen counter adversary C5ISRT
operations.
Congress
 y Aid the DOD’s transition to software-defined warfare
by enacting legislation to incentivize the rapid deve-
lopment, deployment, and continuous updating of sof-
tware-enabled capabilities across the joint force. Re-
cent DOD guidance on software acquisition highlights
the need to rapidly adopt commercial software solu-
tions, streamline the requirements processes, and en-
able consistent digital capabilities. Building on these ef-
forts and echoing the recommendations of the Atlantic
Council’s Commission on Software-Defined Warfare, 36
Congress should also provide the DOD with greater
flexibility in software funding across research, develop-
ment, test, and evaluation (RDT&E), procurement, and
operations and maintenance (O&M) accounts. These
reforms would allow the DOD the required flexibility to
deploy C-C5ISRT capabilities to scale quickly.
36. Whitney McNamara, Peter Modigliani, and Tate Nurkin, “Atlantic Council Commission on Software-Defined Warfare: Final Re-
port,” Atlantic Council, March 27, 2025, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/atlantic-council-commis-
sion-on-software-defined-warfare/.
37. “Adaptive Acquisition Framework,” Defense Acquisition University, accessed April 8, 2026, https://aaf.dau.edu/.
 y Conduct a comprehensive review of the DOD Finan-
cial Management Regulation to align fiscal law with the
Adaptive Acquisition Framework. 37 Congress should
then establish a unified software-funding appropriation
or provide clear statutory guidance on the application
of existing appropriations to infrastructure as a service,
platform as a service, and software as a service solu-
tions that eliminate friction and accelerate delivery of
C-C5ISRT capabilities to operational commanders.
 y Direct the Defense, State, and Treasury departments to
establish closer working ties at geographic combatant
commands to ensure integrated operations and unity
of effort.
Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD)
 y Develop, in collaboration with the Joint Staff and ser-
vices, a departmental policy framework within the Of-
fice of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research
and Engineering that guides salient C-C5ISRT capabi-
lities and integration among the services, to include AI
software selection and development.
 y Expand the existing purview of the Joint Rapid Acqui-
sition Cell within the Office of the Under Secretary of
Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment to include
nonmateriel solutions to urgent/emergent operational
needs, such as AI software or program-user licenses.
 y Direct a comprehensive review of the authorization
requirements of the Federal Risk and Authorization
Management Program (FedRAMP), as applied to DOD
software acquisition, with the objective of reducing au-
thorization timelines to ninety days or less for operatio-
nally relevant solutions. Where FedRAMP adds genuine
security value, the process should be streamlined and
incentivized. Where it functions primarily as an admi-
nistrative gatekeeping mechanism that delays capable
vendors, it should be reformed in favor of faster, opera-
tionally focused security-assessment pathways.
Joint Staff
 y Formally adopt “C5ISRT” through the DOD Terminolo-
gy Program and provide a standardized definition and
common understanding among the joint force.
 y Instill a common framework for planning, resourcing,
and operationally executing C-C5ISRT across the joint

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Information fires: Building C-C5ISRT advantage in competition
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
force through the Joint Warfighting Concept and up-
dates to relevant Joint Publications, including an up-
dated deterrence concept.
Military services
 y Identify the organizations or units which perform OIE
functions aligned with C-C5ISRT and assign the appro-
priate operational and tactical universal joint tasks and
associated measures related to the coordination, inte-
gration, or employment of OIE to align planning, rea-
diness reporting, training, exercises, and requirements.
 y Structurally reform the ATO process and accelerate its
existing compliance architecture. Publish Risk Manage-
ment Framework (RMF) authorizing official (AO) chains
of review, expand the pool of cleared agreements of-
ficers authorized to conduct ATO work on classified
networks, establish reciprocal ATO recognition across
services, and institute provisional ATOs for operational-
ly urgent C-C5ISRT tools. Reform efforts should shift the
RMF from a compliance-checklist orientation to a risk-
based, operationally focused outcome-driven assess-
ment model with a target authorization timeline of sixty
days or less, with incentive structures that reward AOs
for timely, well-reasoned decisions rather than defaul-
ting to delay.
 y Rapidly fund and field C-C5ISRT tools, software, and de-
cision aids that utilize AI/ML for key operational centers.
Prioritize speed and agility to rapidly deliver C-C5ISRT
capabilities to warfighters. Implement a bottom-up trai-
ning approach that enables operators to collect data
and refine capabilities.
 y Prioritize upgrades to operational centers to accommo-
date requisite people, equipment, and physical spaces
including a collocated and accredited sensitive com-
partmented information facility (SCIF) space that accom-
modates special access programs (SAP) and compart-
mented access programs (CAP). Operational centers
must be accredited to the classification of future com-
petition and conflict.
 y Prioritize the funding and outfit of live virtual and
constructive (LVC) training environments, accredited
up to SAP/CAP, at key operational centers. Soldiers,
sailors, airmen, marines, and guardians should be able
to train from the same watchfloors where they stand
watch. These watchfloors are warfighting units in their
own right and should be resourced as such.
 y Ensure that individuals assigned to write requirements for
software contracts are trained, retained, and promoted
in accordance with their expertise. Consider utilizing
reservists with public-sector software experience on
long-term orders to develop expertise in the near term.
 y Integrate public affairs and intelligence early and often
in junior officer career paths. Mandate early involve-
ment and integration at the operational level.
Combatant commands
 y Apply the FIWCPAC model from INDOPACOM PACFLT
to service component commanders across the globe,
where appropriate.
 y Craft a deterrence framework for respective areas of
responsibility that nests within the Joint Concept with
specificity on how C-C5ISRT capabilities enable de-
terrence and should be utilized.
 y Craft unclassified CCIRs and/or PIRs to share with indus-
try partners so that they can design tools to assist (e.g.,
tailor AI models, refine data scrapes).
 y Capture relevant sentiment data from every joint ope-
ration and incorporate feedback to refine future joint
force operations, activities, and investments.
Conclusion
If addressed effectively during the competition phase, C-C5IS-
RT operations will provide the United States with a decisive
operational advantage. Reforming DOD processes to bet-
ter enable the rapid acquisition, training, and deployment
of C-C5ISRT capabilities will allow the US military to sense,
target, and disrupt adversary systems before conflict be-
gins. Achieving this outcome requires urgency and coordi-
nation throughout the national security enterprise, including
Congress, the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint
Staff, the military services, the combatant commands, and pri-
vate industry. These reforms would position the joint force to
disrupt adversary C5ISRT systems, impose operational dilem-
mas, and create favorable conditions for deterrence and broa-
der strategic influence.
The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not
reflect the views or policies of the US Department of Defense,
Department of the Navy, Department of the Air Force, or the US
government. No federal endorsement is implied or intended.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Information fires: Building C-C5ISRT advantage in competition
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
About the authors
Lieutenant Commander Martin Zuber is the 2025-2026 senior US Navy fellow at the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center for Strategy
and Security. A surface warfare officer turned cryptologic and maritime cyber warfare officer, he has served in operational and staff
roles across the Indo-Pacific, Middle East, and European theaters. He holds degrees in computer science and business analytics, with
expertise in cyber warfare and artificial intelligence.
Lieutenant Colonel Caleb Eames is the 2025-2026 senior US Marine Corps fellow at the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center for
Strategy and Security. His career spans enlisted and commissioned service in nuclear, biological, and chemical defense, embassy
security, and public affairs, with operational experience in Iraq and across the Indo-Pacific. He currently serves as a communications
strategy officer in the US Marine Corps and holds degrees in criminal justice, government administration, and communications.
Lieutenant Colonel Daniel Minnocci is the 2025-2026 senior US Air Force fellow at the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center for
Strategy and Security. Most recently, he served as policy branch chief at Headquarters Air Force, where he led the development and
coordination of Air Force protection policy. A career Security Forces officer, he has held command and staff roles across Air Force, joint,
and multinational organizations, with extensive deployment experience.
Amy Cowley is an assistant director in the Forward Defense program at the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center for Strategy and
Security. She holds degrees in international affairs and political science.
Acknowledgments
Forward Defense is grateful to Vannevar Labs for its support of this publication. This publication was written and published in ac-
cordance with the Atlantic Council’s Intellectual Independence Policy, which requires all donors to agree to the Council maintaining
independent control of the content and conclusions of its work. The authors are solely responsible for the publication’s analysis and
recommendations.
About the center
The Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security works to develop sustainable, nonpartisan strategies to address the most important
security challenges facing the United States and the world. The Center honors General Brent Scowcroft’s legacy of service and embo-
dies his ethos of nonpartisan commitment to the cause of security, support for US leadership in cooperation with allies and partners, and
dedication to the mentorship of the next generation of leaders.
Within the Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security, Forward Defense leads the Atlantic Council’s US and global defense program-
ming, developing actionable recommendations for the United States and its allies and partners to compete, innovate, and navigate the
rapidly evolving character of warfare. Through its work on US defense policy and force design, military applications of advanced tech-
nology, space security, strategic deterrence, and defense industrial revitalization, it informs the strategies, policies, and capabilities that
the United States will need to deter, and, if necessary, prevail in major-power conflict.
