
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
This paper is a sequel to the Issue Brief One World, Two Systems Take Shape
During the Pandemic (September 8, 2020)—but can be read on its own
The election of Joe Biden as the forty-sixth US president is not expected to
change the list of substantive issues dividing the United States and China,
such as trade, investment, technology, geopolitical competition, national
security, and human rights—except that the priority among them may
change, with human rights concerns moving more to the forefront. However,
the tone and modality of the unfolding of the US-China competition will
change from Donald Trump’s unilateralism to Biden’s efforts to build
alliances with “likeminded” countries in Europe, Asia, and elsewhere to deal
with the challenges China has posed. In a way, Biden’s alliance-building
approach may intensify pressure on the rest of the world to take sides.
How countries respond to this challenge, unwelcome by most, depends on
whether they see themselves as competitors to China, or as “price takers”
in the international economic system.
The background
The US-China competition and conflicts have split the world into a US-
sphere and Sinosphere, pushing other countries to take sides, especially
when Biden begins to build coalitions of “likeminded” countries to deal
with China. The most important question here is how the United States
defines the “China challenge”: is it to push back and change China’s malign
behaviors and policies in specific areas, or to question the legitimacy of
China’s political regime? Based on Joe Biden’s statements—especially his
interviews with the New York Times 1 — and those from people reportedly
advising him (including a recent report from Brookings 2 counseling Biden
to view China as a strategic competitor, but not an enemy), the former
view seems likely to prevail in the next US administration. Such a view
would be amenable to other countries, helping with alliance-building
1 Thomas L. Friedman, “Biden Made Sure ‘Trump is Not Going to Be President for
Four More Years,’” New York Times, December 2, 2020, https:/ /www.nytimes.
com/2020/12/02/opinion/biden-interview-mcconnell-china-iran.html?refer-
ringSource=articleShare.
2 Ryan Hass, Ryan McElveen, and Robert D. Williams, The Future of US Policy Toward
China: Recommendations for the Biden Administration, November 2020, https:/ /www.
brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/FP_20201210_us_china_monograph.pdf.
HOW THE REST
OF THE WORLD
RESPONDS TO THE
US-CHINA SPLIT
ISSUE BRIEF
JANUARY 2021 HUNG TRAN
The GeoEconomics Center works
at the nexus of economics, finance,
and foreign policy with the goal
of helping shape a better global
economic future.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
How the Rest of the World Responds to the US-China Split
efforts. This approach has also been endorsed by the
Senate Republican majority’s report 3 on transatlantic
cooperation on China; and welcomed by the European
Union (EU) which has floated its own proposal for
revitalizing the US-EU partnership.4 By contrast, the latter
view—attacking the role of the Communist Party of China
(CPC) as expressed lately by several of Trump’s senior
officials5 —will likely attract few international adherents.
However, Trump’s “China hawks,” having established a
certain following in the Republican Party and beyond, will
likely continue to make strong anti-China statements. This
will help shape US public opinion in favor of being tough
on China, which, in turn, will constrain Biden’s room for
maneuver as well as color China’s perception of the US
attitude.
Basically, US-China interactions have contained elements
of cooperation, competition, contention and conflict—
but, after four years of Trump, the pendulum has swung
well toward the contention/conflict end of the spectrum.
3 “The United States And Europe: A Concrete Agenda For Transatlantic Cooperation On China,” US Senate Committee on Foreign Relations,
November 2020, https:/ /www.foreign.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/SFRC%20Majority%20China-Europe%20Report%20FINAL%20(P&G).pdf.
4 “Joint Communication: A new EU-US agenda for global change,” European Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, December 22, 2020, https:/ /ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_2279.
5 Marc Santora, “Pompeo Calls China’s Ruling Party ‘Central Threat of Our Times,’” New York Times, January 30, 2020, https:/ /www.nytimes.
com/2020/01/30/world/europe/pompeo-uk-china-huawei.html?referringSource=articleShare.
It probably won’t escalate further under Biden but would
not change very much. Against this backdrop, the reaction
by the rest of the world so far seems to have been divided
between developed and developing countries.
Many among the developed countries, especially
the European Union (EU), see China as a competitor
economically, and in terms of governance models. They
tend to side with the United States in criticizing China on
human- and democratic-rights issues. However, they differ
with the United States under the Trump administration in
attaching value to working with China in strengthening
trade rules, and on dealing with global problems such as
climate change and pandemic threats. Overall, the EU
will cooperate with the United States in demanding that
China change perceived “bad policies” in areas where the
interests of both sides coincide.
By contrast, most developing countries give priority
to securing opportunities for trade and investment
Chinese and U.S. flags flutter near The Bund, before U.S. trade delegation meet their Chinese counterparts for talks in
Shanghai, China July 30, 2019. REUTERS/Aly Song

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
How the Rest of the World Responds to the US-China Split
cooperation with major countries, including the United
States, Europe and China. In particular, the ruling elites
of those countries prefer China’s “non-interference
in internal affairs” approach to financing—raising no
awkward questions about human rights, transparency,
or corruption in making loans—in contrast with Western
bilateral official creditors or international financial
institutions.
The US-China split and the pressure to
take sides
The US-China competition and conflict have deepened
and widened, from trade wars using tariffs, to export
and investment controls of high-technology goods, and
to geopolitical struggles for strategic advantage and
influence. The contention has led to a “one world, two
systems” situation taking shape during the pandemic. 6
Other countries have been increasingly pressured to take
sides, despite the fact that many of them would prefer
not to do so.
In any event, a dividing line seems to have been drawn
between developed and developing countries. The
latest manifestation of this division was at the October
6, 2020 meeting of the UN General Assembly’s Human
Rights Committee. At that meeting, Germany delivered
a statement on behalf of thirty-nine developed countries
criticizing China for its violations of human and democratic
rights in Xinjiang, Tibet, and Hong Kong. 7 In response,
Pakistan presented a statement on behalf of fifty-five
developing countries opposing interference in what they
considered to be China’s internal affairs in Hong Kong. In
addition, Cuba released a statement on behalf of forty-
five developing countries supporting China’s “measures
against threats of terrorism and extremism in Xinjiang.” 8
In another sign of support from developing countries,
Chinese nationals have been elected heads of four UN-
affiliated international organizations (out of fifteen), while
no other country has more than one of its nationals in
a similar position. However, on October 13, 2020, China
was elected to the UN Human Rights Council with one
6 Hung Tran, “One World, Two Systems” Takes Shape During the Pandemic, Atlantic Council, September 8, 2020, https:/ /atlanticcouncil.org/
in-depth-research-reports/issue-brief/one-world-two-systems-takes-shape-during-the-pandemic/.
7 “Nearly 40 Nations Criticize China’s Human Rights Policies,” Associated Press, October 6, 2020, https:/ /www.latimes.com/world-nation/sto-
ry/2020-10-06/nearly-40-nations-criticize-chinas-human-rights-policies.
8 “Nearly 40 Nations Criticize China’s Human Rights Policies.
9 Mary Hui, “China’s Election to the UN Human Rights Council Revealed Its Shaky Global Status,” Quartz, October 14, 2020, https:/ /
qz.com/1917295/china-elected-to-un-rights-council-but-with-lowest-support-ever/.
10 Kat Devlin, Christine Huang, and Laura Silver, “Unfavorable Views of China Reach Historic Highs in Many Countries,” Pew Research Center,
October 6, 2020, https:/ /www.pewresearch.org/global/2020/10/06/unfavorable-views-of-china-reach-historic-highs-in-many-countries/.
11 Janell Fetterolf, Mara Mordecai, and Richard Wike, “US Image Plummets Internationally as Most Say Country Has Handled Coronavirus
Badly,” Pew Research Center, September 15, 2020, https:/ /www.pewresearch.org/global/2020/09/15/us-image-plummets-international-
ly-as-most-say-country-has-handled-coronavirus-badly/.
12 Aggressive messages by Chinese diplomats, usually on Twitter. https:/ /www.cnn.com/2020/05/28/asia/china-wolf-warrior-diplomacy-in-
tl-hnk/index.html
hundred and thirty-nine votes, forty-one fewer than
during the last vote in 2016—perhaps a sign that China’s
influence in developing countries, while still considerable,
may have peaked.9
It is important to put this division in the context of sharply
declining public confidence in both China and the United
States in many developed countries. In a Pew Research
Center survey conducted in fourteen developed countries
and released on October 6, 73 percent of respondents
have an unfavorable view of China, and only 19 percent
expressed confidence in President Xi Jinping.10 The United
States did not do much better, with only 34 percent of
respondents outside the United States having a favorable
view of it, and an even-lower 16 percent professing
confidence in President Donald Trump; President Joe
Biden will likely improve upon that number. 11The low
esteem in which both China and the United States are held
in many developed countries suggests that aligning with
either is very much dependent on the issues and driven by
calculations of national political and economic interests,
rather than by ideological allegiance. Unfortunately, the
storming of the US Capitol Hill on January 6, 2021 has
weakened the moral authority the US used to enjoy,
and will strengthen the national interest approach to
international alliance building.
Developed countries
Among the developed countries, the EU has sufficient
population size and economic heft to aspire to an
independent role between the United States and China.
Basically, the EU sees China as a strategic rival on
governance issues, an economic competitor on trade
and investment issues, and a cooperator on global
threats such as climate change and pandemics. Against
this backdrop, the EU’s current attempt to rebalance its
relationship with China means that it will be more critical
of China’s violations of human and democratic rights, as
well as “wolf warrior”12 diplomatic practices—openly siding
with the United States. The EU will also push China for
reciprocal treatment and a level playing field for trade and

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
How the Rest of the World Responds to the US-China Split
investment activities. However, the economic bargaining
will be kept within the framework of negotiations and, if
possible, on the basis of current or reformed World Trade
Organization (WTO) trade rules—which treat tariffs as a
last resort, not the first, as has been the case under the
Trump administration.
In other words, the EU wants to compartmentalize its
political and economic relationships with China—to be
critical in the former, and more cooperative in the latter.
This approach is viable only to the extent that China
agrees to play the game—at present, it is also in China’s
interests to do so. Basically, the EU and China have
attained a very high level of mutual inter-independence. 13
China is second to the United States as a trading partner
to the EU, with trade volume having increased eight
times between 2000 and 2019 to €560 billion ($662
billion). Many EU companies derive a substantial portion
of their revenues and profits from China. In particular,
13 Max Zenglein, “Mapping and Recalibrating Europe’s Economic Interdependence with China,” Mercator Institute for China Studies, November
17, 2020, https:/ /merics.org/en/report/mapping-and-recalibrating-europes-economic-interdependence-china.
14 Hung Tran, “An EU-China investment deal is near—but is it ‘worth having?’” Atlantic Council, December 22, 2020, https:/ /www.atlanticcouncil.
org/blogs/new-atlanticist/an-eu-china-investment-deal-is-near-but-is-it-worth-having/.
the EU depends on imports from China in one hundred
and three product categories, including electronics,
chemicals, pharmaceuticals and medical products, and
metals/minerals. On the other hand, China also depends
on the EU as its largest source of foreign investment and
job creation, important export markets, and a key source
of technologies and know-how—which is irreplaceable in
lights of US restrictions on high-tech exports to China.
A clear example of the nuanced relationship between
China and the EU is their reported agreement in principle
on the Comprehensive Agreement on Investment. 14
After seven years of negotiations, a deal was reportedly
reached on the strength of market opening moves from
both sides. However, it is unclear whether other key
negotiating demands by the EU have been met—demands
such as China ensuring a level playing field for, and ending
discriminatory practices against, EU companies in China;
and embracing international environmental and labor
European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, European Council President Charles Michel, German Chancellor
Angela Merkel, French President Emmanuel Macron and Chinese President Xi Jinping are seen on a screen during a video
conference, in Brussels, Belgium December 30, 2020. REUTERS/Johanna Geron/Pool

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
How the Rest of the World Responds to the US-China Split
standards. The details of the CAI, when finalized and
publicized, will shed illuminating lights on the relative
strengths of the two sides. Basically, China is prepared to
engage in “give-and-take” negotiations and compromises
in economic matters, but is unlikely to yield on issues
which are integral to China’s political system.
Indeed, the EU-China relationship is asymmetric in the
sense that if China feels it is being pushed too far on the
political front, it is prepared to use its economic leverage
to exert its influence. China has recently made threats
of retaliation, but has yet to take any concrete actions
against the EU. On the other hand, if the EU is confronted
with the need to take concrete steps to punish China for
its human-rights violations in Xinjiang, for example, at
the risk of losing Chinese market access, it’s not clear
where the chips will fall. In this scenario, it is likely that
the internal consensus allowing the EU to speak with
one voice on China—which is difficult to maintain given
the heterogeneity of members’ national interests—could
break down, making the EU feeble in its confrontation
with China.
Developing countries—Africa
Developing countries tend to view the US-China
competition from the perspective of how to gain
better trade and investment opportunities for their
own economic growth and development. Ideally, these
countries do not want to take sides and antagonize either
contestant. However, more often than not, they are being
put in a position of needing to choose between the options
available (or not available) to them, and consequently end
up moving closer to one side than the other.
This perspective gives insights to the growth of China’s
involvement and influence in Africa. In the past two
decades or so, many Western-inspired multilateral
development institutions have slowed their lending
to developing countries, with many projects being
bogged down in lengthy assessments of environmental,
labor-market, and social impacts. Official bilateral
creditors, such as export-import credit agencies in
Western countries, have also cut back on their lending
to developing countries due to fiscal constraints—any
credit extended usually comes with transparency and
anti-corruption conditions. In contrast to the relative
paucity of Western options, China has significantly
increased trading relationships, becoming one of the top
trading partners of most developing countries. China has
also stepped up its lending and investing in developing
countries, starting from a low base at the beginning of
the twenty-first century. Moreover, Chinese loans and
investments come without any awkward questions about
transparency and corruption, consistent with China’s
foreign policy approach of “no interference in domestic
2018 FOCAC Summit | Beijing, 4 September 2018 photo by: Paul Kagame, FLICKR, https:/ /bit.ly/3sI8ONq.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
How the Rest of the World Responds to the US-China Split
affairs of recipient countries.” This approach has been
quite appealing to the ruling elites in many developing
countries, who are eager to show some development
achievements without having been pressured to reform,
including taking measures that, in some instances, can
upset vested interests and cause social unrest that
threatens their rule.
In short, while Chinese trade and investment in
developing countries serves China’s interests in securing
energy and commodity supply, as well as markets for its
manufactured goods and excess capacity in infrastructure
construction, such an engagement also fits well with the
agenda of governments in recipient developing countries.
Consequently, current governments in those countries will
probably not pay much attention to criticism coming from
the domestic opposition and members of civil society, as
well as from Western governments and media—except to
probably become a bit more careful in negotiating future
projects with China. The criticism has centered around
the lack of transparency, potential for corruption, and
mis-investment leading to “debt traps.”
The showcase of China’s efforts is the Belt and Road
Initiative (BRI). Launched in 2013, the BRI has attracted
$575 billion of loans and investment from China for
infrastructure and energy projects in one hundred and
thirty-eight countries in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and
Central and Southern Europe. 15 According to the World
Bank, these projects have the potential to meet some of
the infrastructure needs of the recipient countries, which
are being ill-served by existing infrastructure, and to
promote growth and long-term development—especially
if the countries involved implement necessary reforms to
address corruption, inefficiency, and debt sustainability. 16
In any event, BRI results and risks should be viewed in
the context of a lack of alternative options from Western
governments and companies.
More telling about the asymmetry of financial engagement
between China and the rest of the world is the case of
sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Between 2000–2018, China’s
15 Erik Churchill, et al., “Belt and Road Economics: Opportunities and Risks of Transport Corridors,” World Bank, June 18, 2019, https:/ /www.
worldbank.org/en/topic/regional-integration/publication/belt-and-road-economics-opportunities-and-risks-of-transport-corridors.
16 Ibid.
17 Kevin Acker, Deborah Brautigam, and Yufan Huang, “Risky Business: New Data on Chinese Loans and Africa’s Debt Problem,” Johns Hopkins
University School of Advanced International Studies, July 2020, https:/ /sais.jhu.edu/news-press/event-recap/risky-business-new-data-chi-
nese-loans-and-africa%E2%80%99s-debt-problem.
18 “World Investment Report 2020,” United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 2020, https:/ /unctad.org/webflyer/world-invest-
ment-report-2020.
19 Paul Nantulya, “China Promotes Its Party-Army Model in Africa,” Africa Center for Strategic Studies, July 20, 2020, https:/ /africacenter.org/
spotlight/china-promotes-its-party-army-model-in-africa/.
20 China Power Team, “How Dominant is China in the Global Arms Trade?” Center for Strategic and International Studies, Updated August 25,
2020, https:/ /chinapower.csis.org/china-global-arms-trade/.
21 Jevans Nyabiage, “China boosts its soft power in Africa while launching African space ambitions,” South China Morning Post, October 11,
2020, https:/ /www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy/article/3104900/china-boosts-its-soft-power-africa-while-launching-african.
official bilateral lending to SSA amounted to $80 billion—
compared with $17 billion from all of the official bilateral
creditors belonging to the Paris Club, and $66 billion from
the World Bank (and $44 billion from other multilateral
development banks). 17 Private-sector lenders accounted
for the lion’s share of lending to SSA—$134 billion from
bondholders and $160 billion from bank lenders and
others.
In terms of foreign direct investment (FDI), Africa has
received only about 6 percent of global FDI flows to
developing countries, averaging $694 billion per year in
2017–2019.18 Of that meager amount, China accounts for
more than 12 percent, having surpassed the United States
since 2014 by a widening margin. In fact, the United States
has been divesting from Africa since 2015, reducing its
FDI stock there.
Generally speaking, it is important to keep in mind that
China’s engagement with Africa has been multi-faceted
with long and deep historical roots, reaching well beyond
the recent waves of lending to Africa or the launch of
the BRI in 2013. Starting in the 1950’s and 1960’s, China
supported and developed strong ties with the anti-colonial
liberation movements in various African countries. Such
party-to-party relationships have been maintained, with
many of those liberation movements having become
government ruling parties in today’s Africa. Parts of
the cooperation agenda between the CPC and African
ruling parties are training programs which China has
sponsored for political and military officers, in particular
on China’s party-army model. In the China-Africa Action
Plan 2018-2021 19 China provides 50,000 fellowships to
African public servants and military professionals, giving
China a unique opportunity to cultivate relationships
with current and future African leaders. Furthermore,
China has increased military cooperation with many
African countries, becoming the third largest supplier
of arms to Africa, 20 after Russia and the US. China has
also cooperated with 20 African countries in their space
programs21 —an area ignored by the US—helping those
countries launch more than 40 weather forecasting and

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
How the Rest of the World Responds to the US-China Split
crop monitoring satellites. Last but not least, most African
countries have long worked with China, specifically with
Huawei,22 to build infrastructures and deploy 3G, 4G and
now 5G telecom services. All these relationships help
cement China’s connections with Africa—which are not
easy to dislodge.
Developing countries—LAC, MENA and
CEE
China’s trade, investment and “non-interference” formula
has worked well in several other regions. China’s trade
with Latin America and Caribbean (LAC) countries
has jumped from $12 billion in 2000 to $315 billion in
2019—with China becoming the top trading partner of
several countries. 23 China’s lending to the LAC countries
since 2005 has surpassed $140 billion, exceeding the
combined lending by the World Bank and Inter-American
Development Bank.
China’s trade with the Middle East and North Africa
(MENA) region has grown quickly to $245 billion. China
has signed partnership agreements with fifteen Middle
Eastern countries, including a recently concluded
strategic-partnership pact with Iran. 24 Basically, China
enjoys growing trade and investment relationships with
practically all countries in the region, including those
usually at odds with one another—Saudi Arabia, the
United Arab Emirates (UAE), Qatar, Kuwait, Iran, Iraq, and
Israel, as well as Turkey.
China has tried to make inroads in the Central, Eastern,
and Southern European countries, dealing with them
through the 17+1 grouping to compete with the EU. So far,
the results may have fallen short of what many Central
and Eastern European (CEE) countries had expected,
leading to some disappointment. Out of the $126 billion
of Chinese investment in the EU (not counting the United
Kingdom) in 2000–2019, less than $10 billion has been for
EU members in CEE. 25 In any event, China has acquired
22 Momoko Kidera, “Huawei’s deep roots put Africa beyond reach of US crackdown,” Nikkei Asia, August 15, 2020, https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/Spot-
light/Huawei-crackdown/Huawei-s-deep-roots-put-Africa-beyond-reach-of-US-crackdown.
23 Ted Piccone, “China and Latin America: A Pragmatic Embrace,” Brookings Institution, July 2020, https:/ /www.brookings.edu/research/chi-
na-and-latin-america-a-pragmatic-embrace/.
24 Alam Saleh and Zakiyeh Yazdanshenas, “Iran’s Pact with China is Bad News for the West,” Foreign Policy, August 9, 2020, https:/ /foreign-
policy.com/2020/08/09/irans-pact-with-china-is-bad-news-for-the-west/.Nasar Al-Tamimi, et al., “China’s Great Game in the Middle East,”
European Council on Foreign Relations, October 21, 2019, https:/ /ecfr.eu/publication/china_great_game_middle_east/.
25 Andreea Brînză, “Central and Eastern Europe is Not in Bed with China,” Diplomat, July 3, 2020, https:/ /thediplomat.com/2020/07/central-
and-eastern-europe-is-not-in-bed-with-china/.
26 Hung Tran, “New Asian Free Trade Agreement Secures Economic Space for China,” New Atlanticist, November 16, 2020, https:/ /www.atlan-
ticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/new-asian-free-trade-agreement-secures-economic-space-for-china/.
27 Nalin Kumar Mohapatra, “View: Providing a New Impetus to the India-Russia Strategic Partnership,” Economic Times, last updated Septem-
ber 25, 2020, https:/ /economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/defence/view-providing-a-new-impetus-to-the-india-russia-strategic-partnership/
articleshow/78317032.cms.
28 Nikita Simonov, “India’s Russian Arms Purchases Hit ‘Breakthrough’ 14.4Bln, Official Says,” Moscow Times, September 5, 2019, https:/ /www.
themoscowtimes.com/2019/09/05/indias-russian-arms-purchases-hit-breakthrough-145bln-official-says-a67153.
stakes—in several cases, controlling stakes—in thirteen
seaports across Europe.
Developing countries—Asia
The major deviation from China’s approach in other
developing regions is its aggressive exertion of territorial
claims in Asia, including maritime claims against several
Southeast Asian countries, claims against Japan in the
Senkaku/Diaoyu islands, claims of sovereignty over
Taiwan, and border conflicts with India. Moreover, China
has tried to influence countries in the region to counter
US actions in the Indo-Pacific. China’s aggressive stand
has pushed Asian countries to welcome US engagement,
including active naval presence, in the region to
provide a counterweight. However, due to the growing
economic relationships between Asian countries and
China—especially with the just-concluded Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) 26 further
promoting intra-Asian trade, already accounting for
more than 50 percent of their foreign trade, and with the
fact that the Association of Southeast Asian Countries
(ASEAN) has recently replaced the EU as the top trading
partner of China—these Asian countries are trying to walk
a tightrope. They try to protect their national interests
through diplomatic and political means, but many of them
take care not to antagonize Beijing by formally siding
with the United States specifically against China, as doing
so would jeopardize the economic benefits of trading
with the soon-to-be biggest economy in the world. Even
India, which has actually fought border skirmishes against
China and actively participated in the Quad (which brings
together the United States, Japan, India, and Australia) to
contain China, has also hedged its bets against getting
too close to the United States (with whom it has trade
problems) by reaching out to its traditional partner,
Russia.27 It has recently bought sophisticated S-400
missiles, and Mig-29 and Sukhoi fighter aircrafts from
Russia, and placed $14.5 billion of military orders in 2019.28
Overall, it remains an open question how sustainable such

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
How the Rest of the World Responds to the US-China Split
tightrope walking by most Asian countries can be if the
US-China conflicts continue to escalate.
China has also made advances in Central Asia (CA),
mainly through the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation—
launched in 2001 with eight members including China,
Russia, India, and several former Soviet republics—in
addition to the BRI. China’s trade with CA reached $41.7
billion in 2018, accounting for 22 percent of CA exports
and 37 percent of its imports. 29 Furthermore, China
has beefed up military assistance to the CA countries.
However, China’s growing presence represents an area
of potential conflict with Russia, which regards CA as
parts of its “near abroad” and resents other powers
contesting its influence there; this is somewhat similar to
its contention in the Caucasus against NATO and the EU.
In addition, Russia does not appreciate its economically
junior status in the current relationship with China. These
grievances form a brittle foundation for the budding Sino-
Russia alliance against its common enemy—the United
States. This alliance aims to exploit obvious economic
complementarities between Russia and China. Russia has
diversified its energy exports by building a second Siberian
gas pipeline to China, scheduled to be completed soon,
and continues to supply China with advanced weaponry
in exchange for manufactured goods, investments, and
financing. This is especially useful for both in the face of
Western sanctions.
On the strength of the economic relationships described
above, China has established a range of international
institutions in which it plays a domain role to the exclusion
of the US and EU. Examples include the just-concluded
RCEP, the ASEAN+3 Summit, the BRI Forum, the Asian
Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), the BRIC grouping
and its New Development Bank, the 17+1 grouping with
central and southeastern European countries (many
of which are EU members), the China-Africa Forum,
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization with central
Asian countries, and numerous bilateral partnership
agreements and a few strategic partnership pacts. These
international institutions have given China the political
space to compete against the US and the West.
Conclusion and outlook
Going forward, US-China competition and conflicts are
very likely to persist, with some risk of intensifying—in
particular, in the Taiwanese Straits and the South China
Sea. The conflicts could spread from trade and direct-
investment restrictions, especially in high technology
sectors, to more scrutiny of financial flows including
portfolio capital flows and defense buildups—as has
29 Temur Umarov, “China Looms Large in Central Asia,” Carnegie Moscow Center, March 30, 2020, https:/ /carnegie.ru/commentary/81402.
been the situation in the last few months of the Trump
administration. However, the ways in which the conflicts
unfold will change. Under a Biden administration, the
United States will step back from unilateral actions, and
instead rebuild ties with likeminded countries to present
a “united front” in demanding that China respect agreed-
upon trade and other international rules.
What are the prospects for this “united-front” approach
making progress in negotiating with China? While it is still
too early to judge, it seems fair to say that the outlook will
be mixed. Certain problems can be resolved with China—
such as cutting back on tariffs (especially since China has
seen the benefits of unilaterally reducing tariffs for non-US
trading partners, boosting trade with them to compensate
for losses of trade with the United States) or strengthening
the protection of intellectual-property rights (which is
now also in China’s interest, as it has recently paid and
received an increasing amount of royalties to and from
other countries). However, there seems to be little chance
of getting China to change its political and economic
system, which goes far beyond industrial subsidies to
embrace pervasive control, guidance, and support for
both state and private companies to serve the strategic
goals of the Communist Party of China. Thus, the problem
of an uneven playing field will remain, since it is inherent in
the coexistence between two incompatible political and
economic systems in China and the West. In any event, the
negotiating approach could reduce the unpredictability
in US-China relations seen in the past four years, but will
probably put pressure on other countries to take sides.
While most Western, developed countries will welcome
the renewed US coalition-building efforts with various
degrees of commitment, the developing world remains
the main area of contention. Because these countries will
be in very challenging situations in the aftermath of the
COVID-19 pandemic and associated economic recession,
their need for financing and investment is even more
acute than before. As the Chinese economy continues
to recover more smartly than the West, China will be in
a position to continue investing in developing countries,
especially through the BRI—which is now becoming
a valuable strategic springboard to develop a viable
economic space for China in the face of pushback from
the West. Under these circumstances, unless the West
steps up its official assistance (which will be difficult, given
budgetary constraints in many developed countries) as
well as trade and investment opportunities, economic
engagement between many developing countries and
China will continue; so will their political support for China
in international organizations and forums. Basically, until

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
How the Rest of the World Responds to the US-China Split
the West puts money where its mouth is, no amount of
anti-China criticism will change reality on the ground.
However, China’s aggressive behavior in Asia has pushed
many countries in the region to take countermeasures.
If China were to export its aggressive behavior in Asia
elsewhere, it could jeopardize the support it has earned
in several developing regions, and instead would harden
criticism of its involvement in those countries. Therefore,
how countries align themselves in the US-China conflict
also depends on China’s behavior going forward.
Ultimately, the likely protracted US-China contention will
lead to one of the two possible outcomes. The first one
is war; for example one triggered by escalating conflicts
in the Indo-Pacific region and compounded by a series
of accidents, mistakes and miscalculations by both sides.
The probability of this scenario is still low, but has clearly
risen in recent years. One mitigating factor though is the
result of China’s military modernization efforts, including
building up the third largest nuclear warheads stockpile
30in the world (after the US and Russia) together with a
credible intercontinental ballistic missiles capability. This
will revive the concept of “mutually assured destruction”
(MAD)—this time between the US and China—helping to
deter an all-out war or to contain any armed conflicts to
local or regional theaters.
The alternative outcome is that eventually, one of the
two contestants will collapse politically due to internal
contradictions and weaknesses; much like the collapse
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR)
which ended the previous Cold War in favor of the US
and the West. This time, the major contestants—the US
and China—each has many strengths but also serious
internal weaknesses. In the end, the final outcome of
their contention and conflict will depend on how well
each country can resolve its domestic problems and
strengthen the resilience of its society and economy.
Hung Tran is a nonresident senior fellow at the Atlantic
Council, former executive managing director at the
Institute of International Finance, and deputy director at
the International Monetary Fund.
30 Kelsey Davenport and Kingston Reif, Nuclear Weapons: Who Has What at a Glance, Arms Control Association, August 2020, https:/ /www.
armscontrol.org/factsheets/Nuclearweaponswhohaswhat.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Atlantic Council Board of Directors
Board of Directors
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*Richard W. Edelman
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
*John J. Studzinski
TREASURER
*George Lund
DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
*Peter Ackerman
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Colleen Bell
*Rafic A. Bizri
*Linden P. Blue
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
R. Nicholas Burns
*Richard R. Burt
Michael Calvey
Teresa Carlson
James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
Ralph D. Crosby, Jr.
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Thomas R. Eldridge
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Courtney Geduldig
Robert S. Gelbard
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
*Amir A. Handjani
Katie Harbath
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Amos Hochstein
*Karl V. Hopkins
Andrew Hove
Mary L. Howell
Ian Ihnatowycz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
Joia M. Johnson
Stephen R. Kappes
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Astri Kimball Van Dyke
Henry A. Kissinger
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Neil Masterson
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
H.R. McMaster
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
*Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Thomas R. Nides
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
*Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
W. DeVier Pierson
Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell McCormick
Robert Rangel
Thomas J. Ridge
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Rajiv Shah
Wendy Sherman
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Gine Wang-Reese
Ronald Weiser
Olin Wethington
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Colin L. Powell
Condoleezza Rice
George P. Shultz
Horst Teltschik
John W. Warner
William H. Webster
*Executive Committee Members
List as of December 15 , 2020

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that
 promotes constructive US leadership and engagement
in international affairs based on the central role of
the Atlantic community in meeting today’s global
 challenges.
© 2021 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All
rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means
without permission in writing from the Atlantic Council,
except in the case of brief quotations in news articles,
critical articles, or reviews. Please direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
