
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
1
CHINESE
DISCOURSE POWER:
AMBITIONS AND REALITY
IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
by Kenton Thibaut

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
2 3
The mission of the Digital Forensic Research Lab (DFRLab) is to
identify, expose, and explain disinformation where and when it
occurs using open-source research; to promote objective truth as a
foundation of government for and by people; to protect democratic
institutions and norms from those who would seek to undermine
them in the digital engagement space; to create a new model of
expertise adapted for impact and real-world results; and to forge
digital resilience at a time when humans are more interconnected
than at any point in history, by building the world’s leading hub of
digital forensic analysts tracking events in governance, technology,
and security.
ISBN-13: 978-1-61977-242-7
Cover: China’s President Xi Jinping is shown on a screen through digitally
decorated glass during the World Internet Conference (WIC) in Wuzhen,
Zhejiang province, China, November 23, 2020. REUTERS/Aly Song
This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic
Council’s policy on intellectual independence. The authors are solely
responsible for its analysis and recommendations. The Atlantic Council and
its donors do not determine, nor do they necessarily endorse or advocate
for, any of this report’s conclusions.
August 2022
Author
Kenton Thibaut
Editors
Rose Jackson
Iain Robertson

The author would like to thank the following reviewers for their
thoughtful feedback and recommendations:
Jessica Batke
Graham Brookie
Emerson T. Brooking
Andy Carvin
Kat Duffy
Tuvia Gering
Naima Green-Riley
by Kenton Thibaut
CHINESE
DISCOURSE POWER:
AMBITIONS AND REALITY
IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
4 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2
INTRODUCTION 4
CHINA’S UNDERSTANDING OF DISCOURSE 5
POWER AND WORLD ORDER
CHINA FROM 1978–2008: STEPPING OUT FROM THE SHADOW OF THE WEST 5
CHINA IN THE 2000S: THE THREAT OF THE “DISCOURSE HEGEMONY” OF THE WEST 7
CHINA IN 2012 AND BEYOND: DISCOURSE POWER IN THE XI JINPING ERA 9
CHINA’S INTERNAL REORGANIZATION AND ITS DISCOURSE-POWER GOALS 12
THE PRIMARY BODIES TASKED WITH ENHANCING CHINA’S POWER TO SPEAK 13
HOW CHINA HAS CENTERED CONNECTIVITY IN 18
ITS DISCOURSE-POWER AMBITIONS
DISCOURSE POWER IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN: USING SOCIAL AND DIGITAL 19
GAINING DISCOURSE POWER BY PROMOTING “CYBER SOVEREIGNTY” 22
CHINA’S PARTICIPATION IN TECHNICAL STANDARDS-SETTING ORGANIZATIONS 23
CHINA’S CREATION OF MULTILATERAL ORGANIZATIONS 25
CHINA’S ENGAGEMENT IN REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS 26
SUCCESSES AND LIMITATIONS OF 30
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
2 3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1 For background on the “Fourth Industrial Revolution,” see: Klaus Schwab, “The Fourth Industrial Revolution,” Foreign
Affairs, December 12, 2015, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/2015-12-12/fourth-industrial-revolution.
2 Chen Wenhui, “陈文辉详解数字经济投资逻辑：得平台者得天下” (“Chen Wenhui Explained the Investment Logic of Digital
Economy in Detail: Those Who Win the Platform Win the World”), Yicai, July 28, 2020, https://archive.ph/Y0S7Y.
3 Johnathan E. Hillman, The Digital Silk Road: China’s Quest to Wire the World and Win the Future (New Y ork: Harper Business, 2021), xii.
As China’s military and economic power has grown, so has
its ambition to shape global norms to suit its priorities. China
believes that the United States currently dominates the
international system, and sees growing Western opposition
to China as evidence that the current order is now a threat
to the continued security of the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP). As such, China’s leadership has come to see its ability
to reshape the international order—or, at least, to decenter
US power within it—as essential to the party’s future.
China’s leaders have clearly articulated that they believe that
Western countries, and especially the United States, have
been able to exert global dominance because they possess
what China terms “discourse power” (话语权): a type of nar-
rative agenda-setting ability focused on reshaping global
governance, values, and norms to legitimize and facilitate
the expression of state power.
For the CCP, gaining discourse power translates into an abil-
ity to increase China’s geopolitical power by creating con-
sensus around an alternative, China-led international order—
one that privileges state sovereignty over civil liberties, and
that subordinates human rights to state security. China has
identified both the digital realm and the geographic regions
of the Global South as arenas of opportunity in advancing
its goals and gaining a discourse-power advantage over the
United States.
China’s leadership has been transparent in outlining its goals
for both gaining discourse power and implementing a strat-
egy for doing so. Chinese government scholars believe that
discourse power comprises two, mutually reinforcing com-
ponents: the “power to speak,” or to articulate a coherent
vision for the world order, and the “power to be heard,” or to
have audiences have exposure to, and then to buy into, this
message. This involves embedding cultural values within a
system so that it comes to structure the relations between
states—in both subjective terms (such as norms) and objec-
tive terms (such as rules and standards). To operationalize its
strategies for gaining discourse power, China has embarked
on a major restructuring of the party-state to ensure that
the CCP Central Committee—the seat of CCP leadership,
of which Xi Jinping is the head —retains direct oversight
over the bodies responsible for carrying out China’s dis -
course-power goals.
Chinese official and academic writings also show that the
CCP has come to see the digital arena as crucial in its dis-
course-power strategy, seeing the opportunities brought
about by the Fourth Industrial Revolution as offering a
chance to disrupt the hegemony of the West. 1 As one
Chinese government official wrote in July 2020, “tech -
nological changes in different periods throughout history
not only bring about economic changes, but also affect
changes in the global power structure […] The digital econ-
omy is prompting a reshuffle, and China has the opportu -
nity to gain a first-mover advantage.” 2 Beijing has made
clear its intentions to command the digital world, announc-
ing its aims to dominate advanced-technology manufac -
turing by 2025, to lead in international standards setting
by 2035, and to become a “cyber superpower” by 2050.3
For the CCP, gaining discourse power
translates into increased geopolitical
power by creating consensus around
an alternative, China-led international
order— one that privileges state
sovereignty over civil liberties, and
subordinates human rights to state
security. China has identified both the
digital realm and the Global South as
prime areas of opportunity.

As such, China has embarked on a concerted strategy to
gain discourse power via the digital domain. It has done so
through several mechanisms: by shaping local information
ecosystems via social and digital media platforms, by pro-
moting CCP-approved norms for digital governance and
Chinese-developed international technical standards, and
by offering the physical digital and Internet infrastructure on
which these information ecosystems rely at an affordable
cost, and with no conditions for how it is used.
China also sees the Global South as potentially more recep-
tive to its norms and governance principles, and as an
attractive market for Chinese digital-infrastructure offer -
ings. China’s external propaganda narratives couch Beijing’s
activities in the digital sphere as ultimately aimed at granting
countries more power over the development and direction
of their digital economies.
China has promoted the norm of “cyber sovereignty” (网络
主权)—in China’s definition, the right of each country to exert
total control over the Internet within its borders—in various
international organizations, technical standards-setting bod-
ies, and its commercial relations with countries interested in
Chinese products and services. In its external propaganda
messaging, China often targets audiences with narratives
that erode the legitimacy of the liberal democratic frame -
work and that resonate with local experience; for example,
in the Global South, Chinese messaging on digital coopera-
tion emphasizes a shared distrust of Western governments
or a shared experience as “developing” (to use China’s term)
countries.
In actuality, however, China’s strategy is less about a true
attempt to make the digital world more inclusive, and more
about supporting the Chinese government’s leadership
goals. While boosting its economic growth and protect -
ing its ability to exert political control domestically are two
major goals of China’s promotion of cyber sovereignty,
Beijing sees laying the necessary groundwork for gaining a
discourse-power advantage over the West as another key
objective. As Adam Segal puts it, “cyber sovereignty rep -
resents a pushback against the attempted universalization
of [Western] norms [regarding privacy, free speech, access
to information, and the role of regulation] that has become
the default of the current operating system, as well as a reas-
sertion of the priority of governments over non-state actors.”4
China sees engaging in targeted messaging, and gaining
support for its normative framework across various audi -
ences, as better positioning it to gain the discourse power
it sees as essential for reshaping the international envi -
ronment in a way that better facilitates the expression of
Chinese power. Additionally, China’s leaders fundamentally
4 Adam Segal, “China’s Vision for Cyber Sovereignty and the Global Governance of Cyberspace” in Nadège Rolland, ed., An Emerging China-Centric Order:
China’s Vision for a New World Order in Practice, NBR 87, August 2020, https://www.nbr.org/wp-content/uploads/pdfs/publications/sr87_aug2020.pdf.
5 “Carrying Forward the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence in the Promotion of Peace and Development,” Embassy
of the People’s Republic of China in the Republic of Turkey, June 28, 2004, https://archive.ph/apLY d.
6 For more on the meaning of “free, open, secure, and interoperable” see: “Declaration for the Future of the Internet,” US Department
of State, April 28, 2022, https://www.state.gov/declaration-for-the-future-of-the-internet; Rebecca Klar, “US, Partner Countries Launch
Declaration to Promote Free, Open Internet,” Hill, April 28, 2022, https://thehill.com/policy/technology/3469367-u-s-partner-countries-
launch-declaration-to-promote-free-open-internet/; Robert Morgus and Justin Sherman, “The Idealized Internet vs. Internet Realities,”
New America, July 26, 2018, https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/reports/idealized-internet-vs-internet-realities/.
do not believe that the Chinese perspective can be “heard”
unless they can make the soil fertile globally for their mes-
sage to seed.
As such, China’s strategy around discourse power should
not be understood as an attempt to turn the world into an
authoritarian stage. China is clear in emphasizing its agnos-
ticism with regard to the domestic political characteristics of
the governments with which it engages.5 To this end, it is less
important to China whether countries support “cyber sover-
eignty” because it offers them more freedom in determining
their digital futures, or whether governments see support for
this approach as an opportunity to clamp down on Internet
freedoms. In either case, China gains discourse power by
increasing buy-in for its vision of the global digital order,
bringing it closer to achieving its aims of gaining a compara-
tive advantage over the West.
Lastly, while China has advanced presence and strategy in
standard-setting bodies, normative spaces, the digital infor-
mation ecosystem, and the provision of physical infrastruc-
ture, the Western world’s approach has been more piece-
meal and reactive. Notably, China is advancing much of this
strategy through the very mechanisms the United States and
its allies created to govern and shape a “free, open, secure,
and interoperable” digital world. 6 Chinese leaders have
taken a bet on the West’s overconfidence in its systems and
have built a relatively successful strategy of quietly shaping,
repurposing, and encircling them to advance China’s dis -
course power.
Any effort to counter this reshaping, therefore, relies on the
democratic world reinvigorating its engagement in these
spaces, more clearly defining mutually reinforcing indus -
trial, commercial, and geopolitical strategies, and doubling
down on creating a more geographically inclusive, multis-
takeholder, collaborative system.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
4 5
INTRODUCTION
T
his report provides a framework for understanding
China’s discourse-power ambitions—what Chinese
officials and scholars have said they are, the strategy
China has developed to achieve them, and an initial assess-
ment of the successes and limitations of these efforts to date.
The report begins by tracing the evolution of China’s con-
ception of discourse power, from China’s period of reform
and opening in 1978 to the current era under President
Xi Jinping, and how it came to occupy a central role in
China’s national strategy. It illustrates how Chinese schol-
ars studied the example of the United States and developed
an understanding of discourse power as both the “power
to speak” and the “power to be heard”; these comprise,
respectively, articulating a coherent and cohesive vision for
the world order and having this messaging gain support from
a global audience. It shows how Chinese leadership came to
believe that, through discourse power, the United States was
able to create and maintain an international system that fur-
thers Western values and norms, as well as US economic
and military geopolitical power. It describes how China came
to see certain areas of the global landscape—including the
digital sphere and regions of the Global South—as areas to
engage in to gain a discourse power advantage vis-à-vis the
West.
The next section takes a closer look at how the party-state
has been restructured, in part, to help operationalize China’s
goals to gain “the power to speak” and “the power to be
heard.” A core part of this effort is consolidation of the CCP
Central Committee’s oversight over the main organiza -
tions responsible for carrying out discourse-power-related
work. The Central Committee is the seat of party power in
China, of which Xi Jinping is the head. This analysis outlines
how this restructuring reoriented the main organs of power
in the Chinese party-state around the party’s goals to gain
international discourse power, and describes their various
responsibilities with respect to this work.
The third section focuses on China’s strategy for gaining dis-
course power by centering itself in the ecosystem of global
connectivity. This strategy includes gaining the “power to
speak” by using social and digital media platforms to shape
local information environments in its favor. It also includes
gaining the “power to be heard” by promoting the CCP-
approved norm of “cyber sovereignty”—a vision of strict
state control over the Internet—in multilateral standards-set-
ting organizations, by creating its own multilateral institu -
tions that spread and promote cyber-sovereignty principles
abroad, and by using commercial and diplomatic engage-
ments in regional multilateral organizations to popularize
and gain buy-in for China’s vision for the global order.
Lastly, this report provides a brief assessment of both the
successes and limitations of China’s discourse-power oper-
ations. While China has made its ambitions and intentions
for shaping the international order clear—and has been
open and transparent regarding its ultimate aims—it still
faces obstacles in establishing an alternative order based
on China-defined principles. Efforts to effectively counter
these efforts then rely on the democratic world understand-
ing the gaps that China has exploited in the current system,
and doubling down on creating a more inclusive, multis -
takeholder, collaborative system for shaping a digitally con-
nected global future.
China’s ambitions to supplant the current liberal international
order presents the most viable challenge to the ideological
consensus around open societies since the end of the Cold
War. It has embarked on an ambitious strategy to gain the
discourse power it needs to achieve this task, and this report
illustrates the scope, intentions, and purposeful implementa-
tion of this integrated strategy.
CHINA’S UNDERSTANDING OF
DISCOURSE POWER AND WORLD ORDER
7 Ruan Jianping, “话语权与国际秩序的建构” (“The Right to Speak and the Construction of International Order”), International Politics 9 (2003).
8 Ibid.
9 “GDP per Capita (Current US$)—China,” World Bank, 2020, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?locations=CN.
10 Zheng Qirong, 改革开放以来的中国外交 (China’s Diplomacy since the Reform and Opening Up), (Beijing: World Affairs Press, 2008), 18.
11 Christine Wong, “The Fiscal Stimulus Programme and Public Governance Issues in China,” OECD Journal on Budgeting
3 (2011), https://www.oecd.org/gov/budgeting/Public%20Governance%20Issues%20in%20China.pdf.
12 Xu Jian, “Rethinking China’s Period of Strategic Opportunity,” China International Studies 45, 51 (2014), https://
heinonline.org/HOL/LandingPage?handle=hein.journals/chintersd45&div=5&id=&page=.
I
n China’s view, a country possesses discourse power when
it is able to shape the existing international order to reflect
both its interests (for example, economic and/or security
interests) and its value system (for example, Western values
of liberal democracy and free-market capitalism). China views
itself as currently existing in a discourse-power deficit vis-à-vis
the West, and especially the United States—which, as a result,
makes it a “rule taker” rather than a “rule maker” in the inter-
national system.7
According to Chinese scholarship, the political, economic,
technological, linguistic, and cultural dominance of the
United States has allowed it to structure the international
system to its advantage, in terms of both value orientation
and institutional arrangements.
The value orientation is that of Western democratic, or “uni-
versal,” values—for example, a conception of human rights
based on liberal notions of individual liberty. Institutional
arrangements include, for example, international economic
organizations like the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank, which Chinese scholars argue organize state
behavior around propagating Western capitalist values in
the global economic system. From this perspective, the cur-
rent international order both reinforces and serves as a tool
for Western countries, and especially the United States, to
perpetuate continued dominance of global political, eco -
nomic, security, and value systems.8
However, China’s view of how discourse power shapes
the world was, in large part, informed by its own historical
experience and changing perspectives of its own view of
China’s place in the world.
2008 marked a turning point for China. A
confluence of domestic and international
events convinced China’s leadership to shift
to a more assertive foreign policy posture.
China from 1978–2008: Stepping Out
from the West’s Shadow
China’s position as a “rule taker” vis-à-vis the West was
acceptable, if not ideal, to Chinese policymakers for most of
the period of reform and opening (改革开放), which began in
1978. This period saw China turn from a nearly autarkic econ-
omy to one fueled largely by foreign direct investment (FDI)
and export-driven growth. In the 1980s and 1990s, China
began to open its economy to foreign trade, acceding to the
World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001. By 2008, China’s
per capita gross domestic product (GDP) had risen to more
than $3,400 (in current US dollars) from about $200 in 1978,
an increase of more than 1,600 percent.9
The overriding focus for China’s leadership during this time
was on ensuring internal stability and fueling economic
growth. As such, China followed Chinese leader Deng
Xiaoping’s foreign policy approach of taoguangyanghui (韬
光养晦), a concept that translates to “hiding [one’s] capabil-
ities, focusing on building up national strength, and biding
[one’s] time.”10
However, 2008 marked a turning point for China. A con -
fluence of domestic and international events convinced
China’s leadership to shift from taoguangyanghui to a more
assertive foreign policy posture.
First, China gained more confidence in its social and eco-
nomic model following the global financial crisis of 2007–
2008. China was the first major economy in the world to
recover from the crisis. After a short but steep downturn in
2008, China’s economy recovered to grow by 8.7 percent in
2009 and by 10.4 percent in 2010, at a time when Western
nations were still struggling.11 This led to a view among many
in China’s leadership that the country was entering a period
of “strategic opportunity,” with the West in decline and the
East rising.12

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
6 7
Second, growing nationalism among the Chinese popu -
lace created bottom-up domestic pressure for China to act
with more confidence on the world stage. This was due, in
large part, to China’s heavy investment in patriotic educa-
tion, which the CCP implemented in earnest following the
Tiananmen Square democracy-protest movement and sub-
sequent crackdown in 1989. A central theme in patriotic edu-
cation was China’s grievance over its “century of humiliation”
(百年国耻), a period of one hundred years beginning with
the Opium Wars in the 1840s and ending with the establish-
ment of Communist China in 1949. This emphasizes China’s
exploitation at the hands of Western imperialist powers and
was largely designed to curb the infiltration of Western influ-
ence that the party believed was largely responsible for
the Tiananmen Square crisis.13 As a result, China’s popular
youth-nationalist movement gained momentum in the mid-
2000s—and along with it came a demand to reclaim China’s
“rightful place” in world affairs.14
Connected mostly by new information technology, particu-
larly the Internet, popular nationalists (sometimes referred
to as China’s “angry youths,” or fenqing [愤青]) engaged with
each other in both online and offline shows of force, and
often pressured the government to take more assertive for-
eign policy positions in defense of China’s interests.15
For example, “angry youths” engaged in widespread pro-
tests following what they viewed as unfair coverage of the
2008 Beijing Summer Olympic Games, in which Western
media organizations like CNN and the BBC focused heav-
ily on ongoing protests promoting the Tibetan indepen -
dence movement. This was seen by China’s patriotic youths
as an insult to their country’s national pride. Chinese “angry
youths” embarked on a widespread online campaign
emphasizing Western attempts to “humiliate” China through
media coverage, a campaign that was even amplified by
the Chinese embassy in the United States at the time.16 In
another example, in 2010, “angry youths” organized mas-
sive protests after then Japanese Prime Minister Koizumi vis-
ited a World War II memorial at Japan’s Yasukuni Shrine. The
individuals buried at the site have long been viewed by the
Chinese as war criminals who perpetrated mass suffering of
China during World War II.17
13 Orville Schell and John Delury Wealth and Power: China’s Long March to the Twenty-First Century (New Y ork: Random House, 2014), xiii.
14 Suisheng Zhao, “Foreign Policy Implications of Chinese Nationalism Revisited: the Strident Turn,” Journal of Contemporary China 22, 82 (2013).
15 Lijun Y ang and Y ongnian Zheng, “Fen Qings (Angry Y outh) in Contemporary China,” Journal of Contemporary China 21, 76 (2012), 638.
16 “[ 东方时空]正告CNN：网民为什么愤怒?” (“Warning to CNN: Why are Netizens Angry?”), Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in the United States of
America, April 1, 2008, https://web.archive.org/web/20220715165604/http://us.china-embassy.gov.cn/chn/zclm2013/zt/szwt/200804/t20080401_5074704.htm.
17 “Anti-Japan Protests Spread across China,” Financial Times, September 18, 2012, https://www.ft.com/content/85f4f7a2-0138-11e2-99d3-00144feabdc0.
18 Stephanie T. Kleine-Ahlbrandt, Susan Shirk, and Wang Yizhou, “Does Promoting ‘Core Interests’ Do China More Harm Than Good?”
ChinaFile, May 2, 2013, https://www.chinafile.com/conversation/does-promoting-core-interests-do-china-more-harm-good.
19 Michael D. Swaine, “China’s Assertive Behavior—Part One: On ‘Core Interests,’” China Leadership
Monitor 32 (2010), 3, https://carnegieendowment.org/files/CLM34MS_FINAL.pdf.
20 Jia Qingguo, “Learning to Live with the Hegemon: Evolution of China’s Policy T oward the US since
the End of the Cold War,” Journal of Contemporary China 14, 44 (2005), 395.
As China gained confidence in its
growing economic and military power,
Beijing also began to take a more
expansive view of what it considered
to be China’s “core” interests - a
development that expanded the remit of
China’s foreign policy domain.

Additionally, as China gained confidence in its grow -
ing economic and military power, Beijing also began to
take a more expansive view of what it considered as
China’s “core” interests, a development that expanded
the remit of China’s foreign policy domain. Pre-2008,
China defined its “core interests” as largely limited to
issues concerning territorial sovereignty (e.g., Hong Kong,
Taiwan, and Tibet) and anything affecting or questioning
the centrality of CCP leadership to China’s political sys -
tem (for example, calls for multi-party democracy in China
would be defined as violating China’s “core interests”). 18

However, beginning in 2009, China’s official use of the term
began to apply to a growing number of foreign policy issues.
Data from major official and unofficial Chinese state media
reports illustrate the switch that took place from 2008 to
2009. According to a report authored by Michael Swaine,
state media mentions of China’s “core interests” in the con-
text of foreign policy issues increased from only a single arti-
cle in the People’s Daily in 2001 to two hundred and sixty
articles in 2009, and three hundred and twenty-five articles
in 2010.19 China in the years before 2008 adopted a foreign
policy centered around “learning to live with the hegemon,”
i.e., conforming to the reality of US dominance of the inter-
national order.20 As China grew more confident, however,
it expanded the purview of its core interests on the world
stage—and its foreign policy grew more muscular as a result.
At the same time, however, China was responding to what it
perceived as a Western-led “China Threat Theory.” A prevail-
ing view among Chinese academics was that, after the end
of the Cold War, the United States made the expansion of
its values the main driver of its foreign policy, and ultimately
established an international order on the basis of suppos-
edly “universal values”—that is, on norms that emphasize
freedom, equality, and justice, but only in the context of
Western-style democracy.21
In this context, Chinese scholars argue that Western policy-
makers promulgated the “China Threat Theory,” or the idea
that a rising China and its Chinese socialist system posed a
fundamental threat to the order that the United States had
built.22 This anxiety was reflected in Chinese academic writ-
ings on foreign policy. A survey of one hundred and eight
Chinese academic articles revealed that nearly 26 percent
of authors viewed the United States as using its control over
the international system to “contain” China, with “almost all
of the papers seeing the US “pivot to Asia” as having an anti-
China agenda at its core.”23
Chinese fears over the dominance of Western “univer -
sal values” were outlined in a leaked April 2013 internal
CCP document known as “Document No. 9”—or, more for-
mally, “Communiqué on the Current State of the Ideological
Sphere” ( 关于当前意识形态领域情况的通报 ). In it, party
leaders outlined the threat of universal values to party legit-
imacy, defining the threat as “the people who espouse uni-
versal values believe Western freedom, democracy, and
human rights are universal and eternal. This is evident in their
distortion of the Party’s own [values]…that ‘the West’s values
are the prevailing norm for all human civilization’ […] Given
Western nations’ long-term dominance [of the global sys -
tem], these arguments can be confusing and deceptive.”24
Beijing views the current order as inextricably bound up
with Western-style democracy and the values that under -
gird it. As such, this order is inherently hostile to China
and incompatible with its ability to rise. As one Chinese
scholar put it, “Western countries use their discourse
hegemony to slander China. Negative discourses such
as ‘China Threat Theory’ have seriously damaged China’s
national image and undermined its [power].” 25 As such,
China’s leadership saw the urgency of developing a strat-
egy to shape perceptions of its rise, to influence the inter-
national order to counter the dominance of Western val -
ues, and to mitigate the threat to the party’s legitimacy.
21 Zhang Xudong, 全球化时代的文化认同:西方普遍主义话语的历史批判 (Cultural Identity in the Age of Globalization: A
Historical Critique of the Western Discourse of Universalism) (Beijing: Peking University Press, 2006), 18.
22 Zhao Changfeng and Lu Jun, “近年来国内学界关于中国国际话语权研究述评” (“Review of Domestic Academic Research on China’s
International Discourse Power in Recent Y ears”), Socialism Studies, September 8, 2018, https://archive.ph/2cf7X.
23 For more on the US “pivot to Asia,” see: Kenneth G. Lieberthal, “The American Pivot to Asia,” Brookings,
December 21, 2011, https://www.brookings.edu/articles/the-american-pivot-to-asia/.
Jinghan Zeng, Yuefan Xiao, and Shuan Breslin, “Securing China’s Core Interests: the State of the Debate in China,” International Affairs 91, 2 (2015), 250.
24 “ 《明鏡月刊》獨家全文刊發中共9號文件” (“‘Mirror Monthly’ Exclusively Publishes the Full Text of the CCP’s No. 9 Document”),
China Digital Times, September 8, 2013, https://chinadigitaltimes.net/chinese/345627.html; “Document 9: A ChinaFile
Translation,” ChinaFile, November 8, 2013, https://www.chinafile.com/document-9-chinafile-translation#start.
25 Zhao and Lu, “近年来国内学界关于中国国际话语权研究述评.”
26 Note: China’s policymaking process is not monolithic but is often the result of bargaining between ministries, state-owned enterprises, and
provincial governments with varying degrees of power and sometimes overlapping portfolios with competing interests within the party-state.
However, for simplicity’s sake, this report uses the term “CCP” to refer to the policies of the party-state. Given that issues of ideological orientation
are considered “high politics,” the highest levels of the party will ultimately decide the contours of the policy itself. In addition, since 2012, Xi
Jinping has taken charge of all foreign policy-related decision-making bodies in an effort to improve coordination among interest groups.
“Western countries use their discourse
hegemony to slander China. Negative
discourses such as ‘China Threat Theory’
have seriously damaged China’s national
image and undermined its power.”

To this end, Chinese scholars in the 2000s began to engage
more actively with the concept of “discourse power,” seeing
it as the core philosophical concept around which to build
China’s external influence strategy. In the scholars’ thinking,
the strategy is useful for both shaping the world to suit its
ambitions and to combat what they saw as hostile Western
forces leveraging their dominant position in the current
global order to stymie China’s rise. In this view, China must
come to have its own discourse power on the world stage in
order to break the “discourse hegemony” of the West, and to
ultimately occupy its rightful place as a leader on the global
stage.
China in the 2000s: The Threat of the
“Discourse Hegemony” of the West
Some of the earliest Chinese academic writings on “inter -
national discourse power” can be traced back to the early
2000s, though the topic gained increasing prominence
following China’s more assertive foreign policy posture
post-2008.
As with most areas of China’s domestic and foreign policy,
the Politburo Standing Committee of the CCP holds the ulti-
mate decision-making power over issues of highest impor-
tance; however, the committee often seeks input and advice
from a range of experts, specialized institutions, scholars,
and interest groups while formulating policy decisions. 26
Such a process of consultation occurred (and continues
today) with regard to China shaping its discourse-power
strategy.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
8 9
As an example, in May 2022, a public organization super-
vised by China’s United Front Work Department—the CCP’s
main body responsible for overseeing China’s external pro-
paganda efforts, as detailed below—funded a paper written
by a professor at China’s Central Committee Party School
titled “The Improvement of China’s International Discourse
Power in the New Era Based on International Communication
Capacity.”27 In other words, the work of scholars and experts
on discourse power is germane to understanding the
thinking behind China’s strategy, as this research is often
requested and solicited on the government’s behalf. These
findings are then integrated into the policymaking process
and inform the contours of the overall discourse-power
strategy.
In addition to the contributions of Chinese scholars and
experts, China’s understanding of discourse power is also
informed by Western philosophy. China’s conception of dis-
course power draws heavily from postmodernism, which
recognizes that concepts, knowledge, representation, and
ideology play an important role in the composition of geopo-
litical power. This is perhaps best represented in the Chinese
discourse-power tradition through the application of French
postmodernist philosopher Michel Foucault’s “discourse
power theory” as a frame for understanding what China sees
as Western dominance of the international system.28
In the Foucauldian view, a state’s dominance in the produc-
tion of knowledge (i.e., values of right and wrong) is linked to
geopolitical power. This is because the state can socialize
those who receive this knowledge to act in accordance with
what it prescribes as acceptable behavior—in other words, to
“train” states to adhere to certain norms, i.e., shared expec-
tations about appropriate behavior held by a community of
actors.29 Chinese scholars view the West’s ability to dominate
the production of knowledge through the use of discourse
as central to its dominance of the international system.30 An
example of this, in China’s view, is the United States’ ability
to make “universal values” related to democracy and human
rights widely accepted norms for state behavior in the inter-
national system.
27 Liu Jia and Wen Jichang, “国际传播效能视角下的新时代中国国际话语权提升” (“The Improvement of China’s International Discourse Power
in the New Era—Based on International Communication Capacity”), Journal of Shandon Academy of Governance 1 (2022); “中华思源工
程扶贫基金会简介” (“Introduction to China Siyuan Foundation for Poverty Alleviation”), China Siyuan Foundation for Poverty Alleviation,
last visited June 20, 2022, https://archive.ph/SYlwt. The professor serves at the Institute of International Development Strategy of China’s
Central Committee Party School. The paper was funded under a program of the China Siyuan Project Poverty Alleviation Foundation, a
national public-fundraising foundation established in March 2007 under the supervision of the United Front Work Department.
28 Ruan, “话语权与国际秩序的建构.”
29 Martha Finnemore, National Interests in International Society (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996).
30 Ni Shixiong, 当代西方国际关系理论 (Contemporary Western Theory) (Shanghai: Fudan University Press, 2004), 204.
31 G. John Ikenberry and Darren J. Lim, “China’s Emerging Institutional Statecraft: The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the Prospects for
Counter-Hegemony,” Brookings, April 2017, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/chinas-emerging-institutional-statecraft.pdf.
32 Graham Y oung, “Mao Zhedong and the Class Struggle in Socialist Society,” Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs 16 (1986).
33 Hua Zhengxue, “中国新型政党制度建构国际话语权的三大进路” (“Three Approaches to the Construction of International
Discourse Power in China’s New Political Party System”), Gansu Political Consultative 1 (2022).
In addition to norms, China also sees evidence of the dis -
course power of the United States in its ability to shape
international rules and standards. In this view, the current
order comprises US-led international political and economic
arrangements that determine the rules of how states inter-
act with each other. China sees the United States as having
shaped international institutions to project its preferred sys-
tems and values, including market capitalism and Western-
style participatory democracy. For example, governing
principles of Western-created international economic institu-
tions, such as the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund, often tie funding and support to countries to reforms
that encourage the development of open market economies
and democratic governance.31
In addition to Western philosophy, Chinese scholarship has
also taken inspiration from Maoism to shape understand -
ing of discourse power. In both academic writing and official
speeches on the topic, interlocutors often depict the con -
test over international discourse power as a “public opin -
ion struggle,” language that echoes themes prevalent in
Maoism. For example, Mao Zedong often spoke in terms of
“class struggle,” which he viewed as a political process nec-
essary for the transformation of society from capitalism to
communism.32
In China’s view, discourse power is
comprised of both the “power to speak,”
or to articulate a vision for the global
order, and the “power to be heard,” or
to create buy-in for this vision among a
global audience.
Discourse power is often described as a similar type of
“struggle.” 33 Current Chinese President Xi Jinping him -
self used the term to describe China’s discourse-power
efforts in June 2021 remarks to the Political Bureau of
the CCP’s Central Committee, stating that China must
emphasize “the strategy and art of public opinion
struggle” in order to gain the discourse power needed
to shape the international order. 34
Based, in large part, on their understanding of how the
United States was able to transform its discourse domi -
nance into geopolitical power, Chinese thinkers developed
the view that an appropriate discourse-power strategy com-
prises two core components.
First is the “power to speak,” or the ability to articulate and
disseminate one’s interests, values, and vision for the global
order on the world stage. Second is the “power to be heard,”
or the ability to create buy-in for this vision among a global
audience through the resonance of one’s message. The
“power to be heard” rests on embedding cultural values
within a system so that it comes to structure the relations
between states—through both subjective means (such as
norms) and objective means (such as rules and standards).
As Chinese scholar Zhang Zhongjun put it, “no matter how
high the quality of discourse is, only when it is known by the
audience can it have the basis for recognition and then bring
about discourse power.”35
As the above illustrates, China’s leadership fundamen -
tally does not believe that the Chinese perspective can be
“heard” unless it is able to make the soil fertile globally for
its message to take seed. As such, China’s discourse-power
strategy cannot be understood as simply the power politics of
a rising state. Rather, it must be viewed as a serious and disci-
plined strategy to gain global influence, with the ultimate goal
of creating a China-centered alternative international order.
No matter how high the quality of
discourse is, only when it is known
by the audience can it have the basis
for recognition and then bring about
discourse power.
34 “ 习近平在中共中央政治局第三十次集体学习时强调 加强和改进国际传播工作 展示真实立体全面的中国” (“During the 30th Collective Study of
the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, Xi Jinping Emphasized Strengthening and Improving International
Communication Work and Showing a True, Three-Dimensional and Comprehensive China”), Xinhua, June 1, 2021, https://archive.ph/XFwgh.
35 Zhang Zhongjun, “增强中国国际话语权的思考” (“Reflections on Enhancing China’s International Discourse Power”), Theoretical Horizon 4 (2012).
36 “ 习近平关于实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦论述摘编” (“Excerpts from Xi Jinping’s Thesis on Realizing the Chinese Dream
of the Great Rejuvenation of the Chinese Nation”), People’s Daily, December 2013, https://archive.ph/nmcml.
37 “Speech by Xi Jinping at a Ceremony Marking the Centenary of the Communist Party of China,” Embassy of the
People’s Republic of China in the Republic of Latvia, July 1, 2021, https://archive.ph/QFfia.
38 David Bandurski, “CCP Media Policy, Soft Power, and China’s ‘Third Affliction,’” China Media Project, January 5,
2010, https://chinamediaproject.org/2010/01/05/ccp-media-policy-and-chinas-third-affliction/.
39 Ibid.
40 For more on what achieving the second centenary goal means for Taiwan, see: David Sacks, “What Xi Jinping’s Major Speech Means
For Taiwan,” Council on Foreign Relations, July 6, 2021, https://www.cfr.org/blog/what-xi-jinpings-major-speech-means-taiwan.
China in 2012 and Beyond: Discourse
Power in the Xi Jinping Era
The goals of growing international discourse power and
shaping the international order reached elevated promi -
nence after Xi Jinping was named general secretary of the
CCP during the 18th Party Congress in November 2012.
Upon assuming office, Xi proclaimed that the Chinese
Dream (中国梦) of the rejuvenation of the Chinese nation (
中华民族伟大复兴) was the driving goal of CCP rule for the
“New Era.”36 In line with these goals, Xi put forward a num-
ber of foreign policy initiatives designed to articulate China’s
vision for the global order.
In Xi’s view, the last century of Chinese history can be divided
into three periods: first was the era of Mao Zedong, in which
China “stood up” as a country in its own right; second was
the Deng Xiaoping-Jiang Zemin-Hu Jintao era of reform and
opening, in which China “grew rich”; and last was Xi’s ten-
ure, which marks the “New Era” and China’s transition from
“growing rich” to “growing strong.”37
Similarly, China’s experience during these periods has been
characterized by some academics in terms of the “three
afflictions” (三挨), or the idea that China, over the past hun-
dred years of its history, has faced three major obstacles to
its national power.38 The first was China’s suffering at the
hands of foreign aggressors (“ 中国挨打的问题”), and the
second was China’s low level of economic development (“
中国挨饿的问题”); according to this philosophy, these were
overcome by Mao and Deng, respectively. The third afflic-
tion occupies the focus of the “New Era” and is China’s “suf-
fering of criticism” (“中共政权挨骂的问题”) at the hands of
the West”—that is, efforts by foreign nations to denigrate and
erode the legitimacy of China’s political system.39 In this view,
in line with his predecessors, defeating this “third affliction”
rests on Xi’s shoulders.
The culmination of the “New Era” will be the one hundredth
anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic of
China (PRC) in 2049, the year by which Xi has stated China
will reach its “national rejuvenation”—which includes reach-
ing global superpower status, and the above aims to “grow
strong” and resolve the “third affliction.” It also includes other
goals, including “resolving the Taiwan question.”40 In short,
national rejuvenation would mark China’s ascendance to its

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
10 11
“rightful” position as a global leader that possesses a com-
mensurate level of international discourse power.41
Xi’s tenure also officially marked China’s transition from the
more inwardly focused approach of “peaceful develop -
ment” (和平发展) and taoguangyanghui that characterized
the period of reform and opening, to the more outwardly
focused “peaceful rise” (和平崛起) and a more “proactive”
and “self-achieving” foreign policy—one termed “fengfa
youwei” (奋发有为).42
Under Xi’s leadership, China has launched major policy ini-
tiatives and has articulated a Chinese vision of the global
order that it hopes to promote as part of its quest to gain
discourse power. In 2014, Xi launched his signature foreign
policy theme of “Major Country Diplomacy with Chinese
Characteristics” ( 中国特色社会主义大国外交), which—as
with the foreign policies of previous leaders—takes as a
core tenet the “Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence,” a
long-standing framework for China’s external relations. It
includes “mutual respect for territorial integrity and sover-
eignty, mutual non-aggression, mutual non-interference
in internal affairs, equality and cooperation, and peaceful
coexistence.”43
However, in a departure from previous leaders, Xi espouses
greater leadership for China in the international commu -
nity, along with communicating the country’s “political ideas,
political demands, and national interests” to global audienc-
es.44 Xi also declared that China must “work to reform the
international system and global governance and increase
the representation and say of China.” 45 Xi has repeatedly
emphasized the need to “tell China’s story well” (讲好中文
故事) on the international stage, and has proposed an alter-
native set of China-defined values to those of the current
Western-led international order. In line with these goals, in
2017, China’s Central Party School issued a guide for future
diplomacy centered around the idea that China must “guide
the international community” to build a “new world order”
based on Chinese governance principles.46
41 “ 习近平关于实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦论述摘编.”
42 Y an Xuetong, “从韬光养晦到奋发有为” (“From Hide One’s Capabilities and Bide One’s Time to Becoming
Industrious and Promising”), Quarterly Journal of International Politics 4 (2014).
43 Xi Jinping, “Carry Forward the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence T o Build a Better World Through Win-Win Cooperation,”
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, July 1, 2014, https://archive.ph/4FXDt.
44 Liza Tobin, “Xi’s Vision for Transforming Global Governance: A Strategic Challenge for Washington and Its Allies” in Scott D.
McDonald and Michael C. Burgoyne, eds., China’s Global Influence: Perspectives and Recommendations, APCSS, September
2019, https://apcss.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/2-Xis_Vision_for_transforming_Global-Governance-Tobin.pdf.
45 “The Central Conference on Work Relating to Foreign Affairs was Held in Beijing,” Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of the People’s Republic of China, November 29, 2014, https://archive.ph/MPn3s.
46 “ 习近平首提’两个引导’有深意” (“Xi Jinping’s First Mention of ‘Two Guides’ Has Deep Meaning”), People’s Daily, February 20, 2017, https://archive.ph/1WNWA.
47 “ 习近平外交思想研究与中国国际问题三大体系建设专题研讨会线上召开” ( “Symposium on Research on Xi Jinping Thought on Diplomacy and Construction
of China’s Three Major Systems of International Issues Held Online”), Guangming Net-Academic Channel, June 1, 2022, https://archive.ph/wNvVW.
48 Zhang Zhenjiang, “中国国际关系学科建设的应然与实然” (“What Should Be Done in China’s International Relations
Discipline Construction”), Aisixiang, June 2, 2022, https://archive.ph/wDgFd; Tuvia Gering, “Discourse Power,”
Discourse Power, June 16, 2022, https://tuviagering.substack.com/p/discourse-power-june-16-2022.
49 For more on the “Three Systems,” see: Tuvia Gering, “Discourse Power,” Discourse Power, July 18,
2022, https://tuviagering.substack.com/p/discourse-power-july-18-2022.
50 Xi Jinping, “Work T ogether to Build the Belt and Road” in Governance of China Vol. 2 (Shanghai: Shanghai Press, 2018), 559.
Numerous workshops, symposiums, and study sessions
have been held throughout China across academia and
government to operationalize these goals. For example, in
an online symposium held in June 2022, experts gathered
to contribute concrete proposals to shore up China’s inter-
national discourse power.47 In one session, titled “China’s
International Relations Discourse System Construction and
International Communication,” contributors emphasized the
need to restructure the academic discipline of international
relations. They proposed doing so in terms of the “Three
Great Systems 三大体系,” an understanding of Chinese phi-
losophy and social science that also undergirds Xi’s Thought
on Diplomacy.
The “Three Great Systems” include the disciplinary system
学科体系 (which involves training young talent in the prac-
tice of policy and international diplomacy), the academic sys-
tem 学术体系 (shoring up and innovating the theory and phi-
losophy behind China’s approach to international relations),
and the discourse system 话语体系 (developing and utiliz-
ing mechanisms for spreading China’s approach to inter -
national relations to a global audience).48 These proposals
are aimed at cultivating the skill sets of young people to pre-
pare the future generation to meet the needs of China’s dis-
course-power goals.49
China further institutionalized and formalized its approach
to discourse power at the 19th National Congress in 2018,
where Xi established “Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism
with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era” ( 习近平新时
代中国特色社会主义思想), a guiding document that cod -
ified his “Major Country Diplomacy” and outlined con -
crete goals toward “building a new type of international
relations.” As part of these efforts, China has repeat -
edly emphasized its goals to reform the global gover -
nance system and to create “a community with a shared
future for mankind” ( 人类命运共同体) based on respect
for “sovereignty, dignity, territorial integrity, devel -
opment path, social systems, and ‘core interests.’” 50
This language is meant to articulate to a global audience
China’s vision for international relations, and to stand in con-
trast to that of the order supported by the United States and
Western countries. For example, China emphasizes a mul-
tilateral approach to international relations as an alterna -
tive to what it claims is a “unilateral” approach taken by the
United States. Chinese “multilateralism” is a form of engage-
ment that privileges state-to-state interactions over multis-
takeholder approaches to rule-making, and one that aims to
exclude non-state and civil-society actors.51
Similarly, under these new foreign policy frameworks, China
has sought to promote its own concepts as alternatives to
the Western norms it sees as structuring the current interna-
tional system. For example, China has championed a defi-
nition of “human rights” that actively subordinates personal
and civic freedoms in favor of state-centered economic
development. That is, in China’s view, “human rights” has
come to mean the right of every country to pursue a devel-
opment path that suits its “national conditions,” in contrast
to the Western-centric definition that emphasizes civil and
personal liberties.52 Similarly, China’s emphasis on “non-in-
terference” and respect for “core interests” in other coun-
tries’ internal affairs is meant to communicate a willing -
ness to engage in relationships and exchanges without
consideration for a country’s internal political systems. 53
In China’s view, “human rights” has
come to mean the right of every country
to pursue a development path that suits
its “national conditions,” in contrast
to the Western-centric definition that
emphasizes civil and personal liberties.

China often tailors its messaging about its norms to its audi-
ence. In the Global South especially, this messaging often
overtly criticizes the United States while elevating China’s
approach to international relations. For example, in the
Middle East, China often emphasizes its principle of nonin-
terference, contrasting its role with that of Western countries,
given the latter’s history of intervention in the region. For
51 Zhang Qingmin, “China’s Multilateral Diplomacy,” IDEES, July 24, 2021, https://revistaidees.cat/en/chinas-multilateral-diplomacy/.
52 Kenton Thibaut, China’s Discourse Power Operations in the Global South, Atlantic Council, April 20, 2022, https://www.
atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/chinas-discourse-power-operations-in-the-global-south/.
53 Ibid.
54 “ 坚定自主自立信念 走团结自强之路” (“Firmly Believe in Self-Reliance and Take the Road of Unity and Self-Improvement”),
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, January 15, 2022, https://archive.ph/9RvdQ.
55 “Full T ext: Keynote Speech by Chinese President Xi Jinping at Opening Ceremony of 8th FOCAC
Ministerial Conference,” Xinhua, December 2, 2021, https://archive.fo/ODK6H.
56 Ibid.
57 Ibid.
58 Zhang Zhizhou, “国际话语权建设中几大基础性理论问题.” (“Several Basic Theoretical Issues in
the Construction of International Discourse Power”), Study Times, 2017.
59 Thibaut, China’s Discourse Power Operations in the Global South.
60 “Carrying Forward the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence in the Promotion of Peace and Development.”
example, following the United States’ Summit for Democracy
in December 2021, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi took
the opportunity to emphasize solidarity with Middle Eastern
countries in opposition to the United States, stating: “The
United States instigates regime change by engaging in color
revolutions and seeks geopolitical interests through military
intervention at every turn [....] The ‘Arab Spring’ promoted in
the name of fake democracy has instead caused millions of
casualties and displacement of tens of millions of people […]
China and Middle Eastern countries should firmly follow their
own path.”54
Similarly, at a speech to the Forum for China Africa
Cooperation (FOCAC) on November 29, 2021, Xi Jinping
promoted China’s aim to build a “community with a shared
future for mankind” in Africa.55 Xi said China’s cooperation
with African countries would not hinge on Western notions
of “so-called human rights” that violate the sovereign right
of countries to determine their own “internal affairs.”56 As Xi
declared, “[both China and Africa] advocate for a develop-
ment path that suits our own national conditions…and both
oppose interference in internal affairs, racial discrimination
and unilateral sanctions.”57
As highlighted in the examples above, China sees the
regions of the Global South as an important vector for gain-
ing discourse power. Zhang Zhizhou, one of the most influ-
ential Chinese scholars on discourse-power strategy, argues
that Western cultures will not accept China’s governance
principles due to the incongruence between Chinese and
“Western Christian ideology,” stating that “the natural differ-
ence between Chinese culture and Christian civilization will
directly reduce the degree of Chinese discourse accepted
by the world.”58 This is why China views the Global South as
one of the prime areas in which it can gain discourse power;
it sees a common experience of “developing countries”
as holding powerful appeal in spreading its governance
principles.59
In light of the above, China’s strategy around discourse
power should not be understood as an attempt to turn the
world into an authoritarian stage. China is clear in empha-
sizing its agnosticism with regard to the domestic political
characteristics of the governments with which it engages.60

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
12 13
To this end, it is less important to China why coun -
tries support its vision for a global order than whether
they simply do so. In either case, China gains dis -
course power by increasing buy-in for its vision for the
global order, bringing it closer to achieving its aims
of gaining a comparative advantage over the West.
China’s strategy should not be understood
as an attempt to turn the world into an
authoritarian stage. China is agnostic
with regard to the political systems of its
interlocutors. It is less important to Beijing
why countries support its aims, than that
they simply do so.

China has also proffered alternative international institu -
tional arrangements to facilitate the spread of its values,
most notably through the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). Xi
launched the BRI in 2013 as his signature foreign policy pro-
gram and infrastructure-investment initiative. In China’s view,
the BRI functions as a normative framework, as it operates
under the principles of China’s “five principles of peaceful
coexistence,” as well as a structural one, providing an institu-
tional arrangement to facilitate China’s external propaganda
efforts.61
As an example, at the Belt and Road Forum for International
Cooperation in May 2017, Xi emphasized China’s inten -
tions to “foster a new model of international relations”
under the auspices of the BRI. As one report urged in
2018, “we must firmly seize the historic opportunity of the
‘Belt and Road’, deconstruct the discourse hegemony of
Western developed countries […] and truly realize the rise
of China’s international discourse power.” 62 As of March
2022, one hundred and forty-six countries had signed
memoranda of understanding for BRI-affiliated projects. 63
Under Xi, China has developed and deployed a num -
ber of external initiatives designed to gain the discourse
power appropriate for its “New Era.” However, at the same
time, China has also embarked on a major restructuring of
61 Xi Jinping, “Work T ogether to Build a 21st-Century Maritime Silk Road” in Governance of China Vol. 1 (Shanghai: Shanghai Press, 2015), 320–324.
62 Chen Zhengliang, Zhou Jie, and Li Baogeng, “国际话语权本质析论—兼论中国在提升国际话语权上的应有作为” (“An Analysis of the Nature
of International Discourse Power—China’s Due Action in Improving International Discourse Power”), Zhejiang Social Sciences 7 (2014).
63 “Countries of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI),” Green Finance & Development Center, last visited June 2, 2022, https://archive.ph/2uI86.
64 Hu Nan and Zhang Dongyue, “把加强顶层设计和坚持问计于民统一起来—访中共中央党校（国家行政学
院）教授戴焰军” (“Unify Strengthening T op-Level Design and Insisting on Asking People
 —Interview with Dai Y anjun, a Professor at the Party School of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (National School of
Administration)”), Central Commission for Discipline Inspection and State Supervision Commission, November 26, 2020, https://archive.ph/s8W53.
65 Chinese leadership’s plan for China’s development from 2021 to 2025. Topics covered are broad, and include near-term PRC economic, trade, science
and technology, defense, political, social, cultural, environmental, and other policy priorities. “中华人民共和国国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划
和 2035 年远景目标纲要” (“Outline of the People’s Republic of China 14th Five-Y ear Plan for National Economic and Social Development and Long-
Range Objectives for 2035”), CSET, May 12, 2021, https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/t0284_14th_Five_Y ear_Plan_EN.pdf.
66 Hu and Zhang, “把加强顶层设计和坚持问计于民统一起来.”
67 See: Susan V. Lawrence, China’s Communist Party Absorbs More of the State, CRS, IF10854, March 23, 2018, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/
IF10854/2; “中共中央印发《深化党和国家机构改革方案》” (“CPC Central Committee Releases ‘Deepening Party and State Institutional Reform Plan’”), Xinhua,
March 21, 2018, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/ccp-central-committee-publishes-plan-for-deepeningthe-reform-of-party-and-state-agencies/; “《中
共中央关于深化党和国家机构改革的决定》和《深化党和国家机构改革方案》诞生记” (“An Account of the Birth of the CPC Central Committee Decision on
Deepening Party and State Institutional Reform and the Deepening Party and State Institutional Reform Plan”), Xinhua, March 22, 2018, https://archive.ph/qnrrH.
the party-state that centers the party at the heart of its dis-
course-power strategy.
China’s Internal Reorganization and
Its Discourse-Power Goals
The drive to consolidate CCP oversight over the organiza-
tions responsible for discourse power is captured by the
concept of “top-level design” ( 顶层设计), a development
approach that has gained prominence in China’s political
life under Xi. Top-level design orients the entirety of China’s
social, economic, security, and political apparatus in a pol-
icy hierarchy with the CCP’s Central Committee at the top—
which, in turn, is led by Xi Jinping.64
Top-level design plays a key role in China’s discourse-power
goals, including in its 14th Five Y ear Plan and its long-term
goals for 2035, which include taking its “rightful” place as a
global power.65 As Dai Yanjun, a professor at China’s Central
Party School, expressed in a November 2020 interview, top-
level design means that, in all of China’s domestic and global
activities, the country will adopt a whole-of-society approach
oriented toward “ensuring the leadership of the Communist
Party of China and […] reflecting the superiority of the social-
ist system with Chinese characteristics.”66
Indeed, since coming to power in 2012, Xi has sought to bol-
ster the CCP’s authority over all aspects of the party-state,
and the 2018 Congress saw the announcement of a major
reorganization that would place the party at the center of
control across a wide variety of departments and bureau -
cracies. The goal was to “strengthen the Party’s unified and
centralized control” over the direction and operation of the
country, with “the leadership of Xi Jinping” as the core.67
The Central Committee oversees the main bodies of the par-
ty-state that ensure party priorities regarding international
discourse power are translated through to policy guidance.
In effect, this means that any of the policymaking bodies or
bureaucratic entities that are responsible for disseminating
propaganda—or implementing any other policy tool used
to gain discourse power—must adhere to the policies and
overarching strategy from the Central Committee. This rep-
resents a shift away from the pre-Xi Jinping era, in which pol-
icy decision-making was more decentralized, to one marked
by increasing consolidation under the Central Committee.68
The Primary Bodies Tasked with
Enhancing China’s Power to Speak
As mentioned above, in China’s view, the “power to speak”
includes the ability to articulate a coherent vision for the
world order. It is China’s proposition for what the world
should look like and for how governments should interact
with each other. As part of its reorganization, China has des-
ignated specific departments as responsible for ensuring
the party’s vision is translated down into policy. As one of
the leading Chinese scholars on discourse power wrote,
“behind the power to speak is the strength of the Party,
which must coordinate all efforts.”69
The primary bodies tasked with enhancing China’s “power to
speak” include the following.
• Central Propaganda Department (CPD) . The CPD is
one of the most important organizations in China’s dis-
course-power strategy. It is responsible for developing
China’s “ideological orientation,” and for making sure
this work flows through to all of the party-state’s propa-
ganda work. For example, the CPD is responsible for reg-
ulating the content of China’s publishing, news media,
and film industries, and for providing content directives
for Chinese state media organizations like People’s Daily
and Xinhua.70 In March 2018, Xinhua announced that
the CPD would oversee a new network, Voice of China,
formed by the merger of China Central Television (CCTV).
Its remit includes “strengthening international [discourse
power] by telling China’s stories well.”71
• The United Front Work Department (UFWD). Similarly,
the UFWD is responsible for translating party guidance
on discourse-power priorities into external propaganda
strategies for use in China’s international communica -
tion work. For example, in a speech at the Central United
Front Work Conference in May 2015, Xi emphasized
68 Jean-Pierre Cabestan, “China’s Foreign and Security Policy Institutions and Decision-Making under
Xi Jinping,” British Journal of Politics and International Relations 23, 2 (2021).
69 Zhang, “国际话语权建设中几大基础性理论问题.”
70 Xinhua, “中共中央印发《深化党和国家机构改革方案》” (“CPC Central Committee Releases ‘Deepening Party and State Institutional Reform
Plan’”), State Council of the People’s Republic of China, March 21, 2018, https://archive.ph/qoiPK; “CCP Central Committee Publishes Plan
for Deepening the Reform of Party and State Agencies,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET), March 18, 2021, https://
cset.georgetown.edu/publication/ccp-central-committee-publishes-plan-for-deepening-the-reform-of-party-and-state-agencies/.
71 “ 组建中央广播电视总台，撤销央视、央广等建制” (“The Central Radio and Television Station was Established, and the
Establishment of CCTV, CCTV, etc. was Abolished”), Xinhua, March 21, 2018, https://archive.ph/6Qewi.
72 “ 固发展最广泛的爱国统一战线” (“Xi Jinping: Consolidate and Develop the Broadest Patriotic United Front”), Xinhua, May 20, 2015, https://archive.ph/DI6Qw.
73 “ 中华人民共和国国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和 2035 年景目标纲要.”
74 Cabestan, “China’s Foreign and Security Policy Institutions and Decision-Making under Xi Jinping”; “Top Diplomat Y ang Jiechi Warns the US Against Playing
‘Taiwan Card,’ Vows China’s Firm Actions to Safeguard Sovereignty in Phone Talk with Sullivan,” Global Times, May 19, 2022, https://archive.ph/08bEE.
75 John Costello and Joe McReynolds, China’s Strategic Support Force: A Force for a New Era (Washington, DC: National Defense University Press, 2018).
the UFWD’s importance in improving China’s dis -
course-power work by providing feedback from its exter-
nal discussion and exchange activities.72 The UFWD is
also a core organization in enhancing China’s “power to
be heard,” described in more detail below.
• Office of the Central Cyberspace Affairs Commission
(CAC). To help guide China’s propaganda work in the
online sphere, the CAC dictates many of the regulations
and guidelines that control how China’s external propa-
ganda flows through platforms to reach its intended audi-
ences. The CAC is also responsible for overseeing much
of the work in China’s 14th Five-Y ear-Plan on “promoting
the construction of a community of common destiny in
cyberspace” by encouraging “international cooperation,”
and by formulating international rules and digital technol-
ogy standards that China can then promote in interna -
tional forums and in its international exchanges.73
• Foreign Affairs Commission (FAC). The FAC is respon-
sible for formulating China’s state-to-state diplomatic
strategy in a way that aligns with party priorities, includ-
ing on its discourse-power-related goal of “telling China’s
story well.” In a shift from previous years, the FAC has
played an increasingly prominent role in the oversight of
China’s diplomacy, as power has shifted away from the
state body in charge of diplomatic affairs, the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs (MFA). One such indicator is that current
Foreign Minister of China Wang Yi is not China’s chief
diplomat, a role that instead falls to FAC General Office
Director Yang Jiechi.74 This is an example of the consoli-
dation of discourse-power work under the party during Xi
Jinping’s tenure.
• Political Work Force of the People’s Liberation Army
(PLA). In addition to party and state agencies, the PLA
also plays an important role in policy guidance for China’s
discourse-power-related work. The PLA houses the
Political Work Force, a “storytelling” entity responsible
for developing discourse-power strategies for burnish-
ing the image of the PLA and amplifying positive sto -
ries about the CCP, both domestically and internation -
ally. According to limited news coverage, these entities
also house the Network Systems Department, which is
responsible for developing and implementing cyber- and
information-warfare capabilities.75

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
14 15
“A fierce battle has begun in the global
public opinion field. This battle is
manifested as a struggle for discourse
power between Western political parties,
led by the United States, and the world’s
progressive parties represented by the
CCP. This struggle is not only a moral
confrontation, but also a strategic game.”
The agencies listed above help to ensure that China’s dis-
course-power operations adhere to party priorities, and that
various strategies follow the correct “direction.” However,
just as important as this internal policy-defining function are
the external communication and dissemination of Chinese
concepts to a broader international audience, which under-
gird China’s “power to be heard.”
The bodies tasked with enhancing China’s “power to be
heard” engage in a variety of tactics for disseminating exter-
nal propaganda, and for seeking to create buy-in among
audiences for China’s messaging. As described above, in
China’s view, gaining support from external audiences is
central for embedding its cultural values within the interna-
tional system; they then come to structure relations between
states through norms (subjective values), as well as rules and
standards (objective values).
One such tactic is “engaging in public opinion battles.” Since
assuming office in 2012, Xi has repeatedly emphasized the
need to engage in and win “public opinion battles” in the
fight to gain international discourse power.76 The militaris-
tic overtones of this phrasing are captured in the People’s
Liberation Army’s “Political Work Regulations,” which outline
“public opinion warfare” as one of the three main types of
political combat styles (along with psychological warfare and
information warfare) that will take place under “information-
alized conditions.”77
The goal of public opinion warfare is to shape global public
opinion to gain international support for China, so that—in
the event of a conflict—China can “coerce opponents into
76 “ 以舆情管理之功完善社会治理体系” (“Improve the Social Governance System with the Power of Public
Opinion Management”), Light of Theory, July 7, 2020, https://archive.ph/2rzuA.
77 Dean Cheng, “Winning Without Fighting: Chinese Public Opinion Warfare and the Need for a Robust American Response,” Heritage Foundation,
November 26, 2012, https://www.heritage.org/asia/report/winning-without-fighting-chinese-public-opinion-warfare-and-the-need-robust-american.
78 Ibid.
79 Jia Wenshan, “全面提升国际话语权的中国探索” (“China’s Exploration of Comprehensively
Enhancing International Discourse Power”), People’s Tribune 29 (2021).
80 “ 《新时代宣传思想工作》第十章 对外宣传工作” (“‘Propaganda and Ideological Work in the New Era’ Chapter 10
External Propaganda Work”), Central Party School Publishing, April 6, 2021, https://archive.ph/B8SIE.
81 Lin Ping, “习近平新时代中国特色社会主义统战思想的鲜明特点” (“Distinctive Features of Xi Jinping’s Socialist United Front
Thought with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era”), Journal of Guangdong Institute of Socialism 1 (2018).
compliance without having to go to war.”78 As one academic
studying methods for Beijing to improve discourse power
put it:
“In the global public opinion field, a fierce battle of public
opinion has just begun and will last for a long time in the
future. This fierce battle of public opinion is manifested as
a struggle for discourse power between Western political
parties led by the United States and the world’s progressive
parties represented by the Communist Party of China. This
struggle is not only a moral confrontation, but also a strate-
gic game.”79
In addition to engaging in public opinion warfare, agencies
tasked with enhancing China’s “power to be heard” are also
encouraged to develop contacts and networks abroad that
can serve as local advocates for Chinese narratives. In April
2021, the CPD released a document outlining the impor -
tance of this tactic in China’s international discourse-power
work. The CPD released the “Propaganda and Ideological
Work in the New Era” (新时代宣传思想工作), essentially a
blueprint outlining the policy guidelines and aims of China’s
“internal and external propaganda work” within the emerg-
ing geopolitical environment.
Chapter 10 of the document, on external propaganda, out-
lines the party’s need to develop “international discourse
power” and defines developing a “circle of international
influencers” as a central strategy for achieving this goal. As
the CPD put it, China must “establish extensive international
contacts, make a group of good ‘friends’ among foreign poli-
ticians, parliamentary political parties, business elites, celeb-
rities from all walks of life, and non-governmental organi -
zations […] and [use this] circle of influencers to spread […]
China to all parts of the world.”80
The United Front Work Department, outlined above and
again below, is tasked with developing this network of influ-
encers. The types of influencers China seeks to capture are
diverse—including scholars, politicians, government offi -
cials, businesspeople, and domestic actors who may serve
as advocates for Chinese policies, and who may serve to fur-
ther Chinese interests.81 Xi emphasized the importance of
this work in a Central Committee speech from May 2021, in
which he stated that China must “expand [its] international
communication through international influencers,” adding
that these “foreign influencers” will be the country’s “top sol-
diers of propaganda against the enemy.”82
Alongside identifying core tactics, China’s leadership has
also identified the regions of the Global South as areas of
particular opportunity for gaining the “power to be heard.”
China sees the Global South as a target for spreading its nar-
rative-framing and governance principles, and as attractive
markets for Chinese infrastructure offerings through plat -
forms like the BRI.
In an influential essay on the topic, published in Xinhua in
February 2017, China scholar He Jianhua wrote that, in order
to overcome the discourse deficit of “the West is strong
while China is weak” (“西强我弱”), China must “find the right
entry points” for its narratives and make them the focus of
their efforts.83 He identified the United Nations, as well as
messaging in the Global South around human rights and
China’s successes in development, as such “entry points.”
He wrote that development is “the most important entry
point and focus for enhancing China’s international influence
as quickly as possible. Because in this field, China has little
political resistance, many friends, and fruitful results, which
can quickly have an impact.”84
“Developing countries in the Middle East
and North Africa, sub-Saharan Africa,
and Latin America are natural allies of
China’s diplomacy.”
For example, China engages in external propaganda mes-
saging that seeks to erode the legitimacy of the liberal dem-
ocratic framework while gaining support for Beijing’s own
international governance model. It does so by crafting nar-
ratives that resonate with target audiences by emphasiz -
ing a shared distrust of Western governments, that criticize
Western interventionism, or that emphasize a shared experi-
ence as “developing countries” (to use China’s term).
One Chinese scholar writes that these shared experiences
make “developing countries in the Middle East and North
82 “ 习近平在中共中央政治局第三十次集体学习时强调 加强和改进国际传播工作 展示真实立体全面的中国” (“During the 30th Collective Study of
the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, Xi Jinping Emphasized Strengthening and Improving International
Communication Work and Showing a True, Three-Dimensional and Comprehensive China”), Xinhua, June 1, 2021, https://archive.ph/XFwgh.
83 He Jianhua, “西强我弱国际话语格局怎样改变” (“How to Change the International Discourse Pattern of ‘The West Is Strong and I Am Weak’”),
Xinhua, February 15, 2017, http://web.archive.org/web/20200810013119/http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2017-02/15/c_1120468174.htm.
84 Ibid .
85 Xiao Xi and Y ang Yizhong, “新形势下世界’中国观’的变化与加快构建中国国际话语权的战略路径” (“Changes in the World’s ‘China View’ under the New
Situation and the Strategic Path to Accelerate the Construction of China’s International Discourse Power”), Jilin University Journal Social Sciences 62, 1 (2022).
86 Ibid.
87 Gerry Groot, “The Expansion of the United Front Under Xi Jinping,” China Story, 2015, https://www.thechinastory.
org/yearbooks/yearbook-2015/forum-ascent/the-expansion-of-the-united-front-under-xi-jinping/.
88 Ryan Fedasiuk, “Putting Money in the Party’s Mouth: How China Mobilizes Funding for United Front Work,” CSET, September 16, 2020,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/article/putting-money-in-the-partys-mouth-how-china-mobilizes-funding-for-united-front-work/.
89 Groot, “The Expansion of the United Front Under Xi Jinping.”
Africa, sub-Saharan Africa, and Latin America” “natural allies”
of China’s diplomacy.85 Organizations such as the United
Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, and others
are viewed as primary platforms for disseminating Chinese
norms, and as best positioned to assert China’s leadership,
allowing Beijing to “build China’s international united front
and strive for more international discourse rights.”86
In short, China sees its power to be heard as relying, in large
part, on the resonance of its messaging; it deploys this mes-
saging by engaging in public opinion battles and expanding
its circle of “foreign influencers.” In doing so, it aims to gain
the support it sees as necessary for shaping a new interna-
tional order.
To this end, a number of party-state, academic, commercial,
and other actors have been tasked by the party to enhance
China’s “power to be heard.”
• United Front Work Department (UFWD). Referenced in
the “power to speak” list above, the UFWD is also largely
responsible for developing the “network of China influ-
encers” essential for gaining support for China’s vision for
the global order. The UFWD has been greatly ramping up
its external propaganda efforts in recent years. Under Xi,
the UFWD added more than forty thousand new mem-
bers in the first few years after 2012. 87 A Jamestown
Foundation report estimated that “organizations cen -
tral to China’s national and regional united front sys -
tems spent more than $2.6 billion in 2019 alone, exceed-
ing funding for China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs,” with
almost a quarter of these funds earmarked for external
propaganda.88 China created the leading small group on
United Front Work in 2015 with Xi leading it, ensuring the
Central Committee directly oversees its work.89
 As part of their efforts to win influencers for China, UFWD
organizations will often host conferences or events ded-
icated to promoting Chinese governance principles.
For example, each year, the UFWD of Zhejiang prov -
ince co-hosts the World Zhejiang Business Conference.
Attendees in 2019 included more than two thousand
senior party officials, Zhejiang businessmen, repre -
sentatives of China’s major state-owned enterprises
(SOEs) and industry associations in China, Fortune 500

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
16 17
companies, foreign experts and scholars, and represen-
tatives from foreign industry, business, academia, and
government. The main goals of the convention include
“comprehensively deepening exchanges and coopera-
tion between Zhejiang and the rest of the world” in order
to “promote the achievements of [China’s] development
model and the glory of its national strength.”90
• Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference
(CPPCC). The CPPCC is a consultative political body
comprising more than two thousand representatives from
different sectors of Chinese society. It is supervised by
the UFWD and liaises with non-CCP members to advance
party interests.91 The CPPCC is chaired by the Politburo
Standing Committee member in charge of overseeing
UFWD operations. According to China’s constitution,
one of the CPPCC’s main tasks is to create an “Influencer
Sphere” (朋友圈) for China. The BRI is a locus of activ -
ity for various UFWD organizations, including the CPPCC,
as it represents both a platform for fostering China’s
economic development and a way to “expand united
front activities to a global scale.” 92 In 2015, the UFWD
instructed lower-level departments to focus on influ -
ence activities that would advance economic coopera-
tion among the BRI and to “create favorable international
environment through propaganda and exchange activ-
ities.”93 Part of these efforts involves expanding China’s
circle of influence, with which the CPPCC is tasked, thus
increasing China’s power to be heard.
• International Liaison Department (ILD). The ILD con-
ducts party-to-party exchanges on behalf of the CCP. It
popularizes and promotes CCP discourse-power con -
cepts and policies to socialist political parties. As of 2020,
China’s ILD claims to have established relationships with
more than six hundred political parties and organiza -
tions from more than one hundred and sixty countries.
For example, in Latin America, China’s ILD convened
more than three hundred meetings with more than sev-
enty-four political groups across the region during a fif-
teen-year period beginning in 2002. 94 These engage-
ments focused on gaining political support for China’s
activities and initiatives along the BRI, proselytizing the
90 “ 世界浙商大会” (“The World Zhejiang Entrepreneurs Convention”), Baidu Baike, last updated May 3, 2022, https://archive.ph/Z9alZ.
91 Alex Joske, “The Party Speaks for Y ou,” ASPI, June 9, 2020, 5, https://www.aspi.org.au/report/party-speaks-you.
92 Lin, “习近平新时代中国特色社会主义统战思想的鲜明特点.”
93 Y ang Weimin, “‘一带一路’战略与海外统一战线的拓展——以浙江实践为例” (“‘The Belt and Road’ Strategy and the Expansion of the
Overseas United Front—Taking the Practice of Zhejiang as an Example”), Journal of Chongqing Institute of Socialism 87, 4 (2016).
94 ” 中联部简介: 我部简介,” International Department, Central Committee of the CPC, https://archive.ph/aFVh7; Ryan C.
Berg and Thiago de Aragão, “Is Latin America Important to China’s Foreign Policy?” Center for Strategic and International
Studies, September 9, 2021, https://www.csis.org/analysis/latin-america-important-chinas-foreign-policy.
95 Ibid.
96 “ 政党携手，共铸人类命运共同体” (“Political Parties Join Hands to Build a Community with a Shared
Future for Mankind”), Sohu, February 13, 2018, https://archive.ph/c00W0.
97 “ 中国共产党与世界政党高层对话会” (“High-level Dialogue between the Communist Party of China and the World
Political Parties”), Keywords to Understand China, January 19, 2020, https://archive.ph/ZATBC.
98 “ 政党携手,” Sohu.
99 Ibid.
efficacy of its governance system, and spreading positive
messages about China’s role in global governance.95
 As with the work of the UFWD, the BRI provides an
important organizing function for the activities of the ILD.
In March 2018, Minister of the ILD Song Tao highlighted
that the ILD’s role was to spearhead an initiative to build
a “community of common destiny” among countries
in the BRI and with political parties around the globe, a
“new type of political party relationship” that reflects the
“new type of international relations” on which China’s
vision for a new global order is built.96 Each year, the ILD
hosts a “Chinese Communist Party and World Political
Parties High-level Dialogue” in Beijing. In January 2020,
delegates representing more than two hundred politi -
cal parties and organizations from more than one hun-
dred and twenty countries attended the meeting. The
event included panels, closed-door discussions, and
exchanges between participants on topics including the
role of political parties in “jointly pursuing the BRI,” among
others.97
• Universities and think tanks. Universities and think tanks
facilitate international exchange programs and other
cooperation projects, most often under the auspices of
the BRI. In doing so, they help to promote Chinese con-
ceptions of global governance. In 2018, then Secretary
of the Party Committee of Peking University Hao Ping
pledged the university would “make good use of various
international talent training platforms and international
exchange platforms to cultivate outstanding talents […]
and lay a solid foundation for China’s [governance con-
cepts] through [their] integration.” 98 Renmin University
Party Secretary Jin Nuo and Tsinghua University Party
Secretary Chen Xu made similar pledges, with Nuo stat-
ing the university would work to “actively serve the coun-
try’s diplomatic needs, attract more foreign students to
China, and help more young people to expand their inter-
national horizons,” and Chen stating Tsinghua would
“encourage teachers and students to play a role in inter-
national scientific research cooperation, think tank con-
struction, academic organization and standard setting” in
service of China’s discourse-power goals.99
• Industry associations and commercial actors. The CPD
describes firms as “irreplaceable” in conducting exter -
nal propaganda work and spreading norms of Chinese
governance, and claims that the BRI especially has given
Chinese-funded enterprises the “wings to go global.”100
Discussing guidelines for firm behavior, the CPD urges
Chinese-funded enterprises to be “proactive in publicity”
and to “create a corporate image of compliant operation,
honesty and trustworthiness, and enthusiasm for public
welfare, as well as a brand image of independent innova-
tion and excellent quality.”101
• Multilateral and regional organizations. China often
leverages multilateral organizations to win over interna-
tional “influencers” who understand their domestic envi-
ronments and are able to promote Chinese concepts local-
ly.102 As outlined in previous DFRLab reports, this strategy is
what Chinese scholars call the “subcutaneous injection (皮
下注射)” theory of communications, which holds that local
influencers are able to ensure a more rapid dissemination
of Chinese concepts in a particular region.103 China has
been deepening its engagement in regional organizations
over the past two decades. For example, Dawn Murphy
traces China’s post-2000 engagement in Sub-Saharan
Africa and the Middle East through the establishment of
two regional organizations, FOCAC in 2000 and the China-
Arab States Cooperation Forum (CASCF) in 2004, and the
use of these platforms to advocate “for changes to [some]
norms of the current order, including those related to
democracy promotion and human rights.”104
• Media organizations. These agencies are responsible
for much of the external propaganda work core to China’s
“power to be heard,” and for engaging in the “public opin-
ion struggles” mentioned by Xi and described above. The
CPD is responsible for directing the propaganda work of
the government bodies involved in the broadcast media
aspect of this “public opinion” struggle, including Xinhua
100 “ 《新时代宣传思想工作》第十章 对外宣传工作.”
101 Ibid.
102 Zhao Xinli, “积极通过国际友人开展国际传播” (“Actively Carry out International Communication through International Friends”), Public Diplomacy
Quarterly 3 (2021), https://caod.oriprobe.com/articles/62415542/ji_ji_tong_guo_guo_ji_you_ren_kai_zhan_guo_ji_chua.htm.
103 Thibaut, China’s Discourse Power Operations in the Global South.
104 Dawn C. Murphy, China’s Rise in the Global South: The Middle East, Africa, and Beijing’s Alternative
World Order (Redwood City, CA: Stanford University Press, 2022), 5.
105 Zhao, “积极通过国际友人开展国际传播.”
106 Chinese Discourse Power: China’s Use of Information Manipulation in Regional and Global Competition, Atlantic Council, December
2020, 1–25, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/China-Discouse-Power-FINAL.pdf.
107 Sarah Cook, “Beijing’s Global Megaphone: The Expansion of Chinese Communist Party Media Influence since 2017,” Freedom House, January
2020, https://freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/2020-02/01152020_SR_China_Global_Megaphone_with_Recommendations_PDF.pdf.
108 “RCEP Media & Think Tank Forum,” China Daily, last visited June 24, 2022, https://archive.ph/xt6Vo.
In Latin America, the CCP’s
International Liaison Department
convened more than three hundred
meetings with more than seventy-four
political groups from 2002-2017. These
engagements focused on gaining
support for the BRI, and spreading
positive messages about China’s
socialist system and its role in global
governance.
 News Agency, China Media Group, and the National
Press and Publication Administration. The CCP’s news-
paper, the People’s Daily, was also placed under Xinhua
management, partly in an effort to “improve the quality
ofexternal propaganda.”105
• The State Council Information Office (SCIO). The SCIO
(also known as the Central Office of Foreign Propaganda)
is overseen by China’s State Council, and is tasked with
“telling a positive China story to the world,” including pub-
licizing and promoting Chinese governance norms. 106
The SCIO oversees the national English-language state-
run news publication China Daily, which, like the CPD-
run Xinhua, has signed content-sharing agreements
with local media organizations in other countries, with a
recent focus on countries connected to the BRI.107 China
Daily also works alongside national and local-level pro-
paganda departments to organize platforms like the
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Media &
Think Tank Roundtable Forum, which, among other aims,
popularizes Chinese governance concepts to Asian audi-
ences that include officials, ambassadors, media repre-
sentatives, businesspersons, and scholars.108

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
18 19
HOW CHINA HAS CENTERED
CONNECTIVITY IN ITS DISCOURSE-
POWER AMBITIONS
109 Chen, “陈文辉详解数字经济投资逻辑：得平台者得天下.”
110 Hillman, The Digital Silk Road, xii.
111 James McBride and Andrew Chatzky, “Is ‘Made in China 2025’ a Threat to Global Trade?” Council on Foreign Relations, May 13, 2019, https://www.
cfr.org/backgrounder/made-china-2025-threat-global-trade; Rogier Creemers, “Outline of the National Informatization Development Strategy,”
Digichina, July 27, 2016, https://digichina.stanford.edu/work/outline-of-the-national-informatization-development-strategy; “科技部关于印发《国家新
一代人工智能开放创新平台建设工作指引》的通知” (“Notice on the Publication of the Guidance on National New Generation Artificial Intelligence
Open Innovation Platform Construction Work”), State Council of the People’s Republic of China, August 4, 2019, https://archive.ph/QHdZR.
112 Daniel Rechtschaffen, “Why China’s Data Regulations Are a Compliance Nightmare for Companies,” Diplomat, June 27, 2019,
https://thediplomat.com/2019/06/why-chinas-data-regulations-are-a-compliance-nightmare-for-companies/.
113 “Personal Information Protection Law of the People’s Republic of China,” National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic of China,
December 29, 2021, http://web.archive.org/web/20220113105908/http://en.npc.gov.cn.cdurl.cn/2021-12/29/c_694559.htm.
C
hina’s leadership has been transparent in both outlin-
ing its goals for gaining discourse power and imple-
menting a strategy for doing so. However, in recent
years, Chinese official and academic writings also show that
the CCP has come to see the digital arena as crucial in its
discourse-power strategy, seeing the opportunities brought
about by the Fourth Industrial Revolution as offering a chance
to overcome its current discourse-power deficit and gain a
strategic advantage over the United States.
As one Chinese government official wrote in July 2020,
“technological changes in different periods throughout his-
tory not only bring about economic changes, but also affect
changes in the global power structure […]The digital econ-
omy is prompting a reshuffle, and China has the opportunity
to gain a first-mover advantage.”109 Beijing has made clear
its intentions to command the digital world, announcing its
aims to dominate advanced-technology manufacturing by
2025, to lead in international standards setting by 2035, and
to become a “cyber superpower” by 2050.110
These goals are supported by a number of major policy
initiatives. These include, among others, “Made in China
2025,” passed in 2015, which outlined China’s ambitions
to transition from the world’s factory to a lead supplier and
developer of advanced technologies by 2025; the “National
Informatization Development Strategy (2016-2020),” which
urged companies to invest abroad to support China’s Digital
Silk Road; and the Ministry of Science and Technology’s
“Notice on the Publication of the Guidance on National New
Generation Artificial Intelligence Open Innovation Platform
Construction Work” (科技部关于印发《国家新一代人工智
能开放创新平台建设工作指引》的通知 ), which provides
guidelines for Chinese companies to build open innovation
platforms to develop AI technologies.111
To facilitate the implementation of these policies, China has
also passed a number of laws that grant the CCP expanded
oversight of the mechanisms of the digital economy. The
Cyber Security Law, implemented in 2017, grants the Chinese
government extensive power to control and request access
to information held by firms within its borders.112 Article 2 of
the law states that it applies to Chinese companies abroad,
as well as those operating domestically. Similarly, the
Personal Information Protection Law (中华人民共和国个人
信息保护法), which took effect in November 2021, provides
no protection against government access to private informa-
tion, and citizens must still provide their data if they are des-
ignated as being in the interest of China’s national security.113
In support of its ambitions to become a cyber superpower,
China has developed a concerted strategy to gain interna-
tional discourse power via the digital domain. It has done
so by using social and digital media of all varieties to seed
its influence, and by shaping the governance of the digital
infrastructure upon which these platforms are built and run
through the promotion of CCP-approved norms.
“Technological changes in different
periods throughout history not only
bring about economic changes, but
also affect changes in the global power
structure…The digital economy is
prompting a reshuffle, and China has
the opportunity to gain a first-mover
advantage.”
As detailed below, China has envisioned and developed
a concerted strategy designed to center itself at the heart
of a digitally connected world. China’s leadership believes
that by centering Beijing in this way, it can achieve its goals
of shifting the global order to further ensure the continued
power of the CCP.
Discourse Power in the Digital
Domain: Using Social and Digital
Media to Shape Local Information
Environments
One primary way in which China aims to gain the “power
to speak” and the “power to be heard” in the digital realm
is by leveraging social and other media platforms to shape
local information environments by spreading pro-China pro-
paganda, engaging in transnational repression to suppress
potential detractors, and otherwise shaping the information
environment to suit its priorities.
China’s view of the utility and timeliness of this approach
is spelled out plainly in an April 2021 guiding policy doc -
ument released by the CPD on shoring up China’s “exter-
nal public opinion work.” The document stated that “the
rapid development of the internet has accelerated the pro-
cess of networkization and digitization of the international
mainstream media. The internet is reshaping the interna -
tional public opinion pattern and the international media
ecology and has increasingly become an important battle-
field for major powers to compete for discourse power.”114

These views are also reflected in Chinese scholarly writ -
ings, including those funded by Chinese state and party
bodies for the express purpose of developing strategies to
gain discourse power.115 These works expound extensively
on the utility of new Internet and information technologies
for enhancing China’s discourse power, describing them as
having become “key carriers for the dissemination of main-
stream ideological discourse.”116
China sees gaining proficiency in these platforms as
an opportunity to overcome Western dominance of the
media system. In the Chinese view, the dominant position
of Western countries in international communication has
cemented their international discourse dominance. As one
scholar bemoaned, “Western countries, relying on the com-
munication systems constructed by news media such as
CNN and BBC and social media such as Facebook, Twitter,
and Y ouTube, exert extensive and huge discourse influence
in the world, and these discourses carry a large number of
Western values.”117
114 “ 《新时代宣传思想工作》第十章 对外宣传工作.”
115 For example, the first work cited in this paragraph was funded by the National Social Science Fund in 2020. See: Hua Zhengxue, “中国新型政党制度建构
国际话语权的三大战略” (“Three Strategies for China’s New Political Party System to Build International Discourse Power”), Gansu Zhengxue 3 (2021).
116 Ibid.
117 “ 国际话语权之争” (“The Battle for International Discourse”), People’s Tribune 29 (2021).
118 “Xi Focus: Showing the Way Forward to Convey China’s Stories Globally,” Xinhua, January 7, 2022, https://archive.ph/kbcpI.
119 Yu Y an, “中国媒体国际话语权建构探析——以“西方反华媒体炒作新疆棉事件”为例” (“An Analysis of the Construction of Chinese Media’s
International Discourse Power—Taking ‘Western Anti-China Media Hype Xinjiang Cotton Incident’ as an Example”), Press Outpost 5 (2022).
120 “China-Proposed BRI Welcomed in ‘Global South’: the Guardian,” Xinhua, April 7, 2022, https://archive.ph/osa3G.
121 Ibid.
122 Thibaut, China’s Discourse Power Operations in the Global South.
123 “About Us,” StarTimes, https://archive.fo/oFAB2; “StarTimes to Broadcast Program to Boost Sino-
Africa Relations,” Xinhua, January 29, 2021, https://archive.fo/3Omoa.
124 Eric Olander, “China’s StarTimes is Now One of Africa’s Most Important Media Companies,” China Africa Project, August 27,
2017, https://chinaafricaproject.com/ podcasts/podcast-china-africa-startimes-media-tv-dani-madrid-morales/.
Picking up on this theme in a June 2021 speech to the
Central Committee, Xi urged the party to “carefully build a
foreign discourse system, give full play to the role of emerg-
ing media, enhance the creativity, appeal, and credibility
of foreign discourse, tell Chinese stories, spread Chinese
voices, and explain Chinese characteristics well.”118 A state-
funded study of ways to enhance China’s discourse power
noted the utility of social media platforms in gaining an
advantage, stating “every individual can use social media
to spread Chinese ideas and development achievements to
the outside world and defend China’s image” through public
opinion battles.119
The BRI is a primary framing device around which
China operationalizes its discourse-power activities
in the digital media realm. For example, in March 2017 ,
Xinhua launched a website with additional languages—
English, French, Spanish, Russian, and Arabic—specifically
dedicated to promoting BRI-related news, including promot-
ing concepts of Chinese global governance. As with other
areas, China has deployed these tactics with a focus
on the Global South. An April 2022 article features the
headline, “China-Proposed BRI welcomed in Global South”
and quotes an opinion article in the Guardian stating that the
BRI “has brought hundreds of billions of dollars to the devel-
oping world in the form of infrastructure, public health and
digital connectivity, and been ‘avidly welcomed’ in ‘Global
South.’”120 It also highlighted that “China’s global vision […]
challenges the power of the rich countries and the free-mar-
ket principles of the liberal international order, but it also
holds out the promise of solving some of the most intracta-
ble and destabilizing problems facing humanity.”121
The DFRLab has previously reported on some of China’s
recent digital media efforts.122 For example, Chinese tele -
vision company StarTimes, which offers relatively low-cost
cable packages to African subscribers, now has more than
thirteen million subscribers across the continent.123 As part
of its digital offerings, StarTimes features several channels
devoted to promoting Chinese narratives, including those
promoting China’s image as a “benevolent and responsible
world power.”124 In October 2021, it debuted a new program
called the “China-Africa Express” to promote Chinese nar-
ratives, including those celebrating a shared China-Africa

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
20 21
experience as “developing countries” and promoting
Chinese concepts of democracy and human rights.125
In a document examining China’s external propaganda
activities released in June 2021, the CPD praised the
strides China has made with international media in recent
years, stating, “relevant key foreign propaganda media
have made great strides to go overseas, deeply imple -
mented localization strategies […] from topic selection to
language and style, external reports are closer to over -
seas audiences, and the originality, speed, view count, and
citation rate of news reports have greatly increased.” 126
“The rapid development of the
internet has accelerated the process
of networkization and digitization
of the international mainstream
media. The internet is reshaping the
international public opinion pattern and
the international media ecology and
has increasingly become an important
battlefield for major powers to compete
for discourse power.”

In addition to digital media, China has increasingly used
social media platforms to engage in discourse-power-re -
lated activities. Tactics range from being relatively central-
ized and overt (for example, in messaging from official dip-
lomatic accounts) to more decentralized and covert (for
example, inauthentic amplification of Chinese narratives on
Twitter by an army of fake bots).
In one of its more well-known tactics, China has leveraged
these platforms to conduct “public opinion battles” under
what is known as “wolf warrior diplomacy,” a term that has
largely come to describe the combative and pugnacious
attitude of Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs officials, dip-
lomats, and spokespeople in defending China and attack-
ing critics, largely on Twitter. 127 Wolf-warrior diplomacy is
thought to be a tactic both in response to top-down bureau-
cratic pressure to present China as “confidently rising” and
125 “ 上新丨四达时代集团首档中非交流资讯节目‘中非直通车’正式起航” (”StarTimes Group’s First China-Africa Exchange
Information Program ‘ChinaAfrica Express’ Officially Set Sail”), WeChat, October 11, 2021, https://archive.ph/NOz2j.
126 “ 《新时代宣传思想工作》第十章 对外宣传工作.”
127 Jonathan Sullivan and Weixiang Wang, “China’s ‘Wolf Warrior Diplomacy’: The Interaction of Formal
Diplomacy and Cyber-Nationalism,” Journal of Current Chinese Affairs (2022).
128 Ibid.
129 Ben Nimmo, Ira Hubert, and Y ang Cheng, “Spamouflage Breakout: Chinese Spam Network Finally Starts to Gain Some Traction,”
Graphika, February 2021, https://public-assets.graphika.com/reports/graphika_report_spamouflage_breakout.pdf.
130 Ibid.
131 Ibid.
132 “China: Free Xinjiang ‘Political Education’ Detainees,” Human Rights Watch, September 10, 2017, https://
www.hrw.org/news/2017/09/10/china-free-xinjiang-political-education-detainees.
in bottom-up incentives generated by popular nationalists
online in China.128
In addition to “wolf warriorism,” China’s tactics on social
media include more covert activities, including undertaking
information operations on both Western and Chinese plat-
forms and using social media to target and harass potential
detractors.
One tactic that state-linked actors employ on social media
is aimed at increasing China’s international standing by pro-
moting CCP-approved narratives while criticizing Western
countries.129 The narrative content of this messaging is
informed by centralized guidance from the CPD. The tactics
here involve messaging—pushed by state media and gov-
ernment officials—targeted at a broad international audience
in both Chinese and English, which is then amplified by net-
works of pro-China accounts.
For example, Graphika identified a network of fake accounts
on Twitter, which it named “Spamouflage,” that engaged in
coordinated inauthentic manipulation elevating CCP pro -
paganda. In one case, after articles emerged in mid-Janu-
ary detailing the low efficacy of China’s Sinovac COVID-19
vaccine, the network engaged in a coordinated campaign
to republish disinformation that questioned the safety of the
US-produced Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine. These posts were
then amplified “hundreds of times” by Chinese official and
diplomatic Twitter accounts.130
Chinese actors will also deploy these Twitter networks to
address short-term “crises” in response to significant for -
eign policy events. Such operations include instances of
widespread messaging on Y ouTube, Twitter, and Facebook
targeting the Hong Kong protests in September 2019, pro-
China COVID-19 messaging beginning in February 2020,
and the launch of English-language Y ouTube channels in
June 2020.131
For example, China engaged in widespread media and
social media activity in 2017 following reports in Western
media about detentions of Uyghur Muslims in China’s west-
ern province of Xinjiang. 132 According to a 2019 dataset
released by Twitter that tracked almost twenty-three thou-
sand accounts originating in the People’s Republic of China
from 2014 to August 2017, just seven hundred and sixty-one
Chinese-language tweets were sent from the China-based
accounts identified in the Twitter dataset; this number sky-
rocketed to 37,935 in October and 47,041 in November 2017,
immediately following increasing international attention on
Xinjiang.133
Topics related to China’s “core issues” often involve more
sophisticated and covert tactics.134 Discourse-power-related
online activities touching on Hong Kong, Taiwan indepen-
dence, and other highly sensitive topics related to China’s
territorial or political sovereignty likely fall under the pur -
view of the PLA—more specifically, Base 311, the psy -
chological-warfare unit of the People’s Liberation Army
Strategic Support Force (PLASSF), which oversees China’s
information-warfare operations.135 China’s Central Military
Commission, which Xi Jinping leads, established the
PLASSF in December 2015 as part of a broader military
restructuring.136
While direct attribution is difficult due to the covert nature
of Base 311 operations, a number of suspected Chinese-
language disinformation operations have been identified
by investigative journalists, media, and civil-society groups
regarding elections in Taiwan.137 This included the run-up
to Taiwan’s 2020 presidential election, during which China
sought to sow negative stories about incumbent Tsai Ing-
wen in an effort to bolster its preferred candidate.138 In addi-
tion, Nathan Beauchamp-Mustafaga and Michael Chase
have conducted extensive research on Chinese mili -
tary technical writings on “cognitive domain operations”
(renzhiyu zuozhan, 认知域作战) to show that the PLA is
“developing technologies for subliminal messaging, deep
fakes, overt propaganda, and public sentiment analysis on
Facebook, Twitter, LINE, and other platforms.”139
133 “China,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute, September 19, 2019, https://infoops.aspi.org.au/country/china/.
134 Teddy Ng and Minnie Chan, “Hong Kong Added to Beijing’s List of ‘Core Interests’ amid Post-Occupy Unease,” South China Morning Post, January
29, 2015, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1694486/hong-kong- added-beijings-list-core-interests-amid-post-occupy-unease.
135 For more on how China’s military uses social media for influence operations, see: Nathan Beauchamp-Mustafaga and Michael S. Chase, “Borrowing
a Boat Out to Sea: The Chinese Military’s Use of Social Media for Influence Operations,” SAIS Foreign Policy Institute, April 13, 2019.
136 Li Bicheng, Hu Huaping, and Xiong Y a, “Intelligent Agent Model for Online Public Opinion Guidance” (“
网络舆情引导智能代理模型”), National Defense Science & T echnology 3 (2019).
137 J. Michael Cole and Shelley Shan, “PRC Steps Up Psychological Warfare Targeted at Taiwan,” Taipei Times, August 26, 2011, https://
www.taipeitimes.com/News/front/archives/2011/08/26/2003511686; Mark Stokes and Russell Hsiao, The People’s Liberation Army
General Political Department: Political Warfare with Chinese Characteristics, Project 2049 Institute, October 14, 2013, https://project2049.
net/2013/10/14/the-peoples-liberation-army-general-political-department-political-warfare-with-chinese-characteristics/.
138 Joshua Kurlantzick, “How China Is Interfering in Taiwan’s Election,” Council on Foreign Relations,
November 7, 2019, https://www.cfr.org/in-brief/how-china-interfering-taiwans-election.
139 Beauchamp-Mustafaga and Chase, Borrowing a Boat Out to Sea.
140 “China-Linked WeChat Accounts Spread Disinformation in Advance of 2021 Canadian Election,” DFRLab, November 4, 2021, https://
medium.com/dfrlab/china-linked-wechat-accounts-spread-disinformation-in-advance-of-2021-canadian-election-cb5a8389049.
141 Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian, “China’s Long Arm Reaches into American Campuses,” Foreign Policy, March 7, 2018, https://foreignpolicy.
com/2018/03/07/chinas-long-arm-reaches-into-american-campuses-chinese- students-scholars-association-university-communist-party/.
142 Manchester CSSA, “「学联活动」线上投票 ·“经七十载风雨 颂繁荣华夏” 写给祖国的三行情书&摄影大赛” (“(CSSA Activity) Online
Voting ‘after 70 Y ears of Wind and Rain, Praise the Prosperity of China’ Love Letter & Photography Contest for the Motherland”),
WeChat, October 28, 2019, https://archive.ph/DXQ1Y; Imperial CSSA, “【学联活动】《我和我的祖国》电影包场庆祝活动” (“(CSSA
Activity) ‘My People, My Country’ Private Movie Celebration Event”), WeChat, October 1, 2019, https://archive.ph/hsvEH.
143 Glasgow CSSA, “招募 | “青春，为祖国歌唱”—《我和我的祖国》快闪招募令” (“Recruiting: ‘Y outh, Singing for Our
Motherland’—“Me and My Country” Flash Recruitment”), WeChat, June 25, 2019, https://archive.ph/0BGcS.
144 Glasgow CSSA, “发声 | 我在英国，我支持祖国！留学生合唱团正式出道！” (“Vocalize: I Am in the UK, I Support the
Motherland! International Students Choir Officially Debuted!”), WeChat, August 18, 2019, https://archive.ph/th2MS.
Lastly, other covert activities include leveraging social media
platforms to target diaspora populations abroad and engage
in transnational repression. For example, regarding the ded-
icated targeting of Chinese diaspora, a DFRLab study in
2021 showed that in the run-up to the Canadian elections,
diaspora populations in a largely Chinese-speaking area of
Toronto were targeted with disinformation on the Chinese
messaging platform WeChat regarding a conservative can-
didate who was tough on China. The candidate later lost the
election.140
Similarly, state-linked actors have used WeChat to encour-
age offline political activities, such as through Chinese
Students and Scholars Associations (CSSAs), which are uni-
versity organizations for Chinese students studying abroad.
CSSAs are student-run groups with ties to the Chinese
embassy in the countries in which they operate. CSSAs offi-
cially help new arrivals with student life, monitor their actions,
and occasionally organize pro-China protests and political
activities offline.141
For example, China’s National Day in 2019 occurred during
the peak of the Hong Kong protests and saw many activ -
ities and organized events. For that National Day, the
Manchester, United Kingdom, CSSA encouraged students
to participate in a “love letter” and photography contest to
display their love for the motherland, and the Imperial CSSA
rented out a movie theater to play a state-propaganda mov-
ie.142 In June 2019, the Glasgow CSSA called for its members
to form a choir as part of a project to film a patriotic music vid-
eo.143 Members of the same choir were also likely present in
a National Day protest against the Hong Kong demonstra-
tions two months later, with students chanting slogans such
as “one nation one China” and “we are family, we love Hong
Kong, we love China.”144 One post on the Glasgow CSSA
WeChat account contained tips for how to “be patriotic” and

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
22 23
engage in effective protest to support China’s stance on
Hong Kong.145
In addition to these activities, China uses these platforms
to target dissidents. In a 2022 report, Freedom House cat-
egorized China as one of the “most prolific perpetrators of
transnational repression.”146 Researchers have tracked how
China has developed sophisticated social-media-monitor-
ing software to track potential targets, and have outlined the
Chinese government’s ability to easily access user metadata
and content from Chinese social media companies. 147 For
example, in August 2019, the Uyghur Human Rights Project
obtained screenshots of threatening WeChat messages sent
by Chinese security personnel in China to Uyghurs residing
in the United States, urging them to come back to the main-
land and threatening their family members.148
In China’s view, it gains the “power to speak” by using these
platforms to transmit a consistent and coherent message on
China’s vision of itself and its role in the world, and by tak-
ing the “power to speak” away from potential detractors.
It gains the “power to be heard” by infiltrating information
ecosystems and trying to create the perception of growing
acceptance of Chinese norms and concepts. The StarTimes
program on China-Africa cooperation under Chinese gover-
nance principles is an example of this tactic.
However, China’s leaders understand that there are limita-
tions to digital and social media. In order to truly gain a dis-
course-power advantage vis-à-vis the West, and to fully ben-
efit from the opportunities brought by the digital age, China’s
leaders recognize the need to control the future direction of
global connectivity by shaping norms of global governance.
Gaining Discourse Power by
Promoting “Cyber Sovereignty”
China has sought to embed the CCP-defined norm of “cyber
sovereignty” in global digital-governance architecture as a
means of achieving this dominance over global connectiv-
ity. Far from just an empty phrase, “cyber sovereignty” has
implications for activities ranging from how data are stored
and used to establishing the critical technical standards that
determine which countries stand to gain from the future dig-
ital economy.
145 Glasgow CSSA, “分享 | 面对“远音”，海外留学生应如何理性表达爱国声音?” (“Share: In Face of the ‘Noise,’ How Should
Overseas Student Rationally Express Their Patriotic Voice?”), WeChat, November 29, 2019, https://archive.ph/mfsmN.
146 Y ana Gorokhovskaia and Isabel Linzer, “Defending Democracy in Exile: Policy Responses to Transnational Repression,” Freedom
House, June 2022, 27, https://freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/2022-06/Complete_TransnationalRepressionReport2022.
147 Adrian Shahbaz and Allie Funk, “Social Media Surveillance,” Freedom House, 2019, https://freedomhouse.
org/report/freedom-on-the-net/2019/the-crisis-of-social-media/social-media-surveillance.
148 “Repression Across Borders: The CCP’s Illegal Harassment and Coercion of Uyghur Americans,” Uyghur Human Rights
Project, August 2019, https://uhrp.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/UHRP_RepressionAcrossBorders-2-2.pdf.
149 Segal, “China’s Vision for Cyber Sovereignty and the Global Governance of Cyberspace.”
“Cyber sovereignty” (网络主权), also termed “network sov-
ereignty,” holds that state governments should have total
control of the Internet traffic within their borders. Cyber
sovereignty represents China’s vision for a global digital
order and derives from its preferred international norms
of mutual non-interference and respect for sovereignty, as
well as its preference for multilateralism (over multistake -
holderism). China’s external propaganda narratives depict
Beijing’s activities in the digital sphere as ultimately aimed
at granting countries more power over the development
direction of their digital economies, and Beijing has pro -
moted the norm of “cyber sovereignty” in various inter -
national organizations, technical standards-setting bod -
ies, and in the commercial relations Chinese firms have
with countries interested in Chinese digital infrastructure.
“The construction of international
discourse power should make efforts
in the following two areas at the same
time: first, actively participate in existing
international organizations with
universal influence, improve China’s
voting rights and decision-making power
in them, and strengthen China’s ability
to guide agendas and decision-making.
Second, vigorously take advantage of
emerging areas such as cyberspace
governance to gain a strategic
advantage, create new mechanisms for
global affairs governance.”
In actuality, however, China’s strategy is less about a true
attempt to make the digital world more inclusive and more
about supporting the Chinese government’s leadership
goals. Boosting its economic growth and protecting its abil-
ity to exert political control domestically are two major goals
of China’s promotion of cyber sovereignty. As Adam Segal
puts it, “cyber sovereignty represents a pushback against
the attempted universalization of [Western] norms [regarding
privacy, free speech, access to information, and the role of
regulation] that has become the default of the current oper-
ating system, as well as a reassertion of the priority of gov-
ernments over non-state actors.”149
In other words, “cyber sovereignty” is a normative concept
designed to provide an alternative governance framework to
that of Western democracies, which emphasize that cyber-
space should be free, open, and governed by a bottom-up
approach of civil-society, private-sector, and technical-com-
munity actors, as well as governments. 150 By gaining dis -
course power in the digital sphere, the CCP is better posi-
tioned to shape the international environment in a way that
facilitates the expression of Chinese power.
Indeed, “cyber sovereignty” carries with it specific regula-
tory and policy implications for the digital domain. Countries
included in the BRI, for example, are offered a global gov-
ernance framework that legitimizes government freedom to
control and access data, digital-platform content, and other
online elements for whatever purposes they wish. 151 This
includes potentially censoring and controlling online media
spaces or tracking and limiting citizens expression and orga-
nizing in the name of state security.
For example, a 2019 study by the Australian Strategic Policy
Institute detailed the deep role Chinese telecommunica -
tions company Huawei has played in spreading China’s
vision of cybersecurity in Belarus, one of the transport gate-
way countries in the BRI linking China with European Union
and Central European countries.152 In a 2018 report, Freedom
House reported that China had conducted such trainings
with government officials in at least thirty-five countries on
topics related to cyber management and new information
technologies.153
Also embedded within the norm of “cyber sovereignty” is
China’s approach to international engagement on digital
affairs, which can be characterized as multilateral (i.e., gov-
ernment to government) versus multistakeholder (i.e., includ-
ing civil-society and nongovernment actors in the engage-
ment process). This is because China views multistakeholder
mechanisms as being organized around Western-approved
“universal values” rather than organized around government
interests, which China views as the core benefit of multilat-
eral organizations.154 As such, China promotes organizations
and platforms that promote high-level state-to-state engage-
ment in the digital-governance domain.
150 See, for example: “The Five ‘Ideals,’” New America, https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/reports/idealized-internet-vs-internet-realities/
the-five-ideals/; “International Strategy for Cyberspace,” White House, May 16, 2011, https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/blog/2011/05/16/launching-us-
international-strategy-cyberspace; “DoD Cyber Strategy [April 15],” US Department of Defense, April 2015, https://www.hsdl.org/?view&did=764848.
151 Robert Greene and Paul Triolo, “Will China Control the Global Internet Via Its Digital Silk Road?” Carnegie Endowment, May 8,
2020, https://carnegieendowment.org/2020/05/08/will-china-control-global-internet-via-its-digital-silk-road-pub-81857.
152 Danielle Cave, et al., “Mapping China’s Tech Giants,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute, April 18, 2019, https://www.aspi.org.au/report/mapping-chinas-tech-giants.
153 “Freedom on the Net 2018,” Freedom House, October 2018, https://freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/FOTN_2018_Final.pdf.
154 Zhang, “China’s Multilateral Diplomacy.”
155 “ 习近平在中共中央政治局第三十四次集体学习时强调 把握数字经济发展趋势和规律 推动我国数字经济健康发展” (“During the 34th Collective Study
of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, Xi Jinping Emphasized to Grasp the Development Trend and Laws of
the Digital Economy and Promote the Healthy Development of My Country’s Digital Economy”), Xinhua, October 19, 2021, https://archive.ph/Q5YY0.
156 Ibid.
157 Liu Jia and Wen Jichang, “国际传播效能视角下的新时代中国国际话语权提升” (“The Improvement of China’s International Discourse Power
in the New Era—Based on International Communication Capacity”), Journal of Shandong Academy of Governance 1 (2022).
In an October 2021 speech to the Central Party Committee’s
Political Bureau, Xi emphasized the urgency of “empowering
the transformation and upgrading of traditional industries,
and continuously strengthening China’s digital economy,”
including “advancing digital industrialization and industrial
digitization,” in order to drive essential domestic and inter-
national economic growth.155 At the same time, Xi empha-
sized the role of international digital governance in achiev-
ing these goals. He called for China to “actively participate
in the negotiation of digital economy issues in international
organizations,” to engage in “bilateral and multilateral digital
governance cooperation,” and to promote Chinese “voice”
in digital governance concepts—including the norm of cyber
sovereignty—on the world stage.156
As one Chinese scholar explained, “the construction of inter-
national discourse power should make efforts in the follow-
ing two areas at the same time: first, actively participate in
existing international organizations with universal influence,
improve China’s voting rights and decision-making power
in them, and strengthen China’s ability to guide agendas
and decision-making. Second, vigorously take advantage
of emerging areas such as cyberspace governance to gain
a strategic advantage, create new mechanisms for global
affairs governance.”157
To achieve these goals, China is an active participant in exist-
ing multilateral platforms for digital governance, has pro -
moted and created its own platforms, and has socialized
“cyber sovereignty” norms in regional multilateral institutions
like FOCAC.
China’s Participation in Technical
Standards-Setting Organizations
China is actively involved in multilateral standards-set -
ting organizations, which it sees as crucial for advanc -
ing its discourse-power agenda in the digital sphere.
As Henry Tugendhat and Julia Voo outline, stan -
dards-making governance models fall into two cate -
gories: first are multistakeholder standards-develop -
ment organizations, which involve “the convening of
governments, private sector, civil society, and intergov -
ernmental organizations” and are favored by countries

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
24 25
like the United States; the other are multilateral organizations,
such as the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO), the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), and
the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), in which
only official state government representatives are allowed
to participate, and in which China has become increasingly
active over the past decade.158
The CCP has strong links to these standards-setting bodies,
as most of its industry representatives are also high-rank -
ing members in the party. For example, Zhang Xiaogang,
the former president of the state-owned Ansteel Group
Corporation, served as president of ISO from 2015–2017. He
was also a member of China’s national standardization com-
mittee, as well as deputy head of the China Standards 2035
Strategic Project Task Force, and previously served as secre-
tary of the Party Committee for Ansteel.159 Similar profiles can
be seen for Shu Yinbiao, who was elected president of the
IEC for January 2020–2023.160 He also serves as a member
of the National Committee of the Chinese People’s Political
Consultative Conference, and as secretary of the Party
Leadership Group and chairman of China Huaneng Group.161
These industry leaders give China the power to steer the
direction of technology development for the world to follow.
In addition to generally preferring multilateral engagements,
another core reason that China prefers engaging in multilat-
eral standards-setting organizations is that technologies that
are compliant with the standards developed in them are pro-
hibited by the World Trade Organization from being banned
from international trade.162 As Stacie Hoffmann, Dominique
Lazanski, and Emily Taylor note, “in essence, this gives an
incentive to China to make sure all of their national standards
and technology are standardized primarily through these
three organizations […] This is an important vehicle for China
and its companies to standardize technologies in order to
enable and ensure their place in global trade.”163
Under the multilateral approach inherent in its “cyber sover-
eignty” framework, China has been active in putting forward
alternative Internet technologies in organizations like the
ITU that are then marketed by Chinese companies, including
158 Henry Tugendhat and Julia Voo, “China’s Digital Silk Road in Africa and the Future of Internet Governance,” China Africa
Research Initiative, August 2021, https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5652847de4b033f56d2bdc29/t/61084a3238e
7ff4b666b9ffe/1627933235832/WP+50+-+Tugendhat+and+Voo+-+China+Digital+Silk+Road+Africa.pdf.
159 ““ 晓刚|客座教授” (“Zhang Xiaogang: Visiting Professor”), Quality and Standards Academy, March 31, 2021, https://archive.ph/p2Vvq.
160 “Yinbiao Shu,” International Electrotechnical Commission, January 1, 2019, https://archive.ph/79q2U.
161 “ 舒印彪委员：实现’双碳’离不开煤电长效互保机制” (“Member Shu Yinbiao: The Realization of ‘Dual Carbon’ Is Inseparable from
the Long-T erm Mutual Guarantee Mechanism of Coal Power”), People’s Daily, March 7, 2022, https://archive.ph/7xYUc.
162 Stacie Hoffmann, Dominique Lazanski, and Emily Taylor, “Standardising the Splinternet: How China’s
Technical Standards Could Fragment the Internet,” Journal of Cyber Policy 5, 2 (2020).
163 Ibid, 245.
164 Kristin Shi-Kupfer and Mareike Ohlberg, China’s Digital Rise: Challenges for Europe, Mercator Institute for China Studies,
April 2019, https://merics.org/sites/default/files/2020-06/MPOC_No.7_ChinasDigitalRise_web_final_2.pdf.
165 Hoffmann, et al., “Standardising the Splinternet.”
166 Ibid.
167 Bao Yuanyuan, “当前国际舆论环境下提升中国国际话语权的路径思考” (“Reflections on the Path to Enhance China’s International
Discourse Power under the Current International Public Opinion Environment”), International Communication 4 (2021).
168 Emily Weinstein, et al., “China’s State Key Laboratories System: A View into China’s Innovation System,” CSET, June 2022,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uplooads/CSET-Chinas-State-Key-Laboratory-System.pdf.
along the BRI. According to a recent Mercator Institute for
China Studies (MERICS) analysis, Chinese experts have sub-
mitted more than 40 percent of the standards for the ISO
group governing fifth-generation technology (5G) regula -
tions.164 In particular, China has sought to gain support for
its model of “decentralized Internet infrastructure,” which
(despite the name) seeks to grant network operators and
infrastructure companies the power of centralized control of
the Internet by promoting “digital ledger technologies” that
provide operators with the ability to engage in “fine-grained
micromanagement and surveillance.”165
Given that most of China’s largest telecommunications oper-
ators and infrastructure providers are either state owned
(e.g., China Telecom) or subject to the ultimate authority of
the government (e.g., Huawei), the result of these activities
is “the central micromanagement of services, access con-
trols, and application of policy and regulation at the point
of connection”; in other words, the Chinese state gains ulti-
mate control over digital infrastructure and direct access to
the data that flow through it.166
The implications of this are significant. This large-scale data
access not only feeds the development of artificial intelli -
gence (AI) innovations, but also provides potential appli -
cations for the state’s discourse-power apparatus. In one
study commissioned by a State Key Laboratory of Media
Convergence and Communication, the authors recom -
mended using artificial intelligence and big-data technol -
ogy to carry out analysis on foreign audiences, with the goal
of developing “personalized and differentiated dissemina-
tion” for China’s external propaganda messaging.167 (State
Key Laboratories are usually hosted within universities or
enterprises within China, and receive guidance from the
party-state on conducting research into areas of science
and technology deemed essential by government policy
planners.)168
As the report put it, “big data analysis helps to discover what
kind of communication content and form the communication
target is interested in; it helps to find more resonant story
points, story lines and narrative methods, so as to achieve
accurate matching between communication content and
communication target […] this allows us to carry out targeted
dissemination, thereby further winning international sup -
port.”169 Recent research shows that the PLA has already
begun to develop technologies for deploying these tactics,
including those related to public-sentiment analysis and
propaganda.170
As Xi himself stated in a 2016 speech on the importance
of gaining control over the cybersphere, “no matter how
large an internet company is, no matter how high its mar -
ket value is, if it is heavily dependent on foreign countries
for its core components, and if the ‘major artery’ of the sup-
ply chain is in the hands of others, it is like building a house
on someone else’s foundation. No matter how big and
beautiful it is, it may not stand up to wind and rain, and it
may be so vulnerable that it collapses at the first blow.” 171
“No matter how large an internet
company is, no matter how high its
market value is, if it is heavily dependent
on foreign countries for its core
components, and if the ‘major artery’ of
the supply chain is in the hands of others,
it is like building a house on someone
else’s foundation. No matter how big and
beautiful it is, it may not stand up to wind
and rain, and it may be so vulnerable that
it collapses at the first blow.”
169 Bao Yuanyuan, “当前国际舆论环境下提升中国国际话语权的路径思考” (“Reflections on the Path to Enhance China’s International
Discourse Power under the Current International Public Opinion Environment”), International Communication 4 (2021).
170 Beauchamp-Mustafaga and Chase, Borrowing a Boat Out to Sea.
171 “ 习近平在网信工作座谈会上的讲话全文发表” (“The Full T ext of Xi Jinping’s Speech at the Forum on Cybersecurity and Informatization Work”), Xinhua,
April 25, 2016, https://archive.ph/hnnFl; Emily de La Bruyère, “A New Type of Geopolitical Power: China’s Competitive Strategy for the Digital Revolution,”
NBR 97 (2022), https://www.nbr.org/publication/a-new-type-of-geopolitical-power-chinas-competitive-strategy-for-the-digital-revolution/#footnote9.
172 Chaeri Park, “Knowledge Base: China’s ‘Global Data Security Initiative’ 全球数据安全倡议,” Digichina, March 31, 2022, https://digichina.stanford.edu/work/
knowledge-base-chinas-global-data-security-initiative/; Tugendhat and Voo, “China’s Digital Silk Road in Africa and the Future of Internet Governance.”
173 Park, “Knowledge Base.”
174 BRICS is an informal economic bloc comprising the “emerging economies” of Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa.
“The Full T ext of Xi Jinping’s Speech at the 14th BRICS Summit,” CGTN, June 24, 2022, https://archive.ph/1N27D.
175 “Empowering China’s Digital Informants,” China Media Project, February 7, 2022, https://
chinamediaproject.org/2022/02/07/empowering-chinas-digital-informants/.
176 While publicly introduced by Xi in 2015, the concept of “cyber sovereignty” first appeared in 2010, in a State Council Information Office white
paper addressing the state of the Chinese Internet: “The Internet in China,” Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in the United States
of America, June 8, 2010, https://web.archive.org/web/20220711153739/https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/ce/ceus/eng/zt/bps/t944131.htm.
China’s Creation of Multilateral
Organizations
In addition to participating in technical organizations, China
has been active in establishing its own multilateral mecha-
nisms to promote “cyber sovereignty” norms and its vision
for global digital governance. For example, China launched
the “Global Initiative for Data Security” ( 全球数据安全倡
议, also translated as the “Global Security Initiative”), in
September 2020, which puts forth a framework for develop-
ing international rules for digital security.172 Chinese Foreign
Minister Wang Yi announced the initiative’s “core principles”
during its official launch. These included “respect the [cyber]
sovereignty, jurisdiction, and data management rights of
other countries,” as well as pursuing cooperation through
“multilateralism” (多边主义).173
Xi promoted the initiative at a speech at a BRICS Summit in
June 2022, stating: “Some countries […] pursue unilateral
dominance at the expense of others’ rights and interests
[…] It is important that BRICS countries support each other
on issues concerning core interests, practice true multilat-
eralism, safeguard justice, fairness and solidarity and reject
hegemony […] Not long ago, I put forward the Global Security
Initiative, which advocates a vision of common, comprehen-
sive, cooperative and sustainable security […] China would
like to work with BRICS partners to operationalize the GSI
and bring more stability and positive energy to the world.”174
China’s most significant effort to spread CCP-approved
norms of digital governance is through its World Internet
Conference (WIC). The annual event is hosted in Wuzhen,
China, by the CAC (as introduced above). The CAC dictates
many of the regulations and guidelines that control how
China’s external propaganda flows through platforms to
reach intended audiences. As an illustration of this point, the
current director of the CAC, Zhuang Rongwen, also serves
as the vice minister of the Propaganda Department.175
The WIC is a high-profile event, and often features a key -
note address from Xi Jinping. At the 2015 WIC conference,
for example, Xi first publicly outlined China’s vision of “cyber
sovereignty” in global digital governance.176 WIC hosts high-
level Chinese officials and heads of state; executives from

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
26 27
standards-setting organizations including the ITU, ISO, and
the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
(ICANN); executives from multinational technology firms
including Alibaba, Tencent, Facebook, and Amazon; and
academics and thought leaders to discuss issues related to
the Internet, all in order to promote China’s vision of cyber
sovereignty.177
WIC attendance by BRI countries, and especially those from
the Global South, has grown dramatically in recent years. For
example, the last WIC conference was held in September
2021, the theme of which was “Towards a New Era of Digital
Civilization—Building a Community with a Shared Future in
Cyberspace.” According to WIC’s website, the 2021 confer-
ence included “nearly 2,000 representatives from domestic
and foreign governments, international organizations, indus-
try associations, global leading enterprises, universities and
research institutes from over 80 countries and regions.”178
Often, BRI countries will participate in the platform to facil-
itate partnerships relating to digital-infrastructure projects.
For example, seven heads of government participated in the
2015 WIC; all of them were from Central and South Asian
countries that had previously shown interest in the fiberoptic
network-building projects that China was promoting through
the BRI.179 Similarly, Chinese telecom company Huawei has
a “Seeds of the Future” program that trains aspiring global
technology professionals from BRI countries in information
and communications technology (ICT).180
China’s Engagement in Regional
Organizations
Along with China’s active participation in existing technical
platforms and the creation of its own mechanisms, a key fea-
ture of its discourse-power strategy in the digital domain is
socializing its “cyber sovereignty” principles in regional mul-
tilateral institutions.
As with its external propaganda more broadly, China uses
these regional platforms to deploy narratives that resonate
with local audiences. For example, China has put out state -
ments from its meetings with regional organizations like FOCAC,
the Forum of China and the Community of Latin American and
177 “Xi Jinping Sends Congratulatory Letter to World Internet Conference,” CGTN, September 26, 2021, https://archive.ph/MWvpu.
178 Ibid.
179 Heather Timmons, “Mapped: The Heads of State Attending China’s ‘World Internet Conference,’” Quartz, December 16,
2015, https://qz.com/575180/mapped-the-heads-of-state-attending-chinas-world-internet-conference/.
180 “Seeds for the Future,” Huawei, last visited June 20, 2022, https://archive.ph/xJOEu.
181 Thibaut, China’s Discourse Power Operations in the Global South.
182 Sally Adee, “The Global Internet Is Disintegrating. What Comes Next?” BBC, May 14, 2019, https://www.bbc.
com/future/article/20190514-the-global-internet-is-disintegrating-what-comes-next.
183 “Xi Jinping Attends the Opening Ceremony of the Eighth Ministerial Conference of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation and Delivers
a Keynote Speech,” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, November 29, 2021, https://archive.ph/tZNlh.
184 Ibid.
185 Ibid. The English phrasing is more accurately translated as “community of common destiny”; however, the official Chinese translation puts it as “shared future.”
186 “China and Africa in the New Era: A Partnership of Equals,” China Daily, November 27, 2021, https://archive.ph/fmLIt.
Caribbean States (China-CELAC Forum), and the China-Arab
States Cooperation Forum (CASCF), all of which have empha-
sized China’s anti-imperial solidarity with developing countries
and shared history of exploitation.181 As part of these cooper-
ation efforts, China offers affordable digital products and ser-
vices to countries that may be naturally distrustful of a Western-
centered Internet, in which they view companies like Google
and Facebook as able to “colonize” their digital spaces.182
For example, in his opening speech at FOCAC’s Eighth
Ministerial Conference in November 2021, Xi outlined nine
priorities for cooperation with African countries through the
year 2035, one of which was digital innovation.183 The range
of activities was broad, including establishing joint centers to
develop satellite remote-sensing applications, cooperating
on technological innovation projects (including on artificial
intelligence, new materials, green manufacturing, etc.), and
accelerating China-Africa links in digital e-commerce. The
digital-innovation programs would be carried out under the
auspices the BRI.184 Following Xi’s speech, FOCAC’s African
counterparts pledged to support Chinese international-gov-
ernance principles, including “safeguarding multilateral -
ism,” “opposing unilateral sanctions,” and “opposing inter-
vention in domestic affairs,” all core concepts that China has
emphasized in its foreign affairs as standing in contrast to
the “unilateral, interventionist, and imperialist” approach of
the United States and the West.185
In FOCAC, China has promoted its governance principles as
a means of helping African countries “eliminate the digital
divide” as a form of “developing country solidarity.” Projects
organized through FOCAC include a Digital Silk Road e-com-
merce project, in which Chinese companies build digital-pay-
ments infrastructure from the ground up; this also involves
micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises participating in
a lecture series sponsored by the Chinese government, “the
Silk Road E-Commerce Capacity Building Cloud Lectures,”
which promotes Chinese global digital-governance prin -
ciples.186 As one example of these efforts, Chinese tele -
com company Huawei is funding, via Chinese government
loans, the construction of a $79-million data center in Dakar
that will host government data and digital platforms for the
African country of Senegal. The project will allow the govern-
ment to move hosting from servers in the West. At the most
recent meeting of FOCAC, Senegalese President Macky Sall
praised the move as helping to ensure his country’s “digital
sovereignty.”187
China’s activities in the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) have similar goals. Sarah McKune and
Shazeda Ahmed describe the SCO as being “crucial to the
incubation and strengthening of [China’s] cyber sovereignty
norm” for Internet governance.188 The concept of cyber sov-
ereignty is much more institutionalized among SCO coun-
tries than in the broader international community. As such,
the SCO has begun to function as a disseminator of Chinese
governance concepts. For example, SCO member states
submitted an International Code of Conduct for Information
Security at the United Nations General Assembly in both
2011 and 2015, built on China’s principle of cyber sover -
eignty. China then cited these efforts as legitimating prece-
dents when it submitted its own proposal for an International
Cyberspace Cooperation Strategy to the UN Conference on
Disarmament in 2017.189

China’s leadership has long recognized
the advantages to be won from gaining
control over digital governance, and
has engaged in a vigorous internal
restructuring and external strategy
to gain the discourse power it sees
as essential for achieving this. That
China’s model is enabled through, and
dependent upon, information technology
means that the ways democratic
societies build and manage technology
will have a major impact on China’s
ability to succeed in its goals.

187 Segal, “China’s Vision for Cyber Sovereignty and the Global Governance of Cyberspace.”
188 Sarah McKune and Shazeda Ahmed, “The Contestation and Shaping of Cyber Norms Through China’s Internet Sovereignty
Agenda,” International Journal of Communication 12 (2018), https://ijoc.org/index.php/ijoc/article/viewFile/8540/2461.
189 Ibid.
190 “China’s Tech-Enhanced Authoritarianism,” House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (2019),
(Statement of Dr. Samantha Hoffman, fellow at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute).
191 Matthew S. Erie and Thomas Streinz, “The Beijing Effect: China’s ‘Digital Silk Road’ as Transnational Data
Governance,” New Y ork University Journal of International Law and Politics 1 (2021), 3.
To conclude, China has engaged in a concerted strategy
to promote its norm of “cyber sovereignty” at the technical,
political, and social levels of international society, engaging
in—and, at times, creating—multilateral platforms to do so.
China has leveraged regional forums to engage with host
countries and provide them attractive opportunities to host
a range of much-needed digital infrastructure, all under the
auspices of gaining greater control over their digital futures.
In its external propaganda messaging, China often targets
audiences with narratives that erode the legitimacy of the
liberal democratic framework and that resonate with local
experience; for example, Chinese messaging on digital
sovereignty to countries in the Global South emphasizes
a shared historical experience of colonial exploitation or
shared status as “developing” countries.
At the same time, however, Chinese leaders work actively
in the international technical bodies to implement standards
and technologies that ensure the data from this digital infra-
structure ultimately end up under Chinese government con-
trol.190 This is because, in actuality, China’s strategy is less
about a true attempt to make the digital world more inclu-
sive and more about laying the groundwork Beijing sees as
necessary for gaining a discourse-power advantage over
the West.
This phenomenon highlights the core contradictions in
China’s governance principles of cyber sovereignty and
multilateralism—offering the promise of inclusiveness and
control over one’s digital future, while executing a strategy
designed to centralize power in the hands of the Chinese
party-state. The CCP retains the ability to exert ultimate con-
trol over user content, physical infrastructure, and gover -
nance principles that determine who ultimately gains from
digital development.191

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
28 29
Communist Party
Industry/Firms Central Committee
Central Military
Commission
Foreign Affairs Commission
Develops diplomatic
strategy to
“tell China’s story well”
Cyberspace Affairs
Commission
Regulations on online
propaganda, platforms,
data, and standards
Central Propaganda
 Department
Establishes “ideological
direction” of discourse power
work. e.g., content
directives for state media
International Liaison
Department
Promotes CCP policies to
socialist political parties
United Front Work Dept
Develops external propaganda
strategies; develops “network
of influencers” to enhance DP
e.g., Huawei: “Seeds of the
Future” program trains
professionals from BRI
countries in ICT
e.g., StarTimes: Digital media;
programs promote
China’s image and
governance principles
e.g., Ansteel Group:
former President
Zhang Xiaogang president
of ISO from 2015–2017; China
Standards 2035 Task Force
e.g., China Huaneng Group
e.g., China Huaneng Group:
Chairman Shu Yinbiao current
president of IEC;
CPPCC member
Bureau for Press,
Publishing, Radio,
Film, and TV
Xinhua People’s
Daily
Voice of
China CGTN
e.g., CCP & World Political
Parties High-level Dialogue
e.g., exchanges with political
parties “jointly pursuing” the BRI
Hong Kong, Macau,
and Taiwan Office
Overseas Chinese Affairs Office.
Oversees CSSAs; works with security
forces to monitor Chinese abroad
CPPCC
Liaises with non-CCP
members to advance
party interests
PLA
Oversees “public opinion
warfare under informa-
tized conditions” Political Work
Department
Develops strategies to
burnish
image of PLA and CCP
PLA Strategic
Support Force
Oversees China’s
information-warfare
operations
Power to Speak
(Policy articulation,
coordination, etc)
Power to Be Heard
(Dissemination)
Platforms
Regional
FOCAC
e.g., Xi 2021 speech helping
African countries develop
digitally as a form of “develop-
ing country solidarity”
CASCF
SCO
e.g., SCO submitted
International Code of Conduct
for Information Security at UNGA
in 2011 and 2015 based
on cyber sovereignty principles
BRICS
e.g., June 2022 speech
Xi promotes GSI; cyber
sovereignty
RCEP
Technical
ISO, ITU, IEC
e.g., China puts forward
technologies and standards
that are then marketed by
Chinese firms along BRI
Initiatives
Global Initiative for Data
Security (GSI) Framework for
international rules for digital
security; emphasizes
cyber sovereignty
BRI
e.g., Xi 2017 BRI forum
promotes China IR model
World Internet Conference
Platform popularizing Chinese
digital norms and policies;
e.g., cyber sovereignty
Universities/
Think Tanks
Universities and Think Tanks
e.g., Renmin, Peking,
Tsinghua, facilitate
exchange programs and
cooperation under BRI that
promote Chinese norms
State Council
State Council Info Office
(SCIO)
Tasked with “telling a positive
China story to the world”
Ministry of Foreign
Affairs (MFA)
China Daily
e.g., content-sharing
agreements with local media
featuring pro-China narratives
Chinese
Embassies
Information
Department
e.g., “wolf-warrior
diplomats” Zhao Lijian
and Hua Chunying
e.g., RCEP Media and
Think Tank
Roundtable Forum
China Radio
International
Provincial and
Local-level UFWD
e.g., World Zhejiang Business Confer-
ence Exchange platform promoting
China’s governance model
Propaganda
Bureau
Produces and
disseminates DP-related
content
Internet Public
Opinion Bureau
Oversees
DP-related work of the
PLA online
Network Systems
Department
Develops/implements
cyber and information-operations
capabilities
Base 311
Psyops: “Subliminal
messaging, deep fakes,
propaganda, social media
sentiment analysis”
Xi Jinping
CCP General Secretary
President
China’s Discourse-Power Ecosystem Map
CSSAs
e.g., state has used WeChat to
organize CSSA protests abroad on
sensitive China issues
indicates connections
as outlined in report
Tell China’s story well; engage in public-opinion struggles
Leading small groups (e.g., United Front, external propaganda)
Create networks of pro-CCP/
pro-China influencers; promote China policies abroad
Tactics:
sock puppets,
bots,
disinformation
campaigns,
covert-information
operations on
Western
platforms, etc.
Create networks of pro-CCP/pro-China influencers;
promote China governance model
*Note: This is not designed to be an exhaustive map of China’s discourse-power bureacracy; rather, it is a
representative snapshot of the functions, connections, and roles of the bodies outlined in this report.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
30 31
While China has advanced presence
and strategy in standard-setting bodies,
in normative spaces, in the digital-
information ecosystem, and in its
provision of physical infrastructure, the
Western world’s approach has been
more piecemeal and reactive in recent
years. While recent conversations in
Washington have referenced Chinese
discourse power ambitions, they tend
to treat questions of “disinformation”
or Chinese propaganda as distinct from
this much broader strategy underpinning
China’s activities across economic,
security, informational, and diplomatic
domains.

However, China has identified the digital arena as a bat -
tlefield to be conquered and a strategically advantageous
space in its quest for discourse power. While China has
advanced presence and strategy in standard-setting bodies,
in normative spaces, in the digital-information ecosystem,
and in its provision of physical infrastructure, the Western
world’s approach has been more piecemeal and reactive in
195 See for example: “Atrocities in Xinjiang: Where Do We Go from Here?” Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, 117th Cong. (2021), https://www.govinfo.
gov/content/pkg/CHRG-117shrg46165/html/CHRG-117shrg46165.htm; “Disinformation in the Gray Zone: Opportunities, Limitations, and Challenges,” House
Committee on Armed Services, 117th Cong. (2021), https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-117hhrg45429/html/CHRG-117hhrg45429.htm; “Innovation
Opportunities and Vision for the Science and T echnology Enterprise,” House Committee on Armed Services, 117th Cong. (2021), https://www.govinfo.
gov/content/pkg/CHRG-117hhrg44409/html/CHRG-117hhrg44409.htm; “NATO 2030: A Celebration of Origins and an Eye toward the Future,” House
Committee on Foreign Affairs, 117th Cong. (2021), https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-117hhrg44883/html/CHRG-117hhrg44883.htm; “Operations
in Cyberspace and Building Cyber Capabilities Across the Department of Defense,” House Committee on Armed Services, 117th Cong. (2021), https://
www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-117hhrg45604/html/CHRG-117hhrg45604.htm; “Strengthening the U.S. Ties with Southeast Asia,” House Committee
on Foreign Affairs, 117th Cong. (2021), https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-117hhrg46605/html/CHRG-117hhrg46605.htm; “Technology and
Information Warfare: The Competition for Influence and the Department of Defense,” House Committee on Armed Services, 117th Cong. (2021), https://
www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-117hhrg44945/html/CHRG-117hhrg44945.htm; “T echno-Authoritarianism: Platform for Repression in China and
Abroad,” Congressional Executive Commission on China, 117th Cong. (2021), https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-117hhrg46147/html/CHRG-
117hhrg46147.htm; “The Atrocities Against Uyghurs and Other Minorities in Xinjiang,” House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 117th Cong. (2021), https://
www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-117hhrg44450/html/CHRG-117hhrg44450.htm; “U.S.-European Cooperation on China and the Broader Indo-Pacific,”
House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 117th Cong. (2021), https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-117hhrg45169/html/CHRG-117hhrg45169.htm.
recent years. It is worth noting here that, while recent con-
versations in Washington have referenced Chinese dis -
course-power ambitions, they tend to treat questions of
“disinformation” or Chinese propaganda as distinct from
this much broader strategy underpinning China’s activities
across economic, security, informational, and diplomatic
domains.195
Notably, China is advancing much of this strategy through
the very bodies and mechanisms the United States and its
allies created to govern and shape a “free, open, secure, and
interoperable” digital world. Chinese leaders have taken a
bet on Western overconfidence in these systems and built
a relatively successful strategy of quietly shaping, repurpos-
ing, and encircling the digital world to advance China’s dis-
course power.
That China has placed the idea of a globally connected
world at the heart of its drive for global influence, however,
should be instructive for Western countries as they craft their
own policies and approaches. Whether they acknowledge
it or not, the world’s democracies find themselves in a fight
to shape global norms and the world order itself through the
design, use, and governance of the digital ecosystem.
Any effort to counter this reshaping then relies on the demo-
cratic world reinvigorating its engagement in these spaces,
more clearly defining mutually reinforcing industrial, com -
mercial, and geopolitical strategies, and doubling down on
the multistakeholder, collaborative system that China has
identified as a threat to its dominance.
SUCCESSES AND LIMITATIONS OF
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER
192 Sheena Chestnut Greitens, “Dealing with Demand for China’s Global Surveillance Exports,” Brookings, April 2020, https://
www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/FP_20200428_china_surveillance_greitens_v3.pdf.
193 Xiao and Y ang, “新形势下世界’中国观’的变化与加快构建中国国际话语权的战略路径.”
194 Zhang, “增强中国国际话语权的思考.”
C
hina’s ambitions to supplant the current liberal interna-
tional order present the most viable challenge to the
ideological consensus around open societies since
the end of the Cold War. China has embarked on an ambitious
strategy to gain the discourse power it needs to achieve this
task, and this report illustrates the scope, intentions, and pur-
poseful implementation of this integrated strategy.
China’s leadership has long recognized the advantages to
be won from gaining control over digital governance, and
has engaged in a vigorous internal restructuring and exter-
nal strategy to gain the discourse power it sees as essen-
tial for achieving this. That its model is enabled through, and
dependent upon, information technology means that the
ways democratic societies build and manage technology will
have a major impact on China’s ability to succeed in its goals.
China has made notable inroads in several areas core to
digital governance. China occupies leadership positions
in many of the multilateral bodies responsible for devel -
oping the standards for interoperability that will power the
digital economy of the future. China has also engaged in a
wide-ranging external propaganda campaign to enhance
the appeal of its vision of global governance, including the
digital-governance principles enshrined under the norm of
“cyber sovereignty.”
Demand for Chinese digital technologies and infrastructure,
coupled with the promise of total state control over data
resources under the principle of “cyber sovereignty,” is a
powerful pull factor—particularly for countries in the Global
South. Many countries buy Chinese technology because it is
affordable and accessible and solves a problem. Even in the
case of surveillance technologies, some states seek to address
crime or provide better services to their citizens. Western —
in particular, US—messaging on the risks of building through
Chinese technologies and networks has largely ignored these
motivations.
As Sheena Greitens notes in an April 2020 study, the
demand factors for Chinese technology are complex, and
do not necessarily equate to support for authoritarianism
writ large. She writes, “adoption of Chinese surveillance
and public security technology is driven by demand factors
in recipient countries that ‘pull’ this technology from China
to solve local governance challenges, in ways that may or
may not intersect with Beijing’s grand strategy or geopolit-
ical priorities.”192
At the same time, the CCP still faces significant constraints
when asserting this agenda-setting power on the world
stage. China’s multilateral approach is generally slower and
more piecemeal in terms of spreading norms; in addition,
the concepts undergirding “cyber sovereignty” are vague,
meaning China lacks the ability to provide a concrete pol-
icy direction even for those countries that find the concept
appealing.
Similarly, China’s attempts to gain discourse power and con-
vince an international audience of the appeal of its narratives
has, in some areas, met with mixed success. One 2021 study
funded by the National Social Science Foundation of China
found that global favorability ratings of China were mixed,
categorizing the US perception as “increasingly negative,”
the European view as “mixed,” those of countries in East and
Southeast Asia as “complicated,” and those of countries in
the Middle East and North Africa, sub-Saharan Africa, and
Latin America as “relatively objective.”193 The language of the
report hardly suggested that China is winning a “decisive vic-
tory” in its public opinion battles, and the authors concluded
that “European and American countries [still] monopolize
international discourse power, and China is still in a position
of passivity.”194
As such, while China has made significant strides in investing
in and developing its instruments of discourse power, and
in organizing the party-state around these goals, China can
still be characterized as existing in a “discourse power defi-
cit” vis-à-vis Western countries and the United States. As of
yet, the CCP’s current understanding of discourse power is
as much aspirational as it is real. China’s conception of the
parameters of its discourse power are equally shaped by the
constraints and limitations it faces when trying to assert this
agenda-setting power on the world stage. As such, the world
does not need to accept China’s dominance in this sphere
as inevitable.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
32 33
About the Author
Kenton Thibaut is the Resident China Fellow at the Atlantic
Council’s Digital Forensic Research Lab (DFRLab) based in
Washington, D.C., where her research focuses on Chinese
influence operations.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
34 35
*Executive Committee Members

List as of July 13, 2022

CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers

EXECUTIVE
CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones

PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe

EXECUTIVE VICE
CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley

VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev

TREASURER
*George Lund

DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
John Bonsell
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
Richard R. Burt
*Teresa Carlson
*James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Richard Edelman
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Mark T. Esper
*Michael Fisch
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Jarosław Grzesiak
Murathan Günal
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Kay Bailey Hutchison
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
*Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Brian L. Kelly
Henry A. Kissinger
John E. Klein
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Yann Le Pallec
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Christian Marrone
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Majida Mourad
Dambisa F. Moyo
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
*Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell
dddMcCormick
Michael Punke
Ashraf Qazi
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
Gil Tenzer
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim

HONORARY
DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
CHINESE DISCOURSE POWER: AMBITIONS AND REALITY IN THE DIGITAL DOMAIN
36
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan
organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and
engagement in international affairs
based on the central role of the
Atlantic community in meeting
today’s global challenges.
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 778-4952
www.AtlanticCouncil.org
