
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
IATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
A DEMOCRATIC
TRADE PARTNERSHIP:
Ash Jain and Matthew Kroenig, with Marianne Schneider-Petsinger
Ally Shoring to Counter Coercion
and Secure Supply Chains

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
II ATLANTIC COUNCIL
The Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security works to develop
sustainable, nonpartisan strategies to address the most important
security challenges facing the United States and the world. The Center
honors General Brent Scowcroft’s legacy of service and embodies his
ethos of nonpartisan commitment to the cause of security, support for US
leadership in cooperation with allies and partners, and dedication to the
mentorship of the next generation of leaders.
This report is a product of the Scowcroft Center’s Democratic Order
Initiative, which is aimed at reenergizing American global leadership and
strengthening cooperation among the world’s democracies in support of a
rules-based democratic order.
This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic Council
Policy on Intellectual Independence. The authors are solely responsible for
its analysis and recommendations. The Atlantic Council and its donors do
not determine, nor do they necessarily endorse or advocate for, any of this
report’s conclusions.
ISBN-13: 978-1-61977-237-3
© 2022 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights reserved. No
part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by
any means without permission in writing from the Atlantic Council, except
in the case of brief quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews.
Please direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street NW, 12th Floor
Washington, DC 20005
For more information, please visit
www.AtlanticCouncil.org.
Cover: Shutterstock

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
IIIATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
A DEMOCRATIC
TRADE PARTNERSHIP:
Ash Jain and Matthew Kroenig, with Marianne Schneider-Petsinger
Ally Shoring to Counter Coercion
and Secure Supply Chains

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
1ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION AND EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2
II. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 7
III. D-TEP: STRATEGIC VISION AND GOALS 15
IV. CORE ELEMENTS OF D-TEP 17
V. PARTICIPATING NATIONS 22
VI. CHALLENGES AND OBSTACLES 24
VI. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ACTION 27
VII. CONCLUSION 29
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 30
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 30

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
2 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
I. INTRODUCTION AND EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
T
he post-World War II global economic order is in
the midst of a profound transition. The first phase
of this order, established by the United States and
its allies around the Bretton Woods system of institutions,
encouraged free markets and open trade, and focused
primarily on economic engagement within the free world.
The second phase, which began with the end of the Cold
War, expanded the order to include all nations willing to
reduce trade barriers. But the era of inclusive globalization
now appears to be coming to an end. In the aftermath of
the 2008 global financial crisis, the COVID-19 pandemic,
and more recently, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the global
economic order is entering a new third phase.
The precise contours of this new phase are still unclear,
but a few trends are emerging. As China and Russia act
more aggressively to challenge the rules-based order,
the United States and other leading democracies have
begun imposing new trade barriers, including a widening
range of tariffs and sanctions, against them. At the same
time, free trade has become less salient, particularly in the
United States, where both political parties have begun
to emphasize supply chain resilience and domestic
onshoring. While free trade still appears to have reso-
nance in other parts of the world, the question is whether
this third phase of the order will be characterized by
increasing protectionism, or whether a new model for
economic engagement can emerge that fosters secure
supply chains and, at the same time, maintains the bene-
fits of an open global trading system.
This report seeks to encourage the latter. It suggests
that a new Democratic Trade and Economic Partnership
(D-TEP) could provide an integrated framework for the
United States and its allies and partners to work together
to counter the economic challenges posed by revisionist
autocracies, while ensuring that the global economic
order remains free and open, as well as stable and secure.
Challenges to the Global Order
From Russia’s invasion of Ukraine to China’s increas-
ingly assertive actions to undermine key tenets of the
global order, the world is at an inflection point, entering
This is the fifth and final report in a five-part series of Atlantic Council publications, as part of a project on
revitalizing the rules-based international system and positioning the United States and its allies to succeed
in an era of strategic competition.
The first publication, Present at the Re-Creation: A Global Strategy for Revitalizing, Adapting, and Defending
a Rules-Based International System, sets forth an overarching global strategy for the United States and its
allies to uphold the rules-based system by strengthening cooperation among the world’s democracies, while
seeking to cooperate with other global powers on areas of common concern.
The second report, From the G7 to a D-10: Strengthening Democratic Cooperation for Today’s Challenges,
proposes the creation of a new D-10 core group of influential democracies across North America, Europe,
and the Indo-Pacific, aimed at deepening strategic collaboration on the most pressing challenges facing the
rules-based order.
The third report, An Alliance of Democracies: From Concept to Reality in an Era of Strategic Competition,
suggests that an Alliance of Democracies could foster cooperation among a larger group of nations com-
mitted to shared values and goals, potentially as a standing body stemming from the Biden administration’s
series of democracy summits.
The fourth report, Toward a Democratic Technology Alliance: An Innovation Edge that Favors Freedom,
calls for a new alliance that would ensure that the free world prevails in the race for advanced technologies
by jointly investing in innovation, countering unfair practices, and developing rules and norms consistent with
democratic values.
This report contends that a Democratic Trade and Economic Partnership could provide an integrated framework
for leading democracies and other partners to coordinate on economic challenges posed by revisionist autocra-
cies and foster free, fair, and secure trade. This report draws on relevant sections from these previous publications.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
3ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
what President Joe Biden has called a long-term global
“struggle between democracy and autocracy.”1
In the economic domain, the rules-based order, led by
the United States and its democratic allies since the
end of World War II, has advanced an interconnected
global economy based on free markets and open trade
and finance. While its benefits have often been uneven,
this order has resulted in dramatic increases in global
economic prosperity and improved living standards for
people around the world.
Among the biggest beneficiaries of this open economic
order have been China and Russia. But rather than liber-
alizing their political systems as they integrated into the
global economy, as many had hoped, the authoritarian
leaders in Moscow and Beijing have reaped the bene-
fits of the global trading system while consolidating their
repressive regimes. To fuel their economic growth, China,
and to some extent Russia, have engaged in intellectual
property theft, forced technology transfers, and other
unfair trade practices, while taking advantage of unfet-
tered access to global markets.2
At the same time, as corporations have relocated produc-
tion facilities abroad and increased global trade, the
United States, its European allies, and other democracies
around the world have become dependent on China and
Russia across a range of critical economic sectors. In the
energy sector, for example, the European Union (EU) was,
prior to the start of the latest conflict in Ukraine, reliant on
Russia for more than 40 percent of its natural gas imports
and over a quarter of its crude-oil imports. Dependency on
China is even more dramatic. The United States and other
democracies are deeply reliant on Chinese supply chains
across a range of industry sectors, from pharmaceutical
ingredients to lithium batteries to essential earth minerals.
The concern over supply chain dependencies is not just
theoretical. Moscow and Beijing are using their economic
clout to coerce democratic nations to accede to their
1 “Remarks by President Biden to Mark One Y ear Since the January 6th Deadly Assault on the U.S. Capitol,” White House, January
6, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/01/06/remarks-by-president-biden-to-mark-one-
year-since-the-january-6th-deadly-assault-on-the-u-s-capitol/; “Remarks by President Biden on the United Efforts of the Free
World to Support the People of Ukraine,” White House, March 26, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-
remarks/2022/03/26/remarks-by-president-biden-on-the-united-efforts-of-the-free-world-to-support-the-people-of-ukraine/
2 Karen M. Sutter, “U.S.-China Trade Relations,” Congressional Research Service, 2020, updated
March 2, 2022, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF11284.
3 Stephen Dziedzic, “Chinese Official Declares Beijing has Targeted Australian Goods as Economic Punishment,” ABC News, July 7,
2021, https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-07-07/australia-china-trade-tensions-official-economic-punishment/100273964
4 James Dobbin, et al., “Conflict with China,” RAND, 2011, https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/occasional_papers/2011/RAND_OP344.pdf.
5 Elaine Dezenski and John C. Austin, “Rebuilding America’s Economy and Foreign Policy with ‘Ally-Shoring,’” Brookings, June 8, 2021,
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/the-avenue/2021/06/08/rebuilding-americas-economy-and-foreign-policy-with-ally-shoring/.
6 “Building Resilient Supply Chains, Revitalizing America Manufacturing, and Fostering Broad-Based Growth,” White House, June 2021, 17,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/100-day-supply chain-review-report.pdf; “Remarks
by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Y ellen on Way Forward for the Global Economy,” US Department of the
Treasury, press release, April 13, 2022, https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0714.
7 Remarks by Janet Y ellen, Atlantic Council, April 13, 2022, https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0714
political demands. In recent months, China has acted to
restrict Australian imports after its leaders called for an
independent investigation into the origins of COVID-19,3
and forcefully retaliated against Lithuania for its deci-
sion to allow Taiwan to open a representative office in
its own name. Many analysts have suggested that China
and the United States are in a situation of “mutually
assured economic destruction.”4 Were China to engage
in more aggressive actions, such as taking military action
against Taiwan, the rapid imposition of sanctions and the
increasing decoupling that the West has employed against
Russia would be far more difficult to impose against China,
given the potential economic consequences.
The COVID-19 pandemic served as a wakeup call for
supply chain dependencies, prompting democratic
governments to look for alternative sources of supplies
as it became clear that China was the dominant source
for personal protective equipment (PPE) and other health
supplies. With Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the United
States and its allies have moved swiftly to isolate Russia
from the global economy, cutting off trade and invest-
ment across large swathes of the Russian economy.
Recognizing the growing strategic dependencies on
autocracies, policymakers have begun to look to ways to
promote supply chain resilience by seeking to promote
domestic manufacturing in certain industries, such as
semiconductors.
Rather than relying strictly on domestic on-shoring, which
would be costly and impractical, a growing chorus of voices
have suggested that the way to establish more resilient
supply chains is through “ally shoring”— sourcing essential
goods and services with countries that share democratic
values and a commitment to an open, rules-based inter-
national order.5 The White House has called for “work[ing]
with America’s allies and partners to strengthen our collec-
tive supply chain resilience,” 6 and Treasury Secretary Janet
Y ellen spoke about the need for “friend shoring” among
countries that “have strong adherence to a set of norms
and values about how to operate in the global economy.” 7

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
4 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Congress has also begun to take steps to promote supply
chain resilience among allies and partners.8
The Biden administration’s launch of the Indo-Pacific
Economic Framework (IPEF) is a concrete manifestation
of this effort. With its parameters still being developed,
the initiative seeks to strengthen economic engagement
among US allies and partners in the Indo-Pacific, as a
complement to the Quad’s ongoing discussion on supply
chains. Separately, the US-EU Trade and Technology
Council is facilitating an economic dialogue among trans-
atlantic partners, including on supply chains.
While potentially impactful, the current patchwork of multi-
lateral supply chain dialogues and initiatives remains
too narrow, both in terms of economic and geographic
scope. Rather than approaching the challenges system-
atically, these efforts have tended to focus on a handful of
sectors, such as semiconductors, with outcomes that are
bifurcated along regional lines. Y et today’s supply chains,
particularly those involving China, are global, not regional,
and the same set of strategic and economic challenges
impacting the United States are also impacting America’s
allies across both Europe and the Indo-Pacific. What
is lacking is an integrated framework that would bring
together leading democracies to coordinate a free world
strategy on these challenges.
A New Economic Framework
Given the significant vulnerabilities they face, the United
States and its democratic allies must adopt a fundamen-
tally new approach to deal with the growing economic
challenges to the rules-based order.
The United States and leading democracies in Europe,
North America, and the Indo-Pacific should lead the estab-
lishment of a new strategic trade and economic frame-
work for the twenty-first century: a Democratic Trade and
Economic Partnership (D-TEP) that would bring together
willing democracies, and potentially other nations that
meet certain criteria, to act together under a common
economic umbrella. D-TEP would provide a holistic and
systematic framework for the United States and its allies
and partners to coordinate on the economic challenges
posed by revisionist autocracies and help position the free
world to succeed in an era of strategic competition.
D-TEP would be focused primarily on achieving the
following goals.
8 United States Innovation and Competition Act of 2021, https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/senate-bill/1260/text.
1 Reducing strategic dependence on China and
Russia. D-TEP would aim to reduce vulnerability
among democracies to coercion, blackmail, or poten-
tial economic disruptions from revisionist autocra -
cies – namely China and Russia – by encouraging the
shifting of supply chains in certain areas toward more
stable and trusted partners. The goal is not to cut off
all trade and investment, particularly with regard to
China. Rather, it is to identify critical economic sectors
in which the United States and its allies cannot afford
to continue allowing unfettered trade and investment
flows, and to take impactful steps to reduce strategic
dependence in these sectors.
2 Expanding free, fair, and secure trade among
democracies, by bringing down trade and investment
barriers in the industry sectors around which supply
chains would be reorchestrated under this framework.
The goal is to expand the benefits of free, fair, and
secure trade, while pushing back against rising protec-
tionism and encouraging greater openness within the
democratic world.
3 Incentivizing nations on the fence to join the free
world in upholding the rules-based order. With the
economic benefits of supply chain shifts accruing to
member states, the prospect of D-TEP membership
could serve as a powerful inducement for nonaligned
democracies and other nations to work more closely
with the United States and its allies to advance shared
interests and reduce strategic vulnerabilities to autoc-
racies that are challenging the order.
All three of these goals are important and interconnected.
Reducing strategic dependence on China and Russia will
require shifting supply chains to more reliable and trusted
allies and partners. For this to work, the private sector
needs meaningful incentives, including the reduction of
trade barriers in the affected industry sectors, which could
facilitate new opportunities to foster more free and secure
trade. Nations that are part of this framework will accrue
significant economic benefits, and access to these bene-
fits can be used as an incentive to persuade governments
on the fence to join and take meaningful steps toward
upholding the rules-based order.
To be clear, D-TEP would not be intended to supplant or
undermine the World Trade Organization or the existing
bilateral and multilateral trade and investment agree-
ments that D-TEP members have in place among them-
selves or other states. The United States and its allies

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
5ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
should continue looking for ways to strengthen the
WTO and reinforce its efforts to expand open trade and
investment worldwide, even as it builds a more tailored
economic framework with democratic allies and partners.
In pursuit of these goals, D-TEP would be organized
around four core pillars, each of which would entail
commitments by member states and corresponding
benefits.
Pillar One would entail an agreement among member
states on a common framework for regulating trade and
investment flows to China and Russia. The framework
would distinguish between three categories: (i) stra-
tegic sectors vital to national security, such as arms and
advanced technologies that could have security applica-
tions, in which trade would be restricted; (ii) critical and
sensitive sectors, such as energy and pharmaceuticals,
in which incentives would be developed to encourage
the shifting of supply chains away from China and Russia;
and (iii) other economic sectors, such as furniture and
appliances, in which trade would generally be permitted
without restrictions (except where subject to sanctions
related to other issues).
Pillar Two would set forth a commitment by D-TEP
member states to take collective action to assist other
members if they become the subject of economic coer-
cion. Some have likened this to NATO’s Article V, where
an attack against one is considered an attack against all.9
A commitment by democracies to act together under
this pillar could serve as a significant deterrent against
economic coercion and a channel to coordinate joint
assistance to those that are targeted.
Pillar Three would outline an agreement between
member states to reduce trade barriers among them-
selves in specific industry sectors. Such an agreement
would be structured in a narrow and practical way, begin-
ning with the critical sectors identified in Pillar One, where
it is in the interest of D-TEP members to promote the
shifting of supply chains away from China and Russia.
Over time, D-TEP could also facilitate agreements to
reduce trade barriers in other industry sectors, serving
as a platform to revitalize discussions among the United
States and its allies on fostering more free, fair, and secure
trade.
Pillar Four would constitute a set of bold economic initia-
tives in areas where autocratic powers, particularly China,
are at risk of outcompeting the democratic world, and
9 Ivo H. Daalder and Anders Fogh Rasmussen, "Memo on an 'Economic Article 5' to Counter Authoritarian Coercion, The
Chicago Council on Global Affairs, June 9, 2022. Jonas Parello-Plesner, “An ‘Economic Article 5’ to Counter China,” Wall
Street Journal, February 11, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/an-economic-article-5-to-counter-china-11613084046.
10 The D-10, as currently organized by the Atlantic Council’s D-10 Strategy Forum, includes these ten participants.
India was added in Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s attempts to formalize a D-10 in 2021.
where the United States and its allies have a particularly
strong interest in working together to maintain a strategic
edge. These initiatives, with a potential focus on global
infrastructure, digital commerce, and clean energy tech-
nology, as well as other critical technologies, could help
limit Beijing and Moscow’s attempts to co-opt nations
in the global South by making them more economically
dependent on China and Russia.
Together, these four pillars would facilitate a series of
mutually reinforcing activities and provide an integrated
framework to reduce strategic dependence on autocra-
cies and advance the rules-based economic order. D-TEP
would pool the economic power and influence of the
world’s leading democracies based around shared inter-
ests and a common willingness to act. At the same time,
it would consolidate a meaningful package of economic
benefits that many nations around the world—in partic-
ular, developing nations—could find compelling and
attractive.
Importantly, D-TEP would not force member states to
choose between trading at large with China and the West.
Rather, it would focus on restricting trade or incentivizing
supply chain shifts in specific industry sectors, leaving
unchanged the ability to engage in trade and investment
across a wide range of other (except, as noted, where
targeted sanctions have been imposed) areas. In addi-
tion, D-TEP could help rekindle domestic political support
for more open global trade.
To achieve its objectives, D-TEP may benefit from a
two-tiered membership structure. DTEP allies, or full
members, would consist of nations that are free-market
democracies, committed to the rule of law, and willing
to embrace the full scope of obligations required under
D-TEP. This could include the leading democratic econ-
omies of the G7—the United Kingdom, Canada, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, and the United States—and the
D-10, which also includes Australia, South Korea, and the
European Union.10 The partnership would aspire to bring
in other rising democracies, particularly Mexico and India.
DTEP associates would include free-market econo-
mies, that are willing to commit to most, but not all, of the
required obligations. This could provide an avenue for
association with nondemocratic, but increasingly signif-
icant, economic partners, such as Vietnam. Associates
would gain partial access to the supply chain reorchestra-
tion and other benefits under this framework.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
6 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
While seeking to maximize participation, D-TEP’s success
will not be determined by how many nations end up
joining. Rather, it will depend on having the full commit-
ment of the world’s largest democratic economies. If it can
facilitate agreement among the G7 or D-10 across its four
pillars, D-TEP could have a significant impact on reducing
strategic dependence on China and Russia and advancing
free, fair, and secure trade.
Key Recommendations
While the rationale for establishing a new trade and invest-
ment partnership along the lines of D-TEP is compelling,
several obstacles and concerns must be considered,
including whether such a framework could further polarize
the global order, undermine the WTO, involve significant
economic costs, or become too unwieldy or impractical
to implement. Moreover, bringing D-TEP to fruition will
require determined US leadership and support from key
allies. To move this forward in a feasible way, the following
recommendations should be considered.
1 The United States should establish a senior diplomatic
envoy, based at the State Department or National
Security Council (NSC), that would be responsible
for developing and coordinating strategies to reduce
supply chain dependencies, and other leading democ-
racies should follow suit. In addition, Washington
should consider establishing a dedicated Office of
Strategic Competition that would focus on integrating
a wider range of strategies—across the areas of trade,
technology, security, disinformation, democracy,
and development—that are required to position the
United States and its allies to succeed in the long-term
systemic competition with rival autocracies.
2 The United States should engage a small core group
of likeminded allies to discuss the possibility of
establishing a new integrated trade and economic
partnership. Initially, this core group could include
some members of the G7 or D-10, including Germany,
Japan, and the United Kingdom, which—together with
the United States—constitute the world’s four largest
democratic economies. If agreement on a basic frame-
work can be reached, discussion could expand to
include the remaining G7 and D-10 members.
3 Given their economic and political significance, Mexico
and India, among other rising democracies, should
be approached early on in the consultation process.
Bringing these nations into this framework would
provide an enormous boost, and the United States
and its allies should prioritize efforts to include them –
ideally as full members if they are willing to sign on to
the required obligations, but at least as associates, with
a pathway toward full membership over time.
4 The Biden administration should also consult Congress
early in the process, as dedicated funding and imple-
menting legislation will be required to make D-TEP a
reality. Similarly, lawmakers in other leading democ-
racies should be consulted to help build support
among allies and partners. In addition, the private
sector should be engaged to ensure that the incen-
tives for supply chain reorchestration are appropriately
designed, and to help build a broader base of support
for this framework.
5 Finally, even as it pursues a new trade and economic
partnership among allies and partners, Washington
should seek to reinvigorate efforts to strengthen and
reform the WTO, and foster efforts to expand greater
economic openness. At the same time, it should
continue to engage with Beijing to discuss trade and
economic issues, while seeking to reassure China
that the supply chain reorchestration called for under
this proposal would not cut off China from the global
economy.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
7ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
II. STRATEGIC CONTEXT
11 Ash Jain and Matthew Kroenig, Present at the Recreation: A Global Strategy for Revitalizing, Adapting, and Defending a Rules-Based International
System, Atlantic Council, October 30, 2019, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/present-at-the-re-creation.
12 “Evolution of Trade under the WTO: Handy Statistics,” World Trade Organization,
https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e/trade_evolution_e/evolution_trade_wto_e.htm.
13 Max Roser, “Economic Growth,” Our World in Data, 2013,
https://ourworldindata.org/economic-growth#:~:text=An%20almost%203%2Dfold%20increase,grown%2013%2Dfold%20since%201950.
Success of the Rules-Based Order
Over the past seventy-five years, the United States and its
democratic allies across North America, Europe, and the
Indo-Pacific have established a rules-based order aimed
at defending shared security interests, promoting free-
market economies, and advancing shared democratic
norms. This order has proven highly successful, facilitating
unparalleled levels of peace, security, and global pros-
perity, and fostering freedom for hundreds of millions of
people around the world.11
In the economic domain, the rules-based order has served
to promote an interconnected global economy based
on free markets and open trade. The core principle—as
enshrined in the Bretton Woods system and its key insti-
tutions—is that an open, rules-based economic system,
including the free movement of goods and capital,
reduces prices and increases standards of living. Since the
1950s and the early days of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (the precursor to the WTO), the volume of
global trade has increased by forty times.12 Over the past
seven decades, this order has produced dramatic gains in
prosperity, with global gross domestic product (GDP) rising
1,300 percent since 1950.13 While its benefits have often
been uneven, both within and across nations, it helped
fuel unprecedented innovations in communications,
health, and other areas that have significantly improved
living standards for people around the world.
Russian president Vladimir Putin and Chinese president Xi Jinping meet in Beijing and issue a joint manifesto establishing a
“no limits” partnership, February 3, 2022. (via REUTERS)

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
8 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
China and Russia Push Back
China and Russia have been among the biggest bene-
ficiaries of an open economic order. China’s integration
into the global economy helped to lift four hundred million
Chinese out of poverty, and Russia’s economy prospered
after its embrace of free markets following the collapse
of communism.14 With the end of the Cold War, there was
widespread optimism within the West that the bene-
fits of trade and economic engagement would provide
China and Russia with a stake in the existing rules-based
system. In addition, many believed this would reinforce
Russia’s nascent transition to democratic rule, and provide
the Chinese Community Party with a strong incentive to
promote political liberalization at home.15
However, rather than liberalizing their political systems as
they integrated into the global economy, the authoritarian
leaders in Moscow and Beijing have reaped the bene-
fits of the global trading system while consolidating their
repressive regimes and undermining core elements of
the rules-based order. Russia and China’s rising wealth—
largely facilitated by foreign investment and trade— “has
emboldened them to challenge Western democracies
head on.”16 The challenges posed by these autocratic
powers are evident in several domains.
As underscored by its unprovoked invasion of Ukraine,
Russia has emerged as the most aggressive challenger
to the rules-based order. Russia’s accumulated wealth,
facilitated by large-scale energy exports, has provided
14 Russian per capita GDP rose from $3,492 in 1990 to $10,126 in 2020. “GDP per Capita (current US$)—Russian
Federation,” World Bank, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?locations=RU.
15 Robert Robb, “China Isn’t Going to Change. It’s Time to Break Some of Our Economic Ties,” Arizona Republic, December 3, 2021,
https://www.azcentral.com/story/opinion/op-ed/robertrobb/2021/12/03/china-wont-change-its-time-decouple-our-economies/8838408002/.
16 Edward Alden, “The West Though Money Could Tame Dictators. Has Putin Proved it Can’t?” Washington Post,
April 11, 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2022/04/11/russia-china-peace-capitalism/.
17 Hans Binnendijk, et al., The China Plan: A Transatlantic Blueprint for Strategic Competition, Atlantic Council, March 22,
2021, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/china-plan-transatlantic-blueprint/.
the resources to support its military capabilities, which
provided Moscow with ambitions to reconstitute, by
force, its influence in countries of the former Soviet Union.
Russia has also invested in cybersecurity assets to allow
it to meddle in foreign elections and engage in coer-
cion—through military intimidation, economic boycotts,
energy disruptions, arms sales, and targeting of individ-
uals in Europe with chemical agents— that is inconsis-
tent with norms relating to self-determination and foreign
interference.
If Russia seeks to disrupt the order, China may be seeking
to displace it. As it has risen, China has frequently violated
fundamental principles and norms of the rules-based
system. Beijing has engaged in what many now consider
a genocide against the Uyghur population in Xinjiang,
and is dismantling Hong Kong’s liberal institutions despite
its international treaty commitments. At the same time,
Beijing has engaged in a rapid military build-up as it issues
explicit military threats against its neighbors, including
Taiwan, and asserts claims of “indisputable sovereignty”
over disputed territories that underscore its ambitions to
carve out a regional sphere of influence. On the economic
front, China’s unfair trade and economic policies run
contrary to liberal economic norms, and have provided
China’s state-run economy—and companies within it—
unfair commercial advantages, by engaging in forced
technology transfer, intellectual-property theft, coun-
terfeiting, espionage, illegal subsides, and dumping to
depress prices and push rivals out of the market.17

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
9ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
China’s Increasing Economic Power
18 Robert G. Sutter, “U.S.-China Trade Relations: Perilous Past, Uncertain Present,” Rowman & Littlefield, 2018.
19 Wayne M. Morrison, “China’s Economic Rise: History, Trends, Challenges, and Implications for the United States,”
Congressional Research Service, June 25, 2019, https://www.everycrsreport.com/reports/RL33534.html.
20 Woetzel et. al, “China and the World: Inside the Dynamics of a Changing Relationship,” McKinsey Global Institute, July 1, 2019,
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/china/china-and-the-world-inside-the-dynamics-of-a-changing-relationship.
21 Thomas Hout and Pankaj Ghemawat, “China vs the World: Whose T echnology Is It?” Harvard Business
Review, December 2020, https://hbr.org/2010/12/china-vs-the-world-whose-technology-is-it.
22 Ellen Nakashima and Gerry Shih, “China Builds Advanced Weapons Systems Using American Chip Technology,” Washington Post, April 9, 2021,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/china-hypersonic-missiles-american-
technology/2021/04/07/37a6b9be-96fd-11eb-b28d-bfa7bb5cb2a5_story.html.
23 Ibid.
24 “Globalisation and Autocracy Are Locked Together. For How Much Longer?” Economist, March 19, 2022,
https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2022/03/19/globalisation-and-autocracy-are-locked-together-for-how-much-longer.
China and Russia have depended on unfettered access
to global markets to fuel their economic growth, and to
gain access to technology, capital, and critical resources.18
After China and Russia joined the WTO in 2001 and
2011, respectively, they obtained the full benefits of the
global trading system—including reduced trade barriers
and nondiscriminatory tariff treatment. Since opening
its economy to foreign trade and investment, China
has become the world’s largest manufacturer of goods,
and, according to the World Bank, has had the “fastest
sustained expansion by a major economy in history.” 19
China has surpassed the United States as the world’s
largest exporter of goods—and increasing its share of
global trade from 1.9 percent in 2000 to 11.4 percent in
2017—and could overtake the United States as the world’s
largest economy sometime this decade.20
To be sure, China and Russia’s entry into the World Trade
Organization (WTO) has benefitted the global economy
in many ways, including by providing reliable sources
for lower-wage manufacturing and access to natural
resources. But it has come at a significant cost. Since
2006, Beijing has been implementing policies aimed
at appropriating technology from foreign corporations
across several critical industries, such as air transpor -
tation, power generation, high-speed rail, information
technology, and electric automobiles. 21 China is also
harnessing civilian technologies for strategic military
purposes, such as hypersonics and supercomputers,
which it has advanced by utilizing access to US technol-
ogy.22 As the Economist notes, autocracies, including
China and Russia, “are now an especially serious rival to
democracies when it comes to investment and innova-
tion.”23 The share of patent applications issued to compa-
nies based in autocracies has gone from 5 percent to
more than 60 percent since the mid-1990s. 24 Having
driven its economy by trading with the world, China
appears to be positioning itself to become the world’s
primary challenger to the rules-based, democratic order.
U.S.
$2.3T
Germany
$806B
China
$4T
Japan
$1T
China’s Growing Economic Prowess
GLOBAL MANUFACTURING OUTPUT
SOURCE: United Nations Statistics Division and Howmuch.net, 2018.a

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
10 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Supply Chain Dependencies
As multinational firms have relocated production facilities
and increased trade and investment abroad, the United
States, its European allies, and other democracies around
the world have become dependent on China and Russia
across a range of critical economic sectors. In the energy
sector, for example, the EU was, prior to the start of the
latest conflict in Ukraine, reliant on Russia for more than
40 percent of its natural gas imports and over a quarter
of its crude oil imports. For certain countries, this depen-
dence is even greater; Poland, Finland, and Slovakia look
to Russia for two-thirds of their oil imports.25 More than 35
percent of US palladium is sourced from Russia, and, as
the White House recently warned, Putin has the means
to cut off critical minerals and gases needed to sustain
the West’s supply chain for semiconductor chips.26 India’s
25 Thomas Earl, “How Russian Oil Flows to Europe,” Transport & Environment, March 8, 2022,
https://www.transportenvironment.org/discover/how-russian-oil-flows-to-europe.
26 Alexandrea Alper and Karen Freifeld, “Russia Could Hit U.S. Chip Industry, White House Warns,” Reuters, February 11, 2022,
https://www.reuters.com/technology/white-house-tells-chip-industry-brace-russian-supply-disruptions-2022-02-11/; Ambrose
Evans-Pritchard, “Vladimir Putin Controls the Supply Chain of Western Technology, So Who Is Bluffing?” Telegraph, February
22, 2022, https://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2022/02/22/vladimir-putin-controls-supply chain-western-technology-
bluffing; Alper and Freifeld, “Russia Could Hit U.S. Chip Industry, White House Warns,” Reuters, February 11, 2022, https://
www.reuters.com/technology/white-house-tells-chip-industry-brace-russian-supply-disruptions-2022-02-11/.
27 Ashok Sharma, “India to Boost Arms Output, Fearing Shortfall from Russia,” Associated Press, April 7, 2022,
https://www.defensenews.com/global/asia-pacific/2022/04/07/india-to-boost-arms-output-fearing-shortfall-from-russia.
28 “Global Lithium Market: China is Unlikely to Tap into Afghanistan’s Resources Fast,” GlobeNewsWire, November 4, 2021, https://www.globenewswire.
com/news-release/2021/11/04/2327800/0/en/Global-Lithium-Market-China-is-Unlikely-to-Tap-into-Afghanistan-s-Resources-Fast-IndexBox.html.
29 Jevans Nyabiage, “China’s Dominance of Rare Earth Supply Is a Growing Concern in the West,” South China Morning Post, April 25,
2021, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy/article/3130990/chinas-dominance-rare-earths-supply-growing-concern-west.
30 Patricia Fok, “China Dominates the Pandemic PPE Market. What Does that Mean for U.S. as Virus Surges?” PBS News, October 27, 2020,
https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/china-dominates-the-pandemic-ppe-market-what-does-that-mean-for-u-s-as-virus-surges.
largest military supplier is Russia, on which it depends for
more than half of its defense equipment.27
Dependency on China is even more dramatic. The
United States and other democracies are deeply reliant
on Chinese supply chains across a range of industry
sectors, from pharmaceutical ingredients to smartphones
to essential earth minerals. China dominates the global
lithium-battery supply chain, producing 76 percent of
the world’s lithium-oxide and hydroxide exports.28 China
provides more than 60 percent of the world’s rare-earth
metals, which are essential for the manufacture of electric
car batteries, satellites, weapons, wind turbines, and solar
panels.29 In the health sector, even before the pandemic,
China was the largest exporter of PPE, accounting for more
than half of the world’s facemasks, gowns, and goggles,
and its share of the market has grown since then.30
Rare
Earth
Metals
Personal
Protective
Equipment
Lithium
Ion
Batteries
Solar
Photo-
voltaics
Active
Pharmaceutical
Ingredients
60%
83%
76%
71%
40%
46%
40%
27%
Coal Gas Oil
 Percent of Global Supply Provided by China Percent of EU Supply
Provided by Russia
(prior to 2022 Ukraine invasion)
Dependencies on China and Russia
SOURCE: US Geological Service, United Nations, US Department of Energy, Foreign Policy, Financial Times, European Commissionb

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
11ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
The global economy is heavily dependent on Chinese
manufacturing, as well as on China’s growing consumer
market. More than 82 percent of mobile phones and
94 percent of laptop computers imported to the United
States were assembled in China.31 China is now the largest
trading partner for large parts of the democratic world,
including the EU, for which China overtook the United
States in 2020, as well as Australia, Japan, South Korea,
Brazil, and Indonesia.32 The US and Chinese economies
are also deeply intertwined, US companies have invested
more than $700 billion of assets in China, and China owns
as much as a trillion dollars in US sovereign debt.33
Autocratic Coercion
The concern about supply chain dependencies is not just
theoretical. Moscow and Beijing are using their economic
clout to coerce democratic nations to accede to their
political demands. In 2014, for example, Russian state
gas company Gazprom cut gas supplies to Slovakia by
50 percent in response to Slovak assistance to Ukraine
following Russia’s seizure of Crimea.34 In 2017, Russia’s
state-controlled rail company restricted freight deliveries
through Latvia in retaliation for Latvia’s refusal to support
the Nord Stream 2 pipeline.35 And, just last year, Gazprom
limited the supply of gas as a way to pressure Moldova
into distancing itself from the European Union.36
The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the risks inherent in
depending on Chinese supply chains for critical supplies.
At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, China national-
ized production of PPE, and initially withheld exports in
order to deal with its own outbreak, as the United States’
European allies suffered from severe shortages. While
its actions to restrict exports during the early days of the
pandemic did not appear aimed at causing deliberate
harm, China now regularly engages in coercion against
democratic states, by using its economic leverage to
31 Kevin Rudd, “T o Decouple or Not to Decouple?” Asia Society, https://asiasociety.org/policy-institute/decouple-or-not-decouple.
32 Anders Sundell, “Visualizing Countries Grouped by Their Largest Trading Partner,” Visual Capitalist, February
11, 2022, https://www.visualcapitalist.com/cp/biggest-trade-partner-of-each-country-1960-2020/.
33 Annabelle Timsit, “How Much Debt Does China Own?” Quartz, September 24, 2020, https://qz.com/1905559/how-much-us-debt-does-china-own.
34 “Russia cuts gas supplies to Slovakia by 50% in response to Slovak assistance to Ukraine,” Alliance for Securing Democracy, October 2014,
https://securingdemocracy.gmfus.org/incident/russia-cuts-gas-supplies-to-slovakia-by-50-in-response-to-slovak-assistance-to-ukraine/.
35 “Russian state-controlled company restricts rail freight deliveries through Latvia in retaliation for Latvia’s refusal to support for Nord
Stream 2,” Alliance for Securing Democracy, May 23, 2017, https://securingdemocracy.gmfus.org/incident/russian-state-controlled-
company-restricts-rail-freight-deliveries-through-latvia-in-retaliation-for-latvias-refusal-to-support-for-nord-stream-2/.
36 “Russia Attempts to Use Gas Supply to Gain Concessions from Moldova,” Alliance for Securing Democracy, October 2021,
https://securingdemocracy.gmfus.org/incident/russia-attempts-to-use-gas-supply-to-gain-concessions-from-moldova/.
37 Binnendijk et al., The China Plan.
38 Dziedzic, “Chinese official declares Beijing has targeted Australian goods as economic punishment.”
39 Ash Jain and Dan Fried, “State of the Order: Assessing January 2022,” Atlantic Council, February 8, 2022,
https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/commentary/blog-post/state-of-the-order-assessing-january-2022/.
40 “Ties That Bind, A Helsinki Commission Staff Report on Secure Supply Chains,” Wilson Center, 2021,
https://www.wilsoncenter.org/sites/default/files/media/uploads/documents/Ties_that_Bind.pdf.
41 Leon Whyte, “US-China: Mutually Assured Economic Destruction?” The Diplomat, May 26, 2015,
https://thediplomat.com/2015/05/u-s-china-mutually-assured-economic-destruction/
pressure democracies to reverse political decisions that
it found objectionable. In 2010, China restricted the export
of rare-earth minerals and took other measures against
Japan after a collision between a Chinese fishing boat and
a Japanese coast-guard ship near the disputed Senkaku/
Diaoyu islands. 37 The same year, Beijing imposed
restrictions against Norway on imports of salmon after
Liu [Xiaobo] won the Nobel Peace Prize, and, in 2016,
restricted trade with South Korea after Seoul agreed
to deploy a US Terminal High Altitude Area Defense
(THAAD) missile-defense system.
Beginning in 2020, China imposed hefty tariffs on
Australian barley and wine imports, while throwing up
barriers to several other products—including timber,
lobster, and coal—in retaliation for “smearing China” after
Australia called for an independent investigation into the
origins of COVID-19.38 Last year, China banned Lithuanian
imports, and began to pressure multinational corpora-
tions to reduce investments in Lithuania and stop sourcing
supplies from that country, in retaliation for Lithuania’s
decision to allow Taiwan to open a representative office in
its own name. Beijing has used similar tactics against the
United States, threatening economic retaliation against
the National Basketball Association, Hollywood studios,
and universities for allowing free speech critical of China.39
As noted in a recent report, the COVID-19 pandemic “has
laid bare long-standing vulnerabilities in US and global
supply chains, including American reliance on sole-source
manufacturing and on Chinese manufacturing, in partic-
ular.” 40 Given their intertwined economies, some analysts
have suggested that China and the United States are in a
situation of “mutually assured economic destruction.41 As a
result, leading democracies are in a vulnerable position if
they choose to stand up to Beijing’s coercive threats. Were
China to engage in a more aggressive assault against
the rules-based order, such as taking military action

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
12 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
against Taiwan, the rapid imposition of sanctions and the
increasing decoupling that the West has employed against
Russia would be far more costly and challenging to impose
against China, given the consequences they would have
on the US and global economies. 42
Deglobalization and Protectionism
Policymakers in the United States and its allies have recog-
nized the problems posed by the growing strategic depen-
dencies on autocracies. The COVID-19 pandemic, followed
by Russia’s further invasion of Ukraine, have both served
as wakeup calls, prompting democratic governments to
look for alternative sources of supply for critical items. As
China and Russia act more aggressively to challenge the
rules-based order, the United States and other leading
democracies have begun imposing new trade barriers,
including a widening range of tariffs and sanctions, against
42 Dobbin, et al., “Conflict with China.”
43 “Globalisation and autocracy are locked together. For how much longer?”, The Economist, May 19, 2022,
https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2022/03/19/globalisation-and-autocracy-are-locked-together-for-how-much-longer.
44 Kevin Y ao, “China pursues economic self-reliance as external risks grow: advisers,” Reuters, August 4, 2020,
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-economy-strategy/china-pursues-economic-self-reliance-as-external-risks-grow-advisers-idUSKCN25031K.
45 John Micklethwait and Adrian Wooldridge, “Putin and Xi Exposed the Great Illusion of Capitalism,” Bloomberg, March 24, 2022,
 https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-03-24/ukraine-war-has-russia-s-putin-xi-jinping-exposing-capitalism-s-great-illusion.
46 David Brooks, “Globalization is Over, The Global Culture Wars Have Begun,” New Y ork Times, April 8, 2022,
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/04/08/opinion/globalization-global-culture-war.html.
them. However, these calls for shifting supply chains away
from China are also fueling pressure toward protectionism.
As free trade has become less salient, particularly in the
United States, both political parties have begun to empha-
size supply chain resilience and domestic onshoring.
This has coincided with a gradual slowing of the process
of globalization since the global financial crisis of 2008.
According to the Economist, between 2008 and 2019,
world trade, relative to global GDP, fell by about five
percentage points. 43 Recognizing its own economic
dependence, particularly on the West, China itself has
begun to reduce its reliance on overseas markets. 44 A
notable essay in Bloomberg suggests that “geopolitics
is definitively moving against globalization—toward a
world dominated by two or three great trading blocs.”45
Globalization has slowed and, according to columnist
David Brooks, has “even kicked into reverse.”46
Globalization in Retreat
Trade openness index
1945-1980
Postwar rebound
1980-2008
Liberalization
2008-2017
'Slowbalization'
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
SOURCE: Peterson Institute for International Economics and Our World in Datac
The trade openness index is defined as the sum of the world's exports and imports divided by global GDP.
53.5%
61.1%
39.5%
10.1%

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
13ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
The challenges facing the global economic order are
significant. But they also offer an opportunity to reshape
the order in ways that are more structured and condu-
cive to the interests of the United States and its allies.
As the Bloomberg piece notes, “the answer to globaliza-
tion’s woes isn’t to abandon economic liberalism, but to
redesign it.”
Supply Chain Resiliency
and Ally Shoring
As an alternative to protectionism, a growing chorus of
voices has called for the United States to establish more
resilient supply chains by strengthening cooperation with
democratic allies and partners 47. Elaine Dezenski and
John Austin, for example, have called for “ally shoring”—
sourcing essential goods and services with countries that
share democratic values and a commitment to an open,
rules-based international order.48 A recent report issued
by Deloitte suggested the need to “protect critical supply
chains by enabling closer supply chain coordination
among allies and partners.” 49 In addition, a report issued
by Chatham House, based in the United Kingdom, has
advocated for greater cooperation among allied democ-
racies to protect “strategic supply chains without sliding
into protectionism,” while others have called on the United
States to “deepen economic integration among like-
minded nations” and pointed to the need for “a tighter free
world economic bloc that makes it harder for autocratic
regimes to coerce.” 50
While encouraging domestic reshoring efforts, the Biden
administration has also emphasized the need to work with
allies and partners on supply chain resiliency. As a presi-
dential candidate, Biden called for new approaches to limit
dependence on China and Russia by creating a “strong
understanding with our allies on how best ensure supply
47 A new Atlantic Council report by Frank Kramer also suggests that ally shoring, or friend shoring, is often critical to assuring the key elements of
resilient supply chains necessary for national security. Frank Kramer, "Free but Secure Trade: Priorites in Support of National Security," Atlantic
Council, 2022, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/Free-but-Secure-Trade-Priorities-in-Support-of-National-Security.pdf
48 Dezenski and Austin, “Rebuilding America’s Economy and Foreign Policy with ‘Ally-Shoring’.”
49 “Boosting Resilience: Working with Like-minded Partners to Orchestrate Critical Supply Chains,” Deloitte Center for Government Insights, 2022,
https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/public-sector/articles/boosting-resilience-working-
with-like-minded-partners-to-orchestrate-critical-supply chains.html.
50 Marianne Schneider-Petsinger, “US and European Strategies for Resilient Supply Chains,” Chatham House, September 14, 2022,
https://www.chathamhouse.org/2021/09/us-and-european-strategies-resilient-supply chains/06-conclusions-and-recommendations;
Micklethwait and Wooldridge, “Putin and Xi Exposed the Great Illusion of Capitalism”; Michael Beckley and Hal Brands, “The Return of
Pax Americana?” Foreign Affairs, March 14, 2022, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/russia-fsu/2022-03-14/return-pax-americana;
Miyeon Oh, Robert Dohner, and Trey Herr, Global Value Chains in an Era of Strategic Uncertainty: Prospects for US-ROK Cooperation,
Atlantic Council, November 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/GLOBAL-VALUE-CHAINS-final-11-19-1.
pdf; Miyeon Oh, James Hildebrand, and Enhancing US-Japan Cooperation on Global Supply Chains, Atlantic Council, May 27,
2021, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/enhancing-us-japan-cooperation-on-global-supply chains/.
51 “The Biden Plan to Rebuild US Supply Chains and Ensure the US Does Not Face Future Shortages of
Critical Equipment,” The Biden-Harris Campaign, https://joebiden.com/supplychains/.
52 “Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Y ellen on Way Forward for the Global Economy.”
53 United States Innovation and Competition Act of 2021, S. 1260 (2020–2021), https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/senate-bill/1260/text.
54 “America Creating Opportunities, Pre-Eminence in T echnology, and Economic Strength Act (COMPETES) Act of 2022,”
House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, https://science.house.gov/americacompetes.
chain security for all of us.”51 The White House followed
with a report that cited the need to “cooperate with our
allies and partners to foster and promote collective supply
chain resilience.” More recently, Treasury Secretary Janet
Y ellen affirmed the economic and geostrategic benefits
of “friend shoring,” by which the United States can count
on countries with “strong adherence to a set of norms and
values about how to operate in the global economy.” 52
Congress is also considering legislation to foster ally-
shoring. The Senate last year passed a bipartisan bill,
the United States Innovation and Competition Act—
co-sponsored by Senators Chuck Schumer (D-NY) and
Todd Y oung (R-IN)—that would establish a program in the
Department of Commerce that would “work with govern-
ments of countries that are allies or partners of the United
States to promote diversified and resilient supply chains,”
and call for the United States and European allies, as
“close partners…sharing values grounded in democracy…
and the rules-based international order,” to work together
to diversify reliance on Chinese supply chains.53 A similar
measure in the House of Representatives, co-sponsored
by Representatives Ro Khanna (D-CA) and Mike Gallagher
(R-WI), passed earlier this year and is currently pending
reconciliation. 54 In addition, Representatives Michael
McCaul (R-TX) and Doris Matsui (D-CA) co-sponsored
A growing chorus of voices
has called for the United States
to establish more resilient
supply chains by strengthening
cooperation with democratic allies
and partners.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
14 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
legislation that aims to foster more secure semiconductor
supply chains and establishes a common funding mecha-
nism with US partners.55
In addition, allies have joined these calls for supply chain
resiliency. The EU has proposed measures for diversifying
and strengthening supply chains, including by enhancing
cooperation with the United States and other likeminded
countries, focusing on “reshoring or nearshoring.”56 The
Japanese government, which has been concerned about
the concentration of its supply chains in China since the
dispute over the Senkaku Islands, has offered several
rounds of subsidies to encourage firms to relocate
production back to Japan or diversify supply chains by
moving to a third country, mostly in Southeast Asia.57
Existing Supply Chain Dialogues
The United States and its allies have begun to discuss
supply chain cooperation through a number of existing
venues. Through the Trade and Technology Council (TTC),
launched in September 2021, the United States and the
EU established a Secure Supply Chains Working Group,
one of ten issue-based working groups within the TTC, to
improve resilience and security of supply in key sectors,
with an initial focus on semiconductors, clean energy,
pharmaceuticals, and critical materials.58
The Biden administration’s Indo-Pacific Economic
Framework (IPEF) is a concrete manifestation of ally-
shoring. While its parameters are still being developed,
55 See “Analysis for CHIPS Act and BIA Briefing,” Department of Commerce, April 6, 2022,
https://www.commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2022/04/analysis-chips-act-and-bia-briefing.
56 Marcin Szczepański, “Resilience of Global Supply Chains,” European Parliamentary Research Service, November 2021,
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2021/698815/EPRS_BRI(2021)698815_EN.pdf.
57 Oh, et al., Enhancing US-Japan Cooperation on Global Supply Chains.
58 “EU-US Trade and Technology Council Inaugural Joint Statement,” European Commission, September 29,
2021, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/STATEMENT_21_4951.
59 Matthew P. Goodman and Aidan Arasasingham, “Regional Perspectives on the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework,” Center for Strategic
and International Studies, April 11, 2022, https://www.csis.org/analysis/regional-perspectives-indo-pacific-economic-framework.
60 “Quad Principles on T echnology Design, Development, Governance, and Use,” White House, September 24, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/09/24/quad-principles-on-technology-design-development-governance-and-use/.
61 “QUAD Allies India, Australia & Japan Form A ‘Supply Chain Shield’ Against China’s Dominance,” Eurasian Times, April 29, 2021,
https://eurasiantimes.com/quad-allies-india-australia-japan-form-a-supply chain-shield-against-chinas-dominance/.
62 “2021 Report to Congress on China’s WTO Compliance,” United States Trade Representative, February 2022, https://
ustr.gov/sites/default/files/files/Press/Reports/2021USTR%20ReportCongressChinaWTO.pdf.
the initiative will focus on “supply chain resilience”
as one of four pillars for cooperation among regional
allies.59 In addition, through the Quad, the United States
is working with Australia, Japan, and India to discuss criti-
cal-technology supply chains, and to diversify equipment
suppliers and telecommunications—as well as critical
medical supply and service supply chains—particularly
amid the COVID-19 pandemic, through the Quad Vaccine
Partnership.60 Separately, the Supply Chain Resilience
Initiative (SCRI), a trilateral agreement among Japan,
Australia, and India, convenes the countries’ trade minis-
ters to locate supply chain vulnerabilities, support invest-
ment and trade diversification, and ultimately act as a
“supply chain shield against China’s dominance.”61 The
United States, the EU, and Japan have also restarted a
trilateral dialogue on trade challenges.62
While potentially impactful, the current patchwork of multi-
lateral supply chain dialogues and initiatives remains too
narrow, both in terms of economic and geographic scope.
Rather than approaching the challenges systematically,
these efforts have tended to focus on a handful of sectors,
such as semiconductors, and are leading to outcomes
that are bifurcated along regional lines. Y et today’s supply
chains, particularly those involving China, are global, not
regional, and the same set of strategic and economic chal-
lenges impacting the United States are also impacting
America’s allies across both Europe and the Indo-Pacific.
What is lacking is an integrated framework that would
bring together leading democracies to coordinate a free
world strategy on these challenges.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
15ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
III. D-TEP: STRATEGIC VISION AND GOALS
G
iven the significant vulnerabilities they face, the
United States and its democratic allies must adopt
a fundamentally new approach to deal with the
growing economic challenges to the rules-based order.
The United States and leading democracies in Europe,
North America, and the Indo-Pacific should lead the estab-
lishment of a new strategic trade and economic frame-
work for the twenty-first century: a Democratic Trade and
Economic Partnership (D-TEP) that would bring together
willing democracies, and potentially other partners that
meet certain criteria, to act together under a common
economic umbrella. D-TEP would provide a holistic and
systematic framework for the United States and its allies
and partners to coordinate on economic challenges posed
by revisionist autocracies and help position the free world
to succeed in an era of strategic competition.
D-TEP would be focused primarily on achieving the following
goals.
1 Reducing strategic dependence on China and
Russia. First, D-TEP would aim to reduce democracies’
vulnerability to coercion, blackmail, or potential supply
chain disruptions from China and Russia. The goal is not
to cut off all trade and investment, particularly with regard
to China. Rather, it is to identify critical economic sectors
in which the United States and its allies cannot afford
to continue allowing unfettered trade and investment
flows, and to take impactful steps to reduce strategic
dependence in these sectors. D-TEP would also seek to
ensure that China and Russia are not able to gain access
to military and other national security-related products,
services, and technologies.
2 Expanding free, fair, and secure trade among democ-
racies. Second, D-TEP would be aimed at fostering
free, fair, and secure trade within the democratic world,
by bringing down trade and investment barriers in the
industry sectors around which supply chains would
be reorchestrated under this framework. The goal is
D-TEP would provide a holistic
and systematic framework for
the United States and its allies
and partners to coordinate on
economic challenges posed by
revisionist autocracies and help
position the free world to succeed
in an era of strategic competition.
G7 leaders discuss common challenges in Schloss Elmau, Germany, June 2022. (via Council of EU)

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
16 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
to expand the benefits of trade, while pushing back
against rising protectionism and encouraging greater
openness within the democratic world. Over time,
D-TEP could help facilitate agreements among democ-
racies on expanding market access in other sectors,
while fostering closer economic engagement and
cooperation among states committed to upholding the
rules-based order.
3 Incentivizing nations on the fence to join the free
world in upholding the rules-based order. Finally,
D-TEP would aim to incentivize nations, particularly
those in the global South, to join the United States
and its allies in upholding the rules-based order. With
the economic benefits of supply chain shifts accruing
to member states, the prospect of D-TEP membership
could serve as a powerful inducement for nonaligned
democracies and other nations to work more closely
with the United States and its allies to advance shared
interests and reduce strategic vulnerabilities to autocra-
cies that are challenging the order.63
All three of these goals are important and interconnected.
Reducing strategic dependence on China and Russia will
require shifting supply chains to a broad group of reli-
able and trusted allies that can provide a pool of diverse
63 “To attract allies and partners, it is not enough merely to oppose flagrant violations of territorial sovereignty. The United States also
needs to be for something—something that is more appealing to the rest of the world than, say, Russian arms or Chinese cash…
Y ou know what would be really appealing? If the United States could offer the promise of greater trade and investment with countries
in the global South.” Daniel W. Drezner, “The Biden Administration’s Zombie Foreign Economic Policy,” Washington Post, April 12,
2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2022/04/12/biden-administrations-zombie-foreign-economic-policy/.
64 See Josh Lipsky, Bretton Woods 2.0
sources of goods and services. For this to work, the
private sector needs meaningful incentives to shift these
supply chains, including the reduction of trade barriers
in the affected industry sectors, which could also facil-
itate new opportunities to foster more free and secure
trade among democracies. Nations that are part of this
framework will accrue significant economic benefits, and
access to these benefits can be used as an incentive to
persuade governments on the fence to work more closely
with the United States and its allies to reduce vulnerabili-
ties to autocracies that are challenging the order.
To be clear, D-TEP would not be intended to supplant or
undermine the World Trade Organization or the existing
bilateral and multilateral trade and investment agree -
ments that D-TEP members have in place among them-
selves or other states. The United States and its allies
should continue to look for ways to strengthen the
WTO and reinforce its efforts to expand open trade and
investment worldwide, even as it builds a more tailored
economic framework with democratic allies and part-
ners.64 Washington should also continue to work through
the Group of Twenty (G20) and other more inclusive
economic venues, and maintain a bilateral economic
dialogue with China to seek to resolve trade disputes and
prevent a further breakdown of the global trading system.
Share of global GDP (%)
56.7%
14.2%
10.3%
 Autocratic Challengers
China
Russia
Iran
North Korea
18.8%
Democracies’ Economic Power
SOURCE: WORLD BANK
United States
Japan
Germany
United Kingdom
France
Italy
Canada
South Korea
Australia
European Union
  D-10 
 Other democracies
      Rest of the world

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
17ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
IV. CORE ELEMENTS OF D-TEP
65 Binnendijk, et al., The China Plan.
66 US law contains nine categories of prohibited goods range from depleted uranium, chemicals, toxins, machine tools and parts with particular
application, high-performance computers, x-ray components, telecommunications equipment, sensors, lasers, navigation equipment, avionics,
underwater equipment, and some aircraft. The Commerce Department’s Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) has also issued a series of new
China-related Entity List designations and export control reforms to restrict exports to China in the fields of AI, quantum computing, biotechnology
and drones. “China: Economic Sanctions,” Congressional Research Service, August 22, 2016, https://www.everycrsreport.com/files/20160822_
R44605_160c92226c43bf33f590663dd758fe9b4e0b8caa.pdf; Jeffrey I. Kessler, et al., “United States Adopts Wide-Ranging China Restrictions,”
WilmerHale, December 29, 2021, https://www.wilmerhale.com/en/insights/client-alerts/20211229-united-states-adopts-wide-ranging-china-restrictions.
67 Nearly all corporate transactions with foreign acquirors or investors now merit some level of CFIUS risk analysis to determine
whether a deal triggers a mandatory filing or presents a risk of CFIUS attention. Also, China deals, especially those involving the
health sector, advanced technology or information about US persons, are increasingly likely to be reviewed by CFIUS before or
after closing. Most OECD nations have stepped up their foreign investment screening systems in response to Chinese acquisitions
in strategic sectors. “Understanding U.S.-China Decoupling: Macro Trends and Industry Impacts,” China Center, US Chamber of
Commerce, 2021, https://www.uschamber.com/assets/archived/images/024001_us_china_decoupling_report_fin.pdf.
I
n pursuit of the goals outlined above, D-TEP would be
organized around four core pillars, each of which would
entail commitments by member states and corre-
sponding benefits.
Pillar One: Regulating Trade and
Investment with China and Russia
Pillar One of D-TEP would facilitate an agreement among
member states on a common framework for regulating
trade and investment flows with China and Russia. The
goal is to reduce vulnerability among democracies to
coercion, blackmail, or potential supply chain disrup-
tions from China and Russia, by identifying economic
sectors in which the United States and its allies cannot
afford to continue allowing unfettered trade and invest-
ment flows, and to take steps to reduce strategic depen-
dence in these sectors. It would rely on reshoring and
ally shoring—sourcing essential goods and services with
likeminded countries that share democratic values—as a
means to reduce these risks.
The framework would distinguish between three catego-
ries of industry sectors: strategic sectors vital to national
security; sensitive and critical industry sectors; and other
economic sectors.65
• For strategic sectors vital to national security ,
D-TEP would prohibit member states from engaging
in trade and investment with China and Russia.
This includes arms and other military equipment,
intelligence-related items, and advanced tech-
nologies with potential security applications—
such as those relating to certain applications of AI,
quantum computing, 5G technology, and biotech -
nology, and related research and development in
these areas. Many leading democracies, including
the United States and the EU, already have regula-
tions and export controls in place that prohibit the
sale of defense articles and certain dual-use tech-
nologies to unauthorized states.66 D-TEP would seek
to harmonize regulations on export controls, invest-
ment screening, outbound investments, and other
measures, and ensure they are adequate to prevent
China or Russia from obtaining items that pose
significant security risks, and to ensure that D-TEP
states are not reliant on Russian or Chinese sources
for such items.67
A key goal of D-TEP is to reduce strategic dependency on Russia and China in critical industry sectors, such as the production
of lithium ion batteries. (via REUTERS)

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
18 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
• For sensitive and critical industry sectors, D-TEP
states would commit to measures aimed at incentiv-
izing private industry to shift supply chains away from
China and Russia, and toward DTEP member states.
These include areas in which supply chain disruptions
could cause significant vulnerabilities or harm to the
security or the economies of the United States and its
allies, or the well-being of their citizens. Drawing on
a White House policy directive on critical infrastruc-
ture, sectors included in this category are those that
pertain to energy (e.g., oil, gas, solar), health and medi-
cine (e.g., vaccines, pharmaceutical ingredients, PPE),
rare-earth minerals, chemicals, transportation (e.g.,
commercial aircraft, high-speed trains), water and
wastewater systems, telecommunications, internet
and computing, financial products (e.g., government
bonds), agricultural commodities, other important tech-
nology products (e.g., semiconductors), and other crit-
ical manufacturing.68
 D-TEP would facilitate agreement on specific sectors
and products to include in this category, and on what
measures can be taken to encourage the shifting of
supply chains in these areas to D-TEP member states.
Such measures could include corporate tax and finan-
cial incentives to incentivize production in D-TEP states;
the removal of tariffs and regulatory hurdles on prod-
ucts in these sectors; the imposition of new tariffs on
products in these sectors that originate from China and
Russia; and supplier-certification programs, similar to
the Blue Dot Network.69
68 Presidential Policy Directive 21 could form the basis of national security sensitive products. Those sectors include chemicals, commercial
facilities, communications, critical manufacturing, dams, defense industrial base, emergency services, energy, financial services, food
and agriculture, government facilities, healthcare and public health, information technology, nuclear reactors, materials and waste,
transportation systems, and water and wastewater systems. These sectors have been extensively analyzed by government and
industry, and plans have been drafted which identify risks (including supply chain risks) and propose mitigation strategies.
69 Even so, T okyo has been trying to change course, allocating $2.2 billion in 2020 to entice Japanese companies with operations in
China to move back to Japan or Southeast Asian countries to diversify Japan’s supply chains; Blue Dot Network—a set of countries
that will certify infrastructure projects as compliant with global standards—provides a strong base from which to expand US efforts.
A resilience plan mandate should require key critical infrastructure companies to have at a minimum non-Chinese companies in
their supply chains—a “China-plus one” approach—which would require additional supplier in a democracy/member state.
• For other economic sectors, such as furniture, appli-
ances, electronics, toys, industrial parts, and other
broad streams of existing commerce, D-TEP would
generally permit open trade and investment, in accor-
dance with the WTO and other existing trade agree-
ments. But this would be subject to two important
caveats. First, trade in these sectors (as well as those
above) may be restricted by existing, and potentially
future, sanctions against China and Russia for viola-
tions of international norms. This includes sanctions
against Russia for its invasion of Ukraine, and against
China for its human rights violations in Xinjiang and
Hong Kong, as well as penalties imposed against
Beijing for unfair trade practices. Second, democracies
should avoid becoming overly dependent on China or
Russia in any specific industry sector, or on aggregate
imports or exports, in ways that could give these auto-
cratic powers potential coercive leverage. D-TEP could
develop guidelines on levels of risk and when supply
chain diversification may be beneficial in these sectors.
Delineating between these sectors and implementing
this framework in a practical way may prove challenging.
Moreover, regulating the sourcing of critical components
for an industry may not be entirely effective by itself, as
there may be single sources hidden several layers down
in the supply chain that need to be addressed as well. Still,
such a framework could provide a rational and construc-
tive starting point to build upon. Moreover, once D-TEP
is established, other autocratic challengers to the rules-
based order, such as Iran and North Korea, could be
considered for similar treatment under Pillar One.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
19ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
Pillar Two: Assisting Democracies
Subject to Economic Coercion
Pillar Two would entail a commitment by D-TEP member
states to take collective action to assist other members
if they become the subject of economic coercion. Some,
including former NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh
Rasmussen, have likened this to NATO’s Article V, in which
an attack against one is considered an attack against all.70
In response to such coercion, member states could seek
to locate and coordinate delivery of alternative sources
of goods to replace those being cut off, provide financial
assistance to target nations that suffer economic damage,
and impose sanctions or other retaliatory actions against
those engaged in economic coercion.71 Where private-
sector or non-governmental entities are being targeted,
member states could also seek to coordinate joint
actions to defend these entities and mitigate the potential
economic harm.
Whereas Pillar One would be aimed at taking steps to
prevent coercion by reducing opportunities available
to revisionist autocracies, Pillar Two would be aimed
at deterring such coercion through the threat of retalia-
tory measures and the promise of assistance to potential
target nations that would render the use of such coer -
cion ineffectual. If Pillar One is successful, the opportu-
nities available to autocratic powers to engage in such
coercion would be limited. But fully implementing Pillar
One, including the reorchestration of supply chains, could
take years. In the meantime, D-TEP member states need
to develop a common understanding as to what types of
coercive actions would trigger action under Pillar Two,
and what forms of assistance member states would be
prepared to provide.
Pillar Three: Reducing Trade
Barriers within the Free World
Pillar Three would outline an agreement between member
states to reduce trade barriers among themselves in
specific industry sectors. Such an agreement would need
to be structured in a narrow and practical way, beginning
with the critical sectors identified in Pillar One, where it is
in the interest of D-TEP members to promote the shifting
of supply chains away from China and Russia, and toward
the democratic world. For these sectors, member states
would seek agreement on reducing tariff and nontariff
70 Ivo H. Daalder and Anders Fogh Rasmussen, "Memo on an 'Economic Article 5' to Counter Authoritarian Coercion, The
Chicago Council on Global Affairs, June 9, 2022. Jonas Parello-Plesner, “An ‘Economic Article 5’ to Counter China,” Wall
Street Journal, February 11, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/an-economic-article-5-to-counter-china-11613084046.
71 Recently, democracies have sought to work together to assist nations that have been the targets of coercion. The EU, for example, filed a claim
with the WTO in light of Chinese coercion campaign against Lithuania, and lowered tariffs on imports from Ukraine, after Russia’s invasion.
72 Zoe Liu Zongyuan, “What the China-Solomon Islands Pact Means for the US and South Pacific,” Council on Foreign Relations, May 4,
2022, https://www.cfr.org/in-brief/china-solomon-islands-security-pact-us-south-pacific. Beijing’s recently-concluded bilateral security
cooperation agreement with the Solomon Islands, for example, reflects China’s growing influence in the South Pacific.
barriers; harmonizing standards and regulations to
promote greater compatibility; and enacting reciprocal
procurement provisions, so that preferential treatment
for government purchases of goods and services in these
sectors would extend to all D-TEP member states.
The reduction of trade barriers in these sectors could
help facilitate greater market access in these sectors
to member states, which would provide another mean-
ingful incentive for nations to take on the commitments
required under Pillar One. Over time, D-TEP could also
facilitate agreements to reduce trade barriers in other
industry sectors as well, serving as a platform to revitalize
discussions among the United States and its democratic
allies—across the Atlantic and Indo-Pacific—on fostering
more free, fair, and secure trade, while promoting greater
economic integration within the free world.
Pillar Four: Coordinating Initiatives
to Counter Autocratic Influence
Pillar Four would constitute a set of bold economic initia-
tives in areas in which revisionist autocracies, particularly
China, are outcompeting the democratic world, and in
which the United States and its allies have a particularly
strong interest in working together to maintain a strategic
edge. These initiatives could help counter Beijing and
Moscow’s attempts to co-opt nations in the global South
by making them more economically dependent on China
and Russia.72
• Global infrastructure initiative. Through its Belt and
Road Initiative, China has invested billions of dollars
in physical infrastructure across Asia, Africa, and Latin
America, as it aims to become the partner of choice
for countries across the global South. In response, the
United States and its allies launched the Build Back
Better World (B3W) partnership at the G7 summit in
June 2021, with the goal of creating “a values-driven,
D-TEP would entail a commitment
by member states to take collective
action to assist other members
if they become the subject of
economic coercion.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
20 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
high-standard, and transparent infrastructure part-
nership” to help finance projects in developing coun-
tries.73 D-TEP could serve as the coordinating body for
an expanded infrastructure initiative, building on the
G7's recently announced global infrastructure plan,
with the aim of drawing increased levels of funding
from member states, mobilizing private-sector capital,
and coordinating funding from development-finance
institutions. Grounded in D-TEP, such an initiative could
facilitate priority funding for infrastructure projects in
member states, and allow companies based in member
states priority access to bid on new projects in third
countries.
• Digital commerce initiative. Digital commerce
represents the future of global economic growth.
Seeking to outcompete the democratic world, China’s
Digital Silk Road aims to serve as the center of global
e-commerce networks by promoting digital free-trade
zones, establishing regional logistics centers, and
expanding China-centric digital infrastructure in devel-
oping countries—including next-generation cellular
networks, fiber-optic cables, and data centers.74 While
enhancing digital connectivity, these efforts are also
serving to spread authoritarianism and infringe on
fundamental human rights. D-TEP could launch a digi-
tal-commerce initiative aimed at counteracting the
spread of digital authoritarianism and ensuring that
international digital connectivity creates a secure,
free, and open cyber environment. 75 The initiative
would coordinate efforts among democracies to pool
financial resources, and provide logistical support for
building digital infrastructure in the developing world,
while seeking agreement on shaping norms and rules
on digital commerce that are consistent with demo-
cratic norms and values.76
73 “Fact Sheet: President Biden and G7 Leaders Launch Build Back Better World (B3W) Partnership,” White House, June 12, 2021, https://www.
whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/06/12/fact-sheet-president-biden-and-g7-leaders-launch-build-back-better-world-
b3w-partnership/; “DFC Announces Support for New Build Back Better World Initiative, Bolstering Global Infrastructure Investments,” US
International Development Finance Corporation, June 12, 2021, https://www.dfc.gov/media/press-releases/dfc-announces-support-new-build-
back-better-world-initiative-bolstering-global. See also Tal Alexrod, "G-7 rolls out global infrastructure plan," ABC News, June 26, 2022.
74 Jonathan E. Hillman, “Competing with China’s Digital Silk Road,” Center for Strategic and International
Studies, February 9, 2021, https://www.csis.org/analysis/competing-chinas-digital-silk-road.
75 Clayton Cheney, “China’s Digital Silk Road: Strategic T echnological Competition and Exporting Political Illiberalism,” Council on Foreign
Relations, September 26, 2019, https://www.cfr.org/blog/chinas-digital-silk-road-strategic-technological-competition-and-exporting-political.
76 Pepijn Bergsen, et al., “Digital Trade and Digital T echnical Standards,” Chatham House, January 24, 2022, https://
www.chathamhouse.org/2022/01/digital-trade-and-digital-technical-standards/digital-trade;
 Daniel S. Hamilton, “Advancing Supply Chain Resilience and Competitiveness: Recommendations for U.S.-EU Action,”
Transatlantic Leadership Network, https://www.transatlantic.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/TTC-Supply-Chains.pdf.
77 Ana Swanson and Brad Plumer, “China’s Solar Dominance Presents Biden With an Ugly Dilemma,” New Y ork Times,
April 20, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/20/business/economy/china-biden-solar-panels.html.
78 Such an initiative could build on the Biden administration’s recently released strategy on securing supply chains to ensure a clean energy transition.
Tsisilile Igogo, “America’s Strategy to Secure the Supply Chain for a Robust Clean Energy Transition,” US Department of Energy, February 24, 2022,
 https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2022-02/America%E2%80%99s%20Strategy%20to%20Secure%20the%20
Supply%20Chain%20for%20a%20Robust%20Clean%20Energy%20Transition%20FINAL.docx_0.pdf.
79 Ash Jain and Matthew Kroenig, Toward a Democratic T echnology Alliance: An Innovation Edge That Favors Freedom, Atlantic Council, June 2022,
https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/toward-a-democratic-technology-alliance-an-innovation-edge-that-favors-freedom/
• Clean energy technology initiative. China dominates
the global supply chain for renewable energy sources,
producing the vast majority of the world’s solar panel
materials.77 D-TEP would facilitate the launch of a new
clean energy technology initiative aimed at ensuring
that the democratic world will not become depen-
dent on China or any other autocratic power for its
future energy requirements. The core of this initiative
will include a dramatic infusion of funding for research
and development, production incentives, and other
measures to ensure that the free world will lead the
future of clean energy manufacturing and innova-
tion, such as geothermal, hydropower, nuclear, solar,
and wind.78 Similar initiatives could be developed to
jumpstart cooperation around other critical technolo-
gies—from AI to quantum computing to hypersonics—
with the goal of accelerating technological innovation
among leading democracies and reducing reliance on
China.79
Together, these four pillars would facilitate a series of
mutually reinforcing activities, provide an integrated frame-
work to reduce strategic dependence on autocracies, and
advance the rules-based economic order. D-TEP would
pool the economic power and influence of the world’s
leading democracies based around shared interests and
a common willingness to act.
At the same time, it would consolidate a meaningful
package of economic benefits that many nations around
the world—in particular, developing nations in the global
South—could find attractive. Such benefits could poten-
tially accrue across each of D-TEP’s four pillars. First, partic-
ipating nations could benefit from the potential relocation
of manufacturing facilities in critical sectors that would be
incentivized under Pillar One, providing increased jobs
for their citizens and facilitating access to secure supply

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
21ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
chains in critical sectors that would allow them to reduce
their dependencies on China and Russia. Second, they
could benefit from the guarantee of economic support
from the United States and other powerful democracies
under Pillar Two, which could provide a robust deterrent
against economic coercion. Third, they could benefit
from the reduction of trade barriers and increased market
access to other member states in the industry sectors
covered under Pillar Three. Fourth, they could benefit
from increased foreign investment, financial assistance,
and private-sector participation that could follow from the
initiatives described under Pillar Four. More broadly, by
joining a coalition of likeminded nations prepared to take
meaningful action, member states would become part of
a robust network of partners to help protect and defend
the rules-based trade and economic order that has been
essential to sustaining their own national prosperity.
At the same time, such efforts to limit trade with China and
Russia in specific sectors may lead to some economic
downsides, as supply chains shift to higher-wage econ-
omies with increased production costs. However, the
premise of the framework is that the strategic benefits
of reorchestrating supply chains will outweigh these
economic costs in the long-run. Moreover, such costs
would be mitigated if some of the impacted supply chains
shift toward lower-wage member-states, such as India or
Mexico.
Importantly, D-TEP would not require member states to
fully decouple from China or choose between trading with
China and the West. Rather, it would focus on selective
decoupling – restricting trade or incentivizing supply chain
shifts in specific industry sectors, leaving unchanged the
ability to engage in trade and investment across a wide
range of other areas (except, as noted, where targeted
sanctions have been imposed).
Importantly, D-TEP would not
require member states to fully
decouple from China or choose
between trading with China and
the West.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
22 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
V. PARTICIPATING NATIONS
80 The D-10, in its current manifestation in the form of the Atlantic Council’s D-10 Strategy Forum, includes these ten
participants. India was also included in Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s attempts to formalize a D-10 in 2021.
81 Ash Jain and Matthew Kroenig, “From the G7 to a D10: Strengthening Democratic Cooperation for Today’s Challenges,” Atlantic Council, June 1, 2021,
https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/From-the-G7-to-a-D10-Strengthening-Democratic-Cooperation-for-Todays-Challenges.pdf.
82 Ash Jain and Matthew Kroenig, “An Alliance of Democracies: From Concept to Reality in an Era of Strategic
Competition,” Atlantic Council, December 7, 2021, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/
An-Alliance-of-Democracies-From-concept-to-reality-in-an-era-of-strategic-competition.pdf.
A
t the outset, D-TEP would bring together leading
democracies that share strategic concerns over
the challenges to the rules-based order posed by
China and Russia. This could include the advanced industri-
alized economies of the G7—the United Kingdom, Canada,
France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the United States—and
the D-10, which also includes Australia, South Korea, and
the European Union.80 Collectively, these leading democ-
racies constitute nearly 60 percent of the world’s economy,
and would represent an influential economic bloc.81
In addition, D-TEP would aspire to include India, Mexico,
Brazil, South Africa, Indonesia, and other democracies
worldwide that are willing to support the goals of this
framework. Bringing in these emerging economies could
bolster the legitimacy and impact of this framework. With
all of the world’s democracies on board, D-TEP’s share
of the global economy would rise to about 70 percent.82
And as noted above, the inclusion of lower-wage econo-
mies could also help with the goal of shifting supply chains
away from China, as it would provide attractive economic
alternatives for firms to relocate manufacturing facilities.
However, many of these nations, with their traditional
nonaligned foreign policies, have been reluctant to take
sides in what they see as a growing competition among
great powers, and may hesitate to participate in a new
framework that requires them to circumscribe existing
trade relationships with countries on which they are
significantly dependent. India, for example, relies heavily
on Russia for military equipment, and China remains
Indonesia’s largest trading partner. But the economic bene-
fits of participating in D-TEP may help shift the strategic
calculus among many of these nations and incentivize
them to reduce such ties.
Also requiring careful consideration is whether D-TEP
membership should be extended to nondemocratic,
but increasingly significant, economic partners such
as Vietnam. On the one hand, it would be beneficial to
include all free-market nations—democratic or not—that
are willing to join in common efforts to constrain China
and/or Russia, as provided by this framework. On the other
hand, for D-TEP to succeed, critical supply chains must be
relocated to nations that are stable, reliable, and trusted—
and the most stable and trusted partners are those that
are committed to democracy and the rule of law. If these
supply chains simply end up moving from one set of
autocracies to another, that may not serve the intended
purpose, as it would expose these supply chains to new
vulnerabilities stemming from domestic political instability
and international human rights sanctions. More broadly,
President Biden launches a new Indo-Pacific Economic Framework in Tokyo, and US officials meet with their European coun-
terparts in the US-EU Trade and Technology Council. (via REUTERS)

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
23ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
there is a compelling economic and strategic rationale for
keeping critical supply chains grounded within democ-
racies that share common interests and values, and are
committed to upholding the rules-based order, partic-
ularly in the context of the current systemic competition
between democracy and autocracy.
Still, completely shutting out nations that are unfree or
unwilling to commit to all of the actions required under
this framework could prove counterproductive, as it would
risk ceding economic influence to China and Russia.
These considerations suggest that D-TEP may benefit
from a two-tiered membership structure that focuses on
committed democracies, but provides an avenue for asso-
ciation with others as well, provided they meet certain
criteria:
• DTEP allies, or full members, would consist of nations
that meet two basic criteria. First, they must be free-
market democracies committed to the rule of law.
This would include nations whose economies are
premised on open markets and transparency, and
whose governments are democratically elected and
committed to protecting human rights and the rule of
law.83 Second, they must be willing to commit to the full
scope of obligations required under D-TEP, including
the measures aimed at regulating trade with both
China and Russia. Nations that meet these criteria
would be considered full members and would gain the
full slate of benefits described above.
• DTEP associates would consist of other nations that
do not meet both of these criteria, but are broadly
supportive of D-TEP’s goals. Associates would need
to be free-market economies, and must be willing to
make a sufficient level of commitment to regulating
trade with China and Russia, though they may not
embrace the full scope of this framework. D-TEP asso-
ciates, which could include democratic and non-demo-
cratic partners, would gain partial access to the supply
chain reorchestration benefits under Pillar One, as well
as a subset of benefits under each of the other pillars.
83 Several credible indices can be relied upon to determine which nations meet this criteria, including, for example, Freedom House’s
Freedom in the World. “Freedom in the World,” Freedom House, https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world.
84 See remarks by Liz Truss, suggesting that the democratic world should be open to striking trade deals with countries that do not share
its approach to domestic political governance, providing these countries are not trying to undermine liberal democracies, their shared
institutions, or international law and order. https://chathamhouse.soutron.net/Portal/Default/en-GB/RecordView/Index/190734
85 Taiwan is a full member of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC).
Such a two-tiered approach could be useful as a means
to consolidate support among democracies committed
to implementing the full scope of this framework, while
providing a docking mechanism to bring in others that are
generally supportive, but not yet willing to make all of the
required commitments. D-TEP allies would serve as the
foundation of an economic alliance of democratic nations
united in pursuing common goals, while D-TEP associate
status would help create a wider network of partners
working to bolster supply chain resiliency.84
Maintaining the distinction between these two types of
participation is important, because it provides an aspi-
rational pathway for nations not yet fully committed to
take the actions necessary to achieve full membership
over time. It will also be critical to ensure that the benefits
available to D-TEP associates are narrowly tailored, and
commensurate with the limited scope of commitments
they are willing to take on. For D-TEP to achieve its goals,
the benefits of ally status must be significantly more robust
than those accorded by associate status, so that they can
serve as meaningful inducements toward achieving full
membership.
In addition to the leading democracies of the D-10, most
of the thirty-eight member states of the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
including small and middle-power democracies across
Europe and parts of Latin America, would likely qualify for
membership as D-TEP allies. Taiwan might also be invited
as a full member.85 Every effort should also be made to
bring in rising democracies, including India and Mexico, as
full or associate members.
At the same time, the success of this partnership will
not be determined by how many nations end up joining.
Rather, it will depend on having the full commitment of the
world’s largest democratic economies. If it can facilitate
agreement among the G7 or D-10 across its four pillars,
D-TEP would go a long way toward achieving its goals,
and would have a significant impact on protecting the
rules-based economic order.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
24 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
VI. CHALLENGES AND OBSTACLES
86 “China Wants to Insulate Itself Against Western Sanctions,” Economist, February 26, 2022,
https://www.economist.com/business/china-wants-to-insulate-itself-against-western-sanctions/21807805.
While the rationale for establishing a new trade and invest-
ment partnership along the lines of D-TEP is compel -
ling, several obstacles and concerns must be seriously
considered.
• D-TEP could further polarize the global order. One
significant concern is that, by fostering greater
economic decoupling between democracies and
China and Russia, D-TEP could further polarize the
global order and play into a new Cold War dynamic.
While this is an important factor to consider, the
reality is that the global order is already polarized.
Competition between democratic and autocratic
powers is now an established feature of the current
system, and the key question is whether demo -
cratic nations can find effective ways to organize for
success. Still, even as they establish a framework for
closer economic alignment, the United States and
its allies should continue to engage with China—and
Russia, subject to the state of the war in Ukraine—to
seek cooperation on issues where they may still have
overlapping interests, such as trade and investment
in non-sensitive sectors, global financial stability,
and sustainable development, including through the
United Nations and the G20.
• Economic decoupling from China and Russia could
prove counterproductive. A related concern is that, as
the Chinese and Russian economies are further disag-
gregated from the West, Beijing and Moscow will have
a freer hand to act more aggressively to challenge
the rules-based order. This is also an important argu-
ment. Beijing is itself looking for ways to decouple in
areas it considers critical, in order to reduce its own
economic exposure to the West. 86 And, untethered
from the global economy, China and Russia may be
able to take greater political and military risks without
fear of economic retaliation. D-TEP, however, is not
aimed at completely cutting off China and Russia from
the global economy. Rather, it is focused on targeted
industry sectors where democracies are more vulner-
able to coercion. Trade would continue in other sectors
(except where sanctions have been imposed), and
the United States and its allies would continue to
International trade remains vital to global prosperity, and leading democracies should continue to support efforts to advance
an open global economy. (via REUTERS)

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
25ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
have economic leverage over Beijing and Moscow
in these sectors. With D-TEP in place, the West could
have greater economic leverage against Russia and
China, as it could threaten to impose sanctions in these
sectors without worrying about the potential for retalia-
tory sanctions against critical supply chains.
• D-TEP could undermine the WTO. Another important
concern is that D-TEP could undermine the interna-
tional trading system—in particular, the World Trade
Organization, which represents a global consensus in
favor of a free and open economy. Critics may suggest
that the United States and its allies should concen-
trate on strengthening and reforming the WTO, rather
than building a separate framework with a subset of
democratic WTO members. However, the WTO is not
designed to address issues such as strategic depen-
dency or economic coercion, and the United States
and its allies would need to look elsewhere for action
on these issues. Moreover, there is not a binary
choice between upholding the WTO or advancing
a new economic partnership among democracies.
Washington should continue to work at strengthening
the WTO, even as it works more closely with demo-
cratic partners to reduce supply chain vulnerabili -
ties and advance other shared interests. By fostering
closer coordination on economic challenges, D-TEP
might also be used as a mechanism to hold account-
able those engaging in unfair trade practices, including
China.
• D-TEP would be too unwieldy and impractical to
implement. Another concern is that, by attempting
to combine too many elements and a wide range of
participants, D-TEP will be difficult or impractical to
bring to fruition. It would be more feasible, critics might
contend, to treat the four proposed pillars as separate
initiatives, and work through smaller regional group-
ings, such as the Quad and TTC, rather than through a
single entity. While this concern merits consideration,
in many ways, D-TEP’s value stems from the notion
that the sum is greater than the parts. The four pillars
proposed here are interconnected and mutually rein-
forcing, and they will have a significantly greater impact
if implemented as part of an integrated framework.
Moreover, advancing them under a common umbrella
87 Alan Crawford, Colum Murphy, and Alberto Nardelli, “Alarmed by Russia’s Invasion, Europe Rethinks Its China Ties,” Bloomberg, April 28, 2022, https://
www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-04-28/alarmed-by-russia-s-aggression-europe-rethinks-its-china-ties; Binnendijk, et al., The China Plan.
88 Alexander Chipman Koty, “European Parliament Votes to Freeze the EU-China Comprehensive Agreement on Investment,” China
Briefing, May 27, 2021, https://www.china-briefing.com/news/european-parliament-votes-to-freeze-the-eu-china-comprehensive-
agreement-on-investment; Phillippe Le Corre, “Europe’s Tightrope Diplomacy on China,” Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace, March 2021, https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/03/24/europe-s-tightrope-diplomacy-on-china-pub-84159.
may actually make it easier to gain traction, as this
could help draw support from a wider range of constitu-
encies—from those who support new trade restrictions
and a harder line on China, to those who support free
trade and strengthening alliances. That said, D-TEP
sets ambitious goals, and bringing this partnership
to fruition will require strong US leadership and close
coordination with a small core group of allies. And if it
proves unfeasible to establish in the immediate term,
the concepts underpinning D-TEP could still serve as a
comprehensive vision for integrating more narrowly-fo-
cused dialogues and initiatives over time.
• Europe will not support trade restrictions on China.
Another key obstacle relates to whether Europe will
be prepared to take on new economic commitments
that could significantly reduce trade with China. Given
the significant trade and investment ties they have with
China, many European nations have been reticent
about the prospect of restricting trade and investment.
However, the strategic context with regard to Europe’s
views on China has changed significantly, even in just
the past year. EU-China relations have sharply deteri-
orated in light of China’s human rights crackdown in
Xinjiang and Hong Kong, its aggressive gambit to
sanction members of the European Parliament, and
its coercive pressure campaign against Lithuania.87 In
response, the EU parliament indefinitely postponed
plans to adopt a new Comprehensive Agreement on
Investment with China, and EU strategy documents
now recognize China as a “systemic rival.”88 Following
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, many European govern-
ments have also expressed concern over supply chain
dependencies with China, which could make it more
difficult to hold Beijing accountable if it were to provide
The four pillars proposed here
are interconnected and mutually
reinforcing, and they will have
a significantly greater impact
if implemented as part of an
integrated framework.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
26 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
direct support to Russia.89 These factors could make it
easier for Europe to support the supply chain decou-
pling activities provided under D-TEP.
• The private sector will lobby hard to preserve open
trade with China. Another concern is that the private
sector may seek to scuttle any effort that could accel-
erate economic decoupling with China. Multinational
companies in the United States, Europe, and other
democracies have made significant investments in
existing supply chains, particularly manufacturing facil-
ities in China, and it will certainly entail higher costs to
dismantle these facilities and relocate them. However,
driven partly by supply chain challenges caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, many companies have already
begun to recognize that exclusive reliance on Chinese
manufacturing is risky, and have started to shift produc-
tion lines elsewhere. In addition, many business exec-
utives increasingly understand the national security
concerns regarding China, and are adjusting to the
new strategic context. According to the US Chamber
of Commerce, companies are anticipating that “some
form of decoupling will be likely… to prepare for or
hedge against such an outcome.”90 Because D-TEP
would allow companies to continue doing business
89 FT piece: “I don’t want us to be facing a similar situation with China in 10 years,” Lars Klingbeil, co-chair of the Social Democratic party, told Der Spiegel
at the weekend. “We have to drastically reduce our dependence on authoritarian states. We can see that with Russia in terms of our energy supply.
With China, we can start now.” Relatedly, there is renewed interest in free Germany’s Finance Minister recently called for renewing discussions on
a transatlantic free trade agreement. We should resume negotiations on a transatlantic free trade agreement. Especially now in the (Ukraine) crisis,
it is becoming clear how important free trade is with partners around the world who share our values,” Christian Lindner, the finance minister of
Europe’s largest economy, told Handelsblatt. Reuters. https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/germany-calls-for-new-talks-on-transatlantic-trade-deal
90 “Understanding US-China Decoupling,” US Chamber of Commerce, 2021,
https://www.uschamber.com/assets/archived/images/024001_us_china_decoupling_report_fin.pdf
91 Franklin D. Kramer, “Managed Competition: Meeting China’s Challenge in a Multi-vector World,” December 2019,
https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Meeting-Chinas-Challenges-Report-WEB.pdf
across a wide range of industry sectors, the private
sector may actually support a framework that focuses
on providing greater incentives to shift supply chains in
the specific sectors identified in Pillar One.
7 Using D-TEP to reduce trade barriers is politi-
cally unfeasible. Finally, some have suggested that
Congress will not support attempts to reduce trade
barriers, as Pillar Two would entail. While free-trade
agreements have become politically unpopular in the
United States, there is growing support in Congress
for shifting supply chains away from China, and toward
allies and partners, as evidenced by passage of bills in
both the House and Senate, with bipartisan support,
that call for ally shoring. The politics around trade in
the United States and other democracies are shifting.
China is perceived as a significant economic threat,
and Congress may be willing to support the reduc-
tion of trade barriers and greater market access in
specific sectors if it is part of an overall package, such
as D-TEP, that would help reduce strategic dependen-
cies, while creating new jobs in the United States. The
notion of supporting free, fair, and secure trade may
have growing political resonance in the context of the
growing challenges from Russia and China.91

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
27ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
VI. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ACTION
B
ringing D-TEP to fruition will require determined
US leadership, and support from key allies. To
move this forward in a feasible way, several prac-
tical steps should be considered.
1 The United States should establish a senior diplomatic
envoy, based at the State Department or National
Security Council, that would be responsible for devel-
oping and coordinating efforts to reduce supply chain
dependencies on China and Russia. In close coordi-
nation with the Commerce Department and US Trade
Representative, such an envoy could take the lead in
engaging allies and partners on such efforts, including
the potential for a new trade and economic partner-
ship, as proposed here. In addition, the administration
should consider establishing a dedicated Office of
Strategic Competition that would focus on integrating
a wider range of strategies—including across the areas
of trade, technology, security, disinformation, democ-
racy, and development—that are required to posi-
tion the United States and its allies to succeed in the
long-term systemic competition with rival autocracies.
Similar offices should be established by other leading
democracies to serve as counterparts for more effec-
tive strategic coordination.
2 The United States should engage a small core group
of likeminded allies to discuss the possibility of estab-
lishing a new integrated trade and economic part-
nership. Initially, this core group could include some
members of the G7 or D-10, including Germany,
Japan, and the United Kingdom, which, together with
the United States, constitute the world’s four largest
democratic economies. If agreement on a basic
framework can be reached, discussion could expand
to include the remaining G7 and D-10 members, as
well as other key allies and partners.
3 Given their economic and political significance,
Mexico and India, among other rising democracies,
should be approached early on in the consultation
process. Bringing these nations into this framework
The United States should engage
a small core group of likeminded
allies to discuss the possibility
of establishing a new integrated
trade and economic partnership.
Congressional legislation and dedicated funding will be required to make D-TEP a reality. (via REUTERS)

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
28 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
would provide an enormous boost, and the United
States and others should prioritize efforts to include
them – ideally as full members if they are willing to
sign on to the required obligations, but at least as
associates, with a pathway toward full membership
over time. Once a sufficient set of allies and partners
have expressed their support for this framework, the
administration could then proceed with formalizing an
agreement and inviting a broader group of nations to
participate.
4 The Biden administration should also consult
Congress early in the process, as dedicated funding
and legislation will be required to make D-TEP a
reality. Several members of Congress, across both
sides of the aisle, have expressed support for supply
chain resilience and ally shoring. These and other
members should be engaged as this framework
is being developed. Similarly, lawmakers in other
leading democracies should be consulted to help
build support among allies and partners. In addition,
the private sector should be engaged to ensure that
the incentives for supply chain reorchestration are
appropriately designed, and to help build a broader
base of support for this framework.
5 Finally, even as it pursues a new trade and economic
partnership among allies and partners, Washington
should seek to reinvigorate efforts to strengthen and
reform the WTO and foster efforts to expand greater
economic openness. At the same time, it should
continue to engage with Beijing to discuss trade and
economic issues, including on areas where greater
cooperation may be possible, and where disagree-
ments need to be resolved. The administration should
also reassure China that the supply chain reorches-
tration called for under D-TEP is not intended to cut
off China from the global economy. Rather, the United
States and its allies will continue to allow trade and
economic engagement in non-strategic and non-crit-
ical industry sectors (subject to existing sanctions),
while seeking a resolution to the ongoing trade
disputes and pressing Beijing to take meaningful
steps to end its unfair trade practices.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
29ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
VII. CONCLUSION
92 Carbis Bay G7 Communique, June 2021, https://www.g7uk.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/
Carbis-Bay-G7-Summit-Communique-PDF-430KB-25-pages-3.pdf
M
eeting in the United Kingdom in 2021, the leaders
of the G7 affirmed their commitment to “champi-
oning freer, fairer trade within a reformed trading
system” and “a more resilient global economy,” while
“upholding our values as open societies.”92 In the after-
math of the Covid-19 supply chain disruptions and Putin’s
further invasion of Ukraine, leading democracies have
begun to take meaningful actions toward these goals.
But there is much more to be done. Leading democracies
must now work to build a more systematic and sustainable
framework to selectively decouple from revisionist autoc-
racies, and advance a free, fair, and secure trading system.
The United States and its democratic allies and partners
retain a preponderance of global power in the world, and
if they stand united behind a shared vision, they can have
an enormous impact in shaping the future of the global
economic order. Utilizing their combined economic influ-
ence, they can work to ensure that the new third phase
of the global economic order that will define much of the
21st century is characterized not by protectionism and
fragmentation, but rather by openness and resilience
that leads to a more secure, prosperous, and democratic
world.
a. “Mapping Countries Manufacturing Output: China’s Superpower vs. the World,” Howmuch.net, 2018, Mapping
Countries Manufacturing Output: China's Superpower vs. the World (howmuch.net)
b. Felix K. Chang, “China’s Rare Earth Metals Consolidation and Market Power,” Foreign Policy Research Institute, March 2, 2022,https://www.fpri.org/
article/2022/03/chinas-rare-earth-metals-consolidation-and-market-power/#:~:text=T ellingly%2C%20China%E2%80%99s%20share%20of%20global%20
rare%20earth%20metals,sought%20ways%20to%20reduce%20their%20reliance%20on%20them; Taisei Hoyama et. al., “Reliance on Chinese Protective
Gear Soars in Chinese Pandemic’s Wake,” Nikkea Asia, August 24, 2020, https://asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/Coronavirus/Reliance-on-Chinese-protective-
gear-soars-in-pandemic-s-wake; “National Blueprint for Lithium Batteries,” Federal Consortium for Advanced Batteries, US Department of Energy, June
2021, https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2021-06/FCAB%20National%20Blueprint%20Lithium%20Batteries%200621_0.pdf; Elisabeth Braw, “When
Clean Energy Is Powered By Dirty Labor” Foreign Policy, April 12, 2021, https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/04/12/clean-energy-china-xinjiang-uyghur-labor/;
Douglas Irwin, “The Pandemic Adds Momentum to the Deglobalization Trend,” Peterson Institute for International Economics, April 23, 2020, https://www.piie.
com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/pandemic-adds-momentum-deglobalization-trend; Tom Hancock and Wang Xuequiao, “China Drug Scandals
Highlight Risks to Global Supply Chain,” Financial Times, August 6, 2018, https://www.ft.com/content/38991820-8fc7-11e8-b639-7680cedcc421; “In Focus:
Reducing the EU’s Dependence on Imported Fossil Fuels,” European Commission, April 20, 2022, https://ec.europa.eu/info/news/focus-reducing-eus-
dependence-imported-fossil-fuels-2022-abr-20_en#:~:text=REPower%20EU%20to%20cut%20dependence,and%20cost%20%E2%82%AC99%20billion
c. Douglas Irwin, “The Pandemic Adds Momentum to the Deglobalization Trend,” Peterson Institute for International Economics, April
23, 2020, https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/pandemic-adds-momentum-deglobalization-trend
Citations for Graphs and Tables
(via Shutterstock)

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
30 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Ash Jain is director for democratic order with
the Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security,
where he oversees the Atlantic Council’s
Democratic Order Initiative and D-10 Strategy
Forum. His work focuses on strengthening cooperation
among democracies and advancing a rules-based, demo-
cratic order. He previously served as a member of the
secretary of state’s policy planning staff, focusing on US
alliances and partnerships, international norms, and chal-
lenges to the democratic order — including those posed
by Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea. Mr. Jain was a
Bosch public policy fellow with the German Marshall Fund
Transatlantic Academy and executive director for the
Project for a United and Strong America, where he coor-
dinated a bipartisan foreign policy task force to produce
a blueprint for a values-based national security strategy.
He also served as an adviser for the White House Office of
Global Communications and with the Senate Committee
on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. Mr. Jain
has also taught as an adjunct professor at Georgetown
University’s School of Foreign Service. He earned a JD/MS
in foreign service from Georgetown University and a BA in
political science from the University of Michigan.
Matthew Kroenig is the deputy director for
strategy in the Scowcroft Center for Strategy
and Security and director of the Scowcroft
Strategy Initiative. In this role, he supports the
director in overseeing all aspects of the Center’s work
and manages its strategy practice area. His own research
focuses on great power competition with China and
Russia, emerging technology, and strategic deterrence
and weapons nonproliferation. Dr. Kroenig is also a
tenured associate professor of government and foreign
service at Georgetown University. He previously served
in several positions in the US government, including
in the Strategy Office in the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the Strategic Assessments Group at the
Central Intelligence Agency, and is currently serving as a
commissioner on the Congressional Commission on the
Strategic Posture of the United States. Dr. Kroenig is the
author or editor of seven books, including The Return of
Great Power Rivalry: Democracy versus Autocracy from
the Ancient World to the US and China (Oxford University
Press, 2020), which was Amazon’s #1 New Release in
International Relations. He is a life member of the Council
on Foreign Relations, and holds an MA and PhD in political
science from the University of California at Berkeley.
Marianne Schneider-Petsinger is senior
research fellow in the US and the Americas
Programme at Chatham House in the United
Kingdom, responsible for analysis at the nexus
of political and economic issues. She is the project lead for
the Chatham House Global Trade Policy Forum. She writes
and speaks on global trade, transatlantic economic coop-
eration and the United States’ use of geo-economic strat-
egies and tools. She holds a BA in International Affairs and
Economics from the University of Maine, and completed
her Master’s degree, focusing on International Trade and
Finance, at the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy
at Tufts University and the John F. Kennedy School of
Government at Harvard University.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge the invaluable contributions of
Danielle Miller, as well others who helped develop this report, including
Jeffrey Cimmino, Imran Bayoumi, and Jacob Levitan.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
31ATLANTIC COUNCIL
A DEMOCRATIC TRADE PARTNERSHIP: ALLY SHORING TO COUNTER COERCION AND SECURE SUPPLY CHAINS
*Executive Committee Members

List as of May 2, 2022

CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers

EXECUTIVE
CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones

PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe

EXECUTIVE VICE
CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley

VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev

TREASURER
*George Lund

DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
John Bonsell
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
Richard R. Burt
*Teresa Carlson
*James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Richard Edelman
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Mark T. Esper
*Michael Fisch
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
*Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Brian L. Kelly
Henry A. Kissinger
John E. Klein
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Yann Le Pallec
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Christian Marrone
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Dambisa F. Moyo
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
*Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell
dddMcCormick
Michael Punke
Ashraf Qazi
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
Gil Tenzer
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim

HONORARY
DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster

*Executive Committee Members

List as of May 2, 2022

CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers

EXECUTIVE
CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones

PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe

EXECUTIVE VICE
CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley

VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev

TREASURER
*George Lund

DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
John Bonsell
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
Richard R. Burt
*Teresa Carlson
*James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Richard Edelman
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Mark T. Esper
*Michael Fisch
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
*Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Brian L. Kelly
Henry A. Kissinger
John E. Klein
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Yann Le Pallec
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Christian Marrone
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Dambisa F. Moyo
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
*Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell
dddMcCormick
Michael Punke
Ashraf Qazi
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
Gil Tenzer
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim

HONORARY
DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan
organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and
engagement in international affairs
based on the central role of the
Atlantic community in meeting
today’s global challenges.
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 778-4952
www.AtlanticCouncil.org
