
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
1
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Erich C. Frandrup
Embracing Underseas Robots:
A US Strategy to Maintain
Undersea Superiority in an
Age of Unmanned Systems

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
ISBN# ISBN-13: 978-1-61977-130-7
Cover image: PACIFIC OCEAN (Aug. 13, 2020) Sailors assigned to Coastal Riverine Squadron (CRS) 3 and the expedi-
tionary mine countermeasure company of Explosive Ordnance Disposal Mobile Unit (EODMU) 5 retrieve a Mark 18 Mod
2 unmanned underwater vehicle (UUV) during a transit through the Northern Mariana Islands. EODMU-5 and CRS-3
operate together onboard a Mark VI patrol boat to transport, launch and retrieve the UUV for underwater survey collec-
tions in support of Navy Expeditionary Forces Command Pacific-Task Force (CTF) 75. CTF-75 is the primary expedition-
ary task force responsible for the planning and execution of coastal riverine operations, explosive ordnance disposal,
diving engineering and construction, and underwater construction in the U.S. 7th fleet area of operations. (U.S. Navy
photo by Mass Communication Specialist 2nd Class Cole C. Pielop) 200813-N-BR087-1100. https://www.flickr.com/photos/
usnavy/50247237398/in/photolist-TpPtET-2jybe6h-pXFoUv-diuF6H-enBakJ-2hemBTb-ZBEUNP-XgCxTu-9ToBnA/
This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic Council Policy on Intellectual Independence. The au-
thors are solely responsible for its analysis and recommendations. The Atlantic Council and its donors do not determine,
nor do they necessarily endorse or advocate for, any of this report’s conclusions.
Disclaimer: Commander Erich Frandrup, US Navy, was the Federal Executive Fellow at the Scowcroft Center for Strategy
and Security, Atlantic Council in Washington, DC. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not reflect
the official policy or position of the US Navy, US Department of Defense, or the US government
October 2020
Erich C. Frandrup
Senior US Navy Fellow,
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security
Embracing Underseas Robots:
A US Strategy to Maintain
Undersea Superiority in an
Age of Unmanned Systems

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
II
ATLANTIC COUNCIL

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
III
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 1
Strategic Context 2
Major Elements of the Strategy 4
I Foresight into the promise and threat of UUVs 4
II Transitioning to manned/unmanned system joint operating concepts 4
A Proposed operating concept for offensive mining 5
Operating concept for mine counter-measures (MCM) 7
Other manned/unmanned system operating concepts 9
Developing the capability - smartly! 9
Engaging our partners about unmanned undersea systems 10
Assumptions 12
Guidelines for Implementation 13
Risks, Criticisms, Alternatives 14
Conclusion 15
About the Author 16

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
IV
ATLANTIC COUNCIL

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
1
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Executive Summary
1 Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, US Department of Defense, February 15, 2016, https://fas.org/irp/doddir/dod/jp1_02.pdf, 147.
The United States Navy currently enjoys “undersea supe-
riority.” In other words, and slightly altering the doctrinal
definition of “maritime superiority,” the United States mili-
tary has a degree of dominance over any other opposing
force within the undersea domain which permits US un-
dersea forces (and its related surface, land, and air forces)
to conduct undersea operations at a given time and place
without prohibitive interference by the opposing force.1 This
is a considerable advantage, and one that is largely due to
the strength, versatility, and vastness of the US submarine
force. In an age of emerging technologies with increased
development and use of unmanned systems, this strategy
maps out how the United States will maintain undersea su-
periority against its competitors.
There are four major elements to this strategy. First, de-
veloping foresight on both the promise that Unmanned
Undersea Vehicles (UUV) possess and the threats that they
pose within the undersea domain is critical. Second, there
needs to be a transition to manned/unmanned system joint
operating concepts. This paper provides a “deep-dive” on
two potential operating concepts pertaining to mine war-
fare. Third, the capabilities required within these operating
concepts need to be developed smartly and comprehen-
sively. Fourth, opportunities to engage US partners and al-
lies with unmanned systems should be considered, even
outside the bounds of military purposes.
Finally, concerning this strategy’s implementation, this
paper argues that developing offensive capabilities should
be prioritized over defensive capabilities, that existing tech-
nologies both within industry and within the military should
be leveraged, and that a “crawl-walk-run” approach to fully
operationalizing the concepts is essential.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Strategic Context
2 Norman Friedman, “Submarine,” Encyclopaedia Brittanica, June 10, 2019, https://www.britannica.com/technology/submarine-naval-vessel.
3 Andrew Tunnicliffe, “From attack submarines to spies: US Navy asks more of its underwater fleet,” Naval Technology, January 3, 2020 https://www.naval-
technology.com/features/us-nuclear-attack-submarines/.
4 Kyle Mizokami, “The Reason Why the U.S. Nuclear Submarine Force is the Best in the World,” National Interest, March 15, 2020, https://nationalinterest.
org/blog/buzz/reason-why-us-nuclear-submarine-force-best-world-133027.
5 Dimitrios Mitsopoulos, “All the Nuclear Missile Submarines in the World in One Chart,” Popular Mechanics, June 8, 2018, https://www.popularmechanics.
com/military/navy-ships/a21204892/nuclear-missile-submarines-chart/.
6 The PLA Navy: New Capabilites and Missions for the 21st Century, Office of Naval Intelligence, 2015, https://fas.org/irp/agency/oni/pla-navy-2015.pdf.
7 Kyle Mizokami, “Russia vs. America: Who Has The World’s Best Submarines?,” National Interest, September 20, 2019, https://nationalinterest.org/blog/
buzz/russia-vs-america-who-has-worlds-best-submarines-82166.
8 Robert W. Button, John Kamp, Thomas B. Curtin, and James Dryden, A Survey of Missions for Unmanned Undersea Vehicles, RAND Corporation, 2009,
https://www.rand.org/pubs/monographs/MG808.html.
Naval power is a pillar to US prosperity. It ensures the
defense of US maritime borders. It enables the United
States to project military might globally, and in doing so,
is a source of security to protect US interests in regions
far beyond its borders. Naval power is the backbone that
ensures sea lines and maritime trade lines carrying global
commerce remain protected and flow uninterrupted. It al-
lows the United States to rapidly, and with scalable force,
respond to global contingencies and crises. Perhaps most
importantly, naval power is a deterrent to US adversaries
and a symbol of assurance to US global allies and partners.
A key component of a nation’s naval power is the strength
and breadth of its undersea force, and for the past couple of
hundreds of years, the submarine force is how this strength
and breadth materialized. Submarines have been used in war
since the American Revolution and provide the preponder-
ance of a navy’s undersea power capabilities.2 Among other
advantages, submarines offer precision strike capabilities,
covertness, an ability to operate in denied areas, and an abil-
ity to operate independently for long periods of time without
refueling (especially nuclear-powered submarines). In addition
to these characteristics, nuclear-armed submarines offer an
added advantage of contributing to nuclear deterrence.
Today, and looking into the future, these characteristics
and capabilities are packaged together within the US Navy
through its current use and future development of various
classes of submarines to include the Los Angeles-class,
Seawolf-class, Virginia-class, Ohio-class, and Columbia-
class vessels.3 Today, the US submarine force is arguably
the best globally, but some of the United States’ biggest
competitors have formidable submarine forces of their
own.4,5 Specifically, it is worth comparing attributes of the
US submarine force to other global power competitors—
namely China and Russia.
Regarding China, its submarines are primarily conventionally
(i.e., non-nuclear) powered, and its use of submarines is limited
in scope, focusing more on regional missions.6 Further, unlike
US submarines, Chinese submarines are not capable of dual
missions. In other words, each submarine is not capable of
performing both anti-submarine warfare and land-attack mis-
sions but can only perform one of those missions.
Russia is the closest global peer to the United States with
regards to its submarine force. While the United States
emerged from the Cold War as the undisputed global un-
dersea warfare power, Russia emerged as a competitor in
this arena in the twenty-first century.7 Most notably, its newest
class of submarines, the Yasen-class, rivals the capabilities
of the newest US fast-attack submarines, the Virginia-class.
The Yasen-class submarines give Russia a nuclear-powered,
highly automated, and quiet platform that can be used both
for anti-submarine warfare and for strike missions.
While manned submarines will continue to be a staple of
undersea naval power for the foreseeable future, the recent
boom in, and rapid evolution of, emergent technologies
provide a glimpse into the promise of unmanned systems
within the undersea domain. Automation will continue
to develop and, if and when feasible, opportunites to re-
move “man” and replace him with “machine” will continue.
Computer processing speeds will continue to increase, the
degree of autonomy of unmanned systems will grow, data
management and data transfer processes will improve, and
batteries and other sources of energy will enable machines
to perform missions for longer periods of time without the
need to consistently recharge.
Today’s UUVs, in US naval applications, are generally used
for mine counter-measure (MCM) operations; intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) operations; and for
conducting oceanographic surveys. 8 However, there have
been recent developments by the US Navy to capitalize on
UUVs, to include awarding Boeing a contract for its Orca
Extra-Large Unmanned Undersea Vehicle (XLUUV). Based
on a previously developed prototype UUV, the XLUUV

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
could potentially be used for MCM, anti-submarine warfare,
anti-surface warfare, electronic warfare, and/or strike mis-
sions. However, the US Navy has not revealed specifics of
its intended operations.9 But just as autonomous systems in
the aerial domain brought new capabilities to, and to some
degree revolutionized, land warfare, the US Navy is only
beginning to tap into the potential that UUVs could bring
to undersea warfare.10
Meanwhile, China and Russia continue to develop their own
UUV capabilities. In October of 2019, China most notably
revealed a UUV program marked “HSU001.” While the ca-
pabilities of this large-diameter UUV are only speculative
at this point, there is suspicion that it can execute a wide
arrange of missions both at sea and within the littorals and
can deliver various payloads or even deploy smaller UUVs
and/or sensors. While its level of autonomy is unknown, the
HSU001 will likely be capable of long-endurance missions
that last weeks or even months.11
In Russia, several types of UUVs are being developed.
Perhaps most concerning, a UUV program named
“Poseidon,” first revealed by Russia in 2015, gives Russia
an intercontinental, autonomous, nuclear-powered torpe-
do.12 While its intended use remains unclear, estimates indi-
cate that the vehicle will be in service around 2027. Further,
Russia claims that this torpedo could even be fitted with
a nuclear warhead.13 Another drone, named Cephalopod,
also revealed in 2015, will potentially give Russia the capa-
bility to launch torpedoes at enemy submarines from UUVs
and can be utilized to protect or escort Russia’s ballistic
missile submarines, provide port security, or even operate
in restricted waters such as the Baltic Sea. 14 Finally, the
9 Berenice Baker, “Orca XLUUV: Boeing’s whale of an unmanned sub,” Naval Technology, January 30, 2020, https://www.naval-technology.com/features/
boeing-orca-xluuv-unmanned-submarine/.
10 Roger Connor, “The Predator, a Drone That Transformed Military Combat,” Smithsonian Air and Space Museum, March 9, 2018, https://airandspace.si.edu/
stories/editorial/predator-drone-transformed-military-combat.
11 David R. Strachan, “China Enters the UUV Fray,” Diplomat, November 22, 2019, https://thediplomat.com/2019/11/china-enters-the-uuv-fray/.
12 Matthew Kroenig, Mark Massa, and Christian Trotti, Russia’s exotic nuclear weapons and implications for the United States and NATO, Atlantic Council,
March 6, 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/issue-brief/russias-exotic-nuclear-weapons-and-implications-for-the-united-
states-and-nato/.
13 Franz-Stefan Gady, “US Intelligence: Russia’s Nuclear-Capable ‘Poseidon’ Underwater Drone Ready for Service by 2027,” Diplomat, March 26, 2019,
https://thediplomat.com/2019/03/us-intelligence-russias-nuclear-capable-poseidon-underwater-drone-ready-for-service-by-2027/.
14 Kyle Mizokami, “Russia Working on New ‘Cephalopod’ Underwater Attack Drone,” Popular Mechanics, July 30, 2018, https://www.popularmechanics.com/
military/navy-ships/a22593766/russia-working-on-new-cephalopod-underwater-attack-drone/.
15 H. I. Sutton, “Harpsichord AUV,” March 30, 2019, http://www.hisutton.com/Harpsichord_AUV.html.
16 Richard R. Burgess, “Q&A With CNO Adm. Mike Gilday,” Seapower Magazine, March 31, 2020, https://seapowermagazine.org/qa-with-cno-adm-mike-
gilday/.
17 Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America, US Department of Defense, 2018, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/
Documents/pubs/2018-National-Defense-Strategy-Summary.pdf.
18 Ben Werner, “CNO Gilday Releases New, Simplified Command Guidance to Fleet,” USNI News, December 4, 2019, https://news.usni.org/2019/12/04/cno-
gilday-releases-new-simplified-command-guidance-to-fleet.
Harpsichord is a UUV capable of being carried by either
Russian submarines or ships, giving them an improved
ISR capability. It is estimated that this UUV can operate at
depths of up to two thousand meters.15
Today, with the robustness, global reach, and technologi-
cal prowess of its submarine force alone, the United States
arguably enjoys undersea superiority relative to its biggest
global competitors. However, there is little doubt that the
emergence and promise of UUVs brings a new dimension
to undersea warfare. When recently asked about where he
sees the best application of unmanned systems for naval
warfare, the chief of naval operations (CNO) said:
Unmanned is an important part of the future. It must be a
central component of our future battle force to support the
way we want to fight in a distributed way. Going forward, I
believe there will be a requirement for seaborne-launched
vehicles to deliver effects downrange, likely using a mix of
manned and unmanned assets. Ultimately, we must lever-
age technology to expand our reach, lethality and warf-
ighter awareness in undersea, surface and air domains.
We must continue to experiment more with unmanned,
and we need to do it with greater speed.16
With this context in mind, considering the cost to build and
sustain a globally deployable submarine force moving for-
ward, and heeding both the 2018 National Defense Strategy
and the Navy’s 2019 Design for maintaining Maritime
Superiority (which both encourage the development of ad-
vanced autonomous systems), this strategy will look at how
the United States will maintain undersea superiority against
its competitors in an age of unmanned systems.17,18

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Major Elements of the Strategy
19 Bill Bahnmaier, “Managing Technology in an Interesting Unmanageable World,” Hot Topic Forum, Defense Acquisition University, January 27, 2020,
https://media.dau.edu/media/Hot+Topic+Forum+-+Managing+Technology+in+an+Interesting+Unmanageable+World/1_tt5s2841.
20 Connor, “The Predator,” 2018.
21 Timothy McGeehan and Douglas Wahl, “Flash Mob in the Shipping Lane!,” Proceedings, January 2016, https://www.usni.org/magazines/
proceedings/2016/january/flash-mob-shipping-lane.
22 Doctrine, Operating Concepts, And Vision, “Curtis E. LeMay Center for Doctrine Development and Education, February 27, 2015, https://www.doctrine.
af.mil/Portals/61/documents/Volume_1/V1-D08-Doctrine-Concepts-Vision.pdf.
This strategy has four key elements that are critical to its
implementation. First, and perhaps most importantly, the
United States needs to develop foresight both into the
promise of, and the threats posed by, unmanned vehicle
in the undersea domain. Second, there needs to be a tran-
sition to manned-unmanned system joint operating con-
cepts. Third, the capabilities need to be developed smartly
and comprehensively. Finally, the United States needs to
leverage the opportunities that these systems give us with
regards to engagement with key allies and partners, to in-
clude beyond their military applications.
I FORESIGHT INTO THE PROMISE AND
THREAT OF UUVS
As technologies proliferate across the globe, societies
and organizations often do not have the means or ability
to effectively absorb them, understand their implications,
or develop strategies to manage them. Even further, to a
large degree, emerging technologies are being integrated
into our daily lives without a complete understanding of
the positive potential or negative consequences that they
bring.19 This, coupled with the near impossibility to predict
the future of warfare and unmanned systems’ roles within
it, can make tuning technologies for future warfare use very
difficult. However, developing foresight, or a systematic
way of thinking about the future, is possible, advantageous,
and necessary.
Looking into the future, there is already a movement to re-
place “man with machine” across various warfare domains.
Perhaps most notably was the transition to using unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) to conduct both ISR and strike mis-
sions (often in conjunction with each other). This utilization
revolutionized the way the United States conducts warfare
along the land-air interface.20 Concerning UUVs, while their
developments are more in their infancies, there is appli-
cability within various warfare arenas. New concepts for
conducting mine warfare, strike operations, and ISR mis-
sions, to name a few, all have room to welcome unmanned
systems. Even humanitarian aid and disaster relief (HADR)
could see innovative ways to implement UUVs. As an exam-
ple, they could be utilized in search and recovery efforts at
sea for maritime structures (e.g., oil rigs) damaged or sunk
during natural disasters (similar to oil rigs in the Gulf of
Mexico damaged in the wake of Hurricane Katrina in 2005)
or to assist in personnel recovery efforts. UUV swarm tac-
tics, a concept already envisioned and published, could be
developed to present significant problems to or innovative
strike against an adversary’s navy. 21 Looking even further
into the future, UUVs, in conjunction with other seafloor
sensors, could potentially create a degree of global under-
sea transparency (similar to how the use and advancement
of satellite sensors and imagery has slowly created global
transparency of the Earth’s surface). Undersea transpar-
ency would undoubtedly revolutionize undersea warfare,
especially pertaining to submarine warfare and their ability
to traverse or conduct strike operations stealthily.
While UUVs show significant promise and will certainly en-
hance and complement the United States’ ability to conduct
undersea warfare operations, it is equally important to fore-
see the threats posed by an adversary’s use and employ-
ment of these systems. Any capability developed by the
United States can stimulate an “in kind” capability devel-
oped by an adversary. Thus, as UUV “offensive” capabilities
and operating concepts of our own are developed and ma-
tured, parallel efforts should remain focused on defensive
capabilities and their associated operating concepts so that
an adversary does not gain decisive advantages within the
undersea domain.
II TRANSITIONING TO MANNED/
UNMANNED SYSTEM JOINT
OPERATING CONCEPTS
A new capability is only as good or effective as the operat-
ing concept that employs it. As one source describes this
notion:
operating concepts generally look out from five to fifteen
years, and postulate reasonable operating scenarios
that, through a combination of analysis and the use of
descriptive examples, examine a range of issues such as
employment, operating environment, command and con-
trol, support, organization, and planning considerations.22

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
In other words, even a piece of military equipment that has
state-of-the-art technology and brings revolutionary and
game-changing warfare capability is deemed almost use-
less unless it can be employed in concert with other tools
and within the existing constructs and frameworks of mili-
tary operations. Further, as the future of warfare becomes
more and more multi-regional, multi-vectored (hybrid and
conventional), and multi-domain, it is imperative that these
operating concepts apply across domains (i.e., air, land,
sea, cyber, space), military services, and even across the
full spectrum of conflict.23 For example, a hypersonic missile
is arguably a game-changing weapon.24 However, unless it
can be successfully launched from some sort of platform,
successfully guided by some means, successfully discern
its target from the target’s surroundings, successfully com-
manded and controlled within a command and control (C2)
network, successfully impact its target, do all of the above
with high degree of consistency, and can be implemented
within the context of other US strike weapons and with con-
sideration of an adversary’s ability to counter or defeat the
weapon, a hypersonic weapon serves no credible purpose.
In short, it is the development and implementation of an op-
erating concept to employ a hypersonic missile that really
gives this weapon its value.
Similar to a hypersonic missile, a UUV serves little credible
purpose to the US military without the bedrock of an op-
erating concept that provides its purpose, its supporting
and supported elements, and the context in which it will be
utilized within military operations. While operating concepts
should be developed to govern any and all future uses of
UUVs within military operations, this paper will focus on
new operating concepts that implement UUVs into the two
specific mission arenas of mine warfare—offensive mining
and MCM.
A Proposed operating concept for offensive
mining
As a vignette, imagine this scenario: “tensions between
Taiwan and China spike and US intelligence reports that
Chinese PLA Navy warships will soon sortie from various
Chinese ports. In response, US submarines discreetly place
23 Franklin D. Framer, Managed Competition: Meeting China’s Challenge in a Multi-vector World, Atlantic Council, December 2019, https://www.
atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Meeting-Chinas-Challenges-Report-WEB.pdf.
24 Steven Simon, “Hypersonic Missiles Are a Game Changer,” New York Times, January 2, 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/02/opinion/hypersonic-
missiles.html.
25 Erich Frandrup, “The US Navy Needs Offensive Undersea Drones,” Defense One, November 26, 2019, https://www.defenseone.com/ideas/2019/11/us-
navy-needs-offensive-undersea-drones/161548/?oref=d-river.
26 Ben Werner, “Navy, Air Force Test Deploys 2,000-Pound Mine at Stand-off Range,” September 24, 2018, https://news.usni.org/2018/09/24/36763.
27 Joseph Trevithick, “U.S. Is Betting Big On Naval Mine Warfare With These New Sub-Launched and Air-Dropped Types,” The Drive, November 20, 2018,
https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/25235/the-u-s-is-getting-back-into-naval-mine-warfare-with-new-sub-launched-and-air-dropped-types.
28 Megan Eckstein, “U.S. Naval Offensive Mining Updates Will Focus on Sub Community Tactics, Smart Mines,” USNI News, November 5, 2019, https://news.
usni.org/2019/11/05/u-s-naval-offensive-mining-updates-will-focus-on-sub-community-tactics-smart-mines.
29 Frandrup, “The US Navy Needs Offensive Undersea Drones.”
30 Ibid.
a set of large UUVs on the seabed floor of the Taiwan Strait
in the vicinity of the shipping lanes extending from the
ports. Once settled, each UUV waits for the order to release
a half-dozen smaller tactical UUV, each armed with explo-
sives and non-kinetic effectors (e.g., such as deployable
netting to foul a ship’s propulsion gear). The order comes
and the small tactical UUV deploy, maintaining connections
to a command module via acoustic and satellite links. These
tactical craft loiter just outside the ports, until one by one,
they detect the unique acoustic signature of their assigned
Chinese warship and break off to intercept it. Once in po-
sition, three feet under a Chinese keel, each tactical UUV
signals its status back to a command center and awaits the
order to immobilize its target.”25
“Naval mines have progressed little since the 1970s intro-
duced the Mk 60 encapsulated torpedo and the Mk 67
Submarine Launched Mobile Mine, although recent years
have brought efforts to more accurately employ immobile
mines, develop sensor packages to better discriminate
targets,” and even develop “smart mines” such as the
Hammerhead.26,27,28,29 To date, however, the modernization
of mine warfare has lagged significantly when compared to
other warfare areas and, further, these advancements have
not been fully implemented into broader undersea warfare
operating concepts.
As portrayed in the Taiwan Strait vignette, UUVs can rev-
olutionize offensive mining and, in a hybrid manner, also
augment submarine strike capabilities. The notional UUVs
described in the scenario would “combine some of the
advantages and capabilities of a fast-attack submarine
(stealthy, mobile, sensor-driven pursuit of targets, ability to
follow or discriminately strike at will) and those of a sea
mine (even stealthier, far cheaper, present physical and psy-
chological barriers to an adversary)—without some of the
drawbacks (submarines are really expensive; And today’s
sea mines are mostly indiscriminate, counter the notion of
freedom of navigation, and are really difficult to clean up
once the mission has concluded).”30
How can an operating concept like this come to fruition at a
reasonable cost? It is worth first pointing out that advanced

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
UUVs like this would not need to be developed from
scratch. The Navy and private industry already operate
basic UUVs models and have acquisition requirements in
place that could be leveraged or developed and improved
for offensive mining purposes.31,32
To create a “mother” UUV that can be submarine launched,
we can build upon current requirements for the Virginia-
class submarines. 33 Also, designs of UUVs that already
exist today (such as the Boeing-developed Echo Ranger,
Echo Seeker, and Echo Voyager) should be leveraged for a
lower-cost solution rather than developing the system from
scratch.34 The mother UUV would also require to have the
31 “Hydroid wins contract modification for MK 18 UUV programme,” Naval Technology, September 19, 2019, https://www.naval-technology.com/news/
hydroid-wins-contract-modification-for-mk-18-uuv-programme/.
32 Wendy Laursen, “Growing Interest in AUVs for Oil and Gas,” Maritime Executive, August 11, 2016, https://www.maritime-executive.com/article/growing-
interest-in-auvs-for-oil-and-gas.
33 “On Demand Structures – Submarine Launch of UUVs,” US Navy Small Business Innovation Research, April 12, 2019, https://www.navysbir.com/nx19_1/
nx19-002.htm.
34 Alex Davies, “Boeing’s Monstrous Underwater Robot Can Wander the Ocean for 6 Months,” Wired, March 21, 2016, https://www.wired.com/2016/03/
boeings-monstrous-underwater-robot-can-wander-ocean-6-months/.
35 “New Generation REMUS 100 for Defense Applications,” Hydroid, n.d., https://www.hydroid.com/new-generation-remus-100-defense-applications.
ability to carry, launch, and recover smaller tactical UUVs
and carry a command and control module that enabled it
to both communicate with the smaller UUVs and external
assets (e.g., submarines, naval warships, buoys, etc.) for
command and control purposes.
To develop a tactical UUV that is carried by and launched
from the “mother” UUV, there are platforms in use today
that should be used as prototypes. Namely, the Mk 18 Mod 1
Kingfish (Remus 100) UUV is primarily used today by explo-
sive ordnance disposal (EOD) units to search for undersea
mines.35 These platforms are small enough to be contained
inside a larger diameter UUV and have compartmentalization
A Knifefish Unmanned Undersea Vehicle (UUV) transits the Massachusetts Bay. 190517-N-YM590-1008 MASSACHUSETTS BAY (May 17, 2019) A
Knifefish Unmanned Undersea Vehicle (UUV) transits the Massachusetts Bay at the completion of a mission during an operational test conducted by
members from Operational Test and Evaluation Force (OPTEVFOR). Knifefish is a medium-class mine countermeasure UUV designed for deployment
off the Littoral Combat Ship. OPTEVFOR is the Navy’s sole test and evaluation organization for surface, air, and undersea warfare, along with various
other programs which impact the Navy’s overall mission. (U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist 1st Class Brian M. Brooks/RELEASED)
https://www.dvidshub.net/image/5553957/knifefish-uuv-test

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
characteristics that could be leveraged to include an acoustic
guidance systems, an explosive warhead, or an inertial nav-
igation system that could include “come home” technology
which tells the UUV to disarm and return to a predetermined
location for recovery and/or disposal. Current operating
depths (100 meters), speed (5 knots), and endurance (12
hours) of the Mk 18 Mod 1 would need to be improved in
order to be utilized in this operating concept.
The command and control network for this system, however,
would require more extensive research and development.
Integration of the network of UUVs and the ability to command
and control them would be challenging. Radio waves get ab-
sorbed very quickly in water and an air-water trans-medium
network would likely need to be developed. However, ships,
other surface platforms, buoys, or submarines can all be com-
ponents of the networked system that could enable adequate,
and even real-time, command and control.
Operating concept for mine counter-
measures (MCM)
The ability to counter sea mines is as equally important as
effectively employing them. Sea mines make ideal weapons
because they are cheap, effective, can be employed quickly
from a variety of platforms, and can be employed against a
variety of targets to include ships, submarines, and critical
undersea infrastructure. History has proven these simple
facts during numerous conflicts. For example, during the
Iran-Iraq Tanker War in the late 1980s, the USS Samuel B.
Roberts (FFG-58) struck a mine in the Persian Gulf, requir-
ing over $90 million in repairs, and during World War II,
over seven hundred thousand naval mines were employed,
accounting for more ships sunk or damaged than by any
other means (the Allies lost about 650 ships to mines while
the Axis lost around 1,100). 36,37 Further, as of 2018, of the
nineteen US Navy ships that have been seriously damaged
or sunk by enemy action since September 1945, fifteen (or
almost 80 percent) were victims of sea mines.38
To counter sea mines in recent decades, the US Navy’s
MCM mission has historically been comprised of the MCM
triad—helicopters that tow various sleds and other tools
36 Bradley Peniston, “The Day Frigate Samuel B. Roberts Was Mined,” USNI News, May 22, 2015, https://news.usni.org/2015/05/22/the-day-frigate-samuel-
b-roberts-was-mined.
37 “Mines, Naval,” The Oxford Companion to American Military History, September 31, 2020, https://www.encyclopedia.com/history/encyclopedias-
almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/mines-naval.
38 Scott C. Truver and David Everhart, “Defeating Mines and Other Unmanned Maritime Threats,” September 8, 2018, https://www.realcleardefense.com/
articles/2018/09/08/defeating_mines_and_other_unmanned_maritime_threats_113782.html.
39 Truver and Everhart, “Defeating Mines,” 2018.
40 Megan Eckstein, “Navy Thinking Beyond Littoral Combat Ship for Future Mine Warfare,” USNI News, November 2, 2018, https://news.usni.org/2018/11/02/
navy-thinking-beyond-littoral-combat-ship-future-mine-warfare
41 https://www.defensenews.com/opinion/commentary/2020/05/08/the-us-navys-modernization-rush-must-not-harm-mine-countermeasures/.
42 “New Generation REMUS 100,” Hydroid.
43 “REMUS 600 for Defense Applications,” Hydroid, n.d., https://www.hydroid.com/remus-600-defense-applications.
through a minefield that either neutralize or enable neu-
tralization, MCM-class ships that employ sonars and similar
tools to defeat mines while physically traversing through
a minefield, and EOD divers that can perform “hands on”
render safe or disposal procedures on sea mines.39
Today’s US Navy MCM force, however, is evolving rapidly.
The primary platforms for two of the three legs (MH-53E he-
licopters and MCM-1 class ships) of the legacy MCM triad are
rapidly aging, breaking down, and are going out of service
within the next few years. Further, the Navy will not have
correlating replacement platforms. Instead, the capabilities
that these platforms offered were planned to be assumed by
the Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) MCM module. However, due
to recent issues within the LCS program, the Navy is already
looking to divorce the MCM module from the LCS program
and utilize and operate the module in a piece-meal manner
from ashore or from other vessels of opportunity.40
With these uncertainties in mind and with renewed inter-
est to maintain robust MCM capabilities, there is enormous
opportunity for the expansion of the third leg of the MCM
triad—underwater MCM. And within this arena, UUVs can
play a significant role. Today, EOD teams utilize the Mk 18
Mod 1 (Remus 100) and Mk 18 Mod 2 (Remus 600) UUVs
to search for undersea mines. 41,42,43 These sensors have
revolutionized two of the three critical phases of the MCM
mission—the ability to find and accurately geolocate sea
mines (“find” and “fix”). In other words, instead of physi-
cally driving a MCM-1 class ship and its searching sonar
over a minefield and risking lives of over eighty members
onboard, UUVs can do this mission today.
However, there is significant room for expanding this op-
erating concept. Currently, once the Mk 18 Mod 1 or Mk
18 Mod 2 are pre-programmed to search a finite area and
“find” and “fix” a mine, there is a considerable pause in the
sequence of events before the final phase, destroying or
rendering safe the mine (“finish”), is completed. This lag is
due to two things. First, UUVs currently cannot guarantee
with 100 percent certainly that a sea mine-shaped item on
the ocean floor is actually a sea mine, as sometimes junk
on the ocean floor (like tires or barrels) can appear like sea

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
mines when analyzing the sonar data downloaded from the
UUV. Second, the UUVs that “find and fix” the mines cur-
rently cannot destroy them or render them safe.
Thus, after an area is searched by a UUV, there is a signif-
icant lag in time that allows for several steps to take place
before a mine or a series of mines can be destroyed. First,
the UUV has to be recovered by personnel and the raw col-
lection data from the search must be assessed by person-
nel trained to sift through and analyze significant sonar data.
Once the data is analyzed, a small boat (often from ashore or
from a vessel nearby) must be deployed to the minefield and
either a diver or a tethered unmanned system must be em-
ployed to reacquire a contact and determine if it is actually
a mine or not. Finally, the mine must be destroyed (usually
through the diver or tether unmanned system placing an ex-
plosive countercharge next to it). This process between the
“find and fix” phase and the final “finish” phase can often
take hours per mine, or, in the case of a large minefield, can
add days. Depending on the scenario at hand, this lag can
have significant operational and strategic impacts.
In light of this, consider this vignette: in retaliation of on-
going US sanctions that have crippled its economy, Iran
placed several bottom sea mines in a line across a shipping
lane within the Strait of Hormuz. Within hours of placing the
mines, a foreign-flagged merchant ship triggers a mine and
is significantly damaged but is able to limp into a nearby
port in the UAE. US intelligence, with high certainty, indi-
cate Iran emplaced anywhere from twenty-five to fifty mines
in a defined area within and around the shipping lane. All
Strait of Hormuz maritime traffic is halted. There is a global
sense of urgency to clear the shipping lanes in and out of
the Arabian Gulf to continue the safe flow of oil, food, and
other essential imports and exports.
An EOD team with a family of UUV systems rapidly deploy
to the area from a US Navy helicopter. Two EOD technicians,
a rigid hull inflatable boat (RHIB) (designed to operate in a
minefield), and the UUV systems are employed from a heli-
copter into the waters adjacent to the suspected minefield.
Four pre-programmed UUVs and an accompanying com-
mand and control module are employed to simultaneously
and conjunctively search a pre-determined shipping lane
through the suspected minefield. As each UUV acquires a
mine-like object with a high degree of certainty during its
search, it deploys a smaller tactical UUV from an aft com-
partment that is “geo-locationally” synchronized with the
mother UUV. The mother UUV continues its search as the
tactical UUV swims toward the target. Comprised of a small
44 “Northrop Grumman Showcases Autonomous Maritime Capabilities at U.S. Navy’s Advanced Naval Technology Exercise,” Northrop Grumman
Corporation, September 18, 2019, https://news.northropgrumman.com/news/releases/northrop-grumman-showcases-autonomous-maritime-capabilities-
at-u-s-navys-advanced-naval-technology-exercise.
45 “Geneinno T1, 1st professional diving drone that can equip with robotic arm,” geninno, 2020, https://geneinno.us/products/geneinno-t1.
search camera, a deployable explosive counter-charge,
and now controlled by the EOD technicians through the
command and control module, the tactical UUV arrives at
the location of the mine. Through the command and control
module, the EOD technicians take steering control of the
small UUV and identify the object as a mine utilizing a video
screen linked to the tactical UUV’s camera. The EOD tech-
nicians use the tactical UUV to place a counter charge next
to the mine, back the small UUV away, initiate the count-
er-charge, and detonate the sea mine. After the detonation,
on command, the tactical UUV automatically swims back
to the mine’s location and the EOD technicians, through
video feed, verify that the mine is properly neutralized. The
tactical UUV, utilizing “come home” technology, swim to a
preprogrammed rendezvous point for recovery and reuse.
This process continues until the entire suspected minefield
is searched and all threats are neutralized in a similar man-
ner within a shipping lane. A shipping lane is cleared and
open within six hours of the on-scene arrival of the system
of UUVs and the EOD team.
While this operating concept would rely on technologies that
may not be readily available today (especially with regards
to mine recognition utilizing only sensors, communications,
and command and control), from a platform perspective,
there are existing UUVs today that could be used as proto-
types or a starting point to bring this concept to reality. The
Mk 18 family of systems would be a great starting point for a
“mother UUV” as they already conduct MCM searches. They
would need to be outfitting with an additional compartment
that enables them to carry and launch smaller tactical UUVs
for sea mine pursuit and interrogation. Further, software en-
hancement would need to be made to enable real-time mine
recognition, but there is already demonstrated potential in this
arena from Northrop Grumman during a 2018 exercise where
they demonstrated its µSAS and real-time automated target
recognition technologies that can operate off a man-portable
autonomous underwater vehicle for real-time classification of
mine-like objects.44
Concerning a smaller tactical UUV, various commercial off-
the-shelf (COTS) solutions would make good prototypes.
For example, the Geneinno Titan T1 underwater drone can
dive to 492 feet (greater than an EOD diver can dive), has
an integrated camera, and has a robotic arm that can carry
and drop an explosive charge.45 Required advancements to
a prototype like this would include an ability to marry up to
and be launched from a mother UUV, an ability to geo-spa-
tially synch with the mother UUV and autonomously drive
to a set location, be networked into a command module

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
for “piloted” maneuvers, employ and remotely detonate an
explosive charge, and “come home” for recovery.
Perhaps the most complicated aspect of this operating con-
cept is the ability to command and control the networked
system of UUVs. While technology may not yet enable a
sophisticated network of networks today of this kind, it is
not too far-fetched to be ready and available in a matter of
years. Through research, experts have already shown some
promise in the feasibility of underwater acoustic streaming
of camera and sonar data, further indicating that live under-
water acoustic streaming is a realistic capability of UUVs.46
Other manned/unmanned system operating
concepts
These two operating concepts are only a “sample size” of
concepts that should be explored and developed. There
46 Bas Binnerts et al, “Development and Demonstration of a Live Data Streaming Capability Using an Underwater Acoustic Communication Link” IEEE, 2018,
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8559159/metrics#metrics.
is significant room for more ideas that leverage unmanned
systems in the undersea domain. Just to highlight a few,
UUVs can be implemented into new operating concepts
to enhance submarine warfare, undersea ISR missions in
confined or contested waters, strike missions, force pro-
tection of undersea infrastructure and key ports, force
protection of warships and submarines, and naval special
warfare operations.
Developing the capability - smartly!
Once operating concepts have been developed, devel-
oping the coinciding manned/unmanned systems will
require a calculated approach. First, an iterative process
for developing these systems is required. Second, devel-
oping cohesiveness amongst the key stakeholders will
be paramount. Third, counter-UUV capabilities should
not be forgotten.
A UUV as it is departs on a mission. Unmanned Underwater Vehicle (UUV) operator Art Kuykendall, attached to Commander, Task Group (CTG)
56.1, guides a UUV as it is departs on a mission. CTG 56.1 provides mine countermeasure, Explosive Ordnance Disposal, salvage diving, and force
protection for the U.S. 5th Fleet. (U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist 2nd Class Scott Raegen/RELEASED) https://www.dvidshub.net/
image/869457/uuv-operations

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
It is critical to first point out that there naturally will be an itera-
tive process between implementing new operating concepts
and developing the capabilities that the concepts govern.
Many (or most) of the US Navy’s unmanned systems are cur-
rently in the research and development stage, but the capa-
bilities that these unmanned systems possess will have to be
operationalized.47 In other words, certain UUV capabilities
that are in development or that exist today can and should be
leveraged as prototypes. These prototypes should be further
developed by the Navy’s applicable warfare centers, then put
into the hands of operators in the fleet to test and assess the
capability, and then returned to the developers to further re-
fine the capability. While there will be an inherent degree of
flexibility in the iterative process, this process should be well
defined and managed to prevent long development times and
increased costs that often come from loosely managed re-
search, development, engineering, and acquisition processes.
Second, cohesiveness among the critical stakeholders,
such as the Navy’s pertinent warfare centers, operational
units, and even industry,48 is crucial to operationalizing the
concepts. While the process should not circumnavigate
the Navy’s research, development, engineering, and ac-
quisition processes, formal procedures should be formed
within the confines of the processes and should leverage
already-existing cooperation efforts between DoD and in-
dustry.49 Some examples of how to better develop cohe-
siveness amongst stakeholders include:
  Formalizing working groups or mini “task forces”
comprised of key stakeholders to collectively get
after the solutions.
  Providing clear guidelines and “operating lanes” and
communicating them to the Navy’s warfare centers
to prohibit unnecessary warfare center competitions
that could otherwise hinder collective progress.
  Leveraging think tanks that have established rela -
tionships with industry or with emerging technol -
ogy efforts and bringing them into the fold.
47 Lauren C. Williams, “Navy seeks unmanned fleet, but Congress needs convincing,” Defense Systems, February 5, 2020, https://defensesystems.com/
articles/2020/02/05/navy-unmanned-underwater-williams.aspx.
48 Ben Werner, “Huntington Ingalls Industries Planning for Increased U.S. Navy Demand for UUVs,” USNI News, February 13, 2020, https://news.usni.
org/2020/02/13/huntington-ingalls-industries-planning-for-increased-u-s-navy-demand-for-uuvs.
49 Justin Doubleday, “Pentagon eyes next generation of autonomous weapon systems,” Inside Defense, January 27, 2020, https://insidedefense.com/daily-
news/pentagon-eyes-next-generation-autonomous-weapon-systems.
50 “US Department of Defense spending on counter-UAS reaches USD 1.5 billion in 2018,” Unmanned Airspace, November 4, 2018, https://www.
unmannedairspace.info/counter-uas-systems-and-policies/special-report-us-department-defense-spending-counter-uas-reaches-usd-1-5-billion-2018/.
51 Kyle Mizomaki, “Why Our Seas Are Suddenly Swimming With Drug-Running Narcosubs,” Popular Mechanics, March 4, 2020, https://www.yahoo.com/
news/why-seas-suddenly-swimming-drug-223400474.html.
52 Associated Press, “US navy seizes submarine with seven tonnes of cocaine on board,” The Guardian, July 22, 2015, https://www.theguardian.com/
world/2015/jul/23/us-navy-seizes-submarine-with-seven-tonnes-of-cocaine-on-board.
  Considering incentives that could be offered to in -
dustry to increase willingness to participate.
Third, as new operating concepts are developed for
manned/unmanned systems, it would be foolish to forget
or to not acknowledge that US adversaries could and likely
will be maturing and developing innovative concepts of their
own. Similar to the Department of Defense’s massive effort
to counter US adversaries’ use and weaponization of small
unmanned aerial systems in recent years, counter-UUV ca-
pabilities will be of importance moving forward.50 To a large
degree, a reliance on the intelligence community will help
the US military avoid technological or strategic surprise that
could come from encountering an adversary’s new underwa-
ter capability without a plan to counter or defend against it.
Engaging our partners about unmanned
undersea systems
Military-to-military engagements have paid huge dividends
for the United States in building and maintaining a large net-
work of global partners and allies; this network remains one
of the United States’ bedrocks for global strength. As emerg-
ing technologies and UUVs continue to develop, there will
be opportunities that expand both within and even beyond
military engagements to further build on current partnerships
and establish new ones. Beyond UUV uses and operating
concepts already described in this paper, UUVs present an
opportunity to create partnerships in new ways to include for
law enforcement and economic purposes.
Within the law enforcement arena, UUVs can play a key
role as the United States and other nations, specifically in
Central and South America, work together to counter drug
trafficking. One common tactic for narco-smugglers is the
increased use of narco-submarines or semi-submersibles,
which provide a covert means to avoid cargo searches and
law enforcement presence at border crossing.51 For exam-
ple, in 2015, US authorities caught a narco-submarine trying
to smuggle over seven tons of cocaine (valued at hundreds
of millions of dollars) off the coast of El Salvador.52 Similarly,
in 2016, the US Coast Guard caught a narco-submarine

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
11
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
attempting to smuggle six tons of cocaine three hundred
miles west of Panama. 53 While successful in some cases,
these discoveries require significant manpower, assets, and
surveillance tools across commonly used smuggle routes.
UUVs or other undersea reconnaissance tools could be
force multipliers to patrol, detect, identify, track, and com-
municate narco-submarines or semi-submersible to ap-
propriate authorities and can stimulate increased or new
partnerships as the United States and other countries in
the region look to mutually benefit from a decrease in drug
trafficking.
UUVs can also play contributing roles in building a nation’s
economic prosperity, specifically with regards to offshore
commodities such as oil and seafloor minerals. Many of the
US partners in the Middle East rely on offshore oil to drive
their economies. For example, oil makes up around 50 per-
cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in Kuwait and Qatar
53 “US Coast Guard intercepts vessel carrying cocaine worth $200m,” BBC News, March 29, 2016, https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-us-
canada-35915232/us-coast-guard-intercepts-vessel-carrying-cocaine-worth-200m.
54 Antonio M. Ollero et al, Economic Diversification for a Sustainable and Resilient GCC, World Bank Group, December 2019, http://documents.worldbank.
org/curated/en/886531574883246643/pdf/Economic-Diversification-for-a-Sustainable-and-Resilient-GCC.pdf, 25.
55 “Marine Mining Market to Estimated Reach Worth US$ 7.0 Bn by 2026,” Crypto Journal, January 26, 2020, https://cryptonewsgazette.com/marine-mining-
market-to-estimated-reach-worth-us-7-0-bn-by-2026/.
56 “ROV Systems,” Oceaneering International, Inc, n.d., https://www.oceaneering.com/rov-services/rov-systems/.
and remains a major component in the economies of Saudi
Arabia, Oman, UAE, and Bahrain.54 And, the global marine
mining market is estimated to be a seven billion dollar in-
dustry by 2026 (up from a 500 million dollar industry in
2017) due to the increasing depletion of global terrestrial
metal deposits. 55 Numerous commercial industries, such
as Oceaneering, utilize ocean-friendly remote operated
(tethered) vehicles today for roles such as undersea oil fa-
cility inspections or to conduct maintenance.56 Imagine the
advantages of doing this offshore work completely auton-
omously, without the need for an offshore platform from
which to humanly launch, drive, and recover the vehicle.
Similarly, imagine a UUV being able to autonomously pilot
to undersea mines to assist with collecting and transporting
these valuable mineral commodities. Most importantly, the
partnerships that the United States can form by engaging
and sharing these emerging technologies with allies for
these purposes is immense.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
12
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Assumptions
57 National Defense Strategy, US Department of Defense, 2018.
58 Gina Harkins, “China’s Antics Are a ‘Game-Changer’ for the Navy and Marine Corps, 4-Star Says,” Military.com, January 16, 2020, https://www.military.
com/daily-news/2020/01/16/chinas-antics-are-game-changer-navy-and-marine-corps-4-star-says.html.
59 Sinéad Baker, “The US says China is stealing technology to modernize its military, and that could erode American dominance,” Business Insider, May 3,
2019, https://www.businessinsider.com/us-accuses-china-steal-military-technology-2019-5.
A few core assumptions should be highlighted with regards
to this strategy. First, there is an underlying assumption that
the United States will maintain ambitions to prohibit its big-
gest competitors (China and Russia) from gaining a compet-
itive military advantage within any warfighting domain. This
assumption is supported by language within the National
Defense Strategy that includes a Department of Defense
objectives to “sustain Joint Force military advantages, both
globally and in key regions” and “investing broadly in mili-
tary application of autonomy, artificial intelligence, and ma-
chine learning, including rapid application of commercial
breakthroughs, to gain competitive military advantages.”57
Second, and an assumption that closely ties with the first,
China and Russia will continue to develop a robust undersea
unmanned system capability. As highlighted in the “strategic
context” of this paper, both Russia and China are already
and are continuing to pursue various UUV programs and
platforms. As the United States nearest peer in undersea
warfare strength, Russia will certainly look to gain an advan-
tage in this arena over the United States if it can. And, as
China seeks to continue to spread its influence and domi-
nance across the South China Sea, it too will likely continue
to develop UUVs that provide it with regional advantages.58
Should this assumption be wrong, the United States would
gain an even more significant undersea warfare advantage
relative to its peers. But assuming it is correct, the United
States, in kind, needs to develop similar capabilities in order
to avoid losing its advantage in the undersea domain.
Finally, US adversaries will assumingly continue to exploit
US UUV capabilities and use them to their own advantage.
China, especially, has been suspect of stealing intellectual
property with concerns to military equipment and will likely
continue to do so. 59 In other words, as the United States
develops new and advanced UUV capabilities, it is likely
that similar types of these capabilities will be developed by
its adversaries.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
13
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Guidelines for Implementation
Concerning strategy implementation, a few guidelines are
worth specifying. First, the United States should prioritize
developing offensive capabilities first, before focusing
on defensive capabilities. Second, existing technologies
should be leveraged to the fullest extent possible. Third,
the use of a crawl-walk-run approach is advisable as the
operating concepts are finalized and fully implemented.
In an age of great power competition, the development
of operating concepts that incorporate UUVs should be
viewed in light of both China and Russia. The National
Defense Strategy already calls on the Department of
Defense to “increase lethality,” add “advanced autono-
mous systems,” and “expand our competitive space, seizing
the initiative to challenge our competitors where we pos-
sess advantages and they lack strength.” In other words,
the United States should boost US superiority in exisiting
areas of advantage—to include undersea offensive power.
Given the United States’ undersea superiority over China
and Russia, the United States needs to strengthen this su-
periority and focus on giving China and Russia yet another
undersea warfare problem to deal with in addition to the
world’s most elite submarine force.
Second, developing advanced UUV should be done by
“piggy-backing” on UUVs that are already developed and in
use by both the military and private industry.  Adding com-
ponents, such as an explosive warhead or an acoustic guid-
ance package, to an already existing UUV to make it useful
in combat applications will decrease cost as opposed from
building a UUV program from the ground up. Utilizing al-
ready existing UUVs as prototypes and iteratively develop-
ing them for use within these new operating concepts is the
smartest and quickest approach.
Finally, a crawl-walk-run approach to implementing new op-
erational concepts is essential. During the “crawl” or “test”
phase, UUVs should prove their ability to perform stand-
alone tasks in a controlled environment and prove their
ability to integrate into command and control networks. In
the “walk” phase, UUVs should be integrated with manned
systems (such as submarines or surface vessels) during mil-
itary exercises and incorporated into pertinent war games.
This phase should focus on testing assumptions, experi-
menting within the operational concept, tweaking the oper-
ational concepts in light of adversary actions or the nature
of the threats, maintaining a pulse on emerging technolo-
gies, and making adjustments along the way. Lastly, in the
“run” phase, UUVs should be utilized and employed oper-
ationally and incorporated into current, future, and contin-
gent operations to include being written into associated
operational and contingency plans.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
14
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Risks, Criticisms, Alternatives
60 H. I. Sutton, “China Discovers Underwater Spy Drones In Its Waters,” Forbes, January 15, 2020, https://www.forbes.com/sites/hisutton/2020/01/15/china-
discovers-underwater-spy-drones-in-its-waters/#7a506b4d6990.
Several criticisms, arguments against, and risks of this strat-
egy are worth addressing. First, why should the US mili-
tary rely more on unmanned systems since US submarines
alone arguably already give the United States undersea
superiority? In short, UUVs will likely not replace subma-
rines (at least any time soon) but will be complementary to
US submarines. UUVs can augment submarine lethality (a
notion highlighted in the 2018 National Defense Strategy)
or augment submarines during other operational missions.
Specifically, as a far cheaper alternative to a submarine,
UUVs can provide protection for submarines or be an “in-
dicator and warning” tool to sense or identify potential
threats before a submarine finds itself in unnecessary dan-
ger. Further, UUVs can conduct missions in hostile or con-
tested water that would otherwise put a submarine in high
risk situations. Finally, as US competitors continue to field
their own UUVs for military purposes, the United States too
should utilize the offensive and defensive military advan-
tages that UUVs offer.
A second criticism of this strategy is that the increased
production of UUVs will create risk for an “undersea arms”
race. This is unlikely. While there is a large degree of au-
tonomy in some of today’s UUVs, the UUVs described in
the operating concepts within this strategy will have com-
plexities concerning system-of-system integration and in
the ability to command and control these systems. These
complexities alone will likely prevent most countries from
developing these systems, at least in the near term.
Third, and a natural concern stemming from the last criti-
cism, will US adversaries seek to capture and exploit UUV
systems in order to steal or attempt to replicate the technol-
ogy? This is a valid concern and something that China has
already done with US UUVs.60 While there may be techno-
logical solutions that can be built into UUVs to counter this
problem (e.g., a mechanism for total UUV self-destruction or
“smartchips” that self-destruct or scramble software code
when tampering is suspected), this is an area in which the
United States should be OK assuming risk. Why should the
United States assume this risk? First, UUVs are not ships
or submarines (which contain much more sensitive equip-
ment) and would otherwise be the assets conducting these
missions. So, in a relative sense, it warrants being OK with
this risk. Second, an advantageous tradeoff to assuming
this risk is that the United States could invest less money
and save cost on the survivability of these systems.
Fourth, will offensive UUV concepts like the ones mentioned
in this paper be mimicked and used against the United
States? While this is a valid concern, it is not a concern
that should prohibit development. Operating concepts like
these will likely be used against the United States even if the
United States does not develop them first. There is value in
increasing lethality, being on the leading edge of these types
of concepts, and posing complex problems for US adversar-
ies that they will have to consider and overcome.
Fifth, as UUVs and other underwater systems begin to pro-
liferate across the oceans globally, will concepts that utilize
these technologies diminish the stealth of submarines and
thus lessen the United States’ undersea nuclear deterrent?
As more maritime systems with “eyes and ears” are utilized,
there could be a level of global (or at least regional) transpar-
ency that will begin to materialize globally within the under-
sea domain—similar to how a network of globally positioned
satellites with high resolution cameras have brought a high
level of transparency to the Earth’s surface. This undersea
transparency would indeed hinder a submarine force’s abil-
ity to remain stealthy. To mitigate the risks associated with
decreased stealth, a couple of solutions could be consid-
ered. First, undersea stealth technology could be improved.
Second, submarines may have to accept an increased level
of undersea transparency and alter their own operating con-
cepts to best mitigate being seen or heard.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
15
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Conclusion
This paper presented a strategy for how the United States
can maintain undersea superiority against its competitors
in an age of unmanned systems. It provided an overview of
current US undersea capabilities (manned and unmanned
systems) and similar capabilities of its biggest competitors—
China and Russia. The paper then discussed that, in light of
both rapidly evolving emerging technologies and guidance
stemming from both the National Defense Strategy and the
Navy’s 2019 “Design for maintaining maritime superiority,”
UUVs will play a critical role in giving the United States con-
tinued dominance in the undersea domain. Next, it laid out
steps the US Navy could take to successfully implement
UUVs into undersea warfighting operational concepts.
Further, it provided detailed operational concepts specific
to mine warfare and highlighted how current technologies
could be improved, consolidated, and applied into more
innovative ways to conduct offensive mining and mine
countermeasures. Then, it provided guidelines in imple-
menting the strategy to include prioritizing the develop-
ment of offensive versus defensive capabilities, and then
laid out a crawl-walk-run approach to operationalizing new
manned/unmanned system operational concepts. Finally,
the paper considered and rebutted the most common criti-
cisms and risks associated with the recommended strategy.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
16
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
About the Author
Commander Erich C. Frandrup was the academic year 2019 to 2020 Senior US
Navy Fellow at the Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security of the Atlantic Council. In
this role, he focused his research and writings on maritime security in the Arabian Gulf
region and on the integration of drones into security and defense operational concepts.
Originally from Newport, Washington, Commander Frandrup received his commission
from the United States Naval Academy in 2002 with a Bachelor’s of Science degree
in Ocean Engineering. He was selected into the Navy’s Explosive Ordnance Disposal
(EOD) community upon graduation.
Throughout his eighteen-year military career, Commander Frandrup deployed four times
to the Middle East to include two deployments to Bahrain in support of the Navy’s
5th Fleet and two deployments to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. He was
most recently assigned to the Joint Staff where he served as both the EOD action officer
in the Operations Directorate (J3) and then as the Executive Assistant to the Deputy
Director for Nuclear and Homeland Defense Operations (J36).
Commander Frandrup is a qualified EOD officer, surface warfare officer, and a basic
dive officer. He also holds a Master’s of Art degree in National Security and Strategic
Studies from the United States Naval War College and a Master’s of Science degree in
Mechanical Engineering from Duke University. Commander Frandrup assumed com-
mand of the Naval Diving and Salvage Training Center in Panama City Beach, FL in
August of 2020.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
C3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*Richard W. Edelman
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
*John J. Studzinski
TREASURER
*George Lund
SECRETARY
*Walter B. Slocombe
DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Odeh Aburdene
Todd Achilles
*Peter Ackerman
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Colleen Bell
Matthew C. Bernstein
*Rafic A. Bizri
Linden P. Blue
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
R. Nicholas Burns
*Richard R. Burt
Michael Calvey
James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
Ralph D. Crosby, Jr.
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Thomas R. Eldridge
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Courtney Geduldig
Robert S. Gelbard
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
*Amir A. Handjani
Katie Harbath
John D. Harris, II
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Amos Hochstein
*Karl V. Hopkins
Andrew Hove
Mary L. Howell
Ian Ihnatowycz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
Joia M. Johnson
Stephen R. Kappes
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Astri Kimball Van Dyke
Henry A. Kissinger
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Neil Masterson
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
H.R. McMaster
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
*Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Thomas R. Nides
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Hilda Ochoa-Brillembourg
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
*Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Carlos Pascual
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
W. DeVier Pierson
Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell McCormick
Robert Rangel
Thomas J. Ridge
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Rajiv Shah
Stephen Shapiro
Wendy Sherman
Kris Singh
Christopher Smith
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Gine Wang-Reese
Ronald Weiser
Olin Wethington
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Colin L. Powell
Condoleezza Rice
George P. Shultz
Horst Teltschik
John W. Warner
William H. Webster
*Executive Committee Members
List as of October 8, 2020
Atlantic Council Board of Directors

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Embracing Underseas Robots: A US Strategy to Maintain Undersea Superiority in an Age of Unmanned Systems
C4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and engagement in international
 affairs based on the central role of the Atlantic community in
 meeting today’s global challenges.
© 2020 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means without permission
in writing from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of brief
quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please
direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor, Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
