
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
A
mid growing public awareness of cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, a
group of large digital platform corporations and payment services
providers launched the Libra (now renamed Diem) project 1 in June 2019
to introduce digital stablecoins to improve payment transactions and promote
financial inclusion. This private sector initiative added impetus for central banks
in many countries to accelerate their efforts to study the advisability of issuing
central bank digital currencies (CBDCs)—for fear of failing to keep pace with
financial innovation and changes in user preference in payment mechanisms.
Indeed, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) reports that more than sixty
central banks 2 around the world are investigating the issuance of CBDCs, with
central banks (CBs) responsible for 20 percent of the world’s population ready
to do so in the next three years. Furthermore, seven major central banks—the
US Federal Reserve, Bank of Canada, European Central Bank, Bank of England,
Riksbank, Swiss National Bank, and Bank of Japan—in 2020 outlined three
foundational principles 3 for the issuance of CBDCs: not compromising monetary
and financial stability; complementing existing forms of money; and supporting
innovation and efficiency.
Among major central banks, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) is the first to
have staged large-scale trials of digital currency (in their case the yuan, started
in the middle of 2020) for retail transactions—calling the unit “ Digital Currency/
1 “White Paper, v2.0.,” Diem Association, April 2020, https://www.diem.com/en-us/white-paper/.
2 “Ready, Steady, Go?” – Results of the Third BIS Survey on Central Bank Digital Currency,” BIS
Papers, January 2021, https://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap114.htm
3 “Central Bank Digital Currencies: Foundational Principles and Core Features,” Governors of
Federal Reserve, January 2020, https://www.bis.org/publ/othp33_summary.pdf.
THE DIGITAL YUAN,
DIGITAL EURO,
AND THE DIEM:
Key Issues for
Public Debate
ISSUE BRIEF
APRIL 2021 HUNG TRAN
The GeoEconomics Center works at the
nexus of economics, finance, and foreign
policy with the goal of helping shape a
better global economic future. The Center
is organized around three pillars - Future
of Capitalism, Future of Money, and the
Economic Statecraft Initiative.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF THE DIGITAL YUAN, DIGITAL EURO, AND THE DIEM: KEY ISSUES FOR PUBLIC DEBATE
Electronic Payment ”4 (DCEP). In October 2020, the European
Central Bank (ECB) released its report on a digital euro ,5
setting out the key principles and requirements guiding an
eventual issuance of a retail digital euro and highlighting the
issues that remain unresolved. Other central banks are further
behind. The US Federal Reserve is engaged in researching
and developing policies for a digital dollar ,6 with the Boston
Fed launching a CBDC project. Recently, Fed staff published a
study7 on the necessary, but not sufficient, preconditions that
support a general purpose digital dollar for day-to-day use by
the public, concluding that “there is a great deal of work yet to
be done.” Sweden’s central bank, the Riksbank, made progress
4 Hung Tran and Barbara C. Matthews, “China’s Digital Currency Electronic Payment Project Reveals the Good and the Bad of Central Bank Digital Currencies,”
New Atlanticist, August 24, 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/chinas-digital-currency-electronic-payment-project-reveals-the-good-and-
the-bad-of-central-bank-digital-currencies/.
5 Report on a Digital Euro, European Central Bank, October 2020, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/Report_on_a_digital_euro~4d7268b458.en.pdf.
6 Jay Lindsay, “Boston Fed Exploring the Tech, Benefits, and Tradeoffs of a Digital Dollar,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, August 2020, https://www.bostonfed.
org/news-and-events/news/2020/08/boston-fed-exploring-the-tech-benefits-and-tradeoffs-of-a-digital-dollar.aspx.
7 Jess Cheng, Angela Lawson, and Paul Wong, “Preconditions for a General-Purpose Central Bank Digital Currency,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve,
February 24, 2021, https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/preconditions-for-a-general-purpose-central-bank-digital-currency-20210224.htm.
8 “Riksbank Extends Test of Technical Solution for the e-Krona,” Sveriges Riksbank, February 12, 2021, https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/press-and-published/
notices-and-press-releases/notices/2021/riksbank-extends-test-of-technical-solution-for-the-e-krona/.
9 “Swiss Test of Central Bank Digital Currency Completes,” From the Markets, December 4, 2020, https://www.marketsmedia.com/swiss-test-of-central-bank-
digital-currency-completes/.
in the past year and decided to extend the testing of its digital
krona8 for another year to further investigate several technical
issues, including offline functions. Other central banks, such as
the Swiss National Bank ,9 have explored the use of wholesale
CBDCs to facilitate large value payments among approved
financial institutions.
This issue brief compares known features of the digital yuan and
digital euro to highlight critical issues for public consideration. It
also assesses the use case of the Diem, a digital currency that
will only increase in importance as major central banks begin to
issue their own CBDCs.
A man wearing a mask walks past the headquarters of the People’s Bank of China, the central bank, in Beijing, China, as the country is hit
by an outbreak of the new coronavirus, February 3, 2020. Source: REUTERS/Jason Lee

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF THE DIGITAL YUAN, DIGITAL EURO, AND THE DIEM: KEY ISSUES FOR PUBLIC DEBATE
THE DIGITAL YUAN AND DIGITAL EURO
F
rom strategic and technological perspectives, there are
many similarities in the design of the two digital currencies,
based on information available to the public. Both will
be issued by their respective central banks as legal tender in
their jurisdictions. China has clarified that the DCEP will be a
component of the monetary aggregate M0 (notes and coins,
plus bank reserves) and that the digital yuan will ultimately
replace the physical yuan—the use of cash in retail transactions
has already declined significantly in China as it is increasingly
replaced by mobile payment mechanisms. By contrast, the ECB
has specified that the digital euro will only complement, not
replace, the physical euro—the use of cash, while falling, is still
substantial in many euro area member states. This will affect
the remunerative policy on the CBDC as well as the privacy of
user transactions.
Both central banks will also adopt a two-tiered system not
reliant on distributed ledger technology (DLT)—they will issue
digital currencies to commercial banks as intermediaries, which
in turn will distribute digital currencies to end users, assuming
responsibility for compliance with Know Y our Clients (KYC),
Anti Money Laundering (AML), and Counter the Financing of
Terrorism (CFT) regulations. This approach keeps the central
banks free from assuming responsibility for dealing directly
with hundreds of millions of retail customers and ensures a
smooth execution of their numerous transactions, limiting their
exposure to considerable reputational risks.
Both CBDCs will be stored in digital wallets with apps that
can be downloaded by end users from digital payment
services sites sponsored by banks or other authorized
intermediaries. Presumably, the digital wallet apps would
have to conform to technical standards and specifications
laid down by central banks. It is important to note that the
identity of the user downloading the wallet apps will be
known to the app services providers and, ultimately, the
central banks. Digital currencies can be transmitted between
different wallets, either via reconciliation of senders’ and
receivers’ bank accounts or directly between end users
without going through intermediaries.
10 “Share of Population Aged 25 and Over with a Bank Account in China in 2011 and 2017,” Statista, July 24, 2020, https://www.statista.com/statistics/920173/china-
share-of-adult-population-with-a-bank-account/.
11 “Close to 40 Million EU Citizens Outside Banking Mainstream,” WSBI, March 5, 2016, https://www.wsbi-esbg.org/press/latest-news/Pages/Close-to-40-million-
EU-citizens-outside-banking-mainstream.aspx.
The technological properties of CBDCs and digital wallets
allow CBs to have a remunerative policy on CBDC holdings,
something not possible with bank notes and coins. The ECB
has been explicit about the option of paying variable and
differentiated interest rates on CBDCs to influence consumer
behavior—at the cost of some seigniorage income. The PBOC
probably has a similar option in mind when it discusses CBDCs
improving the efficacy of monetary policy operations.
Both central banks also emphasize cash-like features of their
digital currencies, including the ability to make or receive
payments without being online or connected to telephone
networks, probably by putting two cell phones close to each
other and using near field communication protocols. However,
there seems to be nuances here. The PBOC emphasizes the
ability to use the digital yuan without having a bank account,
pointing out that downloading digital wallets is much easier
than opening a bank account, thus promoting financial inclusion
for households with telephone or Internet connections, but no
bank accounts. In China, about 20 percent of adults 10 don’t
have a bank account, compared with 8.6 percent unbanked in
Europe,11 and 5.4 percent in the United States.
By contrast, the ECB highlights that using the digital euro as an
independent token (or, more accurately, in bearer form) would
involve some application of distributed ledger technology (for
example, requiring the validation of transactions by a group of
authorized validators) or a pre-paid device or card. In either case,
the direct transmission of the digital euro among users would
not fully satisfy AML or CFT regulations; conceivably, some
form of control would have to be implemented. Furthermore,
offline transfers of CBDCs among devices still require those
devices to be online at certain points, so users can load
digital money. More information is needed to ascertain the
exact technological configurations and platforms used by the
central banks to allow direct transmissions of digital currencies
between wallets without going through users’ bank accounts
or intermediaries, as well as for offline transactions.
Another common technological feature emphasized by both
central banks is that their digital currencies and associated
wallets will be interoperable with current and future payments

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF THE DIGITAL YUAN, DIGITAL EURO, AND THE DIEM: KEY ISSUES FOR PUBLIC DEBATE
services and platforms. This feature is important for China
because current payment platforms operated by Alipay12 and
WeChat Pay ,13which between them have more than 2 billion
users (mostly inside, but also outside China), account for almost
95 percent of mobile payments in China,14 but are not presently
interoperable. This will give the digital yuan a competitive edge
in attracting users, further improving payment practices in
China. CBDCs also need to be programmable to allow service
providers to develop new and competitive front-end services
based on CBDCs, coupling their payment functions with a
wide range of financial services including credit, investment,
insurance, and smart contracts.
Last but not least, both CBs stress the critical importance of
ensuring cyber security for the smooth and reliable operations
of CBDCs, as well as the integrity and security of their
underlying systems and record keeping. Any hacking by bad
actors or disruptions of service will reflect badly on the issuing
central banks and undermine public confidence in CBDCs.
12 Rita Liao, “Jack Ma’s Fintech Giant Tops 1.3 Billion Users Globally,” TC, July 15, 2020, https://techcrunch.com/2020/07/14/ant-alibaba-1-3-billion-users/.
13 Terry Stancheva, “21 Mind-Blowing WeChat Statistics in 2021,” Review 42, February 4, 2021, https://review42.com/resources/wechat-statistics/.
14 “Is the Alipay/WeChat Pay Payments Duopoly at an Inflection Point?,” Kapronasia, October 7, 2020, https://www.kapronasia.com/china-payments-research-
category/is-the-alipay-wechat-pay-payments-duopoly-at-an-inflection-point.html.
DIVERGENT INSTITUTIONS
AND POLICIES
I
n addition to the common technological features described
above, the CBDCs face further challenges that will require
different solutions, due to divergent political, legal, and
regulatory regimes in China and the European Union (EU).
First, CBDCs pose a challenge to bank intermediation and
financial stability. The ease with which users can transform bank
deposits to digital currencies means that banks can theoretically
be disintermediated if people prefer to hold CBDCs instead of
bank deposits. As a consequence, banks could lose access to
a source of relatively cheap and stable retail funding and be
forced to rely on more expensive and less stable wholesale
funding. Alternatively, banks could borrow more from central
banks to fund their assets, but that raises the demand for high
quality securities to be used as collateral with central banks,
causing a shortage of such assets in financial markets and
The European Central Bank (ECB) headquarters is pictured during sunset as the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues
in Frankfurt, Germany, March 21, 2021. Source: REUTERS/Kai Pfaffenbach

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF THE DIGITAL YUAN, DIGITAL EURO, AND THE DIEM: KEY ISSUES FOR PUBLIC DEBATE
heightening the role of central banks in the economy—deeply
affecting central banking, monetary policies, and the functioning
of a market economy. In times of market stresses, there could
be digital bank runs leading to bank failures on timelines much
shorter than during traditional bank runs. The ECB clearly
recognizes these risks and has mentioned possible remedies,
including imposing limits on holding digital currencies (perhaps
per wallet or per user) or imposing disincentives like charging
negative interest rates on holdings of digital currencies above
certain thresholds. These measures also aim to discourage
the use of CBDCs as investment instruments. There has been
no explicit press coverage of how the PBOC will deal with this
problem, but some form of control over the conversion from
bank deposit to digital currency will have to be imposed.
Second, even though both CBs stress that their digital
currencies are just like physical currencies, that is not quite
true—the anonymity of holding and transacting in bank notes
and coins will be lost in the transition to digital currencies. The
movements of digital currencies in and out of digital wallets will
leave electronic footprints which can be traced, monitored, and
even controlled, either indirectly through banks or directly by
CBs. The question then becomes what authorities will do with
the information and how the privacy of personal financial data
can be safeguarded. China offers the concept of “controlled
anonymity” where other users and many companies are not
privy to the financial data of the user, only the authorities are.
PBOC officials have been quoted in the media saying that the
ability to monitor digital currency transactions, probably in real
time, will greatly help authorities deal with crimes like financial
fraud, money laundering, and financing terrorism, as well as
improve the overall efficacy of monetary policy operations.
However, it is also obvious that the availability of personal
digital financial data will significantly strengthen China’s social
credit monitoring system, which is used to monitor and control
the behavior of the population.
By contrast, the EBC pledges to respect all EU laws and
regulations about protecting the privacy of personal data.
In particular, the ECB stresses that the digital euro will only
complement, not replace, the physical euro, giving users the
option to use cash to preserve anonymity if they wish. Based on
media reports, the digital yuan seems positioned to eventually
replace the physical yuan—significantly enhancing the ability of
15 Coco Feng, “Beijing is Exploring Digital Yuan Cross-Border Payments by Joining with Hong Kong, Thailand, UAE, and the Bank of International Settlements,”
South China Morning Post, February 24, 2021, https://www.scmp.com/tech/policy/article/3122924/beijing-exploring-digital-yuan-cross-border-payments-joining-
hong-kong.
16 Karen Y eung, “China’s SWIFT Joint Venture Shows Beijing Eyeing Global Digital Currency Use, to Internationalize Yuan,” South China Morning Post, February 4,
2021, https://www.scmp.com/economy/china-economy/article/3120582/chinas-swift-joint-venture-shows-beijing-eyeing-global.
the PBOC to monitor user financial transactions. If this is true,
the PBOC may fail to observe one of the three CB-established
foundational principles mentioned previously: CBDCs should
complement existing forms of money.
Third, the continued presence or eventual absence of physical
currencies will determine whether central banks can impose
negative nominal interest rates on CBDC holdings. The ECB,
by promising to retain the physical euro, appears to exclude the
possibility of imposing negative interest rates on digital euro
holdings. In comparison, by mentioning that the physical yuan
can be eventually phased out, the PBOC retains the option to
impose negative rates. It is important for central banks to clarify
this point.
Fourth, both central banks will allow non-residents of their
jurisdictions to use their digital currencies, likely subject to
some form of control to avoid destabilizing capital flows. The
ECB is also open to making the digital euro interoperable with
digital currencies of other major countries, including those
in the United States, Japan, and the United Kingdom (UK).
Presumably, this interoperability and programmability will allow
digital payments services providers to offer end users facilities
for digital currency exchanges. This would make cross-border
and cross-currency transactions more efficient and less costly.
However, this also requires close cooperation among CBs
issuing CBDCs to avoid excessive currency substitution and
destabilizing capital flows—particularly the risk of boosting
the balance sheet of a central bank and exposing it to risks in
uncontrolled situations.
By contrast, the PBOC has not indicated whether it wants
the digital yuan to be interoperable with other major CBDCs.
The PBOC has joined the Multiple CBDC Bridge 15with Hong
Kong, Thailand, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), and the BIS
Innovation Hub office in Hong Kong to explore cross-border
payments using distributed ledgers. The National Clearing
Center, a subsidiary of the PBOC, also formed a joint venture
with SWIFT ,16 the international financial messaging service
for payments among banks and other financial institutions.
According to media reports, the joint venture formed to promote
internationalization of the yuan, even though China has long
used SWIFT for cross-border payments in yuan—accounting for
2.4 percent of total SWIFT payments in January 2021, ranking

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF THE DIGITAL YUAN, DIGITAL EURO, AND THE DIEM: KEY ISSUES FOR PUBLIC DEBATE
fifth17 behind the USD (38.3 percent), euro (36.6 percent),
British pound (6.8 percent) and Japanese yen (3.5 percent).
China has also used SWIFT to complement financial messaging
through its own Cross-border Interbank Payments System
(CIPS), which has cleared all cross-border yuan payments
since the beginning of 2021. SWIFT explained that forming the
joint venture is an effort to update compliance with regulatory
requirements in China. Generally speaking, it appears unlikely
that China will want to make the digital yuan interoperable with
other major CBDCs, for fear of losing control over non-resident
use of the digital yuan. This has been a key motivation behind
its reluctance to fully liberalize China’s capital accounts and
make the yuan freely convertible.
Besides the convenience and relative transaction costs of using
different digital currencies, CBDC usage by non-residents
will depend more on fundamental considerations—namely
trust in issuing authorities, especially in the use or misuse of
personal financial data, and the influence of structural issues
such as capital controls, currency convertibility, sophistication
of financial markets, and robustness of related laws and
regulations. On these fundamental grounds, China is seen as
less developed than other major countries and thus the digital
yuan will likely face strong headwind 18in gaining widespread
international use. However, if the United States continues to
use financial sanctions, especially secondary sanctions, to
promote its foreign policy goals, sanctioned countries like
China will have compelling incentives to make use of the
digital yuan—as a political alternative to the USD—to evade
US sanctions.
THE DIEM
I
n June 2019, a group of major digital platform corporations
and payment service providers formed the Libra Association
(registered in Zurich and to be regulated by the Swiss
Financial Markets Supervisory Authority, FINMA) to launch a
cryptocurrency—the Libra— based on a group of currencies
of major countries, thus referred to as stablecoins. After
discussions with CBs and regulators to address concerns
about risks to monetary operations, currency substitution,
and financial stability, the Libra Association changed its
name to the Diem Association and its unit was renamed the
Diem. The Diem was also reconfigured and is, at least for
now, based on a single currency—there will, for example,
17 Susanne Barton, “Yuan’s Popularity for Global Payments Reaches Five-Y ear High,” Bloomberg, February 17, 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2021-02-18/yuan-s-popularity-for-cross-border-payments-hits-five-year-high?sref=a9fBmPFG.
18 Hung Tran, “Can China’s Digital Yuan Really Challenge the Dollar?,” New Atlanticist, November 30, 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/
can-chinas-digital-yuan-really-challenge-the-dollar/.
be a USD-Diem, a euro-Diem, and a yen-Diem—instead of a
cocktail of currencies. The Diem Association (DA) guarantees
conversion of the Diem to its base currency on demand and
on a one-for-one basis, maintaining 100 percent reserves
at all times with pledges to prevent the fractionalization of
the Diem by front-end service providers. The 100 percent
reserve coverage and non-fractionalization pledges are
meant to assuage regulators’ concerns about the Diem
mechanism eventually developing into a parallel fractional
reserve banking system.
The Diem will use distributed ledger technology, but not
with permissionless validation. Instead, the DA will rely of its
small group of founding members to be validators of Diem
transactions, hoping that their reputations will help promote
the acceptance of the Diem. The DA promises the benefits of
a permissionless, public validation system, such as anonymity,
by using what they call “Byzantine Fault Tolerance” security
protocols and allowing new members to join the DA and
participate in its governance, like a standard-setting body.
Finally, the Diem will be programmable and interoperable with
other payments systems, even able to integrate with central
bank digital currencies (to hopefully avoid maintaining 100
percent reserves), allowing other digital services providers to
offer new products to end users.
Bertrand Perez, Managing Director and COO at Libra Association
poses after a Blockchain conference at the United Nations in
Geneva, Switzerland September 27, 2019. Source: REUTERS/
Marina Depetris

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF THE DIGITAL YUAN, DIGITAL EURO, AND THE DIEM: KEY ISSUES FOR PUBLIC DEBATE
The Diem is completely different from currently available
cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and Ethereum. The Diem is
designed to be used as means of payment with value completely
linked to underlying currency such as the USD or euro, and
thus considered stable, whereas cryptocurrencies present
significant volatility in their values in terms of major currencies,
and are used increasingly as speculative instruments, rather
than means of payment. Anonymity in the creation or mining,
holding, and transacting of cryptocurrencies continues to allow
illegal and criminal activity, a challenge for law enforcement
agencies around the world. However, linking the Diem to a
national currency and using a permitted validation process with
a small group of DA members removes one of the attractive
aspects of cryptocurrencies—their position outside the control
of central banks.
When the Libra/Diem Association first proposed the Libra (now
renamed Diem), it had a strong use case: a cryptocurrency not
dependent on third-party authority or controlled by national
authorities that provides an efficient payment mechanism
for billions of members of platform companies around the
world. Following consultations with relevant central banks
and financial regulators, changes were made and the current
Diem version will move away from permissionless DLT toward
reliance on a small group of “reputable” validators in a permitted
DLT system, and will be based on and backed by a single major
currency on a one-for-one basis, allowing no fractionalization
of the Diem. At the same time, the PBOC and the ECB, among
others, are making visible progress toward launching their own
CBDCs. In this new environment, the use case for the Diem
is much less compelling—if CBDCs are available, why use a
digital ersatz? This is especially the case as front-end financial
services are developed to accompany CBDCs. The key benefit
to members of the DA is their ability to monitor, harvest, and
monetize user transactions data. However, the accumulation
and harvesting of personal transaction data is undergoing
growing public scrutiny in many countries and could face
tightening regulations in the future.
KEY ISSUES FOR PUBLIC DEBATE
G
enerally, a comparison between the digital yuan, digital
euro, and the Diem suggests that the key differentiating
factor is not the technological platforms underpinning the
digital units (for CBDCs these seem to converge on the broad
features described by the PBOC and the ECB), but the strength of
and trust in public policies and institutions—specifically the legal
and regulatory environment, including issues such as degrees of
currency convertibility and capital account liberalization, as well
as the sophistication of the financial ecosystem and robustness
of the legal and regulatory framework.
Beyond technological and public institutions issues, the most
important of which for individual users are safety, security,
reliability, and ease of use of the CBDC system, two important
problems must be contended with. First, the intention and
ability of a CB to impose negative interest rates on CBDC
holdings deserves more attention. Negative nominal interest
rates have been advocated by some economists to give
CBs more space to ease monetary policies to fight deflation.
The existence of physical currencies significantly frustrates
the attempt to escape the zero-bound limit to policy rates—
people can simply convert their bank deposits to cash to avoid
negative policy rates forcing banks to pass on negative rates
to their customers. Consequently, the continued existence of
cash as envisioned by the ECB will afford their users some
protection against negative rates, while users in China will be
at the mercy of the PBOC if and when cash is phased out. For
people living in democracies, negative interest rates on cash
or CBDC holdings represent a confiscatory tax on their wealth
made by unelected central bankers and will be resented. This
could undermine citizens’ trust in their CB—arguably its most
valuable asset. As such, the decision to eventually abandon or
retain cash, and the ability of CBs to impose negative rates on
CBDCs, is critical and should be thoroughly discussed in public
fora to raise citizens’ awareness.
QR code of the electronic payment service Alipay that belongs
to Ant Group Co Ltd is seen at a market stall in Beijing, China,
December 31, 2020. Source: REUTERS/Thomas Peter

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF THE DIGITAL YUAN, DIGITAL EURO, AND THE DIEM: KEY ISSUES FOR PUBLIC DEBATE
Second, concerns are growing about the ownership and
use of personal financial data arising from transactions in
digital currencies by sponsors of the systems, be it central
banks in the case of CBDCs or groups of private sector
platform companies in the case of stablecoins like the Diem.
Decisions must be made as to what extent personal data can
be collected, how long data can be retained, how data can
be used and for whose benefit, and what safeguards will be
created to protect against abuses.
The concerns about the use of personal transaction data
related to digital currencies is one part of the overarching issue
of protecting the privacy of personal data in an increasingly
digitalized world. There are three models competing for wider
adoption. At one extreme is the US model, which is weary of
government use of personal data and intrusion in personal
spheres, but seems indifferent to the mining of personal data
by platform corporations for profit. This indifference appears
to have changed slightly amid growing concerns about
monopolistic powers of those companies and in the context
of the debate about the balance of freedom of speech and
corporate responsibility to filter out dangerous material. At
the other extreme, companies and other entities deemed to
be “personal information handlers” in China, as well as those
19 George Qi and Qianqian Li, “China Releases Draft Personal Information Protection Law,” the National Law Review, January 21, 2021, https://www.natlawreview.
com/article/china-releases-draft-personal-information-protection-law.
20 “General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),” Intersoft Consulting, May 25, 2018, https://gdpr-info.eu/.
outside China doing business with people or entities inside
Chia, are likely to be constrained and regulated in their access
to and use of personal information, according to the draft
Personal Information Protection Law .19 However, the Chinese
government has total access to all sources of personal
data, including information which companies are required
by law to turn over to the government. In the middle is the
EU’s strong legal and regulatory safeguards against abuses
of personal data by both companies and governments—as
typified by the General Data Protection Regulation 20 (GDPR)
and the Digital Markets Law and Digital Services Law recently
tabled by the European Commission. Judging by the growing
adoption of GDPR requirements by non-EU companies, even
in their non-EU operations, GDPR could evolve to become the
international standard.
Robust public debate about these issues is warranted and
should inform central banks in their final decisions about the
issuance of CBDCs.
Hung Tran is a nonresident senior fellow at the Atlantic
Council, former executive managing director at the Institute
of International Finance and former deputy director at the
International Monetary Fund.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF THE DIGITAL YUAN, DIGITAL EURO, AND THE DIEM: KEY ISSUES FOR PUBLIC DEBATE
Atlantic Council Board of Directors
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*Richard W. Edelman
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
*John J. Studzinski
TREASURER
*George Lund
DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
*Peter Ackerman
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Colleen Bell
*Rafic A. Bizri
*Linden P. Blue
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
R. Nicholas Burns
*Richard R. Burt
Michael Calvey
Teresa Carlson
James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
Ralph D. Crosby, Jr.
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Thomas R. Eldridge
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Courtney Geduldig
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
Amir A. Handjani
Katie Harbath
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Amos Hochstein
*Karl V. Hopkins
Andrew Hove
Mary L. Howell
Ian Ihnatowycz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Astri Kimball Van Dyke
Henry A. Kissinger
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Neil Masterson
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
H.R. McMaster
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
*Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Dambisa F. Moyo
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Thomas R. Nides
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
W. DeVier Pierson
Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell McCormick
Robert Rangel
Thomas J. Ridge
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Rajiv Shah
Wendy Sherman
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Gine Wang-Reese
Ronald Weiser
Olin Wethington
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Colin L. Powell
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
John W. Warner
William H. Webster
*Executive Committee Members
List as of March 15, 2021

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and engagement in international
 affairs based on the central role of the Atlantic community in
 meeting today’s global challenges.
© 2021 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means without permission
in writing from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of brief
quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please
direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
