
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Executive Summary
“All enterprises must persevere in putting proletarian politics in command
and ideological and political work first.”1—Document of the Politburo of the
Chinese Communist Party, September 2, 1975
China’s leadership has embarked on a new and risky path in economic policy
making, one that has huge implications for the Chinese people and for the
world. It stands in marked contrast to the emphasis on market opening and
engagement with the world that defined the first decades of the post-Mao
period that started in 1978. Instead today Beijing is intent on strengthening
control over private companies and foreign investment, reserving set shares
of its market for indigenously produced technologies like semiconductor
chips and electric vehicle batteries, and boosting the role of state-owned
firms.
It is all part of what can be considered a new form of state capitalism, defined
by a top-down approach to the economy featuring government-directed and
supported industrial policies with the goal of creating a far more self-sufficient
country, and critically, one that continues to grow rapidly . At the same time, it
aims to be more egalitarian, overcoming some of the inequalities associated
with the earlier approach of growth at all costs while avoiding the social insta-
bility that might result from too large a gap. Beijing sees it as providing a new
model of growth for developing countries around the world and as directly
competing with a Western free market model that China’s leaders believe is
becoming increasingly broken. In a speech earlier this year to top provincial
and national officials, Chinese President Xi Jinping, who is also general sec -
retary of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), described the rest of the world
1 Kenneth Lieberthal, James Tong, and Sai-cheung Y eung. Central Documents and Politburo Politics
in China (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1978). doi:10.3998/mpub.20021.
Xi Jinping’s Politics
in Command
Economy
ISSUE BRIEF
Atlantic CouncilAtlantic Council
SCOWCROFT CENTER
FOR STRATEGY AND SECURITY
The Scowcroft Center for
Strategy and Security works to
develop sustainable, nonpartisan
strategies to address the most
important security challenges
facing the United States and the
world. The Center honors General
Brent Scowcroft’s legacy of
service and embodies his ethos
of nonpartisan commitment to
the cause of security, support
for US leadership in cooperation
with allies and partners, and
dedication to the mentorship of
the next generation of leaders.
The Scowcroft Center’s Asia
Security Initiative promotes
forward-looking strategies and
constructive solutions for the most
pressing issues affecting the Indo-
Pacific region, particularly the
rise of China, in order to enhance
cooperation between the United
States and its regional allies and
partners.
JUL Y 2021 DEXTER TIFF ROBERTS

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command Economy
as facing “chaos,” and noted with approval China’s growing
strength saying “time and momentum are on our side.” 2
Following the US-China trade war defined by punishing
industrial tariffs pushed by former US President Donald
J. Trump, the COVID-19 pandemic that devastated the
global economy but which China emerged from relatively
unscathed, and in the face of what has become the en -
trenched policy of Washington to try to block the global ex-
pansion of China’s technology giants like Huawei, Chinese
leaders have become far more open about discussing their
ambitious goals. These goals include building a more in -
ward-focused, technologically self-reliant economy, with a
larger role for state planning and state firms, and with all
businesses, including privately owned ones, firmly under
the thumb of the CCP. It includes huge top-down projects
like Xi’s model modern city of Xiong’an, the “Greater Bay
Area,” which attempts to link Hong Kong and Macau with
Shenzhen and Pearl River Delta cities in a massive inte -
grated economic zone, and other domestic developments
that aim to drive faster regional growth in China. 3 At the
same time, China aims to continue to expand overseas,
through both Xi’s signature Belt and Road Initiative (BRI),
and by creating its own domestic core technologies that
can compete with and displace multinational versions in
markets overseas.
Starting in 2020, Xi and his deputies began to refer to their
new economic vision as the “dual circulation” strategy, a
phrase quickly picked up by cadres across the country and
repeated ad nauseum in China’s state-controlled press.
One “circulation” refers to China’s continued engagement
with the world through trade and investment as with BRI,
while the second is its much expanded internal circula -
tion—relying much more on the innovative abilities of its
own people and companies to move up the technology
value chain and create China’s own globally competitive
high-tech products; and relying much more on the spend -
ing power of the Chinese people by continuing to expand
its middle class outside of big cities and along the coast,
and into the smaller towns and rural areas in the interior of
China as well.
The new emphasis on what could also be called “politics
in command” ( zhengzhi guashuai), a phrase Mao Zedong
regularly wielded, including during the most political of
eras, the disastrous 1966-76 Great Proletarian Cultural
2 习近平 [Xi Jinping], “把握新发展阶段, 贯彻新发展理念, 构建新发展格局” [Seize the new development stage, implement the new development concept，build
the new development blueprint], 求是网 [QS Theory], April 30, 2021, http://www.qstheory.cn/dukan/qs/2021-04/30/c_1127390013.htm.
3 Dexter Roberts, The Myth of Chinese Capitalism: The Worker, the Factory, and the Future of the World (New Y ork: St. Martin’s Press, 2020).
Revolution, appears to be hurting China’s economy, one
already beset by challenges. These challenges include a
rapidly aging population, excessive reliance on investment
and debt, and growing wealth inequality. The challenge
facing China’s economy is most apparent when looking at
productivity which has dropped off dramatically in recent
years. The emphasis on top-down planning and the use
of multiple targets in the development of technology and
elsewhere in the economy has also led to excessive waste
of resources and renewed pressure to fudge statistics, a
worrying trend that looks likely to skew policy making.
This issue brief will look at the key elements of China’s
new “politics in command” strategy, including its anteced -
ents in Chinese history originating in the earlier Mao era,
and how it was largely abandoned under the Reform and
Opening policies pursued by Deng Xiaoping that helped to
power the rapid economic growth that defined the 1980s
and 1990s. It will examine how the global financial crisis
of 2008, during the administration of President Hu Jintao
and Premier Wen Jiabao, set in motion a resurgence of
state capitalism and a reliance on investment that aimed
to keep China’s economy growing fast and so avoid wides -
cale layoffs for its workers. And it will look at how industrial
policy has now become a defining element of today’s eco -
nomic strategy—and is being taken to new levels—under
Xi. The report will examine the strategy’s key elements,
including the strengthened role of state firms, the increas -
ing encroachment by the party on the operations of private
companies, its impact on foreign companies, the use of
top-down industrial plans and state subsidies, the central
role of Xi in pushing it, and how it has affected policy mak -
ing among officials in lower levels of government including
at the provincial level and below.
A central question is whether the new economic focus will
help Beijing succeed in its goal of maintaining rapid eco -
nomic growth and higher living standards, central to contin-
ued popular support for the party, or whether it will hinder
or even stall that growth in the face of the substantial do -
mestic challenges of demography, debt, and inequality. (A
future report will focus on those same domestic challenges
to continued growth and their implications for China’s
development.)
That outcome will determine whether the party and Xi’s ad-
ministration are able to maintain the still high level of popu -

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command EconomyISSUE BRIEF
lar support they enjoy today, or whether it is likely to erode,
another question that will be examined in this and future re-
ports. Similarly, how Chinese political elites might respond
to Xi’s unprecedented amassing of power and now clear
intention to stay in power for much longer than his prede -
cessors, will also be considered. Finally, this report will pro-
vide policy suggestions for other countries and particularly
the United States, China’s largest trading partner, that aim
to slow China’s move toward an economic policy defined
by “politics in command” and lessen the potential negative
impact it will have on their economies and companies.
Background
“The changeover from…capitalist to socialist ownership
in private industry and commerce is bound to bring
about a tremendous liberation of the productive
forces.”—Mao Zedong, speech to the Supreme State
Conference (January 25, 1956)4
For most of the first part of China’s modern history, the state
exerted ironclad control over the economy with Chairman
Mao taking cues from his communist elder, Josef Stalin
of the Soviet Union. After the founding of the People’s
Republic of China in 1949, the custom of five-year plans
was adopted, which dictated what would be produced, in
what quantities, and where it would be sold and at what
price. It was an economy entirely made up of state-owned
firms and in the countryside, agricultural communes. Like
other communists before him, Mao believed such a “sci -
entific” system would maximize the goods produced and
create a much larger and even more vibrant economy. The
reality was instead an economy skewed toward developing
heavy industries, to the detriment of a strong agricultural
or service sector and one which stunted the growth of a
consumer market.
That all changed with the death of Mao in 1976 and his even-
tual replacement with paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
Deng’s Reform and Opening policy launched in late 1978
was a clean break with Mao and the past; along with the
dissolution of the agricultural communes, the process of
reforming and shuttering urban state enterprises began,
opening the way for the rise of private enterprise. Deng’s
most important contribution was to downplay the impor -
4 Mao Tse Tung, “Socialism and Communism,” accessed on June 14, 2020, https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/mao/works/red-book/ch03.htm.
5 William A. Joseph, “Ideology and China’s Political Development” in Politics in China: An Introduction, Third Edition (New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 2019).
6 Ibid.
7 Ibid.
tance of ideology in the economy. Even as he made it clear
that the political system would continue to be tightly con -
trolled by the party, Deng liberated business from politics.
As he expressed it in two of his many memorable slogans—
China’s economy would develop by “crossing the river by
feeling the stones”—experimentation rather than through
following any dogma; similarly, as Deng pithily put it: “It
doesn’t matter whether a cat is black or white, as long as it
catches mice”—in other words, political orientation wasn’t
important, getting the job done or, specifically, growing the
economy was what mattered. 5
‘Three Represents’ Brings Private Business into the Party
In 2002, China’s then president Jiang Zemin took a step
that was key to the future development of the private
sector. Jiang coined a new political slogan, the “Three
Represents,” as a way to provide ideological justification
for a then revolutionary reform: allowing entrepreneurs to
formally enter the party. (Earlier in 1999, he had changed
the constitution to formally recognize the increasing im -
portance of the private sector.) As with most party catch -
phrases its meaning was not obvious from its wording. It
called for the CCP to always represent “the development
trend of China’s advanced productive forces, the orien -
tation of China’s advanced culture, and the fundamental
interests of the overwhelming majority of the Chinese peo -
ple”—“advanced productive forces” referring to the private
sector.6 After first using the slogan during a study tour of
the market-oriented southern province of Guangdong in
February 2000, Jiang presided over it being formally put in
the party constitution in 2002 and into the state constitu -
tion shortly afterward. 7 Those breakthroughs of the 2000s
were to usher in a more hands-off approach to the Chinese
economy and an ever larger role for private enterprise that
was to continue with few setbacks until today’s resurgence
of state capitalism.
The first hints of this radical shift in economic focus toward
a much more government-focused development started
appearing as early as 2006, when China announced its
Medium- and Long-Term Plan for Science and Technology
Development featuring sixteen mainly government-funded
megaprojects, including developing a civilian jetliner,
manned spaceflights, and nuclear reactors, and began to

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command Economy
herald a new strategy it called “indigenous innovation” aim-
ing for domestic tech supremacy in key technologies. 8 In
2009 and 2010, China announced its plans to target twenty
separate industries with subsidies and other favorable pol -
icies as part of a new Strategic Emerging Industries plan. 9
The new economic strategy has become much more boldly
apparent since Xi Jinping took charge as party general
secretary and president in 2012 and 2013, respectively. It
doubles down on the earlier plans to achieve homegrown
capabilities and today is heavily tinged with what University
of California San Diego political economist Barry Naughton
has called “technological utopianism.”10 Under Xi, the world
has seen the launch in 2015 of another ambitious plan to
move up the technology chain and upgrade manufacturing
called Made in China 2025; Xi has also made it abundantly
clear that the relatively hands-off approach to economic
management of previous years is no longer in favor. 11
The ascension of Xi to a level of leadership power not seen
in decades has been critical to the shift now happening in
China. Xi, whose character and policy preferences were de-
fined in part by his youthful experience of living and work -
ing in the impoverished Chinese countryside, has played
a critical part in pushing to reassert the role of the party in
business, including that which is privately-run, in downsiz -
ing the role and privileges long accorded to foreign com -
panies, and elevating the role of state-owned enterprises
once again to a leading role in the economy. Xi’s success -
ful changing of the Chinese constitution to allow himself to
stay in power indefinitely has given a sense of seeming per-
manence to the new policies and convinced China’s policy
makers to take them very seriously.12
At the same time, across China, party and government offi -
cials appear to be redefining their priorities away from the
previous longtime emphasis on constantly trying out new
economic reforms in search of policies that would attract
8 Dexter Roberts and Pete Engardio, “China’s Economy: Behind All the Hype,” Bloomberg Businessweek, October 22, 2009, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2009-10-22/chinas-economy-behind-all-the-hype?sref=a9fBmPFG.
9 Ibid.
10 Author interview with Barry Naughton, April 30, 2021.
11 Ibid.
12 Richard McGregor and Jude Blanchette, After Xi: Future Scenarios for Leadership Succession in Post-Xi Jinping Era, CSIS Freeman Chair in China Studies and
the Lowy Institute, April 22, 2021, https://www.lowyinstitute.org/publications/after-xi.
13 Jennifer Harris and Jake Sullivan, “America Needs a New Economic Philosophy. Foreign Policy Experts Can Help.” Foreign Policy, February 7, 2020, https://
foreignpolicy.com/2020/02/07/america-needs-a-new-economic-philosophy-foreign-policy-experts-can-help/.
14 Xinhua, “Xi Unveils Plan to Make China ‘Great Modern Socialist Country’ by Mid-21st Century,” October 18, 2017, http://english.www.gov.cn/news/top_
news/2017/10/18/content_281475912476280.htm.
new domestic and foreign investors, lift growth in their lo -
calities and industries, and often win them promotion in the
then GDP growth-oriented cadre measurement system.
Today instead they are focusing on the goals and targets
handed down under the new industrial policies, aiming
to tap the large amounts of readily available government
credit, and as they rise to higher positions of leadership in
the Chinese system, working increasingly hard to ensure
they demonstrate the now apparently mandatory fealty to
Xi and his doctrines.
To be sure, China is not alone in pushing new industrial
policies and emphasizing a stronger role for the state. The
European Union (EU), the United Kingdom, and, notably, the
United States, have also all talked about the need to have
a much more hands-on approach to managing their own
economies. Roosevelt Institute fellow Jennifer Harris and
soon-to-become US National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan
wrote last year that it was time to “move beyond the prevail-
ing neoliberal economic philosophy of the past 40 years”
and to accept that “industrial policy is deeply American.” 13
But China arguably is taking it to a whole new level with its
sweeping plans for state capitalism. Facing other countries
who also are aiming for more self-sufficiency and are joust -
ing to secure key technologies like semiconductor chips
has only convinced China to move more quickly toward as -
serting state control over the economy.
Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command Economy
“A great modern socialist country that is prosperous,
strong, democratic, culturally advanced, harmonious,
and beautiful.”14
China’s new economic experiment is one its leaders see
as necessary to meet the challenges it faces internally and
those coming from abroad. After decades of an average
double-digit annual rise in GDP its economy has started

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command EconomyISSUE BRIEF
to slow with quarterly growth between 6.4 percent and
6.9 percent since mid-2015. 15 The reforms that unleashed
productivity, including the early move to end agricultural
communes and allow farmers to decide what to plant and
where to sell it, the rise of rural industry with the creation
of township and village enterprises, the market opening
driven by China’s entry into the World Trade Organization in
2001, the mass migration of people from the countryside to
work in factories and on construction sites, state enterprise
reform, and the growth of private business all have either
run their natural course or with the non-state sector, is now
being hindered by political controls.
Its falling birth rate and rapidly aging population—the latest
population census shows only 12 million babies were born
last year, the lowest number since the famine that followed
China’s disastrous Great Leap Forward in 1961, and the pro-
portion of those over 65 years of age has grown from 8.9
percent to 13.5 percent over the last ten years—are creat -
ing new health care and pension costs which are pressur -
ing families and local governments.16 The decision in May to
allow couples to have three children is not expected to spur
significant growth in the population, as it is seen as coming
too late.17 If China does not find a way to move up the eco -
nomic value chain while keeping growth high it faces the
prospect of falling into the so-called middle-income trap,
when rising wage costs mean countries are unable to con -
tinue to compete in industries built on low-cost labor and
do not yet have the technological ability to transition to a
higher value-added economy. That would mean China, like
Russia, Brazil, and South Africa before it, never graduates
into the club of high-income nations.
China’s leaders are unwilling to countenance that alarming
prospect. Instead, they have set boldly ambitious targets to
15 Barry Naughton, “Grand Steerage” in Fateful Decisions: Choices That Will Shape China’s Future, eds. Thomas Fingar and Jean C. Oi (Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 2020).
16 Ning Jizhe, “Main Data of the Seventh National Population Census,” National Bureau of Statistics of China, May 1, 2021, http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/
PressRelease/202105/t20210510_1817185.html; Sui-Lee Wee, “China’s ‘Long-Term Time Bomb’: Falling Births Stunt Population Growth,” New York Times, May 10,
2021 (updated May 31, 2021), https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/10/china-census-births-fall.html?smid=tw-share.
17 BBC News, “China allows three children in major policy shift,” British Broadcasting Corporation, May 31, 2021, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-
china-57303592.
18 Xinhua, “Xi declares ‘complete victory’ in eradicating absolute poverty in China,” Xinhuanet, February 25, 2021, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2021-
02/25/c_139765861.htm.
19 Xinhua, “Xi Focus: Xi says China can build a moderately prosperous society in all respects on schedule,” Xinhuanet, November 13, 2020, http://www.xinhuanet.
com/english/2020-11/03/c_139488138.htm.
20 Bloomberg News, “Xi Says Economy Can Double as China Lays Out Ambitious Plans,” Bloomberg, November 3, 2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2020-11-03/china-s-xi-says-economy-can-double-in-size-by-2035?sref=a9fBmPFG.
21 Xi Jinping, “Full text of Xi Jinping’s report at 19th CPC National Congress,” China Daily, November 4, 2017, https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/
china/19thcpcnationalcongress/2017-11/04/content_34115212.htm.
22 CGTN, “President Xi Jinping calls for self-reliance in Guangdong inspection,” October 13, 2020, https://news.cgtn.com/news/2020-10-13/President-Xi-Jinping-
calls-for-self-reliance-in-Guangdong-inspection-Uy43r9wWyI/index.html.
build China into a much richer and more powerful, globally
influential country, tied to both the just-celebrated 100 th an-
niversary of the creation of the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP) on July 1 of this year, and the 100th anniversary of the
founding of the People’s Republic of China coming in 2049.
As part of the first of the centennial goals, earlier this year
China’s leaders already proclaimed success in ending ex -
treme poverty.18 Two additional targets—doubling GDP and
per capita income between 2010 and 2020—were also met
and all are part of what Beijing calls “building a moderately
prosperous society.”19 The second centennial goal coming
mid-century, as well as new plans to once again double
GDP by 2035 and start to set global technological standards
which Xi announced late last year, are far more ambitious.20
As the party general secretary explained to assembled del-
egates in the Great Hall of the People in Beijing at the 19 th
Party Congress in 2017, the goal is for China to develop into
“a great modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong,
democratic, culturally advanced, harmonious, and beauti -
ful.” The party will not only ensure that “common prosper -
ity for everyone is basically achieved” by 2050, Xi said, but
also that “China has become a global leader in terms of
composite national strength and international influence.”21
“We are witnessing major changes never seen in a
century, and we need to take the path of indigenous
innovation through self-reliance.”22
Rather than opt for more reform to drive the economic
growth needed to meet such ambitious goals—for example,
by loosening and eventually ending legacy policies of its
past like the household registration system or hukou, and
dual land policy which restricts the ability of rural Chinese
to sell or rent their land at market prices, as well as balance
the economic playing field to allow its private sector to

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command Economy
grow much faster—Beijing has chosen a very different path.
Through massive support of new technologies that have
been designated as “fundamental core areas” for national
security, its leaders are hoping to both end reliance on the
rest of the world and, critically, unleash new productivity on
its economy that will enable it to keep growing rapidly for
many years to come.
The scale of the plan, which was further fleshed out with
the release last November of China’s 14 th five-year plan, is
awesome.23 In order to achieve breakthroughs in advanced
technologies, including artificial intelligence (AI), quantum
computing, blockchain, neuroscience, biotechnology, robot-
ics, and semiconductors to ensure its technological self-re -
liance and power its economy, R&D investment will rise to
7 percent annually and China’s leaders intend to spend as
much as half a trillion dollars every year, or 4 percent to 6
percent of GDP, according to calculations by Naughton.24 “It
reflects this remarkable confidence or arrogance that they
can push the economy in these very major ways that they
want to move it,” Naughton said in an interview.
Technological utopianism
The plan is based on a belief that the world is at a crucial
moment when new technologies and new uses for tech -
nology will transform the global economy. As Xi put it in
remarks in Guangdong province in 2020: “We are witness -
ing major changes never seen in a century, and we need
to take the path of indigenous innovation through self-re -
liance.”25 Xi and other Chinese officials believe that coun -
tries that get first-mover advantage will dominate not just
economically, but will also become the geopolitical and mil-
itary superpowers of the coming decades. (A key plank of
China’s grand plan is “civilian-military fusion,” or ensuring
new technologies not just drive economic growth but also
military modernization.) They also believe that technologi -
cal breakthroughs—likely through AI, cloud computing, and
the Internet of Things—have the potential to not just mod -
ernize manufacturing but also lead to productivity break -
23 Naughton, “Grand Steerage.”
24 Ibid.
25 CGTN, “President Xi Jinping calls for self-reliance in Guangdong inspection,” October 13, 2020, https://news.cgtn.com/news/2020-10-13/President-Xi-Jinping-
calls-for-self-reliance-in-Guangdong-inspection-Uy43r9wWyI/index.html.
26 Naughton, “Grand Steerage.”
27 Ibid.
28 Ibid.
29 Peter Brenan, “Weak Chinese consumption holds back global economic recovery,” S&P Global, March 16, 2021, https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/
news-insights/latest-news-headlines/weak-chinese-consumption-holds-back-global-economic-recovery-63169784.
30 Naughton, “Grand Steerage.”
throughs from new economic and social structures like
smart cities. Officials also believe they are well-positioned
to dominate new technologies. Among the competitive
advantages they identify are having a very large pool of
well-educated workers (others see weaknesses in China’s
aging labor force), the world’s largest manufacturing base,
as well as an enormous domestic market, all allowing China
to leverage scale. “Being the lead market is extremely im -
portant, because it means that innovative firms are close to
the customer and can adapt and fine-tune innovations to
meet customer needs most effectively,” writes Naughton. 26
China for now has the money to fund the plan. After more
than a decade of fiscal reforms China’s central and local
governments have doubled the taxes they take which now
amount to more than one-fifth of GDP. 27 And China’s offi -
cials have access to more funds through both fast-growing
social insurance premiums and, notably, the huge reve -
nues earned by local governments through land sales. This
larger pool of revenues has grown rapidly in recent years
and amounted to 36 percent of GDP in 2018. 28 China’s still
large state sector, including control over the banks and the
interest rates they charge, has also allowed it to engage
in what economists call “financial repression”—tapping the
high savings of the Chinese people to drive investment,
while household consumption is stunted (it still is below
40 percent of GDP, much lower than most other countries
around the world).29 This has allowed China to maintain the
world’s highest investment rate, around 40 percent of GDP.
“Their attitude to this waste is that of the venture capitalist:
most of the new firms will fail, and the money spent on them
will be lost, but the few that succeed will become future
champions,” according to Naughton.30
“The state advances, the private sector retreats.”
A key goal of the new industrial policy is to strengthen the
role of state enterprises, often at the expense of the private
sector. China, of course, has long stressed the importance
of government firms in its economy with their leading role

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command EconomyISSUE BRIEF
enshrined in the constitution. But throughout the first few
decades of Deng’s Reform and Opening policy that em -
phasis seemed increasingly lip service. As private firms be -
came the key driver of economic growth a popular recent
slogan “56789” was coined to describe their importance:
they generate 50 percent of total tax revenue, 60 percent
of GDP, 70 percent of all innovation produced, and employ
80 percent of urban workers while making up 90 percent of
registered companies.31
And while the importance of the private sector to China’s
economy has not lessened, its status in the eyes of China’s
top officials has undergone a real downgrading in recent
years and earlier efforts to make a fairer playing field have
stalled. While this trend is abundantly obvious under Xi’s
government, its origins began much earlier during the
global financial crisis of 2008 and spawned the rise of a
new phrase guo jin min tui —“the state advances, the pri -
vate sector retreats.”32
Xi Jinping in charge
In a break with tradition extending back to the Deng era,
Xi is the clear power and brains behind the new economic
strategy. Having the party general secretary play such an
outsized role in setting the terms of and directing the new
plan, as Xi is doing, would have been unimaginable under
the more collective style of leadership of his predecessors.
Economic policies have been the purview of the premier
in the past. Much of the strategy’s pillars—its emphasis on
self-reliance, surprising given how much China’s economy
and its people’s living standards to date can be directly
tied to its years of opening to the world; its apparent hos -
tility toward things foreign, including increasingly overseas
business; its preference for big state enterprises, even
when they are inefficient, over less easily controlled private
enterprise; and its focus on a much stronger role for the
CCP, not just in politics, but in economics, and indeed in
education and society as well—seem linked to the revolu -
tionary ethos of the China Xi grew up in. Coming of age at
the height of China’s turbulent Cultural Revolution, Xi saw
his traditional schooling halted, spent years in the Shaanxi
countryside learning, he says, the importance of hard work,
frugality, and zili gengsheng or self-reliance. Xi, too, is the
first Chinese leader to be born after the 1949 revolution and
31 Roberts, The Myth of Chinese Capitalism.
32 Dexter Roberts, “China’s State Enterprises Have to Pay Up,” Bloomberg, May 18, 2012, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2012-05-17/chinas-state-
enterprises-have-to-pay-up?sref=a9fBmPFG.
33 BBC News, “Li Keqiang: China’s marginalised premier,” British Broadcasting Corporation, September 28, 2020, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-
china-19870221.
so only knows the rule of the CCP, unlike his predecessors
who, at least in their early years, all grew up in a country
then ruled by the Nationalist Party.
Xi has been able to push sweeping and disruptive changes
across China’s economy and society by amassing an un -
precedented amount of power, in part through the execu -
tion of a far-reaching anti-corruption campaign during his
first years as top leader. As well as targeting those who
were legitimately venal, at the same time the campaign
seems to have crippled any early opposition to his new
policies by either removing or frightening into silence all
those officials who might have tried to block them. That
power later was cemented in place when Xi successfully
oversaw the changing of the Chinese constitution to end
term limits for the presidency, a move that signaled his in -
tention to stay in power beyond the two five-year terms of
his predecessors.
Xi also broke with party precedent by taking charge of sev-
eral high-level economic policy-making bodies that tradi -
tionally would have been led by his number two, Premier Li
Keqiang. These “leading small groups” fall under the party
and thus function as powerful policy-making bodies sepa -
rate and superior to the traditional ministries and commis -
sions led by Li in his role as head of the State Council. Of
course, Li also is a party member and so could well have
headed—and indeed once would have been expected to
head—any leading small groups dealing with the economy.33
Not in Xi’s China. Xi not only heads the outward-oriented,
small groups that traditionally would be headed by the party
secretary general as top leader, such as ones on state se -
curity, Taiwan, and foreign affairs, but also is the director
of an Internet security committee, a finance and economy
committee, and a newly created one, the “comprehensive
deepening reform committee,” a commanding organization
with sprawling responsibilities over military and cultural re -
forms, along with overseeing all economic reforms.
“Love the motherland, love the people, love the
Communist Party.”
Another key focus of Xi’s has been reining in what had
been the increasingly independent private economy. Xi has
asserted control over non-state firms in large part by ex -

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command Economy
panding the reach of the CCP over their operations. Former
leader Jiang’s efforts to bring entrepreneurs into the party
with the Three Represents was largely about reassuring
them that they would no longer be the targets of anti-cap -
italist crackdowns and even providing new business op -
portunities such as opening government contracts to their
bidding and allowing them to more easily win business
licenses, opportunities that came more easily with party
membership. Xi by contrast has sternly reminded private
firms of their responsibilities to the party and the nation—
not just the opportunities the government provides them.
As Xi put it in a key address in Beijing to heads of top pri -
vate businesses in 2016, China’s entrepreneurs shouldn’t
simply run their businesses with the traditional aim of mak -
ing money. They must also “love the motherland, love the
people, love the Communist Party, and actively practice
socialist core values.” 34 Just a few days before that Xi had
shown just how dramatically attitudes toward private busi -
ness were shifting. In a speech to the central party school
in Beijing,35 he warned that some Chinese have “unwittingly
become trumpeters of Western capitalistic ideology,” which
could lead to “disastrous consequences.”36
Not long after those ominous words, Xi launched a cam -
paign to establish party cells in private companies. Starting
with some of China’s largest and best-known firms, it soon
moved to encouraging smaller firms to also participate; ac -
cording to the CCP’s constitution, any firm that has at least
three party members can open a formal party organization.
Since Xi took power in 2012, the proportion of private en -
terprises with such cells grew from 35.6 percent to 48.3
percent by 2018, with more than 90 percent for China’s
34 Dexter Roberts and Jasmine Zhao, “Chinese Business Feels the Sting of the Party,” Bloomberg, May 5, 2016, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2016-05-05/chinese-business-feels-the-sting-of-the-party?sref=a9fBmPFG.
35 Nectar Gan, “China’s President Xi Jinping warns Communist Party schools against ‘Western capitalist’ values,” South China Morning Post, May 1, 2016, https://
www.scmp.com/news/china/policies-politics/article/1940396/chinas-president-xi-jinping-warns-communist-party.
36 Roberts and Zhao, “Chinese Business Feels.”
37 Neil Thomas, “Party Committees in the Private Sector: Rising Presence, Moderate Prevalence,” MacroPolo, December 16, 2020, https://macropolo.org/party-
committees-private-sector-china/?rp=e.
38 Scott Livingston, The Chinese Communist Party Targets the Private Sector, Center for Strategic and International Studies, October, 2020, https://www.csis.
org/analysis/chinese-communist-party-targets-private-sector; Xinhua News Agency, “中共中央办公厅印发《关于加强新时代民营经济统战工作的意见》”
[Announcement from the General Office of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party: Opinion on Strengthening the United Front Work of
Private Economy in the New Era],中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [People’s Republic of China Central Government], September 15, 2020, http://www.gov.cn/
zhengce/2020-09/15/content_5543685.htm.
39 Thomas, “Party Committees.”
40 经济部 [Ministry of Economic Affairs], “2020中国民营企业500强发布报告” [2020 Top 500 Chinese Private Companies Publish Report],中华全国工商业联
合会 [All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce], September 10, 2020, http://www.acfic.org.cn/zzjg_327/nsjg/jjb/jjbgzhdzt/2020my5bq/2020my5bq_
bgbd/202009/t20200904_244200.html.
41 Marshall W. Meyer and Changqi Wu, Making Ownership Matter: Prospects for China’s Mixed Ownership Economy, Paulson Institute, September 2014, http://
www.paulsoninstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/PPM_Making-Ownership-Matter_Meyer-and-Wu_English_R.pdf.
42 Cyrus Lee, “Tencent, Baidu, Alibaba take part in China Unicom’s mixed-ownership reform,” ZD Net, August 17, 2017, https://www.zdnet.com/article/tencent-baidu-
alibaba-take-part-in-china-unicoms-mixed-ownership-reform/; Meyer and Wu, Making Ownership Matter.
largest.37 And after the announcement of a top-level plan
to expand party control in non-state firms last October, the
trend is likely to have increased even more quickly (more
recent statistics are not available). Ye Qing, vice chairman
of the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce,
called at the time for building a “modern private enterprise
system with Chinese characteristics,” with new party cells
exercising control over human resources decisions, carry -
ing out company audits, and monitoring internal corporate
behavior.38 It also is a way to harness them for national
policies. “Xi believes Party organizations help mobilize
companies to support top-level policy agendas,” writes
MacroPolo researcher Neil Thomas.39 “The number of firms
that participated in ‘national strategies’ ( guojia zhanlüe)—
like the Rural Revitalization Strategy and the Belt and Road
Initiative—rose from 384 in 2015 to 471 in 2019. Harnessing
private sector cooperation makes practical sense for Xi as
last year these 500 companies boasted collective assets of
37 trillion yuan ($5.4 trillion).”40
A policy called “mixed ownership,” where state-owned
firms buy into private firms or the reverse, is another way
China’s government is asserting more control over the pri -
vate sector. Announced at the Third Plenum of the CCP in
2013 and strongly promoted under Xi, it also aims to make
state-owned companies more efficient. 41 One prominent
example saw Alibaba and Tencent, best known for its
WeChat app, take stakes in state telecom operator China
Unicom in 2017, part of an effort to get private firms to in -
vest in state-owned firms operating in the overwhelmingly
government-controlled industry of telecoms, as well as en -
ergy, rail, and public utilities. 42

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command EconomyISSUE BRIEF
That effort has gotten a new boost following a three-year
action plan for state enterprise reform that runs from 2020
to 2022 and calls for a deepening of mixed ownership, as
does the 2021 to 2025 14 th Five-Year Plan. 43 Two national
funds pooling private and government funds were set up
last year to help achieve these goals. “We will establish
a major investment platform to allow more private capital
and smaller funds to participate in the SOE ownership re -
forms,” Ma Zhengwu, then chairman of China Chengtong
Holdings, the company responsible for one of the funds,
said in 2017.44 Meanwhile, investment moving in the oppo -
site direction, from state firms into private ones, has con -
tinued apace: the ninety-six large-scale companies now
directly managed by the central government have taken
stakes in more than six thousand private companies since
2013, while the number of large private firms involved in
mixed ownership went up by 24 percent from 2015 to 2018,
according to government data. 45 How much of that prog -
ress on mixed ownership reforms is due to arm-twisting by
Beijing is a serious question. Private companies have been
skeptical about the policy from its beginning. A 2014 survey
conducted at the annual Boao Forum for Asia found that 90
percent of private business owners felt they would have no
management control even if they were to become board
members of mixed-ownership companies. 46
As George Washington University political scientist Bruce
J. Dickson has written, 47 the CCP not only uses “coopta -
tion” to manage its private sector today, but still also uses
“repression.”48 Starting in 2015 following an eight-month
period where senior managers from thirty-four companies
went missing when they were suddenly detained by au -
43 Xinhua, “How will China’s SOE reform fare with three-year action?” Xinhuanet, January 29, 2021, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2021-01/29/c_139707120.
htm; Xinhua News Agency, “Proposal of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party on Drawing Up the 14th Five-Y ear Plan for National Economic
and Social Development and Long-Range Objectives for 2030,” translated by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology, November 3, 2020, https://cset.
georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/t0237_5th_Plenum_Proposal_EN-1.pdf.
44 Li Xiang, “Private, State fund planned for SOEs,” China Daily, September 18, 2017, https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/business/2017-09/18/content_32139300.htm.
45 “Directory,” State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council, accessed July 6, 2021, http://en.sasac.gov.cn/
directory.html; Xinhua, “How will China’s SOE reform fare with three-year action?” Xinhuanet, January 29, 2021, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2021-
01/29/c_139707120.htm; 中华全国工商业联合会 [All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce], “2020 中国民营企业500强 调研分析报告” [2020 Top 500
Chinese Private Companies Survey Report], September 2020, http://www.acfic.org.cn/zzjg_327/nsjg/jjb/jjbgzhdzt/2020my5bq/2020my5bq_bgbd/202009/
W020200910356331413523.pdf.
46 Meyer and Wu, Making Ownership Matter.
47 Bruce J. Dickson, “The Survival Strategy of the Chinese Communist Party,” Washington Quarterly 39 (4) (2016): 27-44, https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/
abs/10.1080/0163660X.2016.1261563?journalCode=rwaq20.
48 Author interview with Bruce J. Dickson, May 18, 2021.
49 Roberts and Zhao, “Chinese Business Feels.”
50 Ibid.
51 John Pomfret, “China’s Leader Attacks His Greatest Threat,” Atlantic, January 25, 2021, https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2021/01/china-xi-
jinping-business-entrepreneurs/617777/.
52 Alexandra Stevenson, “China Reveals Charges Against Outspoken Businessman,” New York Times, April 24, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/24/
business/china-sun-dawu-arrest-charges.html?smtyp=cur&smid=tw-nytimesworld.
thorities in connection with investigations, the phrase “lost
contact,” or shilian , became popular as shorthand for the
trend.49 Notable among them was Guo Guangchang, chair -
man of Fosun Group, a private conglomerate that owned
Cirque de Soleil and Club Med, who disappeared for a few
days in December 2015.50 For the few days until he was re-
leased without charge, trading in Fosun’s Hong Kong-listed
shares was halted. More recently, the party has been crack-
ing down on more outspoken entrepreneurs with several
put in jail. Real-estate tycoon Ren Zhiqiang, given the nick -
name “Big Cannon Ren” for his vocal criticism of the party,
was sentenced last year to eighteen years in prison for
corruption; many believe the fact he wrote an unpublished
essay seen as critical of Xi’s management of the pandemic
was his real transgression.51 Sun Dawu, who founded an ag-
ricultural company in the province of Hebei next to Beijing,
was also known for his frank criticisms of the Chinese po -
litical system and calls for political reform. A land disagree -
ment with a state company led to him being arrested along
with many of his family members in November 2020; later
Sun was charged with illegal fundraising and obstructing
public service, as well as other offenses, and the govern -
ment took over his company.52
Even those tycoons who don’t advocate for political
change can get in trouble for having too much power or
not showing adequate deference to the government.
Concern among Chinese officials had been growing about
how e-commerce giant Alibaba’s Ant Group was taking
business from government-owned banks, with its huge on -
line lending business. After Alibaba’s charismatic founder
Jack Ma criticized Chinese banks as lacking in innovation

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command Economy
and behaving like pawnshops in a public speech, Xi and
his top regulators had had enough. Ant Group’s plans for a
$37 billion stock offering in Shanghai and Hong Kong were
halted last fall and the usually high profile Ma—previously
heralded in the state-owned press for his maverick ways—
largely disappeared from public view. 53 Then Alibaba was
hit with a $2.8 billion antitrust fine in April, the biggest in
China’s history.54 The most recent sign that Ma is unlikely to
ever regain his status as one of China’s most famous entre-
preneurs: when Hupan University, an executive business
school in Hangzhou founded by Ma, announced the Alibaba
founder is stepping down as its head. 55 And China’s state
media has attacked the institution as not having the proper
licenses to issue degrees. “The government thinks Hupan
has the potential to organize China’s top entrepreneurs to
work towards a common goal set by Jack Ma instead of
the Communist Party,” a person close to the school told the
Financial Times.56 And in early July, just days after ride-hail-
ing company Didi Global listed on the New York Stock
Exchange, China’s Internet regulator ordered app stores
to stop offering Didi’s app citing personal data concerns,
slamming the company’s stock price and dealing what ap -
pears a serious blow to its business. Likely in response to
the increasingly precarious position of China’s entrepre -
neurs Ant Group CEO Simon Hu, e-commerce company
Pinduoduo’s founder Colin Huang, and Zhang Yiming, the
thirty-eight-year-old founder of ByteDance, the Chinese
parent company of TikTok, have all stepped down.57
Meanwhile, with Beijing making it very clear that China’s
top tech companies now have a responsibility to help the
state fulfill its development goals, Alibaba, Tencent, and
food delivery giant Meituan have announced they will make
big investments in cloud computing, autonomous driving,
and AI, all of which have been singled out as priority in -
dustries in the big plan. “Internet giants with immense data
53 Jing Yang, “Jack Ma, Alibaba’s Billionaire Co-Founder, Resurfaces After Months of Lying Low,” Wall Street Journal, January 20, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/
articles/alibabas-jack-ma-resurfaces-after-months-of-laying-low-11611117915.
54 Bloomberg News, “China Fines Alibaba Record $2.8 Billion After Monopoly Probe,” Bloomberg, April 9, 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2021-04-10/china-fines-alibaba-group-2-8-billion-in-monopoly-probe?sref=a9fBmPFG.
55 Sun Yu and Ryan McMorrow, “Jack Ma to step down as president of his elite business school,” Financial Times, May 23, 2021, https://www.ft.com/
content/296d2cce-92ca-438e-aa56-f1c3fc4174f3.
56 Sun Yu and Ryan McMorrow, “Beijing forces elite Jack Ma academy to halt new enrolments,” Financial Times, April 9, 2021, https://www.ft.com/content/61efaf8b-
3bb6-4031-86d8-09274fcf956b.
57 Liza Lin and Y oko Kubota, “TikTok Parent’s Founder Zhang Yiming to Step Down as CEO,” Wall Street Journal, May 20, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/
bytedance-founder-zhang-yiming-to-step-down-as-ceo-11621478797?mod=lead_feature_below_a_pos1.
58 人民日报 [People’s Daily], “社区团购”争议背后, 是对互联网巨头科技创新的更多期待” [Behind the “Community group purchase” debate, greater expectations for
tech innovation from internet giants], December 11, 2020, https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/apwKrz1JDSVp2514SCMQ3A.
59 Bloomberg News, “China Tech Giants Spend Billions to Fuel Growth After Crackdown,” Bloomberg, May 26, 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2021-05-26/china-tech-giants-spend-billions-to-fuel-growth-after-crackdown?sref=a9fBmPFG.
60 Zhang Yuzhe, Hu Yue, and Luo Meihan, “Exclusive: Tencent Ordered to Set Up Financial Holding Company,” Caixin, May 26, 2021, https://www.caixinglobal.
com/2021-05-26/exclusive-tencent-ordered-to-set-up-financial-holding-company-101718352.html.
and advanced algorithms should shoulder greater respon -
sibility, aim higher and do more in tech innovation,” the
People’s Daily wrote in a December commentary. 58 “The
Chinese government expects domestic internet giants
to play a bigger role in helping the country achieve tech
self-sufficiency,” Shen Meng, a director at a Beijing-based
boutique investment bank, told Bloomberg. 59 “After all, ad-
vancing fundamental technologies require massive capital
and manpower. In a country which still lacks a mature ven -
ture investment ecosystem, deep-pocketed big tech is in
a better position than startups to lead that breakthrough.”
(Following the crackdown on Ant Group, Tencent also has
been told by regulators to put its finance business into a
new company where it can be better supervised .)60
Goodbye foreign friends
To successfully carry out its ambitious plans to build a much
more self-reliant and powerful economy, Beijing needs for -
eign companies that believe their ability to do business in
China is subject to staying in the good graces of the CCP.
Sharing technology with local partners should be seen as
the accepted price of access to the Chinese market. The
feeling of vulnerability of being constantly exposed to
possible retaliation from the government and a national -
istic population is being cultivated among all multination -
als doing business in China right now. When H&M, Nike,
and other brands were pilloried in the state media and on -
line after they expressed concern about sourcing cotton
from Xinjiang given reports of forced labor there affecting
Muslim Uyghurs, it was just the latest episode where for -
eign brands have been forced to apologize profusely or ac-
cept the possibility of losing access to the Chinese market.
In order to ensure there are no challenges to the official
portrayal of the country as powerful and resistant to out -

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command EconomyISSUE BRIEF
side pressure, China’s leaders cannot accept criticism of its
human rights abuses, its broken promises of autonomy for
Hong Kong, or its bellicose approach to Taiwan. “Increasingly
[the CCP is] saying you have to choose,” former US Deputy
National Security Advisor Matt Pottinger said in a speech
at the Mansfield Center in Montana in March. 61 “You either
have to live by our rules and norms, which means shut your
mouths about things like genocide in Xinjiang, or the threat
of war with Taiwan, or the undermining of the rule of law and
democracy in Hong Kong…or you can forget about having
access to the Chinese market.”62
Now that China doesn’t need the help of multinationals as
it did before, it is much more willing to take a tough line
rather than work hard to woo them, as it did in the years
before its entry into the World Trade Organization in 2001,
and for almost a decade afterward. Domestic companies
now have the financial heft, management skills, and, in -
creasingly, technology that once were only available from
overseas. Research by Loren Brandt, an economist at
the University of Toronto, found that the number of com -
panies with foreign investment dropped by more than 15
percent from 2013 until 2019, while Chinese firms grew by
more than 10 percent. 63 (Data includes all firms with sales
of more than twenty million yuan, making up more than 80
percent of industry output.) What we are seeing today is a
“comprehensive, top-down economic strategy that aims to
reshape the country’s economy and its economic interac -
tions with the rest of the world,” Brandt said in testimony to
the US-China Economic and Security Review Commission
on April 15.64 “This course represents a departure from the
main elements of a development path that evolved over the
course of the first three decades of reform from 1978-2007,”
which included “a combination of bottom-up, decentralizing
domestic economic reform and external opening,” he said.
Challenges
The new economic strategy, not surprisingly, has changed
the policy preferences, work styles, and motivations of tens
61 Matt Pottinger, “Great Power Competition: Beijing vs. the Free World,” moderated by Dexter “Tiff” Roberts, Mansfield Center, Facebook video, March 12, 2021,
https://pt-br.facebook.com/MansfieldCenter/videos/great-power-competition-beijing-vs-the-free-world/236236971530916/.
62 Dexter Roberts, “The risky logic behind China’s economic strategy: ‘Politics in command,’” New Atlanticist, Atlantic Council, May 7, 2021, https://www.
atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/the-risky-logic-behind-chinas-economic-strategy-politics-in-command/.
63 Author interview with Loren Brandt, April 20, 2021.
64 The Chinese Communist Party’s Economic Ambitions: Is the Past Prologue?, US-China Economic and Security Review Commission, April 15, 2021, (statement of
Loren Brandt, Noranda Chair Professor of Economics, University of Toronto), https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2021-04/Loren_Brandt_Testimony.pdf.
65 Author interview with Victor Shih, May 5, 2021.
66 Jean C. Oi, “Future of Central Local Relations” in Fateful Decisions: Choices That Will Shape China’s Future, eds. Thomas Fingar and Jean C. Oi (Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 2020).
67 Author interview with Barry Naughton, April 30, 2021.
of thousands of local Chinese officials. One key shift has
been away from the earlier emphasis common to virtually all
provincial, city, township, and village officials, that put lifting
local GDP growth as the core priority, argues University of
California San Diego political economist Victor Shih. 65 That
focus had already slowly started to change over the last
more than a dozen years as China’s leaders tried to move
away from the GDP target-driven economic system that has
caused many of the country’s most pressing problems. But
while the obsession with ever higher GDP directly caused
the excessive pollution, destabilizing buildup in local gov -
ernment debt,66 and the soaring inequality that Beijing now
wants to avoid, at the same time it served China well by
encouraging competing local officials to advocate for busi -
ness-friendly policies to attract private and foreign com -
panies prized for their more market-oriented operations,
rather than stodgy state-run ones, and thus helped create
a far more vibrant, job-creating, productive economy.
Today targets have not vanished, they have just changed.
While some of the new aims Beijing pushes are needed for
more sustainable growth, such as reducing carbon emis -
sions, or boosting average incomes, others seem to warp
economic priorities. Subsidies are showered on localities to
help them meet the new technological development goals,
including satisfying the often fuzzy concept of producing
innovation. In order to measure performance in localities,
patent registration has been used as a stand-in for inno -
vation, and so is rewarded with state funds or low-interest
loans. “From the standpoint of a local government, they
think ‘Okay, it is Xi Jinping’s world now. We are not being
rewarded for experimentation anymore. We might as well
be part of this opportunity,’” said economist Naughton. 67
The fudging of numbers or even their outright falsifica -
tion has become commonplace. With patents, targets set
for raw numbers of filings have encouraged local cadres
to expand the number of registrations through various
dodges. Tactics have included filing for what are often de -
scribed as “low quality” patents, whose primary purpose is

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command Economy
to win subsidies rather than break new innovative ground,
as well as by splitting what typically would qualify as just
one patent into a larger number by individually register -
ing each process under a separate patent, said Brandt. 68
In 2017, China saw a boom in robot makers, which grew
to an estimated eight hundred companies in just months,
following a new policy that rewarded automation develop -
ment with tax breaks, subsidies, and cheap land. 69 In real -
ity, the vast majority never made any robots, but instead
simply registered to do so to win some of the benefits.
In an undistorted market, only a handful would likely sur -
vive to become truly competitive, Chai Yueting, director of
Tsinghua University’s National Engineering Laboratory for
E-Commerce Technologies, told the author in 2017.70
“East, west, north and south—the party leads them all”71
The amount of time that a cadre must spend on studying
party ideology and doctrine has skyrocketed, particularly
after Xi’s sweeping proclamation at the party congress
in 2017 that “party, government, the military, society and
schools, east, west, north and south—the party leads them
all.”72 That year, too, Xi got his own doctrine put into the
constitution while still serving as leader, the first time ever
that had happened in China. Carrying out ideological cam -
paigns at the local level, often focused on the now official
doctrine of “Xi Jinping Thought,” can affect an official’s
promotion, with Chongqing party secretary and Xi aco -
lyte Chen Min’er being one example. (Chen worked under
China’s top leader in the coastal province of Zhejiang when
Xi was party chief there.) “Now everyone in the government
knows that if Xi likes you, you’re fine. It doesn’t matter how
well you perform,” said Shih.73
Having an even larger influence on cadres’ performance
is Xi’s centralization of power and apparently now clear in -
tention to stay on as leader into a third term or for at least
fifteen years.74 This means officials are focused on trying to
68 Author interview with Loren Brandt, April 20, 2021.
69 Bloomberg News, “Inside China’s Plans for World Robot Domination,” Bloomberg, April 24, 2017, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-04-24/
resistance-is-futile-china-s-conquest-plan-for-robot-industry?sref=a9fBmPFG.
70 Ibid.
71 Nector Gan, “Xi Jinping Thought – the Communist Party’s tighter grip on China in 16 characters,” South China Morning Post, October 25, 2017, https://www.scmp.
com/news/china/policies-politics/article/2116836/xi-jinping-thought-communist-partys-tighter-grip-china.
72 Ibid.
73 Author interview with Victor Shih, May 5, 2021.
74 Oi, “Future of.”
75 Author interview with Victor Shih, May 5, 2021.
76 McGregor and Blanchette, After Xi.
either win the top leader’s favor, or find ways to influence
him, sometimes to the detriment of actually carrying out
policies. That can work out well when those who lobby him
happen to favor a policy that is good for economic growth,
but be very bad for China when they support one that isn’t.
China’s heavy focus on promoting AI is probably positive
for the economy; the increasing emphasis on the state sec-
tor over the private sector which was heavily promoted by
China’s powerful state planning interests, and which also
happened to match with Xi’s own preferences, by contrast
has become a serious problem for China’s economy.75
With a single leader holding so much power, there is also
the risk inherent in relying on any one person’s intellect.
This risk is magnified during a crisis. When Xi ends up mak-
ing what appears now to be the right decision, as he did
when he decided to quickly lock down the country in the
face of the pandemic saving China from the sickness and
death experienced by many other countries and allowing
its economy to quickly recover, it is heralded as good lead -
ership. But how would Xi respond to an unplanned military
clash with the United States in the Taiwan Strait? In a sit -
uation like that, China and the world very possibly could
be better served by the more consensus-based style of
decision-making that was used before Xi’s ascension. That
will become an even more serious issue as the leader gets
older and could even present China with a succession cri -
sis. “Is Xi akin to Stalin after the purges of the 1930s — a
leader who has so thoroughly eliminated rivals and cowed
the system that he will remain in power until he can no lon -
ger perform the duties of office, leaving a succession battle
in his wake?” ask Richard McGregor and Jude Blanchette.76
Senior officials under Xi are relatively older than those that
served under his predecessor Hu. That is apparent from an
examination of CCP Elite, a database that includes some
one thousand seven hundred senior government officials in
China, and that tracks who they hold allegiance to among

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command EconomyISSUE BRIEF
top leaders, compiled by Shih and his colleagues at UC San
Diego.77 Among the senior officials that can be seen as ow-
ing their rise to Xi, or as being part of a presumed Xi faction,
the average age is about sixty-two years old, or five years
older than those who served under Hu at a similar point in
each leader’s tenure. 78 That also puts them less than five
years away from the official retirement age. “Xi is less likely
to promote young people and that apparently is because
Xi himself wants to rule for life. So he does not want young
people around in the government that might challenge him
when he is in his 80s. If he instead promotes a person in
their 60s or 70s, that person will retire before then,” ex -
plained Shih. 79 Having a plank of senior leaders that are
older than those that came before them could have a bad
effect on economic management too. That’s because they
are less likely to support new reforms and, in addition, are
simply less motivated to work hard and try to excel as they
near retirement.
“Unprecedented” technological competition, “main
battleground” for global power
The lofty ambitions of the plan could end up harming the
economy. One of its key aims is to make China self-reliant
in technology, a goal Xi talks about incessantly. The focus
on relying on one’s self is a clear throwback to Mao-era
ideology that reached its crescendo during the Cultural
Revolution. That was when Xi, like thousands of other youth,
was sent to the countryside where he spent years working
with farmers and studying the importance of self-reliance
and other utopian communist ideals. Now with China’s
top leaders facing what they view as an increasingly hos -
tile world, one where, for example, the United States has
tried to cripple the development of technology champion
Huawei, they have decided to make China far more self-
reliant across its supply chains. As Xi put it in a speech
to top Chinese scientists in May: China must prepare for
“unprecedented” technological competition, which has be -
come “the main battleground” for global power, citing AI,
semiconductors, life science, quantum technology, and en -
ergy as priority areas. 80
77 CCP Elite, accessed on June 15, 2021, http://chinadatalab.ucsd.edu/elites/.
78 Victor Shih, “Preparing for the Future: Comparing Factional Characteristics of Xi and Hu’s Factions in Mid-Tenure,” Unpublished work.
79 Author interview with Victor Shih, May 5, 2021.
80 Coco Feng, “Chinese President Xi Jinping seeks to rally country’s scientists for ‘unprecedented’ contest,” South China Morning Post, May 29, 2021, https://www.
scmp.com/news/china/politics/article/3135328/chinese-president-xi-jinping-seeks-rally-countrys-scientists.
81 Anthony Capaccio, “U.S. Faces ‘Unprecedented Threat’ From China on Tech Takeover,” Bloomberg, June 22, 2018, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2018-06-22/china-s-thousand-talents-called-key-in-seizing-u-s-expertise?sref=a9fBmPFG.
82 Luz Ding, “How China’s would-be silicon savior became a debt-ridden disappointment,” SupChina, October 30, 2020, https://supchina.com/2020/10/30/how-
chinas-would-be-silicon-savior-became-a-debt-ridden-disappointment/.
The challenge with these ambitions is twofold. First, pre -
vious experience around the world has shown that tech -
nological breakthroughs come about through openness
and cross-pollination of ideas, not through relying on one’s
self. Silicon Valley in California with its tech centers from
companies from around the world and its multinational en -
gineering workforce, and US universities that attract bright
young people from abroad, are perhaps the best examples.
China, by contrast, censors the free exchange of ideas in its
schools and on the Internet and is unwilling to open its bor-
ders to large numbers of immigrants. The Thousand Talents
Program has had limited success in luring back even over -
seas-trained Chinese for long-term appointments, and has
faced accusations of espionage from the United States
and other countries. 81 Trying to innovate and create glob -
ally competitive technologies and businesses while walling
oneself off from the world is very likely to fail. At the same
time, trying to make everything in one’s own supply chain
is a tremendous waste of resources, going against basic
economic laws like comparative advantage. After a series
of failed semiconductor factories, even some of China’s
officials have gotten worried: companies have “blindly”
entered into chip projects and “are exposed to the risk
of redundant and low-quality capacity-building,” warned
a spokesperson from China’s National Development and
Reform Commission last October. 82
The vast scale of the plan, which is not only spending bil -
lions on developing the latest technologies but also con -
tinuing to fund huge national infrastructure projects in areas
like high-speed rail, electric car charging stations, and tra -
ditional energy projects, is likely to turbocharge the growth
of debt, already at a potentially destabilizing high of at least
276 percent of GDP. Given China’s still tight control over its
banks and financial sector, including capital controls (tight -
ened further with the recent crackdown on the financial
business of Ant Group and other tech companies), the risk
of financial collapse from excessive debt is low. Instead, the
real danger is money continuously funding financially insol -
vent “zombie companies” and industries, many of which are
the state-owned firms favored by Xi. “Zombie businesses

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command Economy
would be sustained by a constant drip-feed of credit, ty -
ing up resources and skilled labor. Governments, banks
and entrepreneurs have every incentive to collude in this
kind of outcome,” according to Naughton. 83 Given the high
level of support for these bold development efforts, with
Xi making clear his preference for huge top-down projects
like Xiong’an and BRI, “political logic makes big projects
likely to continue and possibly lead to ‘zombie infestation,’”
writes Naughton.84
That prospect would only further hurt productivity, the
clearest measure of whether or not China is creating a
sustainable, healthy economy. Years of heavy reliance
on investment, going back at least to the global financial
crisis in 2008 when China launched a $586 billion stim -
ulus package, then the world’s largest, has already taken
a toll. While accounting for 70 percent of GDP growth be -
fore,85 productivity has fallen to around zero today due to
the lack of real reforms plus the growing influence of the
state over economic decision making. 86 Meanwhile, the
amount of capital needed to increase GDP by one unit has
nearly doubled since Xi took power in 2012, according to
the Rhodium Group and the Asia Society Policy Institute’s
China Dashboard. 87 And there are signs that the private
sector, although still very important to the economy, is
being squeezed. The proportion of manufacturing and
infrastructure investment that is made by non-state firms
reached a high of more than half of total investments in
2015 and since then has been shrinking. 88
All of this has huge implications for the world. If China’s
grand plans succeed and it builds global technological gi -
ants, this of course could hurt the business of today’s multi-
nationals, including those from the United States. Beijing’s
already growing pressure on companies, institutions, and
individuals to toe its ideological line on Taiwan, Hong Kong,
Xinjiang, and Tibet will no doubt become much stronger
and effective in muzzling free speech beyond its borders.
On the other hand, failure to achieve China’s ambitious
goals would be equally destabilizing. There is a very real
possibility that Beijing’s emphasis on politics over business,
growing support for its state companies at the expense
of private ones, as well as Xi’s excessive consolidation of
83 Naughton, “Grand Steerage.”
84 Ibid.
85 Brandt, The Chinese Communist Party’s Economic Ambitions.
86 Author interview with Loren Brandt, April 20, 2021.
87 “The China Dashboard,” Asia Society Policy Institute and Rhodium Group, accessed June 15, 2021, https://chinadashboard.gist.asiasociety.org/china-dashboard/.
88 Lingling Wei, “China’s Xi Ramps Up Control of Private Sector. ‘We Have No Choice but to Follow the Party.,’” Wall Street Journal, December 10, 2020, https://
www.wsj.com/articles/china-xi-clampdown-private-sector-communist-party-11607612531.
power could backfire. Even if its companies ultimately don’t
succeed, Beijing’s massive financial support to industries
will likely create global supply gluts affecting the industries
of many other countries. China’s decision to focus so much
of its policy effort and finance on building a state-led econ -
omy rather than on meeting the welfare needs of its own
people could cause populist anger—particularly if the lead -
ership’s efforts fail. That resentment could flare into real
opposition as tensions rise over growing inequality and the
challenges posed by a rapidly aging population. A slow -
ing Chinese economy whose management is challenged
by growing social tensions would weigh heavily on global
growth. The outcome of China’s new “politics in command”
economy will deeply affect the world. For all these reasons
it is imperative that the United States and other countries
adopt specific policies to deal with China’s deeply ambi -
tious plan for global power.
Policy Recommendations
■ The United States should build stronger relationships
with allies in Asia and Europe many of which share sim -
ilar concerns about China’s mercantilist trade practices
and egregious human rights record. This should also
include strengthening the Quad, the economic and se -
curity grouping that includes the United States, Japan,
Australia, and India, and relations with nontraditional
allies like Vietnam, that also shares concerns about
China’s assertive push into the South China Sea.
■ The United States should work to enter the Compre -
hensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific
Partnership (CPTPP), the successor trade grouping for
Pacific nations which former US President Donald J.
Trump pulled out of, with the aim of ensuring China’s
state capitalism does not become tolerated by the
grouping; this goal has an added urgency as China has
announced in recent months its intention to try to enter
CPTPP.
■ The United States should earmark billions of dollars of
funds for private-public cooperation toward innovat -
ing in key sectors, including semiconductor chips. The

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
15
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command EconomyISSUE BRIEF
Endless Frontier Act and the Innovation and Competition
Act, both now being considered in Congress, are two
examples of possible actions.
■ The United States should review the Trump administra -
tion-imposed restrictive academic visa policies and con-
sider loosening them so that Chinese students can once
again return to study in large numbers, many of whom
after graduation might opt to work in the United States
and contribute to American innovation.
■ The US government should work with business groups
to support US companies that are under pressure to
accede to Chinese censorship. Associations like the
American Chamber of Commerce should create special
teams within their organizations that focus on finding
ways to effectively counter Chinese pressure on US
companies, including economic sanctions.
Conclusion
China continues to struggle to transition to a more domes -
tic consumption-driven economy, essential not only for its
grand plans to create an economy far less reliant on the
world, but also necessary to overcome the growing chal -
lenges it faces from falling productivity and excessive re -
liance on investment and debt. China, too, will face more
social pressure as its wealth gap, already one of the highest
in the world, continues to grow. Unfinished legacy policies,
in particular the household registration and dual land sys -
tem, plus a deeply unequal education system, present huge
challenges to building a larger middle class and more sus -
tainable economy and could also lead to pushback against
the CCP, which was founded one hundred years ago and
has ruled China continuously since 1949. All these issues
will be dealt with in depth in a future report.
A key question to watch in the coming months is how suc -
cessful China will be in boosting the spending power of its
households. Even as China has wowed the world with a
dramatically quick turnaround in economic growth, much
of it driven by a surge in industrial production—China last
year produced one trillion tons of steel, a new global re -
89 Xinhua, “Principal contradiction facing Chinese society has evolved in new era: Xi,” China Daily, October 18, 2017, https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/
china/19thcpcnationalcongress/2017-10/18/content_33401026.htm.
90 Naughton, “Grand Steerage,” 64.
91 Andrew G. Walder, “China’s National Trajectory” in Fateful Decisions: Choices That Will Shape China’s Future, eds. Thomas Fingar and Jean C. Oi (Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 2020).
cord—incomes and spending, particularly among the mid -
dle- and lower-class citizens, have not kept up. Meanwhile,
earlier efforts to deleverage have been abandoned at least
temporarily, with debt reaching new highs, a trend likely
to continue as Beijing persists in its ambitious technology
development goals. Key to watch will be whether officials
start to downplay their grand plans as it becomes increas -
ingly obvious how they butt up against the longtime goal
of economic rebalancing toward a more consumption and
services driven economy—or whether officials will double
down on them and count on high growth to eventually lift
incomes and household spending.
Xi has referred to the “principal contradiction” facing China
as “between unbalanced and inadequate development and
the people’s ever-growing needs for a better life.” 89 The
trade-offs facing the country as it funds its top-down plans
even as it faces ever more pressure to meet social needs
will become ever more apparent with new demographic
challenges due to its rapidly aging population. The looming
demographic time bomb—by 2030 there will only be four
people working for every retired person as the labor force
starts to drop much more rapidly—means China is in a race
against time before the cost of healthcare, pensions, and
remaking its economy to deal with a much smaller work -
force soars. This is why economist Naughton has referred
to China’s huge plan as a gamble, “the terms of which will
become markedly less favorable in a decade.” 90
China’s challenges are quantitatively different from other
countries before it because its people are still at a much
lower stage of income development. GDP per capita, for
example, is at only 27 percent of the United States’ and
lower than the equally ambitious Soviet Union’s was in
1987.91 Success in this bold gamble will be the only way
that China can avoid falling into the middle-income trap.
Whether China can create a new economic model, one that
is deeply ambitious and costly, far more state-centered,
and with a role for private enterprise deeply circumscribed
by the party—one that would disprove some of the most
commonly accepted development assumptions—is an as of
yet unanswered question. Its success or failure will rever -
berate around the world.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command Economy
Dexter Tiff Roberts is a senior fellow in the Asia Security
Initiative at the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center for
Strategy and Security. Previously, he was China bureau
chief and Asia news editor at Bloomberg Businessweek,
based in Beijing for more than two decades. He is the
author of the recently-published book The Myth of Chinese
Capitalism (St. Martin’s Press, 2020)
The Asia Security Initiative is grateful to the Charles Koch
Institute for the generous support of our work.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Board of Directors
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*Richard W. Edelman
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
*John J. Studzinski
TREASURER
*George Lund
DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
*Peter Ackerman
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
*Rafic A. Bizri
*Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
R. Nicholas Burns
*Richard R. Burt
Teresa Carlson
James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
Beth Connaughty
*Helima Croft
Ralph D. Crosby, Jr.
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Thomas R. Eldridge
Mark T. Esper
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Courtney Geduldig
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
Amir A. Handjani
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Amos Hochstein
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Andrew Hove
Mary L. Howell
Ian Ihnatowycz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Henry A. Kissinger
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
*Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Dambisa F. Moyo
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Thomas R. Nides
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
W. DeVier Pierson
Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell McCormick
Ashraf Qazi
Robert Rangel
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
Olin Wethington
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Colin L. Powell
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster
*Executive Committee
Members
List as of July 13, 2021

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that
 promotes constructive US leadership and engagement in
 international affairs based on the central role of the Atlantic
community in meeting today’s global challenges.
© 2021 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means without permission
in writing from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of
brief quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews.
Please direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
