
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. CHINA’S ONGOING TRANSITION: THE STATE AND SELF-RELIANCE .. 3
II. THE CHANGING ADEs ..........................................................................................8
 A. United States ......................................................................................................8
 B. The ADEs ............................................................................................................11
III. RECOMMENDATIONS ..........................................................................................17
 A. Enhance Economic and Security Coordination by Expanding
 the G7 to a G10-plus to Formally Include Australia, Norway, the
 Republic of Korea, and the European Union and by Establishing
 a Multinational Staff Focused on China .....................................................17
 B. Establish National Security Limits on Transactions with China ......... 18
 C. Undertake Economic Actions to Offset Unfair Chinese Competition
 and Reduce Dependencies ........................................................................ 20
IV. CONCLUSION .......................................................................................................23
ACKNOWLEDGMENT .................................................................................................23
ABOUT THE AUTHOR ...............................................................................................23
T
he unitary globalized economy no longer exists. Driven in significant
part by security considerations, a new and more diverse globalization
is both required and being built. The transition is ongoing, and its final
form is yet to be determined. Many of the causal factors for this very
significant change revolve around China and the consequent responses to its
actions by the United States, other democracies of the transatlantic alliance,
and the advanced democratic economies of the Indo-Pacific. There are other
important factors generating this new globalization including the impact of
the Russia-Ukraine war both on energy markets and on trade and invest -
ment with Russia generally, as well as the global requirements for mitigating
and adapting to climate change. However, China has been a critical element
in what might be described as the “maximum trade-centered globalization,”
which has dominated trade and investment policy in the three decades since
the end of the Cold War.
China and the
New Globalization
ISSUE BRIEF
FEBRUARY 2023 FRANKLIN D. KRAMER
The Scowcroft Center for Strategy and
Security works to develop sustainable,
nonpartisan strategies to address the
most important security challenges
facing the United States and the world.
The Center honors General Brent
Scowcroft’s legacy of service and em -
bodies his ethos of nonpartisan com -
mitment to the cause of security, sup -
port for US leadership in cooperation
with allies and partners, and dedication
to the mentorship of the next genera -
tion of leaders.
The Scowcroft Center’s Transatlantic
Security Initiative brings together top
policymakers, government and military
officials, business leaders, and experts
from Europe and North America to
share insights, strengthen coopera -
tion, and develop innovative approach -
es to the key challenges facing NATO
and the transatlantic community.
The Atlantic Council’s Global China
Hub researches and devises allied
solutions to three of the greatest chal -
lenges posed by China’s rise: 1) China’s
growing influence on countries, global
institutions, and democratic values; 2)
the global ramifications of political and
economic change in Xi Jinping’s China;
and 3) China’s drive to dominate emerg-
ing technologies and consequences
for individual rights and privacy. The
Global China Hub addresses these
challenges by amplifying and strategi -
cally expanding the Atlantic Council’s
body of work on China, leveraging our
values, extensive global network, and
capacity for integrating insights and in -
formation across our 15 other programs
and centers. In doing so, the Hub capi -
talizes on the Council’s unique capacity
to ascertain “ground truth” on China’s
global impact and to galvanize creative
policy solutions among US and allied
government stakeholders.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
This issue brief describes the still-developing new global -
ization focusing on the issues surrounding China. A funda -
mental challenge that China presents arises because its
actions have generated significant security and economic
challenges, yet it nonetheless is a massive trade and in -
vestment partner for the “advanced democratic econo -
mies” (ADEs), 1 which for purposes of this analysis include
the Group of Seven (G7) countries, 2 plus Australia, Norway,
the Republic of Korea, and the European Union. Adapting
to a new globalization requires establishing a strategic ap -
proach that resolves the inherent contradictions between
those conflicting considerations.
The brief begins by setting forth the ongoing changes in
China that have significantly affected global geopolitical
and geoeconomic environments including the increased
emphasis by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) on the
role of the state and on economic self-reliance. China is an
ever more ideological environment generating a higher de-
gree of economic and security risks including over Taiwan.
The brief then discusses the advanced democratic econ -
omies, first focusing on the United States including the US
emphasis on national security concerns, and then review -
ing the policies of other advanced democratic economies,
especially issues regarding economic dependencies. The
United States has put in place significant limitations on
trade and investment with China and, at the same time, ex -
panded its security and economic cooperation with Taiwan.
The other ADEs have established frameworks or taken
other economic and security measures affecting their re -
lations with China, though, for the most part, not with the
degree of restrictions undertaken by the United States.
The brief concludes with recommendations for the United
States and the other ADEs for responding to China in transi-
1 The ADEs are liberal democracies with advanced economies.
2 The members are Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
3 “Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Y ellen on Way Forward for the Global Economy,” Department of the Treasury, Press Release, April 13, 2022,
https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0714.
4 “Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Y ellen at Microsoft in New Delhi, India,” Department of the Treasury, Secretary Statement and Remarks,
November 11, 2022, https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1096.
tioning to the new globalization with an objective of estab -
lishing “free but secure trade,” as identified by US Treasury
Secretary Janet Yellen. 3 Critical to the success of this new
globalization approach will be:
 ◆ Undertaking selective decoupling from China as partic-
ularly relevant to each ADE’s national security require -
ments; advanced and emerging technologies; and
critical infrastructure resilience.
 ◆ Establishing resilient supply chains outside China in -
cluding in and among the United States and other
advanced democratic economies and through “friend -
shoring,”4 i.e., with reliable partners in the Global South;
utilizing incentives including tax credits, subsidies, and
concessional financing in order to reduce dependen -
cies on China; and developing a critical minerals fi -
nancing initiative focused on enhancing the transition
to clean energy and providing alternatives for other
sectors such as defense.
 ◆ Expanding the G7 to a “G10-plus” of the advanced dem-
ocratic nations, which would coordinate intelligence
and economic and security interactions with China
among the ADEs including through the establishment
of a multinational staff.
Successfully undertaking selective decoupling and es -
tablishing resilient supply chains as the substantive cor -
nerstones of the new globalization will require a multiyear
effort that should be undertaken in prompt coordinated
fashion through the G10-plus so as to accomplish the requi-
site security and economic objectives of the ADEs.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
I. CHINA’S ONGOING TRANSITION: THE STATE AND SELF-RELIANCE
5 Dexter Tiff Roberts, “Xi Jinping’s Politics in Command Economy,” Issue Brief, Atlantic Council, July 2021, 1, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/
uploads/2021/07/Xi-Jinpings-politics-in-command-economy.pdf.
6 Roberts, “Xi Jinping’s Politics,” 1.
7 Document of the Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party, September 2, 1975, quoted by Kenneth Lieberthal, James Tong, and Sai-cheung Y eung in Central
Documents and Politburo Politics in China (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1978), doi:10.3998/mpub.2002; and cited in Roberts, “Xi Jinping’s Politics,”
1. Xi’s decision to emphasize concerns regarding market liberalism was underscored early in his tenure in the April 2013 presentation of “Document 9,” which
included among seven “false ideological trends, positions, and activities” that “Western countries, led by the United States . . . aim to change our country’s
basic economic infrastructure and weaken the government’s control of the national economy.” See “Document 9: A ChinaFile Translation,” ChinaFile (online
magazine), Center on US-China Relations at Asia Society, November 8, 2013, https://www.chinafile.com/document-9-chinafile-translation.
8 Atlantic Council and Rhodium Group, China Pathfinder: Annual Scorecard, October 2022, 8, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/
china-pathfinder-2022-annual-scorecard/.
The ongoing changes in China’s approach to economics
and security under Xi Jinping are having the consequence
of making the country less central to and posing greater
risks for the global economy than has been the case for
many years. China’s changed policies, as underscored by
the recent Chinese Communist Party congress and the
revised CCP constitution, now include a substantially in -
creased role of the state, a focus on self-reliance, and a
willingness to put economic development behind other in -
terests. Those factors have coupled with concerns of the
United States—shared at least in part by the transatlantic
allies and others with advanced democratic economies
(ADEs)—arising from issues of security, unfair competi -
tion, strategic dependencies, and human rights. Security
considerations, in particular, are much heightened and the
prospect of conflict over Taiwan now looms larger. In com -
bination, this multiplicity of concerns has affected economic
interactions with China. To be sure, China is still—and will
remain—an important participant in the global economy.
For the ADEs, however, five overlapping factors have com -
bined to require that economic interactions with China re -
ceive more thoughtful analysis and an appropriate degree
of circumspection.
First, China’s economic policy has now been well described
as “politics in command”: 5 the state and particularly the
CCP are in control, and China consequently is less oriented
to being a market-driven economy. As Dexter Tiff Roberts
has written:
 Beijing is intent on strengthening control over pri -
vate companies and foreign investment, reserving set
shares of its market for indigenously produced tech -
nologies like semiconductor chips and electric vehicle
batteries, and boosting the role of state-owned firms.
It is all part of what can be considered a new form of
state capitalism, defined by a top-down approach to
the economy featuring government-directed and sup -
ported industrial policies with the goal of creating a far
more self-sufficient country . . . 6
In principle, this is not an entirely new idea for China as
the Chinese Communist Party has always been in ultimate
control, but in practice it is a substantial deviation from the
Deng Xiaoping approach of “reform and opening up” and
instead reflects a Mao-era requirement: “all enterprises
must persevere in putting proletarian politics in command
and ideological and political work first.” 7
Findings from the recent China Pathfinder Annual Scorecard
underscore these points:
 At the Sixth Plenum in November 2021, the Chinese
Communist Party (CCP) said the country had entered
a “new era” under Xi Jinping, emphasizing the CCP’s
leading role in steering long-term strategy. For domes -
tic and foreign observers, this sent a clear signal that
market-oriented policy reform is taking a back seat to
ideological imperatives .8
As a result, China’s state-owned enterprises can be ex -
pected to maintain their very significant role:
 For China, 43.6 percent of its top ten companies were
[state-owned enterprises]. This is, unsurprisingly, con -
siderably above the open-economy average of 2 per -
cent. SOEs’ role in China’s economy is one of the key

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
differences between the Chinese system and market
economies.9
This emphasis on state-owned enterprises exists despite
the “average profit margins and return on assets show[ing]
that Chinese SOEs are still extremely inefficient and not very
profitable.”10 By contrast, private-sector firms have received
intense scrutiny including multiple acquisitions by SOEs, 11
crackdowns on leading companies such as Alibaba, 12 and
effective termination of the private tutoring industry. 13
Similarly, the strict implementation of the zero-COVID pol -
icy, then followed by the abrupt order to drop many of its
elements, are reflective of the significant political control
over the economy that the Chinese leadership exerts, 14 as
does the acquisition of “golden shares” in key companies,
discussed further below.
It is accurate to say that in recent weeks there has been a
change in tone by the government with language of a more
business-friendly approach. But that does not alter the sys -
temic control that the state maintains. As reported by the
New York Times:
 Xiang Songzuo, a Chinese economist and a former offi-
cial at the People’s Bank of China, said he did not think
9 Atlantic Council and Rhodium Group, China Pathfinder, 21. The state’s control over financial institutions offers one important example: “Our indicator
measures the degree of state ownership in the country’s top ten financial institutions by market capitalization. For each country, we look at the proportion
of each institution’s public stock owned by the government. . . . We see a high degree of polarization within the results for this indicator, with a weighted
average government ownership proportion of 39.01 percent for China in 2021 compared to the open-economy average of 3.36 percent. . . . This degree of
state involvement in finance has been, and remains, one of the core systemic differences between China’s system and that of open economies.” See China
Pathfinder, 12.
10 Maya Mei, “Fortune Favors the State-Owned: Three Y ears of Chinese Dominance on the Global 500 List,” Trustee China Hand (blog), Center for Strategic and
International Studies (CSIS), October 7, 2022, https://www.csis.org/blogs/trustee-china-hand/fortune-favors-state-owned-three-years-chinese-dominance-global-
500-list.
11 According to a New York Times article, “from 2019 to 2021, state-owned enterprises acquired more than 110 publicly traded Chinese companies, valued at
more than $83 billion. . . . Such acquisitions were rare before Mr. Xi took over in 2012.” See Daisuke Wakabayashi, Chang Che, and Claire Fu, “In Xi’s China, the
Business of Business Is State-Controlled,” New York Times, October 17, 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/10/17/business/china-xi-jinping-business-economy.
html.
12 Canghao Chen, “The Real Cause of China’s Alibaba Crackdown,” Diplomat, September 9, 2021, https://thediplomat.com/2021/09/the-real-cause-of-chinas-
alibaba-crackdown/.
13 Alexander Chipman Koty, “More Regulatory Clarity After China Bans For-Profit Tutoring in Core Education,” China Briefing Magazine, Dezan Shira & Associates,
September 27, 2021, https://www.china-briefing.com/news/china-bans-for-profit-tutoring-in-core-education-releases-guidelines-online-businesses/.
14 Chang Che, Amy Chang Chien, and Alexandra Stevenson, “What Has Changed About China’s ‘Zero Covid’ Policy,” New Y ork Times, December 7, 2022, https://
www.nytimes.com/2022/12/07/world/asia/china-zero-covid-changes.html.
15 Daisuke Wakabayashi and Claire Fu “From Disciplinarian to Cheerleader: Why China Is Changing Its Tone on Business,” New Y ork Times, January 12, 2023,
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/01/12/business/china-economy.html?smid=tw-share&utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email
16 Adam Segal, “China’s Move to Greater Self Reliance,” China Leadership Monitor, December 1, 2021, https://www.prcleader.org/segal.
17 ChinaPower Project, “Will the Dual Circulation Strategy Enable China to Compete in a Post-Pandemic World?,” CSIS, December 15, 2021, https://chinapower.csis.
org/china-covid-dual-circulation-economic-strategy/.
18 As the ChinaPower analysis describes: “The DCS comprises two main components: the internal (domestic) circulation and external (international) circulation. The
overarching goal of the DCS is to enable the internal and external markets to reinforce and sustain the other, with a focus on establishing the domestic market
as the primary driver of economic development.” See ChinaProject, “Will the Dual Circulation Strategy Enable China.”
that fundamentally there had been a major change in
the Chinese leaders’ approach to business, but that
their language had softened because of the sluggish
economy.
 In the current economy, China needs private firms to in-
vest more, hire more and pay more in taxes. As a result,
the tone has changed to “reassure and pacify them,”
Mr. Xiang said. But tension remains because China
wants to maintain control over private companies and
will not entrust oversight purely to the markets or exist-
ing laws.15
Second, China is seeking a much greater degree of “self-re-
liance”16 through its “dual circulation” strategy. Initially de -
scribed by Xi in May 2020, the dual circulation strategy
was “incorporated into China’s central economic blue -
print, the 14th Five Year Plan in March 2021, cementing its
high-level status.” 17 The strategy seeks to put significantly
heavier reliance on China’s domestic market as compared
to its long-standing export-driven approach. 18 Key elements
include reducing “external demand as a driver of economic
growth by boosting domestic consumption,” attaining
“higher levels of self-sufficiency in key areas by enhancing
innovation,” ensuring “access to critical inputs by diversify -

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
ing supply chains,” and positioning China as a “global man-
ufacturing powerhouse in high value-added products.” 19
Two critical elements of this approach are the focus on ad -
vanced and emerging technologies as exemplified by the
Made in China 2025 plan and the very substantial subsi -
dies that China provides to its companies:
 ◆ Made in China is focused on “leapfrogging into emerg -
ing technologies . . . reducing reliance on foreign firms .
. . [with] breakthroughs in 10 sectors [and for ] China . . .
to lead at each point in the value chain,” according to a
Congressional Research Service report. 20
 ◆ China’s state-provided subsidies are far in excess of
any such actions by the advanced democratic econo -
mies, according to Gerard DiPippo et al.:
 Even using a conservative methodology, China’s
industrial policy spending is enormous, totaling at
least 1.73 percent of [gross domestic product] in
2019. This is equivalent to more than $248 billion
at nominal exchange rates and $407 billion at pur -
chasing power parity exchange rates. This is higher
than China’s defense spending for 2019, which the
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
(SIPRI) estimated at $240 billion at nominal ex -
change rates. Alternative data and assumptions,
including for China’s below-market credit, subsidies
to non-listed private firms, government guidance
funds, and state-owned enterprise net payables,
would result in larger aggregate estimates.
 Even with such a low-end estimate, China is an out -
lier; it spends far more on supporting its industries
19 ChinaProject, “Will the Dual Circulation Strategy Enable China.”
20 Karen M. Sutter, “‘Made in China 2025’ Industrial Policies: Issues for Congress,” Congressional Research Service, InFocus Brief IF10964, updated August 11,
2020, 1, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF10964/6.
21 Gerard DiPippo, Ilaria Mazzocco, and Scott Kennedy, Red Ink: Estimating Chinese Industrial Policy Spending in Comparative Perspective, eds. Scott
Kennedy and Matthew P. Goodman, CSIS, May 2022, 2, https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/220523_DiPippo_Red_Ink.
pdf?LH8ILLKWz4o.bjrwNS7csuX_C04FyEre.
22 “Opinion: How China’s New Development Pattern Helps Empower Global Recovery,” Xinhuanet, December 18, 2020, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-
12/18/c_139600803.htm.
23 Articles 30 and 33, Full Text of Constitution of Communist Party of China, Xinhuanet, October 22, 2022, http://eng.chinamil.com.cn/view/2022-10/27/
content_10195159.htm.
24 An analysis by Neil Thomas in 2020 stated: “Party organizations are more pervasive in big companies, present in 92.4% of China’s top 500 private enterprises,
according to ACFIC’s 2019 ‘Top 500’ annual report . . . This coverage has held steady at 92-93%, but could increase further now that Beijing has made these
committees mandatory for listed companies.” By contrast, a 2022 analysis by Colin S. C. Hawes states that “if we calculate the percentage of CPC branches
within Chinese private firms as a whole (rather than merely in large firms), it is currently only around 7%.” See Thomas, “Party Committees in the Private Sector:
Rising Presence, Moderate Prevalence,” Commentary, MacroPolo (Paulson Institute think tank), December 16, 2020, https://macropolo.org/party-committees-
private-sector-china/?rp=e; and Hawes, “Has the Communist Party of China (CPC) Increased Its Control Over Private Corporations?, fifteen eightyfour (blog),
Cambridge University Press, August 23, 2022, https://www.cambridgeblog.org/2022/08/has-the-communist-party-of-china-cpc-increased-its-control-over-
private-corporations/.
than any other economy in this study. As a share
of GDP, China spends over twice as much as South
Korea, which is the second-largest relative spender
in the sample. In dollar terms, China spends more
than twice as much as the United States. 21
A third feature of China’s “new development pattern” 22 is
an emphasis on the establishment of party organizations in
both state-owned and private enterprises. Such activities
are specifically provided for in the CCP constitution, which
states:
 A primary-level Party organization shall be formed
in any enterprise . . . where there are three or more
full Party members. . . . Primary-level Party organi -
zations [in state-owned enterprises] shall guarantee
and oversee the implementation of the principles
and policies of the Party and the state within their
own enterprises and shall support the board of
shareholders, board of directors, board of supervi -
sors, and manager (or factory director) in exercising
their functions . . . and shall participate in making
decisions on major issues in the enterprise. . . .
Primary-level Party organizations in non-public sec -
tor enterprises shall implement the Party’s principles
and policies . . .23
As a matter of fact, these party activities appear to be prev-
alent in larger enterprises but may not be so substantial in
smaller ones. 24 However, since as a general proposition, it
is larger firms from the ADEs that undertake the most sig -
nificant activities in China, there should be an expectation
of CCP involvement. That, however, is hardly conducive to
the normal business approach taken by the private sector

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
in the ADEs. As an analysis from an investment advisory
firm stated:
 The notion that a political party, especially one dedi-
cated to communism, should seek to embed itself in
companies and exert control from within is antitheti -
cal to American notions of capitalism.  American
companies operating within China and American
investors in Chinese companies are faced with the
unsettling prospect of a CCP organization inside
their company with an unclear agenda and overlap -
ping lines of authority with the company’s manag -
ers. There is limited transparency over how party
organizations make decisions, what aspects of a
company they seek to control, what accountability—
if any—they have to a company’s shareholders, and
what information they may be sharing with outside
parties.25
A related development to enhance state control is the
acquisition of “golden shares” in Chinese private compa -
nies by the government or SOEs that provide “board seats
and/or veto rights for key business decisions.” 26 Chinese
regulators including the Cyberspace Administration and
state-owned firms are seeking golden shares in data-rich
Internet and technology firms, especially those organizing,
structuring, and labeling content; these shares “give special
powers to the shareholder like veto power over changes to
the company’s charter, and even the ability to block other
shareholders from holding more than a particular ratio of
the company’s ordinary shares.” 27 As of this writing, the
state is taking golden shares in Alibaba and Tencent, two of
China’s largest technology companies, and has previously
acquired such shares in ByteDance (TikTok’s parent com -
pany) and Weibo (social media), “usually involving a 1 per
cent share of internet groups’ key [subsidiary] entities.” 28
25 “Party Committees in Chinese Companies,” Prevailing Winds (blog), Seafarer Funds, June 2021, https://www.seafarerfunds.com/prevailing-winds/party-
committees-in-chinese-companies/.
26 “China Takes Stakes in Private Data Companies,” Asia Financial (website), Fintech (vertical), December 16, 2021, https://www.asiafinancial.com/china-takes-
stakes-in-private-data-companies.
27 ANI Asia, “China: Govt Buying Stakes in Tech Firms to Increase Its Influence,” Business Standard, March 26, 2022, https://www.business-standard.com/article/
international/china-govt-buying-stakes-in-tech-firms-to-increase-its-influence-122032600263_1.html#:~:text=’Golden%20shares’%20are%20types%20of,of%20
the%20company’s%20ordinary%20shares.
28 Ryan McMorrow, Qianer Liu and Cheng Leng, “China moves to take ‘golden shares’ in Alibaba and Tencent units,” Financial Times, January 12 2023, https://
www.ft.com/content/65e60815-c5a0-4c4a-bcec-4af0f76462de
29 Id.
30 Elsa P. Kania, “In Military-Civil Fusion, China Is Learning Lessons from the United States and Starting to Innovate,” Strategy Bridge (nonprofit organization),
August 27, 2019, https://thestrategybridge.org/the-bridge/2019/8/27/in-military-civil-fusion-china-is-learning-lessons-from-the-united-states-and-starting-to-
innovate. It is perhaps worth noting that such an approach is hardly surprising. The United States and its allies and close partners all rely on the private sector;
the “defense industrial base” is a critical element of national defense strategy.
31 Cate Cadell and Ellen Nakashima, “American Technology Boosts China’s Hypersonic Missile Program,” Washington Post, October 17, 2022, https://www.
washingtonpost.com/national-security/2022/10/17/china-hypersonic-missiles-american-technology/.
As one person knowledgeable about the Tencent transac -
tion stated, ““The state is not going away, this is the trend
for the future.”29
Fourth, China’s military-civil fusion doctrine raises issues
for economic engagement in China by companies from the
ADEs. Military-civil fusion is what it sounds like: a whole-
of-nation attempt “to create and leverage synergies be -
tween defense and commercial developments, particularly
in emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence and
biotechnology.”30 The important issue that the military-civil
fusion doctrine raises is that economic involvement by pri -
vate-sector companies from the ADEs in China might sup -
port—even if inadvertently—important development by the
People’s Liberation Army, particularly through trade and
investment in dual-use technologies. That concern is not
speculative. As a recent analysis by the Washington Post
found:
 Military research groups at the leading edge of
China’s hypersonics and missile programs—many
on a U.S. export blacklist—are  purchasing a range
of specialized American technology, including prod -
ucts developed by firms that have received millions
of dollars in grants and contracts from the Pentagon
. . .
 The advanced software products are acquired by
these military organizations through private Chinese
firms that sell them on despite U.S. export controls
designed to prevent sales or resales to foreign en -
tities deemed a threat to U.S. national security, the
investigation shows. 31
Fifth, the recent changes to the CCP constitution under -
score a more aggressive approach to Taiwan, adding to

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
both military and economic risks. The newly amended
constitution now sets forth the CCP commitment to “res -
olutely oppose and deter . . . ‘Taiwan independence’” to
“achieve reunification of the motherland,” 32 including
through strengthening the Chinese military. As an analysis
by Mariah Thornton states:
 The amendment against Taiwanese independence
. . . demonstrates a significant escalation in cross-
strait relations in two ways. First, the Chinese lead -
ership is establishing a stronger legal basis from
32 Full text of Constitution of Communist Party of China, Xinhuanet.
33 Mariah Thornton, “China’s 20th Party Congress Escalates Cross-Strait Tensions,” Diplomat, October 27, 2022, https://thediplomat.com/2022/10/chinas-20th-
party-congress-escalates-cross-strait-tensions/.
which it will likely pursue harsher, more punitive ac -
tion toward any perceived expressions of Taiwanese
independence or external support for Taiwanese
independence. . . . Second, the amendment sig -
nals Xi’s intention to cement fierce opposition to
Taiwanese independence as part of the fundamen -
tal position of any successive regimes. 33
In sum, China has taken a number of consequential actions
that have changed the nature of its relationships with the
advanced democratic economies.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
II. THE CHANGING ADEs
34 White House, National Security Strategy, October 2022, 11, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/Biden-Harris-Administrations-National-
Security-Strategy-10.2022.pdf.
35 Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, Pub. L. No. 117–58, 135 Stat. 429 (2022), https://www.congress.gov/117/plaws/publ58/PLAW-117publ58.pdf.
36 CHIPS Act of 2022 and the Research and Development, Competition, and Innovation Act, Divisions A and B, Pub. L. No. 117–167, 136 Stat. 1372 (2022), https://
www.congress.gov/117/plaws/publ167/PLAW-117publ167.pdf.
37 Inflation Reduction Act of 2022, Pub. L. No 117–169, 136 Stat. 1818 (2022), https://www.congress.gov/117/plaws/publ169/PLAW-117publ169.pdf.
38 White House, National Security Strategy, 11.
39 These efforts are a very decided change from the approaches of prior administrations (both Democratic and Republican) that were substantially laissez-faire
and led to the relocation (i.e., offshoring) of important industries and supply chains such as for information technology. Among the many analyses of this trend,
a 2022 Big Data China piece by Scott Kennedy and Ileana Mazzocco found that “in the decade leading up to 2010 . . . increased imports from China hurt
employment and wages in regional labor markets that were more exposed to import competition with China. In other words, areas with a high concentration
of manufacturing-based industries that were in direct competition with Chinese companies experienced a fall in employment and wages.” Further, the “regions
affected by the import competition with China have struggled to recover a decade later”; that regional employment issue has been a significant policy driver for
both the current and prior administration. See Kennedy and Mazzocco, “The China Shock: Reevaluating the Debate,” Analysis, Big Data China, collaboration of
CSIS Trustee Chair in Chinese Business and Economics and the Stanford Center on China’s Economy and Institutions, October 14, 2022, https://bigdatachina.
csis.org/the-china-shock-reevaluating-the-debate/.
40 White House, National Security Strategy, 8.
41 White House, National Security Strategy, 23.
In the past several years, the advanced democratic econo -
mies have significantly changed their approaches to global-
ization in important part because of the changes by China
described above.
A. United States
The global engagement of the United States has been im -
portantly affected by a combination of factors. National se -
curity considerations have taken on increased importance,
the relationship between economics and security has re -
ceived heightened attention, concern over dependencies
has received added scrutiny, and significant efforts are be -
ing taken to support the US domestic economy. The results
for this new globalization have been substantial.
First, the US approach to globalization now includes a very
substantial domestic element as a key part of the policy.
The Biden administration has been clear that “to succeed
abroad, we must invest in our innovation and industrial
strength, and build our resilience, at home.” 34 The imple -
mentation of this domestic aspect of the 2022 US National
Security Strategy is reflected in the hundreds of billion
dollars enacted by the combination of the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act, 35 the Chips and Science Act, 36
and the Inflation Reduction Act, 37 each of which contains
significant funding for investment designed to “onshore”
and support the development of key technologies and
industries. There is a focus on “strategic sectors and sup -
ply chains, especially critical and emerging technologies,
such as microelectronics, advanced computing, biotech -
nologies, clean energy technologies, and advanced tele -
communications,”38 as exemplified by the multibillion dollar
funding for semiconductor fabrication and the develop -
ment of hydrogen hubs.39  
Second, China has been identified as presenting a very
significant challenge as the “PRC is the only competitor
with both the intent to reshape the international order and,
increasingly, the economic, diplomatic, military, and tech -
nological power to do it.” 40 The National Security Strategy
makes clear the scope of China’s ambition and the breadth
of its activities:
 Beijing has ambitions to create an enhanced sphere
of influence in the Indo-Pacific and to become the
world’s leading power. It is using its technological
capacity and increasing influence over international
institutions to create more permissive conditions for
its own authoritarian model, and to mold global tech-
nology use and norms to privilege its interests and
values. Beijing frequently uses its economic power
to coerce countries. It benefits from the openness
of the international economy while limiting access to
its domestic market, and it seeks to make the world
more dependent on the PRC while reducing its own
dependence on the world.41
It is worth underscoring the military aspects of the chal -
lenge. The US Department of Defense describes China as
the “pacing challenge” inasmuch as the “PRC is also invest-
ing in a military that is rapidly modernizing, increasingly
capable in the Indo-Pacific, and growing in strength and

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
reach globally—all while seeking to erode U.S. alliances in
the region and around the world.” 42 Moreover, the United
States has reached the clear conclusion that the risks of
military confrontation over Taiwan are growing. Secretary
of State Antony Blinken has stated that China has made
“a fundamental decision that the status quo was no longer
acceptable and that Beijing was determined to pursue re -
unification on a much faster timeline.”43
There is a significant overlap among these factors. It is, as
Treasury Secretary Yellen has said, “increasingly difficult to
separate economic issues from broader considerations of
national interest, including national security.” 44 That combi-
nation has generated revised trade and investment policies
for the United States with respect to China.
Most notable perhaps of the changed policies are the tar -
iffs—initially imposed by the Trump administration and gen-
erally kept in place by the Biden administration—which have
substantially affected certain trade flows. A recent Peterson
Institute for International Economics blog observes:
 As expected, the trade war has had the largest im -
pact on imports from China of products hit with the
highest US tariffs. US imports from China of goods
currently facing a 25 percent duty . . . remain 22
percent below pre-trade war levels . . . US imports
of those same products from the rest of the world
are now 34 percent  higher. US imports from China
of products currently subject to 7.5 percent tariffs
. . . remain 3 percent below levels in August 2019
(right before imposition of tariffs on those products),
whereas comparable imports from the rest of the
world are now 45 percent higher.45
The impact of the tariffs has been across multiple sectors:
 US imports of certain products from China—includ -
ing semiconductors, some IT hardware, and con -
42 White House, National Security Strategy, 23-24.
43 Ellen Francis, “China Plans to Seize Taiwan on ‘Much Faster Timeline,’ Blinken Says,” Washington Post, October 18, 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/
world/2022/10/18/china-seize-taiwan-plan-blinken/.
44 “Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Y ellen on Way Forward for the Global Economy.”
45 Chad P. Bown, “Four Y ears into the Trade War, Are the US and China Decoupling?,” Realtime Economics (blog), Peterson Institute for International Economics,
October 20, 2022, https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economics/four-years-trade-war-are-us-and-china-decoupling.
46 Bown, “Four Y ears into the Trade War.”
47 Eric Sayers and Ivan Kanapathy, “America Is Showering China With New Restrictions,” Foreign Policy, February 15, 2022, https://foreignpolicy. Com/2022/02/15/
us-china-economic-financial-decoupling-controls-restrictions-sanctions/.
48 Sayers and Kanapathy, “America Is Showering China.”
sumer electronics—have   fallen dramatically. Even
clothing, footwear, and furniture imports are down. 46
Tariffs are, however, hardly the only the instrument of
change. Beginning in the Trump administration and signifi -
cantly increasing in the Biden administration are regulatory
limitations on trade and investment, as noted in a Foreign
Policy article. Thus:
 Leveraging new laws passed in 2018, [the Trump
administration] expanded the use of export con -
trols in defense technology, imposed stricter vetting
of foreign investments in strategic U.S. industries,
and restricted the procurement of equipment and
services from five Chinese information technol -
ogy companies, the most prominent of which was
Huawei. . . . Using presidential emergency powers,
the Trump administration also created regimes to re-
move untrusted contractors from U.S. IT infrastruc -
ture projects and block Americans from investing in
companies that work with the Chinese military. 47
Congress has been fully supportive of this approach and
has enacted relevant restrictive legislation during both the
Trump and Biden administrations including adding human
rights as an additional rationale for limitations:
 Congress has passed a slew of China-related bills.
Among other actions, legislators have reformed in -
bound investment screening, forced the delisting
of Chinese stocks that do not comply with U.S. ac -
counting practices, expanded requirements for the
U.S. Defense Department to list Chinese companies
assisting the People’s Liberation Army, strength -
ened sanctions authorities in response to atrocities
in Xinjiang and repression in Hong Kong, presumed
that all goods produced in Xinjiang are made with
forced labor (and thus banned as imports), and pro -
hibited the federal purchase of Chinese telecommu -
nications equipment. 48

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
The Biden administration not only has largely maintained
the restrictions imposed by the Trump administration but
has added significant restrictions of its own. Most notably it
recently has established export controls barring the trans -
fer to China of “advanced computing and semiconductor
manufacturing . . . items and capabilities.”49 These new con-
trols cover not only items manufactured in the United States
but also those produced outside the United States through
the application of the “Foreign-Direct Product Rules.” 50 The
national security rationale for the controls is clear, as under-
scored in a Department of Commerce statement:
 The export controls announced in the two rules
today restrict the PRC’s ability to obtain advanced
computing chips, develop and maintain supercom -
puters, and manufacture advanced semiconductors.
These items and capabilities are used by the PRC to
produce advanced military systems including weap -
ons of mass destruction; improve the speed and ac -
curacy of its military decision making, planning, and
logistics, as well as of its autonomous military sys -
tems; and commit human rights abuses. 51
Experts noted the strong posture of the US government,
with one referring to it as an aggressive approach intended
to undercut China’s capacity to develop its own technolo -
49 Bureau of Industry and Security, “Commerce Implements New Export Controls on Advanced Computing and Semiconductor Manufacturing Items to the
People’s Republic of China (PRC),” Department of Commerce, October 7, 2022, 2, https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/documents/about-bis/newsroom/press-
releases/3158-2022-10-07-bis-press-release-advanced-computing-and-semiconductor-manufacturing-controls-final/file.
50 According to US rules relating to commerce and foreign trade, “foreign-produced items located outside the United States are subject to the EAR [Export
Administration Regulations] when they are a ‘direct product’ of specified ‘technology’ or ‘software,’ or are produced by a plant or ‘major component’ of a plant
that itself is a ‘direct product’ of specified ‘technology’ or ‘software.’ ” See 15 C.F.R. § 734.9 (as amended December 8, 2022), https://www.ecfr.gov/current/
title-15/subtitle-B/chapter-VII/subchapter-C/part-734/section-734.9.
51 Bureau of Industry and Security, “Commerce Implements New Export Controls,” 1.
52 Ana Swanson, “Biden Administration Clamps Down on China’s Access to Chip Technology,” New Y ork Times, October 7, 2022, https://www.nytimes.
com/2022/10/07/business/economy/biden-chip-technology.html?campaign_id=60&emc=edit_na_20221007&instance_id=0&nl=breaking-news&ref=cta&regi_
id=169223421&segment_id=109292&user_id=d2bcc4d73398823c64e17b75c053c05e. According to the article, Emily Kilcrease, a senior fellow at the Center
for a New American Security, said: “It is an aggressive approach by the U.S. government to start to really impair the capability of China to indigenously develop
certain of these critical technologies.”
53 The biotechnology restrictions focused “principally on the Chinese Academy of Military Medical Sciences and its research institutes in response to their use
of ‘biotechnology processes to support Chinese military end uses and end users’. . . [Control of] certain life sciences technology . . . include[d] certain software
(and related technology) designed for nucleic acid assemblers and synthesizers . . . capable of designing and building functional genetic elements from digital
sequence data given . . . possible use in biological weapons programs.” Jeffrey L. Kessler et al., “United States Adopts Wide-ranging China Restrictions,”
WilmerHale, December 29, 2021, https://www.wilmerhale.com/en/insights/client-alerts/20211229-united-states-adopts-wide-ranging-china-restrictions.
54 The earlier quantum computing restrictions added “27 Chinese and third-country entities to the Entity List for their role in support of Chinese ‘quantum
computing efforts that support military applications, such as counterstealth and countersubmarine applications, and the ability to break encryption or develop
unbreakable encryption,’ among other activities.” Kessler et al., “United States Adopts.”
55 The Entity List contains the names of “foreign persons—including businesses, research institutions, government and private organizations, individuals, and
other types of legal persons—that are subject to specific license requirements for the export, reexport and/or transfer (in-country) of specified items.” See
Bureau of Industry and Security, “Entity List,” Department of Commerce (website), accessed November 10, 2022, 1, https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/policy-
guidance/lists-of-parties-of-concern/entity-list. Though requests for export licenses are reviewed on a case-by-case basis, there often is a presumption of
denial associated with a listing. See, for example, Bureau of Industry and Security, “Commerce Implements New Export Controls on Advanced Computing and
Semiconductor Manufacturing Items to the People’s Republic of China (PRC),” Department of Commerce, October 7, 2022, , https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/
documents/about-bis/newsroom/press-releases/3158-2022-10-07-bis-press-release-advanced-computing-and-semiconductor-manufacturing-controls-final/file.
56 Exec. Order No. 14032, 86 Fed. Reg. 30145 (2021), https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/126/14032.pdf.
gies in critical areas. 52 The new controls were not the first
restrictive actions on exports to China taken by the Biden
administration. Previously, it had imposed limitations on bio-
technology/life sciences 53 and quantum computing capa -
bilities54 by adding multiple companies to the Department
of Commerce’s Entity List, thereby essentially preventing
exports to them, 55 as well as expanding the prohibition of
investments to Chinese companies providing “Chinese sur-
veillance technology outside the PRC . . . to facilitate re -
pression or serious human rights abuses.” 56
The results of these multiple restrictions have been con -
sequential in the arenas where they have been applied.
However, it is also important to note that there are other
areas in which US-China trade remains quite substantial
and, in fact, overall US-China bilateral trade has actually
increased. As one recent analysis summarized:
 Yet, US imports from China of certain products have
surged. Imports of products never hit with trade war
tariffs are now 50 percent higher than immediately
prior to the trade war. . . . Products not facing tariffs
made up roughly 33 percent of total US imports from
China before the trade war and have grown to 47
percent today. . . . Imports from China of laptops and

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
computer monitors, phones, video game consoles,
and toys are higher than ever.57 
Accordingly, for overall trade between the United States
and China, US trade statistics show higher levels of exports
and imports: US exports to China totaled $151.1 billion, a
rise of 21.4% ($26.6 billion) compared to 2020, while US
imports from China totaled $506.4 billion, an increase of
16.5% ($71.6 billion).58
As the trade numbers above imply, there is an important dif-
ferential in the analysis of risks undertaken by private-sec -
tor enterprises and by the government. Governments will
review societal risks including external diseconomies and
security while enterprises generally will take a narrower
view focused on the firm and sector. This is not to suggest
that enterprises are unaware of societal risks, as may be
relevant to the enterprise. By way of example, an annual
economic analysis published in 2022 found:
 Even before the pandemic, concerns had been grow-
ing about supply chain resiliency and the asymmet -
ric dependencies that had built up in the deeply
intertwined supply chains linking the United States,
Europe, and China. Before the pandemic hit, many
companies were already shifting production out of
China or diversifying their production. Some didn’t
want to become inordinately dependent on any one
particular link in their supply chain. Several feared
data security and privacy risks. Others wanted to
avoid being caught in a U.S.-China trade war. And
many decided that rising labor costs in China made
other locales more attractive. Footwear, accessories,
toy and furniture manufacturers began moving out
of China more than a decade ago. More than 83%
of North American businesses and about 90% of
European firms have announced plans to relocate at
least part of their supply chains away from China.59
In general, however, it is the government’s role to take ac -
count of the wider risk environment.
57 Bown, “Four Y ears into the Trade War.”
58 Bureau of Industry and Security, Office of Technological Evaluation, “U.S. Trade with China,” Department of Commerce, 2021, 1, https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.
php/country-papers/2971-2021-statistical-analysis-of-u-s-trade-with-china/file#:~:text=Goods%20with%20China-,In%202021%2C%20U.S.%20exports%20to%20
China%20were%20%24151.1%20billion%2C%20a,%25%20(%2445.0%20billion)%20increase.
59 Daniel S. Hamilton and Joseph Quinlan, “Shifting Dependencies: Rethinking Russia, China, and Global Supply Chains,” in The Transatlantic Economy 2022:
Annual Survey of Jobs, Trade and Investment between the United States and Europe (Washington, DC: Foreign Policy Institute, Johns Hopkins University SAIS/
Transatlantic Leadership Network, 2022), 35-42, https://transatlanticrelations.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/TE2022_CHAP3.pdf.
60 White House, “Fact Sheet: Implementation of the Australia–United Kingdom–United States Partnership, (AUKUS), White House Briefing Room, April 5, 2022,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/04/05/fact-sheet-implementation-of-the-australia-united-kingdom-united-states-
partnership-aukus/.
B. The ADEs
The ADEs have adopted security and economic strategies
that, at least rhetorically, highlight certain issues in a fash -
ion comparable to the strategic approach of the United
States. On the security side, while none of the ADEs has
a statutory mandate comparable to the Taiwan Relations
Act, there have been changes in policy and posture—some
significant and some early days—including working more
closely with the United States in key geographic and tech -
nological arenas. Economically, there has been substantial
focus on the issue of dependencies, though the scope of
any actual changes is yet to be determined.
In the security arena, three significant changes include the
Australia-United Kingdom-United States (AUKUS) agree -
ment; Japan’s focus on the need for peace and stability in
the Taiwan Strait; and NATO’s inclusion of China as a chal -
lenge in its new Strategic Concept.
The AUKUS agreement involves very substantial techno -
logical interactions among the three countries. The agree -
ment has two main components:
 ◆ Providing Australia “with a conventionally armed, nu -
clear powered submarine capability” with decisions on
the way forward planned to be made by March 2023.
 ◆ Developing and providing “joint advanced military ca -
pabilities” with efforts in eight areas including auton -
omous underwater vehicles; generation-after-next
quantum capabilities; artificial intelligence; advanced
cyber; hyypersonic and counterhypersonic capabil -
ities; electronic warfare; innovation including ways to
integrate commercial technologies more rapidly; and
information sharing.60
While the substantive results of AUKUS are yet to be
achieved, the agreement is already notable geopolitically
for its substantial engagement of the United Kingdom in

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
the security of the Indo-Pacific, 61 and for underscoring
Australia’s decision to confront China in the security field.
The Japanese determination to include the Taiwan Strait as
a matter of security importance to Japan is likewise conse -
quential for both security and geopolitical reasons. Japan
has explicitly “confirmed a continued close cooperation to
maintain peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait,” including
having done so in the context of US Speaker of the House
of Representatives Nancy Pelosi’s visit to Taiwan, which
was much condemned by China. 62 In addition, Japan has
continued increasing its defense budget, 63 has undertaken
enhanced defense exercises with the United States, 64 is
upgrading its military capabilities such as through the pur -
chase of long-range cruise missiles, 65 and is in the process
of enhancing its defense cooperation with European na -
tions including potentially developing a highly advanced
fighter aircraft with the United Kingdom and Italy. 66
NATO’s new Strategic Concept states quite clearly that the
People’s Republic of China’s “stated ambitions and coer -
cive policies challenge our interests, security and values.”67
Accordingly, NATO will:
 . . . address the systemic challenges posed by the
PRC to Euro-Atlantic security and ensure NATO’s
61 The United Kingdom and Japan are in process of finalizing a reciprocal access agreement, which the Financial Times reported “will make joint exercises and
logistics co-operation between the nations easier.” See Kana Inagaki and Demetri Sevastopulo, “Japan to Sign Military Pact with UK as Allies Eye China Threat,”
Financial Times, November 5, 2022, https://www.ft.com/content/6ea15304-551b-4161-af6c-38cccf56d40d.
62 “Japan, US to Cooperate on Maintaining Peace, Stability in Taiwan Strait,” CNA, Mediacorp, August 5, 2022, https://www.channelnewsasia.com/asia/japan-us-
cooperate-maintaining-peace-stability-taiwan-strait-2860501.
63 Kana Inagaki, “Japan Plans Big Defence Spending Boost to Counter Rising China Threat,” Financial Times, August 31, 2022, https://www.ft.com/content/
d5f91273-61c9-4116-9620-a5e771563e9d.
64 “Japan and U.S. Begin Large-scale Joint Exercise with China in Mind,” Japan Times, November 10, 2022, https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2022/11/10/
national/japan-us-joint-drill-china/.
65 Michelle Y e Hee Lee and Ellen Nakashima, “ Japan to Buy Tomahawk Missiles in Defense Buildup amid Fears of War,” Washington Post, December 12, 2022,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/12/12/japan-tomahawk-missiles-ukraine-war/.
66 Kana Inagaki, Leo Lewis, and Sylvia Pfeifer, “The Fighter Jet That Could Create a New Alliance between the UK and Japan,” Financial Times, November 27,
2022, https://www.ft.com/content/a013530d-82f9-4a89-b5cf-5d76032d8c47; also see Inagaki and Sevastopulo, “Japan to Sign Military Pact.”
67 NATO 2022 Strategic Concept, 2022, 5, https://www.nato.int/nato_static_fl2014/assets/pdf/2022/6/pdf/290622-strategic-concept.pdf; the Strategic Concept
was adopted by heads of state and government at the NATO Summit in Madrid, June 29, 2022.
68 NATO 2022 Strategic Concept, 5.
69 Henry Foy and Demetri Sevastopulo, “Nato Debates Measures to Confront ‘Challenge’ from China,” Financial Times, November 30, 2022, https://www.ft.com/
content/6df14a27-4d0e-49ba-98eb-d9e7b3997486.
70 “US, Canada Warships Sail through Strait,” Taipei Times, September 22, 2022, https://www.taipeitimes.com/News/front/archives/2022/09/22/2003785727.
71 Joseph Pedrajas, “France Calls for Rule of Law Preservation, Freedom of Navigation in Indo-Pacific,” Manila Bulletin, September 16, 2022, https://mb.com.
ph/2022/09/16/france-calls-for-rule-of-law-preservation-freedom-of-navigation-in-indo-pacific/.
72 Associated Press, “German Navy Chief Vows Long-term Commitment to Indo-Pacific,” Asahi Shinbum, November 10, 2021, https://www.asahi.com/ajw/
articles/14478795.
73 Maaike Okano-Heijmans, “Netherlands and Indo-Pacific: Inclusive but Not Value-Neutral,” Clingendael Magazine, Netherlands Institute of International Relations,
August 31, 2021, https://www.clingendael.org/publication/netherlands-and-indo-pacific-inclusive-not-value-neutral.
74 Agence France-Presse, “UK Sends Warship through Taiwan Strait for First Time in More Than a Decade,” Guardian, September 28, 2021, https://www.
theguardian.com/uk-news/2021/sep/28/uk-sends-warship-through-taiwan-straight-for-first-time-in-more-than-a-decade.
enduring ability to guarantee the defence and se -
curity of Allies. We will boost our shared awareness,
enhance our resilience and preparedness, and pro -
tect against the PRC’s coercive tactics and efforts to
divide the Alliance. We will stand up for our shared
values and the rules-based international order, in -
cluding freedom of navigation. 68
The geopolitical value of the Strategic Concept is sub -
stantial, though substantively NATO has not yet taken any
significant implementing steps—which is not entirely sur -
prising given the current focus on Ukraine and the rela -
tively recent issuance of the Strategic Concept. NATO has,
however, begun discussing “concrete ways to meet the
challenge,” according to Secretary of State Blinken follow -
ing a NATO foreign ministers meeting. 69 Moreover, while
not under a NATO flag, a number of NATO nations including
Canada,70 France,71 Germany,72 the Netherlands, 73 and the
United Kingdom74 have undertaken freedom of navigation
activities in the Indo-Pacific including through the Taiwan
Strait. Additionally, Canada recently has required China to
divest its ownership in three mining companies on national
security grounds, as the following news report describes:
 Canada has ordered China to immediately sell its
holdings in three Canadian mining companies, as

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
the need for investments in the extraction of criti -
cal minerals clashes with growing concerns over na-
tional security. . . .
 [Canada’s industry minister, François-Philippe
Champagne, said:] “While Canada continues to
welcome foreign direct investment, we will act de -
cisively when investments threaten our national se -
curity and our critical minerals supply chains, both at
home and abroad. . . .”75
Similarly, the British government has recently decided
to take a 50 percent stake in a new nuclear plant, which
“squeezes out a Chinese state-owned company, China
General Nuclear, which had owned 20 percent of the
project.”76
Economically, the ADEs have highlighted the issue of de -
pendencies (as further described below), but economic in -
teractions with China have not significantly changed, with
trade flows continuing at high levels in:
 ◆ Europe: EU exports and imports to and from China
have increasingly reached higher levels as a recent EU
ten-year review demonstrates. “Both exports to and
imports from China increased between 2011 and 2021.
EU exports to China were highest in 2021 (€223 billion)
. . . EU imports from China were highest in 2021 (€472
billion),” according to Eurostat.77
 ◆ Japan: While the impact of the pandemic (including
China’s zero-COVID policy) affected trade, nonetheless
“China consumed more than 20 percent of Japanese
exports for the first time [in 2020] . . . leapfrogging the
[United States] to become Japan’s leading destination
for exports for the first time in two years. . . . China and
75 Leyland Cecco, “Canada Orders China to Divest from Country’s Mining Companies,” Guardian, November 3, 2022, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/
nov/03/canada-china-mining-companies-divest.
76 Stanley Reed, “U.K. Backs Giant Nuclear Plant, Squeezing Out China,” New Y ork Times, November 29, 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/11/29/business/uk-
nuclear-plant-china.html.
77 Eurostat Statistics Explained, “China-EU: International Trade in Goods Statistics,” Eurostat, February 2022, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/
index.php?title=China-EU_-_international_trade_in_goods_statistics#:~:text=billion%20in%202021.-,Both%20exports%20to%20and%20imports%20from%20
China%20increased%20between%202011,2013%20(%E2%82%AC%20239%20billion).
78 Nikkei staff writers, “China Passes US as Top Japanese Export Buyer, Topping 20%,” Nikkei Asia, January 22, 2021, https://asia.nikkei.com/Economy/Trade/
China-passes-US-as-top-Japanese-export-buyer-topping-20.
79 “Japan-China Relations (Basic Data),” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (website), February 24, 2022, https://www.mofa.go.jp/region/asia-paci/china/data.html.
80 World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS), Republic of Korea data, World Bank (website), accessed November 10, 2022, https://wits.worldbank.org/
CountrySnapshot/en/KO.
81 WITS, Australia data, World Bank (website), accessed November 10, 2022, https://wits.worldbank.org/CountrySnapshot/en/AUS.
82 Swati Pandey, “China to Remain a Key Trade Partner for Australia, Official Says,” Bloomberg, October 19, 2022, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2022-10-19/china-to-remain-a-key-trade-partner-for-australia-official-says.
the U.S. have repeatedly alternated as Japan’s leading
trading partner since the late 2000s. Last year [2020],
China accounted for 22% of all exports, while the U.S.
trailed at 18.4%,” Nikkei reported. 78 The high level of
Japan’s trade with China continued in 2021, with ex -
ports to China increasing from $146 billion to $206
billion.79
 ◆ South Korea: China is South Korea’s largest trading
partner, with trade totaling $240 billion between the
two countries in the 2016-2021 period, compared
with $131 billion in US-South Korea trade in the same
period.80
 ◆ Australia: Overall, Australia-China trade during the
period of 2016-2021 was approximately $160 bil -
lion—more than twice the combined total of its sec -
ond-largest partners in imports (Japan) and exports
(United States).81 At an Asia Society panel discussion in
Melbourne, a senior Australian official described China
as “such an enormous economy,” and was quoted by
Bloomberg as saying that “it will be almost unimag -
inable to think that that importance will decrease
significantly.” The official, Elizabeth Bowes from the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, highlighted
that Australia’s exports to China are higher than a year
earlier, following record two-way trade totaling A$282
billion ($178 billion) in 2021.82 
As noted above, the data underscore the importance for
ADE enterprises to engage in the China market. However,
while trade flows have not been affected, the issue of de -
pendencies has received increased attention by the gov -
ernments of the ADEs.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
Japan has been a leader in generating a degree of move -
ment of Japanese companies from China. As the pandemic
began to disrupt supply chains in 2020, the Japanese gov -
ernment saw an opportunity to diversify supply chains and
in April established a multibillion yen fund to support com -
pany transfers to Japan or Southeast Asia.83 In the first year
of the fund’s existence, more than two hundred companies
received funding to subsidize their moves, 84 and Japanese
companies began to increasingly focus their new invest -
ments elsewhere.85
Europe has not undertaken concrete steps similar to those
of Japan, but the issue of dependencies has received high-
level attention. European Commission President Ursula
von der Leyen’s recent State of the Union Address reflects
that concern, mentioning that China controls the global
processing industry for strategic minerals, and referencing
its dominance in rare earth materials (nearing 90 percent
of the market) and in lithium processing (at 60 percent). 86
Similarly, just prior to his recent trip to China, German
Chancellor Olaf Scholz wrote that Germany seeks to “dis -
mantle one-sided dependencies in the interest of smart di -
versification”; and is putting “supply chains on a broader
footing . . . for example with new raw material partnerships.”
He added that where China bars reciprocity, “it cannot be
without consequences.”87
There have been some European steps toward taking a
broader approach beyond the issue of dependencies. The
European External Action Service recently recommended
in an internal paper that the EU should “identify and ad -
dress the challenges deriving from China’s foreign policy,”
including changing the emphasis in the tripartite division
among systemic rivalry, competition, and cooperation to -
83 In dollar terms, that’s at least $5 billion. See Pascal Delloue, “Why Is Japan Incentivizing Companies to Leave China,” Kusu (company website), July 21, 2022,
https://www.kusucorp.com/blog/why-is-japan-incentivizing-its-companies-to-leave-china-and-why-it-matters.
84 Francesca Regalado, “Japan Chip Suppliers Reap Benefits of ‘China Exit’ Subsidy,” Nikkei Asia, January 25, 2021, https://asia.nikkei.com/Economy/Trade/Japan-
chip-suppliers-reap-benefits-of-China-exit-subsidy; and Delloue, “Why Is Japan Incentivizing Companies.”
85 “Japanese Companies Try to Reduce Their Reliance on Chinese Manufacturing,” Economist, September 18, 2021, https://www.economist.com/
business/2021/09/18/japanese-companies-try-to-reduce-their-reliance-on-chinese-manufacturing.
86 “2022 State of the Union Address by President von der Leyen,” European Commission (website), September 14, 2022, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/
presscorner/detail/en/speech_22_5493.
87 Olaf Scholz, “We Don’t Want to Decouple from China, but Can’t Be Overreliant,” Politico, November 3, 2022, https://www.politico.eu/article/olaf-scholz-we-dont-
want-to-decouple-from-china-but-cant-be-overreliant/.
88 Stuart Lau, “Brussels Playbook: EU-China Rethink—MEPs and Their Receipts—Josep’s Garden, Politico, October 17, 2022, https://www.politico.eu/newsletter/
brussels-playbook/eu-china-rethink-meps-and-their-receipts-joseps-garden/.
89 Ivan Fischer, “Market Commissioner Breton Warns Governments and Businesses China Is a Rival,” Brussels Morning, October 31, 2022, https://brusselsmorning.
com/market-commissioner-breton-warns-governments-and-businesses-china-is-a-rival/27578/.
90 Fischer, “Market Commissioner Breton Warns Governments.”
91 Fischer, “Market Commissioner Breton Warns Governments.”
92 Lorne Cook and Geir Moulson, “EU Leaders Weigh Future of China Ties as Rivalry Mounts,” Associated Press, October 21, 2022, https://apnews.com/article/
european-union-council-xi-jinping-beijing-china-42316d57714db211345dfd1dbb10d11e.
ward greater focus on rivalry and competition. 88  While
hardly a model of clarity, the language is a useful step
toward recognizing the challenges presented by China.
Likewise, according to a Brussels Morning report:
 European Commissioner for Internal Market Thierry
Breton warned European governments and busi -
nesses that they must realise China is the Union’s ri -
val, and urged them not to be naive when approving
Chinese investments. 89
The report further quotes Breton as stating that “the
European market is open, (but) with conditions.”90 According
to the report, Breton also warned European businesses that
they are expanding their investments in China at their own
risk, as the country is becoming more “autocratic.” 91
Similarly, the Associated Press reported that French
President Emmanuel Macron said “Europe made a ‘histori -
cal’ mistake during the global financial crisis of 2007-2008
by pushing some member states to sell their infrastructure.
. . . Macron said Europeans were ‘naïve’ to treat the bloc like
an ‘open supermarket’ because of public finance issues.” 92
It would be inaccurate to say that European efforts have
only been rhetorical. There have been at least three signif -
icant sets of actions involving human rights, cybersecurity,
and cooperation to promote investment:
 ◆ Human rights: After China placed sanctions on four EU
parliamentary members in response to EU sanctions
imposed as a result of human rights violations by China
against the Uighur population, the European Parliament
passed a resolution barring “any consideration by the

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
15
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
European Parliament of the EU-China Comprehensive
Agreement on Investment, agreed in principle between
the EU and China in December 2020.”93
 ◆ Cybersecurity: A key set of issues related to whether
the Chinese telecommunications company Huawei
Technologies Co. Ltd. would be allowed to provide
5G networks for European countries. The EU adopted
a “cyber toolbox” for dealing with the risks raised, 94
and the United Kingdom undertook its own review. 95
Partly as a consequence—and in combination with lim -
its on Huawei and vigorous diplomacy by the United
States—a number of EU member states and the United
Kingdom decided not to utilize Huawei. 96
 ◆ Cooperation on investment: The Baltic countries
have all exited the “17+1” format that was intended to
enhance investment and trade cooperation between
China and Eastern European countries. 97
The European Union has also adopted (or is in process of
adopting) a set of regulatory frameworks that are designed
93 “MEPs Refuse Any Agreement with China whilst Sanctions Are in Place,” European Parliament, Press Release, May 17, 2021, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/
news/en/press-room/20210517IPR04123/meps-refuse-any-agreement-with-china-whilst-sanctions-are-in-place.
94 Network and Information Systems (NIS) Cooperation Group, “Cybersecurity of 5G networks: EU Toolbox of Risk Mitigating Measures,” European Commission,
January 2020, https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/cybersecurity-5g-networks-eu-toolbox-risk-mitigating-measures.
95 UK Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, National Cyber Security Centre, and the Right Honourable Oliver Dowden CBE MP, “Huawei to Be
Removed from UK 5G Networks by 2027,” Government of the United Kingdom, Press Release, July 14,2020, https://www.gov.uk/government/news/huawei-to-
be-removed-from-uk-5g-networks-by-2027.
96 According to The Economist, “Australia, Canada, New Zealand and Sweden have followed America in banning Huawei gear outright. New rules in Britain
force carriers to remove all Huawei technology from public 5G systems by 2027. France has asked operators to rip out Huawei gear from many parts of their
networks. Other countries, such as Japan, have not barred Huawei but signaled that it is unwelcome. The constant risk of fresh restrictions has led many
customers in places without bans to steer clear of Huawei. This has already happened in Italy and Portugal.” See “Can Huawei Thrive despite American
Sanctions?,” Economist, October 25, 2022, https://www.economist.com/business/2022/10/25/ren-zhengfei-has-big-plans-for-huawei-in-spite-of-american-
sanctions.
97 Pepijn Bergsen and Valdonė Šniukaitė, “Central and Eastern Europe Become Hawkish on China,” Commentary, Chatham House, September 16, 2022, https://
www.chathamhouse.org/2022/09/central-and-eastern-europe-become-hawkish-china.
98 “Anti-subsidy Measures,” European Commission, Trade webpages, accessed November 18, 2022, https://policy.trade.ec.europa.eu/enforcement-and-protection/
trade-defence/anti-subsidy-measures_en.
99 “EU Investment Screening and Export Control Rules Effectively Safeguard EU Security,” European Commission Press Corner, September 2, 2022, https://
ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_22_5286.
100 “Policy and Legislation: Cyber Resilience Act,” European Commission (website), September 15, 2022, https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/cyber-
resilience-act.
101 Camille Gijs, “EU Countries Seek to Claw Back Power from Brussels on Upcoming Trade Bazooka,” Politico, October 20, 2022, https://www.politico.eu/article/eu-
countries-seek-to-claw-back-power-from-brussels-on-upcoming-trade-bazooka/.
102 “Critical Raw Materials Act: Securing the New Gas & Oil at the Heart of Our Economy,” Blog of Commissioner Thierry Breton, European Commission Press
Corner, September 14, 2022, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/statement_22_5523.
103 “EU to Impose Extra Tariffs on China Aluminium Foil over Subsidies,” Reuters, December 22, 2021, https://www.reuters.com/markets/commodities/eu-impose-
extra-tariffs-china-aluminium-foil-over-subsidies-2021-12-22/.
104 “EU Counters Steel Subsidies Resulting from Export Restrictions on Raw Materials and Transnational Subsidies from China,” European Commission Press Corner,
March 16, 2022, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_22_1774; and Max Hall, “EU Adds Anti-subsidy Duty to Existing Trade Measures on
Indian and Indonesian Steel,” pv magazine, March 21, 2022, https://www.pv-magazine.com/2022/03/21/eu-adds-anti-subsidy-duty-to-existing-trade-measures-
on-indian-and-indonesian-steel/.
to offset inimical Chinese behavior (though notably, none
mention China by name). These include a countersubsidy
mechanism,98 foreign direct investment screening and
export controls, 99 several actions focused on cybersecu -
rity including a proposed Cyber Resilience Act 100 (as well
as the above-noted cyber toolkit), a proposed anti-coer -
cion instrument, 101 and a proposed European Critical Raw
Materials Act. 102 The application of these measures has,
however, been quite limited thus far in scope and impact:
 ◆ In December 2021, the European Union announced
that it will place extra tariffs on aluminum foil coming
from China after the European Commission found that
producers in China benefited from excessive and unfair
subsidies.103
 ◆ In March 2022, the EU imposed anti-subsidy duties on
imports of stainless-steel cold-rolled flat products orig -
inating in Indonesia and India to counter subsidies on
raw materials and transnational subsidies from China.104

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
 ◆ In 2022 and 2020, the EU imposed duties on glass fiber
fabrics and products from Chinese companies or joint
venture on products arriving via Morocco and Egypt. 105
 ◆ In support of Lithuania, the European Parliament has
passed resolutions calling “on the PRC to revoke its un-
justified sanctions against Lithuanian officials” and con-
demning “the PRC’s trade restriction,” which came in
response to Lithuania allowing “Taiwan” to be utilized
as part of the name of the Taiwan economic office that
was opened in Lithuania.
To sum up, there is a good deal of uncertainty as to fu -
ture European-China trade relations. While overall trade
will likely continue at a high level (as the data noted above
imply), greater restrictions are being contemplated. The de-
bate in Germany exemplifies the issues, as outlined in The
New York Times : On the one hand, “Scholz overruled the
recommendation of six of his ministries and both domestic
and foreign intelligence chiefs to allow Cosco, a Chinese
state-owned shipping company, to buy a stake of up to
25 percent in a container-handling terminal in Hamburg,
Germany’s most important port.” (True, amid public outcry,
COSCO did not get the 35 percent stake it had originally
sought.) On the other hand, Berlin has blocked two deals:
the sale of a semiconductor company to a Chinese-owned
firm and, according to Germany’s economy minister, an -
other proposed investment in a “German company pro -
105 “EU Acts to Stop Chinese Glass Fibre Fabrics Circumventing EU Tariffs via Morocco,” Directorate-General for Trade, European Commission (website), February
25, 2022, https://policy.trade.ec.europa.eu/news/eu-acts-stop-chinese-glass-fibre-fabrics-circumventing-eu-tariffs-morocco-2022-02-25_en.
106 Melissa Eddy, “Germany Blocks 2 Foreign Investment Deals, Taking a Firmer Line on China,” New Y ork Times, November 9, 2022, https://www.nytimes.
com/2022/11/09/world/europe/germany-china-investment.html.
107 Le Monde staff and AFP, “EU Not Looking for ‘Systematic Confrontation’ with China, Says Council President Michel,” Le Monde, updated October 21, 2022,
https://www.lemonde.fr/en/international/article/2022/10/21/eu-not-looking-for-systematic-confrontation-with-china_6001242_4.html.
108 Alexandra Brzozowski, “EU Leaders Wary of Dependencies Created with China, but Far from United, Euractiv, updated October 23, 2022, https://www.euractiv.
com/section/eu-china/news/eu-leaders-wary-of-dependencies-created-with-china-but-far-from-united/.
109 Brzozowski, “EU Leaders Wary of Dependencies.”
ducing critical infrastructure,” which the official declined to
identify due to “secrecy agreements.” 106
The level of European uncertainty regarding the actual
direction of economic relations with China is visible in
high-level statements after a recent meeting of heads of
government. EU Council President Charles Michel, for in -
stance, said: “This discussion showed a very clear will to
avoid being naive, but neither did we want to embark into a
logic of systematic confrontation.” 107
But the concern regarding dependencies remained central
as European Commission President von der Leyen stated
after the same meeting: “Obviously, we have to be very vig-
ilant when it comes to dependencies. And we’ve learned
our lesson.”108
While these statements of European policy do reflect a de -
gree of toughening of views toward China, there is, how -
ever, a clear inclination among at least some European
leaders to have a policy that is different than that of the
United States. Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte, for in -
stance, underscored how the EU should develop its own
course in response to China’s increasing assertiveness.
“It’s important that Europe operates as self-confident as
possible, but also independently,” Rutte said, adding that
the EU should seek “equality and reciprocity, so that we
are not a kind of extension of America but that we have our
own politics vis-à-vis China.” 109

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
17
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
III. RECOMMENDATIONS
110 “Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Y ellen on Way Forward for the Global Economy.”
111 “The European Union and Norway,” Delegation of the European Union to Norway, European External Action Service (website), European Union, July 28, 2021,
https://www.eeas.europa.eu/norway/european-union-and-norway_en?s=174.
As described at the beginning of this brief, the fundamental
challenge in establishing an effective strategy for China is
to reconcile the fact that it is a massive trading partner for
the ADEs while also being a significant security threat and
an economic actor that acts in ways substantially inconsis -
tent with market-based economies. Rather than maximum
trade-centered globalization, which has been a long-stand -
ing approach by the major trading entities, a critical goal for
the United States and its allies and close partners should
now be giving agreed content to the concept of “free
but secure trade,” as identified by US Treasury Secretary
Yellen.110 Doing so will require a combination of selective
decoupling to offset security and economic challenges and
the development of strategic supply chains outside China
to resolve the problems of dependencies.
The recommendations below are intended to provide spe -
cifics for such a coordinated strategic security and eco -
nomic framework for the United States and the ADEs in
dealing with the challenges presented by China.
A. Enhance Economic and Security
Coordination by Expanding the G7 to a G10-
plus to Formally Include Australia, Norway, the
Republic of Korea, and the European Union
and by Establishing a Multinational Staff
Focused on China
As the substantive recommendations below are gener -
ally multinational—or at least have multinational conse -
quences—an important element of implementation will
be to undertake appropriate diplomatic efforts to achieve
as broad a consensus as possible as to their substance.
This will involve both sustained bilateral discussions and
the use of a variety of fora such as the US-EU Trade and
Technology Council, the “Chip 4” alliance (Japan, Republic
of Korea, Taiwan, United States), and the Quadrilateral
Security Dialogue (Australia, India, Japan, United States),
known as the Quad. From the US perspective, it will be im -
portant to recognize the often-substantial differences be -
tween the American economy and the economies of allies
and close partners, and to incorporate that understanding
into a realistic strategy that will mitigate security and eco -
nomic risks without causing unwarranted economic harm.
Critical, however, to effectuating an effective coordinated
security and economic approach will be the need for an
appropriate forum that encompasses the ADEs. The meet -
ings of the G7 group (Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, United Kingdom, United States) have in recent
years included not only the European Union but Australia
and the Republic of Korea as observers as well. Norway
is a democracy with an advanced free-market economy,
a critical energy provider, and very closely associated
with the EU through the European Economic Area (EEA)
Agreement, and has “very close and active cooperation on
foreign and security policy issues” with the EU, 111 as well
as with the United States, both through NATO and bilat -
erally. Expanding the G7 to a G10-plus to formally include
Australia, Norway, the Republic of Korea, and the European
Union would recognize the reality and necessity of a coor -
dinated China policy among the ADEs.
The newly established G10-plus should create a multina -
tional staff to help coordinate and implement China policy.
Indeed, this change is even more important than the for -
mal expansion, and the staff should have three foci: intelli -
gence, economics, and security.
First, a shared intelligence picture will illuminate economic
and security decisions. Each of the G10-plus countries (and
the EU) will likely have information that others may not, and
a common picture on economic and security matters would
be invaluable for policymakers.
Second, economic coordination should include actions
(as discussed below) with respect to limits on China in the
domestic markets of the ADEs; actions taken regarding
China’s domestic market; and actions of importance taken
with respect to other countries including those focused
on the Global South. A common approach to the export of
high-end capabilities, for example, will be very important
as will be protections to enhance resilience for critical in -
frastructures. Similarly, a number of Indo-Pacific strategies
have been promulgated by different members of the pro -
spective G10-plus, and it will be highly valuable for G10-plus
members to have a common understanding of how those
multiple economic strategies are being implemented.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
Third, security issues include limitations on trade and in -
vestment with China—the specifics for a number of which
are discussed below. Security also involves gray area/
hybrid concerns such as cybersecurity and influence op -
erations, matters involving the global commons including
freedom of navigation and space, security support to na -
tions in the Indo-Pacific, and deterrence and defense is -
sues including those concerning Taiwan, the East China
Sea, and the South China Sea.
Regularizing information sharing and, as appropriate, co -
ordination on each of the above three areas would allow
for a more effective set of policies toward China (though
the lead for military and intelligence issues such as military
planning and operations would remain elsewhere).
B. Establish National Security Limits on
Transactions with China
1. Limit or prohibit the transfer of advanced capabilities that
have significant national security implications.
The US Department of Defense has identified fourteen
“critical technology areas” vital to maintaining national se -
curity.112 As discussed above, the United States has also
undertaken a number of regulatory measures to limit the
transfer of certain advanced technology capabilities to
China including with respect to advanced chips, artificial in-
telligence, quantum computing, and biotechnology (each of
which is on the Defense Department list). 113 In a discussion
of the most recent limitations on advanced chips and arti -
ficial intelligence (AI), Under Secretary of Commerce Alan
Estevez indicated that further restrictions were likely with
112 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering, Memorandum on USD(R&E) Technology Vision for an Era of Competition, Department
of Defense, February 1, 2022, 1, https://www.cto.mil/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/usdre_strategic_vision_critical_tech_areas.pdf.
113 The technologies are (in the order presented in the memo): biotechnology, quantum science, future generation wireless technology, advanced materials, trusted
AI and autonomy, integrated network systems-of-systems, microelectronics, space technology, renewable energy generation and storage, advanced computing
and software, human-machine interfaces, directed energy, hypersonics, and integrated sensing and cyber. See Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Research and Engineering, Memorandum, 3-6; also see “Critical And Emerging Technologies List Update,” Report, Fast Track Action Subcommittee on Critical
and Emerging Technologies of the National Science and Technology Council, Executive Office of the President, February 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2022/02/02-2022-Critical-and-Emerging-Technologies-List-Update.pdf.
114 In a conversation at the Center for a New American Security (CNAS), Under Secretary of Commerce Alan Estevez said: “We’re not done. I mean, there’s other
things to be done. There’s other technologies and there’s other things as technology moves, we’re going to stay with it.” See Martijn Rasser, “A Conversation
with Under Secretary of Commerce Alan F. Estevez,” Transcript, CNAS, October 27, 2022, https://www.cnas.org/publications/transcript/a-conversation-with-
under-secretary-of-commerce-alan-f-estevez.
115 “G7 Foreign Ministers’ Statement on Preserving Peace and Stability Across the Taiwan Strait,” Media Note, Office of the Spokesperson, Department of State,
August 3, 2022, https://www.state.gov/g7-foreign-ministers-statement-on-preserving-peace-and-stability-across-the-taiwan-strait/#:~:text=We%20reiterate%20
our%20shared%20and,of%20communication%20to%20prevent%20misunderstanding.
116 White House, “Fact Sheet: Executive Order Addressing the Threat from Securities Investments That Finance Certain Companies of the People’s Republic of
China,” White House Briefing Room, June 3, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/06/03/fact-sheet-executive-order-
addressing-the-threat-from-securities-investments-that-finance-certain-companies-of-the-peoples-republic-of-china/.
respect to other key technologies. 114 The intent, of course,
is to enhance deterrence by reducing the likelihood of a
successful military operation by China, particularly with re -
spect to Taiwan. All of the members of the proposed G10-
plus would be significantly affected by an armed attack by
China against Taiwan; as noted, the importance of main -
taining peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait has been
highlighted by many, including the G7. 115 Limiting China’s
military capabilities is accordingly of high consequence,
and a common approach to limitations on transactions in -
volving advanced technologies will be in the interests of all.
2. Limit or prohibit trade and investment with companies
that have substantial involvement in China’s military-civil
fusion effort.
Militaries do not run only on advanced technologies. More
mundane capabilities including materials, components,
and software are important contributors to military ef -
fectiveness. By way of example, logistics is critical to all
military operations, but most logistic requirements are rela -
tively lower end. For the same reason that advanced tech -
nology exports with national security implications should
be limited to China, so should exports to companies that
significantly support China’s military-civil fusion efforts. The
United States has already prohibited investments in a num -
ber of Chinese companies substantially involved in China’s
military-civil enterprise. 116 However, the United States and
the other G10-plus countries should undertake a more
comprehensive review, and then apply additional restric -
tions to companies significantly engaged in China’s mili -
tary-civil fusion effort to limit the growth in effectiveness of
the Chinese military.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
19
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
3. Limit or prohibit outbound financial investments that sup -
port China’s development of advanced or emerging technol-
ogies that have national security implications.
In earlier versions of the CHIPS and Science Act, the draft
statute provided for review of transactions that transferred
to China (or any “country of concern”) capabilities or owner-
ship that “could result in an unacceptable risk to a national
security capability.”117 While the provision was dropped from
the final enacted statute, outside financial investments can
support development by China of advanced or emerging
technological capabilities with defense or other national
security implications. The law does prohibit “material ex -
pansion of semiconductor manufacturing capacity in the
People’s Republic of China” of state-of-the-art technology
for a ten-year period after receiving any award under the
statute.118
However, a broader approach beyond semiconductors
is warranted. A recent analysis of the issues surrounding
these concerns recommended restrictions on “flows of
capital and associated expertise that can support the indig-
enous [Chinese] development of technology that would be
controlled if it originated in the United States, or emerging
technology that is likely to have national security implica -
tions.”119 Such restrictions would be very important addi -
tions to the types of controls that should be instituted to
enhance deterrence and defense.
4. Prohibit the use of Chinese products by the United States
and other ADEs in their defense and intelligence sectors.
As discussed above, China is not only the “pacing chal -
lenge” for the US Department of Defense, but also a rec -
ognized security challenge for the ADEs, as underscored
by the AUKUS agreement, and Japan’s (and others’) con -
cerns over “peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait.” Put
117 Venable LLP, “A CFIUS-Type Review for Overseas Investment? Beware the Outbound Investment Review Framework Proposed in the COMPETES Act,” JD Supra
(website), February 18, 2022, https://www.jdsupra.com/legalnews/a-cfius-type-review-for-overseas-9974345/.
118 Definition of a legacy semiconductor within Pub. L. 117–167, div. A, § 104, 136 Stat. 1390 (2022), as reprinted in 15 U.S.C. § 4652(a)(6), https://www.
law.cornell.edu/definitions/uscode.php?width=840&height=800&iframe=true&def_id=15-USC-102889058-1966900778&term_occur=999&term_
src=title:15:chapter:72A:section:4652.
119 Sarah Bauerle Danzman and Emily Kilcrease, “Sand in the Silicon: Designing an Outbound Investment Controls Mechanism,” Issue Brief, Atlantic Council, 2,
https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/Sand_in_the_Silicon-Designing_an_Outbound_Investment_Controls_Mechanism.pdf.
120 Department of Defense, Securing Defense-Critical Supply Chains: An Action Plan Developed in Response to President Biden’s Executive Order 14017, 2022, 35,
https://media.defense.gov/2022/Feb/24/2002944158/-1/-1/1/DOD-EO-14017-REPORT-SECURING-DEFENSE-CRITICAL-SUPPL Y-CHAINS.PDF.
121 Stephen Losey, “Pentagon Suspends F-35 Deliveries Over Chinese Alloy in Magnet, Defense News, September 7, 2022, https://www.defensenews.com/
air/2022/09/07/pentagon-suspends-f-35-deliveries-over-chinese-alloy-in-magnet/.
122 “FCC Bans Authorizations for Devices That Pose National Security Threat,” Federal Communications Commission, News Release, November 25, 2022, https://
www.fcc.gov/document/fcc-bans-authorizations-devices-pose-national-security-threat.
plainly, China is a potential military adversary and there -
fore Chinese products should not be utilized to provide any
defense or intelligence capabilities to the United States or
other ADEs. That limitation should extend to components
and to dual-use items to mitigate risks that could affect the
functionality of defense or intelligence capabilities.
By way of example, a Department of Defense report con -
cluded that “procuring measurably secure microelectron -
ics sources [e.g., semiconductors, transistors, diodes] is
challenged by the potential for China, or countries under
the influence of China, to tamper with or insert malicious
functionality into microelectronics products.” 120 Similarly,
the United States recently “temporarily halted deliveries
of F-35 fighters following the discovery that the raw ma -
terials used for a magnet in the plane were produced in
China,”121 although ultimately performance appears not to
be affected. Most recently, the Federal Communications
Commission effectively banned the use of Chinese tele -
communications capabilities in the United States. 122
5. Prohibit the use of Chinese software for key critical infra -
structures in the United States and other ADEs including the
electric grid, pipelines, air, rail, ports, finance, health, and
water.
The Director of National Intelligence has described China’s
very substantial cyber capabilities:
 China almost certainly is capable of launching cy -
ber attacks that would disrupt critical infrastructure
services within the United States, including against
oil and gas pipelines and rail systems. . . . China’s
cyber-espionage operations have included com -
promising telecommunications firms, providers of
managed services and broadly used software, and
other targets potentially rich in follow-on opportu -

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
nities for intelligence collection, attack, or influence
operations.123
Those capabilities can be combined with Chinese-provided
software that enables cyberattack vectors. Examples of
such attacks include the SolarWinds and Hafnium attacks,124
and demonstrate that the use of Chinese software, such as
5G software provided by Huawei, presents very substan -
tial risks. Accordingly, the use of Chinese software for key
critical infrastructures should be prohibited by the United
States and the other ADEs. Such a prohibition should, at a
minimum, cover the electric grid, pipelines, air, rail, ports,
finance, health, and water.
6. Expand the scope of review of Chinese investments in the
United States and the ADEs that present national security
risks.
The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States
has statutory authority to review and, if required, prohibit,
foreign investments that would undercut national security.
Comparable authorities exist in the ADEs; the EU, as noted,
has a regulation focused on screening such investments.
The key challenge is to ensure that national security con -
siderations are looked at broadly enough. The Biden ad -
ministration promulgated an executive order that directs
the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States
(CFIUS) to include in its reviews, among other matters, the
impact on resilience of critical supply chains, leadership for
advanced technologies, and cybersecurity. 125 The United
States should work with the other members of the G10-plus
to establish a comparable common approach.
C. Undertake Economic Actions to Offset
Unfair Chinese Competition and Reduce
Dependencies
1. Utilize tariffs and other limitations including a border-ad -
justment mechanism to offset the impact of Chinese sub -
123 Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community, February 7, 2022, 8, https://www.dni.gov/files/
ODNI/documents/assessments/ATA-2022-Unclassified-Report.pdf.
124 Charlie Osborne, “Everything Y ou Need to Know About the Microsoft Exchange Server Hack,” ZDNet, April 19, 2021, https://www.zdnet.com/article/everything-
you-need-to-know-about-microsoft-exchange-server-hack/.
125 White House, “Fact Sheet: President Biden Signs Executive Order to Ensure Robust Reviews of Evolving National Security Risks by the Committee on Foreign
Investment in the United States,” White House Briefing Room, September 15, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/09/15/
fact-sheet-president-biden-signs-executive-order-to-ensure-robust-reviews-of-evolving-national-security-risks-by-the-committee-on-foreign-investment-in-the-
united-states/.
126 The United States and the European Union are themselves in dialogue as to how to reconcile subsidies available under the Inflation Reduction Act for products
manufactured in the United States, with a desire not to undercut the economies of close allies. See Doug Palmer, “Biden ‘Confident’ U.S. Can Address EU
Concerns about IRA Subsidies,” Politico, December 1, 2022, https://www.politico.com/news/2022/12/01/biden-eu-ira-subsidies-00071645.
sidies and other types of unfair competition that China’s
state-driven economy supports and that Chinese enter -
prises undertake.
The discussion above described both the breadth of
Chinese subsidies to industries and the impact that tariffs
nonetheless can have in affecting trade flows. So long as
China continues its heavy subsidization of its industries,
market-driven companies in the ADEs will often face an
unfair competitive situation. The United States and other
ADEs should determine how to respond to this issue. 126
The European Union countersubsidy mechanism is a start,
but it does not take into account the systemic nature of the
subsidies provided to Chinese industry. Due to the impor -
tance ADEs attach to having their companies move ad -
vanced and emerging technologies from the research and
development stage and into competitive markets, there
will be a need to evaluate whether Chinese companies in
those new markets are obtaining unwarranted advantages
through China’s subsidization activities. Establishing a bor -
der-adjustment mechanism for key sectors likely would
prove much more valuable than a one-by-one approach to
review. The United States and other ADEs should discuss
such a mechanism in the proposed G10-plus format and
enact comparable legislation and the required regulatory
regimes.
2. Establish resilient supply chains outside of China to re -
duce overreliance on the Chinese market through expanded
use of tax credits, subsidies, and concessional financing,
among other things, and specifically enhance energy-sector
and other technology supply chains by developing a critical
minerals financing initiative.
Resilient supply chains are needed for both economic and
security reasons by the United States and the other ADEs.
As the discussion on trade flows demonstrates, the ADEs
rely heavily on trade in and from the China market. The im -
pact of the Russia-Ukraine war has, however, underscored
the dangers of dependencies in circumstances where se -

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
21
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
curity considerations, such as those surrounding Taiwan,
could significantly affect trade flows. There are consider -
able benefits for the ADEs, including the United States, to
maintain trade with China (though with the limitations noted
above), but inasmuch as the Taiwan risks are real, an ef -
fective strategic approach should include diversification in
order to reduce risk. Companies are already responding to
these concerns and a well-known exemplar is Apple, which
is moving a number of its facilities to India. 127
Coincident with the need for responding to the risks is the
desirability for the ADEs generally to enhance trade and
investment with the countries of the Global South. A variety
of mechanisms can be utilized. For example, the Quad has
six working groups undertaking economic and security co -
operation.128 Meanwhile, Australia and India are in the pro -
cess of negotiating a free trade agreement.129 Multilaterally,
the G7 countries have agreed on the Partnership for Global
Infrastructure Investment, which is intended to provide
$600 billion for infrastructure projects; 130 if accomplished,
that will be an enormously valuable achievement.
The countries of the Global South also need capable in -
dustries as part of their economies. While the ADE govern -
ments do have multiple development financing programs,
another worthwhile approach would be to build on the
Japanese government’s subsidy programs that incentiv -
ize companies to move out of China and into more reliable
partnering nations. Such an effort could be supported by
the use of tax credits, subsidies, and concessional financ -
ing. The United States and the other ADEs should utilize
127 “The End of Apple’s Affair with China,” Economist, October 24, 2022, https://www.economist.com/business/2022/10/24/the-end-of-apples-affair-with-china.
128 The working groups are COVID-19 Response and Global Health Security, Climate, Critical and Emerging Technologies, Cyber, Space, and Infrastructure.
See White House, “Fact Sheet: Quad Leaders’ Tokyo Summit 2022,” White House Briefing Room, May 23, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
statements-releases/2022/05/23/fact-sheet-quad-leaders-tokyo-summit-2022/.
129 The agreement has been ratified by Australia, but not by India (as of this writing). Rod McGuirk, “Australia Ratifies Free Trade Deals with India and Britain,”
Associated Press, November 21, 2022, https://apnews.com/article/british-politics-india-australia-global-trade-business-d538020d808747d28b588a9c784
ac207.
130 White House, “Fact Sheet: President Biden and G7 Leaders Formally Launch the Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment,” White House Briefing
Room, June 26, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/06/26/fact-sheet-president-biden-and-g7-leaders-formally-launch-
the-partnership-for-global-infrastructure-and-investment/.
131 White House, “Fact Sheet: Securing a Made in America Supply Chain for Critical Minerals,” February 22, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/?s=Securing+a+Made+in+America+supply+chain. The International Energy Agency (IEA) similarly has stated that the “shift to a clean energy system is set
to drive a huge increase in the requirements for these minerals, meaning that the energy sector is emerging as a major force in mineral markets.” See IEA,
The Role of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions, Executive Summary, 2021, https://www.iea.org/reports/the-role-of-critical-minerals-in-clean-energy-
transitions/executive-summary. The IEA document describes demand: “Solar photovoltaic (PV) plants, wind farms and electric vehicles (EVs) generally require
more minerals to build than their fossil fuel-based counterparts. A typical electric car requires six times the mineral inputs of a conventional car and an onshore
wind plant requires nine times more mineral resources than a gas-fired plant. Since 2010 the average amount of minerals needed for a new unit of power
generation capacity has increased by 50 percent as the share of renewables in new investment has risen.”
132 White House, “Fact Sheet: Securing a Made in America Supply Chain”; and IEA, The Role of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions.”
the G10-plus format to develop a coordinated approach to
expand such incentives with a focus on the Global South.
One specific critical area that demands high focus by the
ADEs—both among themselves and with the countries of
the Global South—involves the supply chains for energy,
especially the critical materials necessary for a clean en -
ergy transition, and for other key sectors such as defense.
The key critical materials for the energy sector include co -
balt, lithium, nickel, and rare earths. The demand for each
is expected to increase by orders of magnitude. The Biden
administration has projected:
 As the world transitions to a clean energy economy,
global demand for these critical minerals is set to
skyrocket by 400-600 percent over the next sev -
eral decades, and, for minerals such as lithium and
graphite used in electric vehicle (EV) batteries, de -
mand will increase by even more—as much as 4,000
percent.131
The United States as well as most ADEs rely on imports for
these materials, including significant reliance on China. The
White House has noted that the United States “is increas -
ingly dependent on foreign sources for many of the pro -
cessed versions of these minerals. Globally, China controls
most of the market for processing and refining for cobalt,
lithium, rare earths and other critical minerals.” 132

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
Giving some specifics, a Biden administration report on
building resilient supply chains found that China refines 60
percent of global lithium and 80 percent of cobalt. 133
Another analysis similarly described China’s significant in -
volvement in refining and processing critical minerals:
 There are many weaknesses in the critical mineral
supply chain, but U.S. import reliance on China
presents one of the most immense risks. Currently,
the [United States] imports over half of its minerals,
with China supplying 80% of those imports. China
controls approximately 55% of the global rare earth
mining capability and 85% of rare earth findings as
of 2020. Additionally, China’s processing capabil -
ity is five times greater than the combined global
capacity for producing rare earth minerals, giving
China a competitive advantage regarding low costs
and infrastructure.134
That degree of concentration presents security as well as
economic issues. As the Secretary of Defense has stated,
“Strategic and critical materials are vital to our national de -
fense . . . enabling the United States to develop and sustain
emerging technologies. . . . [and to] improve our warfighting
capability.” The DOD has made clear that the “concentra -
tion of global supply chains for strategic and critical materi -
als in China creates risk of disruption.” 135
The administration has made some useful efforts to deal
with the problem including convening supply chain min -
isterial fora, 136 expanding activities with Canada and
Australia,137 and establishing contracts for rare earths
133 White House, Building Resilient Supply Chains, Revitalizing American Manufacturing, and Fostering Broad-Based Growth: 100-Day Reviews under Executive
Order 14017, June 2021, 7, https://www. whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/100-day-supply-chain-review-report.pdf.
134 Jeremy Dasilva, “Securing the Critical Mineral Supply Chain Is Vital to the Future of the U.S. Military,” American Security Project (website), October 20, 2021,
https://www.americansecurityproject.org/securing-the-critical-mineral-supply-chain-is-vital-to-the-future-of-the-us-military/.
135 “The Defense Department’s Strategic and Critical Materials Review,” News Release, Department of Defense, June 8, 2021, https://www.defense.gov/News/
Releases/Release/Article/2649649/the-defense-departments-strategic-and-critical-materials-review/.
136 “Joint Statement on Cooperation on Global Supply Chains,” Media Note, Office of the Spokesperson, Department of State, July 20, 2022, https://www.state.gov/
supply-chain-ministerial-joint-statement/.
137 “United States and Canada Forge Ahead on Critical Minerals Cooperation,” Media Note, Office of the Spokesperson, Department of State, July 31, 2021, https://
www.state.gov/united-states-and-canada-forge-ahead-on-critical-minerals-cooperation/; and “Next Steps on U.S.-Australia Critical Minerals Collaboration,”
Office of Public Affairs, Department of Commerce, November 17, 2021, https://www.commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2021/11/next-steps-us-australia-critical-
minerals-collaboration.
138 “DOD Announces Rare Earth Element Award to Strengthen Domestic Industrial Base,” Department of Defense Press Release, February 1, 2021, https://www.
defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/2488672/dod-announces-rare-earth-element-award-to-strengthen-domestic-industrial-base/; and “DOD Awards
$35 Million to MP Materials to Build U.S. Heavy Rare Earth Separation Capacity,” DOD Press Release, February 22, 2022, https://www.defense.gov/News/
Releases/Release/Article/2488672/dod-announces-rare-earth-element-award-to-strengthen-domestic-industrial-base/.
139 Brad Plumer, “Wealthy Nations Offer Indonesia $20 Billion to Curb Coal,” New Y ork Times, November 15, 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/11/15/climate/
indonesia-coal-agreement.html.
140 Franklin D. Kramer, Free but Secure Trade: Priorities in Support of National Security, Atlantic Council, June 2022, 6, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/
uploads/2022/06/Free-but-Secure-Trade-Priorities-in-Support-of-National-Security.pdf.
through the Defense Department. 138 However, a key re -
quirement remains sufficient financing for the very large
future requirements.
In the context of the recent G20 meeting, the United States
and several other ADEs have pledged to provide Indonesia
with $20 billion in financing to support that country’s clean
energy transition from coal. 139 A comparable model should
be developed for financing the necessary mining and pro -
cessing of critical materials. As previously proposed by
the author, a critical minerals financing initiative should be
established:
 The United States should develop a multilateral initia-
tive that would undertake to finance the resourcing
of critical minerals requirements for defense and na -
tional security needs and for the economy as a whole.
Membership should include the United States, the
EU, Australia, Canada, Japan, the Republic of Korea,
and the United Kingdom. A combined effort would
provide a mechanism to coordinate interactions with
key producing countries as well as funding support
for private-sector entities that would undertake the
actual mining and processing. Such an effort should
be combined with actions to support environmentally
sound mining and processing efforts including the
multilateral Energy Resource Governance Initiative.
Finally, a coordinated effort would also allow for sup-
port to riskier but potentially highly important efforts
such as deep-sea mining for critical materials.140
Establishing such a critical minerals financing initiative
would be an important project for the proposed G10-plus.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
23
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
China and the New Globalization
IV. CONCLUSION
China will remain an important part of the new globaliza -
tion. But its relationships with the United States and the
other advanced democratic economies have changed and
will need to further change in important ways. A combina -
tion of selective decoupling focused on national security,
advanced technologies, and critical infrastructures and the
development of strategic supply chains outside China to
reduce dependencies will be the key elements of a new
strategic approach. Establishing the G10-plus along with a
multinational staff to help coordinate such actions will be
invaluable. Successfully undertaking each of those efforts
will be of critical importance to establishing strategic stabil -
ity and economic prosperity for the United States and the
advanced democratic nations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author sincerely thanks Anca Ioana Agachi and Alvina
Ahmed for their valuable research in support of this issue
brief. They are associate director and resident fellow, re -
spectively, at the Transatlantic Security Initiative in the
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Franklin D. Kramer is a distinguished fellow and board di -
rector of the Atlantic Council. Mr. Kramer has served as a
senior political appointee in two administrations, including
as assistant secretary of defense for international security
affairs. At the Department of Defense, Mr. Kramer was in
charge of the formulation and implementation of interna -
tional defense and political-military policy, with worldwide
responsibilities including NATO and Europe, the Middle
East, Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
In the nonprofit world, Mr. Kramer has been a senior fel -
low at CNA; chairman of the board of the World Affairs
Council of Washington, DC; a distinguished research fellow
at the Center for Technology and National Security Policy
of the National Defense University; and an adjunct pro -
fessor at the Elliott School of International Affairs of The
George Washington University. Mr. Kramer’s areas of focus
include defense, both conventional and hybrid; China, in -
cluding managing competition, military power, and China-
Taiwan-US relations; NATO and Russia; cyber including
resilience and international issues; irregular conflict and
counterinsurgency; and innovation and national security.
Mr. Kramer has written extensively; in addition to the cur -
rent report, his publications include: on China, Priorities
for a Transatlantic China Strategy , Managed Competition:
Meeting China’s Challenge in a Multi-vector World , and
The China Plan: A Transatlantic Blueprint for Strategic
Competition (chapters on economics and on “one-world”
cooperation); on trade, Free but Secure Trade ; on global
defense challenges, Transformative Priorities for National
Defense and Deterrence Assurance: Why NATO Needs
a Plan for the Indo-Pacific Region; on NATO and Russia,
NATO Priorities: Initial Lessons from the Russia-Ukraine
War, Defending Ukraine: US Must Offer Military Support
not just Economic Threats , NATO Priorities after the
Brussels Summit , Meeting the Russian Hybrid Challenge,
and Meeting the Russian Conventional Challenge ; on cy -
ber and resilience, We Need a Cybersecurity Paradigm
Change, Cybersecurity for Small and Medium Enterprises
and Academia , NATO Needs Continuous Responses in
Cyberspace, Effective Resilience and National Strategy:
Lessons from the Pandemic and Requirements for Key
Critical Infrastructures, Cybersecurity: Changing the Model,
Cyber and Deterrence: The Military-Civil Nexus in High-End
Conflict, and Cyber, Extended Deterrence, and NATO ; on
innovation and technology, Innovation, Leadership, and
National Security ; and on counterinsurgency, Civil Power
in Irregular Conflict (principal editor and co-author of the
policy chapter) and Irregular Conflict, the Department of
Defense and International Security Reform.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
TREASURER
*George Lund
DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
*Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
John Bonsell
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
*Richard R. Burt
Teresa Carlson
James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Richard Edelman
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Mark T. Esper
*Michael Fisch
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Jarosław Grzesiak
Murathan Günal
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Brian L. Kelly
Henry A. Kissinger
John E. Klein
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Yann Le Pallec
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Christian Marrone
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
*Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Majida Mourad
Dambisa F. Moyo
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell McCormick
Michael Punke
Ashraf Qazi
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
Gil Tenzer
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster
*Executive Committee Members
List as of July 13, 2022
Board of Directors

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and engagement in international
 affairs based on the central role of the Atlantic community in
 meeting today’s global challenges.
© 2023 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means without permission
in writing from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of brief
quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please
direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
