
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
1
UNPACKING THE
GEOPOLITICS OF
TECHNOLOGY
Atlantic Council
GEOTECH CENTER
How Second- and Third-Order Implications
of Emerging Tech are Changing the World
 Mathew Burrows | Julian Mueller-Kaler | Kaisa Oksanen | Ossi Piironen

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
2
Atlantic Council
GEOTECH CENTER
The Atlantic Council Geotech Center works to shape the
global future of data and technology together.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
3
UNPACKING THE
GEOPOLITICS OF
TECHNOLOGY
How Second- and Third-Order
Implications of Emerging Tech
are Changing the World
Atlantic Council
GEOTECH CENTER

Mathew Burrows | Julian Mueller-Kaler | Kaisa Oksanen | Ossi Piironen
This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic Council
Policy on Intellectual Independence. The authors are solely responsible for
its analysis and recommendations. Neither the Ministry for Foreign Affairs
of Finland nor the Atlantic Council and its donors do determine, or do they
necessarily endorse or advocate for, any of this report’s conclusions.
Cover: The Anger of the Gods (La Colère des Dieux) by René Magritte
© 2022 C. Herscovici / Artists Rights Society (ARS), New Y ork
MAGRITTE (1898-1967) was a Belgian surrealist artist who is well known for
his thought-provoking images that take the perceptions of painting into an-
other realm of reality. His work often displays a collection of ordinary
objects in unusual contexts, henceforth, creating an illusion of new meanings
for familiar things and challenging the observers' preconditioned sensing
of reality. Magritte’s work has been exhibited throughout the world and he
remains one of the most widely collected surrealist artist of his time.
ISBN-13: 978-1-61977-205-2

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
4
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. On Technology-Induced Societal Changes 5
 1.1 The Politics of Loss and the Rise of Populism 6
 1.2 Democracy on Defense 8
 1.3 Emerging Technology and Declining Democracy 8
2. The Evolving Geopolitics of Technology 10
 2.1 A Look at the United States: Biden Puts 10
 His Faith in US Tech Revival
 Holding China Accountable for Its Unfair Practices 11
 Building a Green Economy: A Lot More 12
 Difficult than Biden Lets On
 An Inclusive, Highly Tech-Skilled Workforce 12
 and More Diffusion of Innovation
 2.2 A Look at China: The Rising Country’s Tech Ambitions 12
 Cutthroat Commercial and Geopolitical Contest 12
 The Unresolved US-China Competition 14
 2.3 A Look at the “Old” Continent: Europe Aims for a Global Role 15
 in Shaping a Democratic and Secure Tech Future
 The EU Struggle to Achieve Its Goals 15
3. Imagining Alternative Futures 17
 3.1 Postpandemic Letdown and Western Disarray (The Local Picture) 17
 Workers’ Rights and Reforms 17
 New Social Model Evolving 18
 3.2 Europe in a Bipolar Tech World (The Global Picture) 19
 Squeezed by Sino-US Escalating Tensions 19
 All European Governments on Edge 20
 European Split on a Single Foreign Policy 20
 Out with Strategic Autonomy, in with Hedging 20
 3.3 Counting the Costs of Technonationalism and the 21
 Balkanization of Cyberspace (The Regional Picture)
 Europeans Decide to Fight Back 22

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
5
1. ON TECHNOLOGY-INDUCED SOCIETAL CHANGES
D
eveloping new technologies used to be primarily an eco-
nomic and commercial issue, but it is increasingly also
about foreign and security policy. Emerging technolo-
gies in particular have become both an object and a driver
of international cooperation and competition, shaping the global
landscape in different and sometimes unexpected ways. To put it
simple, high tech has come to signify high politics, too. Today, dig-
ital and tech advancements are geopolitical issues of the highest
order, even more so with the second wave of digital innovations,
which are more systemic in reach and will determine future eco-
nomic and technological supremacy as well as respective security
environments.
The development of cutting-edge artificial intelligence (AI) capabili-
ties, for instance, has become the new playing field for great power
competition between the United States and China, both striving for
digital supremacy and spheres of economic influence. Such increas-
ing bipolarity in the international system comes with a price tag for
many countries around the globe. European states in particular are
torn between their alignment in terms of values with the United
States and their dependency on close economic ties with China for
the sake of their own economic health. In worrying about an esca-
lating rivalry, many countries and state conglomerates have started
to pursue their own digital sovereignty, yet lag behind in the global
race of tech development, innovation, and cyber capabilities.1
The international debate concerning technological change also
includes many ethical, social, and legal questions in fields such as
human rights and individual freedoms, competition and market
structure, consumer protection, or public health. Furthermore, the
COVID-19 pandemic has raised significant questions about the role
of technology in crisis management. Conversations around tech-
nological advances, new forms of work, and the change in skills
needed have dominated the employment policy debate in many
countries around the world. The platform economy, technological
advances, and artificial intelligence are irrevocably changing eco-
nomic structures, tasks, and ways of working, and even what we
understand by “work.”
Europe, for example, is already a patchwork of highly varied local
economies and markets. McKinsey Global Institute claims that by
2030, more than half of Europe’s workforce will face significant
transitions. Automation will most likely require almost all workers
to gain new skills. About ninety-four million employees may not
need to change occupations altogether, but will need retraining, as
technology already handles 20 percent of their current activities.2
While some workers in declining occupations might be able to find
similar types of work, estimates indicate that some 21 million will
need to change occupations by the end of this decade. Newly cre-
ated jobs are going to require more sophisticated skills, which are
already scarce today, and the potential social implications cannot be
underestimated in scale.
Similar trends are becoming obvious in the United States, too.
Having studied 702 occupational groupings, Oxford University
researchers Carl Frey and Michael Osborne asserted already in
2013 that technology will inevitably transform many sectors of life:
there is high probability, they estimated, that 47 percent of US work-
ers will see their jobs automated within two decades.3 These fears
have been subsequently echoed by similar studies inter alia from the
European think tank Bruegel, the McKinsey Global Institute, and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
showing automation affecting between 14 and 54 percent of jobs in
the “near future.”4 Furthermore, half (48%) of the 1,896 experts sur-
veyed by the Pew Research Center in 2014 envisioned a future „in
which robots and digital agents have displaced significant numbers
of both blue- and white-collar workers—with many expressing con-
cern that this will lead to vast increases in income inequality, masses
of people who are effectively unemployable, and breakdowns in
the social order.“5 The future is already here, and these effects and
trends, in addition to the geopolitical competition over new technol-
ogies, will continue to transform our world significantly.
In this paper, authors from the Atlantic Council and the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs of Finland examine the transformation of technol-
ogy and work in a broader social and political context, look at strat-
egies that different regions of the world employ, and evaluate the
transition’s geopolitical impact. The change in the global division of
labor as well as its impacts are already well known. Consequences
of the transformation of work challenge the very basis of the well-be-
ing of society, which has traditionally relied on productivity growth
to increase wealth and living standards across the board.6 By all
means, the fourth industrial revolution challenges the traditional seg-
mentation describing work, skills, income, and many of the operat-
ing principles of society as it is known today. However, even if tech-
nology is reshaping the modern workplace and working processes,
and jobs are lost sometimes faster than new work can be created,
these changes do not happen overnight and decision makers have
time to react to them.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
6
1.1 The Politics of Loss and the Rise of
Populism
E
ven if the job ramifications derived from increasing automa-
tion in both Europe and the United States lie at the lower
end of the range of predicted disruptions, emerging tech-
nologies will accelerate trends already well underway—and
with major political consequences. A recent Brookings Institution
study indicates that since 2010, for example, the fifty-three largest
US metropolitan areas accounted for two-thirds of growth in eco-
nomic output and almost three-quarters of job growth, despite mak-
ing up just fifty-six percent of the country‘s population.10 Since then,
this economic and job-growth pattern has intensified: small-town
areas saw their share of the nation‘s economic output shrink by 6.5
percent between 2010 and 2016.11 According to another Brookings
study, Biden’s winning base of 509 counties in the 2020 presiden-
tial election encompassed a staggering 71% of America’s economic
activity, while Trump’s losing base of 2,547 counties represented
just short of 29% of the economy.12
Undoubtedly, the transformation from a production- to a ser -
vice-based economy has shifted the geography of economic
growth dramatically, and technical advancement will most likely
further expedite this process. Such geographic divisions become
a particular problem once people no longer move to more eco-
nomically vibrant areas, as it is increasingly the case in the United
States, for example.13 Given the number of citizens that already
suffer from a strong sense of economic decline and their specific
location in rural, politically overrepresented areas, it should have
come as no surprise that the current order has brought economic
and social cleavages that continue to spawn frightening externali-
ties. The experience of entrenched poverty, the existing lack of eco-
nomic opportunity, and the devastating opioid crisis have deep-
ened small-town resentment of coastal, cosmopolitan elites, and
caused rust-belt Americans to elect Donald Trump as president in
2016.14 Even before the pandemic, the Census Bureau reported that
full-time male workers’ median income is lower in real, inflation-ad-
justed terms than it was forty-two years ago. As Josef Stieglitz sub-
sequently noted, real wages at the bottom are pretty much com-
parable to sixty years ago.15 Remarkably enough, life expectancy
declined in the United States for the fifth year in a row, and not just
since the COVID-19 pandemic. Trumpism may as well be regarded
as a prelude to the political upheaval that will come from the eco-
nomic and social implications of unregulated automation.
Similar trends are obvious in European countries, too. Despite
record high employment rates before the pandemic, long-term
unemployment remained fairly steady, and the number of peo -
ple labeled as „working poor“ has risen. In the United Kingdom,
for example, the number of workers in poverty increased faster in
recent years than the number of people in employment, resulting
in workers being increasingly likely to find themselves in precari-
ous economic circumstances despite having a job.16 In Germany,
the working poor tally has doubled from 2004 to 2014, accounting
for more than three million people in 2018 with too little money to
live, despite working on a part- or full-time basis.17 Even though this
increase is largely driven by a rise in low-wage and/or part-time jobs
held by workers who were previously unemployed or economically

Case Study: Truckers
Despite the current shortage of qualified drivers, there
are few industries in which the threat of displacement
is more significant than for truckers. Self-driving
trucks have already mastered routes throughout the
United States and Europe, and even though investors
and researchers disagree about the exact timing of
the transition, there is little doubt that automation
could potentially arrive in years, rather than decades.7
Ultimately, new technology could make more than a
million US trucking jobs redundant and substantially
reduce the average annual wage for whatever trucking
jobs remain.8 It may reasonably be doubted that all
truck drivers will suddenly become software engineers
with the skillset to profit from technical advancement;
their superfluousness will come with major social
implications. For decades, trucking was, and still is, the
largest employment sector in more than half of the fifty
US states.9 As a matter of fact, there is a strong overlap
between Trump‘s electoral map, rising economic
populism, and an illustration of states where truck
driving is the most common job today.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
7
inactive, the greater incidence of precarious employment challenges
the notion of fairness and human dignity.
An unregulated, increased use of emerging technologies and its social
implications do not bode well for the future, particularly if one believes
that the rise of populism mainly derives from rising economic inequality,
a perception of unfairness, the partial corruption of the political estab-
lishment, and declining faith in the problem-solving capacity of demo-
cratic institutions. People feel threatened when their jobs are at risk, and
research indicates that “economic distress is often perceived as a loss
of identity.“18 If opportunities for economic success, good health, and
justice are taken away from people, they usually get very angry. After all,
wrath is a big driver in political chaos, revolt, or even revolution.
The connection between economic prosperity and economic well-be-
ing on the one hand, and sociopolitical stability on the other, seems to
be well understood by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). Deriving its
legitimacy mostly from the promise of increasing living standards and
economic participation, the Chinese government creates more than fif-
teen million artificial jobs annually to guarantee an inclusive job market
that delivers on the Chinese dream.19 To what extent such market dis-
tortions will work in the long run remains to be seen, but these efforts
point to an additional layer of great power competition. Ultimately, the
fate of each system will depend on more than innovation and efficiency
increases, with the ability to mitigate the negative externalities that
come with each new industrial revolution also defining destiny.
Due to wide-ranging automation, jobs are just no longer where they
used to be. The high-tech industries that are powering today’s econ-
omies have little desire to change their economic models—and why
should they? Most economic hubs simply don’t need the amount of
cheap labor that contributed to building wealth in the industrial age. The
availability and search for highly educated workers is centered around
prosperous, big, and thriving metropolitan areas, reinforcing the vicious
cycle of agglomeration in many democracies, while China is facing its
own problems of surplus production, ghosts cities, and staggering mar-
ket inefficiencies.20
Case Study: Finland and the Nordic
Well-being Society
The Finnish Government has addressed the alternating
world of work in light of the Nordic well-being society
and its changes.21 The message is as follows: the forms
of work and employment relationships are more diverse,
which require changes in, for example, legislation and
social security. Work is no longer tied to time and place,
but the change is not equally strong or synchronous in
all sectors. Technological transformation is global, and
more work is being done on global platforms and in
mobile and virtual networks, and without the traditional
employer-employee relationship. Flexibility is required
in the labor market and in working life, and at the same
time, the precarity of livelihood is a growing concern
both for workers as well as the government. Within the
education sector, continuous learning is emphasized,
and many countries aim for a high-quality model for life-
long learning for all population groups. However, com-
plex and long-term phenomena such as the transforma-
tion of technology and work are not easily converted into
clear policy actions. In addition, regulatory solutions and
efforts to benefit from technology development should
be made in multilateral settings. Foresight and future
work scenarios provide tools for the needed societal
dialogue about the changes and challenges ahead, but
also about the changing values of work. Responsibility
for launching this dialogue rests with decision makers.
Y ear Candidate Counties won Total votes Percent of
Popular Vote
Aggregate
share of US
GDP
2016
Hillary Rodham
Clinton 472 65,853,514 48.18 % 64 %
Donald J. Trump 2,584 62,984,828 46.09 % 36 %
2020
Joseph R.
Biden Jr. 520 81,268,924 51.31 % 71 %
Donald J. Trump 2,564 74,216,154 46.86 % 29 %
Data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the Metropolitan Policy Program at Brookings, Dave Leip’s Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections, The
New Y ork Times, and Moody’s Analytics.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
8
1.2 Democracy on Defense
O
ver the past ten years, these economic factors have
contributed to a steep decline of democracy in the
world.According to the Varieties in Democracy (V-Dem)
Project, “the level of democracy enjoyed by the aver-
age global citizen in 2020 is down to levels last found around
1990.”22 With India’s democratic decline, around two-third of the
world’s population now lives in electoral autocracies. Consequently,
the overall number of liberal democracies has dropped from for-
ty-one countries to thirty-two during the same time period: “In
North America, and Western and Eastern Europe, no country has
advanced in democracy in the past ten years while Hungary, Poland,
Serbia, Slovenia, and the United States of America have declined
substantially.”23
Autocratization in the modern world rarely occurs in a revolution-
ary manner, but proceeds in steps over time. Typically, “[r]uling gov-
ernments first attack the media and civil society, and polarize soci-
eties by disrespecting opponents and spreading false information,
only to then undermine formal institutions.”24 According to the same
report, deterioration of the freedom of expression, including the
media, took place in thirty-two countries during 2020, while media
censorship occurred in forty-two countries.
1.3 Emerging Technology and Declining
Democracy
O
f course, there are various dependent and indepen -
dent causes for the global decline of democracy.
Nevertheless, a 2019 Pew survey of technology innova-
tors, developers, business and policy leaders, research-
ers, and activists revealed that about half (49%) of the respondents
thought technology would weaken core aspects of democracy and
representation by 2030, while some 33 percent gave the opposite
answer.25
A number of hypotheses point to the role of emerging technolo-
gies in projections of democratic decline. The first argument, laid
out above, alludes to the ongoing transformation of working life and
increased risk of losing one’s job because of automation and dig-
italization. The second argument links the decline of democracy
with the expansion of information and communications technology
(ICT), and the transformation of the information landscape. With the
Internet, competition between (often multinational) media corpo-
rations has intensified. Traditional media outlets increasingly profit
from advertising revenue rather than subscriptions, which leaves lit-
tle room for high-quality journalism. Social media trends and click-
bait define what most people read and see, while serious content is
increasingly accessible only for those willing and able to pay for it—
dividing audiences into distinct information bubbles.
From a democratic point of view, the Web and social media outlets
are both a double-edged sword. On the one hand, new platforms

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
9
give everyone a voice, support freedom of expression, and open up
access to diverse sets of information. For authoritarian leaders, ICT
expansion can be a menace by providing digital tools for citizens to
mobilize against the regime. On the other hand, new tech platforms
gave birth to information bubbles and subsequent polarization,
increase the effectiveness of mis- and disinformation, and promote
nonconsensual cultures of debate. Hate speech and conspiracy the-
ories are an increasing threat to the civic trust and democratic polit-
ical order. In democracies, extreme populist parties have been able
to capitalize on this side of technological progress, exploiting public
grievances with targeted messages. Through the all-encompass-
ing digitalization in entertainment, trade, and service delivery, the vir-
tually universal ownership of mobile devices, and the unstoppable
spread of the Internet of Things (IoT), technologies have revolution-
ized the amount of data collection and transfer during the past two
decades. Increasingly rapid data processing, cloud computing, and
advances in applying machine learning all contribute in the vastly
improved accuracy and usability of data analytics. While new tech-
nologies offer new possibilities for democratic participation, they
also allow powerful manipulation and surveillance by both corpo-
rate and state entities.
Commercially acquired personal data—or profiles constructed from
such data—have already been used to manipulate democratic pro-
cesses. Illegitimate manipulation can be attributed to, depending
on the case, either domestic political rivalries or foreign adversar-
ies. Western democracies have responded by legislative measures
to govern data collection, transfer, and usage. The European Union
(EU), for example, has been especially active in promoting new regu-
lation. The idea of strengthening legal control is generally accepted
in Western societies, but when it comes to actual policies, consen-
sus abates: tech companies oppose measures that clash with their
business models, and national governments are concerned about
undercutting innovation and competitiveness. The main question is
how to balance potentially conflicting objectives.
Privacy concerns restrict autocratic countries to a much lesser
extent. The Chinese government, for instance, has exploited per-
sonal data and AI to enable a comprehensive surveillance scheme,
which it uses to restrict the freedom of speech, identify dissidents,
and suppress any type of political opposition. Close links between
Chinese tech giants and the government—the obligation to hand
over consumer data to the authorities—has figured in some Western
decision making cycles to restrict the deployment of Chinese
technology in core communication infrastructure. Nevertheless,
the ongoing US campaign against Chinese tech firms goes much
beyond just espionage and privacy issues. Motivations range from
pure geopolitics to asymmetries in trade and unfair industrial prac-
tices, but also reflect a genuine concern about the export of solu-
tions aligned with the authoritarian societal model.
Interestingly enough, China recently updated its data protection
rules with the new Personal Information Protection Law (PIPL).26
While the main objective is most likely to rein in the growing power
of tech giants like Alibaba and Tencent, the legislation improves citi-
zens’ privacy rights vis-à-vis private companies. The law also applies
to foreign companies processing the personal information of indi-
viduals located within China and is likely to limit cross-border trans-
fer of personal data.27 Furthermore, it is also an effort to keep pace
with a global trend toward strengthened data protection regulation.
The EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), for instance, is a
normative power asset. With regulative frameworks of its own, China
may try to boost its efforts to build up its international trustworthiness
and promote its values and solutions in various types of international
negotiations on standards and norms.28
What does statistical research say about the effect of the ICT upon
the prospects for democracy? According to Pelle Ahlin, a V-Dem
Institute researcher, “the key to understanding the effect of ICT on
democratization is the interplay between the technical literacy of the
population, and the technical literacy of the regime.”29 Accordingly,
if an authoritarian regime has a higher level of technical literacy
than its population, democratic transition is significantly less likely
to occur. Conversely, regimes with lower technical literacy than their
populations are more likely to experience democratic transitions.
China, Iran, and Russia are examples of states using their technical
capacities to suppress popular demands and stay in power, while
democracy attempts during the Arab Spring are instances of the
latter.
Overall, the challenges facing governments today are more com-
plex due to technological and cultural changes. Similarly, public
actors trying to cope with the changes have several limitations. For
example, there are substantial inherent structural barriers, as “lim-
ited investment for innovation, and deeper cultural barriers block-
ing disruptive thinking. In addition, the open use of public data and
knowledge remains challenging in many places.”30 Questions about
reforming either local or global governance systems include how to
make the most of technology, how to work with citizens and draw on
the abilities of society to address needs, and how to rapidly test new
approaches and ways of working in a fast-changing world.
In terms of public administration, the European answer most often
culminates in acting as a platform regulator. In some cases, it is pos-
sible to move from the direct regulation of people to the regulation
of the platforms where commerce, work, and many other aspects of
life take place.31 Although the main players in the platform economy
are multinational, they can be steered by both country-by-country
collaborative measures and rule-making in line with EU regulations.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
10
2: THE EVOLVING GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
T
o understand how countries and regions react to these
described changes more specifically, an examination of
the technology landscape in the United States, China, and
Europe is inevitable. It shows the ever increasing great
power rivalry, China’s growing tech ambitions, and Europe’s strug-
gle to not fall behind, which puts at risk the EU’s bid for digital sov-
ereignty and a global role in shaping a democratic and secure tech
future.
2.1 A Look at the United States: Biden
Puts His Faith in US Tech Revival
The Biden administration is committed to boosting the US potential
for tech innovation for a number of reasons: to outcompete China;
ensure the United States leads in combatting climate change and
erecting a green economy; and build a more tech-skilled, inclusive
workforce. The latter two objections were absent from the Trump
administration’s goals, which were focused exclusively on stunt-
ing China’s rise as a tech leader and luring manufacturing, which
included high-tech industries, back to the United States.
It’s early days yet. The administration has only been able to legislate
a part of its overall funding package, which would help in realizing
goals two and three, and it’s unclear to what degree, even with a full
program enacted, the Biden administration will succeed in spread-
ing tech skills and innovation to disadvantaged communities, includ-
ing rural areas. Moreover, the administration has not fully laid out a
strategy vis-à-vis China’s bid to be a tech leader. In part, Biden wants
to do so with allies and it remains unclear whether the EU would
go along with a highly aggressive set of punitive measures against
Beijing. Furthermore, US businesses have been voicing their con-
cerns about pushing China too hard for fear they would further limit
market access for American firms.
Holding China Accountable for Its Unfair
Practices
Broadly speaking, Biden is largely continuing the China-and-
technology focus that Trump started four years ago. The vigorous
and public accusations made against China by Secretary of State
Blinken and National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan at the Alaska
meeting with Chinese counterparts have been interpreted as the
opening salvo in a stepped-up competition across the board, but
particularly on technology. Sullivan has appointed a deputy on tech-
nology in addition to the traditional senior director for the topic on
the staff of the National Security Council (NSC). There is a practi-
cal political side to heaping opprobrium onto the Chinese govern-
ment. Democratic strategists see it as a way to create consensus
in an otherwise fractious political environment as well as to get the
Republicans and the public behind Biden’s ambitious spending
plans. The administration can point to China’s increasing research
and development (R&D) expenditures in recent years while US
federal spending, which usually favors basic research (as distinct
from the private sector’s more commercially motivated R&D), has
languished. While there is increasing support across the partisan
divide for the view that China is the United States’ big challenge,
so far Republicans are not buying into the full price tag for Biden’s
spending plans. Federal R&D will likely increase, but Biden wants
increased domestic spending targeted at boosting tech innova-
tion in disadvantaged areas, which adds to a cost already making
Republicans wary. Support for free community college for all eligible
applicants has already been dropped from the second part of the
funding package yet to be passed by the Senate.
Western critics condemn China’s use of technology such as facial
recognition, and see the nation’s development of new technology
as too wedded to regime efforts to tighten social control and sup-
press criticism. Showing that Chinese technology equals authoritar-
ianism helps with Biden’s argument that China’s rise as a technolog-
ical player is a threat to the foundations of the Western liberal order.
Administration officials make use of democracy frequently in their
speeches, calling for its protection, in part by prohibiting others from
adopting Chinese technology. No doubt Biden is sincere, but the
argument also serves as justification for calling on allied and demo-
cratic partners to help the United States in its fight against China and
for supremacy.32
Biden’s desire to work alongside allies and partners is a striking dif-
ference with Trump, whose instincts were unilateralist. What remains
unclear is the extent to which US allies and partners in Europe and
Asia want to be thrust into a Cold War-type situation with the Asian
giant. Many are repelled by China’s more aggressive tactics and
share Biden’s concern about the country’s use of technology to but-
tress authoritarian rule. Nevertheless, they depend on the coun-
try for economic trade and investment. Europeans have adopted a
compete, cooperate, and confront approach to dealing with China,
which allows for working with Beijing on issues where interests
overlap, but also competing with and confronting the Chinese gov-
ernment where they do not.33 Worries about the relationship vary
among EU members. While EU leaders signed an investment treaty
with China over US objections, its ratification is currently on hold in
the European Parliament. Brussels as well as individual member
states are making more efforts to closely oversee and, if necessary,
block any unwanted takeovers of European companies by Chinese
firms and investors.
Throughout the world, the United States has been trying to cajole
and sometimes arm-twist countries into blacklisting Huawei
Technologies. Ecuador, for example, negotiated a deal whereby the
US International Development Finance Corporation will help Quito
repay billions of dollars in loans to China in exchange for barring
Huawei from its communications plans.34 Trump convinced Brazil’s
President Jair Bolsonaro to also join the US Clean Network Initiative
banning Huawei, but the Brazilian leader later decided not to limit

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
11
Huawei’s role in what is seen as an effort to avoid delays in the deliv-
ery of Chinese-made COVID-19 vaccines.35 Paraguay, too, is work-
ing with Huawei on a 5G rollout, largely because of the lower price.
These US efforts to force Huawei out of markets has the potential to
divide South America, making it more difficult for regional coopera-
tion in areas involving new communications technology. Regional
splits reproduced elsewhere could have serious economic impli-
cations for the developing world. For many, Huawei offers a cheap
entrance fee for 5G cellular networks.
At home, Biden’s administration has so far been more interested
in soliciting company views than Trump’s. Many US corporations
don’t want to be pushed out of the expanding Chinese market, even
though they support US government efforts to combat state subsi-
dies and intellectual property theft. While there appears to be grow-
ing US public acceptance of the need for some decoupling on crit-
ical goods or sensitive technologies, Qualcomm, for example, has
tried to make the case that US firms will be hurt economically by
being unable to deal with Chinese tech companies like Huawei. So
far, the Biden administration has not made a definitive decision on
retaining those Trump restrictions, making it clear the White House
wants to hear US industry views.
Building a Green Economy: A Lot More
Difficult than Biden Lets On
The Biden administration’s focus on technology as the solution to
climate change was apparent in the White House-organized 2021
Leaders’ Summit on Climate in April. The expert consensus sug-
gests much of the needed technology is yet to be invented and/or
scaled. International Energy Agency head Fatih Birol, for example,
said at the summit that “reaching net-zero emissions by 2050 would
depend in large part on the use of technologies that were not yet
ready to be used at scale, such as carbon capture and storage, and
the use of clean hydrogen as fuel.”36 Make no mistake, he said, this
is a Herculean task.
Trying to undo the widely held view that a transition to a green econ-
omy will involve a weakening of Western competitiveness and loss
of jobs, Biden went out of his way at the summit to put the creation
of new, high-quality jobs at the heart of his green energy push. He
has been criticized by many for sugar-coating what is likely to be
a difficult transition, particularly for many workers having to move
out of fossil fuel-dependent industries. Whatever the challenges,
the Biden administration is ready to invest resources in the effort to
solve climate change and generate new middle-class jobs, being
well aware about the potential social implications should efforts fail.
Furthermore, Biden wants to win the electric vehicle market globally
and has made a down payment with his recently enacted infrastruc-
ture measure, which includes $7.5 billion for zero- and low-emission
buses and ferries, aiming to deliver thousands of electric school
buses to districts across the country, according to the White House.37
President Joe Biden signs bills into law at the South Court Auditorium of The White House in Washington, DC.
November 2021. (Photo by Oliver Contreras/Sipa USA).

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
12
The law also includes $65 billion to “reenergize America’s power
infrastructure.”38 There will be spending on protection against his-
toric super storms, floods, wildfires, and droughts. Some of that will
involve making the nation’s fragmented power grid more secure and
efficient. More uniform broadband Internet access could empower
greater telework and less commuting, which would lessen carbon
emissions.
There are various estimates for new, high-paying jobs that have
been promised. Robert Pollin, economics professor and co-direc-
tor of the Political Economy Research Institute at the University of
Massachusetts Amherst, in April 2021, estimated job creation of
between one million and 1.2 million positions per year in the energy
efficiency and renewable energy space, according to CNBC report-
ing. The new jobs would be in wind and solar energy, heightened
energy efficiency in industrial buildings, and high-efficiency cars,
experts say.39
Moody’s Analytics Chief Economist Mark Zandi’s estimates paint a
far less optimistic picture of job growth. This summer, he forecast
that 2.2 million jobs would be created by 2031—if both the bipartisan
infrastructure bill (which has passed) and the larger, (as of this writing)
still-pending reconciliation package, then structured as a $3.5 trillion
plan, are enacted.40 Since Zandi’s July 2021 report, the $3.5 trillion
price tag has been pared backed significantly, and Zandi has said
a smaller package would yield a smaller number of new jobs, too.41
The Biden administration wants to further revive the Obama-era
clean energy loan program that was criticized for wasteful spend-
ing under the earlier president. Department of Energy Secretary
Janet Granholm recently announced that up to $40 billion in guar-
antees will be made available for a variety of clean-energy projects,
including wind, solar, and hydro power, advanced vehicles, geo-
thermal, and even nuclear energy.42 The plans for boosting govern-
ment-funded basic R&D (described more fully in the next section)
would also contain provisions for green energy.
The infrastructure bill that passed does not contain any measures,
such as a carbon tax or clean energy standards, which would force
power companies to move away from fossil fuels.43 The administra-
tion has promised that the companion spending bill will contain the
largest investment ever made by the United States in a clean energy
economy and hopes it will be passed intact in 2021. The House of
Representatives approved it on November 19, but it still faces sig-
nificant challenges in the Senate. Any compromise would proba-
bly involve scaling it back further, not killing it entirely. Most climate
change experts say that even if Biden gets everything he asks for
from Congress, it’s still too little, too late.
An Inclusive, Highly Tech-Skilled Workforce
and More Diffusion of Innovation
Like other critics of the tech industry, Biden bemoans its concentra-
tion in a select number of coastal areas, reducing the opportunities
for the broad mass of the middle class to get training and high pay-
ing jobs. His administration is well aware that that half of the jobs in
high-growth, high-wage sectors are concentrated in just forty-one
counties in the country. Many of these jobs are in the tech area or
depend on high-tech skills. Biden had originally proposed funding
for schools and community colleges to help build human capital, but
much of the original proposed funding was cut as the infrastructure
bill had been pared down to overcome Republican and moderate
Democratic opposition.
2.2 A Look at China: The Rising Country’s
Tech Ambitions
Chinese Premier Li Keqiang announced last March that China will
significantly increase its R&D spending over the next five years in
a push to make “major breakthroughs” in technology. The com-
ments came during a speech at China’s annual parliamentary “Two
Sessions” meeting, as Beijing laid out its priorities for the coming
years. Accordingly, China’s R&D spending will increase by more than
seven percent per year between now and 2025. R&D will subse-
quently account for a higher percentage of gross domestic product
(GDP) than in the previous five years.44
China’s far reaching ambitions are driven by several factors. Without
major advances in innovation, China is likely to be stuck in the mid-
dle-income trap. After the rapid advances of the past three decades,
any slowdown would result in a plateau in household incomes, mak-
ing it harder for China to achieve its goal of reaching Western living
standards for the bulk of its population by the hundredth anniversary
of Communist Party rule in 2049. While few rapidly developing coun-
tries avoid such a trap, becoming a world innovation leader would
allow for many more well-paid jobs to replace the low-skilled ones
that have characterized the Chinese economy for so long.
The country also faces a demographic crunch that makes inno -
vation imperative. Having benefited from the large bulge in work-
ing-age population during the last three decades, China now faces
a sharp drop-off in the proportion of workers by the mid-2020s and
a rapidly aging population. Boosting its productivity rate therefore
is vital for maintaining growth. Being on the cutting edge of inno-
vation means that it can be a world leader, reaping material advan-
tage along with prestige. China saw how US computing and Internet
prowess boosted its innovation, temporarily lifting its share of world
GDP in the 1990s. No doubt, China wants to replicate that first-mover
advantage for itself in the area of new emerging technologies, first
and foremost artificial intelligence.
Cutthroat Commercial and Geopolitical
Contest
More recently, Beijing’s added push to speed up its innovation
capacity is motivated by fears of the United States stopping the
country in its tracks, preventing it from becoming an innovation
leader. Since 2016, those fears are more than illusory, as the former
Trump administration blacklisted Chinese firms, cutting off supplies
of vital goods and services to China and waging an international
campaign against countries adopting communications equipment
from Chinese companies, most notably Huawei.45

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
13
Alarmed by the speed at which China has mastered and became a
leader in some technologies, the United States believes it still holds
a large advantage in computer chips, which could slow China’s
tech dominance. At this point in time, the country still lacks chip-
makers that can compete with the likes of Intel Corp. and Taiwan
Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., although it is pouring gigantic
resources into building up its own. “Every US market leader in the
computer chip industry now has a Chinese ‘doppelgänger’ that is
being positioned to take its place as a vendor,” according to the
Financial Times.46
Furthermore, China has launched an intensified effort to “de-Amer-
icanize” its supply chains. For many in the leadership who always
wanted to make China less dependent on others, the US trade
war and Huawei sanctions have arguably given decision-makers
in Beijing the necessary cover for something it has long desired.47
US-Chinese tensions have consolidated domestic industry sup-
port for “localizing production.” There is a countrywide consensus
that China must build a viable semi-conductor. Chinese companies
used to prefer US products because they were seen as superior;
increasingly, however, aspiring local chipmakers are working with
Chinese firms to perfect their inputs. This homegrown industry has
the potential to hurt US companies in the medium and long term.
China accounts for at least 25 percent of the sales of most US chip-
makers, which is why US companies such as Qualcomm are lob-
bying the Biden administration to weaken restrictions on sales to
China. Few in Beijing’s decision-making circles believe 100 percent
de-Americanization is a realistic goal in the near future, but the rapid
growth of Chinese start-ups in recent years shows the potential for
them to become semiconductor leaders, threatening US market
share in China and elsewhere in the world.
The country is becoming more competitive in other technologies
as well. Chinese cloud service providers are gaining speed rap-
idly, benefiting from government efforts to prioritize local compa-
nies. Y et China’s cloud service providers are expanding beyond the
home market. Their lower cost is a key factor in their expansion in
Europe and Australia, while cultural similarities are an attraction for
the Southeast Asian market. China’s Belt and Road project and its
related Digital Silk Road also create opportunities.
Some internal factors have influenced the rapid pace of China’s
advances. A report by the US National Security Commission on
Artificial Intelligence projects that “within the next decade, China
could surpass the United States as the world’s AI superpower,”48 and
notes that AI entrepreneurs in China benefit from a ready supply
of data to test their algorithms in an environment where the pub-
lic is less skeptical than in the West about embracing new innova-
tions, such as mobile payment platforms that provide ample data on
consumer habits.49 While Chinese consumers are becoming more
concerned about how the leading tech companies use their data,
they are more trusting of the government. The country has turned
into “a surprise leader in Asia on data privacy rules,” according to
the Financial Times, but the rules on data protection apply only to
tech companies and not the government. 50 The recently estab-
lished social credit system uses “big data” gathered on everybody’s
movements, buying habits, and opinions as voiced on social media
to determine trustworthiness. Apparently, “the goal is to construct a
high-trust society which rewards individuals and companies for fol-
lowing the law.”51 Notwithstanding regional variations, there are dis-
tinct social credit systems for citizens, businesses, and government
officials. Such a surveillance state—repugnant to Westerners—is tol-
erated by most Chinese because it reduces crime, while the govern-
ment uses it for social control and stability.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
14
The Unresolved US-China Competition
A more thorough study would be needed to catalogue just how
close China is to leading on other emerging technologies. The
fact that the country has made so much progress in such a short
amount of time on key issues like AI and genomics suggests,
however, that it is unlikely to be deterred by the sanctions and tar-
iffs that are being levied by others, especially the United States.
There are risks, too, for everybody, especially if the race gets out
of hand and feeds into a broader dispute that erupts into a hot
conflict. Technologically, China and the West could diverge, bring-
ing about a fragmentation of the world economy, and along with it,
subsequently lowering growth for everyone. Alternatively, a new
modus operandi could be established which favors cooperation
except on military-specific technology, pares the West’s tariffs and
sanctions by respective cooperation offers, and provides Chinese
market access across all sectors. Joint Sino-Western tech proj-
ects might be announced to overcome global challenges such
as climate change, poverty, and disease. For Western firms, it is
a chance to reenter the world’s biggest and soon-to-be richest
market. However, reality appears to be moving toward quite the
opposite dynamic and many observers warn of a new Cold War
on technology.
Case Study: China Is Becoming More Capable
in Biotech and Genomics
China’s biotechnology industry has logged double-digit
growth. The country has basically gone from being one of the
slowest to one of the fastest nations in the adoption of new
technologies in the biosphere. The sector is seen in China
and internationally as a core area of national scientific and
economic development. China’s healthcare industry over-
took Japan in 2016 to become the world’s second biggest
and is expected to surpass the US healthcare industry within
three years. Pharmaceutical spending in China totaled $137
billion in 2018 and will reach $140 billion to $170 billion by
2023. Under the “Made in China 2025 strategy”, which is
designed to advance the country’s technology and manufac-
turing goals, Beijing has set targets for domestic drug com-
panies to make progress on innovation and has streamlined
the respective approval process. In one important area of
biotech—namely geonomics—China is thought to be ahead
of the United States and other countries, particularly in the
use of CRISPR gene-editing technology. US scientists are
concerned because genomics will be increasingly important
for biotech breakthroughs and more individualistic health-
care, and will transform materials and manufacturing. The life
code-based global economy could account for more than 25
percent of global GDP by 2030, and close to 40 percent by
2040, including healthcare and medicine, agriculture, food,
materials, energy, and cosmetics.
Chinese President Xi Jinping arrives for the second plenary session of the National People’s Congress (NPC) at the
Great Hall of the People in Beijing, China. March, 2021. REUTERS/Y ew Lun Tian

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
15
2.3 A Look at the “Old” Continent:
Europe Aims for a Global Role in Shaping
a Democratic and Secure Tech Future
In the middle of this great power competition, the EU actively pro-
motes its human-centric vision for technology development and its
role as a trusted standard-setter, market regulator, and advocate for
democratic values. In the coming years, the European focus is most
likely to be on strengthening the EU’s position in global discussions
on technological and digital issues, and to avoid falling behind in the
global AI race.
Generally speaking, confidence in the EU governing structures also
collapsed during the COVID-19 pandemic.52 In this year’s State of
the Union speech, European Commission President Ursula von der
Leyen spoke to the EU’s struggles in achieving its goals and project-
ing its values.53 With the increased understanding of the challenges
and opportunities ahead for the EU, there is correspondingly more
political attention directed to how technology affects Europe’s role
in the world and how it could inform policy adjustments. How do
emerging technologies, in particular, impact the EU’s policies and
what is the role of diplomacy in amplifying Europe’s digital agenda?
At the heart of it is the quest to understand how power and influ-
ence are shaped at the intersection of technology and geopolitics.
The EU is pursuing technological development and autonomy from
a position of relative weakness given the scarcity of homegrown big
tech companies, while US and Chinese giants occupy critical net-
work nodes.54 Similarly, Europe’s research and innovation perfor-
mance has been falling behind. Especially in the fields of biotech-
nology, software, and the Internet, the United States has many more
companies than Europe (8.6 times more in biotechnology and 8.8
times more in software and the Internet); significantly higher R&D
investments (€34.3 billion vs €2.6 billion in biotechnology, respec-
tively; and more investments in software and the Internet (€92.7
billion vs €7.5 billion, respectively).55 The gap is especially wide in
late-stage innovation, and in Europe, there is a strong underlying
imbalance between early- and late-stage financing.56 The EU’s R&D
investment performance compared to its global competitors is cre-
ating concerns over future technological dependencies. Lately, von
der Leyen has further nudged member states toward greater mili-
tary independence from the United States and less reliance on Asia
for computer chips for similar reasons.57
In the end, R&D and innovation are still key drivers that will define
Europe’s future and performance regarding the key technolo -
gies to match the Continent’s green and digital ambitions, support
European competitiveness, and safeguard the security and health
of individuals. Currently the EU is developing a record number of
bills and legal initiatives trying to limit the power of global tech com-
panies. The European Commission’s current strategy is structured
around two key ideas: creating free movement of data to keep busi-
ness rolling, and rules of the game that protect against abuse.58 At
the core of the strategy is establishing coalitions of like-minded part-
ners, and these informal groupings have even begun to dominate
the EU’s foreign policy priorities.
The EU Struggle to Achieve Its Goals
Despite the emphasis on technology in the foreign policy sphere
and strategically oriented initiatives, the EU and its member states
still lack a comprehensive and coordinated digital and technolog-
ical foreign policy. Sure, the need for such a digital foreign policy
has been identified and decision makers are aware that its absence
inhibits the EU’s ability to unleash potential in shaping the global
technological future and project its influence on global rules and
norms. As pointed out, technology is a central component of the
strategic competition between the United States and China. In this
geopolitical and technological rivalry, Europe has not, however,
found its own role. Until now, the EU has taken the lead on respon-
sible digitalization by addressing challenges of the tech indus -
try through regulation, but to elevate these efforts globally, it must
build further on its role as a standard-setter to have a much stronger
voice outside the Union’s borders. Making Europe fit for the digital
age is not only necessary for advancing the Continent’s interests,
but also for European states having the capacity to ensure that the
technological future belongs to all citizens, everywhere. Many long-
term questions remain, such as addressing the taxation of the digi-
tal economy.
Playing a diminishing role in the technology field is deeply challeng-
ing for Europe. Currently, with the European Chips Act and other
digital initiatives, the European Commission is sending geopolitical
and economic signals about a stronger tech sovereignty. However,
many long-term questions remain concerning, for example, the
management of dependencies on foreign technology and balanc-
ing amid US-China competition.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
16
European policy and budgetary negotiations tend to highlight
the opportunities and responsibilities to initiate and drive ethical
debates within technology development and in the quest to solve
global challenges.59 Decision makers aim to shape the discourse on
global governance of technology at an early stage, including themes
such as global justice or democratic deliberation in the process. For
example, the EU has just proposed new rules and actions aiming to
turn Europe into the global hub for trustworthy artificial intelligence,60
and is continually advancing its cyber-deterrence posture to pre-
vent and respond to malicious activities. When it comes to ethical
questions, however, it is less about making a perfect set of rules for
machines or biotechnology, and more about reasonable disagree-
ment, plurality of perspectives, conflicting moral values, and images
of human beings and conceptions of a good life. There are ques-
tions about the role of humans in nature, but in the end, it is about
how societies choose wisely and justify their choices.
Case Study: Ethics and Emerging Technology
Many radical and emerging technologies lack societal impact
at this point. Both artificial intelligence and biotechnology, and
especially the combination of digital technologies and bio-
technology, are in the core of anticipated societal transforma-
tions. DNA reading and writing, biotechnical meat and meat
imitations, neural networks and deep learning, robotic farm-
ing, and autonomous logistics—the potential effects of such
technology advancements in the field are untold and beyond
the scope of this work. As seen in the section on China, this ris-
ing nation is fast becoming more and more capable in biotech
and genomics. A development that underscores an import-
ant point: innovation around biotechnology has expanded
beyond the traditional biotechnology leaders, such as the
United States and Japan, to include other countries, with
China standing as the most important new major player in
this space. In the global biotechnology market, Europe now
comes after the United States and the Asia-Pacific area (with
China and Japan at the forefront). At this stage of the COVID-
19 pandemic, research and development budgets have been
squeezed, especially in Europe, and recovery is slower.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
17
3. IMAGINING ALTERNATIVE FUTURES
T
o better understand the geopolitics of technology during
the next five to ten years, the authors present three scenar-
ios describing possible future developments. The projec-
tions portray a “not-so-distant future,” in which technologi-
cal transformation shapes a postpandemic world.
The first scenario, Postpandemic Letdown and Western Disarray
(The Local Picture), uncovers the digital divides and inequali -
ties within automated working life and COVID-19 aftershocks.
The second scenario, Europe in a Bipolar Tech World (The Global
Picture), reflects deepening US-China tensions and a drifting
toward a transatlantic split. The third scenario, Counting the Costs
of Technonationalism and the Balkanization of Cyberspace (The
Regional Picture), depicts regulation and global governance efforts
gone wrong. Together they broaden the horizon and underscore
the importance of good decision-making today.
3.1 Postpandemic Letdown and Western
Disarray (The Local Picture)
Hopes were high in the middle of 2021 that the West would pull out
of the pandemic and see accelerated growth and a return to relative
normalcy after a year of deep recession. Y et after a spurt of inclusive
growth, in which most segments saw gains, all the prepandemic
structural problems resurfaced, particularly the inequalities that had
grown worse under the pandemic.
Believing it is best not to depend too much on the vagaries of human
employment, employers raced to automate as much of their busi-
ness as possible. For the unskilled and semiskilled, whom everyone
depended on for basic services during the pandemic, it was a dou-
ble whammy. Initially, their wages had grown as employers had no
choice but to hike pay to attract any workers. Then, without the nec-
essary tech skills, they soon learned they were expendable when
firms began to automate their operations. Despite central banks’
monetary-easing efforts, there was no return to prepandemic full
employment. Worker participation rates dropped in the advanced
economies as many of the low-skilled workers grew frustrated in the
search for good-paying jobs. Over time, many of the unskilled and
semiskilled dropped out of the workforce or retired early.
The more tech-savvy workers had largely done well and saw
their wages improve in the aftermath of the pandemic. That ini-
tial improvement was not, however, replicated year after year.
Automation was now also impacting the more complex work pro-
cesses that formerly required skilled humans to operate. Although
not all their jobs were made redundant, there was enough disrup-
tion that even retained skilled workers felt the pervasive, growing
sense of job insecurity. The prepandemic pattern of capital being
remunerated much more than labor resumed. Business leaders
made the case that productivity gains from automation had boosted
GDP in advanced economies above prepandemic levels and gov-
ernment revenues as well, which helped with increased social wel-
fare demands.
Moreover, automation was helping firms deal with China, which
was increasingly unfriendly to Western businesses. After being the
other large economy that didn’t suffer a severe recession during
the pandemic, China’s growth sputtered in the years following the
initial outbreak of the coronavirus. Continuing outbreaks from dif-
ferent variants, such as delta or omicron, crippled parts of Chinese
industry. Xi Jinping’s data security reforms also hit China’s tech firms
hard. Beijing’s efforts to de-Americanize China’s supply chains—
part of the Made in China plan—caused more disruption. With ten-
sions increasing, US and Chinese firms sought to avoid any deal-
ings. European businesses were caught in the crosshairs, and some
bowed out of the Chinese market for fear of US secondary sanc-
tions while others concentrated on doing business with China and
sold off their US interests. With the contraction of global supply
chains, US and European firms saw an opportunity to eliminate jobs
through advanced automation technologies. Chinese businesses
were more constrained in investing in automation technologies as
the government was worried about higher unemployment. Robotics
and 3D printing also took off in the labor-saving effort by Western
businesses.
Workers’ Rights and Reforms
Smaller countries fared better than larger ones in stanching the
growing societal divisions that grew out of rapid technology
changes. To begin with, the income disparities were not as high in
the many smaller European countries that had invested in expen-
sive social welfare efforts. There was an understanding that auto-
mation could not be stopped—and shouldn’t be for the sake of
improved efficiencies and all-around productivity. After all, automa-
tion was a godsend for Western societies with low birth rates and
rapidly aging societies. Instead, the unskilled should be incentivized
to learn new skills. Indeed, the educational systems would have to
be completely remade. Everyone had a right to periodic sabbaticals
for months of learning new skills. Just as there was a right to health-
care and retirement, all workers had opportunities for lifelong learn-
ing. Businesses could see the benefits.
Larger European countries had a harder time coming around to
revamping the whole educational system, despite the benefits
these smaller countries were achieving. There was pushback by
businesses against another set of enhanced worker rights which
the private sector would have to shoulder. In these bigger societies,
reform had been more difficult for some time, adding to the chal-
lenge undertaking these reforms. In France, for example, where
the reelected Macron government had been trying to lessen the
burdens on employers, there was worry that enhancing the exist-
ing training pograms and relatively generous social welfare would
be too costly. Critics cited the low educational standards in job-de-
prived and socioeconomically disadvantaged areas as the real cul-
prit for workers not being able to easily upgrade their skills.
In the United States, deep political partisanship combined with a
decentralized educational system slowed any reforms. Americans

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
18
had seen sagging educational standards for some time, which fed-
eral government officials felt increasingly powerless to reverse
given much of the authority for the educational sector rested with
local and state officials. Conservatives decried the growing role
of government in the economy and saw the new proposed train-
ing-voucher scheme as pushing the country toward socialism and
higher taxes.
The growing numbers of college and high-school dropouts fueled
populism at both ends of the political spectrum—left and right—lead-
ing to a political crisis. When the unemployed staged a million-per-
son march on Washington, the National Guard was called out to
protect the protesters from armed right-wing militant groups. As
it was, the battles between protesters and the radicals resulted in
several hundred dead and much of downtown Washington vandal-
ized. Similar riots broke out across the country. At the congressio-
nal midterm elections, lawmakers calling for increased training pro-
grams and a top-to-bottom reform of the US education system were
elected. Businesses also saw that they had gone too far with auto-
mation and promised to retrain existing workers for new jobsinstead
of just firing them.
New Social Model Evolving
Aided by the lessening of fears of a super-competitive China,
Western leaders felt they had some maneuvering room to develop
a new social model countering what was the fragmenting effect of
the new technologies. Just as World War II had been important for
spurring a new social peace buttressed with healthcare and pen-
sion benefits for all, the postpandemic era ended up redefining
social welfare. Educational excellence would no longer be reserved
for the privileged who could pay for it. Everyone had a right to hav-
ing their abilities fully developed with no one being left behind. For
decades, teachers in many Western societies had been poorly paid.
That changed along with the importance of providing a good educa-
tion to everyone. Several big corporate CEOs took the lead in trying
to regain the trust of their employees by offering more social bene-
fits—paying for educational and retraining programs—and promis-
ing new employment to those whose jobs were eliminated through
automation.
With personal dignity being so connected with employment, the
concept of work was expanded. Volunteerism was honored and
treated as equivalent to paid work. Moreover, with the rapid expan-
sion of the educational sector, many jobs were created that did not
exist before. Small and medium-size businesses—not just the big
ones—became more adept at retraining and finding new oppor-
tunities for their workers. Where young workers once planned to
spend only a few years with an employer, they now found the advan-
tages of staying and benefiting from retraining so enticing that many
ended up, like their grandparents, staying with one firm for their
whole careers.
At times it had looked like some Western societies would be pulled
apart and there was no hope of finding a solution to inequalities.
Y et there was a deep, popular well of support for inclusiveness.
The pandemic had been an eye-opener for many of the deep divi-
sions in society. For the more tech-savvy, younger, and coming-of-
age generation, it was intolerable that the unskilled and semiskilled
should be “losers” in the latest technological revolution. Older gen-
erations—increasingly victims of automation—also began seeing
the benefits of a better social safety net. Over time, the fears fueling
populism dissipated and centrist politics came back with the main-
tenance of a social consensus, a broad-based popular expectation
for political leaders.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
19
3.2 Europe in a Bipolar Tech World
(The Global Picture)
In the run-up to the 2020 presidential election, Biden promised to
turn the clock back on Trump’s policy changes. When it came to
China, however, Biden piled onto Trump’s hostility toward Beijing.
US tariffs on Chinese imports have stayed in place despite Beijing’s
call for them to be reduced. The Biden administration, in coordina-
tion with the EU, has sanctioned China for its ruthless repression of
Uighurs in Xinjiang and taken additional measures to punish the
country for cyber hacking. Sino-US tensions continued to build in
the South China Sea and over Taiwan. With no sign of Beijing back-
ing down, the US administration lays out a strategy for restructur-
ing NATO to be targeted on Russia and China, combining its allies
from Asia and Europe into an enlarged, redefined alliance. Neither
European nor Asian allies are keen on these US ideas, but temper
their criticism to avoid offending the still predominant superpower.
Squeezed by Sino-US Escalating Tensions
With both Asians and Europeans less than enthusiastic, Washington
puts the enlarged NATO idea on the back burner. Y et Europeans
are less able to fend off Washington’s idea of resurrecting the Cold
War-era Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls
(CoCom), which was used to embargo exports of sensitive mate-
rials to communist countries. The US administration believes the
competition over emerging technologies is at the heart of the con-
flict with China. Many in Washington subscribe to the belief that the
Asian country has only become the leading tech competitor through
its theft of US intellectual property. Besides export controls of cut-
ting-edge tech, decision makers seek to wean Europe off China’s
tech exports. Denying the country’s tech giants market access to
Europe and the United States would, American strategists believe,
curb Chinese innovation.
Increased US extraterritorial measures mean that the EU finds it hard
to proceed with its goal of “strategic autonomy” and finding a “third
way” without European businesses incurring restrictions on access
to US markets. The US administration says it will offset any harsh
anti-Chinese measures by offering greater support to the Europeans
against Russia. Northern European export-dependent economies
are likely to be conflicted and divided in their reactions to such an
anti-Chinese push by Washington. The Baltic states, ever mindful of
the Russian threat, are an exception and welcome the increased US
commitment. At the same time, the Baltic states have been part of
the 16+1 format with China, a platform initiated by Beijing to foster
cooperation; although they lack deep ties with China, most of them
have been hoping (like other Eastern Europeans) for more Chinese
investment and trade. Under pressure from Washington, the coun-
tries of the region sign on to the US offer, sacrificing the possibility of
strong economic ties with the Asian giant.
By contrast, the Scandinavian nations and Germany find the
increased hostility toward China under Biden or any other subse-
quent US president very unwelcome. Berlin’s most important trad-
ing partner is China; Finland is the biggest EU investor in China in
proportion to the size of its economy, and China is Sweden’s larg-
est trading partner in Asia. Overall, the EU has become the country’s
biggest trading partner and the two sides—EU and China—recently
signed an upgraded trade deal, expanding the one that was signed
and then halted in 2021. Squeezed between the United States and
China, the Europeans—particularly Nordic nations and Germany—
would pay a stiff economic price for going along with any US stric-
tures against China and would use their diplomatic power to argue
for a course change in US foreign policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
20
Other EU countries are less economically dependent on China, but
resent US interference and push back against US extraterritorial
measures while professing their commitment to strong transatlan-
tic ties. The EU tries to walk a fine line and neither offend Beijing
nor Washington, finding it increasingly hard to defy American deci-
sion-makers on sanctions and tariffs against China without endan-
gering US/NATO security guarantees.
All European Governments on Edge
At home, the European social model is under increasing pressure.
Like the United States, many EU member states instituted new taxes
on the wealthy to cover budget shortfalls. While subsiding during
the first waves of the coronavirus, populism is on the upsurge again.
After the initial economic surge, European economies slow, giving
populism a new lease on life. The EU and immigrants are targets
for the renewed surges, and nationalists are gaining election victo-
ries in multiple member states. There is a growing sentiment in favor
of protectionism and the establishment of more border controls.
Eastern Europeans even begin refusing entry to European citizens
with immigrant backgrounds.
European Split on a Single Foreign Policy
Despite initial efforts to find a united middle ground, Europe splits
and wavers in the face of US pressure. France and the Baltic, one
or two of the Nordic, and several East European states try to tem-
per growing US antagonism, but share Washington’s worries about
a “hyperpuissance” in the East. Since Brexit, the United Kingdom
has been trying to open new markets in Asia, including in China, but
sees no real alternative to the United Sates remaining its closest ally.
London remains the first to always accede to US pressure.
The Baltic and East European governments worry that Russia will
take advantage of Western weakness and intervene in their coun-
tries. Moscow’s strong ties with China are seen as giving Putin
more self-confidence despite Russia playing a junior role to Beijing.
Germany and some of the Nordic states become even more ada-
mant in their belief that China is their economic lifeline. With Western
markets slowing, Asia looks to be the only outlet. Italy and some of
the Eastern European states like Hungary are also eager for new
Chinese investments, and hedge their bets.
Out with Strategic Autonomy, in with
Hedging
The growing split and mutual attacks by the two internal camps par-
alyze the EU. The initial rescue package that many observers saw as
a step toward greater integration is never repeated. The idea of stra-
tegic autonomy is forgotten. Enlargement is at a standstill despite
renewed calls from Ukraine, Georgia, and others seeking entry.
China’s deteriorating human rights record and saber-rattling against
Taiwan angers many European publics, sparking a growing popular
movement throughout Europe opposed to China. Germany seeks to
mediate, going along with some punitive measures against Beijing
and Moscow, but diluting others. Berlin and Paris publicly object to
US interference in EU affairs.
Europeans in both camps secretly welcome Chinese efforts to
invest in developing countries, hoping the economic assistance can
help stimulate economic activity and tamper migration even though
they fear the Chinese efforts will end up bolstering authoritarian-
ism throughout the world. Y et European countries don’t have the
means to engage even in their traditional backyards. Paris has given
up its fight against terrorism in the Sahel. Europe watches as Russia
and China increasingly call the shots in Africa and the Middle East.
Focused on battling China in East Asia, the US administration puts
the blame on Europe for these failures, without wanting to intervene
itself. The only united effort that all member states can still agree on
is beefing up maritime patrols in the Mediterranean to close the EU’s
external southern border.
In Washington, there is finger-pointing over who lost Europe. There’s
a growing realization that the United States overreached despite its
initial effort to rally the West. While in Europe, there is a worry about
the future of the European project. Both the United States and the
EU seek to paper over differences, but for China, the transatlantic
split is further evidence of Western decline, feeding the hardliners’
appetite for more aggressive actions to expand Chinese influence
in the region and beyond.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
21
3.3 Counting the Costs of
Technonationalism and the Balkanization
of Cyberspace (The Regional Picture)
Two trends come together: digital sovereignty and fighting disin-
formation. At one time, Western democracies were committed to
an open, free Internet with minimal government involvement. That
was, however, before the social media channels became the arena
for hatred and disinformation. The Europeans got angry when the
big US tech giants did such a poor job policing it. In the United
States, Republican politicians accused the tech companies of being
biased, banning Trump and other conservatives from Twitter as well
as other outlets. At the same time, many moderate politicians, like
their European counterparts, thought Facebook, Google, and others
could do a better job eliminating hate speech. Worldwide, “Internet
sovereignty” was catching on. Already in 2019, thirty-three gov-
ernments shut down the Internet 213 times, up from the previous
year. Whereas “Internet sovereignty” was once associated just with
China’s “Great Firewall” of censorship, ,it became popular with other
governments, such as India, Russia, Turkey, and Indonesia, too.
While there were varying degrees of government control over the
Internet, the trend line became clearer and darker as democracies
moved in the direction of authoritarianism, believing that liberal
markets were no model for the digital age. While they still decried
China’s growing repression and use of social media to target dis-
sidents, the Internet was seen as a threat to democracy, too, rather
than a bulwark—the way it was originally portrayed. For Western
elites, the unregulated digital space was a conveyor belt of disin-
formation, making it virtually impossible to govern. The French post-
pandemic presidential election, for instance, was marred by wide-
spread disinformation campaigns both by domestic as well as
international foes of President Macron. The newly elected president
blamed his near-defeat (it was only on the recount that he emerged
victorious) on the disinformation coming from right-wing extremists.
Anti-immigrant groups throughout Europe were active in trying to
defeat him and other liberal forces.
The right-wing, Trump-supported attack on the Capitol on January
6, 2021, had been pivotal in persuading lawmakers that there had
to be more oversight of social media. For many progressives in the
Democratic Party, the tech companies were too big and monopo-
listic anyway and should be broken up. It was only a half step for
them to call for more regulation of the companies to prevent the
spread of domestic radicalism. The United States also instituted
curbs on Chinese technology, including their apps. The government
in Beijing moved to tightly regulate China’s tech companies’ opera-
tions abroad, convincing US regulators that those companies could
not be trusted with data gathered in the United States. Over time, US
tech companies saw their market share dwindle in China and Asia,
as more and more US government regulatory curbs encouraged
Chinese tech companies to leave the US market, too.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
22
While it started as a well-meaning effort to prevent disinformation
and propagation of violent extremism, the increasing regulation
began to fracture the Internet into at least three largely separate
regimes, reinforcing the forces of technonationalism and protection-
ism. Because of security fears, the United States and China became
highly protected tech markets; Europe has less of a choice, not hav-
ing tech champions of its own, so both US and Chinese tech compa-
nies operated there, but under EU regulatory control. The economic
costs of such a fractionalizing of the Internet were staggering. Before
all the new regulation, a report by Japan’s Ministry of Economy,
Trade, and Industry (METI) had estimated that at least half of all trade
in services is ICT-enabled (between 50 and 56 percent); digital com-
merce would account for 25 percent of global trade by 2025; and
that this percentage would likely accelerate by an order of magni-
tude over the coming decade.61
Efforts to negotiate globally agreed standards governing the use of
software codes, data sharing, and/or commercialization of private
content and storage of data, as well as minimally accepted standards
on privacy—vital for the continuing flow of data—broke down or
became too complex in view of the proliferation of national require-
ments. Digital commerce depends on open commercial, scientific,
and academic data flows. Without such flows, joint research efforts
also ceased to exist. Increasingly, scientists were only working with
counterparts in their own country, not those outside. In particular, the
number of Chinese students and researchers in the United States
began to dwindle significantly.
The medical and other supply chain shocks from COVID-19, com-
bined with the growing US distrust of China, lent support to the
increasing protectionism and breakdown in flows of information and
people. In addition, the United States sought to export its standards.
Even before the recent regulatory-driven breakup, the American
decision-makers had tried to mobilize support for anti-China “clean
networks” banning Huawei infrastructure. It wasn’t always success-
ful, however. China offered too many economic enticements for
countries even in the United States’ own backyard—Latin America—
for all countries in the region to fall in line with Washington’s dictates.
Europeans Decide to Fight Back
Europeans began to worry about their own ability to trade—not just
with China but other countries in China’s orbit—and stayed out of the
US clean networks program themselves, even though they followed
many of the guidelines for their domestic systems due to worries,
for example, about the security of data running over Huawei-built
infrastructure. Brussels therefore began efforts to counterbalance
the fractionalizing of cyberspace, calling on Washington and Beijing
to support an international effort to map the future of the world’s
climate, using the latest breakthroughs in quantum computing.
Taking a leaf out of its own history, EU leaders thought cooperation
on climate—a pressing interest for all, like the establishment of the
European Coal and Steel Community after WWII—could decrease
the centrifugal dynamics of technonationalism.
At first, Washington was wary, but when it saw Brussels sign an
agreement with Beijing for a joint research effort, it wanted in. The
EU said there would be no proprietary information. The detailed out-
put—a mapping of likely effects of climate change over the next hun-
dred years—would be a free good for countries participating in the
project. Such data would be the basis for policy decided by the next
UN Climate Conference, which the Europeans were scheduled to
host. Any country not participating would be at a disadvantage. The
fruits of an international brain trust using the latest quantum comput-
ing could demonstrate how cooperation was much more powerful
than competition and conflict, curbing for a time at least the grow-
ing US-China hostility. Without more international cooperation on
climate change, decision makers risked incalculable harm to every-
one’s future. Were Americans really ready to balkanize the Internet
if it meant undermining prospects for global innovation that could
help save the planet? Moreover, EU leaders were confident that
young people everywhere would side with them, putting pressure
on Washington and Beijing to limit their competition and explore ave-
nues for an era of great power cooperation.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
23
Mathew Burrows, PhD, serves as the director of Foresight in the
Scowcroft Strategy Initiative and as the co-director of New American
Engagement Initiative within the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center
for Strategy and Security. In 2013 he retired from a 28-year long
career in the State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA), the last 10 years of which he spent at the National Intelligence
Council (NIC), the premier analytic unit in the US Intelligence
Community. In 2007, Burrows was appointed Counselor, the num-
ber three position in the NIC, and was the principal drafter for the NIC
publication Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds, which received
widespread recognition and praise in the international media. In
2005, he was asked to set up and direct the NIC’s new Long Range
Analysis Unit, which is now known as the Strategic Futures Group.
Julian Mueller-Kaler is a resident senior fellow with the GeoTech
Center and with the Scowcroft Strategy Initiative, which provides
actionable foresight, global risk analysis, and innovative strategies
to a community of policymakers, business leaders, and citizens. At
the Council, he studies the implications of emerging technologies on
society and politics, researches the future of the liberal international
order, and leads the GeoTech Center’s efforts to evaluate China’s role
as a global citizen. Before that, Mueller-Kaler worked as a consul-
tant in the office of the German Executive Director at the World Bank
Group, graduated as a Fulbright-Schuman scholar from Georgetown
University’s School of Foreign Service, and acted as co-chair of the
Transatlantic Policy Symposium 2019 in Washington, D.C.
Kaisa Oksanen, PhD, is a Senior Researcher at the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs of Finland, Unit for Policy Planning and Research.
Her key expertise is related to strategic foresight and technolog-
ical transformation. Previously she served as a Chief Specialist at
the Prime Minister’s Office, working with long-term decision-mak-
ing and Government’s strategy work. Before that, she worked at
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, working with foresight
and bio-economy transition. Her background is in social and polit-
ical sciences, and she has done research on systemic innovation
and science and innovation policy. She is also the vice chair of the
Board of the University of Jyväskylä. She has authored several arti-
cles and books on innovation, transformation of work, and regional
development.
Ossi Piironen is a Senior Researcher at the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs of Finland, Unit for Policy Planning and Research. He holds
a PhD in political science, the thesis on socio-political quantification
and international datasets. He has published in various peer review
journals and has several years of experience in teaching global
governance and methodology of political science at the University
of Helsinki, Finland. His latest co-authored book (with Tero Erkkilä)
“Rankings and Global Knowledge Governance: Higher Education,
Innovation and Competitiveness” was published in 2018. His current
responsibilities include foresight activities as well as analysis of new
technologies’ impact on foreign policy and diplomacy.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report was launched at a technology foresight conference in
Washington D.C. on Wednesday, December 8, 2021, marking a year
long cooperation between the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland
and the Atlantic Council GeoTech Center. Special thanks goes to the
Nokia Corporation without whom the conference would not have
been possible. The authors are grateful for this continuing collab-
oration and would like to thank Stephanie Wander, Antti Niemelä,
Christopher Burk, and Giulia Neaher in particular. Lastly, institutional
thanks goes to the Atlantic Council GeoTech Center, the Scowcroft
Strategy Initiative, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland, and the
Embassy of Finland in Washington D.C.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
24
ENDNOTES
1 M. Burrows and J. Mueller-Kaler, Smart Partnerships amid Great Power Competition,
Atlantic Council, January 12, 2021,
https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/
smart-partnerships-amid-great-power-competition/.
2 S. Smit, T. Tacke, S. Lund, J. Manyika, and L. Thiel, “The Future of Work in
Europe: Automation, Workforce Transitions, and the Shifting Geography of
Employment,” McKinsey Global Institute, June, 10, 2020, https://www.mckinsey.
com/featured-insights/future-of-work/the-future-of-work-in-europe.
3 C. Frey and M. Osborne, “The Future of Employment: How Susceptible Are Jobs
to Computerization?,” Oxford Martin School, Oxford University, 2013, https://www.
oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Employment.pdf.
4 D. West, “Will Robots and AI Take Y our Job? The Economic and Political
Consequences of Automation,” Brookings Institution, April 18, 2018, https://
www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2018/04/18/will-robots-and-ai-take-
your-job-the-economic-and-political-consequences-of-automation/.
5 A. Smith and J. Anderson, “AI, Robotics, and the Future of Jobs,” Pew Research
Center, August 6, 2014, http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/08/06/future-of-jobs/.
6 cf. K. Oksanen, Government Report on the Future, Part 1: A Shared
Understanding of the Transformation of Work, Finnish Prime
Minister’s Office, Government Publications Series 13c, 2017.
7 M. Coren, “Truckers Think Automation Won’t Take Their Jobs for
40 Y ears. Silicon Valley Strongly Disagrees,” Quartz, December 7,
2016, https://qz.com/854117/truckers-think-automation-wont-take-
their-jobs-for-40-years-silicon-valley-strongly-disagrees/.
8 cf. N. Kitroeff, “Robots Could Replace 1.7 Million American Truckers in
the Next Decade,” Los Angeles Times, September 25, 2016, https://
www.latimes.com/projects/la-fi-automated-trucks-labor-20160924/.
9 cf. Q. Bui, “Map: The Most Common Job in Every State,” NPR, February
5, 2015, https://www.npr.org/sections/money/2015/02/05/382664837/
map-the-most-common-job-in-every-state.
10 M. Muro and J. Whiton, “Geographic Gaps Are Widening while U.S.
Economic Growth Increases,” Analysis of Moody’s Analytics data in The
Avenue (blog), Brookings Institution, January 23, 2018, https://www.
brookings.edu/blog/the-avenue/2018/01/22/uneven-growth/.
11 cf. R. Florida, “America’s Polarization Threatens to Undo Us,” Bloomberg Media
Group, CityLab (newsletter and website), January 25, 2018,
https://www.citylab.com/equity/2018/01/americas-
polarization-threatens-to-undo-us/551483/.
12 M. Muro et al., “Biden-voting Counties Equal 70% of America’s Economy. What
Does This Mean for the Nation’s Political-Economic Divide?,” The Avenue
(blog), Brookings Institution, November 10, 2020, https://www.brookings.edu/
blog/the-avenue/2020/11/09/biden-voting-counties-equal-70-of-americas-
economy-what-does-this-mean-for-the-nations-political-economic-divide/.
13 cf. Florida, “America’s Polarization Threatens to Undo Us.”
14 cf. C. Hendrickson et al., „Countering the Geography of Discontent:
Strategies for Left-behind Places,” Brookings Institution, November
2018, https://www.brookings.edu/research/countering-the-
geography-of-discontent-strategies-for-left-behind-places/.
15 Joseph E. Stieglitz, “Globalization and Its New Discontents,”
Commentary, Project Syndicate (service), August 5, 2016.
16 H. Barnard et al., „Summary, UK Poverty 2018,” Joseph Rowntree Foundation,
Annual Report, December 4, 2018, https://www.jrf.org.uk/report/uk-poverty-2018.
17 D. Spannagel et al., “Aktivierungspolitik und Erwerbsarmut,” Wirtschafts-
und Sozialwissenschaftliches Institute Report, No. 36 (2017); and
“Drei Millionen Erwerbstätige verdienen zum Leben zu wenig,”
Zeit Online, January 24, 2015, https://www.zeit.de/gesellschaft/
zeitgeschehen/2015-01/erwerbsarmut-einkommen-armut-deutschland.
18 F. Fukuyama, “Against Identity Politics,” Foreign Affairs, September/October 2018,
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/americas/2018-08-14/
against-identity-politics-tribalism-francis-fukuyama, retrieved.
19 M. Burrows and J. Mueller-Kaler, “The Dangers of Economic Decoupling,”
Atlantic Council, March 14, 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/
content-series/smart-partnerships/the-dangers-of-decoupling/.
20 cf. E. Porter, “The Hard Truths of Trying to ‚Save‘ the Rural Economy,”
New Y ork Times, December 14, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/
interactive/2018/12/14/opinion/rural-america-trump-decline.html.
21 Finnish Government, Government Report on the Future, Part 2: Solutions
to the Transformation of Work, Finnish Government Publication Series
33, 2018; and Oksanen, Government Report on the Future, Part 1.
22 Varieties in Democracy (V-Dem), Autocratization Turns Viral: Democracy
Report 2021, V-Dem Institute, University of Gothenburg, March
2021, https://www.v-dem.net/media/filer_public/74/8c/748c68ad-
f224-4cd7-87f9-8794add5c60f/dr_2021_updated.pdf.
23 V-Dem., Autocratization Turns Viral.
24 V-Dem., Autocratization Turns Viral.
25 cf.: J. Anderson and L. Rainie, Many T ech Experts Say Digital
Disruption Will Hurt Democracy, Pew Research Center, February
21, 2020, https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2020/02/21/many-
tech-experts-say-digital-disruption-will-hurt-democracy/.
26 cf. A. Kharpal, “China Passes Major Data Protection Law as
Regulatory Scrutiny on T ech Sector Intensifies,” CNBC, August
20, 2021, https://www.cnbc.com/2021/08/20/china-passes-key-
data-protection-law-as-regulatory-scrutiny-increases.html.
27 Y. Hu, “China’s Personal Information Protection Law and Its Global Impact,”
Diplomat, August 31, 2021,
https://thediplomat.com/2021/08/chinas-personal-
information-protection-law-and-its-global-impact.
28 cf. H. Dorwart, G. Zanfir-Fortuna, and C. Girot, “China’s New Comprehensive
Data Protection Law: Context, Stated Objectives, Key Provisions,” Blog,
Future of Privacy Forum, August 20, 2021, https://fpf.org/blog/chinas-new-
comprehensive-data-protection-law-context-stated-objectives-key-provisions/.
29 P. Ahlin, „Information and Revolution,” V-Dem Policy Brief No. 14,
2017, https://www.v-dem.net/media/filer_public/24/e5/24e51181-ca2b-
4d00-8505-bd615b72112b/v-dem_policybrief_14_2017.pdf.
30 A. Hautamäki and K. Oksanen, “Digital Platforms for Restructuring the
Public Sector,” in Collaborative Value Co-creation in the Plaform Economy,
eds., Anssi Smedlund, Arto Lindblom, and Lasse Mitronen (Singapore:
Springer, 2018), 91-108, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8956-5_5.
31 cf. Finnish Government, Government Report on the Future, Part 2.
32 cf. M. Burrows and J. Mueller-Kaler, “Tech Cooperation at a Precarious Junction,”
Atlantic Council, March 14, 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/content-
series/smart-partnerships/tech-cooperation-at-a-precarious-junction/.
33 cf. M. Burrows and J. Mueller-Kaler, “Europe’s Third Way,” Atlantic
Council, March 14, 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/
content-series/smart-partnerships/europes-third-way/.
34 cf. D. Sevastopulo and G. Long, “US Development Bank Strikes Deal to
Help Ecuador Pay China Loans,” Financial Times, January 14, 2021, https://
www.ft.com/content/affcc432-03c4-459d-a6b8-922ca8346c14.
35 cf. O. Stuenkel, “Latin American Governments Are Caught in the Middle of the
U.S.-China T ech War,” Foreign Policy, February 26, 2021, https://foreignpolicy.
com/2021/02/26/latin-america-united-states-china-5g-technology-war/.
36 cf. “Climate Commitments Are ‘Not Enough’, says Birol,” World
Nuclear News, April 23, 2021, https://www.world-nuclear-news.org/
Articles/Climate-commitments-are-not-enough-,-says-Birol.
37 cf. B. Klein, “Biden Will Soon Sign the Infrastructure Bill into Law.
Here are Key Things to Know,” CNN, updated November 15, 2021,
https://www.cnn.com/politics/live-news/infrastructure-bill-joe-biden-
signing-11-15-21/h_22917d381a894f2e03c53b60a3dfc7aa.
38 K. Lobosco and T. Luhby, “Here’s What’s in the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Bill,” CNN, November 15, 2021, https://www.cnn.
com/2021/07/28/politics/infrastructure-bill-explained/index.html.
39 cf. C. Clifford, “‘Green’ Jobs in Biden’s Infrastructure Bill: What They
Could Pay and How to Be Eligible,” CNBC, December 4, 2021, https://
www.msn.com/en-us/money/markets/green-jobs-in-bidens-infrastructure-
bill-what-they-could-pay-and-how-to-be-eligible/ar-BB1fzrpo.
40 cf. M. Zandi and B. Y aros, “Macroeconomic Consequences of
the Infrastructure and Budget Reconciliation Plans,” Moody’s
Analytics, July 21, 2021, https://www.moodysanalytics.com/-/media/
article/2021/macroeconomic-consequences-infrastructure.pdf.
41 cf. D. Dale, „Fact Check: Biden Makes Misleading Claim about Job-creation
Estimate,” CNN, October 9, 2021, https://www.cnn.com/2021/10/09/politics/
fact-check-biden-moodys-jobs-infrastructure-reconciliation/index.html.
42 cf. L. Aratani, “Biden’s Energy Department Revives Loan Program to Boost
Clean Technology,” Guardian, March 4, 2021, https://www.theguardian.
com/us-news/2021/mar/04/biden-energy-department-loan-program.
43 cf. K. Stacey, “US Set to Wrap Up COP26 with Little to Show
on Climate,” Financial Times, November 7, 2021, https://www.
ft.com/content/1e43cf93-9a75-443d-950b-361d614c217f.
44 cf. A. Kharpal, “China Spending on Research and Development to
Rise 7% per Y ear in Push for Major T ech Breakthroughs,” CNBC, March
5, 2021, https://www.cnbc.com/2021/03/05/china-to-boost-research-
and-development-spend-in-push-for-tech-breakthroughs.html.
45 cf. E. Luce, “Trump Is Serious about US Divorce from China,”
Financial Times, September 19, 2019, https://www.ft.com/
content/27b0a5e2-dab6-11e9-8f9b-77216ebe1f17.
46 C. Ting-Fang and L. Li, “US-China T ech War: Beijing’s Secret
Chipmaking Champions,” Financial Times, May 12, 2021, https://
www.ft.com/content/795060b7-1932-4491-af6f-d983e3cffb50.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
25
47 cf. Burrows and Mueller-Kaler, “The Dangers of Decoupling.”
48 National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence, The Final Report,
2021, https://reports.nscai.gov/final-report/table-of-contents/.
49 National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence, The Final Report.
50 cf. S. Sacks and L. Laskai, „China’s Privacy Conundrum,” Slate,
February 7, 2019, https://slate.com/technology/2019/02/china-
consumer-data-protection-privacy-surveillance.html.
51 cf. A. Chipman Koty, “China’s Corporate Social Credit System: What Businesses
Need to Know,” China Briefing, November 5, 2019, https://www.china-
briefing.com/news/chinas-corporate-social-credit-system-how-it-works/.
52 cf. S. Dennison and J. Puglieri, “Crisis of Confidence: How Europeans
See Their Place in the World,” European Council on Foreign
Relations, Policy Brief, June 9, 2021, https://ecfr.eu/publication/crisis-
of-confidence-how-europeans-see-their-place-in-the-world/.
53 European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, State of the Union
Address, European Commission Press Corner (website), September 15, 2021,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/SPEECH_21_4701.
54 cf. A. K. Jakobsson and M. Stolz, Principled Big T ech: European
Pursuit of T echnological Autonomy, Finnish Institute of International
Affairs (FIAA) Report, 2021, 107–27´; and N. Helwig, ed., Strategic
Autonomy and the Transformation of the EU: New Agendas for Security,
Diplomacy, Trade and Technology, FIIA Report 67, 2021, 105–129.
55 cf. “EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard,” European
Commission, Economics of Industrial Research and Innovation,
R&D Monitoring (website), JRC/DG R&I, January 1, 2020.
56 F. Le Deu and J. Santos da Silva, “Biotech in Europe: A Strong Foundation
for Growth and Innovation,” McKinsey & Company, August 23, 2019, https://
www.mckinsey.com/industries/pharmaceuticals-and-medical-products/our-
insights/biotech-in-europe-a-strong-foundation-for-growth-and-innovation.
57 European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, State of the Union Address.
58 cf. “A Europe Fit for the Digital Age,” European Commission (website), accessed
November 2, 2021,
https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/europe-fit-digital-age_en.
59 cf. “The European Group on Ethics in Science and New T echnologies,” European
Commission (website), July 7, 2021, https://ec.europa.eu/info/research-and-
innovation/strategy/support-policy-making/scientific-support-eu-policies/ege_en.
60 cf. “Europe Fit for the Digital Age: Commission Proposes New Rules and
Actions for Excellence and Trust in Artificial Intelligence,” Press Release,
European Commission, Press Corner (website), April 21, 2021, https://
ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_21_1682.
61 cf. R. Manning, “T echnology Trends Are Reshaping Trade,” Issue Brief, Atlantic
Council, July 7, 2020,
https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/
technology-trends-are-reshaping-trade/.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
26
*Executive Committee Members

List as of November 22, 2021

CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers

EXECUTIVE
CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones

PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe

EXECUTIVE VICE
CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley

VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*Richard W. Edelman
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
*John J. Studzinski

TREASURER
*George Lund

DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
*Peter Ackerman
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
*Rafic A. Bizri
*Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
R. Nicholas Burns
*Richard R. Burt
Teresa Carlson
James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
Ralph D. Crosby, Jr.
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Thomas R. Eldridge
Mark T. Esper
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Courtney Geduldig
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
Amir A. Handjani
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Andrew Hove
Mary L. Howell
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Henry A. Kissinger
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
*Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Dambisa F. Moyo
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
W. DeVier Pierson
Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell
dddMcCormick
Ashraf Qazi
Robert Rangel
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
Olin Wethington
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim

HONORARY
DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
UNPACKING THE GEOPOLITICS OF TECHNOLOGY
27
