
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
TOWARD A
DEMOCRATIC
TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE: An Innovation Edge
that Favors Freedom
Ash Jain and Matthew Kroenig

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
II ATLANTIC COUNCIL
The Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security works to develop
sustainable, nonpartisan strategies to address the most important
security challenges facing the United States and the world. The Center
honors General Brent Scowcroft’s legacy of service and embodies his
ethos of nonpartisan commitment to the cause of security, support for US
leadership in cooperation with allies and partners, and dedication to the
mentorship of the next generation of leaders.
This report is a product of the Scowcroft Center’s Democratic Order
Initiative, which is aimed at reenergizing American global leadership and
strengthening cooperation among the world’s democracies in support of a
rules-based democratic order.
This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic Council
Policy on Intellectual Independence. The authors are solely responsible for
its analysis and recommendations. The Atlantic Council and its donors do
not determine, nor do they necessarily endorse or advocate for, any of this
report’s conclusions.
ISBN-13: 978-1-61977-238-0
© 2022 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights reserved. No part
of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means without permission in writing from the Atlantic Council, except in the
case of brief quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please
direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street NW, 12th Floor
Washington, DC 20005
For more information, please visit
www.AtlanticCouncil.org.
Cover: Freepik

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
IIIATLANTIC COUNCIL
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
TOWARD A
DEMOCRATIC
TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE: An Innovation Edge
that Favors Freedom
Ash Jain and Matthew Kroenig

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
1 ATLANTIC COUNCIL

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
1ATLANTIC COUNCIL
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE 1ATLANTIC COUNCIL
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2
II. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 4
III. THE NEED FOR A DEMOCRATIC 9
 TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
IV. DTA’S PRIMARY LINES OF EFFORT 11
V. ORGANIZATION 21
VI. CHALLENGES AND OBSTACLES 23
VII. CONCLUSION 25
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 26
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 26

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
2 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1 Ash Jain and Matthew Kroenig, Present at the Re-Creation, Atlantic Council, October 30, 2019,
https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/Present-at-the-Recreation.pdf
F
ollowing World War II, the United States and its demo-
cratic allies established and defended a rules-based
international system. This system was expanded and
deepened after the end of the Cold War. Despite its short-
comings, it has proven unmatched in its ability to deliver
peace, prosperity, and freedom to the United States and
much of the world. The global order, however, is at an
inflection point. It is being confronted by revisionist auto-
cratic powers — China and Russia — and, at the same time,
contending with a range of other challenges, from emerg-
ing and disruptive technologies to climate change to a lack
of confidence in open-market democracy.
The rules-based system has been successful in ways that
its founders could not have imagined. But, as the authors of
this report have set forth in a series of related publications,
this system must be revitalized and adapted for a new era.1
Inclusive institutions, including the United Nations (UN),
have been limited in their effectiveness, in part because
of obstruction by autocracies that systematically violate
key tenants of the rules-based system. New institutions
are needed that bring together powerful and likeminded
democracies – those that are willing to play by certain rules
and use their collective influence to positively shape the
future of the system.
Such an approach is particularly necessary to address the
challenges of emerging technologies. The world is expe-
riencing a Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR). An array of
new technologies are being simultaneously developed
and advanced, such as artificial intelligence (AI), quantum
computing, synthetic biology, additive manufacturing,
fintech, and robotics. As with previous advances, these
new technologies offer great promise but also threaten
serious downside risks. Fire can fuel stoves and keep
people warm, but it can also be used to torch villages.
Similarly, AI algorithms can be employed to run efficient
smart cities of the future, but can also guide lethal and
This is the fourth report in a five-part series of Atlantic Council publications, as part of a project on revitaliz-
ing the rules-based international system and positioning the United States and its allies to succeed in an era
of strategic competition.
The first publication, Present at the Re-Creation: A Global Strategy for Revitalizing, Adapting, and Defending
a Rules-Based International System, sets forth an overarching global strategy for the United States and its
allies to uphold the rules-based system by strengthening cooperation among the world’s democracies, while
seeking to cooperate with other global powers on areas of common concern.
The second report, From the G7 to a D-10: Strengthening Democratic Cooperation for Today’s Challenges,
proposes the creation of a new D-10 core group of influential democracies across North America, Europe,
and the Indo-Pacific, aimed at deepening strategic collaboration on the most pressing challenges facing the
rules-based order.
The third report, An Alliance of Democracies: From Concept to Reality in an Era of Strategic Competition,
suggests that an Alliance of Democracies could foster cooperation among a larger group of nations com-
mitted to shared values and goals, potentially as a standing body stemming from the Biden administration’s
series of democracy summits.
This report calls for a Democratic Technology Alliance that would ensure that the free world prevails in the
race for advanced technologies by jointly investing in innovation, countering unfair practices, and developing
rules and norms consistent with democratic values.
This fifth and final report, A Democratic Trade Partnership: Ally Shoring to Counter Coercion and Secure
Supply Chains, proposes an integrated economic framework for leading democracies and other partners to
reduce strategic dependency on revisionist autocracies, coordinate on economic challenges, and foster free,
fair, and secure trade.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
3ATLANTIC COUNCIL
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
destructive autonomous weapons systems. The central
question is how can the United States and its allies harness
these advanced technologies for good while successfully
managing their potential dangers?
Among the greatest challenges in the area of technology
are those posed by China. As it acts to challenge the rules-
based international system, Beijing is pursuing a system-
atic effort to win the race for advanced technologies, and
it appears to be leading in several key areas. China has
invested heavily in research and development in advanced
technologies, from AI to quantum computing to hypersonic
missiles, while also gaining advantages through unfair
practices, including the widespread theft of intellectual
property (IP).
China’s increasing capabilities in the technology realm
pose significant risks for the United States and its demo-
cratic allies and partners. These risks are evident
across three main areas: defense and national secu-
rity, economics, and values. Beijing is using its increas-
ingly advanced technological capabilities to develop
more sophisticated weapons systems. China’s leadership
in advanced technologies could help fuel its economic
growth and render much of the world dependent on it for
critical technologies. Beijing is also employing new tech-
nologies in ways that are inconsistent with democratic
norms, such as facial recognition technology to assert
greater surveillance of its citizens, and is exporting these
technologies to other autocracies.
To be sure, not every aspect of China’s role in developing
advanced technology is cause for concern. Efforts by
Chinese scholars to develop AI for medical diagnostics,
for example, could constructively advance scientific knowl-
edge and provide health benefits for people around the
world. The challenges posed by China and other autocra-
cies, including Russia, stem from their disregard of inter-
national norms and systematic attempts to undermine key
elements of the rules-based order.
The nation or group of nations that are first to develop and
harness the technologies of the 4IR will enjoy a sustained
economic, military, and geopolitical advantage. The first
three industrial revolutions originated in the West and
helped propel democracies to a position of global leader-
ship that has lasted for several centuries. If leading democ-
racies are able to maintain their technological edge, they will
be well-positioned to sustain their geopolitical, economic,
and military advantages and uphold the rules-based interna-
tional system. If, on the other hand, the Chinese Communist
Party (CCP) succeeds in deploying advanced technologies
ahead of the democratic world, it will be in a much stronger
position to advance a China-centric system that is more
consistent with its autocratic values. Indeed, the strategic
competition between democracy and autocracy may ulti-
mately be decided in the technological domain.
For the United States to prevail in this competition,
it must successfully harness the technologies of the
Fourth Industrial Revolution. But to compete effectively,
the United States cannot act alone. It must work closely
with democratic allies and partners to leverage shared
capabilities and resources, and implement joint strat-
egies and policies that are strategically aligned. Several
efforts have been initiated to help strengthen democratic
cooperation on the technologies of the 4IR, including
through the G7, the Quad, and the US-EU Trade and
Technology Council. However, while valuable, these
efforts have been limited in geographic and techno-
logical scope. What is missing is an integrated frame-
work for technology cooperation that brings together
leading democracies to advance a holistic, coherent,
and effective set of strategies across a range of domains.
The nation or group of nations that
are first to develop and harness the
technologies of the Fourth Industrial
Revolution will enjoy a sustained
economic, military, and geopolitical
advantage.

The United States and leading democracies across North
America, Europe, and the Indo-Pacific should establish
a new Democratic Technology Alliance (DTA). Bringing
together the world’s most technologically advanced
democracies, such an alliance would foster cooperation
across a wide range of the most critical and emerging tech-
nologies, including AI, quantum, 5G, biotech, semiconduc-
tors, nanotechnology, hypersonics, and others.
The DTA should focus on three major lines of effort. First, it
should strengthen innovation ecosystems in the free world
through joint research and development, increased data
sharing, and forging a common approach to technology
regulation. Second, it should limit China’s unfair technology
advantages by developing common approaches to invest-
ment screening, IP theft, export controls, outbound invest-
ment, and cybersecurity. Third, the DTA should follow a
two-track path for establishing global technology norms:
seeking agreement on rules and norms among leading
democracies, while also seeking to engage autocratic
powers from a unified position of strength to negotiate a
more inclusive set of global norms.
Through a new technology alliance, the United States and
its allies can work together to ensure that democracies
maintain their technological edge and foster new technol-
ogies in a manner consistent with democratic values, while
acting to uphold the rules-based international system.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
4 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
II. STRATEGIC CONTEXT
Challenges to the Rules-Based
International System
Following World War II, the United States and its demo-
cratic allies established and defended a rules-based inter-
national system. The security of the system has been
underpinned by US military power and strong alliances in
Europe and the Indo-Pacific. Guided by liberal principles
at home, leading democracies sought to establish a liberal
international system grounded in international institutions,
open global markets, and democracy and human rights.
A distinctive feature of this system is its sheer density of
formal and informal rules as enshrined in international
organizations, institutions, and agreements. During the
Cold War, this system operated mostly in the West, but it
was significantly expanded after the collapse of the Soviet
Union, as countries previously behind the Iron Curtain,
as well as many other nations in the developing world,
adopted democratic capitalism as the best way to struc-
ture their domestic political economies.
The rules-based system has been successful far beyond
what its founders could have imagined. According to
almost every objective measure, the world is more
peaceful, prosperous, and free today than prior to 1945.
Despite its shortcomings, the system has fueled unprec-
edented innovations that have dramatically improved
living standards for people around the world. However,
this system faces significant challenges today. Revisionist
autocracies— Russia and China— are seeking to disrupt
and displace it. As they grapple with internal political chal-
lenges, many in the West are increasingly uncertain about
the model of open-market democracy. At the same time,
the emergence of advanced and potentially disruptive
technologies, including those often referred to as part of
the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR), could have profound
impacts on the future of the international system.
The Fourth Industrial Revolution
Over the past few centuries, several industrial revolu-
tions have reshaped the human experience. In the First
Industrial Revolution (1760 to 1830), the steam engine and
waterpower enabled mechanized production. The second
(1870 to 1914) saw electric power revolutionize mass
production and railroads and telegraphs increase global
connectivity. The third, also known as the Digital Revolution
(1980 to present), witnessed the development of personal
computers, the internet, smartphones, and a range of
other digital technologies. All three fundamentally altered
important aspects of the human experience, including for
militaries, economies, societies, and geopolitics.
The world is now entering a Fourth Industrial Revolution.
This concept gained widespread use after a 2015 article
China’s increasing capabilities in the technology realm pose significant risks for the democratic world. (via REUTERS)

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
5ATLANTIC COUNCIL
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
published by Klaus Schwab in Foreign Affairs. 2 The
founder of the World Economic Forum, Schwab has
suggested that the current period in technological devel-
opment is characterized by “a fusion of technologies that
is blurring the lines between the physical, digital, and
biological spheres.” 3 The exponential pace of change,
the impact of these new technologies on nearly every
industry in every country, and the massive transformative
power of these changes suggest that a “Fourth Industrial
Revolution” is now taking shape.4
The 4IR features the development of numerous
cutting-edge technologies. As with previous advances,
these new technologies offer great promise but
also threaten serious downside risks. Fire can
fuel stoves and keep people warm but can also
be used to torch villages. AI can be used to guide
driverless cars and aid radiologists in spotting disease,
or they can be used to help authoritarians spy on their
populations and control killer robots. Additive manu-
facturing can be used to “make anything anywhere,”
including medical equipment for hospitals, or compo -
nents for nuclear weapons.5 Advances in biotechnology
and gene editing can facilitate more effective tailored
medicine, or more lethal bioweapons. Hypersonic tech-
nology may enable high-speed international travel, or
missiles that can travel over five times the speed of sound
and evade missile defenses. A key challenge facing
the world is how can humanity best harness the upside
potential of these technologies while managing their
downside risks?
Democracy Versus Autocracy
in the New Technology Race
Like the previous industrial revolutions, the 4IR will have
major implications for geopolitics. The First and Second
Industrial Revolutions originated in Western Europe and the
third was led by the United States, which helped propel the
West to a global leadership position over the past several
centuries. The winner in the race for the new technologies
of the 4IR will enjoy similar advantages. Economists predict
that this suite of technologies will transform the global
economy and that the firms and companies at the forefront
of these developments will likely reap significant economic
gains. Military strategists predict that the world may be on
the verge of a new revolution in military affairs, and the
2 Klaus Schwab, “The Fourth Industrial Revolution: What it Means and How to Respond,” Foreign Affairs, December
12, 2015, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/2015-12-12/fourth-industrial-revolution.
3 Ibid.
4 Ibid.
5 Matthew Kroenig and Tristan Volpe, “3-D Printing the Bomb? The Nuclear Nonproliferation Challenge,” Washington Quarterly, Fall
2015, https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/attachments/151105_Presentation_Volpe.pdf.
6 Zachary Basu, “Officials Warn 5 Key T ech Sectors Will Determine Whether China Overtakes U.S.,” Axios, October
22, 2021, https://www.axios.com/2021/10/22/china-advanced-tech-dominance-ai-quantum.
7 Graham Allison et al., The Great T ech Rivalry: China vs the U.S., Avoiding Great Power War Project, Belfer Center for Science and International
Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School, December 2021, 5, https://www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/GreatTechRivalry_ChinavsUS_211207.pdf.
country that is first able to harness the new technologies
of the 4IR and develop the operational concepts to employ
them on the battlefield could achieve a decisive military
advantage. As has been witnessed throughout history,
technology often fuels economic and military strength, and
can prove determinative in terms of geopolitical power.
China has gained significant advantages that may posi-
tion it to become the leading global power in several tech-
nological domains over the next two decades. US intel-
ligence officials have assessed that Beijing is actively
working to become the world’s leader in AI and biotech-
nology.6 Under a program previously known as Made in
China 2025, the CCP has begun to implement a system-
atic plan to dominate the new technologies of the 4IR. Eric
Schmidt, the former CEO of Google, suggested China is
now a “full-spectrum peer competitor” of the United States
in the AI domain.7
China has invested heavily in research and development
(R&D), and its academic institutions are producing a steady
stream of science, technology, engineering, and mathe-
matics (STEM) degrees. Compared to the United States,
according to one study, China is graduating four times as
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2000 20172007 2013
US EU China Japan
Gross domestic expenditures on R&D
(billions of PPP dollars)
Source: National Science Board, 2020a

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
6 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
many bachelor’s students with STEM degrees and is on
track to graduate twice as many STEM PhDs by 2025.8
Education in AI and emerging technology is being highly
prioritized. The CCP has created a civilian-military tech-
nological ecosystem that merges commercial compa-
nies, university research laboratories, the military, and the
central government, allowing the Chinese government to
closely guide technological development priorities.9
Chinese government investments in R&D and STEM
education have been important, but they do not fully
account for China’s precipitous rise as a technology
powerhouse. To achieve its goals, the CCP has also been
engaging in unfair trade and technology practices that
violate international law and norms. For decades, the
CCP has conducted a widespread campaign of appro-
priating intellectual property (IP) from the West – one that
FBI Director Christopher Wray labeled a “theft on a scale
so massive that it represents one of the largest transfers
of wealth in world history.”10 Common Chinese practices
include cyber intrusion to steal IP; purchasing Western
companies for the sole purpose of exploiting access to the
IP; and engaging in forced technology transfer in which
Western firms are required to partner with, and turn over
technologies to, local Chinese companies in order to
access Chinese markets – a practice that often results in
8 Ibid., 6–7.
9 Kelley M. Sayler, Emerging Military T echnologies: Background and Issues for Congress, Congressional
Research Service, updated April 6, 2022, 5–6, https://sgp.fas.org/crs/natsec/R46458.pdf.
10 Wray, “The Threat Posed by the Chinese Government.”
the Chinese partner producing the technology locally and
forcing the Western firm out of the market. The CCP’s “mili-
tary-civil fusion” program requires Chinese companies and
citizens, anywhere in the world, to share useful technology
with the People’s Liberation Army (PLA).
In addition, China has provided significant government
subsidies to its technology giants, such as Huawei, Alibaba,
Tencent, and ByteDance, which gives them an unfair
advantage in global markets, and runs contrary to interna-
tional trade rules. Many governments have chosen Huawei
5G over Western competitors not so much because of its
technology, but because it is more affordable due to these
subsidies.
China’s increasing capabilities in the technology realm
pose significant risks for the United States and its
democratic allies and partners. These risks are evident
in three main areas: defense and national security,
economics, and values. First, in the defense and national
security arena, China is using its increasingly advanced
technological capabilities to develop advanced weapons
systems. China’s development of hypersonic weapons
could enable it to evade US missile defenses, and the
Defense Intelligence Agency has warned Beijing is seeking
to develop directed-energy weapons “to disrupt, degrade,
China
India
Russian Federation
US
Indonesia
Saudi Arabia
Mexico
Brazil
Japan
Korea
Turkey
Germany
United Kingdom
5
STEM Graduates
10 15 20 25 30 35 400
Projected percentage share of graduates with
STEM degrees in 2030
Source: OECD, 2015b

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
7ATLANTIC COUNCIL
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
or damage satellites and their sensors and possibly
already has a limited capability to employ laser systems
against satellite sensors.”11 In the event of a conflict, these
weapons could be used to undermine US and allied
command, control, and communications on the battlefield.
China’s increasing capabilities in the
technology realm pose significant
risks for the United States and its
democratic allies and partners.

Relatedly, there are clear national security risks for democ-
racies that depend on China for the most important tech-
nologies of the twenty-first century. Huawei 5G provides
a prime example. Data flowing over China’s 5G networks
could make its way back to Beijing to assist the CCP in
espionage. There is already evidence that Huawei’s
digital technology at the African Union is being used for
such a purpose.12 In addition, Western countries relying on
Chinese technology could be vulnerable to coercion or
cyberattack. If, for example, China was to take a provoc-
ative action, such as invading Taiwan, it might succeed in
deterring intervention by other countries by threatening
to shut down or disrupt those nations’ digital systems.
Given that 5G infrastructure is expected to run the smart
cities of the future, such an attack could result in signifi-
cant economic loss and physical destruction. Finally, reli-
ance by US allies on Chinese technology poses risks to alli-
ance relationships. The Pentagon cannot risk close military
interoperability with a country using Chinese technology in
critical systems.
Second, technology dominance could allow China to
gain significant advantages on the global economic front.
Beijing’s leadership in developing advanced technolo-
gies, such as renewable energy or robotics manufacturing,
could help fuel China’s economic growth. At the same time,
much of the world, including the United States and its allies,
could end up becoming dependent on Beijing for these
critical technologies.
Third, if autocracies prevail in the race to dominate twen-
ty-first century technologies, it could pose significant
11 Sayler, Emerging Military T echnologies, 17–18.
12 Joshua Meservey, “How China Has Been Using Huawei-Made Cameras to Spy on the African Union Headquarters,” Heritage Foundation, December
23, 2020, https://www.heritage.org/africa/commentary/how-china-has-been-using-huawei-made-cameras-spy-the-african-union-headquarters.
13 Sayler, Emerging Military T echnologies, 6; and Bryan McBournie, “What to Know About Hypersonic Missiles Russia Is Using
in Ukraine,” Axios, March 25, 2022, https://www.axios.com/2022/03/25/kinzhal-hypersonic-missiles-russia-ukraine.
14 Doug Palmer, “Tech Sanctions Have Hit Russia Harder Than Expected, Biden Official Says,” Politico, March 30, 2022,
https://www.politico.com/news/2022/03/30/u-s-boasts-99-percent-drop-in-controlled-technology-exports-to-russia-00021785.
15 Eric Rosenbaum, “Iran Is ‘Leapfrogging Our Defenses’ in a Cyber War ‘My Gut Is We Lose’: Hacking Expert Kevin Mandia,” CNBC,
November 18, 2021, https://www.cnbc.com/2021/11/18/iran-leapfrogging-our-defenses-in-cyber-war-hacking-expert-mandia-.html.
threats to democratic values. China is already employing
AI algorithms to develop facial recognition technology
and spy on its citizens. With the help of this technology,
China has developed an Orwellian social credit score
system. Chinese citizens lose credits if they commit anti-so-
cial behavior such as jaywalking. If citizens’ scores drop
below a certain point, they can lose basic rights, such
as the ability to purchase a train ticket. Moreover, China
is exporting authoritarianism, selling this technology
abroad to assist other dictators in tracking the behavior
of their own citizens and cracking down on dissent. By
leading the 4IR, China would be in a strong position to
shape the norms and standards for the technologies of the
twenty-first century.
More broadly, perhaps the greatest competition in the
new technology race is over the future of the rules-based
system itself. If China succeeds in dominating the key
technologies of the twenty-first century, then it will likely
reap the significant economic, military, and geopolitical
advantages that previous global technology leaders have
accrued. China could eventually attain the economic and
military capabilities to establish a competing new order
more consistent with Chinese autocratic values. The stakes
in this new technology race could not be higher.
To be sure, not every aspect of China’s role in devel -
oping advanced technology is cause for concern. Efforts
by Chinese scholars to develop AI for medical diagnos-
tics, for example, could constructively advance scientific
knowledge and provide health benefits for people around
the world. The challenges posed by Beijing stem from its
disregard of international norms and underlying attempts
to displace key elements of the rules-based order.
Moreover, China is not the only challenger in this space.
Russia has also invested in efforts to develop and
harness advanced technologies. In the AI realm, Russia
has focused on military applications such as autono-
mous vehicles, and it has also developed hypersonic
weapons that it deployed for the first time in its invasion
of Ukraine,13 though US and allied sanctions are impeding
Moscow’s efforts in the technology space.14 Other coun-
tries, such as Iran, are also seeking to exploit advanced
technologies by, for example, bolstering their cyber-of-
fensive capabilities.15

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
8 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Calls for a New Technology Alliance
Recognizing the need for democracies to work more
closely together, there have been several calls for the
establishment of a new democratic technology alliance.
A report issued by the Center for New American Security
contends that technological leadership by the world’s
major democracies will be essential to safeguarding
democratic values and “to counteract growing invest-
ments in and deployments of emerging technologies
by authoritarian, revisionist powers.” 16 Andrew Imbrie,
Tarun Chhabra, and others suggested, in a Georgetown
University report, that the United States needs to collabo-
rate with its allies and partners to “shape the trajectory of
artificial intelligence,” and proposed a three-pillar frame-
work for cooperation consistent with those outlined in
this report. 17 Others have called for a new grouping
of techno-democracies – a “T-12” – that would help
16 Martijn Rasser, et al, Common Code: An Alliance Framework for Democratic T echnology Policy, Center for New
American Security, October 21, 2020, https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/common-code
17 Andrew Imbrie, et al, “Agile Alliances: How the United States and Its Allies Can Deliver a Democratic Way of AI,” Center for
Security and Emerging T echnology, February 2020, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/agile-alliances/
18 Jared Cohen and Richard Fontaine, Unite the T echno-Democracies, Foreign Affairs, November/December 2020; also see Anja Manuel, “How
to Win the T echnology Race with China,” Stanford University, June 18, 2019, https://fsi.stanford.edu/news/how-win-technology-race-china
19 Lucy Fisher, “Downing Street Plans New 5G Club of Democracies,” The Times, May 29, 2020.
20 Maggie Miller, Senators introduce bill creating technology partnerships to compete with China, The Hill, March 4, 2021, https://
thehill.com/policy/cybersecurity/541726-senators-introduce-bill-creating-technology-partnerships-to-compete-with/.
democracies “regain the initiative in global technology
competition.” 18 More recently, the British government
proposed a “D-10 club of democracies” to focus on tech-
nology cooperation, though its reported plans to expand
the G7 as a D-10 were deferred.19
In addition, Congress is considering legislation intended to
foster democratic partnerships on emerging technologies.
The Democracy Technology Partnership Act, sponsored
by Senators Mark Warner (D-VA), Ben Sasse (R-NE), and
a coalition of bipartisan senators, would create an inter-
agency office at the State Department tasked with coordi-
nating partnerships among the US and other democratic
countries to promote research and set standards around
emerging technologies.20

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
9ATLANTIC COUNCIL
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
III. THE NEED FOR A DEMOCRATIC
TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
For the United States and its allies to succeed in the
long-term strategic competition with autocracies, they
must ensure that they win the race for advanced tech-
nologies. As described above, harnessing the technolo-
gies of the 4IR will be critical for success across the secu-
rity, economic, and governance domains. The nation or
group of nations that succeed in this race will have the
ability to develop the most advanced weapons systems,
drive sustained economic growth, and propagate the
rules and norms for the use of these technologies in ways
that are consistent with their own values and models of
governance.
But to compete effectively with China and other autocratic
rivals, the United States cannot act alone. It must work
together with likeminded allies and partners, to leverage
shared capabilities and resources and implement strate-
gies and policies that are strategically aligned.
Several efforts have been initiated to help strengthen
democratic cooperation on advanced technologies,
including through the G7, the Quad, and the US-EU
Trade and Technology Council. However, while these
efforts are valuable, they are limited in geographic
and technological scope. What is missing is an inte-
grated framework for technology cooperation that
brings together leading democracies, under a common
umbrella, to advance a comprehensive and coordi-
nated set of strategies across a range of domains.
To compete effectively with China
and other autocratic rivals, the
United States must work together
with likeminded allies and partners
to leverage shared capabilities and
resources.
The United States and leading democracies across North
America, Europe, and the Indo-Pacific should come
together and establish a Democratic Technology Alliance
(DTA). Such an alliance would foster cooperation across a
wide range of the most critical and emerging technologies,
including AI, quantum computing, 5G, biotech, semicon-
ductors, clean energy, nanotechnology, hypersonics, and
others.
Leading democracies continue to maintain a preponder-
ance of power in the international system. Together, the
United States and its D-10 allies and partners possess
Share of global GDP (%)
56.7%
14.2%
10.3%
 Autocratic Challengers
China
Russia
Iran
North Korea
18.8%
Democracies’ Economic Power
Source: World Bank, 2019
United States
Japan
Germany
United Kingdom
France
Italy
Canada
South Korea
Australia
European Union
  D-10 
 Other democracies
      Rest of the world

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
10 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
nearly 60 percent of global GDP, compared to only 16
percent in China.21 If leading democracies work together
to accelerate technology innovation, counter China’s
unfair technology practices, and establish common norms,
they will be able to position themselves for success in the
broader strategic competition with autocracies.
While fostering technology cooperation among democ-
racies, the DTA could also serve as a coordinating body
to engage China and other global powers in areas of
21 The D-10, as organized by the Atlantic Council, includes Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan,
South Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States, plus the European Union.
potentially overlapping interest. As it engages in compe-
tition, the free world should look for opportunities to coop-
erate with China and other global powers, and seek to
develop common rules and norms for managing the use of
technology and mitigating its potentially harmful impacts.
Such cooperation can be fostered through entities such
as the Group of Twenty (G20), as well as other bilateral and
multilateral venues where technology cooperation should
be prioritized as a key area for dialogue and engagement.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
11ATLANTIC COUNCIL
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
IV. DTA’S PRIMARY LINES OF EFFORT
22 Robert A. Manning and Peter Engelke, The Global Innovation Sweepstakes: A Quest to Win the Future, Atlantic Council,
June 2018, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/The-Global-Innovation-Sweepstakes.pdf.
23 “Gross Domestic Spending on R&D,” OECD, https://data.oecd.org/rd/gross-domestic-spending-on-r-d.htm.
24 Arjun Kharpal, “China Spending on Research and Development to Rise 7% Per Y ear in Push for Major Tech Breakthroughs,” CNBC, March
5, 2021, https://www.cnbc.com/2021/03/05/china-to-boost-research-and-development-spend-in-push-for-tech-breakthroughs.html.
25 William M. Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Y ear 2021, US Congress, Public Law 116–
283—Jan. 1, 2021, p. 1405, https://www.congress.gov/116/plaws/publ283/PLAW-116publ283.pdf.
The DTA should be oriented around three main pillars:
(1) strengthening the free world’s innovation ecosystem,
(2) limiting unfair technology practices by autocratic rivals,
and (3) establishing technology rules and norms that are
consistent with democratic values.
Pillar One: Strengthen the Free
World’s Innovation Ecosystem
The first pillar of the DTA would be to strengthen the free
world’s innovation ecosystem; that is, the network of enti-
ties, resources, and structures, including those that support
human capital, financing, R&D, and higher education, that
join forces in a way that catalyzes new products, ideas,
methods, and systems. Winning the new technology race
will require sharpening the free world’s longstanding
innovation edge. Toward that end, the DTA should facili-
tate cooperation in several areas to spur innovation and
enhance technological development in the free world.
PROMOTE JOINT RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT
The DTA should help ensure democracies devote sufficient
resources to invest in R&D to guarantee that, collectively,
these investments are significantly greater that those made
by autocratic rivals, and encourage these efforts to be more
coordinated and systematic.
As a recent Atlantic Council study noted, the world’s top
innovators—the United States, South Korea, Germany,
Sweden, Japan, and others—also lead in R&D invest-
ment.22 The United States has long been the world’s
largest spender on R&D in aggregate terms, but China is
increasing its R&D spending. According to the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the
United States spent close to 3.5 percent of its GDP on R&D
in 2020, while China spent just under 2.5 percent. In dollars,
the United States spent $100 billion more than China.23
Beijing is increasing its R&D spending, but combined
spending by democracies will continue to dwarf China’s.24
The challenge is to ensure that these R&D efforts are effec-
tively coordinated.
Recent efforts have sought to promote greater R&D coop-
eration among the United States and its allies. The 2021
National Defense Authorization Act authorized funds for
integrated development of telecommunications and micro-
electronics technologies between the United States and
Japan, which already pursue around one hundred and
sixty joint scientific research collaboration projects. The
Multilateral Telecommunications Security Fund authorizes
the federal government to develop a common funding
mechanism with foreign partners “to support the devel-
opment and adoption of secure and trusted telecommu-
nications technologies,” and specifically names the United
Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan
as potential partners in this endeavor. 25 In addition, a
Harnessing advanced technologies, such as synthetic biology and quantum computing, will be critical for democracies
to succeed. (via REUTERS)

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
12 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Democracy Technology Partnership Act, which is currently
pending in the US Congress, includes provisions aimed
at advancing cooperation on R&D among democracies.
Among other provisions, it calls for establishing an inter-
national Technology Partnership Fund “to support joint
research projects between government research agencies,
universities, technology companies and other businesses
from partner countries.”26
The DTA should build on these examples of R&D cooper-
ation among democracies and develop integrated plans
for the development of technologies critical for winning
the new technology race. According to the OECD’s 2020
data, a majority of G7 countries and the European Union
(EU) spend more than 2 percent of their GDP annually on
R&D, but not all are all at this level.27 DTA members should
consult on establishing a joint commitment to spending a
minimum percentage of their GDP on R&D. The DTA should
facilitate joint R&D projects that marry the scientific and
technological strengths of different democratic nations.
Allies could also contribute to a fund that would be allo-
cated to supporting the most promising research efforts
anywhere in the free world. By taking these steps, the DTA
can ensure that the whole of democracies’ R&D efforts is
greater than the sum of its parts and propel the free world
to a new century of technological leadership.
DEVELOP HUMAN CAPITAL
Innovation requires human capital, and the DTA should
support efforts by member countries to cultivate this crit-
ical resource. STEM education, complemented by critical
thinking skills, is essential to advancing groundbreaking
innovation.
The free world appears to be falling behind on this front.
The United States retains one of the world’s best university
systems, which continues to attract top-notch students in
the technology field from around the world. Other leading
democracies, particularly in Europe, also serve as desti-
nations for large numbers of foreign students. However,
China now produces more STEM graduates than any other
country, and this lead is projected to grow over the coming
years.28 Indeed, many of China’s best technologists were
26 “Democracy T echnology Partnership Act,” Mark R. Warner, US Senator from the Commonwealth of Virginia, accessed
May 31, 2022, https://www.warner.senate.gov/public/_cache/files/8/9/895e0a40-65ee-43cc-8629-450555faefe7/
AC6A0E54DB992E1612161C48BB34FC57.democracy-technology-partnership-act-two-pager-explainer.pdf.
27 Other partners, such as Sweden, spent more than 3.5 percent of GDP, while South Korea spent almost 5 percent of GDP on R&D in 2020.
See “Gross Domestic Spending on R&D,” OECD, accessed May 31, 2022, https://data.oecd.org/rd/gross-domestic-spending-on-r-d.htm.
28 “How is the Global Talent Pool Changing (2013, 2030),” Education Indicators in Focus, OECD, April 2015, https://www.oecd.org/education/skills-beyond-
school/EDIF%2031%20(2015)--ENG--Final.pdf?fbclid=IwAR3dtAkSdSwRxU2qh8u9aWJEzRmeCVyL38uS54hy2ibuZ-4VZ2TgYEgSm0k, see Figure 2.
29 Manning and Engelke, The Global Innovation Sweepstakes, 62–63.
30 Peter Engelke and Robert A. Manning, Keeping America’s Innovative Edge: A Strategic Framework, Atlantic Council, April
2017, 31, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/keeping-america-s-innovative-edge-2/.
31 James Ryseff, “The United States Can Only Achieve AI Dominance with Its Allies,” War on the Rocks, October 9, 2020,
https://warontherocks.com/2020/10/the-united-states-can-only-achieve-ai-dominance-with-its-allies/.
trained in the West. While the quality of education in
many Chinese universities is uneven, the sheer number
of researchers that China has now dedicated to scientific
R&D could challenge the ability of the free world to main-
tain technological leadership.
The DTA should work to ensure that the free world main-
tains a deep reserve of human capital. It could do so by
pooling resources among member countries to support
academic scholarships and competitive grants for the
study of critical technologies.29 The DTA could also look
to increase exchange programs to ensure a steady flow of
ideas and collaboration across borders and between insti-
tutions of higher education. The DTA could facilitate regular
exchanges of information on STEM education, especially
in higher education, so members can identify best prac-
tices for sustaining strong universities and high graduation
rates in those subjects. Such exchanges could also focus
on confronting the challenge of economic displacement
where technology and automation replace jobs previously
held by humans, including by identifying successful initia-
tives that prioritize job-retraining programs.30
In addition, the United States and its allies benefit greatly
from attracting talent from abroad, and the DTA should
facilitate dialogues on ways to improve immigration poli-
cies that allow highly-skilled professionals in the tech-
nology field to work in member nations.
INCREASE DATA SHARING
China, which possesses the world’s largest population,
lacks legal protections for privacy, thereby giving the CCP
and China’s technology sector access to a vast, in-house
pool of data for improving AI, among other applications.
Several analysts have suggested that “data is the new
oil,” and China is the “Saudi Arabia of data.”31 To be sure,
AI innovation depends significantly on how data are
processed, as well as on how much data are available.
China has a substantial advantage in the latter given its
size. Acting in concert, however, democracies can coun-
teract that advantage, even as they maintain legal protec-
tions to secure privacy and respect the rights of citizens.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
13ATLANTIC COUNCIL
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
The DTA should seek to establish a common data pool
for AI development in the free world. The EU has shown
what a first step toward creating a common data pool for
AI development can look like with the passage of the Data
Governance Act. The act allows for the creation of common
European data spaces relating to areas such as the envi-
ronment and finance while also regulating the data market-
place between private sector companies.32 Applying a data
framework that encourages sharing across the DTA will
require the trust of all involved, and here the DTA should
work to establish an entity that can secure and maintain the
data shared amongst its members.
The United States and the EU ran into a stumbling block
on data regulation after an EU Court of Justice ruling inval-
idated a mechanism for sharing data outside the EU. 33
Earlier this year, however, they announced an agreement
on data privacy and data flows to remedy the challenge
raised by the ruling. The United States agreed to new
measures that would protect EU personal data privacy.34
Despite divergent approaches to tech regulation, including
in the realm of data protection, the US-EU resolution on
this issue suggests that DTA members could overcome
barriers to data sharing, even absent symmetrical regula-
tory frameworks.35
DEVELOP A COMMON APPROACH TO
TECHNOLOGY REGULATION
The DTA should work to develop common regulatory
frameworks to ensure that democratic countries properly
address antitrust, privacy, and other concerns, while also
ensuring that regulation does not unduly hamper the free
world’s technological competitiveness. The proliferation of
new technologies raises questions of regulation on issues
ranging from antitrust to privacy. Diverging approaches to
regulation between leading democracies, however, has led
to friction among allies. In addition, the EU’s Digital Markets
Act has caused some concern in the United States, as
the proposed regulation would disproportionately affect
32 “Data Governance: Why Is the EU Data Sharing Law Important?” European Parliament News, April 6, 2022,
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/20220331STO26411/data-governance-why-is-the-eu-data-sharing-law-important.
33 Blanka Soulava, Hamish Cameron, and Victoria Ying, Data Rules for Machine Learning: How Europe Can Unlock the Potential
While Mitigating the Risks, Atlantic Council, November 2021, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/
report/data-rules-for-machine-learning-how-europe-can-unlock-the-potential-while-mitigating-the-risks/#part-one.
34 “Fact Sheet: United States and European Commission Announce Trans-Atlantic Data Privacy Framework,” White House, March 25, 2022,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/03/25/fact-sheet-united-states-and-european-commission-announce-
trans-atlantic-data-privacy-framework/#:~:text=The%20United%20States%20and%20the,decision%20underlying%20the%20EU%2DU.S.
35 Morten Skroejer and Nicole Lawler, “Can the US and EU Rein in Big T ech with Diverging Approaches?” New Atlanticist, Atlantic Council,
January 20, 2022, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/can-the-us-and-eu-rein-in-big-tech-with-diverging-approaches/.
36 Evelyn N. Farkas, “T o Counter China, the U.S. and EU Need to Get Back on the Same Page – Fast,” Politico, September
20, 2021, https://www.politico.com/news/agenda/2021/09/20/digital-markets-act-eu-china-us-512602.
37 “Global Lithium Market: China is Unlikely to Tap into Afghanistan’s Resources Fast,” GlobeNewsWire, November 4, 2021, https://www.globenewswire.
com/news-release/2021/11/04/2327800/0/en/Global-Lithium-Market-China-is-Unlikely-to-Tap-into-Afghanistan-s-Resources-Fast-IndexBox.html.
38 Jevans Nyabiage, “China’s Dominance of Rare Earth Supply Is a Growing Concern in the West,” South China Morning Post, April 25,
2021, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy/article/3130990/chinas-dominance-rare-earths-supply-growing-concern-west.
39 Dezenski and Austin, “Rebuilding America’s Economy and Foreign Policy with ‘Ally-Shoring’.” See also Ash Jain and Mathew Kroenig,
“A Democratic Trade Partnership: Ally Shoring to Counter Coercion and Secure Supply Chains,” Atlantic Council, June 2022.
several large US tech companies, while not applying to
Russian or Chinese firms.36
The DTA should facilitate greater coordination on these
and related regulatory issues in the technology arena. This
effort should begin with sustained continued dialogue on
key issues related to technology regulation, with a gradu-
alist approach that could build habits of cooperation over
time.
SECURE SUPPL Y CHAINS
The DTA should take steps to ensure democracies have
robust and secure supply chains for advanced technology
that are not dependent on autocracies, especially China.
China dominates the global lithium-battery supply chain,
producing 76 percent of the world’s lithium-oxide and
hydroxide exports.37 China also provides more than 60
percent of the world’s rare-earth metals, which are essen-
tial for the manufacture of electric-car batteries, satellites,
weapons, wind turbines, and solar panels. 38 For much of
the latter part of the twentieth century, the United States
was the premier producer of rare earth elements, but by
the 2010s, China has become the dominant global supplier.
In 2019, the United States was 100% net import reliant on
rare-earth elements. The United States and its allies are
reliant on China for critical elements that are needed for
everything from cell phones and electric vehicles to fluo-
rescent lights and missile guidance systems.
To address these vulnerabilities, the United States should
look to establish more resilient supply chains by relying on
“ally shoring”—sourcing essential goods and services with
countries that share democratic values and a commitment
to an open, rules-based international order. 39 The DTA
could facilitate efforts to reduce dependences on China
and Russia in the area of critical technology supply chains.
Through the use of financial incentives, including grants
and tax breaks, the DTA could incentivize the shifting of
supply chains away from these autocracies and toward

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
14 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
more trusted and reliable member states. It could also
consider creating a joint fund that would provide incen-
tives to corporations that relocate production facilities to
allied states.
DTA members can also shape technology produc-
tion through procurement practices. Governments are
important technology customers, particularly for those with
defense applications, and they can use this influence to
stimulate the development of emerging technologies and
support businesses in allied countries. This could include
a commitment by defense departments and ministries to
only procure defense systems made with semiconductors
fabricated in democracies. DTA members could employ
similar “buy democratic” provisions to encourage private
investment in the rare earths sector, and they could coor-
dinate on public support for research into mapping mining
capacity and lowering extraction costs.
Participating countries would benefit from secure supply
chains and from bringing manufacturing jobs back home.
The DTA could coordinate such efforts to ensure they are
implemented in a more systematic way, so that member
states can benefit from cross-national comparative advan-
tages. In the area of semi-conductors, for example, China,
which currently produces only 12 percent of the global
supply, has invested in efforts to expand its global market
share. In response, leading democracies have begun to
take steps to accelerate domestic production. The EU has
proposed a comprehensive set of measures to ensure the
“supply, resilience and technological leadership in semi-
conductor technologies and applications.”40 In autumn
2021, Quad partners announced they would launch a
joint initiative to “map capacity, identify vulnerabilities,
and bolster supply chain security for semiconductors.”41
The Biden administration has announced measures to
encourage new investments in semi conductors, and the
US Congress is currently working on legislation known as
the America COMPETES Act that would authorize more
than $50 billion in subsidies to promote domestic semicon-
ductor manufacturing. In addition, Representatives Michael
McCaul (R-TX) and Doris Matsui (D-CA) co-sponsored
legislation that aims to foster more secure semiconductor
40 European Commission Press Release, February 8, 2022, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_22_729.
41 “Fact Sheet: Quad Leaders’ Summit,” White House, September 24, 2021,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/09/24/fact-sheet-quad-leaders-summit/.
42 “Fact Sheet: Securing a Made in America Supply Chain for Critical Minerals,” White House, February 22, 2022,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/02/22/fact-sheet-securing-a-made-in-america-supply-chain-for-critical-minerals/.
43 See “Analysis for CHIPS Act and BIA Briefing,” Department of Commerce, April 6, 2022,
https://www.commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2022/04/analysis-chips-act-and-bia-briefing.
44 “Sweden – Proposal for New Foreign Direct Investment Screening Rules,” Mannheimer Swartling, November 26, 2021,
https://www.mannheimerswartling.se/en/publications-and-newsletter/sweden-proposal-for-new-foreign-direct-investment-screening-rules/; and Steven
Scheer, “With Eye to China, Israel Forms Panel to Vet Foreign Investments,” Reuters, October 30, 2019,
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-israel-investment-panel/with-eye-to-china-israel-forms-panel-to-vet-foreign-investments-idUSKBN1X926T.
45 European Commission, EU foreign investment screening mechanism becomes fully operational, press release,
October 9, 2020, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_1867.
supply chains. 42, 43 The DTA could play a leading role in
encouraging and coordinating similar efforts across other
critical technology sectors.
Pillar Two: Limit Unfair Technology
Practices by Autocratic Rivals
The second pillar of the DTA would focus on constraining
unfair technology practices by autocratic rivals, particularly
China. As discussed above, China has become a global
technology leader in large part by systematically engaging
in unfair trade and technology practices that violate inter-
national law and norms. Leading democracies need to
develop a more coordinated and sophisticated response
to counteract China’s unfair practices. But the key to
success is for leading democracies to work in unison.
Without effective coordination on each of the measures
described below, China may seek to exploit the weakest
links in the chain. On export controls, for example, if only
the United States or the EU have put in place strong export
controls to prevent rival autocracies from buying critical
technology, China may be able to acquire the same tech-
nology from nations that lack similar controls.
COMMON FOREIGN INVESTMENT SCREENING
MECHANISMS
The DTA should develop common foreign investment
screening mechanisms. Leading democracies should
make it much more difficult for autocratic rivals to gain a
technology advantage by purchasing sensitive technolo-
gies in the free world.
Several important steps have already been taken in this
direction. In 2018, the US Congress passed the Foreign
Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA) to
strengthen the resources and authority of the Committee
on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS). In
addition, other democratic partners, including Sweden and
Israel, have proposed laws or implemented measures to
monitor foreign investment.44 An EU foreign direct invest-
ment (FDI) screening mechanism became fully operational
in 2020.45

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
15ATLANTIC COUNCIL
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
There is, however, more work to be done. Many democ-
racies lack adequate FDI screening mechanisms. 46
Moreover, standards for FDI screening vary across nations.
It is possible, for example, that Israel would deny a Chinese
investment into an AI company with a specific application,
but that the United States would permit it. This unevenness
allows autocratic rivals to gain advantages by exploiting
gaps in the system.
The DTA should bring leading democracies together to
ensure that all have adequate FDI screening mecha-
nisms in place, and to help develop common standards for
approving FDI in sensitive technological areas.
COMMON EXPORT CONTROL STANDARDS
The DTA should seek to coordinate a common set of
export control standards for advanced technologies. While
the United States and its allies have developed common
export control lists for sensitive technologies that could
lead to the spread of nuclear weapons, for example, export
control standards for the broader slate of emerging tech-
nologies are uneven and uncoordinated. Moreover, the
standards for balancing commercial and national security
interests related to the export of dual-use technologies
vary widely among leading democracies, leading to situa-
tions where the same types of technology may be denied
by one country and permitted by another. Furthermore,
the cat and mouse game that exists with regard to
updating export control lists provides additional opportu-
nities for rival autocracies to exploit. The US Commerce
Department, for example, has placed Huawei on its
Consolidated Screening List, but Huawei Marine Networks,
a company dealing with underwater cables, rebranded as
HMN Technologies, is not currently on the list.
To address these challenges, the DTA should seek to
harmonize export control regulations, including screening
standards and lists of controlled items and entities. The US
National Science and Technology Council’s control list of
emerging technologies should be a starting point for these
lists.47
46 Léon Korsten et al., Multi-Jurisdiction Guide for Screening Foreign Investments, DLA Piper, May 26, 2021,
https://www.dlapiper.com/en/belgium/insights/publications/2021/05/multi-jurisdiction-guide-for-screening-foreign-investments/.
47 Technologies on the list include: advanced computing, advanced engineering materials, advanced gas turbine, engine technologies,
advanced manufacturing, advanced and networked sensing and signature management, advanced nuclear energy technologies,
artificial intelligence, autonomous systems and robotics, biotechnologies, communication and networking technologies, directed energy,
financial technologies, human-machine interfaces, hypersonics, networked sensors and sensing, quantum information technologies,
renewable energy generation and storage, semiconductors and microelectronics, and space technologies and systems.
48 Gavin Bade, “‘We’re in an Economic War:’ White House, Congress Weigh New Oversight of U.S. Investments in China,” Politico,
February 19, 2022, https://www.politico.com/news/2022/02/19/china-investments-economy-us-congress-00008745.
COMMON APPROACH TO REGULATING
OUTBOUND TECHNOLOGY INVESTMENTS
The DTA should also seek to develop a common approach
to regulating outbound technology investments to ensure
that Western companies are not subsidizing–directly or
indirectly–China’s efforts to develop advanced tech-
nologies, including those that could be used for military
purposes. Under the existing framework, for example,
Chinese technology companies, including those that work
with the PLA to design weapons, are able to benefit from
foreign investments that help accelerate their research
and development efforts. This includes direct investments
by multilateral corporations that entail joint partnerships
with local Chinese companies, which often require them to
transfer technological information as a condition of doing
business. It also includes indirect investments, whereby
institutions and individuals in leading democracies make
portfolio investments that include companies in China’s
technology sector.
Partly in response to these concerns, the US Congress
is currently considering legislation that could address
these concerns by prohibiting investment from the United
States into China’s technology sector.48 There are several
issues that legislative efforts along these lines will need to
address. Should all investment in Chinese technology be
banned? Does it make sense to ban all technology-related
investments or only those with firms producing technolo-
gies with a clear military application? Who will decide what
crosses the line? Should the legislation specify the list of
prohibited investments, or simply provide general guide-
lines and turn to the executive branch for the specifics?
As a first step, companies should be required to disclose
investments in China to help map the scale and nature of
the problem, and pave the way for future legislation that
imposes restrictions.
Moreover, such legislation alone will not be sufficient. A
unilateral approach would disproportionately harm US
investors, while failing to prevent Chinese companies from
obtaining foreign investments in technology. A more effec-
tive solution requires a coordinated free-world approach
to restrict investments in China’s technology sector, a role
that the DTA could facilitate.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
16 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
COMMON APPROACH TO COUNTERING
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY THEFT
China has built a research and technology development
strategy premised on the theft of large volumes of IP from
the free world, especially the United States. The CCP relies
on cyber intrusions, among other techniques including
human and “open source” intelligence, to pilfer technical
data, trade secrets, and other proprietary information
from Western companies. Chinese intelligence agencies
recruit individuals with access to sensitive data in Western
technology firms, military organizations, and academic
research programs, and persuade them to share that infor-
mation with China.
China’s “thousand talents” program also serves as a means
for China to bribe technologists living abroad to share tech-
nology with China—either by coming to work in China or
simply handing over the technology to Chinese compa-
nies. Chinese spies are prioritizing a wide range of sensi-
tive technologies, including biotech, nanotech, agricultural
technology, and quantum computing. Nearly 80 percent of
US economic espionage prosecutions are related to theft
to benefit China.49 The estimated cost of China’s IP theft for
US businesses is several hundred billion dollars per year.50
Chinese IP theft is also damaging to the ability of the free
world to uphold a rules-based system in that it simultane-
ously undercuts the West’s innovation advantages as it
boosts China’s innovation potential.
In response, the DTA should work to ensure that all
members have a common set of economic espionage laws
that prohibit China’s unfair activities. These laws should
include provisions to protect liberal traditions of open
inquiry even while rigorously countering Chinese espio-
nage activities. In addition, and more importantly, DTA
members should make it a priority to investigate and pros-
ecute Chinese firms and individuals involved in IP theft
where feasible, especially those that have a physical pres-
ence in DTA member states.
Furthermore, DTA members should continue to drive
cooperation in cybersecurity activities, sharing informa-
tion on known Chinese threat actors and working collec-
tively to detect and deter cyber espionage. These efforts
can center on existing best practices and standards, such
as the National Institute of Standards and Technology’s
(NIST’s) Cybersecurity Framework, as a basis for common
49 Editorial Board, “America is Struggling to Counter China’s Intellectual Property Theft,” Financial Times,
April 18, 2022, https://www.ft.com/content/1d13ab71-bffd-4d63-a0bf-9e9bdfc33c39.
50 Ibid.
51 Yusho Cho, “Eyeing US, China Wields $33bn Subsidies to Bolster Chips, Defense,” Nikkei, May 17, 2021,
https://asia.nikkei.com/Politics/International-relations/US-China-tensions/Eyeing-US-China-wields-33bn-subsidies-to-bolster-chips-defense.
52 Ibid.
53 Ip, “‘Industrial Policy’ is Back.”
defensive measures across the DTA. A concerted effort by
DTA countries to lower barriers to law enforcement intelli-
gence sharing and cooperation could also be effective on
this issue.
COUNTERVAILING MEASURES FOR UNFAIR
TECHNOLOGY SUBSIDIES
China creates an unfair playing field in the technology
sector by providing subsidies to its technology giants, such
as Huawei, Alibaba, and Tencent, giving them an advan-
tage in global markets. These companies, like Huawei,
can offer cheaper products due to significant subsidies,
enabling them to beat out competition. China has also
sought to bolster key industries, such as semiconductors.
Between 2010 and 2020, for example, Chinese govern-
ment subsidies to the semiconductor industry increased
twelvefold.51
To counter this, as previously mentioned, the US Congress
is currently working on the America COMPETES Act that
would authorize more than $50 billion in subsidies to
promote domestic semiconductor manufacturing, in addi-
tion to tens of billions of dollars toward strengthening
supply chains promoting R&D. Trade ministers from the G7
countries have also pledged to challenge “harmful indus-
trial subsidies.” 52 The EU has taken steps to ramp up its
semiconductor manufacturing capacity while South Korea
and Japan have pursued similar efforts.53
Coordinating through the DTA, democracies should
balance a subsidies-based approach to counteracting
China’s practices with leveraging the advantages of an
open market. Open-market democracies have a proven
innovation model that has long been more effective and
efficient than state planning. Apart from subsidies, DTA
members can encourage the development of key tech-
nologies through procurement practices. As noted above,
governments can use their influence as important tech-
nology customers to stimulate the development of
emerging technologies and support businesses in allied
countries. While democratic governments are playing a
more active role in bolstering technology efforts, it is also
important to keep in mind the inherent risks of such indus-
trial policies, which could lead to governments trying to
pick winners and losers, potentially undermining free-
market innovation.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
17ATLANTIC COUNCIL
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
Moreover, the DTA should promote production in
advanced-technology industries, including by coordinating
on measures such as financial incentives to encourage
companies to build capital-intensive facilities and produce
emerging technologies in allied countries. DTA members
may consider creating a bank or joint funding mechanism
to support companies that open or transfer operations in
member states.
The DTA could also consider additional coordinated
measures to counteract Chinese subsidies. While neither
the DTA nor China stand to benefit from a long-lasting
trade war, tariffs could help offset the financial advantages
Chinese companies derive from state subsidies.
Pillar Three: Establish Rules and
Norms for Twenty-First Century
Technologies
The third pillar of the DTA would focus on establishing
common rules and norms for the technologies of the
twenty-first century. To ensure that new technologies are
designed and utilized in a manner that is consistent with
democratic values, leading democracies should come
together to negotiate shared standards related to AI,
54 Jain and Kroenig, Present at the Re-Creation.
biotechnology, directed energy, cyberspace, and other key
technologies of the 4IR.
The DTA’s efforts to establish global norms for new tech-
nologies would entail two distinct phases. First, the leading
democracies should seek an agreement amongst them-
selves on appropriate rules and norms for specific areas
of advanced technology. Such rules and norms should be
developed, and subsequently implemented, in close coor-
dination with industry representatives. The leading democ-
racies have enormous market and regulatory power, and
an agreement on such rules and norms could be influential
in establishing global standards.
Second, the DTA should seek to engage a more inclu-
sive group of global powers, including China and Russia,
to determine if it is possible to develop common rules
and norms for these technologies. Even if agreement in
specific areas proves to be out of reach in the short-term,
a dialogue on the challenges posed by advanced technol-
ogies, including how to mitigate potentially dangerous or
unethical applications, could be useful over time. Indeed,
as the authors have proposed in a previous strategy paper,
this two-step approach is the best way to handle negoti-
ations on a wide range of issues in order to revitalize and
adapt a rules-based international system.54
Advanced
Computing
Advanced
Engineering
Materials
Advanced
Gas Turbine
Engines
 Advanced
Manufacturing
Advanced and
Networked
Sensing
Advanced
Nuclear
Energy
Artificial
Intelligence Robotics
Biotechnologies Communication
Technologies
Directed
Energy
Financial
Technologies
Source: US National Science and Technology Council c
Human-Machine
Interfaces Hypersonics
Quantum
Information
Technologies
Renewable
Energy
Semiconductors
and Micro-
electronics
Space Tech-
nologies and
Systems
Networked
Sensors and
Sensing
Critical and Emerging Technologies
Key Domains for Competition

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
18 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Some argue for the opposite approach: that the United
States and China, as the world’s two leading economies
and technology leaders, should first seek to negotiate
shared rules and norms and then engage other nations
across the world. Washington and Beijing, however, may
simply be too far apart to reach a meaningful agree -
ment on such rules. Moreover, the United States would
be in a stronger negotiating position if it is able to reach
a consensus among leading democracies on estab-
lishing such rules before it engages with China and other
autocracies.
In several areas of technology, such as AI, there are
existing multilateral efforts already under way to help
develop common standards among leading democracies.
The DTA should not supplant these efforts; rather it would
oversee and coordinate these efforts, while developing
new avenues for dialogues in areas that are currently not
being addressed.
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AI raises many ethical dilemmas. How comfortable is
humankind outsourcing important decisions to machines
without a human in the loop? This is a question in many
domains, including in medicine and transportation, but
nowhere are the issues starker than in the military sphere.
National militaries are already incorporating AI into
weapons systems. On the horizon is the possibility of lethal
autonomous weapons systems (LAWS) that can find and
destroy human targets without a human in the loop. Are
humans comfortable giving machines the ability to choose
whether to take a human life on the battlefield? How could
designers ensure that such usage would be consistent
with international law, which requires military strikes to be
discriminate and proportionate? On the other hand, the
use of AI in weapons systems promises military effective-
ness and the reduction of risk to human personnel. There is
even discussion of incorporating AI into nuclear command
and control, meaning that, conceivably in the future, the
decision to order a nuclear attack could be taken by a
machine. How can democratic societies balance these
concerns?
Another potentially harmful application of AI is in facial
recognition technology. These technologies have
advanced greatly in recent years and are employed in
many ways, such as in airport screening, to make airports
more secure and humans’ lives more efficient. But there
55 “Artificial Intelligence,” OECD, accessed May 31, 2022, https://www.oecd.org/digital/artificial-intelligence/.
56 Sayler, Emerging Military T echnologies.
57 Ibid.
58 “Super-strong, Genetically-engineered Dogs – Could They Cure Parkinson’s Disease?” CNN, October 15, 2015,
https://www.cnn.com/2015/10/28/world/china-mutant-dogs-genetic-engineering/index.html.
59 “Chinese Scientist Who Edited Babies’ Genes Jailed for Three Y ears,” The Guardian, December 30, 2019, https://
www.theguardian.com/world/2019/dec/30/gene-editing-chinese-scientist-he-jiankui-jailed-three-years.
are also nefarious applications. As mentioned above,
China is employing this technology to monitor its citizenry
in an Orwellian fashion, and it is exporting this technology
to other authoritarian governments. How can democratic
societies benefit from this technology while ensuring that
privacy and other basic rights are protected?
There are a number of current efforts to establish norms
for AI, both among democracies and more inclusive
groupings. For example, the OECD developed an inter-
governmental set of principles concerning AI that seek to
“promote artificial intelligence (AI) that is innovative and
trustworthy and that respects human rights and demo-
cratic values.”55 More than forty countries, including several
non-OECD members, have adopted these principles.56 In
addition, NATO released an AI strategy in October 2021
that, in part, aims to “set standards for responsible use of
artificial intelligence.”57
The DTA should foster and coordinate existing efforts on
the ethical uses of AI with the objective of setting new
global standards and norms.
BIOTECHNOLOGY
Advances in biotechnology hold tremendous poten-
tial, while also prompting ethical concerns. On one hand,
synthetic biology, including gene sequencing and gene
editing, has clear medical applications that could improve
disease outcomes by providing tailored treatments. On the
other hand, this same technology could be used to design
new viruses, as well as lethal biological weapons, including
those that could be tailored for specific populations.
This also raises fundamental questions about what it
means to be human. In 2015, China genetically engi-
neered “super-strong” dogs with double the muscula-
ture of normal canines, and some US military strategists
fear that China will use this technology to produce “super
soldiers” in the future.58 In 2018, a Chinese scientist used
CRISPR to produce the world’s first gene-edited babies.59
Should parents be able to select and design desired char-
acteristics for their children, such as height, hair color, or
intelligence?
In the military realm, there have been efforts to regulate or
set standards for biotechnology. The Biological Weapons
Convention, which prohibits the development and use
of biological weapons, has more than one hundred and

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
19ATLANTIC COUNCIL
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
eighty parties. 60 The convention also requires regular
review conferences to assess new developments in
biotechnology. The United Nations (UN) Convention on
Biological Diversity governs the development and use of
genetically modified organisms.61 Other transnational enti-
ties, including the Roman Catholic Church, have offered
ethical guidance on the use of biotechnology, including
genetic engineering and stem cell research, though their
guidance is not binding on states.62
Other regulations, including, for example, the modification
of lethal viruses to be vaccine-resistant, are largely self-im-
posed. Binding regulations are needed to establish safe-
guards related to engineered viruses. The DTA should
establish a working group to discuss these and other
ethical dilemmas posed by emerging biotechnology and
coordinate the development of potential norms in this area.
COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY
The DTA should seek to achieve consensus around a set
of liberal, democratic norms for the use of communica-
tions technology. Citing national security concerns, China,
Russia, and other autorcracies have sought to implement
measures aimed at restricting information flows over the
internet. The CCP has already begun proffering its view in
multilateral settings, including the Belt and Road Initiative’s
“Digital Silk Road,” which promotes China’s vision of
Internet governance. A UN Group of Government Experts
60 “Biological Weapons Convention,” United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, accessed
May 20, https://www.un.org/disarmament/biological-weapons/.
61 Sayler, Emerging Military T echnologies, 23.
62 Brandon Keim, “Vatican Goes 21st Century with Biotech Advice,” Wired, December 12, 2008, https://www.wired.com/2008/12/vaticanbioethic/.
63 Advancing Cyberstability: Final Report, Global Commission on the Stability of Cyberspace, November 2019, https://cyberstability.org/report/.
has met regularly to try to achieve consensus on cyber
norms, but given the divide between democracies and
autocracies in this realm, such efforts have proven to be
challenging.
The DTA could look to embrace the recently issued
Declaration for the Future of the Internet, developed by
the United States and the EU, for guidance, as it includes
an agreement on principles to protect human rights and
privacy, and promote the free flow of information. The
Declaration was prepared by a new global partnership
led by the United States to focus on digital norms. Other
efforts, including the Global Commission on the Stability
of Cyberspace (GCSC), may provide useful guidance.
The GCSC has proposed norms such as prohibitions on
targeting electoral infrastructure through cyber means and
tampering with key components in software and hardware
IT products.63
The cyber domain is also becoming a more important
arena for military action below the traditional threshold of
armed conflict. Clear-eyed discussions between democra-
cies and autocratic rivals are necessary to define red lines
for hostile action in the cyber domain. This could include
a norm against attacking nuclear command, control, and
communications infrastructure and critical infrastructure
(e.g., oil pipelines) that directly impact civilians. While inter-
national cyber norms exist, these are voluntary and gover-
nance in individual states varies.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
20 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
DIRECTED ENERGY
Another area that requires new norms relates to the use
of directed energy weapons. The Department of Defense
defines directed-energy weapons as those “using concen-
trated electromagnetic energy, rather than kinetic energy,
to ‘incapacitate, damage, disable, or destroy enemy equip-
ment, facilities, and/or personnel.’”64 These weapons have
large upside potential in that they can be employed on the
battlefield for air and missile defense and other applica-
tions at a lower cost per shot.65 These weapons can also
be employed for more nefarious ends. Indeed, Russia
has been suspected of using directed-energy weapons
against US embassies around the world to sicken and
disable US diplomats. These cases of Havana Syndrome
have left US embassy officials around the world with
lasting brain injuries. Such attacks are invisible and silent,
and victims generally do not know they are under attack or
what is causing their physical ailments.
Should the use of directed-energy weapons be banned
outright, given the harmful consequences to the human
body? Should their use be outlawed in peacetime? The
DTA should bring together leading democracies to nego-
tiate norms for the use of directed energy. While it would
be useful to engage Russia and China as well, the United
States and its allies would be in a stronger position if they
could develop common norms among themselves first.
HYPERSONICS
Hypersonic technology has much promise for both commer-
cial and civilian applications. It can be employed for rapid air
travel or for missiles that travel at more than five times the
speed of sound and are maneuverable. Many arms control
experts believe that these characteristics of hypersonic
missiles render them especially destabilizing to nuclear stra-
tegic stability. Leading powers around the world, including
the United States, China, and Russia, are investing in hyper-
sonic missile technology. These weapons could be even
more dangerous if they were obtained by other rogue
regimes, such as North Korea or Iran.
The Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR)—an
informal agreement among likeminded countries to
limit the spread of missile technology—does not impose
any binding restrictions on members, however, and
major missile exporters, such as China, are not included.
Moreover, there is also some ambiguity as to how
64 Kelley M. Sayler and John R. Hoehn, “Defense Primer: Directed-Energy Weapons,” Congressional
Research Service, July 20, 2021, https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/AD1145136.pdf.
65 Ibid.
66 Kroenig and Volpe, “3-D Printing the Bomb?”
67 Krepon, Michael. “Norm Setting for Outer Space,” Space News. 8 September 2014.
hypersonic missile technology should be covered in the
MTCR.
The DTA should work with MTCR members to update the
guidelines to explicitly account for hypersonic missiles.
The US and its allies should also seek to expand MTCR
membership to include other missile exporters.
ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING
New norms are also required to address the use of addi-
tive manufacturing. This technology can be used to “make
anything anywhere.”66 The technology is available on the
commercial market and is dual-use in nature, meaning that
the same machine can be used to print toys or weapons,
including parts for nuclear arms. The weapons proliferation
risks of 3D printing are understood in the expert commu-
nity, but there are not yet adequate norms or controls on
the technology.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) and the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) restrict the
transfer of sensitive nuclear technology to nonnuclear
states, but they cannot fully address the proliferation threat
posed by 3D printing. The DTA could encourage the NSG
to update global export controls and other nonprolifera-
tion policies to address the proliferation threat posed by
3D printing. One possibility would be to examine the possi-
bility of end-user controls that prohibit the transfer of this
technology to countries of proliferation concern.
SPACE TECHNOLOGY
Since the earliest days of the Space Race, it has been clear
that advances in technology and scientific research have
allowed humankind to venture into space and establish a
useful presence there. But progress on the development
of international norms for outer space has been mixed. The
1967 Outer Space Treaty bans weapons of mass destruc-
tion in space, and the United Nations passed a resolution
on International Cooperation in the Peaceful Use of Outer
Space in 2013. More recently, however, Sino-American
tensions over satellites and space debris, in particular, have
been a source of dispute. Clashing objectives of national
security and assertion of power have prevented effective
dialogue on international norms from taking place.67

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
21ATLANTIC COUNCIL
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
As spacefaring democracies and autocracies alike
increase their presence throughout the space domain,
additional norms and data-sharing mechanisms are
needed.68 Commercial firms are placing tens of thou-
sands of small satellites in low-Earth orbit, creating poten-
tial issues for space traffic management (STM). The DTA
can serve as a forum for facilitating the exchange of space
situational awareness (SSA) data among trusted democ-
racies. The DTA should help democracies speak with one
voice in fora such as the UN Office for Outer Space Affairs
and other intergovernmental bodies such as the Inter-
Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee (IADC) to
help develop norms for STM and space debris mitigation.
Recently, the United States and several allies and part-
ners signed the Artemis Accords, which sets forth princi-
ples for cooperation in the civil exploration and peaceful
68 Clementine G. Starling et al., The Future of Security in Space: A Thirty-Y ear US Strategy, Atlantic Council, April 2021, https://www.atlanticcouncil.
org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/TheFutureofSecurityinSpace.pdf; and Nicholas Eftimiades, Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security,
Atlantic Council, May 2022, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/small-satellites-the-implications-for-national-security/.
69 Chris Johnson, “Draft International Code of Conduct for Outer Space Activities Fact Sheet,” Secure World Foundation, February 2014,
https://swfound.org/media/166384/swf_draft_international_code_of_conduct_for_
outer_space_activities_fact_sheet_february_2014.pdf; and Joshua Posaner and Giorgio Leali, “America’s New Moonshot: Getting Europe to
Sign Up to Its Space Rules,” Politico Europe, January 4, 2022, https://www.politico.eu/article/space-rules-us-france-germany-europe-moon/.
use of outer space. Separately, the EU has also drafted an
International Code of Conduct for Outer Space Activities.
These measures have provided a foundation for coopera-
tion and future dialogue that the DTA could help advance.
The DTA can help democracies develop norms around
space weapons. A DTA space working group could focus
on the role of dual-capable space systems such as satel-
lite servicing missions, which could interact with satellites
in orbit either to extend their lives with refueling, or, repur-
posed as a weapon, destroy them through collision. These
efforts could build on the Artemis Accords.69 The United
States and China have also been engaged directly on
space-related issues in forums such as the Space Security
Exchanges and the US-China Civil Space Dialogue. In
consultation with DTA members, these dialogues could
continue as a venue to encourage cooperation.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
22 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
V. ORGANIZATION
70 The group has experience working together, having met at the level of policy planning directors and Washington-based ambassadors
for nearly a decade. “D-10 Strategy Forum,” Atlantic Council, accessed May 30, 2022, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/programs/
scowcroft-center-for-strategy-and-security/global-strategy-initiative/democratic-order-initiative/d-10-strategy-forum/.
The DTA should consist of a core group of technologically
advanced democracies that share a common interest in
ensuring that the democratic world prevails in the race
for emerging technologies. The D-10 could serve as a
core group for membership in the DTA. This group, which
includes the G7, plus South Korea and Australia, as well
as the European Union, brings together leading democ-
racies from North America, Europe, and the Indo-Pacific.
This group, consisting of fully consolidated democracies, is
influential— comprising more than half of the global GDP.70
Given that this core group of countries will almost certainly
be involved in every major discussion regarding new tech-
nology, it makes sense that they be given a permanent
seat at the table.
In addition to the D-10, the DTA could engage with a
broader, flexible grouping of countries depending on the
issue. This includes other leading democracies in the tech-
nology field, such as Israel, the Netherlands, Sweden,
Finland, and India. Other nations, including non-democra-
cies, as well as corporations, international organizations,
and other entities should also be engaged in a pragmatic
manner in order to address a wide range of technology
challenges.
To help formalize the DTA, a working-level meeting of
senior officials from leading democracies should come
together to outline a charter document that frames the
alliance’s objectives. The group should also finalize the
alliance’s organizational structure and plan for regular
engagement among members. Alliance members could
aim to announce the creation of the DTA at a G7 summit,
with Australia and South Korea also invited to participate.
The DTA should consist of a core group of technologically advanced democracies, including those represented in the G7
or the D10. (via REUTERS)

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
23ATLANTIC COUNCIL
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
Upon agreement by the D-10 to establish a DTA, each
member should establish a director and office for tech-
nology cooperation. These offices should engage in a
sustained and structured dialogue with their counterparts
in other DTA countries. In addition, at least once a year,
the DTA should convene at higher levels with at least one
cabinet/minister-level official from each country presiding
over the proceedings. These higher-profile meetings will
help bring attention to the work of the DTA and reinforce
this priority among national leaderships.
As this report noted earlier, substantial progress has been
made toward facilitating greater cooperation among demo-
cratic allies and partners in the technology domain. For the
DTA to become a reality, US leadership will be important,
71 “UK Seeks Alliance to Avoid Reliance on Chinese T ech: The Times,” Reuters, May 28, 2020,
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-britain-tech-coalition/uk-seeks-alliance-to-avoid-reliance-on-chinese-tech-the-times-idUSKBN2343JW.
but active buy-in from allies is also essential. The EU has
been proactive in regulating the technology domain, and
through the US-EU Trade and Technology Council, it has
already joined the United States in a dialogue on tech -
nology issues. This type of dialogue could be extended to
a broader, more formal grouping of democracies.71
While these consultations are ongoing, leading democ-
racies should continue to bolster cooperation on tech-
nology through the existing platforms, from the G7 Global
Partnership on Artificial Intelligence to the Quad’s Critical
and Emerging Technology Working Group. These preex-
isting forums can be used to foster habits of cooperation
and could facilitate a transition to a formal DTA.
Citations for Graphs and Tables
a. “The State of US Science and Engineering 2020,” National Science Foundation, January 2020, https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20201/global-r-d;
b. OECD [@OECD], “Over 60% of science, tech, engineers, math #grads coming out of China & India in 2030.”
Twitter. Retrieved June 29, 2022, https://twitter.com/oecd/status/593426808973959168?lang=es;
c. “Critical and Emerging T echnologies List Update,” National Science and T echnology Council, February 2022, https://www.
whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/02-2022-Critical-and-Emerging-T echnologies-List-Update.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
24 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
VI. CHALLENGES AND OBSTACLES
A new DTA could play a valuable role in positioning the
United States and its allies to succeed in the race for
advanced technologies. But there are significant chal-
lenges that must also be considered.
• DTA could further polarize the global order. As with
other proposed entities for cooperation among democ-
racies, one significant concern is that by encour -
aging greater technology coordination among demo-
cratic allies, the DTA could further polarize the global
order. While this is an important possibility to consider,
the reality is that the global order is already polar-
ized. Competition between democratic and autocratic
powers is now an established feature of the current
system. The key question is whether democratic
nations can find effective ways to organize for success,
even as they continue to engage with autocratic rivals,
bilaterally and through other entities, such as the UN
and the G20.
• Technology norms will not be effective if China is
excluded. Another important concern is that efforts
to develop norms for the use of advanced technolo-
gies will be ineffective if major technology producers,
such as China, are not at the table to contribute to their
development. Ideally, China would play a productive
role in contributing to the development of rules and
norms that are consistent with international norms and
democratic values, and every effort should be made to
engage with China on this, including through entities
such as the G20 and other technology-specific venues.
But meaningful cooperation may be difficult to achieve
in many areas of concern. Therefore, while seeking
cooperation with China, the Untited States must simul-
taneously work with likeminded nations to make prog-
ress on technology challenges facing the free world.
Once established, these norms can help regulate the
use of technology among members of the DTA. They
could also help set a global standard that may deter the
misuse or misapplication of such technologies.
• Progress will be easier in smaller coalitions of like-
minded states. Another critique that merits consid-
eration is that by attempting to bring together a
cross-regional group of leading democracies over
a broad range of technology sectors, it will be more
complicated to achieve progress in any specific area.
While this may be the case in some instances, the
goal of the DTA is not to substitute or replace existing
venues for technology cooperation; rather, it is to
provide a coordinating mechanism, with the premise
that their outcomes will have greater impact if imple-
mented as part of an integrated framework. It could also
help identify and fill gaps in the existing architecture of
technology cooperation.
French President Emmanuel Macron delivers a speech during the Global Forum on Artificial Intelligence for Humanity
(GFAIH) at the Institut de France in Paris, France October 30, 2019. (Ludovic Marin/Pool via REUTERS)

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
25ATLANTIC COUNCIL
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
VII. CONCLUSION
The United States and its democratic allies and partners
are facing a contested global order, marked particularly
by the challenges from autocratic rivals China and Russia.
To maintain their power and influence in the international
system, leading democracies must position themselves to
succeed in the race for advanced technologies.
Through a new technology alliance, leading democracies
will be stronger-positioned to lead the development of,
and shape the rules and norms related to, the emerging
technologies of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. As this
report contends, the DTA would strengthen innovation
ecosystems in the free world, limit China’s unfair tech
advantages, and establish technology norms consistent
with democratic norms.
For decades, the rules-based system has sought to expand
peace, prosperity, and freedom. Sustaining and adapting
this system to the twenty-first century world will require a
concerted effort. The time is ripe for democracies to work
together to fully harness the potentially groundbreaking
innovations of the twenty-first century, while taking steps to
mitigate against their potential harms.
Hypersonic technology holds much promise for both military and civilian applications. (via NASA)

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
26 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Ash Jain is director for democratic order with
the Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security,
where he oversees the Atlantic Council’s
Democratic Order Initiative and D-10 Strategy
Forum. His work focuses on strengthening cooperation
among democracies and advancing a rules-based, demo-
cratic order. He previously served as a member of the
secretary of state’s policy planning staff, focusing on US
alliances and partnerships, international norms, and chal-
lenges to the democratic order — including those posed
by Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea. Mr. Jain was a
Bosch public policy fellow with the German Marshall Fund
Transatlantic Academy and executive director for the
Project for a United and Strong America, where he coor-
dinated a bipartisan foreign policy task force to produce
a blueprint for a values-based national security strategy.
He also served as an adviser for the White House Office of
Global Communications and with the Senate Committee
on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. Mr. Jain
has also taught as an adjunct professor at Georgetown
University’s School of Foreign Service. He earned a JD/MS
in foreign service from Georgetown University and a BA in
political science from the University of Michigan.
Matthew Kroenig is the deputy director for
strategy in the Scowcroft Center for Strategy
and Security and director of the Scowcroft
Strategy Initiative. In this role, he supports the
director in overseeing all aspects of the Center’s work
and manages its strategy practice area. His own research
focuses on great power competition with China and
Russia, emerging technology, and strategic deterrence
and weapons nonproliferation. Dr. Kroenig is also a tenured
associate professor of government and foreign service at
Georgetown University. He previously served in several
positions in the US government, including in the Strategy
Office in the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the
Strategic Assessments Group at the Central Intelligence
Agency, and is currently serving as a commissioner on
the Congressional Commission on the Strategic Posture
of the United States. Dr. Kroenig is the author or editor of
seven books, including The Return of Great Power Rivalry:
Democracy versus Autocracy from the Ancient World to the
US and China (Oxford University Press, 2020), which was
Amazon’s #1 New Release in International Relations. He is a
life member of the Council on Foreign Relations, and holds
an MA and PhD in political science from the University of
California at Berkeley.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge the invaluable contributions of
Jeffrey Cimmino, as well as others that helped develop this report, including
Danielle Miller, Amanda Elliott, Jacob Levitan, and Imran Bayoumi.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
*Executive Committee Members

List as of May 2, 2022

CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers

EXECUTIVE
CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones

PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe

EXECUTIVE VICE
CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley

VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev

TREASURER
*George Lund

DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
John Bonsell
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
Richard R. Burt
*Teresa Carlson
*James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Richard Edelman
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Mark T. Esper
*Michael Fisch
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
*Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Brian L. Kelly
Henry A. Kissinger
John E. Klein
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Yann Le Pallec
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Christian Marrone
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Dambisa F. Moyo
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
*Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell
dddMcCormick
Michael Punke
Ashraf Qazi
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
Gil Tenzer
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim

HONORARY
DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster

*Executive Committee Members

List as of May 2, 2022

CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers

EXECUTIVE
CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones

PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe

EXECUTIVE VICE
CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley

VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev

TREASURER
*George Lund

DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
John Bonsell
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
Richard R. Burt
*Teresa Carlson
*James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Richard Edelman
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Mark T. Esper
*Michael Fisch
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
*Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Brian L. Kelly
Henry A. Kissinger
John E. Klein
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Yann Le Pallec
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Christian Marrone
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Dambisa F. Moyo
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
*Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell
dddMcCormick
Michael Punke
Ashraf Qazi
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
Gil Tenzer
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim

HONORARY
DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
TOWARD A DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE
28 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan
organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and
engagement in international affairs
based on the central role of the
Atlantic community in meeting
today’s global challenges.
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 778-4952
www.AtlanticCouncil.org
