
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
EYE TO EYE IN AI
Developing Artificial
Intelligence for National
Security and Defense
Margarita Konaev and Tate Nurkin
Atlantic CouncilAtlantic Council
SCOWCROFT CENTER
FOR STRATEGY AND SECURITY

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
The Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security works to develop
sustainable, nonpartisan strategies to address the most important
security challenges facing the United States and its allies and partners.
The Center honors the legacy of service of General Brent Scowcroft and
embodies his ethos of nonpartisan commitment to the cause of security,
support for US leadership in cooperation with allies and partners, and
dedication to the mentorship of the next generation of leaders.
Forward Defense (FD) shapes the debate around the greatest defense
challenges facing the United States and its allies, and creates forward-
looking assessments of the trends, technologies, and concepts that
will define the future of warfare. Through the futures we forecast, the
scenarios we wargame, and the analyses we produce, F D develops
actionable strategies to help the United States navigate major-power
conflict and defend forward, alongside allies and partners. As the
character of war rapidly changes, F D assesses the operational concepts
and defense-industrial tools necessary to effectively deter and defend
against emerging military challenges.
May 2022
ISBN-13: 978-1-61977-234-2
This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic
Council Policy on Intellectual Independence. The authors are solely
responsible for its analysis and recommendations. The Atlantic Council
and its donors do not determine, nor do they necessarily endorse or
advocate for, any of this report’s conclusions.
The cover artwork is an artificial-intelligence powered painting, generated
by Atlantic Council Young Global Professional Caroline Steel on WOMBO
Dream. Ms. Steel entered “eye” as the prompt and chose “Synthwave”
as the art style, and the AI-powered platform generated the image using
those inputs. Source: https://www.wombo.art/

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ....................................................................................................2
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................4
DEFINING AI ........................................................................................................................6
MILITARY COMPETITION IN AI INNOVATION AND ADOPTION .......................... 9
OVERVIEW OF US MILITARY PROGRESS IN AI ........................................................13
ACCELERATING DOD AI ADOPTION .........................................................................18
KEY TAKEAWAYS AND RECOMMENDATIONS .......................................................23
CONCLUSION ...................................................................................................................27
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................................28
ABOUT THE AUTHORS ..................................................................................................29
EYE TO EYE IN AI
Developing Artificial Intelligence for
National Security and Defense

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Over the past several years, militaries around the
world have increased interest and investment in the
development of artificial intelligence (AI) to support
a diverse set of defense and national security
goals. However, general comprehension of what
AI is, how it factors into the strategic competition
between the United States and China, and how to
optimize the defense-industrial base for this new
era of deployed military AI is still lacking. It is now
well past time to see eye to eye in AI, to establish
a shared understanding of modern AI between the
policy community and the technical community,
and to align perspectives and priorities between
the Department of Defense (DoD) and its industry
partners. Accordingly, this paper addresses the
following core questions.
What is AI and Why Should
National Security Policymakers
Care?
AI-enabled capabilities hold the potential to deliver
game-changing advantages for US national security
and defense, including
 ● greatly accelerated and improved
decision-making;
 ● enhanced military readiness and operational
competence;
 ● heightened human cognitive and physical
performance;
 ● new methods of design, manufacture, and
sustainment of military systems;
 ● novel capabilities that can upset delicate
military balances; and
 ● the ability to create and detect strategic
cyberattacks, disinformation campaigns, and
influence operations.
Recognition of the indispensable nature of AI as
a horizontal enabler of the critical capabilities
necessary to deter and win the future fight has
gained traction within the DoD, which has made
notable investments in AI over the past five years.
1 Katrina Manson, “US Has Already Lost AI Fight to China, Says Ex-Pentagon Software Chief,” Financial Times, October 10, 2021, https://www.
ft.com/content/f939db9a-40af-4bd1-b67d-10492535f8e0.
But, policymakers beyond the Pentagon—as well as
the general public and the firms that are developing
AI technologies—require a better understanding of
the capabilities and limitations of today’s AI, and a
clear sense of both the positive and the potentially
destabilizing implications of AI for national security.
Why Is AI Essential to Strategic
Competition?
The Pentagon’s interest in AI must also be
seen through the lens of intensifying strategic
competition with China—and, to a lesser extent,
Russia—with a growing comprehension that falling
behind on AI and related emerging technologies
could compromise the strategic, technological, and
operational advantages retained by the US military
since the end of the Cold War. Some defense
leaders even argue that the United States has
already lost the military-technological competition
to China.1
While this paper does not subscribe to such a
fatalist perspective, it argues that the stakes of the
military AI competition are high—and that time is
short.
What Are the Obstacles to DoD
AI Adoption?
The infamous Pentagon bureaucracy, an antiquated
acquisition and contracting system, and a risk-
averse organizational culture continue to inhibit
the DoD’s ability to bring in external innovation
and move more rapidly toward widespread
AI integration and adoption. Solving systemic
problems of this caliber is a tall order. But, important
changes are already under way to facilitate DoD
engagement with the commercial technology sector
and innovative startups, and there seems to be a
shared sense of urgency to solidify these public-
private partnerships in order to ensure sustained
US technological and military advantage. Still,
much remains to be done in aligning the DoD’s
and its industry partners’ perspectives about the

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
3
EYE TO EYE IN AI
most impactful areas for AI development, as well as
articulating and implementing common technical
standards and testing mechanisms for trustworthy
and responsible AI.
Key Takeaways and
Recommendations
The DoD must move quickly to transition from a
broad recognition of AI’s importance to the creation
of pathways, processes, practices, and principles
that will accelerate adoption of the capabilities
enabled by AI technologies. Without intentional,
coordinated, and immediate action, the United
States risks falling behind competitors in the ability
to harness game-winning technologies that will
dominate the kinetic and non-kinetic battlefield
of the future. This report identifies three courses
of action for the DoD that can help ensure the
US military retains its global leadership in AI by
catalyzing the internal changes necessary for more
rapid AI adoption and capitalizing on the vibrant and
diverse US innovation ecosystem, including
 ● prioritizing safe, secure, trusted, and
responsible AI development and deployment;
 ● aligning key priorities for AI development and
strengthening coordination between the DoD
and industry partners to help close AI capability
gaps; and
 ● promoting coordination between leading
defense-technology companies and
nontraditional vendors to accelerate DoD AI
adoption.
This report is published at a time that is both
opportune and uncertain in terms of the future
trajectory of the DoD’s AI adoption efforts and
global geopolitics. The ongoing conflict in
Ukraine has placed in stark relief the importance
of constraining authoritarian impulses to control
territory, populations, standards, and narratives,
and the role that alliances committed to maintaining
long-standing norms of international behavior can
play in this effort. As a result, the authors urge the
DoD to engage and integrate the United States’
allies and trusted partners at governmental and,
where possible, industry levels to better implement
the three main recommendations of this paper.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
AI embodies a significant opportunity for defense
policymakers. The ability of AI to process and fuse
information, and to distill data into insights that
augment decision-making, can lift the “fog of war”
in a chaotic, contested environment in which speed
is king. AI can also unlock the possibility of new
types of attritable and single-use uncrewed systems
that can enhance deterrence.2 It can help safeguard
the lives of US service members, for example,
by powering the navigation software that guides
autonomous resupply trucks in conflict zones. 3
While humans remain in charge of making the final
decision on targeting, AI algorithms are increasingly
playing a role in helping intelligence professionals
identify and track malicious actors, with the aim
of “shortening the kill chain and accelerating the
speed of decision-making.”4
AI development and integration are also imperative
due to the broader geostrategic context in which
the United States operates—particularly the
strategic competition with China. 5 The People’s
Liberation Army (PLA) budget for AI seems to match
that of the US military, and the PLA is developing AI
technology for a similarly broad set of applications
and capabilities, including training and simulation,
swarming autonomous systems, and information
operations—among many others—all of which could
abrogate the US military-technological advantage. 6
2 Yuna Huh Wong, et al., Deterrence in the Age of Thinking Machines, RAND, 2020. https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_
reports/RR2700/RR2797/RAND_RR2797.pdf.
3 Maureen Thompson, “Utilizing Semi-Autonomous Resupply to Mitigate Risks to Soldiers on the Battlefield,” Army Futures Command, October
26, 2021, https://www.army.mil/article/251476/utilizing_semi_autonomous_resupply_to_mitigate_risks_to_soldiers_on_the_battlefield.
4 Amy Hudson, “AI Efforts Gain Momentum as US, Allies and Partners Look to Counter China,” Air Force Magazine, July 13, 2021, https://www.
airforcemag.com/dods-artificial-intelligence-efforts-gain-momentum-as-us-allies-and-partners-look-to-counter-china.
5 On AI and the strategic competition, see: Michael C. Horowitz, “Artificial Intelligence, International Competition, and the Balance of Power,”
Texas National Security Review 1, 3 (May 2018), https://repositories.lib.utexas.edu/bitstream/handle/2152/65638/TNSR-Vol-1-Iss-3_Horowitz.pdf;
Michael C. Horowitz, et al., “Strategic Competition in an Era of Artificial Intelligence,” Center for National Security, July 2018, http://files.cnas.org.
s3.amazonaws.com/documents/CNAS-Strategic-Competition-in-an-Era-of-AI-July-2018_v2.pdf.
6 Ryan Fedasiuk, Jennifer Melot, and Ben Murphy, “Harnessed Lightning: How the Chinese Military is Adopting Artificial Intelligence,” Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, Georgetown University, October 2021, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/harnessed-lightning.
7 C. Todd Lopez, “Ethics Key to AI Development, Austin Says,” DOD News, July 14, 2021, https://www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/
Article/2692297/ethics-key-to-ai-development-austin-says/.
8 Danielle C. Tarraf, et al., The Department of Defense Posture for Artificial Intelligence: Assessment and Recommendations, RAND, 2019, https://
www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR4229.html.
As US Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin noted
in July 2021, “China’s leaders have made clear
they intend to be globally dominant in AI by the
year 2030. Beijing already talks about using
AI for a range of missions, from surveillance to
cyberattacks to autonomous weapons.” 7 The United
States cannot afford to fall behind China or other
competitors.
To accelerate AI adoption, the Pentagon must
confront its demons: a siloed bureaucracy that
frustrates efficient data-management efforts and
thwarts the technical infrastructure needed to
leverage DoD data at scale; antiquated acquisition
and contracting processes that inhibit the DoD’s
ability to bring in external innovation and transition
successful AI technology prototypes to production
and deployment; and a risk-averse culture at odds
with the type of openness, experimentation, and
tolerance for failure known to fuel innovation. 8
Several efforts are under way to tackle some of
these problems. Reporting directly to the under
secretary of defense, the chief data and artificial
intelligence officer (CDAO) role was recently
announced to consolidate the office of the chief
data officer, the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center
(JAIC), and the Defense Digital Service (DDS). This
reorganization brings the DoD’s data and AI efforts
under one roof to deconflict overlapping authorities
that have made it difficult to plan and execute AI
INTRODUCTION

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
5
EYE TO EYE IN AI
projects.9 Expanding use of alternative acquisition
methods, organizations like the Defense Innovation
Unit (DIU) and the Air Force’s AFWERX are bridging
the gap with the commercial technology sector,
particularly startups and nontraditional vendors.
Still, some tech leaders believe these efforts are
falling short, warning that “time is running out.” 10
As the DoD shifts toward adoption of AI at scale, this
report seeks to provide insights into outstanding
questions regarding the nature of modern AI,
summarize key advances in China’s race toward
military AI development, and highlight some of the
most compelling AI use cases across the DoD. It
also offers a brief assessment of the incongruencies
between the DoD and its industry partners, which
continue to stymie the Pentagon’s access to the
game-changing technologies the US military will
need to deter adversary aggression and dominate
future battlefields.
9 Brian Drake, “A To-Do List for the Pentagon’s New AI Chief,” Defense One, December 14, 2021, https://www.defenseone.com/ideas/2021/12/list-
pentagons-new-ai-chief/359757.
10 Valerie Insinna, “Silicon Valley Warns the Pentagon: ‘Time Is Running Out,’” Breaking Defense, December 21, 2021, https://breakingdefense.
com/2021/12/silicon-valley-warns-the-pentagon-time-is-running-out.
The urgency of competition, however, must not
overshadow the commitment to the moral code
that guides the US military as it enters the age of
deployed AI. As such, the report reiterates the
need to effectively translate the DoD’s ethical AI
guidelines into common technical standards and
evaluation metrics for assessing trustworthiness,
and to enhance cooperation and coordination with
the DoD’s industry partners—especially startups
and nontraditional vendors across these critical
issues.
We conclude this report with a number of
considerations for policymakers and other
AI stakeholders across the national security
ecosystem. Specifically, we urge the DoD to
prioritize safe, secure, trusted, and responsible AI
development and deployment, align key priorities
for AI development between the DoD and industry
to help close the DoD’s AI capability gaps, and
promote coordination between leading defense
technology companies and nontraditional vendors
to accelerate the DoD’s AI adoption efforts.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Artificial Intelligence, Machine
Learning, and Big-Data
Analytics
The term “artificial intelligence” encompasses an
array of research approaches, techniques, and
technologies spread across a wide range of fields,
from computer science and engineering to medicine
and philosophy.
The 2018 DoD AI Strategy defined AI as “the
ability of machines to perform tasks that normally
require human intelligence—for example,
recognizing patterns, learning from experience,
drawing conclusions, making predictions, or taking
action.”11 This ability to execute tasks traditionally
thought to be only possible by humans is central
to many definitions of AI, although others are less
proscriptive. The National Artificial Intelligence
Act of 2020 merely describes AI as machine-
based systems that can “make predictions,
recommendations or decisions” for a given set
of human-defined objectives. 12 Others have
emphasized rationality, rather than fidelity to
human performance, in their definitions of artificial
intelligence.13
As the list of tasks that computers can perform at
human or near-human levels continues to grow, the
bar for what is considered “intelligent” rises, and
the definition of AI evolves accordingly.14 The task
of optical character recognition (OCR), for instance,
11 “Summary of the 2018 Department of Defense Artificial Intelligence Strategy: Harnessing AI to Advance Our Security and Prosperity,” US
Department of Defense, 2018, https://media.defense.gov/2019/Feb/12/2002088963/-1/-1/1/SUMMARY-OF-DOD-AI-STRATEGY.PDF.
12 “Artificial Intelligence,” US Department of State, accessed May 4, 2022, https://www.state.gov/artificial-intelligence.
13 Stuart J. Russell and Peter Norvig, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, Fourth Edition (Hoboken, NJ: Pearson, 2021), 1. For further
definitions of AI, see, for example: Nils J. Nilsson, The Quest for Artificial Intelligence: A History of Ideas and Achievements (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2010); Shane Legg and Marcus Hutter, “A Collection of Definitions of Intelligence,” Dalle Molle Institute for Artificial
Intelligence, June 15, 2007, https://
arxiv.org/pdf/0706.3639.pdf.
14 Robert W. Button, Artificial Intelligence and the Military, RAND, September 7, 2017, https://www.rand.org/blog/2017/09/artificial-intelligence-and-
the-military.html.
15 Ibid.
16 “AI Principles: Recommendations on the Ethical Use of Artificial Intelligence by the Department of Defense,” Defense Innovation Board, October
2019, https://admin.govexec.com/media/dib_ai_principles_-_supporting_document_-_embargoed_copy_(oct_2019).pdf.
17 Danielle C. Tarraf, William Shelton, Edward Parker, Brien Alkire, Diana Gehlhaus, Justin Grana, Alexis Levedahl, Jasmin Léveillé, Jared
Mondschein, James Ryseff, et al., The Department of Defense Posture for Artificial Intelligence.
once stood at the leading edge of AI research,
but implementations of this technology, such as
automated check processing, have long since
become routine, and most experts would no longer
consider such a system an example of artificial
intelligence. This constant evolution of the definition
is, in part, responsible for the confusion surrounding
modern AI.15
This report adopts the Defense Innovation Board’s
(DIB) definition by considering AI as “a variety of
information processing techniques and technologies
used to perform a goal-oriented task and the
means to reason in the pursuit of that task.” 16 These
techniques, as the DIB explains, can include, but
are not limited to, symbolic logic, expert systems,
machine learning (ML), and hybrid systems. We use
the term “AI” when referring to the broad range of
relevant techniques and technologies, and “ML”
when dealing with this subset of systems more
specifically. For alternative conceptualizations, the
2019 RAND study on the DoD’s posture for AI offers
a useful sample of relevant definitions put forth by
federal, academic, and technical sources. 17
Much of the progress made in AI over the past
decade has come from ML, a modern AI paradigm
that differs fundamentally from the human-driven
expert systems that dominated in the past. Rather
than following a traditional software-development
process, in which programs are designed and
then coded by human engineers, “machine
DEFINING AI

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
7
EYE TO EYE IN AI
learning systems use computing power to execute
algorithms that learn from data.” 18
Three elements—algorithms, data, and
computing power—are foundational to modern AI
technologies, although their relative importance
changes depending on particular methods used
and, inherently, the trajectory of technological
development.
Given that the availability of very large data sets
has been critical to the development of ML and
AI, it is worth noting that, while the fields of big-
data analytics and AI are closely related, there are
important differences between the two. Big-data
analytics look for patterns, define and structure
large sets of data, and attempt to gain insights, but
are an essentially descriptive technique unable to
make predictions or act on results. Predictive data
analytics go a step further, and use collected data
to make predictions based on historical information.
Such predictive insights have been extremely useful
in commercial settings such as marketing or business
analytics, but the practice is nonetheless reliant on
the assumption that future patterns will follow past
trends, and depends on human data analysts to
create and test assumptions, query the data, and
validate patterns. Machine-learning systems, on
the other hand, are able to autonomously generate
assumptions, test those assumptions, and learn from
them.19
18 Ben Buchanan, “The AI Triad and What It Means for National Security Strategy,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, Georgetown
University, August 2020, iii, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/the-ai-triad-and-what-it-means-for-national-security-strategy.
19 Ibid.
20 Alexey Kurakin, Ian Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio, “Adversarial Machine Learning at Scale,” Arxiv, Cornell University, February 2017, https://arxiv.
org/abs/1611.01236.
ML is, therefore, a subset of AI techniques that
have allowed researchers to tackle many problems
previously considered impossible, with numerous
promising applications across national security and
defense, as discussed later in the report.
Limitations of AI
There are, however, important limitations and
drawbacks to AI systems—particularly in operational
environments—in large part, because of their
brittleness. These systems perform well in stable
simulation and training settings, but they can
struggle to function reliably or correctly if the data
inputs change, or if they encounter uncertain or
novel situations.
ML systems are also particularly vulnerable to
adversarial attacks aimed at the algorithms or data
upon which the system relies. Even small changes
to data sets or algorithms can cause the system
to malfunction, reach wrong conclusions, or fail in
other unpredictable ways. 20
Another challenge is that AI/ML systems do not
typically have the capacity to explain their own
reasoning, or the processes by which they reach
certain conclusions, provide recommendations,
and take action, in a way that is evident or
understandable to humans. Explainability—or
what some have referred to as interpretability—is
critical for building trust in human-AI teams, and
is especially important as advances in AI enable
Big-Data
Analytics
Predictive
Big-Data
Analytics
Machine
Learning
Descriptive technique
unable to make
predictions or act on
results of data analysis.
Makes predictions
based on historical
information. Is reliant
on the assumption
that future patterns
follow past trends.
Allows computer
programmers to train
machines to recognize
data of interest and make
predictions or support
decisions.
Figure 1. The progression from, and variance among, big-data analytics, predictive big-data analytics, and
machine learning, three terms that are occasionally conflated in discussions of AI.
Source: Authors.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
greater autonomy in weapons, which raises serious
ethical and legal concerns about human control,
responsibility, and accountability for decisions
related to the use of lethal force.
A related set of challenges includes transparency,
traceability, and integrity of the data sources, as
well as the prevention or detection of adversary
attacks on the algorithms of AI-based systems.
Having visibility into who trains these systems,
what data are used in training, and what goes
into an algorithm’s recommendations can mitigate
unwanted bias and ensure these systems are used
appropriately, responsibly, and ethically. All these
challenges are inherently linked to the question of
trust explored later in the report.
Brittle AI Adversarial Attacks /
Data Corruption
Untraceable
AI
Unexplainable
AI
Limitations
and
drawbacks
of AI
Figure 2. Understanding AI limitations.
Source: Authors. Lower right icon created by Ranah Pixel Studio.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
9
EYE TO EYE IN AI
Much of the urgency driving the DoD’s AI
development and adoption efforts stems from
the need to ensure the United States and its
allies outpace China in the military-technological
competition that has come to dominate the
relationship between the two nations. Russia’s
technological capabilities are far less developed,
but its aggression undermines global security and
threatens US and NATO interests.
China
China has prioritized investment in AI for both
defense and national security as part of its efforts
to become a “world class military” and to gain
advantage in future “intelligentized” warfare—in
which AI (alongside other emerging technologies)
is more completely integrated into military systems
and operations through “networked, intelligent, and
autonomous systems and equipment.” 21
While the full scope of China’s AI-related activities is
not widely known, an October 2021 review of three
hundred and forty-three AI-related Chinese military
contracts by the Center for Security and Emerging
Technology (CSET) estimates that PLA “spends
more than $1.6 billion each year on AI-related
systems and equipment.”22 The National Security
Commission on Artificial Intelligence’s (NSCAI) final
report assessed that “China’s plans, resources,
and progress should concern all Americans. It is
an AI peer in many areas and an AI leader in some
applications.”23
CSET’s review and other open-source assessments
reveal that China’s focus areas for AI development,
like those of the United States, are broad, and
include24
 ● intelligent and autonomous vehicles, with a
particular focus on swarming technologies;
21 Fedasiuk, Melot, and Murphy, “Harnessed Lightning,” 4.
22 Ibid., iv.
23 “Final Report,” National Security Commission on AI, 2021, https://www.nscai.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Full-Report-Digital-1.pdf.
24 Fedasiuk, Melot, and Murphy, “Harnessed Lightning,” 13.
 ● intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
(ISR);
 ● predictive maintenance and logistics;
 ● information, cyber, and electronic warfare;
 ● simulation and training (to include wargaming);
 ● command and control (C2); and
 ● automated target recognition.
Progress in each of these areas constitutes a
challenge to the United States’ capacity to keep
pace in a military-technological competition with
China. However, it is worth examining China’s
advancing capabilities in two areas that could have
a particularly potent effect on the military balance.
Integration
First, AI can help the PLA bridge gaps in
operational readiness by artificially enhancing
military integration and cross-domain operations.
Many observers have pointed to the PLA’s
lack of operational experience in conflict as a
critical vulnerability. As impressive as China’s
advancing military modernization has been from
a technological perspective, none of the PLA’s
personnel have been tested under fire in a high-end
conflict in the same ways as the US military over the
last twenty years. The PLA’s continuing efforts to
increase its “jointness” from an organizational and
doctrinal standpoint is also nascent and untested.
The use of AI to improve the quality, fidelity, and
complexity of simulations and wargames is one way
the PLA is redressing this area of concern. A 2019
report by the Center for a New American Security
observed that “[for] Chinese military strategists,
among the lessons learned from AlphaGo’s victory
was the fact that an AI could create tactics and
stratagems superior to those of a human player
in a game that can be compared to a wargame”
MILITARY COMPETITION IN AI
INNOVATION AND ADOPTION

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
that can more arduously test PLA decision-makers
and improve upon command decision-making. 25 In
fact, the CSET report found that six percent of the
three hundred and forty-three contracts surveyed
were for the use of AI in simulation and training,
including use of AI systems to wargame a Taiwan
contingency.26
The focus on AI integration to reduce perceived
vulnerabilities in experience also applies to
operational and tactical training. In July 2021, the
Chinese Communist Party mouthpiece publication
Global Times reported that the PLA Air Force
(PLAAF) has started to deploy AI as simulated
opponents in pilots’ aerial combat training to “hone
25 Elsa Kania, “Learning Without Fighting: New Developments in PLA Artificial Intelligence War-Gaming,” Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, 19, 7
(2019), https://jamestown.org/program/learning-without-fighting-new-developments-in-pla-artificial-intelligence-war-gaming.
26 Fedasiuk, Melot, and Murphy, “Harnessed Lightning,” 22–23.
27 Liu Xuanzun, “PLA Deploys AI in Mock Warplane Battles, ‘Trains Both Pilots and Ais,’” Global Times, June 14, 2021, https://www.globaltimes.cn/
page/202106/1226131.shtml.
28 Liu Xuanzun, “China’s Future Fighter Trainer Could Feature AI to Boost Pilot’s Combat Capability: Top Designer,” Global Times, November 16,
2020, http://en.people.cn/n3/2020/1116/c90000-9780437.html.
their decision-making and combat skills against fast-
calculating computers.”27
Alongside virtual simulations, China is also aiming to
use AI to support pilot training in real-world aircraft.
In a China Central Television (CCTV) program
that aired in November 2020, Zhang Hong, the
chief designer of China’s L-15 trainer, noted that
AI onboard training aircraft can “identify different
habits each pilot has in flying. By managing them,
we will let the pilots grow more safely and gain
more combat capabilities in the future.”28
Notably, the PLAAF’s July 2021 AI–human dogfight
was similar to the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency’s (DARPA) September 2020
During the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency’s (DAPRA)’s AlphaDogfight Trials, an operational F-16 pilot flies in a
virtual reality simulator against the champion F-16 AI agent developed by Heron Systems. The Heron AI agent defeated the
human pilot in five straight dogfights to conclude the trials. Source: DARPA, https://www.darpa.mil/news-events/2020-08-26.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
11
EYE TO EYE IN AI
AlphaDogFight Challenge in which an AI agent
defeated a human pilot in a series of five simulated
dogfights.29 Similarly, the United States announced
in September 2021 the award of a contract to
training-and-simulation company Red 6 to integrate
the company’s Airborne Tactical Augmented Reality
System (ATARS)—which allows a pilot flying a real-
world plane to train against AI-generated virtual
aircraft using an augmented-reality headset—into
the T-38 Talon trainer with plans to eventually
install the system in fourth-generation aircraft.30
AI-enabled training and simulation are, therefore,
key areas in which the US military is in a direct
competition with the PLA. As the Chinese military is
leveraging AI to enhance readiness, the DoD cannot
afford to fall behind.
Autonomy
A second area of focus for Chinese AI development
is in autonomous systems, especially swarming
technologies, in which several systems will operate
independently or in conjunction with one another
to confuse and overwhelm opponent defensive
systems. China’s interests in, and capacity for,
developing swarm technologies has been well
demonstrated, including the then record-setting
launch of one hundred and eighteen small drones in
a connected swarm in June 2017.31
In September 2020, China Academy of Electronics
and Information Technology (CAEIT) reportedly
launched a swarm of two hundred fixed-wing CH-
901 loitering munitions from a modified Dongfeng
Mengshi light tactical vehicle.32 A survey of the
Unmanned Exhibition 2022 show in Abu Dhabi in
February 2022 revealed not only a strong Chinese
presence—both China National Aero-Technology
Import and Export Corporation (CATIC) and China
North Industries Corporation (NORINCO) had
large pavilions—but also a focus on “collaborative”
operations and intelligent swarming.33
29 Joseph Trevithick, “Chinese Pilots Are Also Dueling With AI Opponents in Simulated Dogfights and Losing: Report,” Drive, June 18, 2021, https://
www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/41152/chinese-pilots-are-also-dueling-with-ai-opponents-in-simulated-dogfights-and-losing-report.
30 “Red 6 to Continue Support ATARS Integration into USAF T-38 Talon,” Air Force Technology, February 3, 2022, https://www.airforce-technology.
com/news/red-6-atars-integration.
31 Xiang Bo, “China Launches Record Breaking Drone Swarm,” XinhuaNet, June 11, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2017-
06/11/c_136356850.htm.
32 David Hambling, “China Releases Video Of New Barrage Swarm Drone Launcher,” Forbes, October 14, 2020, https://www.forbes.com/sites/
davidhambling/2020/10/14/china-releases-video-of-new-barrage-swarm-drone-launcher/?sh=29b76fa12ad7.
33 An author of this paper attended the exhibition.
34 Cao Siqi, “Unmanned High-Speed Vessel Achieves Breakthrough in Dynamic Cooperative Confrontation Technology: Developer,” Global Times,
November 28, 2021, https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202111/1240135.shtml.
35 Ibid.
This interest in swarming is not limited to uncrewed
aerial vehicles (UAVs). China is also developing
the ability to deploy swarms of autonomous
uncrewed surface vehicles (USVs) to “intercept,
besiege and expel invasive targets,” according to
the Global Times.34 In November 2021, Chinese
company Yunzhou Tech—which in 2018 carried
out a demonstration of a swarm of fifty-six USVs—
released a video showing six USVs engaging in a
“cooperative confrontation” as part of an effort to
remove a crewed vessel from Chinese waters.35
It is not difficult to imagine how such cooperative
confrontation could be deployed against US or
allied naval vessels, or even commercial ships, to
develop or maintain sea control. This capability
is especially powerful in a gray-zone contingency
in which escalation concerns may limit response
options.
Russia
Russia lags behind the United States and China
in terms of investments and capabilities in AI. The
sanctions imposed over the war in Ukraine are also
likely to take a massive toll on Russia’s science and
An example of collaborative swarming drones on display
at the UMEX 2022 exhibition in Abu Dhabi in February.
Source: Tate Nurkin.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
12
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
technology sector. That said, US national decision-
makers should not discount Russia’s potential to
use AI-enabled technologies in asymmetric ways
to undermine US and NATO interests. The Russian
Ministry of Defense has numerous autonomy and AI-
related programs at different stages of development
and experimentation related to military robotics,
unmanned systems, swarming technology, early-
warning and air-defense systems, ISR, C2, logistics,
electronic warfare, and information operations.36
Russian military strategists see immense
potential in greater autonomy and AI on future
battlefields to speed up information processing,
augment decision-making, enhance situational
awareness, and safeguard the lives of Russian
military personnel. The development and use of
autonomous and AI-enabled systems are also
36 Jeffrey Edmonds, et al., “Artificial Intelligence and Autonomy in Russa,” CNA, May 2021, https://www.cna.org/CNA_files/centers/CNA/sppp/rsp/
russia-ai/Russia-Artificial-Intelligence-Autonomy-Putin-Military.pdf.
37 “Advanced Military Technology in Russia,” Chatham House, September 2021, https://www.chathamhouse.org/2021/09/advanced-military-
technology-russia/06-military-applications-artificial-intelligence.
discussed within the broader context of Russia’s
military doctrine. Its doctrinal focus is on employing
these technologies to disrupt and destroy the
adversary’s command-and-control systems and
communication capabilities, and use non-military
means to establish information superiority during
the initial period of war, which, from Russia’s
perspective, encompasses periods of non-kinetic
conflict with adversaries like the United States and
NATO.37
The trajectory of Russia’s AI development is
uncertain. But, with continued sanctions, it is likely
Russia will become increasingly dependent on China
for microelectronics and fall further behind in the
technological competition with the United States.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
13
EYE TO EYE IN AI
The Pentagon’s interest and urgency related
to AI is due both to the accelerating pace of
development of technology and, increasingly, the
transformative capabilities it can enable. Indeed,
AI is poised to fundamentally alter how militaries
think about, prepare for, carry out, and sustain
operations. Drawing on a previous Atlantic Council
report outline, the “Five Revolutions” framework
for classifying the potential impact of AI across five
broad capability areas, Figure 3 below illustrates
the different ways in which AI could augment human
cognitive and physical capabilities, fuse networks
and systems for optimal efficiency and performance,
and usher in a new era of cyber conflict and chaos
in the information space, among other effects.38
The DoD currently has more than six hundred AI-
related efforts in progress, with a vision to integrate
AI into every element of the DoD’s mission—from
warfighting operations to support and sustainment
functions to the business operations and processes
that undergird the vast DoD enterprise.39 A February
2022 report by the US Government Accountability
Office (GAO) has found that the DoD is pursuing
AI capabilities for warfighting that predominantly
focus on “(1) recognizing targets through
intelligence and surveillance analysis, (2) providing
recommendations to operators on the battlefield
(such as where to move troops or which weapon
is best positioned to respond to a threat), and (3)
increasing the autonomy of uncrewed systems.”40
Most of the DoD’s AI capabilities, especially
the efforts related to warfighting, are still in
development, and not yet aligned with or integrated
into specific systems. And, despite notable
progress in experimentation and some experience
38 Tate Nurkin, The Five Revolutions: Examining Defense Innovation in the Indo-Pacific, Atlantic Council, November 2020, https://www.
atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/the-five-revolutions-examining-defense-innovation-in-the-indo-pacific-region.
39 Hudson, “AI Efforts Gain Momentum as US, Allies and Partners Look to Counter China.”
40 “Artificial Intelligence: Status of Developing and Acquiring,” US Government Accountability Office, February 2022, 17.https://www.gao.gov/
assets/gao-22-104765.pdf.
41 Nicolas Chaillan, “Its Time to Say Goodbye,” LinkedIn, September 2, 2021, https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/time-say-goodbye-nicolas-m-chaillan.
42 Manson, “US Has Already Lost AI Fight to China, Says Ex-Pentagon Software Chief.”
43 Patrick Tucker, “Pentagon AI Chief Responds to USAF Software Leader Who Quit in Frustration,” Defense One, October 26, 2021, https://www.
defenseone.com/technology/2021/10/pentagon-ai-chief-responds-usaf-software-leader-who-quit-frustration/186368.
44 Ibid.
with deploying AI-enabled capabilities in combat
operations, there are still significant challenges
ahead for wide-scale adoption.
In September 2021, the Air Force’s first chief
software officer, Nicolas Chaillan, resigned in
protest of the bureaucratic and cultural challenges
that have slowed technology adoption and hindered
the DoD from moving fast enough to effectively
compete with China. In Chaillan’s view, in twenty
years, the United States and its allies “will have no
chance competing in a world where China has the
drastic advantage in population.”41 Later, he added
that China has essentially already won, saying,
“Right now, it’s already a done deal.”42
Chaillan’s assessment of the United States engaged
in a futile competition with China is certainly not
shared across the DoD, but it reflects what many
see as a lack of urgency within the risk-averse and
ponderous culture of the department.
Lt. General Michael Groen, the head of the JAIC,
agreed that “inside the department, there is a
cultural change that has to occur.”43 However, he
also touted the innovative capacity of the United
States and highlighted the establishment of an AI
accelerator and the finalization of a Joint Common
Foundation (JCF) for AI development, testing,
and sharing of AI tools across DoD entities.44 The
cloud-enabled JCF is an important step forward that
will allow for AI development based on common
standards and architectures. This should help
encourage sharing between the military services
and DoD components and, according to the JAIC,
ensure that “progress by one DoD AI initiative
OVERVIEW OF US MILITARY
PROGRESS IN AI

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
14
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
will build momentum across the entire DoD
enterprise.”45
While progress should be commended, obstacles
remain that are slowing the adoption of AI
capabilities critical to deterring threats in the
near future, and to meeting China’s competitive
challenges in this decade and beyond.
45 “AI Adoption Journey,” Joint Artificial Intelligence Center, https://www.ai.mil/#:~:text=The%20JAIC’s%20Joint%20Common%20Foundation%20
%28JCF%29%20is%20a,will%20build%20momentum%20across%20the%20entire%20DoD%20enterprise.
The three case studies below provide examples
of the technological, bureaucratic, and adoption
advancements that have occurred in DoD AI efforts.
These cases also highlight the enduring issues
hindering the United States’ ability to bring its
national innovation ecosystem fully to bear in the
intensifying military-technological competition with
China and, to a lesser extent, Russia.
• Improving and making training more accessible
and less costly and also improving the
complexity and fidelity of simulations
and wargaming
• Enhancing cognitive and physical capacities
of humans
• Human-machine teaming and symbiosis,
including brain-computer interfaces and AI
agents performing mundane tasks to allow
humans to focus on mission management
• Speeding up processing, integration, and
visualization of large and complex datasets to
improve situational awareness and
decision-making
• Predictive analysis to anticipate likely
contingencies or crises or pandemic outbreaks
• Enabling digital engineering, advanced
manufacturing, and new supply chain
management tools to speed up and reduce costs
associated with defense production
• Predictive maintenance to enhance platform and
system readiness and increase efficiency
of sustainment
• Cognitive sensing, spectrum management,
threat detection and categorization, cognitive
electronic warfare
• Autonomous systems
• AI enabled or supported targeting
• Swarms
• Detecting and defending against cyber attacks
and disinformation campaigns
• Offensive cyber and information operations
Figure 3: High-level overview of priority AI development programs across five broad objectives for the
development of future military capabilities.
Source: Authors.
Hyper-Enabled Platforms and People:
Human and Machine Performance
Enhancement
Toward Perfect Situational Awareness:
Perception, Processing, and Cognition
The Impending Design Age:
Manufacturing, Supply Chain, and Logistics
Connectivity, Lethality, and Flexibility:
Communication, Navigation,
Targeting, and Strike
Monitoring, Manipulation, and Weaponization:
Cyber and Information Operations

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
15
EYE TO EYE IN AI
Use Case 1: The Irreversible
Momentum, Grand Ambition,
and Integration Challenges of
JADC2
Among the Pentagon’s most important
modernization priorities is the Joint All-Domain
Command and Control (JADC2) program,
described as a “concept to connect sensors from
all the military services…into a single network.” 46
According to the Congressional Research Service,
“JADC2 intends to enable commanders to make
better decisions by collecting data from numerous
sensors, processing the data using AI algorithms
to identify targets, then recommending the
optimal weapon—both kinetic and non-kinetic—to
engage the target.”47 If successful, JADC2 holds
the potential to eliminate silos between service
C2 networks that previously slowed the transfer
of relevant information across the force and, as a
result, generate more comprehensive situational
46 Jackson Bennett, “2021 in Review: JADC2 Has Irreversible Momentum, but What Does That Mean?” FedScoop, December 29, 2021, https://
www.fedscoop.com/2021-in-review-jadc2-has-irreversible-momentum. 
47 “Joint All-Domain Command and Control (JADC2) In Focus Briefing,” Congressional Research Service, January 21, 2022.
48 Ibid.
49 Jackson Bennett, “JADC2 Cross Functional Team to Stand Up AI-Focused Working Group,” FedScoop, December 16, 2021, https://www.
fedscoop.com/jadc2-cft-stands-up-ai-working-group.
50 “DoD Announces Release of JADC2 Implementation Plan,” US Department of Defense, press release, March 17, 2022, https://www.defense.gov/
News/Releases/Release/Article/2970094/dod-announces-release-of-jadc2-implementation-plan.
awareness upon which commanders can make
better and faster decisions.
AI is essential to this effort, and the DoD is exploring
how best to safely integrate it into the JADC2
program.48 In December 2021, reports emerged that
the JADC2 cross-functional team (CTF) would start
up an “AI for C2” working group, which will examine
how to leverage responsible AI to enhance and
accelerate command and control, reinforcing the
centrality of responsible AI to the project. 49
In March 2022, the DoD released an unclassified
version of its JADC2 Implementation Plan, a
move that represented, in the words of General
Mark Milley, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
“irreversible momentum toward implementing”
JADC2.50
However, observers have highlighted several
persistent challenges to implementing JADC2 along
the urgent timelines required to maintain (or regain)
Figure 4: The stages of the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center’s (JAIC’s) AI adoption journey.
Source: JAIC, https://www.ai.mil/.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
16
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
advantage in perception, processing, and cognition,
especially vis-à-vis China.
Data security and cybersecurity, data-governance
and sharing issues, interoperability with allies, and
issues associated with integrating the service’s
networks have all been cited as challenges with
recognizing the ambitious promise of JADC2’s
approach. Some have also highlighted that all-
encompassing ambition as a challenge as well.
The Hudson Institute’s Bryan Clark and Dan Patt
argue that “the urgency of today’s threats and the
opportunities emerging from new technologies
demand that Pentagon leaders flip JADC2’s focus
from what the US military services want to what
warfighters need.”51
To be sure, grand ambition is not necessarily
something to be avoided in AI development and
integration programs. However, pathways to
51 Bryan Clark and Dan Patt, “The Pentagon Should Focus JADC2 on Warfighters, Not Service Equities,” Breaking Defense, March 30, 2022,
https://breakingdefense.com/2022/03/the-pentagon-should-focus-jadc2-on-warfighters-not-service-equities.
52 Amanda Miller, “AI Algorithms Deployed in Kill Chain Target Recognition,” Air Force Magazine, September 21, 2021, https://www.airforcemag.
com/ai-algorithms-deployed-in-kill-chain-target-recognition.
adoption will need to balance difficult-to-achieve,
bureaucratically entrenched, time-consuming, and
expensive objectives with developing systems that
can deliver capability and advantage along the
more immediate threat timelines facing US forces.
Use Case 2: Brittle AI and the
Ethics and Safety Challenges
of Integrating AI into Targeting
Demonstrating that the age of deployed AI is
indeed here, in September 2021 Secretary of the Air
Force Frank Kendall announced that the Air Force
had “deployed AI algorithms for the first time to a
live operational kill chain.”52 According to Kendall,
the objective of incorporating AI into the targeting
process is to “significantly reduce the manpower-
intensive tasks of manually identifying targets—
shortening the kill chain and accelerating the speed
Figure 5. The JADC2 Placemat reflects the complexity and ambition associated with the Department of
Defense’s JADC2 Implementation Plan. Source:
Source: US Department of Defense. https://media.defense.gov/2022/Mar/17/2002958406/-1/-1/1/SUMMARY-OF-THE-JOINT-
ALL-DOMAIN-COMMAND-AND-CONTROL-STRATEGY.PDF

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
17
EYE TO EYE IN AI
of decision-making.”53 The successful use of AI to
support targeting constitutes a milestone for AI
development, though there remain ethical, safety,
and technical challenges to more complete adoption
of AI in this role.
For example, a 2021 DoD test highlighted the
problem of brittle AI. According to reporting from
Defense One, the AI-enabled targeting used in the
test was accurate only about 25 percent of the time
in environments in which the AI had to decipher
data from different angles—though it believed it was
accurate 90 percent of the time—revealing a lack
of ability “to adapt to conditions outside of a narrow
set of assumptions.”54 These results illustrate the
limitations of today’s AI technology in security-critical
settings, and reinforce the need for aggressive and
extensive real-world and digital-world testing and
evaluation of AI under a range of conditions.
The ethics and safety of AI targeting could also
constitute a challenge to further adoption, especially
as confidence in AI algorithms grows. The Air Force
operation involved automated target recognition
in a supporting role, assisting “intelligence
professionals”—i.e., human decision-makers. 55 Of
course, DoD has a rigorous targeting procedure
in place, of which AI-enabled targeting algorithms
would be a part, and that, thinking further ahead,
autonomous systems would have to go through.
Still, even as they are part of this process and
designed to support human decisions, a high error
rate combined with a high level of confidence in
AI outputs could potentially lead to undesirable or
grave outcomes.
Use Case 3: The Limits of AI
Adoption in the Information
Domain
Intensifying competition with China and Russia
is increasingly playing out in the information and
cyber domains with real, enduring, and disruptive
53 Ibid.
54 Patrick Tucker, “Air Force Targeting AI Thought It Had a 90% Success Rate. It Was More Like 25%,” Defense One, December 9, 2021, https://
www.defenseone.com/technology/2021/12/air-force-targeting-ai-thought-it-had-90-success-rate-it-was-more-25/187437.
55 Miller, “AI Algorithms Deployed in Kill Chain Target Recognition.”
56 Alex Tamkin and Deep Ganguli, “How Large Language Models Will Transform Science, Society, and AI”, Stanford University Human-Centered
Artificial Intelligence, February 21, 2021, https://hai.stanford.edu/news/how-large-language-models-will-transform-science-society-and-ai.
57 Matt Turek, “Media Forensics (MediFor),” Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, accessed May 4, 2022, https://www.darpa.mil/program/
media-forensics.
58 Patrick Tucker, “Joint Chiefs’ Information Officer: US is Behind on Information Warfare. AI Can Help,” Defense One, November 5, 2021, https://
www.defenseone.com/technology/2021/11/joint-chiefs-information-officer-us-behind-information-warfare-ai-can-help/186670.
implications for US security, as well as the US
economy, society, and polity.
For cyber and information operations, AI
technologies and techniques are central to the
future of both offensive and defensive operations,
highlighting both the peril and promise of AI in the
information domain.
Concern is growing about the threat of smart bots,
synthetic media such as deepfakes—realistic
video or audio productions that depict events or
statements that did not take place—and large-
language models that can create convincing
prose and text.56 And, these are just the emerging
AI-enabled disinformation weapons that can be
conceived of today. While disinformation is a
challenge that requires a societal and whole-of-
government response, DoD will undoubtably play a
key role in managing and responding to this threat—
due to its prominence in US politics and society, the
nature of its functional role, and the impact of its
ongoing activities.
AI is at the forefront of Pentagon and other US
government efforts to detect bots and synthetic
media. DARPA’s MediaForensics (MediFor) program
is using AI algorithms to “automatically quantify the
integrity of an image or video,” for example. 57
Still, there is concern about the pace at which this
detection happens, given the speed of diffusion
of synthetic media via social media. As Lt. General
Dennis Crall, the Joint Staff’s chief information
officer, observed, “the speed at which machines
and AI won some of these information campaigns
changes the game for us…digital transformation,
predictive analytics, ML, AI, they are changing the
game…and if we don’t match that speed, we will
make it to the right answer and that the right answer
will be completely irrelevant.”58

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
18
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
As the discussion above illustrates, the DoD has a
broad set of AI-related initiatives across different
stages of development and experimentation,
building on the successful deployment of AI-
enabled information-management and decision-
support tools. As the focus shifts toward integration
and scaling, accelerating these adoption efforts is
critical for maintaining US advantage in the strategic
competition against China, as well as effectively
containing Russia.
In this section, the paper highlights some of the
incongruencies in the relationship between the
DoD and its industry partners that may cause
lost opportunities for innovative and impactful
AI projects, the positive impact of expanding the
use of alternative acquisition methods, and the
growing urgency to align processes and timelines
to ensure that the US military has access to high-
caliber technological capabilities for future warfare.
Additionally, this section discusses the DoD’s
approach to implementing ethical AI principles, and
issues related to standards and testing of trusted
and responsible systems.
DoD and Industry Partnerships:
Aligning Perspectives,
Processes, and Timelines
Although the DoD has issued a number of high-
level documents outlining priority areas for AI
development and deployment, the market’s ability
to meet, or even understand, these needs is far
from perfect. A recent IBM survey of two hundred
and fifty technology leaders from global defense
organizations reveals some important differences
in how defense-technology leaders and the DoD
view the value of AI for the organization and the
59 “Deploying AI in Defense Organizations: The Value, Trends, and Opportunities,” IBM, May 2021, https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/
EJBREOMX.
60 Ibid.
61 Authors’ interview with a defense technology industry executive.
62 Katerina Sedova, et al., “AI and the Future of Disinformation Campaigns, Part 1: The RICHDATA Framework,” Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, Georgetown University, December 2021, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/ai-and-the-future-of-disinformation-campaigns/;
Katerina Sedova et.al, “AI and the Future of Disinformation Campaigns, Part 2: A Threat Model, Center for Security and Emerging Technology,”
Center for Security and Emerging Technology, Georgetown University, December 2021, 1. https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/
CSET-AI-and-the-Future-of-Disinformation-Campaigns-Part-2.pdf; Ben Buchanan, et al., “Truth, Lies, and Automation: How Language Models
Could Change Disinformation,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, Georgetown University, May 2021. https://cset.georgetown.edu/
publication/truth-lies-and-automation.
mission.59 For instance, only about one-third of
the technology leaders surveyed said they see
significant potential value in AI for military logistics,
medical and health services, and information
operations and deepfakes. When asked about the
potential value of AI-enabled solutions to business
and other noncombat applications, less than one-
third mentioned maintenance, procurement, and
human resources.60
These views are somewhat incongruent with the
DoD’s goals in AI. For example, military logistics
and sustainment functions that encompass
equipment maintenance and procurement are
among the top DoD priorities for implementing
AI. Leidos’ work with the Department of Veterans
Affairs also illustrates the potential of AI in medical
and health services. 61 Finally, with the use of AI in
disinformation campaigns already under way, and
as the discussion in the previous section highlights,
there is an urgent need to develop technical
measures and AI-enabled tools for detecting and
countering AI-powered information operations. 62
The DoD and its industry partners have different
priorities and incentives based on their respective
problem sets and missions. But, divergent
perspectives on valuable and critical areas for AI
development could result in lost opportunities for
impactful AI projects. That said, even when the
Pentagon and its industry partners see eye to eye
on AI, effective collaboration is often thwarted by
a clumsy bureaucracy that is too often tethered to
legacy processes, structures, and cultures.
The DoD’s budget planning, procurement,
acquisition, and contracting processes are, by and
large, not designed for buying software. These
ACCELERATING DOD AI ADOPTION

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
19
EYE TO EYE IN AI
institutional barriers, coupled with the complex and
protracted software-development and compliance
regulations, are particularly hard on small startups
and nontraditional vendors that lack the resources,
personnel, and prior knowledge required to
navigate the system in the same way that defense
primes do.63
The DoD is well aware of these challenges. Since
2015, the Office of the Secretary of Defense
and the military services have set up several
entities—such as DIU, AFWERX, NavalX, and
Army Applications Laboratory—to interface with
the commercial technology sector, especially
startups and nontraditional vendors, with the aim of
accelerating the delivery of best-in-class technology
solutions. Concurrently, the DoD has taken other
notable steps to promote the use of alternative
authorities for acquisition and contracting, which
provide greater flexibility to structure and execute
agreements than traditional procurement.64 These
include “other transaction authorities, middle-tier
acquisitions, rapid prototyping and rapid fielding,
and specialized pathways for software acquisition.”65
The DIU has been at the forefront of using some
of these alternative acquisition pathways to source
AI solutions from the commercial technology
sector. The Air Force’s AFWERX has also partnered
with the Air Force Research Lab and the National
Security Innovation Network to make innovative use
of the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
and Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
funding to “increase the efficiency, effectiveness,
and transition rate” of programs.66 In June 2021,
for instance, the USAF SBIR/STTR AI Pitch Day
awarded more than $18 million to proposals on
the topic of “trusted artificial intelligence, which
indicates systems are safe, secure, robust, capable,
and effective.”67
These are steps in the right direction, and it has
indeed become easier to receive DoD funding for
63 Daniel K. Lim, “Startups and the Defense Department’s Compliance Labyrinth,” War on the Rocks, January 3, 2022, https://warontherocks.
com/2022/01/startups-and-the-defense-departments-compliance-labyrinth.
64 Moshe Schwarz and Heidi M. Peters, “Department of Defense Use of Other Transaction Authority: Background, Analysis, and Issues for
Congress,” Congressional Research Service, February 22, 2019, https://sgp.fas.org/crs/natsec/R45521.pdf.
65 “Final Report.”
66 “SBIR Open Topic,” US Department of the Air Force, Air Force Research Laboratory, https://afwerx.com/sbirsttr.
67 “Trusted AI at Scale,” Griffiss Institute, July 26, 2021, https://www.griffissinstitute.org/about-us/events/ev-detail/trusted-ai-at-scale-1.
68 Insinna, “Silicon Valley Warns the Pentagon: ‘Time is Running Out.’”
69 Jory Heckman, “DoD Seeks to Develop New Career Paths to Stay Ahead of AI Competition,” Federal News Network, July 13, 2021, https://
federalnewsnetwork.com/artificial-intelligence/2021/07/dod-seeks-to-develop-new-career-paths-to-stay-ahead-of-ai-competition.
research, development, and prototyping. Securing
timely funding for production, however, remains a
major challenge. This “valley of death” problem—the
gap between the research-and-development phase
and an established, funded program of record—is
particularly severe for nontraditional defense firms,
because of the disparity between venture-capital
funding cycles for startups and how long it takes to
get a program into the DoD budget.68
The Pentagon understands that bridging the “valley
of death” is crucial for advancing and scaling
innovation, and has recently launched the Rapid
Defense Experimentation Reserve to deal with these
issues.69 Still, the systematic changes necessary to
align budget planning, acquisition, and contracting
processes with the pace of private capital require
congressional action and could take years to
implement. Delays in implementing such reforms
are undermining the DoD’s ability to access cutting-
edge technology that could prove essential on future
battlefields.
Building Trusted and
Responsible AI Systems
Ensuring that the US military can field safe and
reliable AI-enabled and autonomous systems
and use them in accordance with international
humanitarian law will help the United States
maintain its competitive advantage against
authoritarian countries, such as China and
Russia, that are less committed to ethical use of
AI. An emphasis on trustworthy AI is also crucial
because the majority of the DoD’s AI programs
entails elements of human-machine teaming and
collaboration, and their successful implementation
depends, in large part, on operators trusting the
system enough to use it. Finally, closer coordination
between DoD and industry partners on shared
standards and testing requirements for trustworthy
and responsible AI is critical for moving forward with
DoD AI adoption.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
20
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Alongside the DoD’s existing weapons-review
and targeting procedures, including protocols for
autonomous weapons systems, the department is
also looking to address the ethical, legal, and policy
ambiguities and risks raised more specifically by
AI.70 In February 2020, the Pentagon adopted five
ethical principles to guide the development and use
of AI, calling for AI that is responsible, equitable,
traceable, reliable, and governable. Looking to put
these principles into practice, Deputy Secretary
of Defense Kathleen Hicks issued a memorandum
directing a “holistic, integrated, and disciplined
approach” for integrating responsible AI (RAI) across
six tenets: governance, warfighter trust, product-
and-acquisition lifecycle, requirements validation,
responsible AI ecosystem, and AI workforce.71 While
JAIC was tasked with the implementation of the
RAI strategy, it is unclear how this effort will unfold
now that it has been integrated into the new CDAO
office.
Meanwhile, in November 2021, the DIU released
its responsible-AI guidelines, responding to the
memo’s call for “tools, policies, processes, systems,
and guidance” that integrate the ethical AI principles
into the department’s acquisition policies.72
These guidelines are a tangible step toward
operationalizing and implementing ethics in DoD
AI programs, building on DIU’s experience working
on AI solutions in areas such as predictive health,
underwater autonomy, predictive maintenance,
and supply-chain analysis. They are meant to be
actionable, adaptive, and useful while ensuring
that AI vendors, DoD stakeholders, and DIU
program managers take fairness, accountability,
and transparency into account during the planning,
70 “DOD Adopts Ethical Principles for Artificial Intelligence,” US Department of Defense, February 24, 2020, https://www.defense.gov/News/
Releases/Release/Article/2091996/dod-adopts-ethical-principles-for-artificial-intelligence/.
71 “Memorandum for Senior Pentagon Leadership, Commanders of the Combatant Commands, Defense Agency, and DOD Field Activity Directors
on Implementing Responsible Artificial Intelligence in the Department of Defense,” Deputy Secretary of Defense, May 26, 2021, https://media.
defense.gov/2021/May/27/2002730593/-1/-1/0/IMPLEMENTING-RESPONSIBLE-ARTIFICIAL-INTELLIGENCE-IN-THE-DEPARTMENT-OF-DEFENSE.
PDF.
72 Ibid.
73 Jared Dunnmon, et al., “Responsible AI Guidelines in Practice,” Defense Innovation Unit, https://assets.ctfassets.net/3nanhbfkr0pc/
acoo1Fj5uungnGNPJ3QWy/3a1dafd64f22efcf8f27380aafae9789/2021_RAI_Report-v3.pdf.
74 Margarita Konaev and Husanjot Chahal, “Building Trust in Human-Machine Teams,” Brookings, February 18, 2021, https://www.brookings.
edu/techstream/building-trust-in-human-machine-teams/ ; Theresa Hitchens, “AI Slays Top F-16 Pilot in DARPA Dogfight Simulation,” Breaking
Defense, August 20, 2020. https://breakingdefense.com/2020/08/ai-slays-top-f-16-pilot-in-darpa-dogfight-simulation.
75 Sue Halpern, “The Rise of A.I. Fighter Pilots,” New Yorker, January 17, 2022, https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2022/01/24/the-rise-of-ai-
fighter-pilots.
76 Adrian P. Pope, et al., “Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Air-to-Air Combat,” Lockheed Martin, June 11, 2021. https://arxiv.org/
pdf/2105.00990.pdf.
77 “AlphaDogfight Trials Go Virtual for Final Event,” Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, July 2020, https://www.darpa.mil/news-
events/2020-08-07.
development, and deployment phases of the AI
system lifecycle.73
The success of the DoD’s AI programs will depend,
in large part, on ensuring that humans develop
and maintain the appropriate level of trust in
their intelligent-machine teammates. The DoD’s
emphasis on trusted AI is, therefore, increasingly
echoed throughout some of its flagship AI projects.
In August 2020, for instance, DARPA’s Air Combat
Evolution (ACE) program attracted a great deal of
attention when an AI system beat one of the Air
Force’s top F-16 fighter pilots in a simulated aerial
dogfight contest.74 Rather than pitting humans
against machines, a key question for ACE is “how
to get the pilots to trust the AI enough to use it.”75
ACE selected the dogfight scenario, in large part,
because this type of air-to-air combat encompasses
many of the basic flight maneuvers necessary for
becoming a trusted wing-mate within the fighter-
pilot community. Getting the AI to master the basic
flight maneuvers that serve as the foundation to
more complex tasks, such as suppression of enemy
air defenses or escorting friendly aircraft, is only
one part of the equation.76 The AlphaDogfight Trials,
according to the ACE program manager, are “all
about increasing trust in AI.”77
AI development is moving fast, making it difficult to
design and implement a regulatory structure that is
sufficiently flexible to remain relevant without being
so restrictive that it stifles innovation. Companies
working with the DoD are seeking guidelines for the
development, deployment, use, and maintenance of
AI systems compliant with the department’s ethical
principles for AI. Many of these industry partners
have adopted their own frameworks for trusted

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
21
EYE TO EYE IN AI
and responsible AI solutions, highlighting attributes
such as safety, security, robustness, resilience,
accountability, transparency, traceability, auditability,
explainability, fairness, and other related qualities.78
That said, there are important divergences in risk-
management approaches, organizational policies,
bureaucratic processes, performance benchmarks,
and standards for integrating trustworthiness
considerations across the AI system lifecycle.
Currently, there are no shared technical standards
for what constitutes ethical or trustworthy
AI systems, which can make it difficult for
nontraditional AI vendors to set expectations and
78 A recent IBM survey of two hundred and fifty technology leaders from global defense organizations revealed that about 42 percent have a
framework for deploying AI ethically and safely; notably, formalized plans for the ethical application of AI are more common in organizations
whose mission functions include combat and fighting arms than organizations with non-combat missions. These leaders surveyed represent
organizations from a broad range of mission functions, including combat and fighting arms (18 percent), combat support (44 percent), and
combat service-support (37 percent) organizations. “Deploying AI in Defense Organizations,” 4. https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/
EJBREOMX; “Autonomy and Artificial Intelligence: Ensuring Data-Driven Decisions,” C4ISR, January 2021, https://hub.c4isrnet.com/ebooks/
ai-autonomy-2020; “How Effective and Ethical Artificial Intelligence Will Enable JADC2,” Breaking Defense, December 2, 2021, https://
breakingdefense.com/2021/12/how-effective-and-ethical-artificial-intelligence-will-enable-jadc2.
79 Pub. L. 116-283, William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Y ear 2021, 134 Stat. 3388 (2021), https://www.
congress.gov/116/plaws/publ283/PLAW-116publ283.pdf.
navigate the bureaucracy. The DoD is not directly
responsible for setting standards. Rather, the
2021 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA)
expanded the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) mission “to include advancing
collaborative frameworks, standards, guidelines for
AI, supporting the development of a risk mitigation
framework for AI systems, and supporting the
development of technical standards and guidelines
to promote trustworthy AI systems.”79 In July 2021,
the NIST issued a request for information from
stakeholders as it develops its AI Risk Management
Framework, meant to help organizations
“incorporate trustworthiness considerations into
A US Army soldier uses the tactical robotic controller to control the expeditionary modular autonomous vehicle as a practice
exercise in preparation for Project Convergence at Yuma Proving Ground, Arizona, on October 19, 2021. During Project
Convergence 21, soldiers experimented with using this vehicle for semi-autonomous reconnaissance and re-supply. Both
on and beyond the battlefield, trust in AI-enabled capabilities like autonomous and semi-autonomous vehicles is crucial
to success. Source: US Army photo by Sgt. Marita Schwab, US Army flickr. https://www.flickr.com/photos/35703177@
N00/51690959553/

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
22
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
the design, development, use, and evaluation of AI
products, services, and systems.”80
There are no easy solutions to this challenge. But,
a collaborative process that engages stakeholders
across government, industry, academia, and civil
society could help prevent AI development from
going down the path of social media, where public
policy failed to anticipate and was slow to respond
to the risks and damages caused by disinformation
and other malicious activity on these platforms.
Related to standards are the challenges linked
to testing, evaluation, verification, and validation
(TEVV). Testing and verification processes are
meant to “help decision-makers and operators
understand and manage the risks of developing,
producing, operating, and sustaining AI-enabling
systems,” and are essential for building trust
in AI.81 The DoD’s current TEVV protocols and
infrastructure are meant primarily for major defense
acquisition programs like ships, airplanes, or tanks;
it is linear, sequential, and, ultimately, finite once the
program transitions to production and deployment.
With AI systems, however, “development is never
really finished, so neither is testing.”82 Adaptive,
continuously learning emerging technologies like
AI, therefore, require a more agile and iterative
development-and-testing approach—one that, as
the NSCAI recommended, “integrates testing as
a continuous part of requirements specification,
development, deployment, training, and
maintenance and includes run-time monitoring of
operational behavior.”83
80 “Summary Analysis of Responses to the NIST Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework (AI RMF)—Request for Information (RFI),”
National Institute of Standards and Technology, October 15, 2021, https://www.nist.gov/system/files/documents/2021/10/15/AI%20RMF_RFI%20
Summary%20Report.pdf.
81 Michele A. Flournoy, Avril Haines, and Gabrielle Chefitz, “Building Trust through Testing: Adapting DOD’s Test & Evaluation, Validation &
Verification (TEVV) Enterprise for Machine Learning Systems, including Deep Learning Systems,” WestExec, October 2020, 3–4, https://cset.
georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/Building-Trust-Through-Testing.pdf.
82 Flournoy, Haines, and Chefitz, “Building Trust through Testing,” 3.
83 “Final Report,” 384.
An integrated and automated approach to
development and testing, which builds upon the
commercial best practice of development, security,
and operations (DevSecOps), is much better suited
for AI/ML systems. While the JAIC’s JCF has the
potential to enable a true AI DevSecOps approach,
scaling such efforts across the DoD is a major
challenge because it requires significant changes
to the current testing infrastructure, as well as
more resources such as bandwidth, computing
support, and technical personnel. That said, failing
to develop new testing methods better suited to AI,
and not adapting the current testing infrastructure
to support iterative testing, will stymie efforts to
integrate and adopt trusted and responsible AI at
scale.
The above discussion of standards and TEVV
encapsulates the unique challenges modern AI
systems pose to existing DoD frameworks and
processes, as well as the divergent approaches
commercial technology companies and the DoD
take to AI development, deployment, use, and
maintenance. To accelerate AI adoption, the DoD
and its industry partners need to better align on
concrete, realistic, operationally relevant standards
and performance requirements, testing processes,
and evaluation metrics that incorporate ethical
AI principles. A defense-technology ecosystem
oriented around trusted and responsible AI could
promote the cross-pollination of best practices
and lower the bureaucratic and procedural barriers
faced by nontraditional vendors and startups.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
23
EYE TO EYE IN AI
Fully exploiting AI’s capacity to drive efficiencies
in cost and time, support human decision-makers,
and enable autonomy will require more than
technological advancement or development of
novel operational concepts. Below, we outline three
key areas of prioritized effort necessary to more
successfully integrate AI across the DoD enterprise
and ensure the United States is able to deter threats
and maintain a strategic, operational, and tactical
advantage over its competitors and potential
adversaries.
Prioritize Safe, Secure, Trusted, and
Responsible AI Development and
Deployment
The intensifying strategic competition with
China, the promise of exquisite technological and
operational capabilities, and repeated comparisons
to the rapid pace of technology development and
integration in the private sector are all putting
pressure on the DoD to move faster toward fielding
AI systems. There is much to gain from encouraging
greater risk tolerance in AI development to enable
progress toward adopting AI at scale. But, rushing
to field AI-enabled systems that are vulnerable to
a range of adversary attacks, and likely to fail in an
operational environment, simply to “one-up” China
will prove counterproductive.
The ethical code that guides the US military reflects
a fundamental commitment to abiding with the
laws of war at a time when authoritarian countries
like China and Russia show little regard for human
rights and humanitarian principles. Concurrently, the
DoD’s rigorous approach to testing and assurance
of new capabilities is designed to ensure that new
weapons are used responsibly and appropriately,
and to minimize the risk from accidents, misuse, and
abuse of systems and capabilities that can have
dangerous, or even catastrophic, effects. These
values and principles that the United States shares
with many of its allies and partners are a strategic
asset in the competition against authoritarian
84 “Air Force Acquisition Executive Unveils Next E-Plane, Publishes Digital Engineering Guidebook,” US Department of the Air Force, January 19,
2021, https://www.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/2476500/air-force-acquisition-executive-unveils-next-e-plane-publishes-digital-engineer.
countries as they field AI-enabled military systems.
To cement the DoD’s advantage in this arena, we
recommend the following steps.
 ● The DoD should integrate DIU’s Responsible
AI Guidelines into relevant requests for
proposals, solicitations, and other materials
that require contractors to demonstrate how
their AI products and solutions implement
the DoD’s AI ethical principles. This will set a
common and clear set of expectations, helping
nontraditional AI vendors and startups navigate
the Pentagon’s proposal process.
There is recent precedent of the DoD
developing acquisition categories for programs
that required industry to pivot its development
process to meet evolving DoD standards. In
September 2020, for example, the US Air Force
developed the e-series acquisition designation
for all procurement efforts that required vendors
to use digital engineering practices—rather
than building prototypes—as part of their
bid to incentivize industry to embrace digital
engineering.84
 ● DoD industry partners, especially nontraditional
AI vendors, should actively engage with
NIST as the institute continues its efforts to
develop standards and guidelines to promote
trustworthy AI systems, to ensure their
perspectives inform subsequent frameworks.
 ● Among the challenges to effective AI adoption
referenced in this paper were brittle AI and the
potential for adversary cyberattacks designed
to corrupt the data on which AI algorithms are
based. Overcoming these challenges will require
a continued commitment within the DoD to
increase the speed, variety, and capability of
test and evaluation of DoD AI systems to ensure
that these systems function as intended under a
broader range of different environments. Some
of this testing will need to take place in real-
world environments, but advances in model-
based simulations can allow for an increasing
amount of validation of AI system performance in
KEY TAKEAWAYS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
24
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Artificial intelligence can drastically reshape the battlefield of the future. In order to realize this vision, the Department of
Defense must undertake critical steps to effectively leverage AI. Source: US Army.
the digital/virtual world, reducing the costs and
timelines associated with this testing.
 ● Moreover, the DoD should also leverage the
under secretary of defense for research and
engineering’s (USDR&E) testing practices and
priorities to ensure planned and deployed
AI systems are hardened against adversary
attacks, including data pollution and algorithm
corruption.
 ● The DoD should leverage allies and foreign
partners to develop, deploy, and adopt
trusted AI. Engagement of this nature is
vital for coordination on common norms for
AI development and use that contain and
counter China and Russia’s authoritarian
technology models. Pathways for expanding
existing cooperation modes and building new
partnerships can include the following.
85 Zoe Stanley-Lockman, “Responsible and Ethical Military AI: Allies and Allied Perspectives,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology,
Georgetown University, August 2021, https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-Responsible-and-Ethical-Military-AI.pdf.
86 Authors’ interview with a former US military general.
i. Enhancing an emphasis on ethical, safe, and
responsible AI as part of the JAIC’s Partnership
for Defense, through an assessment of
commonalities and differences in the members’
approaches to identify concrete opportunities
for future joint projects and cooperation.
ii. Cross-sharing and implementing joint
ethics programs with Five Eyes, NATO, and
AUKUS partners.85 In addition to supporting
interoperability, this will add a diversity of
perspectives and experiences, as well as help to
ensure that AI development efforts limit various
forms of bias. As one former general officer
interviewed for this project noted, “diversity is
how we ensure reliability. It is essential.” 86
iii. Broadening outreach to allies and partners
of varying capabilities and geographies,

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
25
EYE TO EYE IN AI
including India, South Africa, Vietnam, and
Taiwan, to explore opportunities for bilateral
and multilateral research-and-development
efforts and technology-sharing programs that
address the technical attributes of trusted and
responsible AI.87
Align Key Priorities for AI Development
and Strengthen Coordination between the
DoD and Industry Partners to Help Close
DoD AI Capability Gaps.
The DoD will not be able to fulfill its ambitions in AI
and compete effectively with the Chinese model
of sourcing technology innovation through military-
civil fusion without close partnerships with a broad
range of technology companies. This includes
defense-industry leaders with long-standing ties to
the Pentagon, technology giants at the forefront of
global innovation, commercial technology players
seeking to expand their government portfolio, and
startups at the cutting edge of AI development. But,
the DoD’s budget-planning, procurement, acquisition,
contracting, and compliance processes will likely
need to be fundamentally restructured to effectively
engage with the entirety of this vibrant and diverse
technology ecosystem.
Systemic change is a slow, arduous process. But,
delaying this transition risks the US military falling
behind on exploiting the advantages AI promises
to deliver, from operational speed to decision
dominance. In the meantime, the following actions
could help improve coordination with industry
partners to accelerate the DoD’s AI adoption efforts.
 ● The DoD should assess its communications
and outreach strategy to clarify and streamline
messaging around the department’s priorities in
AI.
 ● The DoD should partner with technology
companies to reexamine their assessments
regarding the potential value of AI solutions
in certain categories, including, but not limited
to, logistics, medical and health services, and
information operations.
 ● The DoD should implement the NSCAI’s
recommendation to accelerate efforts to train
87 Zoe Stanley-Lockman, “Military AI Cooperation Toolbox: Modernizing Defense Science and Technology Partnerships for the Digital Age,” Center
for Security and Emerging Technology, Georgetown University, August 2021, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/military-ai-cooperation-
toolbox/.
88 “Final Report,” 65.
89 Ibid., 305.
90 Authors’ interview with a defense technology executive.
acquisition professionals on the full range of
available options for acquisition and contracting,
and incentivize their use for AI and digital
technologies.”88 Moreover, such acquisition-
workforce training initiatives should ensure
that acquisition professionals have a sufficient
understanding of the DoD’s ethical principles for
AI and the technical dimensions of trusted and
responsible AI. The DIU’s ethical guidelines can
serve as the foundation for this training.
Promote Coordination between Leading
Defense Technology Companies and
Nontraditional Vendors to Accelerate DoD
AI Adoption. 
Rather than building entirely new AI-enabled
systems, in the short to medium term, the DoD will
be integrating AI into a range of existing software
and hardware systems—from cyberdefense
architectures to fighter jets to C2. Progress toward
implementing AI will, therefore, also depend upon
streamlining collaboration between the startups
and nontraditional AI vendors that the DoD has
been courting for their innovative and cutting-edge
technologies and the defense primes responsible
for integrating new capabilities into legacy systems.
The NSCAI recommends identifying “new
opportunities for defense primes to team with
non-traditional firms to adopt AI capabilities more
quickly across existing platforms.” 89 We echo this
recommendation: improved coordination between
defense primes and nontraditional firms can
help ensure AI solutions are robust, resilient, and
operationally relevant, as well as usher promising
prototypes through the “valley of death.”
Without a doubt, moving from concept to practice
can be tricky. This paper’s research revealed a
significant disconnect in perspectives on where
the main challenges to moving innovative new
technologies from the lab to adoption in programs
of record reside. Startups tend to view system
integrators as resistant to engaging, while startups
may be viewed as lacking understanding of the
acquisition process and of developing technologies
that are difficult to integrate into, or scale for,
programs of record.90

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
26
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Bridging this gap will require new government
approaches to resolving concerns of nontraditional
suppliers around intellectual property. Most are
reticent to give ownership of sensitive technologies
that are sold largely to customers outside the
defense market. It will also involve the DoD helping
small businesses navigate the federal acquisition
process through steps such as speeding up cyber
certification and the Authority To Operate (ATO)
process, as well as helping interesting companies
develop use cases for different components
of the DoD. Such proactive facilitation will help
nontraditional suppliers that have worked with DoD
through research-and-development grants come
to a partnership with systems integrators more
prepared.
Most importantly, optimizing the benefits of both
large systems integrators and smaller innovators will
require the DoD to play a more active interlocutor
role in connecting small companies with those that
are running programs of record. There is currently
some understandable hesitancy for the DoD to
demand that companies work together, largely
for fear of running afoul of Federal Acquisition
Regulations (FAR). But, as one industry expert
interviewed for this project argued, the DoD could
be more aggressive in understanding what is
permissible under the FAR and helping companies
connect, especially to meet a specific acquisition
priority or program.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
27
EYE TO EYE IN AI
Over the last several years, interest and investment
in AI have gained momentum. This is especially true
in the national security and defense community,
as strategists, policymakers, and executives seek
decisive advantages amid rising geostrategic
competition and prepare for future operating
environments characterized by complexity,
uncertainty, and, most importantly, speed. AI is now
at the center of military-technological competition
between the United States and China, and both
countries, as well as other militaries throughout the
world, are already deploying AI-enabled systems
with the goal of dominating the battlefield of the
future.
The United States cannot risk falling behind China—
not in AI innovation, not in AI adoption, and not in the
full-scale integration of AI across the national defense
enterprise. Urgency is required in addressing the
range of technical and bureaucratic processes, and
cultural issues that have, to date, dampened the pace
of AI adoption within the DoD. Specifically, the DoD
should prioritize the following.
 ● Building trust in AI: Rather than replacing
humans, DoD AI efforts are primarily
centered on technologies that augment
human understanding, decision-making, and
performance. Building trust and confidence
between humans and their intelligent-machine
teammates is, therefore, a critical aspect of the
successful development and deployment of
military AI.
 ● Developing and implementing standards for
trusted and responsible AI: Currently, there
are no commonly held standards or system-
performance requirements for what constitutes
trusted and responsible AI. The Pentagon and
its industry partners must, therefore, work
collaboratively with bodies like NIST to develop
and implement operationally relevant standards,
testing processes, and evaluation metrics that
incorporate ethical, trustworthy, and responsible
AI principles. This will help advance successful
AI research prototypes into production-ready
solutions.
 ● Facilitating the optimization of the US innovation
ecosystem and defense industrial base:
Bringing cutting-edge AI technologies into the
DoD also requires the Pentagon to reduce the
bureaucratic challenges frequently associated
with the DoD acquisition process, especially
for innovative companies that are outside the
traditional defense-industrial base. Developing
new means of supporting and incentivizing
engagement of these companies and promoting
intra-industry partnerships between leading
defense-technology companies and startups and
nontraditional suppliers will be crucial.
 ● Engaging allies and partners: As noted at the
outset of this paper, the war in Ukraine has
reinforced the importance of allies and partners
in enforcing geopolitical norms and standards.
The same is likely to be true of the future of
AI development and adoption. The DoD will
benefit not only from collaboration across
industry and the national security community,
but also with allies and foreign partners to
ensure establishment and promulgation of
norms and standards that will enable trusted,
responsible, and interoperable AI development
and deployment.
CONCLUSION

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
28
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report is the culmination of an eight-month research project on the national security and defense
implications of AI, conducted under the supervision of F D Deputy Director Clementine Starling and Assistant
Director Christian Trotti, and enabled by research and editing support from F D Young Global Professionals
Timothy Trevor and Caroline Steel. It is made possible through the generous support of Accrete AI.
To produce this report, the authors conducted a number of interviews and consultations. They list
alphabetically below, with gratitude, some of the individuals consulted and whose insights informed this
report. The analysis and recommendations presented in this report are those of the authors alone, and do not
necessarily represent the views of the individuals consulted. Moreover, the named individuals participated in
a personal, not institutional, capacity.
 ● Mr. Prashant Bhuyan, Founder and CEO, Accrete AI
 ● Gen James Cartwright, USMC (Ret.) , Board Director, Atlantic Council; Former Vice Chairman , US Joint
Chiefs of Staff; Former Commander, US Strategic Command
 ● Mr. Jonathan Doyle, Partner, Axion Partners
 ● Mr. Brian Drake, Federal Chief Technology Officer, Accrete AI
 ● Ms. Evanna Hu, Nonresident Senior Fellow, Forward Defense, Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security ,
Atlantic Council
 ● Mr. Ron Keesing, Senior Vice President for Technology Integration, Leidos
 ● Mr. Stephen Rodriguez, Senior Advisor, Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security, Atlantic Council
The authors would also like to thank the following individuals for their peer review of various drafts of this
report, listed below in alphabetical order. The analysis and recommendations presented in this report are
those of the authors alone, and do not necessarily represent the views of the peer reviewers. Moreover, the
named individuals participated in a personal, not institutional, capacity.
 ● Gen James Cartwright, USMC (Ret.) , Board Director, Atlantic Council; Former Vice Chairman , US Joint
Chiefs of Staff; Former Commander, US Strategic Command
 ● Mr. Jonathan Doyle, Partner, Axion Partners
 ● Mr. Brian Drake, Federal Chief Technology Officer, Accrete AI
 ● Ms. Evanna Hu, Nonresident Senior Fellow, Forward Defense, Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security ,
Atlantic Council
 ● Mr. Justin Lynch, Director, Research and Analysis, Special Competitive Studies Project
 ● Ms. Kelley Sayler, Analyst, Advanced Technology and Global Security, Congressional Research Service

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
29
EYE TO EYE IN AI
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Margarita Konaev is a nonresident senior fellow in the Forward  Defense practice of
the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security. Additionally, she
serves as associate director of analysis and a research fellow at Georgetown’s Center
for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET) with interests in military applications of
artificial intelligence and in Russian military innovation. She is also an adjunct senior
fellow with the Center for a New American Security. Previously, she was a non-resident
fellow with the Modern War Institute at West Point, a post-doctoral fellow at the
Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, and a post-doctoral fellow at the University
of Pennsylvania’s Perry World House. Before joining CSET, she worked as a senior
principal in the Marketing and Communications practice at Gartner.
Dr. Konaev’s research on international security, armed conflict, non-state actors
and urban warfare in the Middle East, Russia, and Eurasia has been published by
the Journal of Strategic Studies, the Journal of Global Security Studies, Conflict
Management and Peace Science, the French Institute of International Relations, the
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, Lawfare, War on the Rocks, Modern War Institute,
Foreign Policy Research Institute, and a range of other outlets and organizations. She
holds a PhD in political science from the University of Notre Dame, an MA in conflict
resolution from Georgetown University, and a BA from Brandeis University.
Tate Nurkin is the founder of OTH Intelligence Group and a nonresident senior fellow
with Forward Defense at the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center for Strategy and
Security.
Before establishing OTH Intelligence Group in March 2018, Mr. Nurkin spent twelve
years at Jane’s by IHS Markit where he served in a variety of roles, including managing
Jane’s Defense, Risk, and Security Consulting practice. From 2013 until his departure,
he served as the founding Executive Director of the Strategic Assessments and
Futures Studies (SAFS) Center, which provided thought leadership and customized
analysis on global competition in geopolitics, future military capabilities, and the global
defence industry.
Substantively, Mr. Nurkin’s research and analysis has a particularly strong focus on
US-China competition, defense technology, the future of military capabilities, and
the global defense industry and its market issues. He also specializes in the design
and delivery of alternative futures analysis exercises such as scenario planning, red
teaming, and wargaming.
He previously worked for Joint Management Services, the Strategic Assessment
Center of SAIC, and the Modeling, Simulation, Wargaming, and Analysis team of Booz
Allen Hamilton. From 2014 – 2018 he served consecutive two-year terms on the World
Economic Forum’s Nuclear Security Global Agenda Council and its Future Council on
International Security, which was established to diagnose and assess the security and
defense implications of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.
Mr. Nurkin holds a master of science degree in international affairs from the Sam Nunn
School of International Affairs at Georgia Tech and a bachelor of arts in history and
political science from Duke University.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
TREASURER
*George Lund
SECRETARY
*Walter B. Slocombe
DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
John Bonsell
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
Richard R. Burt
*Teresa Carlson
*James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Richard Edelman
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Mark T. Esper
*Michael Fisch
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
*Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Brian L. Kelly
Henry A. Kissinger
John E. Klein
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Yann Le Pallec
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Christian Marrone
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Dambisa F. Moyo
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
*Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell McCormick
Michael Punke
Ashraf Qazi
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
Gil Tenzer
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster
*Executive Committee
Members
List as of May 17, 2022
Atlantic Council Board of Directors

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that
 promotes constructive US leadership and engagement
in international affairs based on the central role of
the Atlantic community in meeting today’s global
 challenges.
© 2022 The Atlantic Council of the United States.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may
be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means without permission in writing from the Atlantic
Council, except in the case of brief quotations in news
articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please direct
inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
