
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
IIATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
Stewart Scott, Sara Ann Bracket, Yumi Gambrill,
Emmeline Nettles, and Trey Herr
DRAGON TAILS:
Preserving International
Cybersecurity Research

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
III ATLANTIC COUNCIL
The Cyber Statecraft Initiative works at the nexus of geopolitics and cyber-
security to craft strategies to help shape the conduct of statecraft and to
better inform and secure users of technology. This work extends through
the competition of state and non-state actors, the security of the internet
and computing systems, the safety of operational technology and physical
systems, and the communities of cyberspace. The Initiative convenes a
diverse network of passionate and knowledgeable contributors, bridging
the gap among technical, policy, and user communities.
The mission of the Digital Forensic Research Lab (DFRLab) is to identify,
expose, and explain disinformation where and when it occurs using open-
source research; to promote objective truth as a foundation of government
for and by people; to protect democratic institutions and norms from those
who would seek to undermine them in the digital engagement space; to
create a new model of expertise adapted for impact and real-world results;
and to forge digital resilience at a time when humans are more intercon-
nected than at any point in history, by building the world’s leading hub of
digital forensic analysts tracking events in governance, technology, and
security.

This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic Council
Policy on Intellectual Independence. The author is solely responsible for
its analysis and recommendations. The Atlantic Council and its donors do
not determine, nor do they necessarily endorse or advocate for, any of this
report’s conclusions.
ISBN-13: 978-1-61977-247-2
© 2022 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights reserved. No
part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by
any means without permission in writing from the Atlantic Council, except
in the case of brief quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews.
Please direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street NW, 12th Floor
Washington, DC 20005
For more information, please visit
www.AtlanticCouncil.org.
Cover image licensing language: CSI produced this report’s cover image using in part OpenAI’s DALL-E program, an
AI image-generating application. Upon generating the draft image-prompt language, the authors reviewed, edited,
and revised the language to their own liking and take ultimate responsibility for the content of this publication.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
IVATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
Stewart Scott, Sara Ann Bracket, Yumi Gambrill,
Emmeline Nettles, and Trey Herr
DRAGON TAILS:
Preserving International
Cybersecurity Research

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
C
ybersecurity, writ large, benefits enormously from an international community of
researchers, hackers, and bug hunters. They find and disclose critical vulnerabilities,
often responsibly, while working outside affected vendors or codebases. Y et, the policy
debates that shape the legal environment around vulnerability disclosure often fail to consider
cybersecurity as a function of both the supply of vulnerability research and the health of those
research communities. This paper analyzes a series of Chinese regulatory changes altering
vulnerability disclosure practices to assess their impact on the supply of research from China’s
significantly productive community. The paper examines disclosure data from a mix of propri-
etary and open-source codebases, looking across vendor and software types with a simple
time-series analysis to look for the impact of recent Chinese regulations. The study of this data
revealed that while national regulations do indeed affect the supply of vulnerability research
under some circumstances, the effect is not as large, consistent, or discernible as might first be
expected. The prospect of copycat regulations, however, motivates concluding policy recom-
mendations focused on strengthening the health of the global vulnerability-research community
and lowering barriers-to-entry for both research and disclosure.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors of this report would like to thank Winnona DeSombre, Art Manion, Allen
Householder, Nick Reese, Dakota Cary, John Speed Meyers, Chris Rohlf, Jarek Stanley, Sasha
Romanosky, Jantje Silomon, Mischa Hansel, and Matthew Tompkins for their feedback and
insight during the development of this report. Thank you to Nancy Messiah and Andrea Raitu
for data visualization and web design and to Donald Partyka for graphic and document design.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
1ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION 2
 COMMUNITY IMPACT, NOT NATIONAL INTENT 3
 CVD—THE BIG PICTURE 4
MAKING LAW FOR VULNERABILITY DISCLOSURE 5
 THE RMSV 7
 STRATEGIC CONTEXT 7
EFFECTS OF THE RMSV 9
 METHODOLOGY 9
 ON THE DATA 11
 FINDINGS ON THE RMSV 13
 MICROSOFT 13
 RED HAT 17
 PRODUCT TYPE BREAKDOWN 18
 BY-COMPANY BREAKDOWN: MICROSOFT 19
 BY-COMPANY BREAKDOWN: RED HAT 22
DISCUSSION 24
 OPEN-SOURCE SPOTLIGHT 24
CONCLUSION & RECOMMENDATIONS 26
APPENDIX I: DATA CHALLENGES 28
APPENDIX II: THE FULL RMSV 29
APPENDIX III: NULL FINDING CHARTS 33
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 37
For more on this project and the datasets behind it, visit us on the web here.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
2 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
INTRODUCTION
1 Eric S. Raymond, The Cathedral & the Bazaar: Musings on Linux and Open Source by an Accidental Revolutionary (O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2001).
2 China’s Cyber Capabilities: Warfare, Espionage, and Implications for the United States, Before the US-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, 117th Cong. (2022) (statement of Dakota Cary, research analyst, Center for Security
and Emerging T echnology), https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2022-02/Dakota_Cary_T estimony.pdf.
3 Chris Bing, “China’s Government Is Keeping Its Security Researchers from Attending Conferences,” CyberScoop, March
8, 2018, https://www.cyberscoop.com/pwn2own-chinese-researchers-360-technologies-trend-micro/.
4 Cyberspace Administration of China (CAC), “Notice of the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology and the State Internet Information Office
of the Ministry of Public Security on Issuing the Regulations on the Management of Security Vulnerabilities of Network Products-Office of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China,” Pub. L. No. No. 66 (2021), http://www.cac.gov.cn/2021-07/13/c_1627761607640342.htm.
5 To the reader, because there are several translations of the title, one might also find sources calling the RMSV “Regulations
on the Management of Network Product Security Vulnerability,” “the vulnerability disclosure provisions of the Data
Security Law,” “Provisions on Security Loopholes of Network Products,” or any other number of synonyms.
6 Amit Y oran, “One in 10 Assets Assessed Are Vulnerable to Log4Shell,” T enable (blog), December 22, 2021, https://www.tenable.com/blog/
one-in-10-assets-assessed-are-vulnerable-to-log4shell?utm_source=charge&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=internal-comms.
7 “Readout of White House Meeting on Software Security,” The White House, January 13, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/01/13/readout-of-white-house-meeting-on-software-security/.
8 “Responding to and Learning from the Log4Shell Vulnerability” (Washington, DC, February 8, 2022), https://
www.hsgac.senate.gov/hearings/responding-to-and-learning-from-the-log4shell-vulnerability.
9 Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), “Emergency Directive 22-02 Mitigate Apache
Log4J Vulnerability,” ED 22-02 (2022), https://www.cisa.gov/emergency-directive-22-02.
O
ne complicated reality of cybersecurity is the
sheer volume of vulnerability disclosure to tech-
nology vendors and open-source projects
that originates outside these organizations. Indeed, the
notion originally articulated by Eric Raymond and credited
as Linus’ Law, that “given enough eyeballs, all bugs are
shallow,” is a central part of the open-source ecosystem’s
security model.1 What often goes underappreciated is that
these “eyes” may belong to the same person or people
frequently examining the same or related codebases—the
global distribution of eyes is uneven. Bug-bounty programs
often show disproportionate contributions from a small
number of people and countries, as some are home to
comparatively more active researcher communities.2
One of the most prolific of these communities is that in
China. For at least a decade, Chinese corporate research
teams and individual researchers have dominated
marquee hacking competitions and corporate bounty
programs, scouring everything from browsers and mobile
operating systems to networking gear. Their dominance
in hacking competitions halted abruptly in 2018, when
China blocked its researchers from participating in
such events abroad.3 Soon after, the Regulations on the
Management of Network Product Security Vulnerabilities,
or RMSV for short, took effect in September 2021. The
law requires Chinese network product providers to
notify the country’s Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology (MIIT) about vulnerabilities found in “network
products”4 within a few days of reporting them to the
appropriate vendor.5 As 2021 wound to a close, the legal
environment for Chinese vulnerability research appeared
fraught with the potential for a chilling effect caused by
the ambiguities and requirements within the RMSV.
Enter Log4j. At the end of 2021, a bug in the popular
logging library Log4j came into the public view as vendors
raced to patch millions of vulnerable devices and applica-
tions—by some estimates, 10 percent of digital systems,
including servers, web applications, Internet-of-Things
(IoT) devices and more, were vulnerable. 6 Amid the
ensuing tumult—White House summits,7 Congressional
testimony,8 national directives,9 and desperate calls for
patching—a somewhat surprising strand in the saga went
largely undiscussed. In late November 2021, a researcher
at Chinese technology giant Alibaba a severe vulnera-
bility in Log4j and disclosed it privately to the Apache
Software Foundation (ASF) team maintaining the library.
A month later, Alibaba found itself on the receiving end
of government sanction. China’s Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology suspended subsidiary Alibaba
Cloud from a cyber threat- and information-sharing

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
3ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
partnership for six months, apparently for failing to report
the Log4j vulnerability, also known as Log4Shell, directly
and promptly to the MIIT.10, 11
The precise enforcement mechanism behind Alibaba’s
suspension remains unclear in the sparse reporting on
the incident. The MIIT may have cited a clause in the
company’s contract for the government-facing infor-
mation-sharing platform, or it may have relied on the
aforementioned RMSV, published in July 2021. 12 Legal
mechanisms aside, and disregarding the concurrent rifts
between the Chinese government and Alibaba, which
has been on the losing end of massive antitrust fines
recently,13 an uncomfortable and under-addressed fact
remains: the MIIT appears to have punished Alibaba, a
titanic cybersecurity entity, for following what were by all
accounts best practices, or at least something close to
them. This augurs poorly for the supply of vulnerability
research originating in China, and thus the security of
software including open source and its “many eyes.” The
law has the potential to either funnel vulnerability infor-
mation to the MIIT well ahead of industry-standard time-
lines or to create “a chilling effect on future coordinated
disclosure” 14 in one of the world’s largest information
technology (IT) hubs.
10 Sophie Yu and Eduardo Baptista, “China Regulator Suspends Cyber Security Deal with Alibaba Cloud,” ed. Gerry Doyle, Reuters, December
22, 2021, https://www.reuters.com/world/china/china-regulator-suspends-cyber-security-deal-with-alibaba-cloud-2021-12-22/.
11 Southern Finance and Economics, “Exclusive | Alibaba Cloud Is Suspended from the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology’s Network Security
Threat Information Sharing Platform Cooperation Unit – 21 Finance,” December 22, 2021, https://m.21jingji.com/timestream/html/%7BU9Pjf0FaKEU=%7D.
12 To the reader, an anonymous source familiar with the matter indicated the former possibility was more likely, which was reiterated by reporting
from the Wall Street Journal, though the text of the RMSV law, found in Appendix III of this paper, seems equally applicable. See David Uberti
and Liza Lin, “Alibaba Employee First Spotted Log4j Software Flaw but Now the Company Is in Hot Water With Beijing,” Wall Street Journal,
December 22, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-halts-alibaba-cybersecurity-cooperation-for-slow-reporting-of-threat-state-media-
says-11640184511. Other reporting refers to enforcement of the RMSV rather than contract clauses—see Phil Muncaster, “Alibaba Suffers
Government Crackdown Over Log4j,” Infosecurity Magazine, December 23, 2021, https://www.infosecurity-magazine.com/news/alibaba-suffers-
government/. Regardless of the precise legal lever used, the source of the apparent sanction was Alibaba’s failure to share the vulnerability
with the MIIT more promptly, per the company’s own statement, cited in Xinmei Shen’s article, “Apache Log4j Bug: Alibaba Cloud Vows to Boost
Compliance after Chinese Ministry Pulls Support for Not First Reporting Security Issue to Government,” South China Morning Post, December
23, 2021, https://www.scmp.com/tech/big-tech/article/3160854/apache-log4j-bug-alibaba-cloud-vows-boost-compliance-after-chinese.
13 Raymond Zhong, “China Fines Alibaba $2.8 Billion in Landmark Antitrust Case,” New Y ork Times, April 9,
2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/09/technology/china-alibaba-monopoly-fine.html.
14 Cyber Safety Review Board, “Review of the December 2021 Log4j Event” (Arlington, VA: Department of Homeland Security, Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, July 11, 2022), https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/publications/CSRB-Report-on-Log4-July-11-2022_508.pdf.
15 Uberti and Lin, “Alibaba Employee First Spotted Log4j Software Flaw but Now the Company Is in Hot Water with Beijing.”
16 Allen D Householder et al., “The CERT Guide to Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure” (Pittsburgh, PA: Software Engineering Institute,
Carnegie Mellon University, August 2017), 4, https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/asset_files/specialreport/2017_003_001_503340.pdf.
17 Elizabeth Montalbano, “Google Project Zero Cuts Bug Disclosure Timeline to a 30-Day Grace Period,” Threatpost, April 16,
2021, https://threatpost.com/google-project-zero-cuts-bug-disclosure-timeline-to-a-30-day-grace-period/165432/.
Community Impact, Not National
Intent
Chen Zhaojun, a researcher with Alibaba Cloud’s security
team, reported Log4Shell to ASF privately via email on
November 24, 2021. Just weeks later—by December 9—
he followed up with an alert that discussion of the bug was
percolating through cybersecurity fora. 15 Coordinated
vulnerability disclosure (CVD) refers to the process in
which discoverers pass vulnerability information to
various vendors, affected entities, and eventually the
public. Given the many overlapping stakeholders in any
software ecosystem, CVD is messy, and as in the case of
Log4Shell, does not end after a single communication. As
Carnegie Mellon University’s CERT Coordination Center
(CERT CC) puts it, “there is no single ‘right’ way to do
this.”16 Certainly though, it is difficult to consider Alibaba’s
approach to Log4Shell “wrong” in any sense pertinent
to current CVD norms. Alibaba’s researcher disclosed
Log4Shell, a vulnerability easily exploitable through many
vectors including chat messages on Minecraft servers,
to those best suited to remediate it—the ASF team main-
taining the library. Alibaba kept the information close for
a relatively short time, well within the thirty-day window
allowed by, say, Google’s Project Zero, and it communi-
cated important developments regarding public knowl-
edge of the vulnerability.17

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
4 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Deep, legitimate concerns exist about the intent of
requirements to provide advanced notice of vulnerabili-
ties to government agencies. This is especially true where
those government agencies are implicated in harvesting
vulnerabilities for offensive use from national databases
and hacking competitions, 18, 19 all under a framework
conceiving of vulnerabilities as a national resource. 20
Concerns over state access to vulnerabilities and influ-
ence on disclosure practices are not limited to China.21, 22
However, this paper considers these regulations through
a different lens: their impact on the supply of vulnerability
disclosures worldwide.
CVD—The Big Picture
Researchers ranging from hobbyists to enterprise lab
technicians hunt for vulnerabilities in products, open-
source libraries, and embedded software. They have a
variety of motivations: profit, prestige, ethical principles,
and even entertainment.23 Testaments to the importance
of this thriving, distributed, community are widespread:
bug bounty programs and platforms like HackerOne or
EU-FOSSA 2, tomes of acknowledgments for external
researchers in common vulnerabilities and exposures
(CVE) records, and even the remarkable innovation of the
open-source ecosystem itself, premised on the open and
free flow of contributions from researchers and devel-
opers to projects and their maintainers.
If many eyes can better find vulnerabilities, then the
global supply of security research—the product of these
“eyes”—is essential to managing the level of risk posed
by software to users. Regulations that might constrict this
supply or limit its global reach are thus concerning. While
much previous work has focused on the intricacies of
vulnerability disclosure in a specific, transactional frame,24
18 Priscilla Moriuchi and Bill Ladd, “China Altered Public Vulnerability Data to Conceal MSS Influence,” Recorded
Future, March 9, 2018, https://go.recordedfuture.com/hubfs/reports/cta-2018-0309.pdf.
19 Patrick Howell O’Neill, “How China Turned a Prize-Winning IPhone Hack against the Uyghurs,” MIT Technology Review,
May 6, 2021, https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/05/06/1024621/china-apple-spy-uyghur-hacker-tianfu/.
20 Dakota Cary (@DakotaInDC), “T oday Is My Last Day at @CSETGeorgetown...,” Twitter, April 22,
2022, 11:05 a.m., https://twitter.com/DakotaInDC/status/1517519983718256640.
21 Will Loomis and Stewart Scott, “A Role for the Vulnerabilities Equities Process in Securing Software Supply Chains,” Lawfare Institute,
January 11, 2021, https://www.lawfareblog.com/role-vulnerabilities-equities-process-securing-software-supply-chains.
22 Mandiant, “Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) | Threat Actors & Groups,” Mandiant, accessed
August 2, 2022, https://www.mandiant.com/resources/insights/apt-groups.
23 Erik Silfversten et al., The Economics of Vulnerability Disclosure (Athens, Greece: ENISA, 2018), 28, https://
www.enisa.europa.eu/news/enisa-news/the-economics-of-vulnerability-disclosure.
24 Silfversten et al., The Economics of Vulnerability Disclosure.
25 To the reader, with such effects, the paper also works to understand what, if any, characteristics of these
effects varied with respect to vendors, product types, codebases, and contributions rates.
26 President Joseph Biden, Executive Order, “Improving the Nation’s Cybersecurity, Executive Order 14028 of May 12, 2021,” Federal
Register, 86, no. 93 (May 17,2021): 26633–47, https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2021-05-17/pdf/2021-10460.pdf.
27 Shalanda Y oung and Chris Inglis, “M-22-16 | Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies: Administration
Cybersecurity Priorities for the FY 2024 Budget,” July 22, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/07/M-22-16.pdf.
this paper takes an aggregate approach, concerned
less with edge cases than the net effect of new laws on
total vulnerability supply. The focus here is on the effect
of the RMSV on research. Because Chinese researchers
are such a significant proportion of the supply of vulner-
ability disclosures, and because the law offers a clear set
of exogenous intervention dates, the possible effects of
the RMSV are a critical case study for policymakers—if
they exist, they should be relatively easy to detect and
correlate to underlying events.
This paper seeks to answer whether the RMSV had
any measurable effects on the supply of either global or
Chinese vulnerability research.25 The analysis measures
whether such effects are detectable in publicly available
vulnerability-reporting and crediting data from a selection
of proprietary vendors and open-source libraries. First,
the paper offers a brief, international history of policies
and laws impacting vulnerability disclosure before diving
into the RMSV. The second section examines statistical
findings on the effect of the RMSV and discusses data
gathering and analytic methodology. Finally, the paper
provides recommendations for the US government and
its allies to consider as they update policies impacting
vulnerability disclosure in the context of the current
administration’s significant efforts to improve the secu-
rity of software and IT supply chains.26, 27 The report does
not seek to indict any one country’s approach to cyber-
security. Rather, it attempts to detect fragility in the global
supply of vulnerability disclosures through accessible
disclosure and acknowledgment data to highlight the
subject law, its effects, and the need for policies to better
encourage vulnerability disclosure outside of any single,
national legal context by bolstering the wider research
community’s health and vitality.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
5ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
MAKING LAW FOR VULNERABILITY DISCLOSURE
28 Haroon Meer and Thu T. Pham, “History of Vulnerability Disclosure,” Duo Security, August 3,
2015, https://duo.com/labs/research/history-of-vulnerability-disclosure.
29 Ars Technica Staff, “When Google Squares off with Microsoft on Bug Disclosure, Only Users Lose,” Ars Technica, January 12, 2015, https://
arstechnica.com/information-technology/2015/01/google-sees-a-bug-before-patch-tuesday-but-windows-users-remain-vulnerable/.
30 Householder et al., “The CERT Guide to Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure,” 6.
31 Householder et al., “The CERT Guide to Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure,” 8.
32 “How Google Handles Security Vulnerabilities,” Google, accessed August 2, 2022, https://about.google/appsecurity/.
33 “Vulnerability Disclosure Guidelines,” HackerOne, accessed August 2, 2022, https://www.hackerone.com/disclosure-guidelines.
34 To the reader, for example, BugCrowd’s program list can be found at https://BugCrowd.com/
programs, and hackerone’s at https://hackerone.com/directory/programs.
35 To the reader, in addition to outlining timelines and reporting requirements, VDPs often also define what types
of research are permitted—for example, some VDPs prohibit testing denial-of-service attacks that would disrupt
networks and data. They may also be referred to as Responsible Disclosure Programs, or RDPs.
36 Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), “Binding Operational Directive 20-01 – Develop and Publish a
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy,” BOD 20-01, (2020), https://www.cisa.gov/binding-operational-directive-20-01.
37 Debora di Giacomo et al., Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure Policies in the EU, ed. Evangelos Kantas and Marnix Dekker (Athens,
Greece: ENISA, 2022), https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/coordinated-vulnerability-disclosure-policies-in-the-eu.
T
he development of CVD processes stretches back
to the 1990s, iterating through periods of tension
and begrudging consensus.28 Roles have evolved,
and even some of today’s champions of coordinated
disclosure and public bounty programs were at best reti-
cent about—and at worst overtly hostile toward—external
vulnerability disclosure in the not-too-recent past.29 In its
“Guide to Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure,” the CERT
CC, affiliated with Carnegie Mellon’s Software Engineering
Institute, describes CVD as the information management
process of moving from initial discovery of a vulnerability
to the deployment of remediation measures—patches,
most commonly. A good CVD policy strives to establish
rules that guide stakeholders through that process along
an optimal route—somewhere between “disclose every-
thing you know about a vulnerability to everyone as soon
as you know it” and “never disclose anything you know
about a vulnerability to anyone.”30 Differences in organi-
zational preference, bug severity and publicity, patching
timelines, maintenance resources, and much more cause
great variation in the execution of CVD. Nonetheless, CERT
CC’s guide lays out several key principles along the path
to patching: reducing harm, presuming researcher benev-
olence, avoiding surprise, incentivizing desired behavior,
making ethical considerations, improving process, and
considering CVD as “a wicked problem.”31
In practice, there are many implementations of these
and other guiding principles. For example, when Google
researchers discover an external bug, they disclose
it to vendors and provide a ninety-day period before
going public with the vulnerability in the absence of
a patch, with some wiggle room for slightly delayed
patches and adoption, as well as a much more aggres-
sive seven-day deadline for zero-day vulnerabilities
under active exploitation. 32 Bug-bounty reporting plat-
forms like HackerOne and BugCrowd run a variety of
programs as aggregation and coordination platforms,
each with their own guidelines—HackerOne’s platform
maintains a 180-day final deadline for disclosure in its
public programs, for instance,33 and both run a variety of
private programs subject to CVD processes customized
by participating organizations.34
Governments also maintain CVD policies for respon-
sibly disclosing bugs found in their systems. For the US
government, the US Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Agency (CISA) published the Binding Operational
Directive (BOD) 20-01 on September 2, 2020, which
required all federal agencies to implement their own
vulnerability disclosure programs (VDPs) by March
2022.35, 36 In April 2022, the European Union Agency for
Cybersecurity (ENISA) published a report on CVD policies
in the European Union (EU), providing useful overview
of processes in its twenty-seven member-state. 37 Only
four member-states—the Netherlands, France, Belgium,
and Lithuania—had adopted a national CVD policy at the
time of publication. Nine EU members had not begun

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
6 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
the process of implementing a national CVD policy at
all, and the rest were at some stage of development. 38
The United Nations maintains a working group that has
written on considerations for encouraging responsible
disclosure.39 Meanwhile, the International Organization
for Standardization (ISO) with the International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) outline responsible
vendor practices for handling external vulnerability
disclosure in the ISO/IEC:29147:2018 standard.40
Because governments also control the legal environ-
ments that might delineate between security research
and prosecutable crime, clear national CVD policies
foster a healthy research community, while their absence
often disincentivizes or even punishes researchers. For
example, reporting by Just Security on the Log4j incident
and the RMSV describes the investigation of a German
security researcher who found vulnerabilities in a polling
application for a political campaign. The authors—Fabiola
Schwarz, Jantje Silomon, and Misha Hansel—emphasize
that a lack of clear guidance and protections imposes
legal concerns on researchers, impeding their ability to
contribute research findings.41 Somewhat similarly, in the
United States, Missouri threatened legal action against
a reporter who found that thousands of social secu-
rity numbers were publicly accessible on the internet
through Missouri’s Department of Education website.42
Fortunately, governments have begun closing these
38 To the reader, ENISA notes that there is a lack of standardization among member-state CVD policies stemming from differing legal and economic
resources. The report also highlights the Network and Information Security Directive 2 (NIS2), which emphasizes the importance of each country
creating its own computer emergency response team (CERT) and recommends the establishment of national vulnerability databases.
39 Mar Negreiro, “The NIS2 Directive: A High Common Level of Cybersecurity in the EU,” European Parliamentary Research Service PE
689.333 (June 2022), 13, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2021/689333/EPRS_BRI(2021)689333_EN.pdf.
40 14:00-17:00, “ISO/IEC 29147:2018,” ISO, accessed June 30, 2022, https://www.iso.org/cms/render/live/en/sites/isoorg/contents/data/
standard/07/23/72311.html. T o the reader, this standard is currently behind a paywall, though arguments from security researchers Katie
Moussouris and Art Manion swayed the ISO to make it freely available for a time. For more on this, read the following: Juha Saarinen,
“ISO Vulnerability Disclosure Standard Now Free,” iTnews, April 18, 2016, https://www.itnews.com.au/news/iso-vulnerability-disclosure-
standard-now-free-418253, and Katie Moussouris, “Vulnerability Disclosure Deja Vu: Prosecute Crime Not Research,” Dark Reading,
May 12, 2015, https://www.darkreading.com/vulnerabilities-threats/vulnerability-disclosure-deja-vu-prosecute-crime-not-research.
41 Fabiola Schwarz, Jantje Silomon, and Micha Hansel, “Empowering Security Researchers Will Improve Global Cybersecurity,” Just
Security, May 6, 2022, https://www.justsecurity.org/81293/empowering-security-researchers-will-improve-global-cybersecurity/.
42 Lucas Ropek, “Missouri Governor Accuses Journalist of Hacking for Warning That State Left Teachers’ Data Exposed,” Gizmodo,
October 14, 2021, https://gizmodo.com/missouri-governor-wants-to-prosecute-journalist-for-war-1847866414.
43 US Department of Justice, Justice Manual, Title 9: Criminal 9-48.000 – Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, [updated May
19, 2022], accessed August 2, 2022, https://www.justice.gov/opa/press-release/file/1507126/download.
44 Adi Robertson, “Justice Department Pledges Not to Charge Security Researchers with Hacking Crimes,” The Verge, May 19, 2022,
https://www.theverge.com/2022/5/19/23130910/justice-department-cfaa-hacking-law-guideline-limits-security-research.
45 “Vulnerabilities Equities Policy and Process for the United States Government,” November 15, 2017, https://trumpwhitehouse.
archives.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/images/External%20-%20Unclassified%20VEP%20Charter%20FINAL.PDF.
46 Schwarz, Silomon, and Hansel, “Empowering Security Researchers Will Improve Global Cybersecurity.”
47 John Sherman, “Memorandum for Senior Pentagon Leadership, Commandant of the Coast Guard, Commanders of the
Combatant Commands, Defense Agency and DoD Field Activity Directors | Subject: Software Development and Open Source
Software,” January 24, 2022, https://dodcio.defense.gov/portals/0/documents/library/softwaredev-opensource.pdf.
48 To the reader, these regulations are notably different from incident-reporting requirements, which have become more common.
Incident-reporting requirements, such as nascent legislation covering critical infrastructure incidents in the United States, or India’s
recent, more expansive regulations are premised on the fact that attackers have already made forays against (usually) non-government
entities, by abusing either known vulnerabilities, unknown ones, or both. Because they are already able to compromise a target,
which does not necessarily even know the exploits involved, there is less, if any, risk that reporting will reveal information about a
vulnerability that others will exploit, especially when governments responsibly control what portion of the report is made public.
loopholes to some degree. In addition to the CISA BOD
20-01, the US Department of Justice recently announced
that it will choose not to charge security researchers
acting in what it defines as good faith under the
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act,43 which has long been
criticized for practical overreach with regards to benevo-
lent research.44
Importantly, where security vulnerabilities are concerned,
governments do more than create legal environments
and act on researcher findings to patch their systems—
many have offensive organizations with an interest in
obtaining some of these vulnerabilities for eventual
use, adding a third dimension to their CVD interactions.
In the United States, the Vulnerability Equities Process
(VEP) governs the management of vulnerabilities found
by government agencies, reviewing the most severe on
a case-by-case basis to decide whether to retain them
for offensive use or disclose them to the vendor or main-
tainer.45 Other countries have made some portion of
their equities processes public too, including the United
Kingdom, Australia, and Canada.46 While these policies
are only tangential to most CVD processes, some US
agencies are explicitly required to submit findings to the
VEP even when working with open-source code,47 and
the handling of vulnerabilities that the US government
learns of in information sharing fora is not well under-
stood from public documentation.48

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
7ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
The RMSV
In July 2021, the Cyberspace Administration of China
(CAC) published a draft version of the RMSV. The
following articles of the RMSV—in effect since September
2021—are the focus of this work:
• “Article 4: No organization or individual may…illegally
collect, sell, or publish information on network prod-
uct security loopholes…”
• “Article 7: Network product providers shall perform
the following…:
i. After discovering or learning that there are security
vulnerabilities in the provided network products…
it shall immediately notify the relevant product
provider…
ii. The relevant vulnerability information shall be
submitted to the Network Security Threat and
Vulnerability Information Sharing Platforms of the
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
within 2 days…”
• “Article 9: Organizations or individuals engaged in the
discovery and collection of network product security
vulnerabilities shall release information on network
product security vulnerabilities to the public through
network platforms, media, conferences, competitions,
etc. principles and abide by the following provisions:
iii. Vulnerability information shall not be released
before network product providers provide network
product security vulnerability repair measures…
iv. Not to publish the details of the security loopholes
in the networks, information systems and equipment
used by network operators…
v. …
vi. Not to publish or provide programs and tools
specially used to exploit the security loopholes…in
activities that endanger network security.”
The RMSV creates a few specific concerns including
the potential for the law to create a chilling effect on
the disclosure of vulnerabilities from China’s research
49 Bing, “China’s Government Is Keeping Its Security Researchers from Attending Conferences.”
50 Justina Alexandra Sava, “Global ICT Market Share 2013 - 2022, By Selected Country,” Statista, March 3, 2022, https://
www.statista.com/statistics/263801/global-market-share-held-by-selected-countries-in-the-ict-market/.
51 “IT Industry Outlook 2022,” Comp TIA, accessed August 2, 2022, http://connect.comptia.org/content/research/it-industry-trends-analysis.
52 To the reader, a similar study of the impact of better legal protections for researchers in the EU, for example,
might struggle with its sample size given the patchwork of legal environments across the EU’s many member-
states, whereas the Chinese model is conveniently (for the purposes of this study) monolithic.
community and thereby impact the supply of vulnera-
bility disclosures more widely. Because of the difficulty
of disclosing the required information within the given
two-day timeline, the ambiguity of what is considered
a “network product provider,” and the fuzzy borders
between provider, individual, and individuals funded by a
provider, researchers might hesitate to disclose a vulner-
ability to the vendor entirely, turning them over to the
government only, if at all, or waiting for further legal clarity
before continuing their work. The ambiguity about which
entities the RMSV covers and the scope of the mandated
notice to government also holds the prospect of legal
penalties over individual researchers.
The RMSV is of particular interest in the context of
studying the impact of CVD regulation for several
reasons. First, it is unambiguous in requiring that some
subsets of vulnerabilities be reported from private enter-
prise to the Chinese government prior to patching, even
if there are ambiguities in what entities and which vulner-
abilities it regulates. If anything, wider quantitative anal-
ysis might reveal the Chinese government’s current views
of those gaps. Second, the RMSV provides a well-delin-
eated timeline to examine—a ‘before’ and ‘after’ for when
its reporting requirements were either publicly known
or enforceable. Third, the portion of the global secu-
rity research that it regulates is enormous—Chinese
researchers, until recently, were prolific contributors at
international hacking competitions, 49 and the nation’s
information and communications technology (ICT) sector
is one of the largest globally. 50, 51, 52 Any chilling effect
would therefore be more likely to emerge in publicly
available data, and its impact on global security would be
nontrivial, particularly given the fact that the only known,
documented instance of potential enforcement was
Alibaba’s handling Log4j.
Strategic Context
The RMSV is noteworthy in its strategic ambiguity. It is
not made explicit how the law applies to multinational
companies with offices in China, what kind of entity is
considered a network product provider, or what degree
of affiliation an individual can maintain with a network
product provider without being subject to the law. In addi-
tion, it is unclear what level of severity a vulnerability must
have to require reporting (and the law provides for no
rating or review process), what level of early disclosure to
affected entities outside of a product maintainer it allows,

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
8 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
if any, what its designs for multi-party products are, or how
it intends to regulate vulnerabilities in critical open-source
software. Some bugs might be reported to vendors by
researchers who do not even realize the presence of
significant security impacts. In some ways, all this vague-
ness might be the point, allowing enforcement at the
convenience of the government and creating a Damocles
sword of legal liability for researching entities. Even the
MIIT’s ability to cope with the significant volume of vulner-
ability research the RMSV seems to demand is doubtful.
Strategic ambiguity is a recurring trend in Chinese cyber-
security policy and law. In China, cybersecurity is part
of broader information security—the goal is full control
of the information space within China to ensure social
stability and regime continuity—including against myriad
threats from and through digital technology.53 As a unitary
government, and with recent reforms to recentralize
the government following devolution to the local level
during earlier phases of reform and opening up,54 China
exercises a top-down imposition of government policy.
Information security has seen a greater national-level
consolidation in oversight because of its strategic nature.
Moreover, many of China’s key enforcement mecha-
nisms relevant to information security are the direct
53 Dean Cheng, Cyber Dragon: Inside China’s Information Warfare and Cyber Operations (Santa Barbara, California: Praeger, 2017).
54 Cheng, Cyber Dragon.
55 Zhong, “China Fines Alibaba $2.8 Billion in Landmark Antitrust Case.”
56 “China Blocks Didi From App Stores Days After Mega U.S. IPO,” Bloomberg News, July 4, 2021, https://www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-07-04/china-regulator-orders-didi-to-be-removed-from-app-stores.
57 Y an Luo, Zhijing Yu, and Vicky Liu, “The Future of Data Localization and Cross-Border Transfer in China: A Unified Framework or
a Patchwork of Requirements?,” International Association of Privacy Professionals (IAPP), June 22, 2021, https://iapp.org/news/a/
the-future-of-data-localization-and-cross-border-transfer-in-china-a-unified-framework-or-a-patchwork-of-requirements/.
responsibility of state entities such as the MIIT, Ministry of
State Security (MSS), and the CAC.
As China innovates in digital technologies, it has sought
to preempt regulatory challenges through a top-down
approach common across sectors (China conducts
nearly all its development planning at the national level
as well). Many of the country’s major technology firms—
Ant Group, Baidu, Tencent, etc.—are private companies
that nevertheless must function inside this policy environ-
ment. Recent fines for monopolistic behavior and blocks
against international initial public offerings (IPOs) demon-
strate the government’s tightening grip on its IT industry
scions,55, 56 alongside a drive towards stricter regulations
and localization of data centers.57
The RMSV emerges from an approach to information
management that focuses on applying regulation with
purposeful ambiguity at the source of what is considered
a resource, all to create wider and more flexible effects
on firms and maybe even individuals. It is precisely this
framework that threatens to undermine the supply of
vulnerability disclosures abroad.
Highlighted RMSV

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
9ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
EFFECTS OF THE RMSV
58 Catalin Cimpanu, “Chinese Government Lays out New Vulnerability Disclosure Rules,” The Record by Recorded Future (blog), July 14, 2021,
https://therecord.media/chinese-government-lays-out-new-vulnerability-disclosure-rules/. To the reader, the precise timeline, however, of
the specific vulnerability reporting requirements is difficult to track through the flurry of recent cybersecurity regulations in China. This best
estimate derives from Bill Goodwin’s reporting at ComputerWeekly and Catalin Cimpanu’s at The Record, indicating that the first draft of the law
that included the reporting mandate was published by the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress of China on July 2, 2020,
alongside the draft Data Security Law. See also: Bill Goodwin, “Chinese Law May Require Companies to Disclose Cyber-Security Preparations
Outside China,” Computer Weekly, July 3, 2020, https://www.computerweekly.com/news/252485674/Chinese-law-may-require-companies-
to-disclose-cyber-security-preparations-outside-China. The key quote citing Goodwin’s reporting is: “The provision that product vendors
might need to share vulnerability details with Chinese state agencies has been known and in the public domain since at least 2020.”
59 To the reader, this date also collides with significant US sanctions activity and other cyber legislation initiatives in
China, making it both the most likely to show an effect and the least conclusive in the case that it does.
60 Microsoft Security Response Center (MSRC), “Security Update Guide – Vulnerabilities,” Microsoft,
[updated August 9, 2022], https://msrc.microsoft.com/update-guide/vulnerability.
61 “Apple Security Updates,” Apple Support, https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT201222.
62 “VMware Security Advisories,” VMware, Inc., https://www.vmware.com/security/advisories.html.
63 AskF5, “Security Knowledge Centers,” F5, https://support.f5.com/csp/knowledge-center/security.
64 Red Hat Customer Portal, “Security Data,” Red Hat, https://access.redhat.com/security/data.
65 “A Distributed Vulnerability Database for Open Source,” OSV, https://osv.dev/.
W
ith these considerations in mind, this paper
looks at a large dataset of publicly reported
vulnerability acknowledgments to detect
a significant change in contributions from Chinese
researchers—from individuals to large companies—
over the lifetime of the RMSV at three key points:
• Public release of Data Security Law draft: July 2020.58,
59
• Publication: July 2021.
• Enactment: September 2021.
Specifically, this paper proposes that any of those three
dates may see either a significant decline in the propor-
tion of vulnerabilities attributed to Chinese researchers
or firms or a significant decline in the total reporting of
vulnerabilities in the case that most reports were initially
unattributed or anonymously made.
Methodology
To look for these effects, the team gathered a variety
of publicly available vulnerability data from both propri-
etary vendors and open-source product managers.
These entities included Microsoft, Apple, VMware, F5,
and Red Hat, which provides data about a wide variety
of open-source packages it is involved with. Specific
data organization and entries varied among these enti-
ties. Microsoft provides the ability to download a spread-
sheet of CVEs reported to the company, which includes
external acknowledgments, dates, and affected prod-
ucts.60 Apple maintains records of its security updates,
which include information on CVEs and external reporters
scraped from its website, as with VMware and F5. 61, 62,
63 Red Hat maintains several datasets relevant to the
task, including the Extensive Markup Language (XML)
files of CVEs reported to its open-source projects, CVE
acknowledgments, dates, and affected projects. 64 The
team selected data sources for their ability to represent
significant subsections of the technology ecosystem—
multi-platform providers (Microsoft), significant infrastruc-
ture providers (VMware and F5), companies with massive
consumer-facing product lines (Apple), and well-estab-
lished open-source software (OSS) stakeholders (Red
Hat). Other entities considered for study but not included
due to processing challenges are Google (specifi-
cally its Chrome stable releases) and the Open Source
Vulnerability (OSV) schema.65
The publication date of security advisories is not neces-
sarily the same as the corresponding vulnerability’s
disclosure, and the lag time between these two dates
might vary within and among vendors based on a host
of factors. These advisories are a useful source of time-
stamped data and possibly make visible the effects of
policy interventions. Random distribution or no consis-
tent patterns of change are thus useful findings as well.
In addition, the decision to publicly credit a researcher (as
opposed to labeling them “anonymous” or crediting no
entity or individual at all) despite the law also would also

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
10 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
reveal something about the respective organization’s
thinking.66
These datasets were compiled (separately) into a log
of CVEs, originating webpages, acknowledged entities
(differentiated into individuals and organizations where
possible), best-estimated publication date, and affected
products.67 From there, the team associated credited
companies with a best-estimate country of legal prove-
nance, while identifying credits to open-source projects
and multinational organizations as such. Some organi-
zations operated only in two countries and were split
to reflect such. While the paper does not identify the
legal environments where individuals operated, some
geolocation information volunteered either through
Twitter, GitHub, or email addresses is available and has
been used in other studies.68 This provided the neces-
sary material for analyzing, roughly, by country contribu-
tion over time. Each entry received a month-year tag for
batching, especially convenient as two of the three signif-
icant dates were on the first and second days of a month
(July 2, 2020, and September 1, 2021—the draft RMSV
released on July 13, 2021). Each step presented various
opportunities for cleaning the datasets, and this paper
describes the steps taken for further analysis.
The data collected by this methodology was unavoidably
noisy.69 Many entries were created by hand at the source,
leading to an enormous quantity of typos and spelling
variations (e.g., Qihoo 360, QIHU360, Qihoo360, or just
360 represent the same company), and different formats
and encoding protocols mangled accents and non-En-
glish characters. There is also considerable overlap
66 To the reader, this is not to say that the law prohibits crediting, but rather that, if a researching entity fails to comply with the
law, public acknowledgment of their disclosure provides an easy source of enforcement information to the MIIT.
67 To the reader, scripts used for scraping and processing for acknowledgments are found through https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-
research-reports/report/preserving-international-cybersecurity-research/. Data cleaning not reflected in these scripts occurred in Excel.
68 Johannes Wachs et al., “The Geography of Open Source Software: Evidence from GitHub,” Technological Forecasting
and Social Change 176, no. 121478 (March 2022), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2022.121478.
69 To the reader, more discussion of data challenges can be found in the Appendix.
70 “CVEs,” Tenable, accessed August 2, 2022, https://www.tenable.com/cve.
between datasets, where vulnerabilities in a common
codebase affected multiple products or where CVEs
were retroactively revealed to discuss the same vulnera-
bility. There is no standard process for acknowledgment
either—some uncredited CVEs may have been reported
anonymously or discovered by researchers internal to
the company providing the data. Meanwhile, F5 didn’t
always list CVEs, relying on its own numbering system
throughout.
Dating entries is similarly imprecise, reflecting many
possible significant dates: original confidential report
to a company, discovery of a known CVE’s impact on
a product not previously known to be affected, public
publishing, addition to another dataset like the US
National Vulnerability Database (NVD), and so on. Not all
Red Hat’s CVEs were updated with accurate reporting
dates on one of their datasets, so this analysis used their
searchable database to fill in dates for approximately
one-third of the entries, supplementing with publication
dates from MITRE and Tenable as needed.70 In addition,
not all companies batched their data in the same manner.
Microsoft seemed to organize reports by CVE mainly,
while Apple and F5 focused on reporting CVEs within
relevant software updates, leading to double reporting
and time-shifts. These discrepancies alongside other
unknown differences in internal policy and the variances
in sample size prevent comparisons between datasets.
Overall, while this data is by no means fully representative
of the security research ecosystem, it does present best
estimates of small slices of that community and its contri-
butions to various product and project environments.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
11ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
On the Data
The datasets utilized for this study had samples sizes of
14,740 (Apple), 4,355 (Microsoft), 3,307 (Red Hat), 1,363
(VMware), and 335 (F5). In addition to providing data
on potential impacts of the RMSV, this data helps illus-
trates trends in vulnerability disclosure across a portion
of the technology ecosystem. Overall, country attribu -
tion acknowledgment ratios give a useful sketch of the
largest, most active research communities as well as the
differences among them.
The following charts detail the total number of records
for each dataset and the number and percentage of
those where an acknowledgment links back to organi-
zations operating out of the United States, China, an EU
member state, or other countries. Each also details the
number and percent of entries with acknowledgments
not linked to country-tagged organizations (where organi-
zations were not able to be tagged to a specific country).
Because acknowledgments can credit multiple organiza-
tions and thus tag multiple countries, the rows do not add
up to 100 percent of entries.
Tables 1 – 5: Dataset contribution counts and ratios by country, aggregated for each company

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
12 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
These charts help highlight differences in vulnera-
bility disclosure patterns across the datasets included
here, but they also underline the variability in disclosure
record-keeping practices. For example, all Red Hat and
Microsoft entries contained some form of acknowledg-
ment, and most entries in the Apple and F5 datasets did
too, yet most VMware entries did not. Similarly, rates of
Chinese contribution varied between datasets, from no
identifiable contributing organizations in the F5 data to
a quarter of entries in the Microsoft dataset crediting an
organization based in China, among others. Somewhat
surprisingly, the portion of acknowledgments crediting
only individual researchers (rather than organizations
either affiliated with the researcher or contributing inde-
pendently) was consistent among the three largest data-
sets at around one quarter of entries, while much lower for
F5 and VMware entries.
Benchmarking these aggregate measurements against
other datasets is useful. An anonymous bug-bounty
platform provided Dakota Cary in his February 2022
Congressional testimony with data on the portion
of bounty payments paid to researchers in different
71 Cary, China’s Cyber Capabilities: Warfare, Espionage, and Implications.
countries by US firms in 2021 through the platform.71 This
paper reproduces that data below in a similar format as
the above data.
Notably, these data show less of a gap between the
United States and China or the European Union, and
greater representation of the European Union overall. Part
of this gap originates from the narrower timeframe of the
bug-bounty platform data. The datasets gathered by this
paper from vendors show, consistently, US dominance
of contributions in earlier years, followed by increasing
representation of other countries—particularly China—
as their IT sectors develop and the disclosure pipe-
lines become more accessible to non-US researchers.
Filtering this paper’s datasets for just 2021 reflects that
shift, bringing parity to the United States and China points
similar to that in the bug-bounty platform numbers, though
the EU still lags. This might reflect selection bias in the
countries with which the bug-bounty platform has devel-
oped strong relationships. Figure 1 shows the contribu-
tions tagged to the United States and China over time in
the Apple dataset, illustrating the changes in composition
over time.

Table 6: Anonymized bug bounty funding data for 2021
Country Funds Paid Percent of Total Payments
United States $6,718,923 15%
EU $6,601,114 15%
China $4,220,302 10%

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
13ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
Figure 1: Contribution counts by country per month, Apple
Findings on the RMSV
The majority of the analysis in this paper looks for an
impact timed with one of the three key dates identi-
fied regarding the RMSV. First, it examines both the
raw counts and proportional contributions by country,
focusing on China while using the US as a baseline. It
discusses these results below. F5 contained no acknowl-
edgments tagged to Chinese companies, thus producing
no finding. Data from Apple and VMware showed no
significant impact correlated with the RMSV, though the
paper includes basic charts of their raw contribution data-
sets in the appendices. Data from Red Hat and Microsoft
produced more notable results and are considered and
analyzed in greater detail below.
MICROSOFT
Between June and July of 2020, CVE contributions
credited to Chinese organizations plummeted from 59
to 11, where they hover each month since (see figure 2).
Even more surprisingly, this decline occurred as overall
contributions increased and broke a trend of a steadily
increasing proportion of Chinese contributions (see figure
3).

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
14 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Figure 2: Contribution counts by country per month, Microsoft
Figure 3: Contribution portions by country per month, Microsoft

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
15ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
To better analyze this result, this paper uses Google’s
CausalImpact analysis package for R. 72 To do so, it
considers the July 2020 data as an intervention treatment
for China-tagged contributions, predicting a post-treat-
ment trendline based on pre-treatment China-tagged
contributions and using non-China contributions as a
covariate to help predict China-tagged contributions
based on data-points unaffected by the RMSV. This
modelling has the advantage of capturing, with consid-
erable nuance, the relationship between China-tagged
contributions and overall contributions each month—
few overall contributions predicts a low number of
China-tagged contributions, while a large number of
contributions makes a large number of China-tagged
contributions more likely. Last, this post-treatment fore-
cast is measured against the actual post-treatment data
72 “An R Package for Causal Inference Using Bayesian Structural Time-Series Models,” CausalImpact, https://
cran.r-project.org/web/packages/CausalImpact/vignettes/CausalImpact.html.
and tested for statistical significance. The results of
this analysis are shown in table, graph, and text form—
provided by the CausalImpact package itself—below.
As a downside, the use of only one predictor variable is
not optimal—the CausalImpact developers recommend
somewhere between five and twenty where possible.
Others to be considered include total CVEs made public
each month and IT-sector size per month among other
predictors of general vulnerability disclosure, though their
addition is beyond the scope of this paper, which serves
mainly as a proof-of-concept analysis. As such, while this
is not rigorous statistical evidence of a significant impact
from the RMSV, it is moderately convincing and provides
clear direction for future analysis.
Table 7: Significance Check
Posterior inference (CausalImpact) Average Cumulative
Actual 11 213
Prediction (sd) 27 (3.5) 549 (69.4)
95 percent CI [21, 34] [418, 686]
Absolute effect (sd) -17 (3.5) -336 (69.4)
95 percent CI [-24, -10] [-473, -205]
Relative effect (sd) -61% (13%) -61% (13%)
95 percent CI [-86%, -37%] [86%, -37%]
Posterior tail-area probability p: 0.00102
Posterior probability of a causal effect: 99.89827%

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
16 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
The x-axis of the above graphs shows the number of time-
steps from the earliest data entry, while the y-axis shows
the number of contributions. The top graph shows as a
black line the number of China-tagged contributions over
time, on top of the predicted number of China-tagged
contributions derived from covariate and pre-treatment
modelling as a dotted blue line, with confidence intervals
shaded in light-blue and the treatment date shown as a
vertical dotted gray line. The second graph shows the
difference between prediction and observed data, called
pointwise causal effects, which the third panel sums up to
show the cumulative deviation from the predictive model.
The significant drop-off in China-tagged contributions,
especially in the context of no corresponding drop-off in
contributions from other countries, is statistically signifi-
cant and described in technical detail below.
During the post-intervention period, the response vari-
able had an average value of approximately 10.65. By
contrast, in the absence of an intervention, we would have
expected an average response of 27.45. The 95 percent
interval of this counterfactual prediction is [20.89, 34.32].
Subtracting this prediction from the observed response
yields an estimate of the causal effect the intervention
had on the response variable. This effect is -16.80 with a
95 percent interval of [-23.67, -10.24]. For a discussion of
the significance of this effect, see below. Summing up the
individual data points during the post-intervention period
Figure 4: Original and projected China-tagged contributions, pointwise difference, and
cumulative difference, Microsoft

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
17ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
(which can only sometimes be meaningfully interpreted),
the response variable had an overall value of 213.00. By
contrast, had the intervention not taken place, we would
have expected a sum of 548.91. The 95 percent interval
of this prediction is [417.75, 686.49]. The above results are
given in terms of absolute numbers. In relative terms, the
response variable showed a decrease of -61 percent. The
95 percent interval of this percentage is [-86 percent, -37
percent]. This means that the negative effect observed
during the intervention period is statistically significant.
The probability of obtaining this effect by chance is very
small (Bayesian one-sided tail-area probability p = 0.001).
This means the causal effect can be considered statisti-
cally significant.73
Interestingly, the drop in China-tagged contributions coin-
cides with an increase of similar size and significance in
contributions tagged either to individuals, companies
with no known country tag, or no acknowledgement at
all.74 This might suggest that in response to the RMSV,
researching entities and disclosure recipients opted to
refrain from explicit, public acknowledgments rather than
from disclosure all together.
73 To the reader, text produced by the summary method of the CausalImpact package.
74 To the reader, statistical analysis of this effect is in the appendix for brevity, though it is essentially a
positive version of the negative RMSV-correlated impact on China-tagged contribution.
RED HAT
While no significant change in contributions from Chinese
entities occurred in the Red Hat data at any of the three
key dates identified above, a significant decline in contri-
butions did occur in April 2017 and has been largely
sustained since, even amid a general increase in the
overall number of contributions, though those declined
from a high of 128 in September 2017 to a lower mean
since (see figure 4). The proportional data reflects that
initial drop while also showing an upward-trending resur-
gence of Chinese contributions beginning in August
2020 (see figure 5). As in the Microsoft, VMware, and
Apple data, the trend of US predominance of contribu-
tions early on, followed by increased participation from
China and other countries persists. If the April 2017 drop
resulted from an external intervention, analysis similar to
that performed on the Microsoft dataset and included in
the appendix also indicates statistical significance, but
no clear exogenous event is apparent, indicating that the
movement reflects either internal policy changes, statis-
tical noise, or a more complex interaction among contrib-
utors and stakeholders.
Figure 5: Contribution counts by country per month, Red Hat

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
18 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Product Type Breakdown
This paper also looked at product-type breakdowns
within each dataset, pulling out information for hypervisor
products in VMware and Microsoft, internet browsers
in Apple and Microsoft, and examining iOS and macOS
updates in Apple. While no significant impact from any
of the three RMSV dates arose in these subsets, further
analysis of the datasets may reveal interesting areas of
research focus. The analysis strove to compare Microsoft
75 Jacques Chester, “A Closer Look at CVSS Scores,” Theory of Predictable Software, June 19, 2022,
https://theoryof.predictable.software/articles/a-closer-look-at-cvss-scores/.
and Apple operating system trends, but a lack of clear
labelling conventions frustrated attempts at identifying
contributions to Microsoft operating systems. These
non-findings may indicate that, while researchers neces-
sarily specialize in specific product types and systems,
the combination of large datasets and smaller numbers of
true experts as well as the difficulties in pulling out infor-
mation on vulnerability severity even with CVSS scores75
drown out any discernable trends in specialization.
Figure 6: Contribution portions by country per month, Red Hat

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
19ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
By-Company Breakdown: Microsoft
To help clarify the specific cause of the July 2020 decline
in China-based contributions in the Microsoft dataset,
this paper analyzed the data’s China-tagged companies
more closely. In addition to the first public knowledge
of the RMSV, the July 2020 date coincided roughly with
several rounds of US sanction activity against Chinese
companies as well as significant cyber legislation in
China.76 While determining precisely which regulations
might have caused the decline is beyond the scope of the
paper, it is possible to measure some impact of compa-
ny-specific sanction activity with this paper’s dataset.
Tracking the contributions of large, China-tagged compa-
nies over time was straightforward. This dataset already
has disclosures tracked over time, linking them to compa-
nies and tagging those companies to the best-approxi-
mated country of operation. In practice, though, poor data
quality complicates the process by providing multiple
spellings of the same companies and inconsistently refer-
encing subsidiary companies, subdivisions, and research
labs. For each of these variations, we created—and then
tracked over time—an alias tag, providing a common
identity for typos, spelling variations, and subsidiaries.
For example, QIHU360 (misspelling), 360 SkyEye Labs
76 US Department of Defense, “DOD Releases List of Additional Companies, in Accordance with Section
1237 of FY99 NDAA,” news release, August 28, 2022, https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/
Article/2328894/dod-releases-list-of-additional-companies-in-accordance-with-section-1237-of-fy/.
(subsidiary), and Vulcan Team (also called Qihoo 360
Vulcan Team) all received the same alias—Qihoo 360.
Sums of pre- and post-July 2020 contributions for each
company (both by their original entry names and by
their aliases) provide a preliminary analysis. Altogether,
Chinese companies contributed 1,090 disclosures in
the Microsoft dataset before July 2020, and 230 after.
An impressive 691 of the pre-RMSV contributions from
China-tagged companies came from Qihoo 360 affiliated
groups, followed by 190 from Tencent, thirty from Baidu,
and twenty-five from Alibaba (and several other compa-
nies contributed similarly or less prior to the RMSV—see
the following table for more).
After July 2020, the data initially tells a different story.
While some companies increased their disclosures—for
example, DBAPP and Venustech more than doubled their
contributions—the largest pre-RMSV contributors fell off
precipitously with no other entities filling the gap to the
same magnitude. Because Qihoo 360 contributed more
than 60 percent of the total pre-RMSV, this paper tracks
Qihoo’s year-month contributions to confirm that it was
the driving force behind the China-tagged contribution
drop-off in July 2020 (see figure #).

Table 8 – By Company Microsoft Contributions
Microsoft Aliases Pre-RMSV Post-RMSV Decrease
Qihoo 360 691 11 680
Tencent 190 11 179
Baidu 30 3 27
Alibaba 25 5 20

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
20 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Indeed, before July 2020, most month-to-month contri-
butions from China-tagged entities came from Qihoo 360
and its affiliated labs and teams. The decline in Qihoo’s
contributions accounts for nearly the entire drop in China-
tagged contributions in the Microsoft dataset after July
2020, as well as the increase running up to it.
Crucially, the US Department of Commerce added Qihoo
360 to the Entity List—a list of foreign entities to which the
Department applies moderate trade restrictions—on June
5, 2020, as well as Qihoo’s UK offices and twenty-three
other companies in China and Hong Kong.77 This would
suggest that the decline in China-tagged contributions is
primarily a result of Qihoo’s shifting legal status combined
77 Bureau of Industry and Security Department of Commerce, “Addition of Entities to the Entity List, Revision of Certain Entries
on the Entity List,” Federal Register, June 5, 2020, https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/06/05/2020-10869/
addition-of-entities-to-the-entity-list-revision-of-certain-entries-on-the-entity-list.
78 Paul Mozur, “Qihoo 360’s Zhou Hongyi: Taking Aim at China’s Internet,” Wall Street Journal, November 30,
2012, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204707104578094460340552442.html.
79 Qihoo 360 T echnology Co Ltd, “Qihoo 360 Announces Completion of Merger,” Cision PR Newswire, July 15, 2016, https://
www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/qihoo-360-announces-completion-of-merger-300299435.html.
80 Viola Rothschild and Hongshen Zhu, “A Crack in the Wall? Not So Fast.,” Council on Foreign Relations
(blog), October 15, 2020, https://www.cfr.org/blog/crack-wall-not-so-fast.
with their contribution preeminence, perhaps augmented
by the inclusion of its UK branches, rather than the public
circulation of the RMSV’s reporting mandates.
Qihoo 360 is a China-based internet software and secu-
rity company founded in 2005 by the former head of
Yahoo’s China operations, Zhou Hongyi. The company
has enjoyed a litigious, dynamic history, from lawsuits
against Yahoo China, Baidu, Tencent, and others to going
private in 2016 as it delisted from the New Y ork Stock
Exchange and reshored to China.78, 79 It also has close ties
to the Chinese government, from executives working with
the Cybersecurity Association of China80—which helped
pass the RMSV—to its role in finger-pointing disputes
Figure 7: Contribution counts within Microsoft by month

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
21ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
with the United States and China’s overall cybersecu-
rity posture.81 Qihoo’s researchers have long dominated
hacking competitions like Pwn2Own and the Tianfu Cup
as well as Microsoft’s security researcher leaderboards.82
Interestingly, the most recent tweet from one of Qihoo’s
subsidiary accounts, 360BugCloud, was made on August
6, 2020, right after the decline in Microsoft contributions
from the company—and, of course, the tweet bragged
about the company’s preeminence in that research
space.83 Despite the company’s decline in contributions
to the Microsoft and Red Hat ecosystems, its researchers
still seem active elsewhere—for instance, most recently,
Steven Seeley discovered CVE-2022-31664 in early
August of 2022, which allows for privilege escalation in
VMware products.84
81 John Feng, “China Accuses CIA of Hacking Beijing for over a Decade,” Newsweek, July 20, 2021, https://
www.newsweek.com/china-accuses-cia-hacking-beijing-over-decade-1611321.
82 360BugCloud (@360bugcloud), Twitter, August 6, 2020, https://twitter.com/360bugcloud.
83 360BugCloud (@360bugcloud), “Qihoo 360 swept the top three …,” Twitter, August 6, 2020, https://
twitter.com/360bugcloud/status/1291583230332686339/photo/1.
84 Jonathan Grieg, “CISA Urges Defenders to Update after VMware Patches Vulnerabilities in Multiple Products,” The Record by Recorded Future
(blog), August 4, 2022, https://therecord.media/cisa-urges-defenders-to-update-after-vmware-patches-vulnerabilities-in-multiple-products/.
Notably, the other large China-tagged entities that
demonstrate a similar decline in contribution do not
conform to the same time frame. Tencent, for example,
contributes through the July 2020 date for a few months
before falling off, while Baidu and Alibaba contributions
dry up earlier, around early 2019. This suggests that
the majority of the chilling effect seen in the MSFT data
arises from the Qihoo 360 entity listing—moreover, that
the larger reticence of large China-tagged corporations
to contribute is part reversion to mean, part generalized
hesitance.
The focus on Qihoo 360 might also help provide some
context for the uptick in unattributed reports that follows
the July 2020 date. Given the reasonably expected
Figure 8: Contribution counts by company by month, Microsoft

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
22 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
delay between receipt of a disclosure and remediating
and reporting it, Microsoft likely found itself with a signifi-
cant number of vulnerabilities from Qihoo 360 disclosed
before the entity listing complicated the two companies’
relationship. The value continuity between pre-enti-
ty-listing Qihoo 360 contributions and post-entity-listing
unattributed contributions might imply the company
chose not to disclose the source of those discoveries.
The fact that disclosure for the elevated levels of unat-
tributed reports was for some five months might hint
at the size of the backlog and the time it took to clear.
Notably, the decline in unattributed disclosures following
the post-July 2020 uptick coincides with a decline in
overall contributions to Microsoft, which could imply that
the chilling effect caused by the entity listing did impact
the entire ecosystem due to the noteworthy productivity
of the entity-listed company.
Given that this July 2020 trend existed only in the
Microsoft ecosystem, checking for possible causal events
within that company’s specific context was also neces-
sary. Two possible explanations specific to Microsoft are
changes to its bug bounty reward incentive programs
both in April and July 2020,85 when the company reduced
or eliminated prizes for certain classes of vulnerabili-
ties that had surged in reporting. In theory, the removal
of financial incentives from a specific type of vulner -
ability research might explain a drop in supply if Qihoo
360 alone focused on the work. There are a few prob-
lems with this explanation, however. First, the later bounty
change occurred on July 24, 2020, after the reporting
date that saw the massive Qihoo 360 drop off—July 14,
2020. Second, the fact that much of the significance in
the Qihoo 360 decline derives from the absence of any
other similar drop off from other companies or coun-
tries frustrates the narrative of removed incentives: total
reports would likely also fall off if they had surged around
a handful of vulnerability types that no longer paid out.
The data specifying what vulnerabilities Qihoo was
reporting before July 2020 and what vulnerabilities were
reported after the date by other contributors can help
address the argument that Qihoo 360 alone was affected
by the reporting changes. 75 percent of the company’s
findings focused on privilege escalation in the months
leading up to July 2020. The April 2020 updates make
no mention explicitly of privilege escalation, though tech-
nical synonyms are certainly possible, and following
the July 2020 collapse, other companies continued to
85 Microsoft, “Microsoft Windows Insider Preview: Bounty Program,” microsoft.com, https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/msrc/bounty-windows-insider-preview.
86 Huawei, “Huawei Signs Server OEM Agreement with Red Hat Enterprise Linux – Huawei Press Center,” press
release, April 26, 2017, https://www.huawei.com/en/news/2017/4/huawei-oem-agreement-redhat.
report privilege escalation vulnerabilities. Privilege esca-
lation remains the second highest compensated security
impact in fact, only following remote code execution. In
simpler terms, the explanation that Qihoo 360 focused
on a specific type of bug and stopped contributing at all
when it was no longer lucrative doesn’t hold insofar as
this paper’s researchers can determine with limited tech-
nical fluency. Other entities continued to the vulnerabili-
ties Qihoo 360 had focused on long after the bounty rule
changes. Moreover, Qihoo 360 should in theory have
kept reporting 25 percent of their original contributions
if the changes did indeed drive a research-type specific
decline—instead, the company effectively collapsed to no
reporting at all. In truth, the starkness of Qihoo’s drop and
the complete absence of any other country or company
behaving similarly at the same time suggests that some-
thing unique to China or Qihoo 360 was at play, and the
timing of entity listing provides a more compelling expla-
nation. Finally, it’s unclear what portion of the MSRC
vulnerability dataset is connected to bounty payouts to
begin with—doubtless, some are uncompensated.
Regarding the broader concept of preserving supplies
of security information, this finding within the Microsoft
data only emphasizes the point: while the RMSV may not
have been the causal factor, reliance on a singular legal
context, or even one company within a singular legal
context, creates a security bottleneck. Changes in law,
trade regulation, or even a company’s financial status
can have an outsized impact on security if those changes
affect vulnerability research and disclosure at a partic -
ularly productive node, as shown in the data on Qihoo
360. Diversifying sources of research across national
lines, market verticals, revenue sources, and other areas
all increase the research community’s resilience and
productivity, avoiding single points of failure.
By-Company Breakdown: Red Hat
The Red Hat data saw a similarly significant decline in
China-tagged contributions in 2017 from February to April.
This decline did not coincide with any of the critical dates
highlighted in analyzing the RMSV—in fact it predates
them all. Accordingly, this paper sought to explain that
decline with the research first looking for potential
causal mechanisms around the 2017 window in general
news about Red Hat and Chinese technology firms. For
example, in April of 2017, Red Hat and Huawei signed a
collaboration agreement for delivering enterprise Linux.86

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
23ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
Earlier in the same month, then-President Trump met
with Xi Jinping at a general-purpose US-China summit.87
However, the summit concluded on good terms, and the
mechanism by which it or a Huawei-Red Hat deal would
reduce China-tagged contributions are unclear.
For better insight, the team replicated the aliasing
process used on the Microsoft dataset and discovered
that, once again, Qihoo 360 was the driving force behind
much of the China-tagged contributions in the Red Hat
data, at least before April 2017. The company was tagged
in almost 80 percent of Chinese contributions prior to
April 2017 and a mere 12 percent afterward, and its work
was the overwhelming source of trends in the total China-
tagged contributions before the steep decline. Huawei,
Tencent, Ant Group, NSFOCUS, VenusTech, and a handful
of universities were also somewhat significant contribu-
tors to the Red Hat ecosystem, but by an order of magni-
tude less than Qihoo 360, and without noteworthy activity
on either side of the key April 2017 date. If anything, their
contributions grew years after the Qihoo decline.
87 “Trump, Xi End Summit with ‘Tremendous’ Progress,” Aljazeera, April 7, 2017, https://www.aljazeera.
com/news/2017/4/7/trump-xi-end-summit-with-tremendous-progress.
88 Henny Sender, “Cayman Lawsuits Challenge Valuations of Delisted Chinese Companies,” Financial Times,
February 28, 2017, https://www.ft.com/content/ed8768f4-fd1a-11e6-8d8e-a5e3738f9ae4.
The Red Hat data, unlike that from Microsoft, does not
show an increase in unattributed contributions coincident
with the April 2017 decline. Moreover, the team could find
no clear exogenous event that might have caused Qihoo
360 to reduce its contributions to the ecosystem to near-
zero. In theory, perceived future competition from Huawei
researchers turning to Red Hat products as part of their
corporate agreement may have incentivized Qihoo, a
much smaller company, to shift its limited resources else-
where, particularly as their concurrent privatization may
have created an environment of financial uncertainty.88
However, this is speculative at best. No other contributing
entity was as prolific as Qihoo 360, and no entity took its
place either. Most likely, this data captures a change in
personnel or internal policy either at Red Hat, Qihoo 360,
or both, and its implications for the fragility of the research
community and the dangers of centralized dependence
are unchanged.

Table 9 – By company Red Hat contributions
Red Hat Aliases Pre April 2017 Sum Post April 2017 Sum Delta
Qihoo 360 115 22 93
Zhejiang University 0 21 -21
VenusTech 0 19 -19
Tencent 3 16 -13
NSFOCUS 0 12 -12
Ant Group 0 11 -11
SQLab NCTU 0 11 -11
Huawei 15 10 5
Qianxin Group 0 10 -10
Kunlun Lab 0 6 -6
UHK 0 6 -6
Tsinghua University 0 5 -5

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
24 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
DISCUSSION
89 US Department of Defense, “DOD Releases List of Additional Companies, in Accordance with Section
1237 of FY99 NDAA,” news release, August 28, 2022, https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/
Article/2328894/dod-releases-list-of-additional-companies-in-accordance-with-section-1237-of-fy/.
90 Rita Liao and Manish Singh, “GitHub Confirms It Has Blocked Developers in Iran, Syria and Crimea,” TechCrunch,
July 29, 2019, https://social.techcrunch.com/2019/07/29/github-ban-sanctioned-countries/.
T
hese data suggest that the RMSV has not yet had
a significant impact on the supply of vulnerability
disclosures in most of these codebases, but with
the possible and notable exception of Microsoft. However,
that is not to suggest that the research community in China
is immune to its legal context. First, the potential for a
delayed effect outside of this study’s timeframe remains,
especially when acknowledging the considerable vague-
ness in CVE reporting and dating practices—depending on
the duration of vulnerability retention, CVEs regulated by
the RMSV may simply not have entered the public record
in appreciable numbers yet. It is possible that the RMSV
will more unambiguously impact vulnerability research
in the future as enforcement practices come to light and
undisclosed vulnerabilities reported prior to its enactment
grow rarer over time. Second, two of the largest datasets
utilized in this study do seem to some form of China-based
supply shock, even if only one might be tied to the RMSV,
and neither trickles clearly into global reporting numbers.
For example, in the Microsoft dataset, that effect may be
correlated with either the first public knowledge of the
RMSV reporting requirements, US sanctioning of Chinese
technology firms,89 other Chinese cybersecurity legislation,
or some combination of the three, and its impact continues
to the present day. In the Red Hat dataset, the cause of the
decline in reporting is unclear as it predates any reported
knowledge of the RMSV, and contributions from China
appear to have since recovered to earlier levels.
Open-Source Spotlight
This paper’s findings are of particular importance to the
open-source ecosystem. At an abstract level, vulnera -
bility research and disclosure closely mirror the system
of open-source contributions: developers, motivated
by profit, prestige, personal interest, and other factors,
contribute to open-source projects they do not neces-
sarily maintain. Similarly, legal environments can indeed
shape this supply of contributors. For example, various
sanction regimes led to the blocking of GitHub devel-
opers in Iran, Syria, Crimea, and other geographies
in 2019. 90 And similar to the vulnerability research
ecosystem, China is well noted as a significant contrib-
utor to and user of open-source projects, where the

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
25ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
geographical distribution of developers resembles the
distribution of vulnerability disclosures by country. 91, 92
In his writing on the shifting open-source ecosystem in
China, Kevin Xu notes that this trend is likely to continue:
“Why the central government would embrace open
source is rather straightforward: it prefers to favor flexible
technologies that aren’t tied to certain vendors, compa-
nies, or countries, so it can control and shape them at will.
The thinking here is not that different from the rationale
behind any large enterprise’s adoption of open source, in
or outside China. ‘Self-reliance’ as a national theme and
technological imperative will be front and center for China
for many years to come.”93
This sustained interest and the general predominance
of open-source software in codebases—both open and
proprietary—makes the supply of open-source contribu-
tors as valuable as the supply of vulnerability research,
and there is considerable overlap between the two.
Potential threats to that supply are more varied in the
open-source ecosystem as well—for example, China
while on the one hand embracing GitHub has also worked
to establish its own open-source ecosystem, Gitee. 94
91 Wachs et al., “The Geography of Open Source Software: Evidence from GitHub.”
92 Silver Keskkula, “What Is This Github Y ou Speak Of?” Medium (blog), September 7, 2016, https://medium.
com/@keskkyla/https-medium-com-keskkyla-what-is-this-github-you-speak-of-dd457a29771.
93 Kevin Xu, “Open Source in China: The Game,” Interconnected, May 10, 2020, https://interconnected.blog/open-source-in-china-the-game/.
94 Meaghan T obin, “China Wants to Build an Open Source Ecosystem to Rival GitHub,” Rest of World,
January 19, 2021, https://restofworld.org/2021/china-gitee-to-rival-github/.
95 Daniel Geer et al., “CyberInsecurity: The Cost of Monopoly,” Schneier on Security, September 24, 2003,
https://www.schneier.com/essays/archives/2003/09/cyberinsecurity_the.html.
While there is nothing inherently wrong with competing
codebases, and even some security to be derived
from that diversity,95 fracturing open-source contributor
bases might drain valuable developers from an already
resource-strapped environment.
At the largest scale, these data illustrate a degree of
fragility in external contribution ecosystems—the tireless
work of security researchers cannot be taken for granted,
and imprecise vulnerability-reporting laws do indeed
have the potential to limit their contributions. The specifics
of the mechanisms involved are less clear—say, whether
laws regulating domestic researchers or limiting interac-
tions with foreign entities providing research have more
impact. Connecting these supply-side effects to security
incidents downstream is almost impossible—one cannot
know what vulnerabilities might have been discovered by
researchers who would have otherwise been searching
for them. Nonetheless, any reduction in the rate of vulner-
ability discovery or constraint on reporting those vulner-
abilities to affected entities and codebase maintainers
promises to reduce cybersecurity at large.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
26 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
CONCLUSION & RECOMMENDATIONS
96 Biden, Executive Order 14028.
97 Cyber Safety Review Board, “Review of the December 2021 Log4j Event.”
T
he passage of the RMSV and its coincidence with an
increased US government attention on the security
and sustainability of open-source software provide
a significant opportunity for both government and industry.
The risk to the cybersecurity of the technology ecosystem
of laws like the RMSV is the potential isolation of significant
subsets of the research community from the larger global
supply of vulnerability disclosures. This kind of fear and
fragmentation only adds risk to an already difficult to miti-
gate landscape.
The United States and allied governments can proac-
tively address these kinds of supply-side security effects
in coordination with industry by further expanding the
supply of disclosure information rather than mimicking
such laws to hoard vulnerability disclosures like a scarce
resource. Key to this proactive approach is smoothing the
journey from discovery to disclosure to patching across
jurisdictions, providing better, more consistent tooling for
vulnerability discovery, and working to better recognize
and countercyclically invest against emerging gaps in
global vulnerability disclosure. Three recommendations
come to the fore:
1 Harmonize Vulnerability Disclosure across the
United States and Allies
The United States, through the National Cyber Director
in partnership with CISA’s Computer Emergency
Response Team (US-CERT) should seek to lower
barriers to vulnerability disclosure in a group of like-
minded allies, including Australia, New Zealand, the
United Kingdom, Estonia, and the Netherlands. Such
an activity should expand to include Japan and other
NATO members in short order. Organized as an ad-hoc
working group, staff-level engagement across these
states should work to harmonize domestic vulner-
ability-disclosure laws so that cross-jurisdictional
disclosure is less burdensome and uncertain for
vulnerability researchers. Harmonization could focus
on requirements for companies to publish and adhere
to CVD policies and the removal of legal penalties for
non-commercial reverse-engineering activities, among
other avenues. The working group should not seek to
determine a common definition of “good-faith” security
research, but rather seek near-term wins to better knit
these jurisdictions together into a common disclosure
environment.
Properly realized, this harmonization would deepen
the supply of vulnerability disclosures to firms and
maintainers in the United States and allied states,
promoting more effective function as a single disclo-
sure environment. As a second stage, the working
group should consider manners of establishing inter-
national processes and protections for receiving and
validating anonymous vulnerabilities. These efforts
should include members of civil society and industry on
a limited basis, with Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative
(JCDC) members as logical starting partners.
2 Improve the Quality and Consistency of Support of
Vulnerability Discovery Tools
Should authorization of the Critical Technology
Security Centers (CTSC) finally pass through the
National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) conference
process, the director of CISA should include vulnerabil-
ity-discovery tooling and long-term support for these
tools as eligible areas of investment for the Open-
Source Software CTSC. Where policy moves threaten
to curtail the supply of vulnerability disclosure, wider
access to more capable, better-supported vulnerability
discovery tools can help counter that effect. Providing
these tools as open source for free use by the commu-
nity will directly benefit open-source software secu-
rity too, and such an approach could well have similar
effects on proprietary code. This would achieve the
above state goals while furthering the administration’s
avowed interest in improving the security of software.96
This would also serve as a good example of indirect
investment from the public sector in the security of
open-source software and follows recommendation
thirteen of the recently released Cyber Safety Review
Board report.97

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
27ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
3 Track Vulnerability Disclosure Patterns and Invest
Against Gaps
The National Security Agency’s (NSA) Cybersecurity
Directorate should work to track patterns in vulner-
ability disclosures, collaborating with researcher
and industry partners through the Cybersecurity
Collaboration Center where possible. While the
resulting trends analysis need not be public, it should
remain unclassified for maximal usefulness as
evidence to compel investment where gaps or the
absence of disclosures appears. This monitoring effort
attempts to understand the sourcing patterns of vulner-
ability disclosures and where disclosures of a similar
style or against critical software cluster.98 This tracking
program should help identify where those disclosures
significantly decline, perhaps as the result of laws
impeding disclosure from other jurisdictions.
If such a gap emerges, the Directorate’s leadership
should collaborate with the National Cyber Director,
leveraging the office’s budgetary review authorities,
as well as existing federal bug-bounty programs to
offer added incentives, such as doubled payments, for
vulnerabilities like those in the identified gap submitted
to private bounty programs. This countercyclical invest-
ment could help incentivize further disclosure against
critical software and offset the effects of policies that
limit disclosures. This program would bring greater
awareness of important trends in vulnerability disclo-
sure regardless of the reason that such disclosure gaps
emerged. This funding would be particularly useful to
incentivizing the discovery of vulnerabilities in technol-
ogies with sufficient maturity to have driven vulnera-
bility density towards sparseness—in other words, the
discovery of vulnerabilities in well-scrutinized systems
are more valuable from a security standpoint, 99 and
incentives to find them can help economic rewards
reflect that.
The supply of vulnerability disclosures is a significant
driver of security outcomes in software. Threats to that
supply will, over time, reduce the security of software and
add risk for individual users and organizations. This is
perhaps most important for open-source software, which
thrives on disclosures and contributions more generally
98 Biden, Executive Order 14028.
99 Dan Geer, “For Good Measure: The Undiscovered,” Usenix, ;Login: 40, no. 2 (April 2015), 50–
52, https://www.usenix.org/system/files/login/articles/login_apr15_12_geer.pdf.
from outside of the original developer network. As the
policy community continues to study the effects of the
RMSV and other regulations, greater sensitivity of the
potential diverging effects of these policies on open-
source and proprietary code should help motivate wider
support for public-sector investments in the health and
sustainability of the open-source software ecosystem. For
China watchers, the future of enforcement of the RMSV
and related policies would benefit from better public
study of how the laws apply under varying political condi-
tions and to companies and individual researchers. A
more concrete understanding of the law’s practical imple-
mentation will help counter the seemingly purposeful
ambiguity it has created.
The United States and its allies should see the disclo-
sure of Log4Shell as a call to action to improve the scale
and resilience of the global supply of vulnerability disclo-
sure. Domestic legal changes to improve vulnerability
research in single countries are useful, but they are insuf-
ficient to address the strategic ramifications of a poten-
tial supply shock. More can be done, to proactively limit
the harm from such a moment and improve the state of
software security along the way. As a closing note, it is
particularly important to acknowledge the general good-
will of researchers in this space. In many ways, the Log4j
case illustrates this emphatically—a corporate researcher
found and responsibly disclosed a crippling vulnera-
bility in an open-source library directly to its maintainers
and kept them abreast of events directly relevant to
their remediation timeline, all in spite of the RMSV and
other legal contexts and with no apparent profit motive.
That kind of relationship, writ large across the security
ecosystem, is one well worth preserving.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
28 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
APPENDIX I: DATA CHALLENGES
100 CVE-Team (Auto-merge), “CVEProject / cvelist,” GitHub, accessed August 2, 2022, https://github.com/CVEProject/cvelist
101 CVE-Team (Synchronized Data), “CVEProject / cvelist,” GitHub, accessed August 2, 2022, https://
github.com/CVEProject/cvelist/blob/master/2010/3xxx/CVE-2010-3609.json
102 Exploit Database, “OpenSLP 1.2.1 / < 1647 trunk - Denial of Service,” August 5, 2011, https://www.exploit-db.com/exploits/17610.
G
athering from organizational feeds rather than CVE
datasets allows for more complex multi-vector
acknowledgment, most prominently in instances
where a researcher showed an existing vulnerability’s
impact on a previously unconnected product. It also allows
focusing in on specific vendor and product types. For
example, the VMware Security Advisory (VMSA) VMSA-
2011-0004.3 responds to the following CVEs: CVE-2010-
3613, CVE-2010-3614, CVE-2010-3762, CVE-2010-3316,
CVE-2010-3435, CVE-2010-3853, CVE-2010-2059, and
CVE-2010-3609. The VMWare security advisory credits
Nicolas Gregoire and US CERT for reporting the issue
that one of these CVEs created for their Service Location
Protocol daemon regarding vulnerability to a denial of
service attack. Most likely, they are referring specifically
to CVE-2010-3609. However, a GitHub CVE list mentions
Gregoire in none of those entries,100, 101 though an exploit
proof of concept on a common exploit database appears
authored by Gregoire.102
That is not to say that the GitHub CVE data is “bad,” but
that—between the changing standards in its recorded
fields and the primary focus of its records—it captures
a different segment of the research community. Further
analyses could gather valuable insight from scraping
through both the exploit and GitHub database credits and
authorship logs. These analyses will face constraints too,
though—for example, using exploit-db.com filters out all
researchers who didn’t upload proof-of-concept code
to that specific database, which likely biases against the
inclusion of researchers outside of the English-speaking
world. Accordingly, Google’s Security Research Team
has contributed over one-thousand entries to exploit-db.
com compared to just one from Qihoo 360. In contrast,
Apple’s security advisories mention Qihoo 360 more than
300 times, versus 2000 mentions of Google that include
multiple departments (Google Security Team, Google’s
TAG, Google Project Zero, etc.).
It’s difficult to compare the 1:1,000 and 3:20 ratios directly,
especially when credits might refer to CVE discovery,
CVE application, or other nuanced forms of acknowledg-
ment—some credits even imply that researchers played a
role in developing patches. Nonetheless, working within
a company’s public-facing ecosystem will help reduce
(but not eliminate) bias against international research and
deal with concerns about filtering effects where exploit
code must be publicly disclosed for inclusion in a dataset.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
29ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
APPENDIX II: THE FULL RMSV
S
ourced from http://www.cac.gov.cn/2021-
07/13/c_1627761607640342.htm,
translation provided by Google Translate.
Notice of the Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology and the State Internet Information Office of
the Ministry of Public Security on Issuing the Provisions
on the Management of Security Vulnerabilities of
Network Products
July 13, 2021 17:11
Notice of the Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology and the State Internet Information Office of
the Ministry of Public Security on Issuing the Provisions
on the Management of Security Vulnerabilities of
Network Products
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology Network
Security [2021] No. 66
All provinces, autonomous regions, municipalities directly
under the Central Government and Xinjiang Production
and Construction Corps industry and informatization
departments, Internet Information Offices, and public
security departments (bureaus), and communications
administrations of all provinces, autonomous regions, and
municipalities directly under the Central Government:
The “Regulations on the Management of Security
Vulnerabilities of Network Products” are hereby issued
and will come into force on September 1, 2021.
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology State
Internet Information Office Ministry of Public Security
July 12, 2021
Provisions on the Management of Security
Vulnerabilities of Network Products
Article 1 In order to regulate the discovery, reporting,
patching, and release of network product security
vulnerabilities, and prevent network security risks,
these Provisions are formulated in accordance with
the «Network Security Law of the People›s Republic of
China».

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
30 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Article 2 Providers and network operators of network
products (including hardware and software) within the
territory of the People›s Republic of China, as well as
organizations or individuals engaged in activities such as
the discovery, collection, and release of network product
security vulnerabilities, shall abide by these Provisions.
Article 3 The Cyberspace Administration of China
is responsible for coordinating and coordinating the
management of network product security vulnerabili-
ties. The Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
is responsible for the comprehensive management of
network product security vulnerabilities, and undertakes
the supervision and management of network product
security vulnerabilities in the telecommunications and
Internet industries. The Ministry of Public Security is
responsible for the supervision and management of
network product security loopholes, and cracks down
on illegal and criminal activities that take advantage of
network product security loopholes in accordance with
the law.
Relevant competent departments strengthen cross-de-
partmental coordination, realize real-time sharing of
network product security vulnerability information, and
conduct joint assessment and disposal of major network
product security vulnerability risks.
Article 4 No organization or individual may use network
product security loopholes to engage in activities that
endanger network security, and may not illegally collect,
sell, or publish information on network product secu-
rity loopholes; It provides technical support, advertising
promotion, payment settlement and other assistance.
Article 5 Network product providers, network operators
and network product security vulnerability collection plat-
forms shall establish and improve network product secu-
rity vulnerability information receiving channels and keep
them unblocked, and keep network product security
vulnerability information receiving logs for no less than
6 months.
Article 6 Relevant organizations and individuals are
encouraged to notify network product providers of secu-
rity vulnerabilities in their products.
Article 7 Network product providers shall perform the
following network product security vulnerability manage-
ment obligations, ensure that their product security
vulnerabilities are promptly patched and reasonably
released, and guide and support product users to take
preventive measures:
(1) After discovering or learning that there are security
vulnerabilities in the provided network products, it shall
immediately take measures and organize the verification
of the security vulnerabilities, and evaluate the degree of
harm and the scope of influence of the security vulner-
abilities; for the security vulnerabilities existing in its
upstream products or components, it shall Immediately
notify the relevant product provider.
(2) The relevant vulnerability information shall be
submitted to the Network Security Threat and
Vulnerability Information Sharing Platform of the Ministry
of Industry and Information Technology within 2 days. The
submitted content shall include the product name, model,
version, and technical characteristics, harm, and scope of
influence of the vulnerability that have network product
security vulnerabilities.
(3) It should organize the repair of network product
security vulnerabilities in a timely manner, and if it is
necessary for product users (including downstream
manufacturers) to take measures such as software and
firmware upgrades, the network product security vulner-
ability risks and repair methods should be promptly noti-
fied to potentially affected product users, and provide
necessary technical support.
The network security threat and vulnerability informa-
tion sharing platform of the Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology simultaneously reports relevant
vulnerability information to the National Network and

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
31ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
Information Security Information Notification Center and
the National Computer Network Emergency Technology
Handling Coordination Center.
Network product providers are encouraged to establish a
security vulnerability reward mechanism for the provided
network products, and rewards are given to organizations
or individuals who discover and report security vulnerabil-
ities of the provided network products.
Article 8 After a network operator discovers or learns of
a security loophole in its network, information system and
equipment, it shall immediately take measures to verify
and complete the repair of the security loophole in a
timely manner.
Article 9  : Organizations or individuals engaged in
the discovery and collection of network product secu-
rity vulnerabilities shall release information on network
product security vulnerabilities to the public through
network platforms, media, conferences, competitions,
etc. principles and abide by the following provisions:
(1) Vulnerability information shall not be released before
network product providers provide network product
security vulnerability repair measures; if it is deemed
necessary to release in advance, it shall evaluate and
negotiate with relevant network product providers,
and report to the Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology and the Ministry of Public Security , published
by the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
and the Ministry of Public Security after evaluation.
(2) Not to publish the details of the security loopholes in
the networks, information systems and equipment used
by network operators.
(3) Do not deliberately exaggerate the harm and risk of
network product security vulnerabilities, and do not use
information on network product security vulnerabilities to
conduct malicious speculation or conduct fraud, extortion
and other illegal and criminal activities.
(4) Not to publish or provide programs and tools specially
used to exploit the security loopholes of network prod-
ucts to engage in activities that endanger network
security.
(5) When releasing network product security loopholes,
it shall simultaneously release repairs or preventive
measures.
(6) During the period of major national events, without
the consent of the Ministry of Public Security, it is not
allowed to release information on network product secu-
rity vulnerabilities without authorization.
(7) Not to provide undisclosed network product security
vulnerability information to overseas organizations or
individuals other than network product providers.
(8) Other relevant provisions of laws and regulations.
Article 10 Any organization or individual establishing a
network product security vulnerability collection plat-
form shall file with the Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology. The Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology shall promptly notify the Ministry of Public
Security and the Cyberspace Administration of China of
relevant vulnerability collection platforms, and publish
the vulnerability collection platforms that have passed
the filing.
Organizations or individuals who find security vulner-
abilities in network products are encouraged to report
to the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology’s
Network Security Threat and Vulnerability Information
Sharing Platform, National Network and Information
Security Information Notification Center Vulnerability
Platform, National Computer Network Emergency
Technology Handling Coordination Center Vulnerability
Platform, China Information Security The evaluation
center vulnerability database reports network product
security vulnerability information.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
32 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Article 11 Organizations engaged in the discovery and
collection of network product security vulnerabilities shall
strengthen internal management and take measures
to prevent information leakage and illegal release of
network product security vulnerabilities.
Article 12 If a network product provider fails to take
measures to remedy or report network product secu-
rity vulnerabilities in accordance with these regulations,
the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology and
the Ministry of Public Security shall deal with it according
to their respective responsibilities; If the circumstances
stipulated in this article are met, punishment shall be
imposed in accordance with the provisions.
Article 13 If a network operator fails to take network
product security loophole repairs or preventive measures
in accordance with these regulations, it shall be handled
by the relevant competent departments according to law;
if it constitutes a situation specified in Article 59 of the
«People›s Republic of China Network Security Law», the
regulations shall be followed. be punished.
Article 14 Violation of these regulations to collect and
publish network product security vulnerability infor-
mation shall be handled by the Ministry of Industry
and Information Technology and the Ministry of Public
Security in accordance with their respective responsibili-
ties; punished in accordance with this provision.
Article 15 Those who use network product security loop-
holes to engage in activities that endanger network
security, or provide technical support for others to use
network product security loopholes to engage in activi-
ties endangering network security, shall be handled by
the public security organs according to law; Those who
fall under the circumstances stipulated in Article 63 shall
be punished in accordance with the provisions; if a crime
is constituted, criminal responsibility shall be investigated
according to law.
Article 16  These regulations shall come into force on
September 1, 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
33ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
Figure 10: Contribution counts by country per month, Apple iOS
Figure 11: Contribution counts by country per month, VMware
APPENDIX III: NULL FINDING CHARTS

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
34 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Figure 12: Contributions by country per month, Apple Safari (browsers)
Figure 13: Contributions by country per month, Apple iOS (mobile operating systems)

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
35ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
Figure 14: Contributions by country per month, Apple macOS (operating systems)
Figure 15: Contributions by country per month, Microsoft Edge and Internet Explorer
(browsers)

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
36 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Figure 16: Contributions by country per month, Microsoft Hyper-V (hypervisors)
Figure 17: Contributions by country per month, VMware hypervisors

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
37ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Stewart Scott is an assistant director with the Atlantic
Council’s Cyber Statecraft Initiative under the Digital
Forensic Research Lab (DFRLab). He works on the
Initiative’s systems security portfolio, which focuses
on software supply-chain risk management and open-
source software security policy. Stewart earned his B.A.
from Princeton University at the School of Public and
International Affairs along with a minor in Computer
Science. His course of study centered on misinformation,
social media policy, online extremism, journalism, and
American political and economic history. He joined the
Atlantic Council after interning with its Cyber Statecraft
Initiative.
Sara Ann Bracket is a research assistant at the Atlantic
Council’s Cyber Statecraft Initiative under the Digital
Forensic Research Lab (DFRLab). She focuses her work
on open-source software security, software bills of mate-
rial, and software supply-chain risk management and is
currently an undergraduate at Duke University.
Yumi Gambrill is a master’s candidate at Georgetown
University’s Security Studies Program. She recently
moved back to the United States after nearly seven years
in the United Arab Emirates, where she completed her
BS in chemistry at New Y ork University Abu Dhabi. After
graduation, Yumi was a management consultant at Booz
Allen Hamilton, focusing on defense and security strategy
and public administration reform in the Middle East and
North Africa region. Her professional interests include
doctrine and norms development for cyber and hybrid
conflict, US-East Asia policy, and public-sector organiza-
tional transformation. In her free time, she is an avid baker
and maker of Japanese sweets, violinist, and scuba diver.
Emmeline Nettles is a research assistant studying inter-
national affairs with minors in Chinese and creative
technology at the University of Colorado Boulder. Prior
to joining the Atlantic Council, she was an undergrad-
uate research assistant in the University of Colorado
Boulder’s political science research lab, STUDIO, where
she conducted quantitative analysis on regional inter -
national organizations in Africa. Emmeline is interested
in continuing to study cyber policy, particularly how the
lack of norms in censorship of social media affects access
to information as well as vulnerabilities found through
open-source intelligence. She speaks some Chinese and
German and has experience with a variety of program-
ming languages. In her free time, she continues her
Chinese studies and practices Muay Thai.
Trey Herr is the director of the Atlantic Council’s Cyber
Statecraft Initiative under the Digital Forensic Research
Lab (DFRLab). His team works on cybersecurity and
geopolitics including cloud computing, the security of the
internet, supply chain policy, cyber effects on the battle-
field, and growing a more capable cybersecurity policy
workforce. Previously, he was a senior security strate-
gist with Microsoft handling cloud computing and supply
chain security policy as well as a fellow with the Belfer
Cybersecurity Project at Harvard Kennedy School and a
non-resident fellow with the Hoover Institution at Stanford
University. He holds a PhD in Political Science and BS in
Musical Theatre and Political Science.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
DRAGON TAILS: PRESERVING INTERNATIONAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
38 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
*Executive Committee Members

List as of July 13, 2022

CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers

EXECUTIVE
CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones

PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe

EXECUTIVE VICE
CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley

VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev

TREASURER
*George Lund

DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
John Bonsell
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
Richard R. Burt
*Teresa Carlson
*James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Richard Edelman
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Mark T. Esper
*Michael Fisch
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Jarosław Grzesiak
Murathan Günal
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Kay Bailey Hutchison
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
*Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Brian L. Kelly
Henry A. Kissinger
John E. Klein
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Yann Le Pallec
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Christian Marrone
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Majida Mourad
Dambisa F. Moyo
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
*Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell
dddMcCormick
Michael Punke
Ashraf Qazi
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
Gil Tenzer
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim

HONORARY
DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan
organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and
engagement in international affairs
based on the central role of the
Atlantic community in meeting
today’s global challenges.
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 778-4952
www.AtlanticCouncil.org
