
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Thomas Warrick and Caitlin Durkovich
Research assistance: Mark Massa
Future of DHS Project:
Key Findings and
Recommendations

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security
The Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security works to develop sustainable, nonpartisan
strategies to address the most important security challenges facing the United States and the
world. The Center honors General Brent Scowcroft’s legacy of service and embodies his ethos
of nonpartisan commitment to the cause of security, support for US leadership in cooperation
with allies and partners, and dedication to the mentorship of the next generation of leaders.
Forward Defense helps the United States and its allies and partners contend with great-
power competitors and maintain favorable balances of power. This new practice area in the
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security produces forward-looking analyses of the trends,
technologies, and concepts that will define the future of warfare and the alliances needed
for the 21st century. Through the futures we forecast, the scenarios we wargame, and the
analyses we produce, Forward Defense develops actionable strategies and policies for
deterrence and defense, while shaping US and allied operational concepts and the role of
defense industry in addressing the most significant military challenges at the heart of great-
power competition.
This publication was produced with contributions from SAIC, Accenture Federal Services,
CenturyLink, current and former government leaders, and subject-matter experts, under the
auspices of a project on refocusing the Department of Homeland Security to protect the
American people from the coronavirus, threats to democracy, future threats, and addressing
DHS’s other major challenges.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
ISBN-13: 978-1-61977-116-1
Cover photo: Department of Homeland Security
This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic Council Policy on Intellectual Independence. The au-
thors are solely responsible for its analysis and recommendations. The Atlantic Council and its donors do not determine,
nor do they necessarily endorse or advocate for, any of this report’s conclusions.
September 2020
Thomas Warrick and Caitlin Durkovich
Research assistance: Mark Massa
Future of DHS Project:
Key Findings and
Recommendations

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
II
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 1
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations 6
I. DHS Needs to Refocus Its Mission to Lead the Defense of the Nation
Against Nonmilitary Threats 4
II. DHS’s Public-Private Partnerships Are Unique and Should Be Modernized
to Effectively Counter the Threats of the 2020s 12
III. Resolving the Issues That Cause DHS’s Low Morale 19
IV. Fixing the Internal Challenges That Hold DHS Back 29
Conclusion 34
Annex 1: Glossary of Abbreviations, Acronyms, and Initialisms Used in This Report 35
Endnotes 37
Future of DHS Project: Participant Biographies 42
Acknowledgements 44

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
1
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Executive Summary
T
he United States will be less secure, and
American democracy will be at risk, unless the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) chang-
es its priorities. Going forward, DHS needs to re-
focus its mission to lead the defense of the United States
against major nonmilitary threats. DHS needs to modern-
ize its approach to public-private partnerships, fix DHS’s
most pressing internal problems, and ensure that DHS’s
actions increase the trust that the American people and
DHS’s own employees have in what the department does.
DHS’s mission is vital to the security and safety of
Americans. DHS has more than its share of controversies
and challenges, but the solution to DHS’s problems is not
to dismantle it, but to make major reforms so that DHS can
meet newly emerging threats that—paradoxically—DHS is
the best cabinet department to address.
The recommendations below are intended to inform the
DHS leadership team in January 2021, regardless of the
outcome of the US election:
1. Refocus DHS’s Mission to Lead the Defense
of the Nation Against Nonmilitary Threats
DHS needs to re-focus its mission around today’s most
serious threats to the nation. These are not what they
were even a few years ago.
The most urgent current threat to the United States is
COVID-19. DHS was created to prevent another attack as
devastating as 9/11, but the reality as of August 2020 is that
COVID-19 is killing more people than 9/11 every four days.
DHS needs to take a stronger leadership role in mobilizing
and prioritizing the increased, coordinated distribution of
needed testing and medical supplies, and eventually vac-
cines, and to coordinate and help fund the infrastructure
changes required to make US schools, factories, nursing
homes, and offices safe. DHS needs to be more pro-active
in future pandemics to sound the national alarm and acti-
vate emergency playbooks to ensure the federal govern-
ment is fully mobilized.
DHS needs to lead the nation’s defense against the
aggressive, ongoing nonmilitary campaigns of Russia,
China, and Iran that are targeting American democracy
itself. These hostile nation-states, at this moment, are car-
rying out cyber operations, threatening US election se-
curity, attacking American critical infrastructure, creating
disinformation, and manipulating social media through co-
vert influence programs. These adversaries’ actions seek
to divide Americans and weaken American power, staying
just below the level that would justify an American military
response. The United States currently has no effective,
integrated, comprehensive defense against this new
style of non-kinetic warfare.
Because DHS has more of the tools to defend against
these threats than any other US government department,
and because so much of what needs defending is in the
hands of state and local governments, the private sector,
and individual Americans, DHS is the department best-
suited to lead the defense of the nation against non-ki-
netic attacks by hostile nation-states.
The greatest long-term threat to the United States is
the effect of climate change or extreme weather on
American critical infrastructure. DHS needs to work more
closely with state and local governments and the private
sector to build greater resilience to hurricanes, floods,
fires, and other weather-driven natural disasters to protect
more American lives and reduce property damage.
While giving greater attention and resources to the threats
listed above, DHS also needs to maintain its level of re-
sources and efforts on its existing missions. None of
DHS’s existing missions are going away. However, DHS
should upgrade its efforts to communicate with the
American people, with DHS’s stakeholders, and with
DHS’s own employees. DHS, more than other cabinet
departments, needs the trust of the American people
and needs to do more to earn that trust.
For the defense of American democracy to succeed, the
secretary of homeland security and DHS generally will
need to be, to the greatest extent possible, nonpartisan
and “above politics,” in the non-partisan traditions of the
uniformed military and the US intelligence community.
If DoD’s bumper-sticker mission is “We fight and win
America’s wars,” DHS’s mission should be, “We lead the
defense of the Nation against non-military threats.”
2. Modernize DHS’s Approach to Public-Private
Partnerships
Protecting American democracy and building a resilient
homeland is a shared endeavor with many stakehold-
ers. This fundamental principle distinguishes DHS’s mis-
sion from that of other cabinet departments. DHS has the
unique ability to convene stakeholders across the home-
land security enterprise to solve a crisis or avert a threat.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
DHS is not responsible for addressing climate change, but
DHS is responsible for working with others, including state
and local governments and the private sector, to protect
critical infrastructure that is at risk from climate change
or extreme weather. Saving lives and infrastructure from
hurricanes, floods, fires, and other weather-related events
takes continuous and persistent engagement by DHS.
Climate change, as noted above, represents the most sig-
nificant long-term threat to critical infrastructure.
DHS’s ability to encourage private-sector companies,
some of which compete with each other, to share infor-
mation to defeat common threats, in cyberspace and
elsewhere, is vitally important. This is especially true
when nation-states are targeting the US private sector
through non-kinetic means. Increasing the speed of infor-
mation sharing is now vital for both government and in-
dustry, as cyberattacks and defenses interact at network
speed. The federal government needs to be able to com-
municate relevant information—including attribution—in re-
al-time to enable increasingly sophisticated companies to
prevent damage to their systems or the theft of valuable in-
formation. The US Cyberspace Solarium Commission’s rec-
ommendations to designate “systemically important critical
infrastructure” and to have DHS support and lead a Joint
Collaborative Environment for the sharing of threat informa-
tion across the federal government will enhance this effort.
Given the growing threats to our democracy, many of
which are targeted at the private sector, DHS should de-
velop a comprehensive engagement strategy to increase
trust and harmonize engagement with key private-sec-
tor partners and make better use of DHS’s convening au-
thorities. DHS also needs to take better advantage of its
“retail” presence around the United States, across all its
mission areas, and devolve operational support down to
the local level.
3. Address the Workplace Causes of DHS’s
Low Employee Morale
Given that DHS has been in last place in federal em-
ployee morale surveys every year since 2010, DHS
should address its workplace and culture issues that
are driving employees’ low morale. DHS’s components
at times have experienced some remarkable turnarounds
in morale—proof that it can be done at DHS. DHS’s focus
should be on the Transportation Security Administration
(TSA) and Customs and Border Protection (CBP), which
make up half of DHS’s workforce. TSA’s problems can be
improved by addressing low pay, promotions, and career
advancement; CBP needs to address problems with trust,
how to deal with poor performers, and promotions.
4. Fix DHS’s Internal Challenges
DHS needs to make a number of internal reforms. DHS’s
decentralized management model needs to change.
Policy and budget officials need to work closely to-
gether—today, they don’t. DHS needs to invest in better
communications capability, including greater classified
connectivity, to be able to lead the defense against so-
phisticated hostile nation-states. DHS should set up a ro-
tation program, analogous to DoD’s joint duty program, so
that promotion to senior ranks requires a headquarters
tour. And DHS should have an “S3” third-ranking offi-
cial, just as the Department of Justice does, to coordinate
DHS’s law enforcement missions.
5. Nominate DHS Senior Leaders Who Can Be
Confirmed by the Senate
As of August 1, 2020, more than seventeen of DHS’s se-
nior leaders are “acting” or “senior official performing
the duties of....” Not having DHS’s senior-most officials
confirmed by the Senate undercuts DHS’s ability to pro-
tect the American people. A Government Accountability
Office (GAO) August 14, 2020, decision said that Acting
Secretaries Kevin McAleenan and Chad Wolf and Senior
Official Performing the Duties of the Deputy Secretary Ken
Cuccinelli were not validly appointed.1 The DHS’s Office of
the General Counsel asked the decision to be withdrawn,2
but GAO said there was neither a factual nor a legal basis
to do so. 3 President Trump announced on August 25 his
intent to nominate Wolf as secretary of homeland security.
Wolf’s confirmation alone will not end the uncertainty at
DHS. Private business executives, state and local leaders,
labor union leaders, and DHS’s own employees all need to
know if the senior DHS officials they are dealing with will
be around for a while. No one will take a risk or build up a
solid relationship of trust with an “acting” official who could
be replaced easily or could be gone tomorrow based on a
changed legal interpretation. It is vitally important for the
security of the United States that DHS and its compo-
nents have Senate-confirmed leadership.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and
Recommendations
The Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center for
Strategy and Security convened the Future of DHS
Project to inform the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) leadership team in January 2021—
regardless of the outcome of the 2020 US elec-
tion—on the direction of DHS’s mission and how
to address the challenges faced by the depart-
ment. These key findings and recommendations
were written by two former DHS officials, proj-
ect Director Tom Warrick and Co-Director Caitlin
Durkovich, based on input from a Senior Advisory
Board of former secretaries and acting secretaries
of DHS and a distinguished bipartisan study group
of more than 100 homeland and national security
experts. The report is the sole responsibility of the
authors, and while the report reflects a consensus
among the experts, not all study group participants
may agree with every recommendation.
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) needs to
refocus its mission to lead the defense of the United
States against major nonmilitary threats—infectious
diseases; hostile nation-state cyber operations, threats
to election security, and foreign disinformation; threats to
critical infrastructure from climate change; vulnerabilities in
new technologies; and growing white supremacism. DHS
was founded in 2003 to focus on the threat from terrorism.4
The department was later pushed to take on new missions,
but without adequate resources. Today’s challenges de-
mand more DHS leadership attention and resources, even
as the department still needs to meet all its other current
missions. For DHS, nothing goes away.
DHS has more than its share of challenges. Controversies
over family separations in 2019 and the deployment of
its officers in cities in the summer of 2020 have raised
questions about DHS’s core missions—even whether to
“abolish DHS.” As of August 1, 2020, seventeen senior
DHS officials have “acting” or “performing the duties of”
in their titles.5 DHS has occupied last place in federal em-
ployee morale among large cabinet departments every
year since 2010.6
The solution to DHS’s problems is not to dismantle the de-
partment, because what DHS does, or should be doing, is
vital to the security and safety of Americans and to national
security broadly. DHS is the third largest cabinet depart-
ment with more than 240,000 employees7 and an annual
budget of $62 billion.8 Scattering DHS’s functions among
other cabinet departments would not make those missions
and capabilities go away. This report recommends major
reforms—driven by strategy and mission priorities—that
DHS urgently should undertake so that it can meet the
newly emerging threats that—paradoxically—DHS is the
best cabinet department to address.
This report sets out in Part I the case for a major re-focus-
ing of DHS’s mission to address today’s greatest non-mil-
itary threats to the United States. Part II makes the case
that DHS’s ability to harness public-private partnerships
today gives it a unique power and obligation among fed-
eral departments to help secure and enhance the resil-
ience of the private sector and American communities
from traditional and emerging threats, including protect-
ing critical infrastructure from violent extremism, climate
change, and a range of threats from hostile nation-states.
Part III gives specific recommendations to address DHS’s
single most important management issue: DHS’s perenni-
ally low employee morale. Part IV gives recommendations
to address DHS’s other most-pressing internal problems
that DHS needs to fix to meet today’s national security
challenges.
Key Findings in blue. Recommendations in black. Topic headings in red.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
I. DHS Needs to Refocus Its Mission to
Lead the Defense of the Nation Against
Nonmilitary Threats
Key Findings
COVID-19 in the last five months of 2020 is
forecast to kill twenty-five times the number
of people killed on 9/11,9 and will still be a
major threat in 2021.
Pandemic disease has not yet received the leadership
attention and resources it deserves. The American peo-
ple are paying a terrible price. In August 2020, COVID-19
is still ravaging the United States, having killed more than
150,000 Americans10—more than in the two large flu pan-
demics of 1967-68 (100,000 dead) and 1957-58 (116,000),
or US deaths in World War I (116,516). 11 In all of US history,
COVID-19 deaths are exceeded only by World War II (US
deaths 405,399), the Civil War (620,000), and the 1918-19
Spanish flu pandemic (675,000).12
In addition to the death toll, COVID-19 has cost the US
economy trillions of dollars of lost productivity in what one
Nobel Prize-winning economist called a necessary “med-
ically induced coma” that was, nevertheless, not long
enough in some states in spring 2020 to bring down in-
fection and death rates.13
A faster federal government response to COVID-19 would
have cut the death toll by at least half, according to at least
one model.14 Detailed plans written between 2006 and
2016 to respond to a pandemic—commonly called “play-
books”—were not publicized or activated.15 The Homeland
Security Council’s National Strategy for Pandemic Influenza
Implementation Plan (May 2006),16 DHS’s own Pandemic
Influenza: Preparedness, Response, and Recovery Guide
for Critical Infrastructure and Key Resources (September
2006), and the Executive Office of the President’s Playbook
for Early Response to High-Consequence Emerging
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
Feb 1 Mar 1 Apr 1 May 1 Jun 1 Jul 1 Aug 1
Confirmed Cases
US EU
Figure 1: Covid-19 cases in the United States
and the European Union
Source: Johns Hopkins University of Medicine (7-day moving average)
DHS’s Roles in a Pandemic
(DHS abbreviations explained in Annex 1)
Before:
• Develop plans, support training, and run exercises to
prepare government officials to deal with pandemics
(FEMA, DHS Front Office, PLCY).
• Fund efforts that can help state, local, tribal and
territorial governments (SLTT) build resilience against
pandemics and other disasters (FEMA).
During:
• Sound the alarm when there is a risk of a pandemic
(DHS Front Office, supported by I&A, FEMA, PLCY,
Health Affairs, CWMD, CBP, and S&T). Participate in the
interagency decision-making to decide how the US
government responds (Front Office, PLCY, others).
• Coordinate the response (FEMA), including stock-
pile and supply chain management. Support the
effort using DHS’s authorities and capabilities—di-
saster response and logistics (FEMA), screening
air travelers and those arriving from overseas (TSA
and CBP). Provide expertise on infectious disease
(S&T through the National Biodefense Analysis and
Countermeasures Center (NBACC), CWMD and Health
Affairs)
• Support the operational continuity of critical infrastruc-
ture, to include modeling and movement of essential
workers (CISA, FEMA).
• Provide assistance to foreign partners (All).
After:
• Fund SLTT recovery efforts (FEMA).
Source: DHS web sites, https://www.dhs.gov.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Infectious Disease Threats Biological Incidents (2016) 17
could have been activated at an early stage. As Figure 1
makes clear,18 the difference between COVID-19 cases in
the United States and the European Union (EU) points to a
massive government-wide policy failure.
The 2002 Homeland Security Act 19 and the National
Response Framework of October 2019 both say that the
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is the
lead agency for a pandemic.20 However, DHS has several
vital roles to play in responding to a pandemic—all to re-
duce the number of people affected and to mitigate the
economic, social, and security impacts (see box at left).
DHS should take a stronger leadership role in mobilizing
resources and public support to defend the nation from
COVID-19 and future pandemics.
Hostile nation-states are increasingly threat-
ening American democracy.
As of January 2021, the most urgent short-term threat to
the United States will still be COVID-19. Climate change
or extreme weather poses the greatest long-term threat
to critical infrastructure in the United States (see Part II
below). The next greatest threat to the United States is
not terrorism, border security, nor street demonstrations,
it is foreign nation-states—specifically Russia, China, and
Iran—executing a strategy to weaken the United States
by targeting American democracy itself.
Desert Storm (1991), Afghanistan (2001-02), and Iraq (2003)
taught American and NATO policymakers the dominance
of their military power—but Russia, China, and Iran appear
to have learned a very different lesson about the power
and capability of non-military campaigns. Author Max
Brooks caught the irony of today’s strategic situation:21
“Desert Storm was the most disastrous campaign
ever fought by the United States—because it
taught other countries and non-state actors that
the US military is too powerful to beat on the
battlefield and thus must be forced to fight else-
where. To that end, potential adversaries have
been thinking creatively about warfare-by-other-
means for decades.”
Starting with the 2016 election, and especially once the
extent of Russia’s efforts to manipulate the 2016 election
became public,22 a consensus emerged among experts in
and out of government that a number of American demo-
cratic institutions are currently targeted by Russia, China,
and Iran.23 Russia, China, and Iran are carrying out non-ki-
netic attacks through nation-state cyber operations 24 for
political or financial gain; 25 challenging US election secu-
rity;26 attacking critical infrastructure;27 carrying out acts of
disinformation;28 undermining confidence in the US judicial
system;29 manipulating social media, including through for-
eign covert influence campaigns;30 and using other hostile
nonmilitary means to weaken the United States.
While there is no consensus on what to call this—hybrid
warfare, gray-zone warfare, active measures, political war-
fare, or asymmetric warfare—one reason it has proven diffi-
cult for the United States to defend against is that it exploits
US weaknesses—especially a lack of US strategic patience,
political and social divisions, the vulnerability of civilian tar-
gets, and the lack of a coordinated defense. And it avoids
US strengths, staying intentionally just below the threshold
of triggering a kinetic US military response—thereby deny-
ing the United States a justification to use its unparalleled
military power against the nation-states carrying out these
attacks. This strategy is working because it prevents the
United States from effective opposition to hostile states’
ambitions while avoiding kinetic war. Veteran Australian
intelligence analyst Ross Babbage in 2019 described the
success of Russia’s and China’s approach by quoting the
great strategist Sun Tzu, “To win one hundred victories in
one hundred battles is not the pinnacle of excellence. To
win without fighting is the pinnacle of excellence.”31
Russia, China, and Iran, acting more or less independently,
share the common goal of weakening US power, and so
defense against their non-kinetic methods has to be a
much higher US national security priority than it is today.
The fact that these same actors are using similar non-kinetic
tactics against other US allies in Europe, the Middle East,
and the Asia-Pacific region should make defense against
these non-kinetic campaigns one of the United States’ top
national security priorities in 2021 and beyond.
On July 24, 2020, William Evanina, director of the US
National Counterintelligence and Security Center, issued
an extraordinary public warning that China, Russia, and Iran
were trying to compromise US political campaigns, candi-
dates, and elections infrastructure, using both social and
Minute 20:30 - 21:30

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
traditional media.32 Democrats said even Evanina’s stark
warning fell short of what the facts required.33 Former Vice
President Joseph Biden on July 17 had raised a compara-
ble warning: “The Russians are still engaged in trying to
delegitimize our electoral process. Fact. China and others
are engaged as well in activities that are designed for us
to lose confidence in the outcome.” 34 Evanina released a
stronger “Election Threat Update for the American Public”
on August 7, 2020.35
Cyberattacks, threats to election security, threats to
critical infrastructure, disinformation, and foreign na-
tion-state threats to confidence in US institutions are,
collectively, threats to American democracy itself. The
Internet is now an indispensable part of the American
economy and the American way of life, as is the nation’s
critical infrastructure. Elections and free expression are
two of the most central aspects of US democracy. Threats
to these, especially those that come from hostile na-
tion-states, need to be treated as one of the United States’
top national security priorities.
The United States currently has no effective, compre-
hensive defense against this new style of non-kinetic
warfare. Multiple departments and agencies have different
roles. While Americans understand that the Department of
Defense (DoD) has the lead if there is a shooting war, today
no department “owns” the defense of the United States
from non-kinetic cyberattacks against US businesses,
state and local governments, or from manipulation of
US-based social media platforms to amplify disinforma-
tion, or from other foreign efforts to sow division among
the American people. Consider the alternatives:
■ Coordination by the White House using the traditional
interagency process is too slow and cumbersome.
Even a White House cyber coordinator would not be
sufficient, because a considerable portion of the effort
does not involve cybersecurity. The White House needs
to play a coordinating role but does not have an opera-
tional capability.
■ DoD is trained to fight kinetic wars, not to engage in
the domestic political arena or the US civilian economy,
where most of the attacks in this campaign take place.
■ The State Department has expertise on international
issues, not on domestic infrastructure. Nor does State
have the capabilities to defend the United States from
these attacks. Diplomacy needs to support the defense
of the nation from these threats, not lead it.
■ Most of the Intelligence Community (IC) focuses on
collecting and analyzing foreign intelligence for policy-
makers and carrying out presidentially directed covert
actions abroad. Many Americans would object to intelli-
gence agencies leading a domestic security effort, and
the IC does not have the authority to carry out all the
actions inside the United States needed to defend the
homeland.
■ The Department of Justice (DOJ) represents the US
government in courts, and houses law enforcement or-
ganizations like the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),
the Drug Enforcement Administration, and other organi-
zations. But DOJ is neither staffed nor configured to lead
the defense of the homeland against this type of attack.
■ The Federal Bureau of Investigation is configured to
investigate crimes, including terrorism, and while its
cyber defense and investigative capabilities are strong,
the FBI’s primary law enforcement mission makes it un-
suited to lead a national defense far outside the law
enforcement context.
The department best suited to defend the United States
against threats to democracy is DHS. DHS is already re-
sponsible for much of what is required for a successful de-
fense of the United States—including cybersecurity, critical
infrastructure, and election security. As explained in Part II,
DHS is already set up to be a conduit for information and
collaboration with many of the primary civilian targets of
these hostile-nation state campaigns: the US private sector
(including social media companies) and federal, state, and
local governments.
Even so, DHS will need more people and resources, and
support from other parts of the US government. DHS will
need help in this non-kinetic conflict, just as DoD relies on
help from civilian agencies in a kinetic conflict. As former
DHS Deputy Secretary Jane Holl Lute often said, there are
times when DoD, the State Department, and other parts
of the federal government need to think of DHS as the
“supported command.”
For the defense of American democracy to succeed, the
secretary of homeland security and DHS generally will
Inspection of voting machines in North Carolina. At left: DHS Acting
Secretary Chad Wolf. Source: DHS photo by Tara A. Molle

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
need to be, to the greatest extent possible, nonpartisan
and “above politics.” This is essential for credibility on
election security. The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
the uniformed military, and the US Intelligence Community
have a similar tradition. Some of the most partisan aspects
of DHS’s current responsibilities, like setting the number
of immigrant visas, could be given to the White House
domestic policy operation or carried out by, for example,
establishing separate commissions.
Immigration is currently one such partisan issue, with
strong and divergent views held by the major political par-
ties. And DHS involvement in partisan political activities
would directly undermine DHS’s more important missions
that keep the American people safe.36
While two secretaries of homeland security have come
from a background in state politics—a highly relevant con-
sideration given DHS’s need to work closely with state
and local governments (see Part II below)—once con-
firmed, the secretary must be viewed as operating the
department in accord with best practices and in a non-
partisan fashion. Former Secretary Janet Napolitano is re-
membered in DHS for her informal remark that when she
became secretary of homeland security, it was as if she
had her partisan bone removed—this helped reinforce her
serious message, consistent with that of other secretaries
of both parties, that what DHS does should be perceived
as nonpartisan.
The idea of using a separate commission to deal with
controversial issues has succeeded elsewhere, such as
monetary policy, which was highly partisan and divisive
125 years ago (e.g., William Jennings Bryan’s “Y ou shall
not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold” speech, July
9, 1896). The Federal Reserve Board now sets monetary
policy using congressionally approved criteria for full em-
ployment, price stability, and moderate long-term interest
rates.37 This demonstrates that even hot-button political
issues can be de-politicized when there are greater na-
tional interests, such as protecting American democracy,
at stake.
DHS needs to get ready for the changing ter-
rorist threat.
Any discussion of DHS’s mission needs to include the cur-
rent state of the terrorism threat to the United States.
DHS has a major role in preventing terrorists from entering
the United States, in working with local communities to
prevent people from becoming terrorists in the first place—
called “countering violent extremism” or “terrorism preven-
tion”—and in working with foreign partners on aviation and
border security.
Today, terrorist threats to the United States have
changed from what they were immediately after 9/11—
and have further evolved from what they were as
Members of Maritime Safety and Security Team (MSST) Boston conduct security sweeps of the New Y ork Harbor, Sept. 11, 2014. MSST
Boston deployed to Staten Island, N.Y., to assist MSST New Y ork with providing a heightened security presence during the 13th anniversary
of Sept. 11. Source: U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Frank J. Iannazzo-Simmons

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
recently as 2016. There has not been a large-scale ter-
rorist attack in the United States since 9/11, 38 and DHS’s
aviation and border security efforts are part of the reason
why. Al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden was killed by US
forces on May 2, 2011. 39 The Islamic State of Iraq and al-
Sham (ISIS) lost control of its final piece of territory in
Baghuz, Syria, on March 23, 2019 40 and ISIS “amir” Abu
Bakr al-Baghdadi was killed by US forces on October 27,
2019.41
The international terrorist threat from the Islamic State
of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and al-Qaeda has not gone away,
and DHS needs to use the next two to three years to get
ready for what is coming next. ISIS is working on staging
a comeback, and is already back to its 2012 level of ac-
tivity in Iraq. 42 Bin Laden’s successor Ayman al-Zawahiri
is reportedly still alive and many of al-Qaeda’s adherents
moved to other safe havens. 43 Al-Qaeda in the Arabian
Peninsula (AQAP) claimed credit for the December 6, 2019,
terrorist attack at the Naval Air Station in Pensacola, Florida
that killed three and injured eight. Terrorist groups are al-
ready trying to exploit the COVID-19 pandemic.44
Top US military leaders who have led these hard-won US
kinetic successes have warned that the United States
cannot capture or kill its way to final victory.45 They say the
United States needs to move more resources into non-
kinetic counterterrorism efforts, especially countering vi-
olent extremism or terrorism prevention. For DHS domes-
tically, this means working with communities to prevent
people from being radicalized.
For DHS internationally, this means working with the State
Department and allies and international partners to im-
plement United Nations (UN) Security Council Resolution
(UNSCR) 2396 (2017) to build up worldwide capabilities to
disrupt terrorist efforts to travel across international bor-
ders. UNSCR 2396 is of special significance for DHS be-
cause it was the first time the Security Council established
a binding international legal requirement under Chapter
VII of the UN Charter that all UN member states needed
to install and use aviation security methods that DHS pi-
oneered—especially Advance Passenger Information and
Passenger Name Record data (API/PNR)—as well as bio-
metrics and watchlists. DHS had campaigned for years for
the universal use of these technologies to make it harder
for terrorists and criminals to evade detection when they
travel internationally. DHS and the State Department un-
dertook to provide other countries assistance to meet their
obligations under UNSCR 2396.46
Saudi Arabia’s Minister of Interior Prince Muhammad bin Nayef bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud greets DHS Counterterrorism Coordinator Under
Secretary for Intelligence & Analysis Francis X. Taylor and DHS Deputy Counterterrorism Coordinator for Policy Thomas S. Warrick in
Washington, DC, on December 10, 2014. Source: DHS photo by Jetta Disco

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Domestic terrorism by white supremacists and other
“homegrown” causes needs more attention and re-
sources by DHS, the DOJ, and the FBI. Since 9/11, more
Americans have died in terrorist attacks by white suprem-
acists and terrorists with similar political alignment than in
attacks by ISIS or al-Qaeda sympathizers.47 The September
2019 DHS Strategic Framework for Countering Terrorism
and Targeted Violence 48 called out white supremacism
as “one of the most potent forces driving domestic terror-
ism.”49 But the DHS Strategic Framework, which struggled
for resources and support since shortly after its release, 50
has resulted in little visible change in DHS’s actions or
priorities.
Recommendations for DHS’s Mission
1.1 DHS needs to refocus its mission around today’s
most serious threats to the nation: (1) In the short
term, COVID-19, which has already killed more than
150,000 Americans 51 and threatens to kill 77,000
more;52 (2) starting immediately, nonmilitary threats
from nation-states like Russia, China, and Iran; and
(3) in the long term, threats to critical infrastructure
from climate change or extreme weather.
1.2 DHS needs to lead the defense of the nation on
cybersecurity, election security, protecting critical
infrastructure, countering foreign nation-state dis-
information, and countering foreign nation-state
misuse of social media—under the mission to “pro-
tect American democracy.” Much of what needs de-
fending is in the hands of the private sector, and state
and local governments. DHS needs to provide lead-
ership and communication.
1.3 While giving greater attention and resources to the
threats listed above, DHS needs to maintain its lev-
el of resources and efforts on its existing missions
of counterterrorism, aviation security, border man-
agement and immigration, maritime security, emer-
gency management, disaster response, and pro-
tecting US continuity of governance. None of DHS’s
existing missions is going away.
1.4 If DoD’s bumper-sticker version of its mission is “We
fight and win America’s wars,”53 DHS needs to think
of its mission as “We lead the defense of the Na-
tion against non-military threats.” There needs to
be clarity—in the White House Situation Room, on
Main Street, in Silicon Valley, in the US Congress,
and among DHS’s own employees—which cabinet
department leads the defense of the nation against
the non-kinetic campaigns now being waged by na-
tion-states determined to undermine US power.54
Secretary Jeh Johnson speaks to the media after the Pulse nightclub shooting. Source: DHS photo by Jetta Disco

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Three urgent recommendations to address COVID-19:
1.5 DHS needs immediately to devote significantly great-
er leadership focus and resources to efforts against
COVID-19. COVID-19 is far and away the greatest, most
urgent short-term threat to the security of the United
States—with the potential to inflict additional Ameri-
can deaths equal to twenty-five more 9/11 attacks be-
fore the end of 2020.55 DHS needs to do much more
to harmonize states’ response efforts and to solve the
COVID-19 resource and logistic shortfalls that continue
to occur across the nation, six months after the scope
of the pandemic became clear. DHS should mobilize
and prioritize the increased, coordinated distribution
of needed testing, vaccination and medical supplies,
and the infrastructure changes required to make US
schools, factories, nursing homes, and offices safe.
1.6 DHS should be more proactive in sounding the na-
tional alarm in future pandemics and public health
emergencies, to ensure the federal government is
fully mobilized. The failure to mobilize the federal gov-
ernment and provide leadership across the homeland
security enterprise for a unified, national effort in Janu-
ary and February 2020 resulted in tens of thousands of
avoidable deaths in the United States. This should nev-
er happen again. Even though HHS has the lead in pub-
lic health issues, if the secretary of HHS cannot organize
the necessary support, DHS should do more to mobilize
the response to global and domestic health emergen-
cies. DHS has the ability that HHS does not to elevate
a public health issue into a national security issue.
1.7 DHS likewise should ensure that national med-
ical supply stockpiles are rebuilt quickly and that
pandemic plans and playbooks are kept available
so they can be publicized, activated, and executed
when needed. DHS needs to speak out more force-
fully and publicly about the reason for the appropri-
ations requests to replenish the national stockpiles,
because this is a national security issue in addition
to a public health issue. Experienced White House
veterans know that in a change of administrations, it
is not just personnel who are changed—White House
computer systems are erased. Both of these can
leave a gap in institutional knowledge about emer-
gency planning for pandemics and other infrequent,
high-consequence events such as earthquakes. Be-
cause of DHS’s responsibilities in emergency man-
agement and planning for the federal government,
DHS should have both the responsibility and the ca-
pability to recall and make known playbooks and oth-
er plans for addressing contingencies like pandemics.
This should include the ability in an emergency to ac-
tivate planning without waiting for formal instructions.
1.8 DHS needs additional resources for both cyberse-
curity and election security and should submit an
emergency supplemental request for the Cyber-
security and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA)
in the first half of 2021 to deliver help in time for
the November 2022 election. The US Cyberspace
Solarium Commission has also called for additional
resources for DHS cybersecurity.56
1.9 The next DHS leadership team needs to be built
around a common understanding of the most ur-
gent threats to the nation outlined in Recommenda-
tion 1.1. DHS must move away from the current de-
centralized approach in which component leaders
often set their own priorities. A department where
the component leaders set their own priorities will
not succeed.
Two urgent recommendations for communications and
public engagement:
1.10 Communications is a core DHS mission. DHS re-
quires world-class capabilities to communicate
much more effectively with the American people,
DHS stakeholders in the private sector and state
and local governments, and, especially, DHS’s em-
ployees. DHS needs a public affairs, internal commu-
nications, and a legislative affairs operation to match
those of the State and Defense Departments. DHS
leadership also should do more to listen, because
DHS needs information from its stakeholders and em-
ployees to succeed. DHS’s communications profes-
sionals need to be involved early in the policy making
process to advise on effective communications with
the public and other stakeholders, and to be able to
report candidly to policy makers when policies are
not working or are not understood by the public.
1.11 DHS also needs to invest urgently in considerably
wider access to classified voice and data networks
used throughout the national security community.
Other national security agencies including State, the
Department of the Treasury, DOJ, and the FBI make
widespread use of classified voice and data systems
to protect national security information. If DHS is to
lead the defense of the nation against non-military
attacks by highly sophisticated nation-states like Rus-
sia and China, DHS needs wider availability of classi-
fied voice and data networks.
1.12 DHS, more than other cabinet departments, needs
to factor into its decisions how its actions affect
the trust the American people have in DHS. DHS
needs the support of the American people in order
to succeed. 57 DHS relies on voluntary cooperation

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
11
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
and the sharing of information from state and local
governments, and from the private sector, to protect
computer networks and critical infrastructure. Even
security functions like aviation security rely on the
American people accepting what DHS does as nec-
essary for their protection. The public needs to have
confidence that the information they provide to DHS
is used appropriately—a consideration that will be-
come even more important as technologies like fa-
cial recognition become more widespread than they
are at present. Stories of aggressive pat-downs at
airport checkpoints of grandmothers, small children,
or people with disabilities hurt DHS’s ability to do its
mission. Public confidence in DHS cannot be com-
manded; it must be earned whenever DHS takes ac-
tion.
 A Pew Research Center study released in April 2020
said that the American people held a favorable view
of DHS by 71 percent vs. 24 percent unfavorable—
but for Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE),
the numbers were split 46 percent favorable vs. 45
percent unfavorable.58 While security should not nec-
essarily be governed by opinion polls, the American
people and their state and local governments need
to be assured that DHS will exercise its authorities
responsibly. DHS needs to re-think both its overall
approach to immigration enforcement and its recent
policy of arrests in the streets away from federal
buildings it is authorized to protect. DHS offices such
as Civil Rights and Civil Liberties (CRCL) and Priva-
cy (PRIV), which directly report to the secretary, are
important in this regard.59 Americans have a visceral
negative reaction to federal officers in desert camou-
flage and gas masks using their powers aggressively
in the streets of the United States. It is vital to DHS’s
mission that DHS find ways to deal with the use of
information, immigration enforcement, and protec-
tion of federal property in ways that do not alienate
states, cities, and the American people.
1.13 Expecting the unexpected needs to be a normal,
permanent part of DHS’s mission. DHS should
have both the authority and the ability to shift fo-
cus, money, and people more rapidly than at pres-
ent. DHS’s mission will always involve responding to
events that were unforeseen or exceeded what was
foreseen. Because of DHS’s responsibility for disas-
ter response, and because of DHS’s broad mission
space, popular opinion associates DHS with events
like Hurricane Katrina (2005), Deepwater Horizon
(2010), Hurricane Sandy (2012), the southwest border
crises of 2014 and 2019, and COVID-19 (2020). This
is true even for those crises that the experts foresaw
but for which the government was not adequately
staffed and resourced when the crisis hit. DHS needs
to be able to meet the challenge not just of predict-
ing what might go wrong, but to operationalize and
pre-plan the response so that DHS can turn what
would otherwise be a major disaster into a lesser,
manageable one.
1.14 The secretary of homeland security should become
a statutory member of the National Security Coun-
cil. Although National Security Presidential Memoran-
dum no. 4 and its predecessors made the secretary
of homeland security a member of the National Se-
curity Council, by law the mandatory members of the
National Security Council are only the president, the
vice president, the secretary of state, the secretary of
defense, the secretary of energy, and the secretary
of the treasury.60 The secretary of homeland security
is the only cabinet official with broad national securi-
ty responsibilities who is not yet a statutory member.
This recommendation will take congressional legisla-
tion to implement.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
12
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
II. DHS’s Public-Private Partnerships
Are Unique and Should Be Modernized
to Effectively Counter the Threats of
the 2020s
Key Findings
Protecting American democracy and building a resilient
homeland is a shared endeavor across a diverse set of
stakeholders known as the homeland security enterprise
(HSE). This fundamental principle distinguishes DHS’s mis-
sion from that of other cabinet departments. DHS has the
unique ability to bring others together to solve a crisis or
avert a threat. While DHS may lead or direct specific oper-
ations, DHS’s chief responsibility is often to coordinate ef-
forts of federal departments and agencies, in consultation
with state, local, tribal, and territorial (SLTT) governments,
nongovernmental organizations, private-sector partners,
and the public, a partnership commonly referred to as the
“homeland security enterprise.” DHS should not be viewed
at the top of a pyramid directing downwards—if anything
the “pyramid” is inverted with DHS often in a supporting
role or called upon to assist when partner resources are
overwhelmed and they ask for federal assistance.61
The enormity of the homeland security mission can be ap-
preciated by the scale of American geography and political
economy: Alaska is about the geographical size of Mexico,
and if California were a country it would be the fifth largest
economy in the world. Adjacent US states do not always
share the same natural hazards or perceived terrorist tar-
gets. American industry owns and operates the majority
of the assets, systems, and networks that underpin the
American way of life, the continuity of the economy, and
US national security. Building a safe, secure, and resilient
nation requires a harmonized approach to managing stra-
tegic risk and defending against threats from nation-states,
terrorists, and criminal adversaries. In this environment,
trust, communication, information sharing, and shared un-
derstanding of desired outcomes are essential.
Homeland security is a decentralized enterprise shared
by diverse stakeholders in the public and private sector.
While DHS is the lead federal partner in the execution
of the homeland security mission, 62 managing strategic
risks—including defending against the threats discussed
in Part I of this report—requires a collaborative and inclu-
sive effort among various partners in the homeland secu-
rity enterprise. The first Quadrennial Homeland Security
Review presented homeland security “as a distributed sys-
tem, where no single entity is responsible for or directly
manages all aspects of the enterprise.”63
While DHS may lead and direct specific operations,
DHS’s chief responsibility is often to coordinate efforts
of executive departments and agencies, in consultation
with SLTT governments, nongovernmental organiza-
tions, private-sector partners, and the public. DHS often
finds itself in a supporting and consultative role or called
upon to assist when the resources of a partner are over-
whelmed and federal assistance is requested.64
As the COVID-19 response showed, if partners take di-
vergent approaches to strategic and existential threats,
it can undermine the national effort. For example, when
DHS failed to coordinate both procurement and distri-
bution of scarce personal protective equipment (PPE)
during the pandemic’s early days, it created a bidding
war among the states, prompting prices to soar to the
detriment of those who needed PPE. 65 It also exacer-
bated supply chain uncertainty and paralyzed the mutual
aid system between jurisdictions. Cyberattacks on infra-
structure, election disinformation campaigns, and climate
change or extreme weather all have regional or national
effects, and yet must be defended one building or com-
puter network at a time.
DHS is distinct among federal agencies in the kinds of
relationships it has with the private sector. Each rela-
tionship is unique to the mission, governed by different
statues and authorities. DHS’s relationships fall into these
categories:
● Operational — For example, the Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) works with airlines and airports to
adjust procedures to meet evolving security threats.
● Operational Support — For example, the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) works after
disasters to remove physical and bureaucratic obsta-
cles to private sector recovery efforts, so people can
rebuild their lives and the economy can recover.
● Supporting — For example, CISA shares threat and
vulnerability information with industry so that corporate
security programs can defeat threats and mitigate risk.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
13
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
● Regulatory — For example, the US Coast Guard (USCG)
and CISA chemical security regulations focus on mar-
itime and chemical industry facilities that have a high-
er-than-average risk for security incidents.
● Contractual — Like other departments and agencies,
DHS contracts for integrated logistics support or ad-
vanced systems and technologies for DHS’s front-line
employees.
DHS’s ability to foster information sharing between pri-
vate-sector companies, some of which compete with each
other, is a vital reason why the homeland security enter-
prise is essential. DHS’s information sharing programs are
designed to let companies facing similar threats share sit-
uational awareness about those threats. DHS’s information
sharing exposes cyber vulnerabilities and hostile exploits,
for example, which allows other companies to defeat threats
and avoid risk that, without DHS, would likely defeat them
one at a time. Authorities such as the Cyber Information
Sharing Act of 201566 and Protected Critical Infrastructure
Information67 encourage the two-way sharing of information
by allowing private businesses to share information about
vulnerabilities, exploits, or incidents. DHS does this by pro-
viding liability and other protections when companies share
information in DHS-approved channels. Similarly, the sup-
ply chain security efforts of Customs and Border Protection
(CBP), including the Customs-Trade Partnership Against
Terrorism (C-TPAT) and the CBP-TSA Air Cargo Advance
Screening program (ACAS) are proven mechanisms for the
private sector to share supply chain and other vulnerabili-
ties with DHS, which allows DHS and the private sector to
enhance supply chain security and resilience.
Most often, the sharing of unclassified or downgraded
classified information on hostile tactics or techniques en-
ables corporate security or cybersecurity officials to share
information within their organizations. Stakeholders such
as the financial services, telecommunications, and elec-
tricity sectors, need higher-fidelity, often classified, intel-
ligence to take action. This lets businesses make informed
decisions and take actions to mitigate threats. Increasing
the speed of sharing is now vital, as cyberattacks hap-
pen at network speed, and the federal government
needs to be able to communicate relevant information,
Secretary Jeh Johnson meets with state officials in Baton Rouge, LA. Source: DHS photo by Barry Bahler

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
14
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
including attribution, in real-time to enable companies to
prevent damage to their systems or the theft of valuable
information.
Foreign adversaries are already carrying out attacks
on US critical infrastructure. As evidenced by a July
23, 2020 National Security Agency (NSA) and CISA joint
Cybersecurity Alert, 68 nation-state adversaries conduct
malicious activity against critical infrastructure, often ex-
ploiting Internet accessible operational technology. While
foreign nation-state cyberattacks against critical infrastruc-
ture have risen exponentially over the last ten years, infra-
structure can also be the target of kinetic attacks, including
by violent extremists.
Climate change or extreme weather represents the most
significant long-term threat to critical infrastructure.
Climate change will also have an increasing impact on
the operational environments that DHS helps secure.
DHS is not responsible for addressing climate change,
but it is responsible for getting partners to protect the
infrastructure that is at risk due to climate change or
extreme weather. DHS will need to help organize and
support the state, local, and private sector investments to
develop the necessary resilience to climate change and
associated trends.69 Famine or drought can drive mass mi-
gration in Central America or cause terrorists to relocate
from a safe haven overseas to the United States or our
allies. Melting sea ice is a reality for the USCG in the Arctic
that could lead to new opportunities for shipping, tourism,
and legal resource exploration, but also for illegal smug-
gling and trafficking, environmental disasters, and illicit re-
source exploitation—in today’s world economy, fisheries
are a vital national resource.
Climate change is driving the frequency, size, impact, and
complexity of a range of natural disasters, including storms,
floods, droughts, and wildfires. This places additional re-
source requirements on FEMA. As these disasters become
more complex, their cascading effects become more un-
predictable, and thereby stress the entire homeland se-
curity enterprise. Higher temperatures and more intense
storms may also damage or disrupt telecommunications
and power systems, creating cascading consequences
for telecommunications infrastructure, emergency com-
munications, and cyber system failure. While FEMA’s Build
Back Better public assistance program70 provides funding
to mitigate future disasters, DHS needs an enterprise-fo-
cused climate change strategy to address the entirety of its
ecosystem. Equally important, the security implications of
climate change must be addressed in any comprehensive
climate change plan. DHS must have a seat at the table to
ensure DHS’s missions and the equities of DHS’s stake-
holders are understood.
Coast Guard crew member measuring ice thickness. Source: U.S. Coast Guard photo

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
15
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Recommendations for Modernizing DHS’s
Public Private Partnerships
Overall
2.1 Task the Office of Partnership and Engagement
(OPE) with developing a comprehensive engage-
ment strategy to increase trust and harmonize
engagement with key private sector partners and
make better use of convening authorities. DHS’s en-
gagements with the private sector have grown, often
without sufficient planning on how to leverage those
relationships across the department. Senior-level en-
gagement with the private sector, especially corpo-
rate leadership, should be continuous and collabora-
tive so that when new or urgent issues arise, senior
officials do not find themselves trying to build trust for
the first time. As noted above, DHS needs to develop
trust to be effective in working with partners across
the homeland security enterprise.
 While CISA carries out many of these engagements,
so do other parts of DHS. The Office of Partnership
and Engagement reports directly to the secretary
and is the right office to develop a comprehensive
strategy and a plan to overcome the constraints and
obstacles that are preventing DHS from engaging in
substantive dialogue with industry in order to allow
industry to better protect itself.
 DHS has unique authorities to convene govern-
ment and private sector stakeholders to address
active and emerging threats. DHS’s incoming lead-
ership does not always know or appreciate these au-
thorities. Understanding the extent and applicability
of these authorities can aid the secretary and head-
quarters staff in identifying courses of action that mit-
igate threats in a crisis.
 These authorities, when used appropriately, allow
department leadership to have substantive discus-
sions with industry that would normally be con-
strained by federal acquisition and government
ethics rules. The secretary of homeland security can
privately seek advice and counsel from a company
or an industry, for example, to close a security gap
that terrorists or hostile nation-states would other-
wise exploit.
 Additionally, DHS knows that engagement must be
continuous and collaborative, not episodic or direct-
ed, but this takes strategic planning because senior
DHS and corporate leader attention must be recipro-
cal, so that when new or urgent issues arise, senior
officials do not find themselves trying to build trust
for the first time. Nor should relationships be con-
strained by one individual on either side feeling he or
she “owns” the relationship. A strategy will help DHS
senior leaders maximize DHS’s ability to interact with
the private sector in ways that strengthen the security
of the homeland.
2.2 DHS should inventory its information-sharing rela-
tionships and adjust its practices according to the
different levels and capabilities of SLTT and private
sector stakeholders. Information sharing is not one-
size-fits-all, and DHS needs to adjust its practices
accordingly. When DHS shares information, it should
be both timely and actionable. Different-sized orga-
nizations have different levels of sophistication and
need different levels of detail to drive corporate exec-
utive actions. Large firms, or companies in technically
sophisticated industries such as telecommunications
and financial services, already have a high level of
knowledge. Sometimes they need very specific and
actionable information, often at a classified level, to
drive executive action. Some companies just want to
be told what DHS needs them to do.
 DHS headquarters needs to have a comprehensive
understanding of its various information sharing re-
lationships and those of other federal departments
and agencies. The secretary should direct an in-
ventory of DHS’s different information sharing pro-
grams, their purpose, and their perceived utility to
stakeholders. The deputy secretary should convene
regular meetings with the Office of Strategy, Policy,
Assistant Secretary Caitlin Durkovich at a DHS-led active shooter
workshop. Source: DHS photo by Barry Bahler

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
16
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
and Plans (PLCY), Office of Intelligence & Analysis
(I&A), Office of Public Affairs (OPA), Office of Part -
nership & Engagement (OPE), Office of Legislative
Affairs (OLA), and component programs to coordi-
nate messaging and two-way information sharing on
emerging threats to ensure information is shared at
the appropriate classification level—as much of it as
possible to components in the field at the unclassi-
fied level. Given the failure before 9/11 to connect the
dots—which appears to have happened in the early
months of the COVID-19 pandemic—DHS needs to
enhance its information-sharing and data visualiza-
tion programs.
2.3 DHS should devolve operational-support decisions
to the local level to strengthen trust with SLTT part-
ners—and have DHS’s local representatives commu-
nicate to headquarters what they are hearing. DHS
is collectively the largest “retail” face of the federal
government to the private sector. To many private sec-
tor partners, DHS is locally based. DHS components
are distributed across the country and employees
work locally to help secure ports, waterways, critical
infrastructure, to include soft targets. DHS needs to do
more to take advantage of its sustained, retail pres-
ence, which is often better attuned than Washington to
the needs of local partners. DHS leadership should in-
stitutionalize a process, to include regular visits to the
field, whereby field employees can report and share
their observations with headquarters and in turn, poli-
cies and programs can be tailored to address and sup-
port the unique needs of the stakeholders.
2.4 DHS should designate “systemically important crit-
ical infrastructure” and DHS’s support should be
comparable to what DoD provides to the compa-
nies in the defense industrial complex. DoD’s De-
fense Industrial Base (DIB) is an unmatched element
of US national power that differentiates the United
States from all potential opponents by allowing DoD
to draw on what the private sector can build in times
of national emergency or crisis. 71 DHS needs to de-
velop a comparable relationship with “systemically
important critical infrastructure” that underpins our
democracy, economy, and national security. The US
Cyberspace Solarium Commission recommended
that Congress should codify the concept of “system-
ically important critical infrastructure” so that entities
responsible for systems and assets that underpin
national critical functions receive additional security
support from DHS consistent with their critical status
and importance.72 DHS should also determine wheth-
er to implement mandatory cyber incident reporting
for “systemically important critical infrastructure”
analogous to the DIB requirements.
2.5 Make threats against critical infrastructure a prior-
ity across the Intelligence Community. The secre-
tary should work to ensure that the US Intelligence
Community’s collection priorities include changes to
threats against critical infrastructure companies. A
May 2018 report of the Council of Foreign Relations
rightly pointed out that the federal government’s clas-
sified information sharing program with the private
sector is a system of a bygone era and that the gov-
ernment needed to give increased priority to collect-
ing intelligence on threats to private companies, par-
ticularly critical infrastructure operators, and amend
its processes for disseminating that intelligence. 73
The National Infrastructure Advisory Council similarly
recommended that Threats to Critical Infrastructure
should be a Priority 1 topic within the National Intel-
ligence Priorities Framework. 74 A validation process
would be needed to ensure transparency and that
collection requests are used only for the purposes of
protecting infrastructure against threats to national
and economic security. This will work only if the pri-
vate sector trusts what DHS is doing.
Climate change or extreme weather
2.6 DHS should incentivize efforts to enhance resil-
ience and mitigate risk, in addition to supporting cri-
sis-driven response activities. Studies show that miti-
gation projects can avoid as much as $6 in damage for
every $1 invested.75 As the United States’ threat profile
shifts away from foreign terrorist attacks on US soil to-
ward pandemics; nation-state threats to democracy;
natural disasters like hurricanes, storms, and earth-
quakes; as well as climate change or extreme weath-
er; cyberattacks; and the other threats of today, DHS’s
grant programs should adapt as well. For example:
● At least 50 percent of the annual $1 billion
Homeland Security Grant Program (HSGP) should
be reserved for all-hazard threats, including coun-
terterrorism, cyberattacks, pandemics, and other
“nontraditional” threats.
● As extreme weather, cyberattacks, and other
asymmetric threats increasingly penetrate the risk
landscape, DHS should advocate for adapting the
national network of fusion centers, which are largely
funded by HGSP, from a law enforcement-centric
approach to an all-hazards framework. Such a shift
in approach ultimately lies with state and local part-
ners, but would better support the department’s
mission to build resilience to all hazards.
● FEMA should adapt the Hazard Mitigation Grant
(HMG) and Building Resilient Infrastructure and
Communities (BRIC) programs to incentivize SLTT
partners to undertake projects that build resilience
against climate change, pandemics, cyberattacks,

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
17
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
and other “non-traditional” threats—breaking out
of its traditional, narrow emphasis on floods and
storms.
The importance of these very significant grant programs
suggests they might fare better outside of FEMA, in a DHS
component that is more policy-oriented and less opera-
tionally focused.
Moreover, the Office of Support Anti-Terrorism by Fostering
Effective Technologies (SAFETY) Act Implementation, which
provides “liability protections to companies that develop and
deploy anti-terrorism technologies,” should be moved out of
the Science and Technology Directorate (S&T) and placed
within CISA to better align with the critical infrastructure
risk management mission. Owners of critical infrastructure
assets are increasingly seeking certification, which allows
them to display DHS approved SAFETY Act marks, akin to
a “Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval.” The SAFETY Act
provides one of the strongest incentives to the private sec-
tor to use their own resources to make the United States
more secure.
Cybersecurity
2.7 DHS should work with Congress to authorize and
appropriate a Cyber Resilience Fund, akin to the
Disaster Recovery Fund, to support rapid response
and recovery of national critical functions. In a crisis,
there is no substitute for ready cash, and this is espe-
cially true if a nation-state adversary takes down a ma-
jor part of US critical infrastructure. If DHS is going to
deter and defend against the type of warfare that US
adversaries are now waging, DHS needs to be able
to demonstrate that the United States can rapidly re-
store critical functions across corporations and indus-
try sectors and get the economy back up and running.
Nothing undermines an adversary’s cyber offensive
strategy better than a recovery that happens within
hours rather than days. This was a recommendation
of the US Cyberspace Solarium Commission.76
2.8 DHS should support and lead the Joint Collaborative
Environment, a common and interoperable environ-
ment for the sharing and fusing of threat information,
insights, and other data across the federal govern-
ment and between the public and private sectors. Data
need to be shared or cross-correlated at the speed
and scale necessary for rapid cyber threat detection
and identification. This was also a recommendation of
the US Cyberspace Solarium Commission.77
2.9 The White House should establish a national cyber
director in the Executive Office of the President, at
the level of assistant to the president, and give the
CISA director a seat at the Deputies Committees
alongside the DHS representative—just as both the
under secretary of defense for policy and the vice
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff sit at the depu-
ties’ table when the military defense of the nation is
being discussed. The reasons are analogous. Military
expertise needs to have a voice at the table, not just
as a backbencher, when policy decisions about the
use of force are decided. Similarly, cybersecurity ex-
pertise needs to have a voice at the table when the
United States makes policy decisions about how to
defend against nation-state, terrorist, or even criminal
enterprise cyberattacks.
 It is also important for DHS and CISA to be at the
table when decisions are made about US offensive
cyber operations, even the most sensitive when
most other cabinet departments are excluded from
the decision-making process. A tactic, software tool,
or method of attack used by US offensive cyber op-
erators can be turned against the United States in
a matter of hours or days. DHS needs to be able to
caution other policy makers if the United States has
particular vulnerabilities to the same attack meth-
od—offensive cyber operators might not know the
vulnerabilities of US cyber infrastructure operators.
Additionally, DHS may need time to prepare US cy-
ber defenses so that US cyber infrastructure opera-
tors can defend themselves when the tactic is turned
against them. Recent history is replete with examples
Members of Coast Guard Shallow-Water Response Boat Team 3
help pets stranded by floodwater caused by Hurricane Florence,
North Carolina, Sept. 16, 2018. Source: U.S. Coast Guard

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
18
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
where US offensive cyber tools were disclosed and
turned against targets inside the United States.78
Other recommendations
2.10 DHS should build the capacity to identify emergent,
strategic threats—and the capabilities that will be
needed to counter those threats. DHS needs to shift
to a more anticipatory, proactive risk mitigation mod-
el, and it should work to ensure its stakeholders do
also. DHS Science & Technology (S&T) should be re-
structured to provide foresight and strategic thinking
about how threats are evolving and what the technol-
ogy for tomorrow needs to be across the HSE. S&T’s
focus should be on early and emerging technologies
and technological solutions. S&T will need to consult
more closely, not just with DHS’s operating compo-
nents, but also with other parts of DHS responsible
for forward thinking on issues like terrorism, cyber-
threats, threats to large data systems, and even up-
coming legal challenges to management of data.
2.11 DHS should strengthen trust with its partners
across the homeland security enterprise. More than
almost any other part of the federal government, DHS
needs the support of its stakeholders to succeed.
Trust is the foundation of DHS’s information shar-
ing and risk management activities. DHS relies on
voluntary cooperation from state and local govern-
ments and the private sector to protect everyone’s
computer networks and critical infrastructure. Certain
missions and partnerships—most notably those of
CISA and TSA—have so far been immune to the fall-
out from recent DHS missteps and operational blun-
ders, but even these are going to be at risk unless
DHS increases the priority of strengthening trust. 79
To build trust, DHS components must sit across the
table from their private sector partners, communicate
regularly, ensure there is a shared understanding of
the problems, speak of the value of mitigating risks
in language that private sector partners understand,
and demonstrate a return-on-investment or other
measures of success.
CBP AMO agents deliver food and water to severely damaged Fox Town on the Abaco Islands in the Bahamas, in the aftermath of Hurricane
Dorian Sept. 6, 2019. Source: CBP photo by Kris Grogan

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
19
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
III. Resolving the Issues That Cause DHS’s
Low Morale
Key Findings
When large cabinet departments are ranked by overall mo-
rale, DHS has occupied last place every year since 2010.
Other departments go up and down over the years (see
Figure 2), but DHS has been last in twelve out of thirteen
surveys done since 2003. Y et at the same time, DHS em-
ployees remain committed to the department and its mis-
sions. Addressing the workplace issues that drive DHS’s
low morale needs to be one of the top priorities that
DHS’s leadership team should address. Sustained leader-
ship attention to the specific workplace issues, especially
at TSA and CBP, could allow DHS to considerably improve
overall morale over the next two to four years.
Measuring morale. Each year, the Office of Personnel
Management conducts the Federal Employee Viewpoint
Survey (FEVS),80 asking the civil service workforce about
a hundred questions about their views on their workplace.
The Partnership for Public Service’s “Best Places to Work
in the Federal Government” project makes the data more
broadly accessible.81 The Partnership weights the answers
to three specific questions that, over time, have been able to
predict whether an employee will remain with the agency.82
While the FEVS survey reports that morale at DHS is low,
the FEVS survey also shows that DHS employees remain
committed to the department and its missions. DHS’s best
FEVS score relative to other departments is “The work
I do is important.” Upon hearing that the Atlantic Council
was undertaking this study of how to improve DHS, more
than a hundred current and former DHS officials volun-
teered ideas and recommendations. The following comes
from an analysis of the FEVS data.
DHS is a component-driven organization, which hinders
the department’s ability to fully align employees to a uni-
fied mission and shared purpose. Efforts to build a “One
DHS” or “Unity of Effort” model were not sustained long
enough or deep enough to take root. As a result, DHS
today still lacks an overall unifying, organizational culture.
Employees feel a stronger loyalty to their component and
almost no loyalty to the department as a whole.
The lack of a common DHS organizational culture and
other challenges related to different degrees of em-
ployee engagement are holding DHS back from moving
toward an organizational culture of innovation, collab-
oration, and empowerment. FEVS survey data show a
DHS employees at a town hall meeting. Source: DHS photo by Jetta Disco

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
20
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
widespread perception of a “punishment culture” and a
“culture of no” where potential solutions are not always
voiced, success is not consistently celebrated, and em-
ployees’ personal empowerment is not always clearly
defined. In 2019, only 41.2 percent of DHS respondents
agreed employees have a feeling of personal empower-
ment with respect to work processes—compared to 50
percent government-wide. In 2019, only 44.7 percent of
DHS respondents agreed employees are recognized for
providing high quality products and services—compared
to 54 percent government-wide. DHS’s score on FEVS
question thirty-two, whether “creativity and innovation are
rewarded,” is one of the lowest-scoring questions across
the entire department.
DHS employees are focused on their component’s goals
and appear not to know or understand about depart-
mental strategies or goals, nor how their individual work
contributes to the larger DHS mission. On FEVS question
fifty-six, “Managers communicate the goals of the organi-
zation,” DHS employees ranked the department fourteenth
out of fourteen—lowest ranked of the large cabinet de-
partments for which FEVS reported data. In contrast, DoD
briefs national strategies, such as the Defeat-ISIS strategy,
down to the battalion commander level.83
On FEVS question twelve, “I know how my work relates to
agency goals” (Figure 3), US Citizenship and Immigration
Services (USCIS) and US Coast Guard (USCG) employ-
ees—13 percent of the department—rate DHS highly. But
CBP, CISA, Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE),
TSA, and the US Secret Service (USSS) employees—74
percent of DHS—have less of an understanding of how
their work relates to agency goals. In 2019, only 51 per-
cent of DHS respondents agreed that “Managers review
and evaluate the organization’s progress toward meet-
ing its goals and objectives,” compared to 64 percent
government-wide.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
2003 2005 2007 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
FEVS Score
NASA
HHS
Intel Community
Com mer ce
Transportation
VA
Army
DOD
Treasury
Inter ior
Navy
DOJ
State
SSA
USAF
Agricul ture
DHS
Source: Partnership for Public Service, Best Places to Work in the Federal Government, 2019
Figure 2: Results of Federal Employee Viewpoint Surveys (FEVS) by cabinet department
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.4
CBP CISA FEMA ICE TSA USCG USCIS USSS
FEVS Score
Source: Office of Personnel Management, FEVS, Report by Agency
Figure 3: Response to FEVS Question 12 by DHS
component, 2017-19 3-year average, “I know how
my work relates to agency goals”

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
21
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Survey results show that trust between DHS employees
and senior department and component leaders is low.
Improving employee trust has to be central to DHS’s
workforce and morale strategies. It must be noted that
the FEVS questions are ambiguous as to whether “senior
leaders” refers to DHS leaders or component leaders. It
is also clear that responses to specific questions tend to
move up or down together, suggesting that DHS employ-
ees reward or punish their leaders across the board, rais-
ing all scores when things improve, but giving everything
lower scores when morale declines.
In 2019, only 37.7 percent of DHS respondents agreed that
“In my organization, senior leaders generate high levels
of motivation and commitment in the workforce,” in con-
trast to the government-wide score of 45 percent. In 2019,
only 47.9 percent of DHS respondents (compared to 56.1
percent government-wide) agreed that “My organization’s
senior leaders maintain high standards of honesty and in-
tegrity.” This is remarkable in a department with the mis-
sions and functions that DHS has.
Turning around DHS’s morale problems starts with the
two components that drive the department’s low FEVS
scores: TSA and CBP, which together account for more
than 59 percent of DHS’s employees (Table 1). 84 DHS’s
overall score is weighted by the number of employees
(survey respondents) in each component.
As Leo Tolstoy wrote in the opening sentence of Anna
Karenina, “All happy families are alike; each unhappy
family is unhappy in its own way.” That applies to DHS’s
components. Specific recommendations address TSA and
CBP below.
The United States Coast Guard (USCG) and US Citizenship
and Immigration Services (USCIS) consistently rate highly
compared to all federal subagencies, but unlike DHS’s
closest counterparts—DoD, DOJ, and Treasury—most DHS
components are clustered at the bottom (Figure 4). DHS’s
Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction office (CWMD)
was the lowest-ranking subagency in the federal govern-
ment in 2019, ranking 420 out of 420. CWMD’s assistant
secretary was removed in October 2019 85 and replaced
by DHS managers with decades of experience at TSA and
USCG.86 This is an important positive example because,
as will be shown later, removing poor performers is some-
thing DHS needs to do more of.
DHS has had some remarkable success stories in turn-
ing around employee morale that should be recognized,
understood, and where possible replicated.
Table 1
DHS Employees by Component, 2018
 Employees Percent
TSA 64,051 30.76%
CBP 60,524 29.06%
FEMA 19,920 9.57%
ICE 19,912 9.56%
USCIS 18,738 9.00%
USCG 8,530 4.10%
USSS 7,292 3.50%
DHS HQ 3,397 1.63%
CISA 3,295 1.58%
FLETC 1,248 0.60%
OIG 760 0.36%
S&T 408 0.20%
DNDO 179 0.09%
Total 208,254 100.00%

Source: Office of Personnel Management, Fedscope
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
420
Rank
DHS DO D DO J Treasury
Figure 4: FEVS rankings of subagencies, 2019
Source: Partnership for Public Service, Best Places to Work in the
Federal Government, 2019

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
22
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
● I&A under Under Secretary Frank T aylor, 2014-17: Brig.
Gen. Francis X. Taylor, USAF (ret.) took office as under
secretary of I&A in early June 2014. He reorganized
I&A to address a top-heavy management structure and
poor performers who were preventing the promotion
of those who were more qualified. As is often the case
during a reorganization, morale declined in the first year,
but increased steadily for the next two years (Figure 5).
In May–June 2017, I&A’s FEVS scores across the board
were higher than before Taylor took office.
●
USSS under DHS Secretary John F
. Kelly and USSS
Director Randolph “Tex” Alles: USSS was rocked
by scandal starting in 2012 when agents had to
be disciplined for hiring prostitutes in Cartagena,
Colombia. This revealed a number of problems within
the USSS culture that took several years to address.
The decline was halted in 2016 and 2017 under
DHS Secretary Jeh Johnson, then morale improved
steadily from 2017 to 2019 under Secretary John
F. Kelly and Director Randolph “Tex” Alles, erasing
most of the loss (Figure 6). Former DHS employees
attributed the success to Secretary Kelly, a former
Marine Corps general, who showed a strong, per-
sonal interest in the USSS officers he encountered
at the White House, both as secretary and when he
was chief of staff to the president, and to efforts by
Director Alles to develop an employee engagement
action plan, to address agents’ concerns about work-
life balance, and to other actions.
● ICE under Director Sarah Saldaña underwent an even
stronger surge in employee morale from 2015 to 2017
(Figure 7).
●
USCG
 and USCIS have long been at the top of DHS’s
components in FEVS surveys. While USCG might be
thought of as unlike other DHS components because of
its core of uniformed personnel, USCIS is DHS’s other
long-term morale success story. USCIS had shown a
steady, year-on-year improvement in almost all cate-
gories (Figure 8). USCIS has a history of being led by
immigration law experts and practitioners. USCIS’s last
three years of survey data, from 2017 to 2019, were the
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
May
2003
May
2005
May
2007
May
2009
May
2010
May
2011
May
2012
May
2013
May
2014
May
2015
May
2016
May
2017
May
2018
May
2019
FEVS Score
Effective Leadership
Effective Leadership: Empowerment
Effective Leadership: Fairness
Effective Leadership: Senior Leaders
Effective Leadership: Supervisors
Employee Skills–Mission Match
Pay
Strategic Management
Teamwork
Innovation
Training and Development
Work–Life Balance
Su pport for Divers ity
Performance-Based Rewards and
Advancement
No data for I&A
in 2003-11 and
2019
Figure 5: DHS’s Information & Analysis
FEVS scores by category
Source: Partnership for Public Service, Best Places to Work in the Federal Government, 2019
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
May
2003
May
2005
May
2007
May
2009
May
2010
May
2011
May
2012
May
2013
May
2014
May
2015
May
2016
May
2017
May
2018
May
2019
FEVS Score
Effective Leadership
Effective Leadership: Empowerment
Effective Leadership: Fairness
Effective Leadership: Senior Leaders
Effective Leadership: Supervisors
Employee Skills–Mission Match
Pay
Strategic Management
Teamwork
Innovation
Training and Development
Work–Life Balance
Su pport for Divers ity
Performance-Based Rewards and
Advancement
Figure 7: ICE FEVS scores by category
Source: Partnership for Public Service, Best Places to Work in the Federal Government, 2019
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
May
2003
May
2005
May
2007
May
2009
May
2010
May
2011
May
2012
May
2013
May
2014
May
2015
May
2016
May
2017
May
2018
May
2019
FEVS Score
Effective Leadership
Effective Leadership: Empowerment
Effective Leadership: Fairness
Effective Leadership: Senior Leaders
Effective Leadership: Supervisors
Employee Skills–Mission Match
Pay
Strategic Management
Teamwork
Innovation
Training and Development
Work–Life Balance
Su pport for Divers ity
Performance-Based Rewards and
Advancement
April 11-12, 2012:
Cartagena, Colombia
Figure 6: US Secret Service FEVS scores by category
Source: Partnership for Public Service, Best Places to Work in the Federal Government, 2019
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
May
2003
May
2005
May
2007
May
2009
May
2010
May
2011
May
2012
May
2013
May
2014
May
2015
May
2016
May
2017
May
2018
May
2019
FEVS Score
Effective Leadership
Effective Leadership: Empowerment
Effective Leadership: Fairness
Effective Leadership: Senior Leaders
Effective Leadership: Supervisors
Employee Skills–Mission Match
Pay
Strategic Management
Teamwork
Innovation
Training and Development
Work–Life Balance
Su pport for Divers ity
Performance-Based Rewards and
Advancement
Figure 8: USCIS FEVS scores by category
Source: Partnership for Public Service, Best Places to Work in the Federal Government, 2019

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
23
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
highest in USCIS’s history and were the continuation of
trends from previous years.
DHS morale can be turned around. Internal DHS success
stories demonstrate this. Just as DoD turned around its
morale issues after the Vietnam War ended in 1975, im-
proving DHS’s morale will likely take an effort of compa-
rable scope and will need to be sustained over more than
one presidential term. However, as DHS’s success stories
show, it may be possible to begin to see significant im-
provements in twelve to eighteen months.
Recommendations for Improving Morale at DHS
3.1 DHS’s headquarters and component leaders need
to recognize that morale at DHS can be improved
by sustained focus and attention on the underly-
ing workforce issues driving the department’s low
morale.
3.2 DHS needs to move to a “culture of cultures” ap-
proach, celebrating the unique aspects of each com-
ponent, while providing a unifying cultural overlay
around a mission that most of its employees can
embrace. In the uniformed military, services and spe-
cialized units have strong individual cultures but the
services share a common ethos and many common
values. This may not be a perfect model for DHS, but
it provides a validating example.
3.3 Public trust and support for DHS’s mission is vitally
important. If the American people do not genuinely
value what DHS is doing, the department will have
trouble improving overall morale.87
Listen to what DHS employees are saying:
3.4 DHS should considerably increase two-way com-
munications with its employees. DHS leadership
should listen more to what employees are saying.
DHS should brief national and departmental strate-
gies to all employees so they know how their work
contributes to such strategies.
3.5 DHS should make better use of the FEVS surveys
as a management tool, sharing the results more
widely within the department and, where neces-
sary, looking for “red flags” among the data for
warning signs of changes that need to be made.
Using the FEVS survey in this way will demonstrate
management support for the importance of the
views of DHS employees—which itself will enhance
morale within the Department by showing that em-
ployees’ views matter. The problems of the CWMD
office, noted above, which ranked 420 out of 420 in
the 2019 survey, is a positive example. Significant
negative responses to the question “My organi-
zation’s senior leaders maintain high standards of
honesty and integrity” deserve immediate investiga-
tion by the DHS front office and the DHS inspector
general, and the results need to be shared with the
employees.
3.6 DHS should create a career path for entry-level per-
sonnel, especially from TSA, to get preference for
hiring into other DHS jobs with better long-term ca-
reer prospects. One of the greatest problems at sev-
eral DHS components, TSA especially (see below), is
the perception that options for career advancement
are often limited or not well-advertised. This leads to
higher turnover, increased costs to train new person-
nel, and lower overall effectiveness because experi-
enced people leave the organization. DHS should al-
low DHS employees to transfer more easily between
components and within components. In particular,
meritorious service in entry-level positions should
give employees a preference that increases a can-
didate’s prospects for being hired elsewhere in DHS
or should open up training opportunities that would
increase a candidate’s ability to be hired for a bet-
ter career-track position. And those DHS employees
who are tied to a particular location—because of fam-
ily reasons, for example—should be given outright
preferment and service credit for other DHS jobs in
the same area. This would increase employee satis-
faction and give DHS the benefit of retaining employ-
ees with strong ties in the community. DHS needs to
find ways of creating career paths for its entry level
employees so that meritorious DHS employees stay
with DHS.
Secretary of Homeland Security Jeh Johnson visits with Iraqi
refugee Jaafar Ghassan Jaafar Abu-Ragheef and his family in New
Y ork City, June 10, 2016. Source: DHS photo by Barry Bahler

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
24
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
TSA
3.7 Morale at TSA can be improved by urgently ad-
dressing issues of pay, promotions and career ad-
vancement, and employee empowerment. FEVS
data show clearly what it will take to improve mo-
rale at TSA. TSA has long had low overall morale—in
2019, for example, TSA was ranked 398 out of 420
subagencies. Apart from two much smaller compo-
nents—I&A and CWMD—TSA was the lowest-ranked
component of DHS.
 TSA employees’ low pay (Figure 9) is a problem that
cries out for correction. TSA scores are half of those
at CBP, ICE, I&A, USCIS, and USSS. As one expert in
this project’s study group said, TSA is competing for
talent against Amazon fulfillment centers—and losing.
 TSA has similar problems offering its employees, es-
pecially screeners, a career path with meaningful pro-
motion and advancement (Figure 10). This is one rea-
son so many screening officers leave TSA in the first
three years compared to other positions in TSA and
the federal workforce generally. The cost of turnover
to TSA is high. 88 Recommendation 3.4 above ad-
dresses this problem by calling on DHS to develop
TSA officers conduct patrols at Union Station. Source: DHS photo by Barry Bahler
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
May
2003
May
2005
May
2007
May
2009
May
2010
May
2011
May
2012
May
2013
May
2014
May
2015
May
2016
May
2017
May
2018
May
2019
FEVS Score
USCIS
USSS
CBP
I&A
ICE
TSA
Figure 9: FEVS scores by component: Pay
Source: Partnership for Public Service, Best Places to Work in the Federal Government, 2019
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
May
2003
May
2005
May
2007
May
2009
May
2010
May
2011
May
2012
May
2013
May
2014
May
2015
May
2016
May
2017
May
2018
May
2019
FEVS Score
USCIS
USSS
CBP
I&A
ICE
TSA
Figure 10: FEVS scores by Component:
Performance-based rewards and advancement
Source: Partnership for Public Service, Best Places to Work in the Federal Government, 2019

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
25
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
career paths by giving meritorious TSA entry-level
employees the increased ability to be hired for other
positions at DHS with more career potential.
 TSA has likewise never been out of the lower end of
the range of DHS components on empowering its em-
ployees (Figure 11). TSA’s procedures and work rules
may have had to be strict in the early days right after
9/11—itself a failure of aviation security screening—but
today the threat picture is different, and there were
indications from study group participants that TSA’s
lack of employee empowerment contributes to exces-
sive turnover. (The fact that other DHS components
have fallen to TSA’s levels shows that lack of empow-
erment is a problem in more of DHS than just TSA. In
2017-19, only 38.7 percent of DHS employees agreed
they had “a feeling of personal empowerment with re-
spect to work processes,” one of the lowest scores
on this question in the federal civilian workforce. The
government-wide average is 48.6 percent, almost 10
percentage points higher than DHS.)
 As noted in the previous three paragraphs, TSA stands
out negatively compared to other DHS components in
low pay, lack of promotion, limited career opportuni-
ties, and lack of employee empowerment. Significantly,
in other respects TSA does not stand out. Employees
at DHS regard their immediate supervisors relatively
highly, and TSA is no exception (Figure 12). The same
can be said for TSA being in the middle of DHS com-
ponent scores for matching employees to the mission,
teamwork, and innovation. It is only on low pay, lack
of promotion, limited career opportunities, and lack
of employee empowerment that TSA stands out.
 A separate group of experts convened by TSA Ad-
ministrator David Pekoske89 to look at TSA’s human
capital problems independently reached similar con-
clusions to those set out above. Their report, released
by ICF Consulting in May 2019,90 found deficiencies in
the TSA Office of Human Capital. It cited the 2018 TSA
Exit Survey saying departing TSA employees were
concerned about leadership issues, including a lack
of management skills, unfair practices in performance
appraisals and career advancement, a hostile work
environment, and inadequate communication with the
TSA workforce. This study also concluded that pay for
screeners “is a key issue for the screening workforce.”
In particular, screeners were aggrieved that their pay
was one-third of TSA employees in “Management, Ad-
ministration and Professional” positions. The pay and
performance management system was so flawed that
a screener starting out in the lowest TSA pay band,
the “E-band,” even with exceptional performance rat-
ings every year, would take more than thirty years to
rise to the top of the E-band.
 If TSA’s morale can be raised by fifteen to eigh-
teen points, that alone would be enough to raise
DHS out of last place in federal workforce morale.
A fifteen to eighteen-point increase is comparable to
what happened at I&A under Taylor in 2015-17, USSS
under Alles in 2017-19, and ICE under Saldaña in
2015-17. With money from Congress for better pay,
by giving TSA employees the prospect for a mean-
ingful career, and by empowering TSA’s employees,
TSA can help lead a turnaround in DHS morale.
CBP
3.8 CBP presents a totally different picture—CBP needs
to address problems relating to trust, how it deals
with poor performers, and promotions. CBP is con-
sistently among the lowest three DHS components
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
May
2003
May
2005
May
2007
May
2009
May
2010
May
2011
May
2012
May
2013
May
2014
May
2015
May
2016
May
2017
May
2018
May
2019
FEVS Score
USCIS
USSS
CBP
I&A
ICE
TSA
Figure 11: FEVS scores by component:
Effective Leadership – Empowerment
Source: Partnership for Public Service, Best Places to Work in the Federal Government, 2019
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
May
2003
May
2005
May
2007
May
2009
May
2010
May
2011
May
2012
May
2013
May
2014
May
2015
May
2016
May
2017
May
2018
May
2019
FEVS Score
USCIS
USSS
CBP
I&A
ICE
TSA
Figure 12: FEVS scores by component:
Effective Leadership – Supervisors
Source: Partnership for Public Service, Best Places to Work in the Federal Government, 2019

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
26
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
(Figure 13) on whether promotions are based on mer-
it (FEVS question twenty-two). More importantly, CBP
employees do not see that steps are taken to deal
with poor performers (question twenty-three)—here
again, CBP’s score is the lowest among major com-
ponents. Nor are CBP employees particularly satis-
fied with their own prospects of getting a better job
within CBP or DHS (question sixty-seven).
 CBP also rates significantly below DHS averages
on whether rewards and advancement are based
on merit (Figure 10). CBP’s lowest FEVS scores,
consistently, are employee empowerment, perfor-
mance-based rewards and advancement, and how
CBP employees rate senior leaders (Figure 14).
 One of the most important events affecting CBP mo-
rale was the announcement between May 2012 and
May 2013 of a change in how CBP paid officers for
uncontrollable overtime.91 After a “stinging” report by
the Office of Special Counsel on the abuse of admin-
istratively uncontrolled overtime (AUO), the National
Border Patrol Council and Congress together agreed
to eliminate AUO in return for higher base pay. 92
Many CBP officers saw their total take-home pay
drop by about $6,500 a year because of the loss of
paid overtime.93 Morale at CBP had been good prior
to 2013, but this change led to a drop (shown in Fig-
ure 14) from which CBP morale has not yet fully recov-
ered. This negatively affected CBP employees’ views
of their senior leaders, employee empowerment, and
most other factors as well.
 A second issue relates to the rapid expansion of the
Border Patrol from FY 2006 through FY 2011 (Figure
15). One historian wrote, “CBP recruited that new
army by lowering its hiring standards ... and shovel-
ing agents through the academy and into the field
before even completing background checks.” 94 Pro-
cedural changes to allow CBP to address corruption
in its ranks have languished. 95 A March 2016 Home-
land Security Advisory Council report concluded
“The CBP discipline system is broken. The length of
time from receiving an allegation of misconduct to im-
posing final discipline is far too long.”96 Congress had
failed to give CBP the authority to discipline its own
ranks.97 Investigations became turf battles among the
DHS inspector general, FBI, ICE, and CBP’s internal
affairs office. 98 When one of the two Senate-con-
firmed commissioners since February 2009, Gil Kerli-
kowske, brought in Mark Morgan to head the Border
Patrol, one journalist noted “Morgan’s outsider status
and the reform agenda had so angered the Border
Patrol union that axing him was No. 1 on its wish list
when Trump came into office....”99 Morgan left CBP on
January 26, 2017, and returned to CBP in July 2019,
when he was named the senior official performing
the duties of the CBP commissioner.
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
CBPCISAFEMAICETSAUSCGUSCISUSSS CBPCISAFEMAICETSAUSCGUSCISUSSS CBPCISAFEMAICETSAUSCGUSCISUSSS
FEVS Score
Q22, “Promotions based
on merit”
Q23, “Steps Taken to Deal
with Poor Performers”
Q67, “Prospectsto get a
better job in your org.”
Figure 13: Response to FEVS Questions 22, 23, and 67
by DHS component, 2017-19 3-Y ear Average
Source: Office of Personnel Management, FEVS, Report by Agency
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
May
2003
May
2005
May
2007
May
2009
May
2010
May
2011
May
2012
May
2013
May
2014
May
2015
May
2016
May
2017
May
2018
May
2019
FEVS Score
Effective Leadership
Effective Leadership: Empowerment
Effective Leadership: Fairness
Effective Leadership: Senior Leaders
Effective Leadership: Supervisors
Employee Skills–Mission Match
Pay
Strategic Management
Teamwork
Innovation
Training and Development
Work–Life Balance
Su pport for Divers ity
Performance-Based Rewards and
Advancement
Figure 14: CBP FEVS scores by category
Source: Partnership for Public Service, Best Places to Work in the Federal Government, 2019
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
FY 1992
FY 1993
FY 1994
FY 1995
FY 1996
FY 1997
FY 1998
FY 1999
FY 2000
FY 2001
FY 2002
FY 2003
FY 2004
FY 2005
FY 2006
FY 2007
FY 2008
FY 2009
FY 2010
FY 2011
FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
FY 2015
FY 2016
FY 2017
FY 2018
Number of Agents
Figure 15: US Border Patrol staffing by fiscal year
Source: CBP, https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/assets/documents/2019-Mar/
Staffing%20FY1992-FY2018.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
27
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 Another negative factor affecting CBP morale was
the practice of releasing detained migrants into the
community while awaiting immigration or asylum pro-
ceedings, known by the derogatory term “catch-and-
release,” likening the migrants to sport fish who get
caught only to be released back into the water to be
caught again. To many in CBP, especially in the Border
Patrol, this practice had the effect of negating their
service to their country, since their best efforts to stop
people from coming into the United States between
official ports of entry were undone by practices they
felt were set by judges or higher officials who did not
value their work. DHS should devise a border and im-
migration management system that can get the sup-
port of Congress and the American people and does
not devalue the Border Patrol’s work.
 DHS and CBP should think about whether a change
in Border Patrol culture would be beneficial for Bor-
der Patrol officers and for the Border Patrol itself. A
journalist assessing the mid-2019 southwest border
crisis wrote, “Most Border Patrol agents serving to-
day signed up for a tough job in a quasi-military agen-
cy protecting the country against terrorists and drug
dealers. They’ve found themselves instead serving
as a more mundane humanitarian agency—the na-
tion’s front-line greeter for families of migrants all too
happy to surrender themselves after crossing the
border. CBP’s [sic] doesn’t have the culture to meet
this challenge, nor does it have the manpower or
support from the rest of government.”100
 While most people saw the 2019 border crisis in hu-
manitarian or partisan terms, the crisis made CBP’s
morale problems worse. CBP’s mid-2019 budget sup-
plemental request asked for an additional $2.1 mil-
lion for the Employee Assistance Program “to offer
additional counseling services to CBP officers and
personnel....”101 An additional $1.1 billion in emergen-
cy supplemental funding in July 2019102 helped CBP’s
resource problems, but it did little to solve CBP’s oth-
er underlying problems.
 The need for counseling programs for CBP personnel
predated the 2019 border crisis. A news organization
in 2019 uncovered the shocking statistic from a CBP
document that CBP’s suicide rate for each year 2015-
2018 was 38 to 40 percent higher than the national
average law enforcement suicide rate (16.66-16.90
per 100,000 officers vs. 12 per 100,000 officers). 103 A
2010 CBS News report documented similar strains on
CBP officers.104 In September 2015, CBP senior lead-
ers publicly observed Suicide Prevention Month with
a program “It’s OK to Call” to the Employee Assis-
tance Program.105 In 2019, DHS’s Chief Human Capi-
tal Office was working across all DHS components to
Border Patrol agents patrol on vehicles. Source: CBP photo by Ozzy Trevino

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
28
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
try to prevent suicides.106 While extreme, this shows a
human facet of the importance and urgency of priori-
tizing improving morale at CBP.
 CBP needs Senate-confirmed leadership empow-
ered by DHS’s headquarters to take the following
actions to deal with urgent workplace issues that
are driving low morale at CBP:
a. Establish a discipline system that can move
quickly, but fairly, to deal with poor perform-
ers, especially those who show susceptibility to
corruption.
b. Ensure a fair promotion process.
c. Increase two-way communications and trust be-
tween CBP employees and CBP’s headquarters,
and between CBP and the communities in which
it works.
Additional recommendations
3.9 DHS needs to devote more resources to training
incoming personnel about what the different parts
of DHS do. Entry-level employees need a revamped
and improved “DHS 101” course—so that all employ-
ees understand the culture of other large DHS compo-
nents and what they do, and how the components and
headquarters work with each other. This also needs
to be part of long-term career path development. This
should be reinforced with a “DHS 201” course for
newly promoted supervisors, and a “DHS 301” course
for middle management. A “DHS 401” course compa-
rable to the DoD Capstone program should be devel-
oped to train DHS members of the Senior Executive
Service. DHS also needs a separate program with
employee engagement to develop the “culture of
cultures” idea in ways that build both cohesion with-
in components and cohesion across components.
3.10 DHS needs to supplement the FEVS annual surveys
with resources for headquarters and components
to conduct “pulse” surveys (fewer questions, but
more frequently) to better understand factors driv-
ing employee morale. FEVS has several limitations—
it is administered annually, asks the same questions,
and is ambiguous as to whether “senior leaders” re-
fers to department or component leadership. DHS
should commission additional surveys and focus
groups to assess progress on morale initiatives.
CBP Global Entry kiosks. Source: DHS/CBP photo by James Tourtellotte

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
29
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
IV. Fixing the Internal Challenges That Hold
DHS Back
Key Findings
Fixing DHS’s morale problems should be one of the de-
partment’s top management priorities, but there are other
priorities that are not far behind.
While DHS is often referred to as a department con-
solidated out of twenty-two separate federal agencies
or programs, the reality is different. As enacted by
Congress and through subsequent legislation and
appropriations practice, the Homeland Security Act
created a weak and under-resourced DHS headquar-
ters and relatively autonomous “components” where
most of DHS’s 240,000 employees work and where most
of DHS’s annual budget of $62 billion is spent. DHS is
sometimes thought of as medieval France, where a se-
ries of powerful feudal barons pay only nominal alle-
giance to a high king or queen.
DHS will never achieve its potential as a cabinet de-
partment until it addresses its headquarters-compo-
nent problems and achieves a greater unity of effort,
which has been a goal of every secretary of homeland
security. Interviews with former DHS officials and the ex -
perts who contributed to the Future of DHS study groups
all point to the headquarters-component divide as being
one of the keys to DHS’s perceived dysfunction. While
this problem exists to some degree at many large, dis-
persed organizations, many who worked at DHS or in
other large government or private organizations all ac-
knowledged that DHS has it far worse. Many former DHS
employees saw themselves in one or both of these two
descriptions:
● Component personnel think headquarters does not un-
derstand component operational practicalities.
● Headquarters personnel think components do not see
the big picture or appreciate that external factors some-
times require changes in what components do and, in
some cases, how they do them.
There is substantial truth in both viewpoints. DHS needs to
close the gap between these perceptions.
DHS should better coordinate policy and resources.
Headquarters has an important role, beyond just the sec-
retary and deputy secretary, in coordinating both policy
and resource decisions across the department. Effective
constitutional governance requires that policy priorities
should be translated into budgets and operations. DoD has
mechanisms to ensure DoD operations are aligned with
national policy. DHS, on the other hand, does not.
At DHS, policy changes come either from within DHS or
from the top down—from the White House, from Congress,
and from outside events. Budgets at DHS are built bot-
tom-up, because DHS’s components are where the peo-
ple, capabilities, and technology are, and where all of the
front-line DHS missions are carried out.
Instead of aligning to national priorities and strategies,
DHS’s budget processes align to the operational require-
ments of DHS’s components. 107 While this leads to incre-
mental improvements based on ground-up input from
operators, former officials noted that this sometimes fails
to take into account external shocks and developments
outside of what component leaders anticipate based on
day-to-day operations. The disconnect between policy and
resources makes it harder for DHS and its stakeholders to
get support for important initiatives from the White House’s
Office of Management and Budget and from Congress.
DHS headquarters, according to former DHS officials, is
not always seen by components as authoritative or final in
budget matters. The DHS budget process contributes to
the president’s budget submission to Congress, usually in
February of each year. This is followed by a separate pro-
cess in which component leaders interact directly with the
congressional committees or subcommittees. This often
leads to adjustments that experts believe have proven lit-
eral lifesavers to key DHS missions—including by DHS’s
own admission. In 2017, the Trump administration said it
was closing the DHS Science and Technology Directorate
(S&T) National Biodefense Analysis and Countermeasures
Center (NBACC) to save money.108 The proposed cuts were
restored by Congress.109 DHS acknowledged in early 2020
that NBACC was “initiating crucial research to mitigate
COVID-19.”110
Currently, the chains of authority for DHS policy and re-
source decisions are not unified until they rise to the level
of the secretary or deputy secretary, and lateral commu-
nications channels are weak or nonexistent. In the view of
many former DHS officials, component senior leaders do
not take policy initiatives seriously unless they come from
the secretary or deputy secretary. Former DHS officials
believe it often takes the secretary or deputy secretary of
homeland security to take a sustained, personal interest in

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
30
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
a specific issue to drive change over the objections of the
senior working-level officials (GS-15) in DHS’s components.
Shifting resources and sometimes personnel to meet ur-
gent, unbudgeted needs is one of DHS’s greatest—and
most recurring—challenges. Historical examples include
Hurricane Katrina (2005), the terrorist liquids plot (2006),
the underwear bomb plot (2009), the laser printer toner
cartridge plot (2010), the rise of ISIS and the Khorasan
Group (2014), the border crisis of 2014, the border and
immigration crisis of 2019, and most recently COVID-19
(2020). Some of these events drove major policy changes,
others drove significant resource changes, and some
drove both.
Some resource shifts can be in the billions of dollars, but
sometimes rapid shifts of a few million dollars or a few
hundred personnel assigned to a project in advance of a
threat can result in improved security for the homeland and
the American people.
History shows these problems are often the result not of
failures at DHS, but failures of the executive branch or
Congress to adequately budget for needs that may have
been—and often are—foreseen by DHS professionals. This
problem runs deep. This challenge has gotten more diffi-
cult in recent years, and many outside experts in homeland
security agree the challenge will get more difficult in the
future if DHS does not put effort into making policy and
resources align, and to being able to reallocate resources
and priorities in a crisis.
DHS would benefit from changing the way it staffs head-
quarters, so that approximately half of key headquarters
offices are component personnel on “joint duty” assign-
ments, and the rest are a cadre of permanent headquar-
ters personnel. DHS needs to build stronger bonds of
understanding and mutual support between headquarters
and components by a “jointness” approach under which
half of all major headquarters units such as PLCY and
Management Directorate (MGMT) personnel would be de-
tailees from the components. DoD’s comparable program,
mandated by the 1986 Goldwater-Nichols Act, proved one
of the most effective steps DoD ever took to build “joint-
ness” in the US military, according to numerous military
and civilian leaders at DoD.
DHS should considerably enhance two-way commu-
nications between headquarters and components. At
the heart of the issues between DHS headquarters and
CBP’s autonomous surveillance towers. Source: U.S. Customs and Border Protection

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
31
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
components is a communications challenge. Information
does not flow smoothly or easily, a problem made more
challenging by geographical dispersal both of compo-
nents from headquarters and from field offices around the
country.
A further problem is the “parallel universes” in which DHS
personnel work. Many employees use only unclassified,
official-use-only computer systems, and still others work
almost entirely on mobile devices. Others work in highly
classified facilities, and still others work on the Secret-level
systems of the national security policy community. DHS
needs solutions that bridge these different data and com-
munications systems and approaches, while being able to
protect both personal privacy and classified information.
A further challenge is coming in the need not just to
communicate, but to communicate more quickly—at net-
work speeds—between operational units and between
headquarters and components. DHS needs additional
personnel and resources to speed up and enhance com-
munications within DHS.
Recommendations for Fixing DHS’s Internal
Problems
4.1 Policy and budget officials at DHS’s headquarters
should work much more closely together and have
frequent, secure communications since most na-
tional security policies and strategies are classified.
DHS needs to significantly increase the resources
dedicated to policy-resource coordination at DHS
headquarters—especially between PLCY and MGMT
below the under secretary level, but also including
the chief financial officer (CFO) and between DHS
headquarters at St. Elizabeths and the DHS financial
personnel at 7th and D Street. Additional personnel—
probably ten or twenty, but not hundreds—need to be
assigned to making sure the necessary information
on policy flows to budget formation, and that financial
information flows back to policy officials. Senior pol-
icy and management officials at the GS-15 and SES
levels need to devote more time to understanding
what each other is doing and why. This may require
additional higher-level security clearances for MGMT
and budget personnel when the reasons for resource
allocations requires knowledge of classified reasons
behind policy decisions.
 Because strategies are often classified while bud-
get decisions are not, DHS needs to develop a se-
cure alerting mechanism so that those who work in
classified spaces and those who work in unclassi-
fied spaces can both communicate critical updates
and relevant policy changes. Policy decisions and
budget decisions sometimes move slowly, but both
go through periods where war and peace—and the
resources to fight a war or win a peace—need to be
decided in minutes with each informing the other.
DoD has systems and procedures in place. DHS does
not. To help with this, DHS could standardize on a
common platform for secure communications—bring-
ing together devices, applications, and mobile com-
munications, including protecting DHS’s mission-en-
abled applications.
 Expecting the unexpected needs to be a normal,
permanent part of how DHS coordinates policy and
resources. DHS needs to be able to adjust money
and people quickly and easily because DHS will al-
ways face urgent threats and issues—such as the
rise of the next ISIS, or a series of natural disasters
that overwhelm state and local governments, or a
massive state-sponsored cyberattack—that were not
foreseen as part of the budget or long-term policy
development process.
4.2 PLCY needs to devote considerably greater efforts
to better communication throughout DHS opera-
tional components of national and DHS policy pri-
orities. This includes changes in policy, the context
surrounding those changes, and possible future di-
rections for policy changes. 111 DHS should standard-
ize on a common platform to effectively and swiftly
communicate policy updates to all relevant person-
nel. As much as possible, component leadership
should never be surprised by changes in policy. This
will require additional headquarters and component
personnel to ensure information is disseminated lat-
erally and vertically, especially within components. It
will also require DHS to invest in classified connec-
tivity because most national security policies and
strategies are classified. This will also require policy
officials and chiefs of staff at headquarters and com-
ponents to communicate the results of their work to
more people.
4.3 DHS needs to set up a department-wide personnel
rotation policy to bring headquarters and compo-
nents closer together. Components need to rotate
personnel—including some of their best people—in
tours at headquarters so that they gain headquar-
ters experience.
 Just as military promotions beyond a certain level
now require joint duty, successfully serving a tour
at DHS headquarters should be rewarded in pro-
motion decisions in components—and required for
promotions to GS-15 or higher. Tours should be for
two to three years, with the possibility of a one-year

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
32
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
extension. DHS headquarters units—including PLCY,
MGMT, I&A, OPS, OLA, OPA, OIG, OPE, PRIV, CRCL—
should set up positions for such detailees such that
half of all personnel in those offices would eventual-
ly be component detailees, and half would be per-
manent headquarters personnel. The overall DHS
budget would be largely unchanged, and whether
detailees should remain on the payroll of their per-
manent component or transferred to the payroll of
the receiving component is not that important—but
DHS needs to ensure that detailees receive bonus-
es and awards from the component where they are
working, and appropriate recognition when they re-
turn home.
 DHS headquarters needs to start requiring GS-13
personnel and below to serve in a component for
at least two years in order to be promoted to GS-15
or SES. Components would advertise open positions
so that headquarters personnel could apply for them
and receive training if needed.
 DHS personnel from components and headquar-
ters should also establish rotational slots to con-
gressional staff positions and to other departments
and agencies that are DHS’s key partners, such as
the State Department’s Counterterrorism bureau and
International Security and Nonproliferation bureau.
(USCG and CBP already do this regularly; DHS head-
quarters and other components, less so.) Those per-
sonnel should first do a six- to twelve-month rotation
to headquarters to develop a strategic view of de-
partmental priorities before sending them to the Hill
or another cabinet department.
4.4 DHS should make no major reorganizational chang-
es in the next year, because the resulting disruption
would take focus away from DHS’s more urgent
mission and management challenges. DHS’s lead-
ership should resist the efforts, which will come from
well-meaning outside voices, to try to solve DHS’s
problems by ordering a major reorganization of the
department. DHS’s most urgent problems are re-fo-
cusing its mission, its approach to public-private part-
nerships, and the workforce issues that drive DHS’s
morale. Moving DHS’s “boxes” around on an organi-
zation chart is not the best solution to these problems.
 A number of ideas have been put forward to reor-
ganize DHS. This ranges from broad-brush ideas to
“Abolish DHS” or “Abolish ICE” to focused ideas like
the June 2018 idea put forward by ICE Homeland
Security Investigations (HSI) senior special agents to
separate HSI from ICE’s Enforcement Removal Op-
erations (ERO).112 It also includes the Trump adminis-
tration proposal to move the US Secret Service from
DHS to Treasury.113 The USSS proposal was motivat-
ed in part by concerns that USSS was not getting
enough of the right kind of support from DHS head-
quarters and for a desire to be separated budgetarily
from the ERO border enforcement mission.114
 Any reorganization is time-consuming and caus-
es disruption in the units affected by it, especially
headquarters units. Given the urgent threats from
COVID-19, foreign nation-state non-military threats,
the need to strengthen trust between DHS and the
American people, and the management challenges
discussed above, the experts involved in the Future
of DHS Project strongly recommend DHS focus on
its core problems and not move boxes around or-
ganizationally in the next year. There are, however,
two smaller changes that would have an immediate,
beneficial effect.
4.5 DHS should have an “S3” deputy secretary-level
official just below the current deputy secretary in
rank to coordinate DHS’s law enforcement compo-
nents. Given the breadth of DHS missions, both the
secretary of homeland security (known as “S1” inside
DHS) and the deputy secretary (“S2”) have broader
responsibilities than their counterparts at other cab-
inet departments. DHS should have an “S3” deputy
secretary-level official, just below the current depu-
ty secretary position, to give DHS senior leadership
more capacity to cover the full range of DHS’s is-
sues. (To keep titles straight, S2 could become the
“principal deputy secretary.”) Another recent expert
study of DHS’s management structure independently
reached this same conclusion.115
 The most pressing need for a third top DHS official is
to coordinate DHS’s law enforcement components—
some or all of ICE, CBP, the Federal Protective Service,
and USSS. DHS has more law enforcement personnel
than any other government department, including
DOJ. As noted above, DHS’s law enforcement com-
ponents have significant internal challenges of trust,
morale, organization, and accountability, as discussed
above in connection with CBP (see Recommendation
3.8) and the tension within ICE between HSI and ERO
(see Recommendation 4.4). DHS will need to look
at the role of legal authorities of DHS’s different law
enforcement arms in light of criticisms DHS received
in the summer of 2020. The underlying reasons of-
fered for transferring USSS to Treasury—that USSS is
not getting the attention and resources it needs from
the DHS front office—need to be addressed by DHS
headquarters even if USSS stays in DHS, as the Fu-
ture of DHS Project’s experts recommend.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
33
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
 The most appropriate solution here is to look at the
model of DOJ, which has a deputy attorney general
who acts as the primary backup to the attorney gen-
eral and who oversees parts of DOJ, and an associ-
ate attorney general, who oversees the Civil Division
and other offices, and is DOJ’s third-ranking official.116
 An “S3” deputy secretary-level official, just below the
current deputy secretary in rank, would be able to co-
ordinate the law enforcement components of DHS. If
DHS’s deputy secretary (“S2”) has a law enforcement
background, that person could serve such a role—but
then “S3” would be necessary to free up some of the
deputy secretary’s time to handle the law enforce-
ment coordination responsibility.
 A second deputy secretary as “S3” would be a better
solution than moving all of DHS’s law enforcement
functions under a single under secretary, who would
have full control over DHS law enforcement. DHS
headquarters should not politicize law enforcement
within DHS. The staff of a second deputy secretary,
like the staff of the current DHS deputy secretary—
which includes a chief of staff and several advisers
and assistants—should be sufficient so that DHS’s
law enforcement components have the right degree
of policy oversight and accountability without micro-
management.117
 DHS would need to request authorization from
Congress for this change, but until Congress acts,
DHS should empower a very senior DHS official to
coordinate DHS’s law enforcement agencies by a
designation and a delegation of authority from
the secretary. There is precedent for this in the way
former DHS Secretary Janet Napolitano began the
tradition—continued by subsequent secretaries—of
designating a DHS under secretary (the next-highest
rank at DHS below the deputy secretary) to serve as
the DHS counterterrorism coordinator to coordinate
and provide oversight over DHS’s counterterrorism
policies and operations.
4.6 DHS should return policy officials working biologi-
cal, chemical, and nuclear threat issues to PLCY. In
2017, DHS set up the Countering Weapons of Mass
Destruction office (CWMD), headed by an assistant
secretary.118 This included “certain personnel from
PLCY and the Office of Operations Coordination with
expertise on chemical, biological, radiological, and
nuclear issues.” 119 Congress passed the Counter-
ing Weapons of Mass Destruction Act in December
2018, but gave CWMD policy responsibility only for
terrorists’ use of CWMD, not for pandemic disease.120
Moving policy experts to the CWMD component di-
minished their influence, because they were focused
on CWMD’s low-risk, high-consequence mission of
countering terrorists’ use of WMD, not on the more
likely and equally high-consequence mission of ad-
dressing pandemic disease.121
 While DHS components are organized operationally,
PLCY is organized around policy issues, like counter-
terrorism, trade, immigration, or cybersecurity, for ex-
ample; or around policy-informing stakeholders, such
as international affairs. Sending PLCY’s biohazard
experts to CWMD as part of the 2017 reorganization
meant they would focus on terrorist use of WMD, not
all-hazard biological threats that include both terror-
ism and pandemic disease. Given DHS’s immediate
need in 2020 and 2021 to focus on policy issues re-
lating to the immediate threat of COVID-19, in addi-
tion to any threats from terrorist groups, those CWMD
policy officials, and the responsibility for developing
related policies, should be returned on a permanent
basis to PLCY to support the DHS under secretary for
policy and other policy officials who deal with threat
prevention. Addressing the challenge of COVID-19
needs to be DHS’s top short-term priority until
COVID-19 is no longer the threat it is today.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
34
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Conclusion
T
he forward defense of the United States faces
different challenges from those that US leaders
faced in 1945, 1989, or even in 2016. A strong mil-
itary, backed by a strong economy, a vibrant de-
mocracy, and US diplomacy, are all vitally necessary but
are no longer sufficient.
The US Department of Homeland Security was created in
2003 to help ensure the United States never again expe-
rienced an attack like 9/11. Underlying that decision was
the recognition that in 2001, the world had changed to
the point where nonmilitary means—four passenger air-
craft—could be used to kill more Americans than died in
the attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941. It should focus US poli-
cymakers that, as of August 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic
is killing as many Americans as died on 9/11—every four
days. The COVID-19 pandemic, the increasing non-kinetic
actions by nation-state adversaries that seek to undermine
American power, and the long-term threat to US infrastruc-
ture from climate and weather changes, all point to the
need for the United States to make another fundamental
change in how the US government defends the nation and
keeps the American people safe. The best solution avail-
able is to refocus the Department of Homeland Security
and to fix DHS’s internal problems so it can lead the de-
fense of the nation against nonmilitary threats.
The American flag, DHS flag, and Border Patrol flag in McAllen, Texas. Source: DHS photo by Barry Bahler

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
35
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Annex 1:
Glossary of Abbreviations, Acronyms, and
Initialisms Used in This Report
CBP Customs and Border Protection, a DHS compo-
nent, headed by the commissioner. Constituent
units include the Office of Field Operations, the
Border Patrol, and Air & Marine.
CISA Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency, a DHS component, headed by a direc-
tor. Formerly known as the National Protection
and Programs Directorate in DHS headquarters,
headed by an under secretary.
CRCL Office of Civil Rights and Civil Liberties, headed
by the officer for civil rights and civil liberties.
Reports directly to the secretary.
CWMD Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction
Office, established in 2017, headed by an assis-
tant secretary.
DHS Department of Homeland Security, headed by
the secretary of homeland security and a dep-
uty secretary of homeland security.
FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency, a
DHS component, headed by an administrator.
FLETC Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, a
part of DHS that reports directly to the secre-
tary, headed by a director.
I&A Office of Intelligence & Analysis, headed by
an under secretary. I&A is a part of the US
Intelligence Community and listed in Executive
Order 12333. Most operational components
also have their own intelligence offices to
support component decisionmaking and
operations.
ICE Immigration and Customs Enforcement, a DHS
component, headed by a director (formerly titled
assistant secretary). Constituent units include
Homeland Security Investigations (HSI) and
Enforcement and Removal Operations (ERO).
MGMT Management Directorate, a unit of DHS
headquarters, headed by an under secretary.
Includes the DHS chief financial officer (CFO),
chief procurement officer, chief human capital
officer (CHCO), chief readiness support officer,
chief security officer (CSO), and chief informa-
tion officer (CIO), and the respective offices
that carry out those functions. Also includes the
Office of Biometric Identify Management, and,
since May 2019, the Federal Protective Service.
NBACC National Biodefense Analysis and
Countermeasures Center, a unit within DHS
S&T.
OGC Office of the General Counsel, reports to the
secretary, headed by the general counsel.
OIG Office of the Inspector General, nominally re-
ports to the secretary, headed by the inspector
general.
OLA Office of Legislative Affairs, reports to the sec-
retary, headed by an assistant secretary.
OPA Office of Public Affairs, reports to the secretary,
headed by an assistant secretary.
OPE Office of Partnership & Engagement, an office
that reports directly to the secretary that coordi-
nates engagement with DHS state, local, tribal,
and territorial governments, and the private
sector, headed by an assistant secretary.
OPS Office of Operations Coordination, an office
that reports directly to the secretary, headed by
a director.
OSEM Office of the DHS Secretary and Executive
Management, effectively the budget-line item
that covers the DHS front office, including the
secretary and deputy secretary, as well as
MGMT, PLCY, and other headquarters compo-
nents and offices.
PLCY Office of Strategy, Policy, and Plans, a compo-
nent within DHS headquarters, headed by an
under secretary.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
36
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
PRIV Privacy Office, headed by the chief privacy
officer. Reports directly to the secretary.
S&T Science and Technology Directorate, which
reports to the secretary, headed by an under
secretary.
SLTT State, local, tribal, and territorial governments.
Sometimes refers to law enforcement within
those jurisdictions.
TSA Transportation Security Administration, a DHS
component, headed by an administrator.
USCG US Coast Guard, a DHS component, headed by
the commandant.
USCIS US Citizenship and Immigration Services, a
DHS component, headed by a director.
USSS US Secret Service, a DHS component, headed
by a director.
(Note: DHS titles for component heads reflect DHS’s historical roots. Use of the definite article “the” in front of a title
indicates DHS has only one official with that title (e.g., “the commissioner [of CBP]” or “the general counsel.” Use of “a”
or “an” refers to a title used more than once (e.g., the senior official in FEMA and TSA are both titled “administrator”).

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
37
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Endnotes
1 Thomas H. Armstrong, Decision, Matter of: Department of Homeland Security—Legality of Service of Acting Secretary of Homeland Security
and Service of Senior Official Performing the Duties of Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security, Government Accountability Office, August 14,
2020, https://www.gao.gov/assets/710/708830.pdf.
2 Chad Mizelle, letter to Thomas H. Armstrong, August 17, 2020, https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/20_0817_ogc_gao-as1-
succession-response.pdf.
3 Thomas H. Armstrong, Decision, Matter of: Department of Homeland SecurityꟷLegality of Service of Acting Secretary of Homeland Security and
Service of Senior Official Performing the Duties of Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security—Reconsideration, Government Accountability Office,
August 21, 2020, https://www.gao.gov/assets/710/708944.pdf.
4 Homeland Security Act, 6 U.S.C. § 101(b)(1)(A).
5 US Department of Homeland Security, “Leadership,” retrieved July 31, 2020, https://www.dhs.gov/leadership.
6 Partnership for Public Service, “Best Places to Work Agency Rankings,” retrieved July 19, 2020, https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/overall/
large.
7 US Department of Homeland Security, “About DHS,” retrieved July 19, 2020, https://www.dhs.gov/about-dhs.
8 Congressional Research Service, Trends in the Timing and Size of DHS Appropriations: In Brief, December 6, 2019, https://fas.org/sgp/crs/
homesec/R44604.pdf.
9 Cecelia Smith-Schoenwalder, “Coronavirus Model Decreases Death Projection as Mask Wearing Increases,” U.S. News & World Report, July
22, 2020, https://www.usnews.com/news/health-news/articles/2020-07-22/coronavirus-model-decreases-death-projection-as-mask-wearing-
increases (77,000 additional deaths by November 1, 2020). The 9/11 death toll has been calculated to be 2,981. Thomas H. Kean and Lee H.
Hamilton, The 9/11 Commission Report, National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, 2004, https://www.9-11commission.
gov/report/911Report.pdf.
10 Johns Hopkins University of Medicine, COVID-19 in the USA, retrieved July 31, 2020, https://coronavirus.jhu.edu.
11 Olivia B. Waxman and Chris Wilson, “How the Coronavirus Death Toll Compares to Other Deadly Events From American History,” Time, April 6,
2020, updated June 28, 2020, https://time.com/5815367/coronavirus-deaths-comparison/.
12 Waxman and Wilson, “How the Coronavirus Death Toll Compares,” 2020.
13 Paul Krugman, “America Drank Away Its Children’s Future,” New York Times, July 13, 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/13/opinion/
coronavirus-schools-bars.html.
14 James Glanz and Campbell Robertson, “Lockdown Delays Cost at Least 36,000 Lives, Data Show,” New Y ork Times, May, 20, 2020, https://
www.nytimes.com/2020/05/20/us/coronavirus-distancing-deaths.html; Bill Chappell, “U.S. Could Have Saved 36,000 Lives If Social Distancing
Started 1 Week Earlier: Study,” NPR, May 21, 2020, https://www.npr.org/sections/coronavirus-live-updates/2020/05/21/860077940/u-s-could-
have-saved-36-000-lives-if-social-distancing-started-1-week-earlier-st.
15 Dan Diamond and Nahal Toosi, “Trump Team Failed to Follow NSC’s Pandemic Playbook,” Politico, March 25, 2020, https://www.politico.com/
news/2020/03/25/trump-coronavirus-national-security-council-149285.
16 US Homeland Security Council, National Strategy for Pandemic Influenza Implementation Plan, May 2006, https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-
resources/pdf/pandemic-influenza-implementation.pdf.
17 Executive Office of the President, Playbook for Early Response to High-Consequence Emerging Infectious Disease Threats Biological Incidents,
2016, https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/6819703/WH-Pandemic-Playbook.pdf.
18 Emma Reynolds, Luke McGee, and James Frater, “One Graphic Explains Why Americans are Facing an EU Travel Ban,” CNN, June 30, 2020,
https://www.cnn.com/2020/06/30/europe/european-union-travel-us-graphic-intl/index.html.
19 Robert Roos, “Homeland Security law leaves HHS in control of bioterrorism preparedness,” Center for Infectious Disease Research and
Policy, November 22, 2002, https://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2002/11/homeland-security-law-leaves-hhs-control-bioterrorism-
preparedness.
20 DHS, National Response Framework, Fourth Edition, October 28, 2019, https://www.fema.gov/media-library-data/1582825590194-2f000855d44
2fc3c9f18547d1468990d/NRF_FINALApproved_508_2011028v1040.pdf.
21 Max Brooks, “War Stories from the Future: Launch of New Forward Defense Practice,” Atlantic Council, June 18, 2020, https://www.
atlanticcouncil.org/commentary/event-recap/war-stories-from-the-future-launch-of-new-forward-defense-practice/.
22 Robert S. Mueller III, Report On The Investigation Into Russian Interference In The 2016 Presidential Election Volume I, Department of Justice,
March 2019, https://www.justice.gov/storage/report.pdf.
23 Reports to this effect are too numerous to mention here, but among the best are:
Jamie Fly, Laura Rosenberger, and David Salvo, Policy Blueprint for Countering Authoritarian Interference in Democracies, Alliance for Securing
Democracy, German Marshall Fund of the United States, 2018, https://www.gmfus.org/publications/asd-policy-blueprint-countering-authoritarian-
interference-democracies.
Suzanne Spaulding, Devi Nair, and Arthur Nelson, Beyond the Ballot: How the Kremlin Works to Undermine the U.S. Justice System,

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
38
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Center for Strategic and International Studies, May 2019, https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/190430_
RussiaUSJusticeSystem_v3_WEB_FULL.pdf.
Ross Babbage, Winning Without Fighting: Chinese and Russian Political Warfare Campaigns and How the West Can Prevail, Vol. I, Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2019, https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/Winning_Without_Fighting_Final.pdf.
24 Isaac R. Porche III, Fighting and Winning the Undeclared Cyber War, RAND Corporation, June 24, 2019, https://www.rand.org/blog/2019/06/
fighting-and-winning-the-undeclared-cyber-war.html.
25 Nicole Perlroth and Katie Benner, “Iranians Accused in Cyberattacks, Including One That Hobbled Atlanta,” New York Times, November 28,
2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/28/us/politics/atlanta-cyberattack-iran.html.
26 Testimony of FBI Director Christopher Wray before the Senate Judiciary Committee, July 23, 2019, as reported in Doina Chiacu, “FBI Director
Wray: Russia Intent on Interfering with U.S. elections,” Reuters, July 23, 2019, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-security/fbi-
director-wray-russia-intent-on-interfering-with-u-s-elections-idUSKCN1UI1XW.
27 Michael Schmitt, U.S. Cyber Command, Russia and Critical Infrastructure: What Norms and Laws Apply?, Just Security, June 18, 2019, https://
www.justsecurity.org/64614/u-s-cyber-command-russia-and-critical-infrastructure-what-norms-and-laws-apply/.
28 Alina Polyakova and Daniel Fried, Democratic Defense Against Disinformation 2.0, Atlantic Council, June 2019, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/
in-depth-research-reports/report/democratic-defense-against-disinformation-2-0/.
29 Suzanne Spaulding, Devi Nair, and Arthur Nelson, Beyond the Ballot: How the Kremlin Works to Undermine the U.S. Justice System,
Center for Strategic and International Studies, May 2019, https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/190430_
RussiaUSJusticeSystem_v3_WEB_FULL.pdf.
30 Emerson T. Brooking and Suzanne Kianpour, Iranian Digital Influence Efforts: Guerrilla Broadcasting for the Twenty-First Century, Atlantic
Council, February 2020, 2, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/IRAN-DIGITAL.pdf#page=6. Other reports to similar
effect include Suspected Iranian Influence Operation: Leveraging Inauthentic News Sites and Social Media Aimed at U.S., U.K., Other
Audiences, FireEye, August 21, 2018, https://www.fireeye.com/content/dam/fireeye-www/current-threats/pdfs/rpt-FireEye-Iranian-IO.pdf.
31 Ross Babbage, Winning Without Fighting: Chinese and Russian Political Warfare Campaigns and How the West Can Prevail, Vol. I, Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2019, https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/Winning_Without_Fighting_Final.pdf.
32 Mary Clare Jalonick, “Democrats: Trump Must Tell Voters About Election Threats,” Associated Press, July 23, 2020, https://apnews.
com/37638ce4b00eb4dc69b9a994573f1fd8.
33 Nancy Pelosi, Pelosi, Schumer, Schiff, Warner Joint Statement Following ODNI Announcement Regarding Election Security and Foreign Threats,
July 24, 2020, https://www.speaker.gov/newsroom/72420-1.
34 Matt Viser, “Joe Biden, citing intelligence briefings, warns that Russia, China are engaged in election interference,” Washington Post, July
17, 2020, https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/joe-biden-citing-intelligence-briefings-warns-that-russia-china-are-engaged-in-election-
meddling/2020/07/17/3ce81580-c89a-11ea-a99f-3bbdffb1af38_story.html.
35 William Evanina, Statement by NCSC Director William Evanina: Election Threat Update for the American Public, Office of the Director of
National Intelligence, ODNI News Release No. 29-20, August 7, 2020, https://www.dni.gov/index.php/newsroom/press-releases/item/2139-
statement-by-ncsc-director-william-evanina-election-threat-update-for-the-american-public.
36 Michael Chertoff, “The Hijacking of Homeland Security,” New York Times, July 28, 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/28/opinion/
homeland-security-portland-trump.html.
37 What economic goals does the Federal Reserve seek to achieve through its monetary policy?, Federal Reserve Board, August 19, 2016, https://
www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/what-economic-goals-does-federal-reserve-seek-to-achieve-through-monetary-policy.htm.
38 Thomas H. Kean and Lee H. Hamilton, The 9/11 Commission Report, National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States, 2004,
https://www.9-11commission.gov/report/911Report.pdf.
39 “Press Briefing by Senior Administration Officials on the Killing of Osama Bin Laden,” The White House, May 2, 2011, https://obamawhitehouse.
archives.gov/the-press-office/2011/05/02/press-briefing-senior-administration-officials-killing-osama-bin-laden.
40 “Islamic State Group Defeated as Final Territory Lost, US-Backed Forces Say,” BBC News, March 23, 2019. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-
middle-east-47678157.
41 “Remarks by President Trump on the Death of ISIS Leader Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi,” the White House, October 27, 2019, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefings-statements/remarks-president-trump-death-isis-leader-abu-bakr-al-baghdadi/.
42 Michael Knights and Alex Almeida, “Remaining and Expanding: The Recovery of Islamic State Operations in Iraq in 2019-2020,” CTC Sentinel 13,
No. 5 (May 2020): 12-27, https://ctc.usma.edu/remaining-and-expanding-the-recovery-of-islamic-state-operations-in-iraq-in-2019-2020/.
43 Colin Clarke and Charles Lister, “Al Qaeda Is Ready to Attack Y ou Again,” Foreign Policy, September 4, 2019, https://foreignpolicy.
com/2019/09/04/al-qaeda-is-ready-to-attack-you-again/.
44 “Contending with ISIS in the Time of Coronavirus,” Crisis Group; Joseph Hinks, “With the World Busy Fighting COVID-19, Could ISIS Mount
a Resurgence?,” Time, April 29, 2020, https://time.com/5828630/isis-coronavirus/; Ryan Browne, “ISIS Seeks to Exploit Pandemic to Mount
Resurgence in Iraq and Syria,” CNN, May 8, 2020, https://www.cnn.com/2020/05/07/politics/isis-coronavirus-iraq-syria/index.html; Ivano di
Carlo, “In Chaos, They Thrive: The Resurgence of Extremist and Terrorist Groups During the COVID-19 Pandemic,” European Policy Centre, May
5, 2020, https://www.epc.eu/en/Publications/In-chaos-they-thrive-The-resurgence-of-extremist-and-terrorist-group~32c800.
45 Michael K. Nagata, “Taking Stock of U.S. Counterterrorism Efforts Since 9/11,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, July 10, 2018, https://
www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/view/policy-forum-july-10-2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
39
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
46 Nathan A. Sales, After the Caliphate: A New Global Approach to Defeating ISIS,” Brookings Institution, April 30, 2019, https://www.brookings.
edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/20190430-Amb.-Nathan-Sales-speech-at-Brookings.pdf.
47 From 2009 to 2018, Right-wing extremism was responsible for 73.3 percent of all extremist murders, compared to 23.4 percent by Islamist
extremism. Murder and Extremism in the United States in 2018, Anti-Defamation League, January 2019, 16, https://www.adl.org/media/12480/
download#page=16; Vera Bergengruen and W.J. Hennigan, “‘We Are Being Eaten From Within.’ Why America Is Losing the Battle Against White
Nationalist Terrorism,” Time, August 8, 2019, https://time.com/5647304/white-nationalist-terrorism-united-states/.
48 US Department of Homeland Security, Department of Homeland Security Strategic Framework for Countering Terrorism and Targeted Violence,
September 2019, https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/19_0920_plcy_strategic-framework-countering-terrorism-targeted-
violence.pdf#page=15.
49 US Department of Homeland Security, Strategic Framework, 2019.
50 Thomas S. Warrick, “DHS’s new counterterrorism strategy calls out white supremacism, but will need resources and support,” New Atlanticist,
Atlantic Council, September 23, 2019, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/dhss-new-counterterrorism-strategy-calls-out-white-
supremacism-but-will-need-resources-and-support/.
51 Johns Hopkins University of Medicine, retrieved July 31, 2020, https://coronavirus.jhu.edu.
52 This is citing University of Washington data and models. Cecelia Smith-Schoenwalder, “Coronavirus Model Decreases Death Projection as Mask
Wearing Increases,” U.S. News & World Report, July 22, 2020, https://www.usnews.com/news/health-news/articles/2020-07-22/coronavirus-
model-decreases-death-projection-as-mask-wearing-increases.
53 Derived from the 1991 US Army leadership strategic vision “Our purpose is to fight and win America’s wars—anywhere, at any
time, under any condition.” From Gordon R. Sullivan, The Collected Works 1991-1995, 442, 1996, https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/
pt?id=mdp.39015038533942&view=1up&seq=442&q1=fight%20and%20win%20America%27s%20wars.
54 DHS’s lead for “non-military threats” is not intended to change the FBI’s lead for federal criminal investigations, including for counterterrorism,
and the DOJ lead for prosecutions of violations of federal law. Counterterrorism should be a shared mission space, in which the FBI focuses
on disruptions and criminal investigations and DHS focuses on prevention and non-prosecutorial outcomes, such as working with local
communities on Countering Violent Extremism or Terrorism Prevention programs. Similarly, organized crime will primarily be a domestic law
enforcement priority, with DHS and the Drug Enforcement Administration both having responsibility for trying to stop narcotics from entering the
United States.
55 Calculated using the University of Washington data and models, see Cecelia Smith-Schoenwalder, “Coronavirus,” showing 77,000 more
American deaths. The 9/11 death toll of 2,981 from Kean and Hamilton, 9/11 Commission Report. https://www.navy.mil/submit/display.asp?story_
id=107045.
56 U.S. Cyberspace Solarium Commission, Report, pg. 105, March 2020, https://s.wsj.net/public/resources/documents/CSC%20Final%20Report.
pdf#page=112.
57 Chertoff, “Hijacking of Homeland Security,” 2020.
58 Pew Research Center, Public Holds Broadly Favorable Views of Many Federal Agencies, Including CDC and HHS, April 9, 2020, https://www.
pewresearch.org/politics/2020/04/09/public-holds-broadly-favorable-views-of-many-federal-agencies-including-cdc-and-hhs/. Views of ICE
were split along partisan lines: 77 percent of Republicans had favorable views compared to only 28 percent of Democrats.
59 Margo Schlanger, “Offices of Goodness: Influence Without Authority in Federal Agencies,” Cardozo L. Rev. 36, no. 1 (2014): 53-117, https://
repository.law.umich.edu/articles/1258/.
60 50 U.S.C. § 3021(c)(1).
61 Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5, Management of Domestic Incidents, February 28, 2003, https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/
publications/Homeland%20Security%20Presidential%20Directive%205.pdf.
62 Homeland Security Act of 2002, 6 U.S.C. § 112(c), Coordination with Non-Federal Entities, https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/6/112.
63 2010 Quadrennial Homeland Security Review Report, Executive Summary, pg 13.
64 Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5; Management of Domestic Incidents
65 Jonathan Allen, “Trump’s war between the states creates eBay-like fight for aid,” NBC News, March 31, 2020, https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/
white-house/trump-s-war-between-states-creates-ebay-fight-aid-n1173116.
66 S. 754 (114th): Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015.
67 Homeland Security Act of 2002, 6 U.S.C. § 131, Title II, Section 202.
68 DHS US-Cert Alert, NSA and CISA Recommend Immediate Actions to Reduce Exposure Across all Operational Technologies and Control
Systems, July 23, 2020, https://us-cert.cisa.gov/ncas/alerts/aa20-205a.
69 2014 Quadrennial Homeland Security Review, Natural Disasters, Pandemics, and Climate Change, pg 22.
70 FEMA, ”Public Assistance Building Back Better,” May 2018, https://www.fema.gov/media-library-data/1528733063847-314574fb8901f484e5578e
5da0c9451d/PAFactSheet_BuildingBackBetterMAY2018.pdf.
71 Defense Industrial Base Sector Specific Plan, An Annex to the National Infrastructure Protection Plan, 2010, https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/
files/publications/nipp-ssp-defense-industrial-base-2010-508.pdf.
72 U.S. Cyberspace Solarium Commission, Report, pg. 97, https://s.wsj.net/public/resources/documents/CSC%20Final%20Report.pdf#page=104.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
40
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
73 Robert K. Knake, Sharing Classified Cyber Threat Information with the Private Sector, Council on Foreign Relations, May 15, 2018, https://www.
cfr.org/report/sharing-classified-cyber-threat-information-private-sector.
74 Wallace et al., letter to President Donald J. Trump, Transforming the US Cyber Threat Partnership (Draft), National Infrastructure Advisory
Council, December 12, 2019, https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/publications/NIAC-Working-Group-Report-DRAFT-508.pdf.
75 National Institute of Building Sciences, Natural Hazard Mitigation Saves: 2019 Report, December 2019, https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.nibs.org/
resource/resmgr/reports/mitigation_saves_2019/mitigationsaves2019report.pdf.
76 U.S. Cyberspace Solarium Commission, Report, pg. 61, https://s.wsj.net/public/resources/documents/CSC Final Report.pdf - page=68.
77 U.S. Cyberspace Solarium Commission, Report, pg. 101, https://s.wsj.net/public/resources/documents/CSC%20Final%20Report.pdf#page=108.
78 Bruce Schneier, “Who Are the Shadow Brokers?,” The Atlantic, May 23, 2017, https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2017/05/shadow-
brokers/527778/.
79 Chertoff, “Hijacking of Homeland Security,” 2020.
80 Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employment Viewpoint Survey, 2019, https://www.opm.gov/fevs/reports/governmentwide-reports/
governmentwide-management-report/governmentwide-report/2019/2019-governmentwide-management-report.pdf.
81 Partnership for Public Service, Best Places to Work in the Federal Government, 2019, retrieved July 24, 2020, https://bestplacestowork.org.
82 The three questions are “I recommend my organization as a good place to work” (currently question forty), “Considering everything, how
satisfied are you with your job?” (question sixty-nine), and “Considering everything, how satisfied are you with your organization?” (question
seventy-one). Best Places to Work in the Federal Government, 2019.
83 Statement by a retired US military reservist with service in the Middle East to the project director, fall 2019.
84 Office of Personnel Management, FedScope, https://www.fedscope.opm.gov/ibmcognos/bi/v1/disp?b_action=powerPlayService&m_encoding
=UTF-8&BZ=1AAABlPUHIJ942n1OwW6CQBT8mX3YHmrePsSyBw7rshtpWrDCvaG4GlPYNUoP~n0DHGw9dCYvmcybSSY oi3lZFVudpcml92ebp
Q9AdEQVay1CEROPFlxoqfjzwiy1IZR8aRQQPQZDV8utWm9ktU6ATONdb10PZPa_3dkzRCtY oKs7C2E629TNV32wlw~dnVp~7azrZxClQOY0ff7G
bykgfALCl29ngZCQi6EXpKWaqyLPtaqyIs~lm07_6wSr92SPyDgico6MMWQRMkI2kDF5sK65AiHQDghl2wKKV9~U~dG7O5sBxUAhAlkO9AkkJo
PfDDYCKBziv8BHjmoaM940Y cIP2TBmOg%3D%3D.
85 Zack Budryk, “Homeland Security official who rolled back some terrorism programs resigns: report,” The Hill, October 2, 2019, https://thehill.
com/homenews/administration/464075-homeland-security-official-who-rolled-back-some-terrorism-programs.
86 DHS, Leadership, retrieved July 25, 2020, https://www.dhs.gov/leadership.
87 Hamed Aleaziz, “‘Disturbing and Demoralizing’: DHS Employees Are Worried the Portland Protest Response Is Destroying Their Agency’s
Reputation,” BuzzFeed News, July 21, 2020, https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/hamedaleaziz/dhs-employee-anger-over-portland-protest-
response.
88 ICF Incorporated, LLC, Final Findings and Recommendations, May 2019, 2, https://www.tsa.gov/sites/default/files/tsa_blue_ribbon_panel_
report_execsum.pdf.
89 The TSA Workforce Crisis: A Homeland Security Risk, US House Committee on Homeland Security Subcommittee on Transportation and
Maritime Security, 116th Cong. (2019) (statement of Jeffrey Neal, senior vice president ICF and chair, Blue Ribbon Panel Reviewing TSA Human
Capital Service), May 21, 2019, https://homeland.house.gov/imo/media/doc/Testimony-Neal.pdf.
90 ICF Inc., Final Findings and Recommendations, 2019.
91 Joe Davidson, “Border Patrol union advocates overtime changes that would cut officers’ pay,” Washington Post, December 3, 2013,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/federal_government/border-patrol-union-advocates-overtime-changes-that-would-cut-officers-
pay/2013/12/03/6f0fbe08-5c56-11e3-be07-006c776266ed_story.html.
92 Davidson, “Border Patrol overtime changes,” 2013.
93 Davidson, “Border Patrol overtime changes,” 2013.
94 Garrett M. Graff, “The Border Patrol Hits a Breaking Point,” Politico, July 15, 2019, https://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2019/07/15/border-
patrol-trump-administration-227357.
95 A.C. Thompson, “Y ears Ago, the Border Patrol’s Discipline System Was Denounced as ‘Broken.’ It’s Still Not Fixed,” ProPublica, June 20, 2019,
https://www.propublica.org/article/border-patrol-discipline-system-was-denounced-as-broken-still-not-fixed.
96 Homeland Security Advisory Council, Final Report of the CBP Integrity Advisory Panel, March 15, 2016, https://assets.documentcloud.org/
documents/2761266/HSAC-CBP-IAP-Final-Report-DRAFT-FINAL.pdf.
97 Graff, “Border Patrol.”
98 Ibid.
99 Ibid.
100 Ibid.
101 Senate Resolution 280, Commending the Officers and Personnel of U.S. Customs and Border Protection for Their Work During the Crisis at the
Southern Border, July 23, 2019, https://www.congress.gov/116/crec/2019/07/23/modified/CREC-2019-07-23-pt1-PgS5016.htm.
102 Assessing the Adequacy of DHS Efforts to Prevent Child Deaths in Custody, House Homeland Security Subcommittee on Border Security,
Facilitation and Operations, 116th Cong. (2020) (testimony of Brian S. Hastings, chief of law enforcement operations, US Border Patrol, US

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
41
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Customs and Border Protection), January 14, 2020, https://www.cbp.gov/about/congressional-resources/testimony/written-testimony-brian-
hastings-CHS-BSFO.
103 Justin Rohrlich, “US border officers die by suicide 30% more often than other cops,” Quartz.com, October 31, 2019, https://qz.com/1738901/
us-border-officers-die-by-suicide-30-percent-more-often-than-other-cops/, quoting a CBP document, CBP Employee Suicide Report, Data from
2007 -Present, September 11, 2019, https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/6534877-Suicide-Summary-20190911-1.html.
104 “Border Patrol Suicide Rate Spikes,” CBS News, August 16, 2010, https://www.cbsnews.com/news/border-patrol-suicide-rate-spikes/.
105 Customs and Border Protection, CBP Suicide Prevention Event, September 16, 2015, https://www.flickr.com/photos/cbpphotos/
albums/72157658329738120.
106 Department of Homeland Security Morale, House Homeland Security Committee, 116th Cong. (2020) (testimony of Angela Bailey, chief human
capital officer, DHS), January 14, 2020, https://homeland.house.gov/imo/media/doc/Testimony-Bailey.pdf.
107 US Department of Homeland Security, Joint Requirements Council, retrieved July 27, 2020, https://www.dhs.gov/joint-requirements-council.
108 Danielle E. Gaines, “Lab at Fort Detrick Faces Closing Under Proposed Federal Budget,” Frederick News Post, May 24, 2017, https://www.
fredericknewspost.com/news/politics_and_government/lab-at-fort-detrick-faces-closing-under-proposed-federal-budget/article_8fdc3d0d-
856c-58f1-b995-7869630b6a67.html.
109 Danielle E. Gaines and Kate Masters, “House Passes National Spending Bill That Restores Funding to Fort Detrick Lab,” Frederick News Post,
September 15, 2017, https://www.fredericknewspost.com/news/politics_and_government/house-passes-national-spending-bill-that-restores-
funding-to-fort-detrick-lab/article_9d38ae45-4787-502a-b494-7b624e33a87f.html; and “Funding restored to National Biodefense Analysis and
Countermeasures lab,” Homeland Security News, April 2, 2018, http://www.homelandsecuritynewswire.com/dr20180402-funding-restored-to-
national-biodefense-analysis-and-countermeasures-lab.
110 S&T Public Affairs, News Release: DHS Initiating Crucial Research to Mitigate COVID-19, March 25, 2020, https://www.dhs.gov/science-and-
technology/news/2020/03/25/news-release-dhs-initiating-crucial-research-mitigate-covid-19.
111 Government Accountability Office, Homeland Security – Clearer Roles and Responsibilities for the Office of Strategy, Policy, and Plans and
Workforce Planning Would Enhance Its Effectiveness, September 2018, 21, https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/694576.pdf#page=25.
112 David Shaw et al., Letter to The Honorable Kirstjen Nielsen, undated but written June 2018, retrieved July 27, 2020, https://www.
documentcloud.org/documents/4562896-FILE-3286.html#document/p1. See Nick Miroff, “Seeking a split from ICE, some agents say Trump’s
immigration crackdown hurts investigations and morale,” Washington Post, June 28, 2018, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-
security/seeking-split-from-ice-agents-say-trumps-immigration-crackdown-hurts-investigations-morale/2018/06/28/7bb6995e-7ada-11e8-8df3-
007495a78738_story.html.
113 Niels Lesniewski, “White House budget plan has Secret Service back under Treasury,” Roll Call, February 10, 2020, https://www.rollcall.
com/2020/02/10/white-house-budget-plan-has-secret-service-back-under-treasury/.
114 Zolan Kanno-Y oungs and Alan Rappeport, “Report Says Secret Service Return to Treasury Could Harm Homeland Security,” New York Times,
January 17, 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/17/us/politics/secret-service-treasury-homeland-security.html.
115 Carrie F. Cordero, Reforming the Department of Homeland Security Through Enhanced Oversight & Accountability, Center for a New American
Security, May 2020, 22, https://s3.amazonaws.com/files.cnas.org/documents/CNAS-Report-HomelandSecurity-final-updated-060820-web-2.
pdf?#page=25.
116 “US Department of Justice, Organization, Mission & Functions Manual: Attorney General, Deputy and Associate,” United States Department of
Justice, last updated September 9, 2014, https://www.justice.gov/jmd/organization-mission-and-functions-manual-attorney-general.
117 The need for oversight and accountability of DHS’s law enforcement operations is discussed in more detail in Cordero, Reforming the
Department of Homeland Security, 2020.
118 DHS Office of the Press Secretary, Secretary Nielsen Announces the Establishment of the Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office,
December 7, 2017, https://www.dhs.gov/news/2017/12/07/secretary-nielsen-announces-establishment-countering-weapons-mass-destruction-
office.
119 Examining the Department of Homeland Security’s Efforts to Counter Weapons of Mass Destruction, Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response and Communications (testimony of James F. McDonnell, William Bryan, and Chris P.
Currie, Joint Prepared Statement), December 7, 2017, 9, https://www.hsdl.org/?view&did=812353#page=13.
120 Public Law 115-387, signed by President Trump on December 21, 2018. The mission of the office is at 6 U.S.C § 591g.
121 Congressional testimony about the reasons why CWMD was set up does not even mention the word pandemic or influenza. Examining the
Department of Homeland Security’s Efforts to Counter Weapons of Mass Destruction, House Homeland Security Committee Subcommittee on
Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communication, December 7, 2017, https://www.hsdl.org/?view&did=812353.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
42
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Future of DHS Project:
Participant Biographies
Senior Advisory Board Co-Chairs
Secretary Michael Chertoff
Executive Chairman and Co-Founder
Chertoff Group
As secretary of homeland security from 2005 to 2009, Michael Chertoff led the country in blocking
would-be terrorists from crossing our borders or implementing their plans if they were already in
the country. He also transformed FEMA into an effective organization following Hurricane Katrina.
At Chertoff Group, Chertoff provides high-level strategic counsel to corporate and government
leaders on a broad range of security issues, from risk identification and prevention to preparedness, response and
recovery. Before heading up DHS, Chertoff served as a federal judge on the US Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit.
Earlier, during more than a decade as a federal prosecutor, he investigated and prosecuted cases of political corruption,
organized crime, corporate fraud and terrorism—including the investigation of the 9/11 terrorist attacks.
Chertoff is a magna cum laude graduate of Harvard College (1975) and Harvard Law School (1978). From 1979-80 he
served as a clerk to Supreme Court Justice William Brennan, Jr. In addition to his role at Chertoff Group, Chertoff is also
Senior Of Counsel at Covington & Burling LLP, and a member of the firm’s White Collar Defense and Investigations prac-
tice group.
Secretary Jeh Johnson
Partner
Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, LLP
Jeh Johnson is the former secretary of homeland security. He served in that position from
December 2013 to January 2017. Following that, Johnson returned to private law practice at Paul,
Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, LLP. Johnson has been affiliated with Paul, Weiss on and off
since 1984, and became the firm’s first African American partner in 1994. Johnson is also currently
on the board of directors of PG&E Corporation, headquartered in San Francisco, and a non-resident
Senior Fellow at the Harvard Kennedy School. Johnson’s career has been a mixture of public service and private corporate
law practice; he has served in three presidentially appointed Senate-confirmed positions.
Prior to becoming secretary of homeland security, Johnson was general counsel of the Department of Defense (2009-
2012). In that position, Johnson is credited with being the legal architect for the US military’s counterterrorism efforts in
the Obama administration. In 2010, Johnson also co-authored the report that paved the way for the repeal of the Don’t
Ask, Don’t Tell policy by Congress later that year. In October 1998, Johnson was appointed by President Clinton to be
general counsel of the Department of the Air Force and served in that position until January 2001. Earlier in his career,
Johnson was an assistant United States attorney for the Southern District of New Y ork (1989-1991).
Johnson is a fellow in the American College of Trial Lawyers and a member of the Council on Foreign Relations. He is
a graduate of Morehouse College (1979) and Columbia Law School (1982), and the recipient of nine honorary degrees.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
43
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Senior Advisory Board Members
Secretary Janet Napolitano
Professor of Public Policy
Goldman School of Public Policy, University of California, Berkeley
Janet Napolitano served as secretary of homeland security from January 2009 to September 2013.
As University of California president from 2013 to 2020, she was a steadfast advocate for California
students, working to stabilize in-state tuition and to enroll historic numbers of California undergrad-
uates. In 2017, under Napolitano’s leadership, the University of California was the first university in
the country to file a lawsuit to stop the federal government’s rescission of the DACA program. The
injunctions the University received prohibiting the rescission of DACA were upheld by the US Supreme Court. Napolitano
also upheld the university’s legacy of leadership on global climate action.
As governor of Arizona from 2003 to 2009, she was the first woman to chair the National Governors Association, was
named one of the nation’s top five governors by Time magazine, and was named by Forbes magazine as one of the 10
most powerful women in the world. She also served as attorney general of Arizona from 1998 to 2003, and as US attorney
for the District of Arizona from 1993 to 1997. Before that, she practiced at the law firm of Lewis & Roca in Phoenix, where
she became a partner in 1989. She began her career in 1983 as a clerk for Judge Mary M. Schroeder of the US Court of
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
The recipient of numerous awards and honors, Napolitano was awarded the Woodrow Wilson Award for Public Service by
the Woodrow Wilson Center for Scholars at the Smithsonian Institution in 2006. In 2012, she received the Anti-Defamation
League’s William and Naomi Gorowitz Institute Service Award, which is given for outstanding achievements in combating
terrorism, extremism and injustice. A New Y ork City native, Napolitano grew up in Pittsburgh, PA, and Albuquerque, NM.
She earned a BA degree summa cum laude in 1979 from Santa Clara University, where she was Phi Beta Kappa, a Truman
Scholar, and the university’s first female valedictorian. She received her JD degree in 1983 from the University of Virginia
School of Law. In 2010, she was awarded the prestigious Thomas Jefferson Foundation Medal (Law), the University of
Virginia’s highest external honor.
Acting Secretary Rand Beers
Senior Fellow
Middle East Institute
Rand Beers served as deputy assistant to the president and deputy homeland security advisor on
the National Security Council staff of the White House from January 2014 to March 2015. Beers
served as acting secretary of homeland security from September 2013 to December 2013. He also
served as acting deputy secretary from May 2013 until September 2013. In June 2009, Beers was
nominated by President Barack Obama and confirmed by the US Senate to serve as the under sec-
retary for the National Protection and Programs Directorate at DHS, later renamed as the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency. He led integrated efforts to reduce risks to physical, cyber and communications infrastructures.
During his tenure at DHS before becoming the acting secretary, he concurrently served as the department’s counter-
terrorism coordinator, overseeing departmental operational and policy functions to prevent, respond to, and mitigate
threats to US national security from acts of terrorism. Throughout his service at DHS, Beers was a top advisor to the
secretary of homeland security, providing counsel and guidance on a wide spectrum of homeland security issues, from
counterterrorism efforts to cybersecurity. Before serving in DHS, he was the co-chair of the DHS transition team for the
incoming Obama administration and served in senior positions at the Department of State.
Prior to the Obama administration, Beers was the president of the National Security Network, a network of experts seek-
ing to foster discussion of progressive national security ideas around the country, and an adjunct lecturer at the Kennedy
School of Government at Harvard. Rand Beers began his professional career as a Marine Corps officer and rifle company
commander in Vietnam (1964-1968). He entered the foreign service in 1971 and transferred to the civil service in 1983.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
44
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Acting Secretary Kevin K. McAleenan
Co-founder & Chairman
Panigam
Kevin McAleenan served as acting secretary of homeland security from April to October 2019.
Before this appointment, he served as commissioner of US Customs and Border Protection (CBP),
having been confirmed by the US Senate in March 2018. Previously, he had served as CBP acting
commissioner since January 2017. As CBP’s chief executive, McAleenan oversaw 60,000 employ-
ees and managed a budget of more than $13 billion. Previously, McAleenan served as deputy
commissioner from November 2014, until his appointment to acting commissioner. In this role, he served as the agency’s
chief operating officer and senior career official.
From 2006 to 2008, McAleenan served as the area port director of Los Angeles International Airport, directing CBP’s
border security operations at the Los Angeles airport and 17 other airport facilities in one of CBP’s largest field commands.
In December 2011, he was named acting assistant commissioner of CBP’s Office of Field Operations. In this position,
McAleenan led agency operations to secure the US border while expediting lawful trade and travel at 329 ports of entry
in the United States and 70 international locations in more than 40 countries.
McAleenan received a 2015 Presidential Rank Award—the nation’s highest civil service award. In 2005, he received the
Service to America Medal, and the Call to Service Award, for spearheading efforts to develop and implement a compre-
hensive antiterrorism strategy in the border security context after Sept. 11, 2001. He received his Juris Doctor degree from
the University of Chicago Law School and a Bachelor of Arts degree from Amherst College.
Report Authors
Thomas S. Warrick
Director, Future of DHS Project
and Nonresident Senior Fellow, Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security
Atlantic Council
Tom Warrick is a nonresident senior fellow at the Atlantic Council. Prior to joining the Atlantic
Council, from August 2008 to June 2019 he was the deputy assistant secretary for counterterrorism
policy at the US Department of Homeland Security and a career member of the Senior Executive
Service. He was an international lawyer in private practice for 17 years, representing companies in
connection with investments in the Middle East and elsewhere.
From 1997 to 2007, he served in the US Department of State on Middle East and international justice issues. From 1997 to
2001, Warrick was deputy in the Office of the Secretary / Office of War Crimes Issues. In 2001, he became special adviser,
then senior adviser, to the assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern Affairs, working on Iraq, Iran, and other issues.
From 2002 to 2003, he led the State Department’s “Future of Iraq” project. From October 2003 to June 2006, he served
in both Baghdad and Washington. From July 2006 to July 2007, he was director (acting) for Iraq Political Affairs. He was
briefly senior political adviser on the Iran desk in 2007.
Warrick joined the US Department of Homeland Security in August 2007 as director for the Middle East, Africa, and
South Asia in the Office of Policy. He became deputy assistant secretary for counterterrorism policy, in the Office of
Policy, in August 2008. In February 2015, Warrick was named deputy counterterrorism coordinator for policy by the
DHS counterterrorism coordinator and under secretary for Intelligence & Analysis. In July 2018, when the counterterror -
ism policy mission was returned to the DHS Office of Policy, Warrick resumed his title of deputy assistant secretary for
counterterrorism policy in the Office of Policy / Office of Threat Prevention and Security Policy. Warrick concluded his
service as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Counterterrorism Policy on June 14, 2019. Warrick received his Juris Doctor
degree from Harvard Law School in 1979 and a Bachelor of Science in Public Administration summa cum laude from
the University of Missouri.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
45
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
For the Department of Homeland Security and the State Department, Warrick has worked on national strategies involving
counterterrorism, Iran, defeating ISIS, Iraq, Syria, Turkey, Lebanon, Egypt, South Asia, Africa, West Africa Counterterrorism,
Somalia, Lebanese Hezbollah, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Israeli-Palestinian affairs, countering terrorist propaganda, Terrorist
Travel, Terrorist Use of the Internet, and Russia.
Caitlin Durkovich
Co-Director, Future of DHS Project and Nonresident Senior Fellow,
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security
Atlantic Council;
Director
Toffler Associates
Caitlin Durkovich is a nonresident senior fellow in the Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security
and a director at Toffler Associates. She has more than twenty years of expertise in national and
homeland security. A recognized expert in critical infrastructure security and resilience, including cybersecurity, Durkovich
has successfully advanced risk management programs that drive thought leadership, advance leading security practices,
influence policy, and evolve industry practices to manage operational and security risks. She has advanced strategy
and policy at the highest levels of government, including the development of Presidential Policy Directive 21: Critical
Infrastructure Security and Resilience (2013) and cochairing the Joint United States-Canada Electric Grid Security and
Resilience Strategy (2016) and the National Space Weather Strategy (2015).
Durkovich is a director at Toffler Associates, a foresight advisory firm. She served eight years at the Department of
Homeland Security, managing the mission to protect the nation’s cyber and physical infrastructure. As assistant secretary
for infrastructure protection, she led both the voluntary partnership to enhance security and resilience across the sixteen
critical infrastructure sectors, as well as the regulatory program to secure high-risk chemical facilities, or the Chemical
Facility Antiterrorism Standards (CFATS). Her experience also includes leading homeland security projects with several
government agencies while at Booz Allen Hamilton, setting industry cybersecurity standards at the ISAlliance, and pi-
oneering early warning cyber intelligence at iDefense (acquired by Verisign). Durkovich is a member of the Board of
Directors of the InfraGard National Members Alliance and the Protect Our Power Advisory panel.
She earned a BA in public policy studies from the Terry Sanford Institute of Public Policy at Duke University and a certif-
icate in business strategy from The Aspen Institute. She lives in Washington, DC with her husband, three children, and
bulldog.
Project and Research Support
Mark J. Massa
Program Assistant, Forward Defense, Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security
Atlantic Council
Mark J. Massa is a program assistant in Forward Defense within the Scowcroft Center for Strategy
and Security at the Atlantic Council. Massa contributes to  FD programs and research on nuclear
security and arms control, homeland security, the Commanders Series, and other endeavors. He is
a second-year MA candidate in the Security Studies Program at the Georgetown University School
of Foreign Service. His research focuses on nuclear weapons, emerging technology, and the Arctic.
Massa graduated magna cum laude from Georgetown University with a degree in Science, Technology, and International
Affairs.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
46
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Ms. Susan Aarons
Lead Associate, Justice Homeland
Transportation
Booz Allen Hamilton;
Former Special Agent, National Security,
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Javed Ali
Towsley Policymaker in Residence
University of Michigan Gerald R. Ford
School of Public Policy
Mr. Stewart Baker
Steptoe & Johnson LLP;
Former Assistant Secretary for Policy
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Patrick Barry
Executive
General Dynamics Information
Technology
Mr. Christian Beckner
Senior Director, Retail Technology and
Cybersecurity
National Retail Foundation;
Former Associate Staff Director
Senate Homeland Security and
Governmental Affairs Committee
Mr. Christopher J. Boyer
Vice President, Global Security &
Technology Policy
AT&T Inc.
Mr. Chuck Brooks
Adjunct Faculty, Program in Applied
Intelligence
Georgetown University
Mr. Nate Bruggeman
Principal
BorderWorks Advisors LLC;
Formerly Counselor to the
Commissioner, Customs and Border
Protection
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Thomas J. Bruno
Managing Director, Department of
Homeland Security Account
Accenture Federal Services***
Mr. Stevan E. Bunnell
Chief Legal Officer
Libra Association;
Former General Counsel
US Department of Homeland Security
Ms. Britaini S. Carroll
Human Capital Principal Director,
Workforce Transformation
Accenture Federal Services***
Mr. Steven A. Cash
Counsel
Day Pitney LLP
Mr. John D. Cohen
Senior Expert on Global Threats
Argonne National Laboratory;
Former Acting Under Secretary for
Intelligence and Analysis
US Department of Homeland Security
Ms. Kathryn Condello
Senior Director, National Security &
Emergency Preparedness
CenturyLink
Ms. Carrie Cordero
Robert M. Gates Senior Fellow
Center for a New American Security
Mr. Chris Cummiskey
Chief Executive Officer
Cummiskey Strategy Solutions LLC;
Former Deputy Under Secretary for
Management
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Lawrence Curran
Data Scientist and Project Manager
New Light Technologies Inc.;
Former Section Chief, Secretary’s
Briefing Staff
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Brian de Vallance
Senior Fellow, McCrary Institute for
Cyber and Critical Infrastructure Security
Auburn University;
Former Assistant Secretary for
Legislative Affairs
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. John F. Dermody
Counsel
O’Melveny & Myers, LLP
Dr. J. Bradley Dickerson
Senior Manager
Sandia National Laboratories;
Former Director of Chemical Security
Policy and Senior Biodefense Advisor
US Department of Homeland Security
Ms. Marjorie Dickman
Chief Government Affairs and Public
Policy Officer
BlackBerry Corporation
Dr. Holly A. Dockery
Deputy Vice President, International,
Homeland, and Nuclear Security
Sandia National Laboratories
Acknowledgements
The following individuals participated in the Future of DHS Project study groups or otherwise contributed to the report. Current and
former affiliations are listed for informational purposes only, as all contributors participated in an individual, not institutional, capaci-
ty. The authors maintain all responsibility for the content of the report.
* Atlantic Council Member ** Atlantic Council Board Director*** Atlantic Council Corporate Member

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
47
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Mr. Thomas R. Eldridge**
Senior Vice President, Strategic
Development
SAIC***
Mrs. Marsha (Catron) Espinosa
Chief of Staff
Office of U.S. Rep. Linda Sánchez
Ms. Maurine Fanguy
Managing Director, Department of
Homeland Security Account
Accenture Federal Services***
Mr. Thomas A. Fanning
Chairman, President, and CEO
Southern Company
Mr. Andrew Farnsworth
Intern, Forward Defense, Scowcroft
Center for Strategy and Security
Atlantic Council
Mr. Patrick Flanagan
Co-Founder
Pre LLC
Mr. A.J. Gary
Homeland Security Advisor and Director
Arkansas Division of Emergency
Management
Dr. Daniel M. Gerstein
Senior Policy Researcher
RAND Corporation;
Former Under Secretary (Acting) and
Deputy Under Secretary, Science and
Technology Directorate
US Department of Homeland Security
Dr. Robert P. (Bob) Griffin Jr.
Founding Dean, College of Emergency
Preparedness, Homeland Security, and
Cyber Security
State University of New Y ork at Albany
Ms. Michele L. Guido
Strategic Security Policy Director
Southern Company
Dr. Trey Herr
Director, Cyber Statecraft Initiative,
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and
Security
Atlantic Council
Mr. David F. Heyman
CEO & Co-Founder
Smart City Works VENTURE Labs;
Former Assistant Secretary for Policy
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Jason Houser
Senior Instructor, Political Science
United States Naval Academy;
Former Deputy Chief of Staff of
Intelligence
US Department of Homeland Security
Lt Col Chris Kelenske
Deputy Homeland Security Advisor to
Michigan Governor Gretchen Whitmer
and Deputy Director
Michigan State Police
Mr. Kevin R. Klein
Director
Colorado Division of Homeland Security
and Emergency Management
Ms. Connie LaRossa
Principal
Cornerstone Government Affairs
Dr. Chappell Lawson
Associate Professor, Political Science
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Mr. Jonathan Lee
Director, Global Public Policy
WhatsApp Inc.***
Amb. (ret.) Marisa Lino
Adjunct Political Scientist
RAND Corporation;
Former Assistant Secretary for
International Affairs
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Andrew Lorenzen-Strait
Managing Director and Founder
Lorenzen-Strait Consulting Services, LLC;
Former Deputy Assistant Director,
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Timothy Manning
Non-Resident Senior Fellow, Adrienne
Arsht – Rockefeller Foundation Center
for Resilience
Atlantic Council;
Former Deputy Administrator for
Protection and National Preparedness,
Federal Emergency Management
Agency
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Charles Marino
Chief Executive Officer
Sentinel Security Solutions, LLC
Mr. Philip A. McNamara
Director, Government Relations
Pew Charitable Trusts;
Former Assistant Secretary for
Intergovernmental Affairs, Partnerships,
and Engagement
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Coleman Mehta
Senior Director, U.S. Policy
Palo Alto Networks, Inc.;
Former Director, Legislative Affairs
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Ian S. Mitch
Senior Policy Analyst
RAND Corporation
LTG Michael K. Nagata, USA (Ret.)
Senior Advisor to the Senior Vice
President
CACI International Inc.
VADM Peter Neffenger, USCG (Ret.)
Distinguished Fellow, Adrienne Arsht
- Rockefeller Foundation Center for
Resilience
Atlantic Council
*Atlantic Council Member **Atlantic Council Board Director ***Atlantic Council Corporate Member

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
48
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Mr. David M. Olive
Principal
Catalyst Partners LLC
Mr. Roger Parrino, Sr.
Director of Preparedness, Intelligence,
and Inspections
Port Authority of New Y ork and New
Jersey
Mr. Barry Pavel
Senior Vice President and Director,
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and
Security
Atlantic Council
Mr. Timothy Perry
Chief of Staff and Deputy Homeland
Security Advisor
California Governor’s Office of
Emergency Services
Ms. Briana Petyo Frisone
National Security Sector Advisor
Guidehouse;
Former Counselor to the Acting
Secretary
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Thomas K. Plofchan, III
Managing Partner
Pangiam;
Former Counterterrorism Counselor to
the Secretary
US Department of Homeland Security
Ms. Amy E. Pope
Non-Resident Senior Fellow, Adrienne
Arsht - Rockefeller Foundation Center
for Resilience
Atlantic Council
Ms. Amy L. Rall
Vice President, Homeland and Justice
Programs
SAIC***
Ms. Subhasri “Sue” Ramanathan
Non-Resident Senior Fellow, Hume
Center for National Security &
Technology
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University;
Former Deputy Assistant Secretary and
Counselor to the Secretary
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Jeff Ratner
Senior Manager, Global Cybersecurity
and Privacy Law
Apple, Inc.
Ms. Lora Ries
Senior Research Fellow, Homeland
Security
The Heritage Foundation;
Former Acting Deputy Chief of Staff
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Eric Rosand
Director
The Prevention Project
Mr. Paul Rosen
Partner
Crowell & Moring LLP
Ms. Laura Rosenberger
Senior Fellow and Director, Alliance for
Securing Democracy
The German Marshall Fund of the United
States
Mr. Todd Rosenblum
Non-Resident Senior Fellow, Scowcroft
Center for Strategy and Security
Atlantic Council;
Former Deputy Under Secretary of
Intelligence
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Paul Rosenzweig
Senior Fellow
R Street Institute
Mr. William Ruch
Principal
Lewis-Burke Associates LLC
Mr. Marc R. Sabbagh
Chief of Staff, Safety and Citizen
Services
Accenture Federal Services***
Ms. Jen Sadosky
Human Capital Lead, Safety and Citizen
Services
Accenture Federal Services***
Mr. Fred Schwien
Director of Homeland Security Programs
and Strategy
The Boeing Company***
Ms. Suzanne Spaulding
Senior Adviser, Homeland Security,
International Security Program
Center for Strategic and International
Studies;
Former Under Secretary, Department of
Homeland Security
Ms. Clementine Starling
Deputy Director, Forward Defense &
Resident Fellow, Transatlantic Security
Initiative, Scowcroft Center for Strategy
and Security
Atlantic Council
Ms. Bobbie Stempfley
Vice President, Cyber Security and
Business Security Officer ISG
Dell Technologies;
Former Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Cybersecurity and Communications
US Department of Homeland Security
Ms. Camille Stewart
Cyber Fellow
Harvard Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs;
Former Senior Policy Advisor, Cyber,
Infrastructure, & Resilience Policy
US Department of Homeland Security
Ms. Lauren Stienstra
Program Director, Homeland Security
and Emergency Management
National Governors Association
*Atlantic Council Member **Atlantic Council Board Director ***Atlantic Council Corporate Member

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
49
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Mr. Seth Stodder
Partner
Holland & Knight LLP
Mr. Steven G. Stransky
Partner
Thompson Hine LLP;
Former Deputy Legal Adviser
National Security Council
Mr. Philip Stupak
Fellow, Harris Cyber Policy Initiative
University of Chicago;
Former Senior Advisor to the Deputy
Secretary
US Department of Homeland Security
BG Francis X. Taylor, USAF (Ret.)
Global Policy Initiative Executive Fellow
University of Notre Dame;
Former Under Secretary, Office of
Intelligence and Analysis
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Miles E. Taylor
US Lead, Advanced Technology and
Security Strategy (on leave)
Google, Inc.;
Former Chief of Staff
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Scott Tousley
Senior Executive, Cyber Programs
Splunk Inc.;
Former Deputy Director, Cybersecurity
Research, Science & Technology
Directorate
US Department of Homeland Security
Ms. Paula Trimble
Senior Principal
Lewis-Burke Associates LLC
Mr. Christian Trotti
Assistant Director, Forward Defense,
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and
Security
Atlantic Council
Mr. Tip Underwood
Vice President, Department of
Homeland Security Programs
SAIC***
Mr. Stephen R. Viña
Senior Vice President and Senior
Advisory Specialist, Cyber Practice
Marsh LLC;
Former Chief Counsel for
Homeland Security
US Senate Committee on Homeland
Security and Governmental Affairs 
Mr. Peter Vincent
Global Security Consultant;
Former Principal Legal Advisor and
Senior Counselor for International Policy,
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
US Department of Homeland Security
Ms. Kemba Walden
Senior Counsel, Cyber & Democracy
Microsoft Corporation;
Former Attorney-Advisor, Office of
General Counsel
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. Robert Walker
Executive Director
Homeland Security Experts Group
Ms. Erin Waters
Communications Consultant; 
Former Advisor and Director of Strategic
Communication
US Department of Homeland Security
Mr. William F. Wechsler
Director, Rafik Hariri Center and Middle
East Programs
Atlantic Council;
Former Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Special Operations and Combatting
Terrorism & Former Deputy Assistant
Secretary for Counternarcotics and
Global Threats
US Department of Defense
Mr. Reza Zomorrodian
Homeland Security Policy Analyst
National Governors Association
*Atlantic Council Member **Atlantic Council Board Director ***Atlantic Council Corporate Member

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
50
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
The Future of DHS Project was made possible with generous contributions from our founding
partner SAIC and an additional generous contribution from CenturyLink. The Atlantic Council is
deeply grateful for their support in this effort.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Board of Directors
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
CHAIRMAN EMERITUS
Brent Scowcroft
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*Richard W. Edelman
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
*John J. Studzinski
TREASURER
*George Lund
SECRETARY
*Walter B. Slocombe
DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Odeh Aburdene
Todd Achilles
*Peter Ackerman
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Colleen Bell
Matthew C. Bernstein
*Rafic A. Bizri
Linden Blue
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
R. Nicholas Burns
*Richard R. Burt
Michael Calvey
James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
Ralph D. Crosby, Jr.
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Thomas R. Eldridge
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Courtney Geduldig
Robert S. Gelbard
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
*Amir A. Handjani
Katie Harbath
John D. Harris, II
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Amos Hochstein
*Karl V. Hopkins
Andrew Hove
Mary L. Howell
Ian Ihnatowycz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
Joia M. Johnson
Stephen R. Kappes
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Astri Kimball Van Dyke
Henry A. Kissinger
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Neil Masterson
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
H.R. McMaster
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
*Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Thomas R. Nides
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Hilda Ochoa-Brillembourg
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
*Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Carlos Pascual
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
W. DeVier Pierson
Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell McCormick
Robert Rangel
Thomas J. Ridge
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Rajiv Shah
Stephen Shapiro
Wendy Sherman
Kris Singh
Christopher Smith
James G. Stavridis
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Gine Wang-Reese
Ronald Weiser
Olin Wethington
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Colin L. Powell
Condoleezza Rice
George P. Shultz
Horst Teltschik
John W. Warner
William H. Webster
*Executive Committee
Members
List as of June 30, 2020

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Future of DHS Project: Key Findings and Recommendations
C4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and engagement in international
 affairs based on the central role of the Atlantic community in
 meeting today’s global challenges.
© 2020 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means without permission
in writing from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of brief
quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please
direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor, Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
