
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Lauren Speranza
A Strategic Concept for
Countering Russian and
Chinese Hybrid Threats

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security
The Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security works to develop sustainable, nonpartisan strategies to
address the most important security challenges facing the United States and the world. The center honors
General Brent Scowcroft’s legacy of service and embodies his ethos of nonpartisan commitment to the cause
of security, support for US leadership in cooperation with allies and partners, and dedication to the mentorship
of the next generation of leaders.
Transatlantic Security Initiative
The Scowcroft Center’s Transatlantic Security Initiative brings together top policymakers, government and
military officials, business leaders, and experts from Europe and North America to share insights, strengthen
cooperation, and develop innovative approaches to the key challenges facing NATO and the transatlantic
community.
This report was produced as part of the Transatlantic Security Initiative’s work focused on hybrid threats in
partnership with the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
ATLANTIC COUNCIL I
ISBN: 978-1-61977-103-1
Cover: World map by vecteezy.com
This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic Council Policy on Intellectual Independence. The authors
are solely responsible for its analysis and recommendations. The Atlantic Council and its donors do not determine, nor do
they necessarily endorse or advocate for, any of this report’s conclusions.
July 2020
A Strategic Concept for
Countering Russian and
Chinese Hybrid Threats
Lauren Speranza

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
II ATLANTIC COUNCIL

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
ATLANTIC COUNCIL III
Executive Summary 1
Introduction 2
Threat Environment 3
Current Efforts to Counter Hybrid Threats and Constraints 9
Building a Strategic Concept for Countering Hybrid Threats 11
Recommendations 14
Conclusion 19
About the Author 20
Table of Contents

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Iv ATLANTIC COUNCIL

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
ATLANTIC COUNCIL 1
T
ackling hybrid threats, particularly from state ac-
tors such as Russia and China, remains one of
the greatest challenges for the transatlantic com-
munity. Hybrid threats have gained more traction
among policymakers and publics across Europe and the
United States, especially in a world with CO vID-19. The
recent coronavirus pandemic has thrust hybrid activities
to the center of transatlantic debates. Both China and
Russia capitalized on the crisis to wage disinformation
campaigns against the West, while strategically delivering
aid to European countries in attempts to build good will
on the international stage. Y et, even as hybrid activities
have accelerated, limited progress has been achieved in
countering them or deterring competitors from using them.
Over the last five years, Euro-Atlantic nations and institu-
tions, such as NATO and the European Union (EU), have
taken important steps to respond to hybrid issues. But as
hybrid threats become more prominent in the future, pol-
icymakers must move toward a more coherent, effective,
and proactive strategy for countering Russian and Chinese
hybrid threats.
To develop such a transatlantic counter-hybrid strategy for
Russia and China, this paper argues that two major things
need to happen. First, transatlantic policymakers have
to build a common strategic concept to guide collective
thinking on hybrid threats. The paper offers five strategic
priorities that could form the basis of this strategic concept.
1) Redefine the conceptual framework for hybrid
threats.
2) Forge a common, in-depth understanding of the
impact of hybrid activities.
3) Articulate clear strategic goals for countering hybrid
threats.
4) Adopt a more proactive, campaign approach to
counter-hybrid.
5) Build clear parameters to support joint attribution
and action.
Second, transatlantic policymakers need to take a range of
practical actions in service of that strategic concept. The
paper concludes by recommending a series of constructive
steps—each corresponding with one of the strategic pri-
orities above—that NATO, the EU, and nations can take,
in cooperation with the private sector and civil society, to
enhance their counter-hybrid capabilities against Russia
and China.
To help redefine the conceptual framework for hybrid
threats
• selectively decouple relations with Russia and China
in specific sectors to discourage hybrid behavior; and
• create a new platform for cooperation between NATO,
the EU, their nations, and the private sector.
To help forge a common, in-depth understanding of the
impact of hybrid activities
• increase transparency and information sharing around
Russian and Chinese hybrid activities;
• stand up national hybrid fusion centers; and
• conduct hybrid campaign analysis.
To reinforce strategic goals for countering hybrid threats
• invest in civic education, media training, and civil
preparedness;
• produce key messages in different languages; and
• provide guidance to the private sector to support
counter-hybrid goals.
To support a more proactive, campaign approach to
counter-hybrid
• clarify counter-hybrid standard operating procedures
(SOPs);
• pair highly capable nations with less capable nations
to build counter-hybrid capacities;
• review resource allocation periodically to support the
most effective counter-hybrid capabilities; and
• create new legislation and keep it up to date.
To support joint attribution and action
• leverage emerging technologies, such as artificial in-
telligence; and
• conduct national interagency exercises based on real
hybrid scenarios.
Executive Summary

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
M
anaging hybrid threats remains one of the
greatest challenges for the transatlantic com-
munity. Hybrid threats have gained more trac-
tion and visibility in policy debates and news
headlines—and among publics across Europe and the
United States—in a world with COvID-19. The recent coro-
navirus pandemic has highlighted the transatlantic com-
munity’s vulnerabilities to a range of hybrid issues—from
manipulation of global supply chains to biowarfare to dis-
information. Y et, even as the transatlantic community has
witnessed these challenges, limited progress has been
achieved in effectively countering these threats. Euro-At-
lantic nations and institutions, such as NATO and the Eu-
ropean Union (EU), have certainly made important strides
to respond to hybrid issues. Collective approaches, how-
ever, have been reactive, falling short of deterring adver-
saries from using hybrid actions. Recognizing the many
constraints and challenging nature of hybrid activities, this
paper argues that the transatlantic community can, and
should, do more to enhance its counter-hybrid strategy.
While the term “hybrid” can be debated and defined in
many ways, this paper refers to hybrid as an approach that
blends conventional and unconventional, overt and covert,
kinetic and non-kinetic, and military and nonmilitary means
to undermine a target and achieve the perpetrator’s polit-
ical and strategic goals.
Hybrid threats can stem from many actors, but this analysis
focuses on hybrid threats primarily as a result of deliberate
and persistent actions by state actors, notably Russia and
China. Russian and Chinese hybrid activities involve a mix
of diplomatic, economic, security, information, and techno-
logical actions designed to quietly undermine democratic
Introduction
Medical supplies to be sent to Italy for the prevention of the novel coronavirus at a logistics center of the international airport in Hangzhou,
China on March 10, 2020. Photo: China Daily via REUTERS

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
3
states and institutions to Moscow’s or Beijing’s benefit
while avoiding a traditional conflict. These state-sponsored
hybrid activities are among the most pressing challenges
for the transatlantic community. This analysis conceptual-
izes hybrid activities in four categories: below-threshold
conflict or use of force (e.g., from kidnappings to assassi-
nations to bioweapons); cyber and related operational at-
tacks (e.g., on critical infrastructure); political subversion and
economic coercion; and information operations.1 The paper
that follows looks at these hybrid threats as they relate to
transatlantic countries, including the United States and the
members and closest partners of NATO and the EU.
Indeed, traditional security concerns, such as nuclear
weapons and conventional defense and deterrence, will
not go away for the transatlantic community. Y et, going for-
ward, transatlantic nations and institutions will increasingly
need to focus on hybrid and nontraditional threats too. 2
This is particularly underscored by the 2020 coronavirus
crisis, in which both Russia and China have played various
roles. Both China and Russia capitalized on the crisis to
wage disinformation campaigns against the West. They
promulgated conspiracy theories designed to sow fear
about America’s handling of the outbreak and to promote
the successes of their own authoritarian regimes. Moscow
and Beijing also strategically delivered aid and medical
supplies to European countries in attempts to build good
will and clout on the international stage. These issues can-
not be effectively addressed alone or in a vacuum, making
1 “Below-threshold” refers to the threshold of armed attack, e.g., NATO’s Article 5, the European Union’s Article 42.7, and the United Nations’
Article 51. See Franklin D. Kramer and Lauren Speranza, Meeting the Russian Hybrid Challenge: A Comprehensive Strategic Framework, Atlantic
Council, May 2017, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/meeting-the-russian-hybrid-challenge/.
2 For more on NATO’s role in these types of crises, see Lauren Speranza, “Six Reasons NATO’s Euro-Atlantic Disaster Response Coordination
Centre is Important for our Future Security,” New Atlanticist, April 7, 2020, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/six-reasons-
natos-euro-atlantic-disaster-response-coordination-centre-is-important-for-our-future-security/.
global cooperation and collective action–especially among
transatlantic allies—paramount. Even as transatlantic na-
tions and institutions shift priorities in the wake of the
coronavirus crisis, key counter-hybrid priorities, such as
building resilience, strengthening civil response capacities,
and investing in civic education, simultaneously serve pri-
orities for pandemic prevention and response. This is all
the more reason to prioritize the counter-hybrid agenda.
To that end, this paper outlines steps for transatlantic poli-
cymakers to move toward a more coherent, effective, and
proactive strategy for countering Russian and Chinese
hybrid threats. At its heart, the paper offers five strate-
gic priorities that could form the basis of a new strategic
concept to guide transatlantic thinking on hybrid threats.
It concludes with several practical recommendations that
nations and institutions should undertake in service of that
strategic concept.
Threat Environment
O
ver the past five years, hybrid activities target-
ing the Euro-Atlantic community have increased
in size, scope, and intensity. From growing for-
eign interference in US and European elections
to looming concerns of manipulation of fifth-generation
(5G) infrastructure, hybrid threats have increasingly cap-
tured the headlines and the attention of top policymakers.
Among transatlantic countries, there has also been a grow-
ing recognition that—in addition to Russia, whose hybrid
activities are well understood—China poses serious hybrid
challenges, albeit in somewhat different ways. This diversi-
fication of the threat environment requires a recalibration
of the transatlantic approach, based on an in-depth under-
standing of the motivations behind, the nature of, and the
similarities and differences between Russian and Chinese
hybrid activities.
Russian Hybrid Activities
For Russia, hybrid warfare is a set of means for it to roll
back the post-Cold War settlement and undermine the
predominantly US-led, rules-based international order to
regain clout as a major player on the global stage. The
Kremlin’s key objectives to that end include: dividing and
weakening NATO and the EU, both of which the Kremlin
sees as a threat; subverting pro-Western governments
and institutions; promoting pro-Russia policies; expanding
Russia’s sphere of influence (geographically, economically,
“ At its heart, the paper offers five
strategic priorities that could
form the basis of a new strategic
concept to guide transatlantic
thinking on hybrid threats.”

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
politically, etc.); and establishing a “moral equivalence” be-
tween Russia and the West. 3 Moreover, hybrid activities
help the Kremlin pursue these goals in a more effective
and realistic way. Its leaders recognize Russia cannot nec-
essarily counter or outright compete with the West militar-
ily, technologically, or economically. By employing hybrid
methods as part of an overarching strategy of intimidation,
however, the Kremlin can have significant influence over
international affairs.4
Russia’s hybrid toolkit is multi-level and often country spe-
cific, which has made it highly effective and difficult to
combat. In its most widely known example, Russia used
below-threshold force to illegally invade eastern Ukraine
and annex Crimea. The Kremlin has also used proxies and
privately contracted forces to influence the outcome of con-
flicts abroad, from Syria to Libya. Other examples of Russia’s
low-level uses of force include attempted assassinations of
pro-Western leaders and the use of deadly chemical attacks
to target political enemies on foreign soil. In terms of cyber
and operational activities, Russia has conducted reckless
and dangerous cyberattacks, infiltrated critical infrastruc-
ture in the United States, and manipulated gas pipelines,
electric grids, and financial systems in Eastern Europe and
beyond to increase its leverage abroad.
With respect to political subversion and economic coer-
cion, Russia has interfered in elections in the United States
and across Europe in attempts to divide transatlantic pop-
ulations and influence the outcomes toward candidates
the Kremlin views as favorable to Russia. Other tools and
tactics include: bribing officials in foreign countries; financ-
ing anti-European parties in Central and Eastern Europe to
promote pro-Russian narratives; and investing in strategic
sectors in foreign countries to maximize dependency on
Russia. On the information-warfare front, the Kremlin has
orchestrated widespread disinformation campaigns and
strategic hack-and-release efforts designed to sow doubt,
3 Some experts argue this strategy stems from valery Gerasimov’s New Generation Warfare doctrine of 2013, while others posit that the
Gerasimov doctrine was just a particularly compelling articulation of what Russia’s strategy has historically been. Regardless of the origin, it is
clear that this overarching set of ideas guides the Kremlin’s goals and tactics. For more, see General valery Gerasimov, “The value of Science
Is in the Foresight: New Challenges Demand Rethinking the Forms and Methods of Carrying Out Combat Operations,“ Voyenno Promyshlennyy
Kurier, February 26, 2013, http://vpknews.ru/articles/14632; and, for example, Keir Giles, “Russia’s ‘New’ Tools for Confronting the West:
Continuity and Innovation in Moscow’s Exercise of Power,” Chatham House, March 2016, https://www.chathamhouse.org/publication/russias-
new-tools-confronting-west.
4 For more on Russia’s hybrid activities, see, for example: Alina Polyakova, et al., The Kremlin’s Trojan Horses 2.0, Atlantic Council, November
15, 2017, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/the-kremlin-s-trojan-horses-2-0/; Heather Conley, et al., “The Kremlin
Playbook,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, October 13, 2016, https://www.csis.org/analysis/kremlin-playbook; and Kramer and
Speranza, “Meeting the Russian Hybrid Challenge.”
5 Anton Troianovsky, “Putin Endorses Brazen Remedy to Extend His Rule, Possibly for Life,” New York Times, March 10, 2020, https://www.nytimes.
com/2020/03/10/world/europe/putin-president-russia.html.
6 While the outbreak of COvID-19 could delay the nationwide vote, many Russia watchers agree the measure will pass. See Andrew Higgins,
“Russia’s Highest Court Opens Way for Putin to Rule Until 2036,” New York Times, March 16, 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/16/world/
europe/russia-putin-president-for-life.html
7 Anne Gearan, Steven Mufson, and Will Englund, “Trump Assures U.S. Oil Companies That They Will Get Federal Help to Offset Pandemic Effects
on Oil Prices,” Washington Post, April 3, 2020, https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-assures-us-oil-companies-will-get-federal-help-to-
offset-pandemic-effects-on-oil-prices/2020/04/03/5f0e7308-75dd-11ea-87da-77a8136c1a6d_story.html.
8 Chris Skaluba and Ian Brzezinski, Coronavirus and Transatlantic Security: Implications for Defense Planning, Atlantic Council, March 30, 2020,
https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/coronavirus-and-transatlantic-security-implications-for-defense-planning/.
create chaos, and sway public opinion in its favor on key
policy issues.
While Russian hybrid activities can be traced much further
back than these examples—including to the major cyber-
attacks in Estonia in 2007 and the Russo-Georgia conflict
in 2008—they have been steadily increasing since the
Kremlin’s illegal annexation of Crimea in 2014. Looking
ahead, several elements could impact the future course of
Russia’s hybrid actions. First are the constitutional changes
that Russian President vladimir Putin has pushed through
national courts to reset presidential term limits. 5 The re-
forms allow Putin to remain in power until 2036, or possibly
for life, pending a final national referendum.6 With his grip
on power soon to be cemented, Putin is likely to attempt
more aggressive hybrid actions, knowing the domestic po-
litical risks for him are low.
Another factor is the 2020 coronavirus pandemic, which
has triggered a global recession and a drastic decline in de-
mand for oil so critical to Russia’s energy-reliant economy.
In early 2020, Russia and Saudi Arabia, the world’s biggest
crude producers, failed to agree to mutual production cuts
in response to the crisis, fueling a price war that further hurt
Russia’s economy.7 Economic, public health, and social pres-
sures inside Russia could push the Kremlin to temporarily
scale back its ambitions in the short term. However, at the
same time, uncertainty and anxiety around the pandemic
could create more fertile conditions for Russia’s hybrid activ-
ities beyond its borders, especially as Euro-Atlantic govern-
ments take extraordinary domestic measures to respond.8
In the long term—even as the pandemic subsides, oil prices
rebound, and the global economy begins to recover—con-
ditions will remain difficult for Russia, whose economy has
suffered from stagnation and sanctions from the West. These
dynamics may lead Putin to be more assertive with hybrid
strategies abroad with the aim of appealing to nationalist sen-
timents at home in order to quell domestic political tensions.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
5
Further emboldening Putin is the lack of traditional US
leadership and pushback that has helped to keep Russia
in check. US President Donald Trump has instead tried
to appeal to Putin, describing his own policy as “getting
along with Russia” and reducing perceived or actual con-
sequences of hybrid actions against the United States.
Political allegations of the Trump campaign “colluding”
with Russia to affect US elections9 have further divided the
American public toward Russian aims, creating more fertile
ground for the Kremlin’s malign influence.10 Compounding
this is fraying transatlantic solidarity, whether the US-
Germany feud over defense spending or French President
Macron’s comments that NATO is “braindead.”11 These di-
visions not only constrain the West’s response to Russia’s
hybrid actions, but also expose cracks in the Alliance that
Putin is all too eager to exploit.
9 See “The Russia Investigation,” CNN, accessed April 2020, https://www.cnn.com/specials/politics/trump-russia-ties.
10 Andrew Weiss, “Trump’s Confused Russia Policy Is a Boon for Putin,” Politico, June 25, 2019, https://www.politico.com/magazine/
story/2019/06/25/trump-putin-russia-weiss-227205.
11 “NATO Alliance Experiencing Brain Death, Says Macron,” BBC, November 7, 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-50335257.
Together, these factors indicate that as long as Putin re-
mains in power, the Kremlin will likely continue escalating
hybrid activities, short of an all-out war with NATO, to push
boundaries and test what is acceptable going forward. In
the relative near term, the transatlantic community must
plan according to Russia’s current trajectory on hybrid is-
sues, which demands a more proactive and widespread
approach.
Chinese Hybrid Activities
Similar to Russia, China seeks a world that is less domi-
nated by the US-led international system and gives China
more influence over global affairs. However, given its his-
tory, governance model, geopolitical position, and relations
with the transatlantic community, China has a different
Ukrainian gas pipeline, a type of critical infrastructure manipulated by Russia through its hybrid activities. Photo: Dmytro Glazkov/World Bank

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
worldview and strategic endgame. All Chinese policies are
underpinned by the need to keep the Chinese Communist
Party (CCP) in power. Beyond that, several long-standing
Chinese narratives impact China’s foreign policy. One
such narrative relates to the “hundred years of humilia-
tion” China experienced as its once-central global role was
diminished by a series of Western incursions in the 1800s.12
The CCP has leveraged this mentality, combined with the
filial piety between the Chinese state and its people, to
keep China stable and unified against external territorial,
economic, political, and cultural threats.13 With another core
principle of “history as destiny,” China believes it will regain
its stature as a powerful, respected actor in the world and a
benevolent overseer of its broader region.14 Described by
Chinese President Xi Jinping as the “Chinese Dream,” this
notion underpins many of the government’s maneuvers to
expand its international influence and reach. At the same
time, China has traditionally preserved a culture of peace-
ful coexistence, indicating it does not seek aggressive ex-
pansion or view foreign interference in the same way as
other powers. Y et Chinese officials have manipulated this
narrative to support China “defending against threats” to
its perceived regional and global role, which the Chinese
government defines at its discretion. 15 Other factors, such
as the unique role and leadership style of President Xi
Jinping and China’s growing material capabilities, have
also created new dynamics suggesting China has shifted
toward a much more assertive role, as evidenced by its
hostile actions in the South China Sea, for example.16
In light of this, many experts argue that China seeks to dis-
place, or at least gradually adapt, the current international
system in order to return to its desired role.17 Y et, such ad-
aptation must be understood with nuance. Indeed, China
has benefitted from many of the current order’s features,
such as Western capitalism, the Euro-Atlantic trade order,
and the US guarantee of free and secure trade routes.
Rather than disrupting or entirely displacing those aspects,
12 Matt Schiavenza, “How Humiliation Drove Modern Chinese History,” Atlantic, October 25, 2013, https://www.theatlantic.com/china/
archive/2013/10/how-humiliation-drove-modern-chinese-history/280878/.
13 Merriden varrall, “Chinese Worldviews and China’s Foreign Policy,” Lowy Institute for Foreign Policy, November 2015, https://www.lowyinstitute.
org/sites/default/files/chinese-worldviews-chinas-foreign-policy_0.pdf.
14 Ibid.
15 There is debate over why China has recently become more assertive in its defense against threats to its international claims and perceived
global role. For more, see varrall, “Chinese Worldviews and China’s Foreign Policy”; and Ankit Panda, “Reflecting on China’s Five Principles, 60
Y ears Later,” Diplomat, June 26, 2014, https://thediplomat.com/2014/06/reflecting-on-chinas-five-principles-60-years-later/.
16 “Xi Jinping and the ‘Chinese Dream,’” DW, May 7, 2018, https://www.dw.com/en/xi-jinping-and-the-chinese-dream/a-43685630. For more on
China’s South China Sea hybrid activities, see Sergio Miracola, “Chinese Hybrid Warfare,” Italian Institute for International Political Studies,
December 2018, https://www.ispionline.it/en/pubblicazione/chinese-hybrid-warfare-21853.
17 For example, see Weizhen Tan, “Why China’s Rise May Call for ‘a New World Order,’” CNBC, April 25, 2019, https://www.cnbc.com/2019/04/25/
why-chinas-rise-may-call-for-a-new-world-order.html.
18 “EU-China: A Strategic Outlook,” Joint Communication To The European Parliament, The European Council And The Council, European
Commission, March 12, 2019, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/communication-eu-china-a-strategic-outlook.pdf.
19 There is some debate about whether or not this is China’s goal to deliberately undermine transatlantic institutions. In some cases, China has
shown it prefers to work with the EU, for instance on trade issues and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action for Iran. Others argue China only
does this out of necessity and would prefer these institutions be replaced with its own China-dominated structures.
China wants to manipulate them to fuel its own rise as a
great power. Much of China’s strategy to do so involves
working with willing nations bilaterally where opportunities
for investment and influence exist. This is a necessary in
Europe, where shared interests are ample, but where a
mismatch of values and political models limits the ceiling
for cooperation. Many European democracies desperate
for investment from Beijing are only willing to cooperate
to a certain extent with communist China. The EU has de-
scribed it as follows.
“There is a growing appreciation in Europe that the
balance of challenges and opportunities presented
by China has shifted…China is, simultaneously, in
different policy areas, a cooperation partner with
whom the EU has closely aligned objectives, a ne-
gotiating partner with whom the EU needs to find a
balance of interests, an economic competitor in the
pursuit of technological leadership, and a systemic
rival promoting alternative models of governance.”18
This realization and, subsequently, more restrictive poli-
cies toward China are increasingly being adopted by Euro-
Atlantic countries and institutions. Because China prefers
to work through mechanisms in which it has more control,
this has driven it to create its own frameworks for engage-
ment in Europe and Eurasia, supported by its growing eco-
nomic and military might. As a result, China’s moves to gain
new political and economic partners have begun to under-
mine EU, NATO, and transatlantic efforts.19 This has led to
the rise of China’s own kind of hybrid activities.
China’s hybrid toolkit in Europe largely focuses on political
and economic coercion to advance its objectives. Chinese
tools include: leveraging unequal trade relationships with
foreign countries to secure favorable terms for China; mak-
ing large foreign direct investments in strategic sectors,
prioritizing investments that give China access to European

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
7
political elites; and launching massive critical infrastructure
projects at cheap rates in foreign countries that connect
China to European markets. These projects overtly favor
Chinese workers and industry and give China control over
operating the infrastructure, posing significant security and
geopolitical risks for the receiving country. China has also
become known for its use of “debt-trap diplomacy,” which
typically involves giving large loans to vulnerable countries
to support these big projects, anticipating their inability to
fulfill payment obligations. When the country defaults on
debt, China subsequently assumes control of the projects,
providing significant leverage beyond its borders. Much of
this is facilitated through China’s self-promoting political
frameworks and initiatives such as 17+1 and the Belt and
Road Initiative (BRI).20 By focusing on pragmatic coopera-
tion on shared challenges and interests, such as economic
development, China uses these tools to build relationships
and further integrate itself with transatlantic countries, de-
spite differences on broader political issues. The Chinese
government then uses those relationships to detract from
20 See Cooperation of Central and Eastern European countries and China, accessed March 24, 2020, http://www.china-ceec.org/eng/; “BRI
Factsheets,” Belt and Road Initiative, accessed March 24, 2020, https://www.beltroad-initiative.com/factsheets/.
the criticism against its delinquency in other international
obligations (e.g., human rights, law of the sea), and to ma-
nipulate political decision-making inside institutions such
as the EU.
China has also conducted a range of operational and cyber
hybrid activities, which have increased as political and
trade tensions have escalated between the United States
and China. This has included the cyber-enabled theft of US
and European intellectual property for China’s commercial
and technological advantage. Using coordinated hacking
and espionage efforts, China has sponsored numerous
operations against defense contractors and producers
of civilian and military technologies, such as aerospace,
semiconductors, and information technology, which China
views as critical to future innovation. China reinforces
these efforts by using unfair practices related to industrial
policy, such as forced technology transfer, which mandates
that US and European companies share their technology
to gain access to Chinese markets. Many academics have
Chinese shipping firm COSCO purchased a majority stake in Greece’s Port of Piraeus (shown above), which China has begun to rapidly
develop as a key node in its Belt and Road Initiative. China plans to make Piraeus the largest commercial harbor on the Mediterranean,
further connecting China to European, and eventually African, markets. Photo: Shutterstock/Aerial-motion

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
also been subject to Chinese attempts at appropriating
their work or intellectual property.
When it comes to information operations, China has used
its Confucius Institutes across Europe and the United
States to propagate Chinese language, culture, and influ-
ence.21 Beyond this, China uses targeted messengers—
whether diplomats in embassies around the world or
Chinese students studying abroad in Europe or the United
States—to promote misleading Chinese narratives in local,
national, and social media. China also uses these organiza-
tions and people as vehicles to invest in media companies
and partnerships, in hopes that they will favor and share
Chinese content, which often oversimplifies complex is-
sues, glorifies China, and misrepresents the truth.
Going forward, China’s hybrid activities will be shaped by a
number of factors. First among these will be the aftermath
of the coronavirus pandemic. The Chinese government’s
management of the outbreak has sparked sharp interna-
tional criticism ranging from lack of transparency to deliber-
ate manipulation of the crisis for its own geopolitical gain.22
Some argue that China’s actions and geopolitical reposi-
tioning around the coronavirus, including its suppression of
key outbreak data and propaganda initiatives to boost its
authoritarian regime as a model to respond to the crisis, are
a prime example of its hybrid activities at work.23 Coupled
with massive economic losses, this could limit China’s polit-
ical and economic ability to expand its influence in Europe
and abroad in the short term. In the longer term, however,
China’s growth is expected to rebound, fueling renewed po-
litical and economic forays into the global arena. Moreover,
some experts argue that the shocks from the pandemic cri-
sis will hit democracies and the US-led global system harder
than communist China, allowing it to emerge as a more in-
fluential world power than before.24
Another major factor that could affect China’s course
is the transatlantic community’s response to its hybrid
21 Pratik Jakhar, “Confucius Institutes: The Growth of China’s Controversial Cultural Branch,” BBC, September 7, 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/
world-asia-china-49511231.
22 Rebeccah Heinrichs, “Five Lies China is Telling About Coronavirus,” Washington Examiner, April 19, 2020, https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/
opinion/five-lies-china-is-telling-about-coronavirus.
23 Tobin Harshaw, “Coronavirus Response Is a Weapon in China’s Brand of War,” Bloomberg, March 28, 2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/
articles/2020-03-28/coronavirus-response-is-a-weapon-in-china-s-brand-of-war.
24 For more on this, see Hal Brands, “Coronavirus Is China’s Chance to Weaken the Liberal Order,” Bloomberg, March 16, 2020, https://www.
bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2020-03-17/coronavirus-is-making-china-s-model-look-better-and-better; and Mira Rapp-Hooper, “China,
America, and the International Order After the Pandemic,” War on the Rocks, March 24, 2020, https://warontherocks.com/2020/03/china-
america-and-the-international-order-after-the-pandemic/.
25 For NATO and the EU’s policies on China, see: “NATO Recognizes China ‘Challenges’ for the First Time,” DW, December 3, 2019, https://www.
dw.com/en/nato-recognizes-china-challenges-for-the-first-time/a-51519351; and “EU Strategy on China,” European Union, June 2016, http://data.
consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-11252-2016-INIT/en/pdf. For samples of national China strategies, see “Approach to Matters Relating to
China,” Government of Sweden, September 26, 2019, https://www.government.se/4adb19/contentassets/e597d50630fa4eaba140d28fb252c29f/
government-communication-approach-to-matters-relating-to-china.pdf; and “National Security Strategy of the United States of America,” White
House, December 18, 2017, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905.pdf.
actions. Thus far, China’s hybrid activities have been
particularly challenging to counter because some of the
actions are currently legitimate or legal, even if undesir-
able for transatlantic nations. Additionally, as highlighted
by the EU’s strategic outlook referenced above, many of
these nations, including the United States, rely on China
as a critical trading partner, which makes some level of
pragmatic cooperation essential. For European nations,
especially those struggling financially and in dire need
of investments and modernization, few alternatives can
compete with China’s infrastructure and loan offers. All of
this has constrained a collective response. Nevertheless,
as evidenced by new strategic documents released by
NATO, the EU, and nations, concerns over China’s hybrid
activities are growing, alongside the political will to take
action.25 In addition to recent worries about the corona-
virus, another major concern involves Chinese-led infra-
structure projects in Europe—from 5G telecommunications
networks and undersea cables to electric grids, power
plants, and nuclear projects—that utilize technology built
by Chinese state-run or subsidized companies. There is a
growing belief among transatlantic policymakers that the
Chinese government could mandate backdoor access to
this infrastructure, which it could in turn manipulate for
espionage or other political purposes. As unity around this
issue grows, China could be forced to change some of
its behavior, but only if the transatlantic community can
respond effectively.
At the same time, China will seek to utilize its influence in
countries like Italy and Hungary to undermine European
consensus on these issues. To stay ahead of the curve,
the transatlantic community needs a more proactive and
comprehensive counter-hybrid approach for China.
Since Russian and Chinese hybrid activities are directly
linked to their worldviews and grand strategies, limiting
them, let alone causing fundamental behavioral change,
is difficult. Because Russian and Chinese hybrid activities

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
9
come with different motivations, tactics, and effects, de-
veloping an overarching counter-hybrid strategy is all the
more challenging. Complicating this further is the poten-
tial for pragmatic hybrid cooperation between Russia and
China against the transatlantic community. Moscow and
Beijing have already sought to harmonize their economic
and military clout in pursuit of shared interests—for ex-
ample by using arms sales and joint military exercises to
expand their influence in Africa. Something similar could
happen in Europe. This difficult threat environment makes
a proactive and unified transatlantic approach to hybrid
threats increasingly important.
T
he recognition of Russian and Chinese hybrid ac-
tions, and the detrimental impacts they can have
on transatlantic societies, has prompted collective
security institutions (primarily NATO and the EU)
and nations to revisit their counter-hybrid approaches. As
a result, significant progress has been made over the last
five years.
At the institutional level, in 2016, NATO and the EU signed
a historic joint declaration to enhance their cooperation de-
spite long-term political and bureaucratic obstacles.26 This
collective effort produced seventy-four concrete proposals
for joint action, twenty of which focused on hybrid, signaling
a new level of political ambition in tackling this challenge.
As part of this, NATO and the EU also jointly supported the
establishment of a unique European Center of Excellence
for Countering Hybrid Threats, housed in Helsinki, which is
structurally independent of the institutions and supported
by twenty-seven transatlantic nations.27
Beyond this cooperation, each institution has taken in-
dividual measures to strengthen its counter-hybrid ap-
proaches. The EU, for its part, created a Joint Framework
on Countering Hybrid Threats to clarify its mandate to act.28
Structurally, it also created a hybrid fusion cell with national
contact points across member states, to enhance intelli-
gence gathering and situational awareness. Alongside this,
26 “Joint Declaration on EU-NATO Cooperation,” NATO, updated July 2018, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/official_texts_156626.htm.
27 Participation in the center is open to EU member states and NATO allies, and NATO and the EU as institutions actively participate in center
activities. For more, see “What is Hybrid CoE?” Hybrid Centre of Excellence,” CoE: https://www.hybridcoe.fi/what-is-hybridcoe/.
28 “EU Joint Framework for Countering Hybrid Threats,” European Commission, April 6, 2016, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52016JC0018.
29 “Code of Conduct on Disinformation,” European Commission, September 26, 2018, https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/code-
practice-disinformation.
30 NATO, press release, “Brussels Summit Declaration,” July 11, 2018, paragraph 3, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/official_texts_156624.htm.
31 In 2019, these teams were deployed for the first time to Montenegro to provide support around national elections. Slobodan Lekic, “First NATO
Counter-Hybrid Warfare Team to Deploy to Montenegro,” Stars and Stripes, November 8, 2019, https://www.stripes.com/news/first-nato-counter-
hybrid-warfare-team-to-deploy-to-montenegro-1.606562.
32 It is worth noting that the CMXs are “coordinated and parallel” rather than truly joint; this means NATO and the EU alternate leadership each
year, and do not truly coordinate as they would have to in reality to leverage their different capabilities. Due to political sensitivities and the fear
that a difficult hybrid scenario could derail these public-facing large-scale exercises and undermine deterrence, they do not test real scenarios,
which limits policymakers’ abilities to identify weaknesses and realistically prepare for the future.
it stood up functional initiatives, such as the East StratCom
Task Force and its EU vs. Disinfo platform designed to
respond to Russian disinformation campaigns against
Europe. In a key legislative move, the EU also adopted a
Code of Practice on Disinformation, a set of self-regula-
tory standards agreed to by nations, online platforms, so-
cial networks, and the advertising industry to address the
spread of online disinformation and fake news.29
NATO, in a parallel effort to reinforce its mandate, pub-
lished important language in a summit communique em-
powering NATO “to assist an Ally at any stage of a hybrid
campaign.”30 It also made structural adaptations, including
the creation of a Hybrid Analysis branch to enhance shared
situational awareness. Functionally, the Alliance also es-
tablished Counter-Hybrid Support Teams (CHSTs), which
provide “fly-away” teams that can deploy to nations to help
build resilience against hybrid threats.31 To test these new
structures and capabilities, NATO and the EU have led an-
nual coordinated and parallel crisis-management exercises
(CMXs), parts of which focus on hybrid.32
In addition to driving these actions inside NATO and the
EU, transatlantic countries have taken steps at the na-
tional level to enhance their own ability to counter hybrid
threats. Many nations have begun working hybrid issues
into their national defense strategies and plans. Sweden
Current Efforts to Counter Hybrid Threats
and Constraints

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
and Finland, for example, have also reinvested in their
total defense and comprehensive security concepts,
which involve all aspects of their societies and govern-
ments in countering hybrid issues. Some nations have also
made important structural adaptations to bring together
key capabilities for functional aspects of hybrid. For in-
stance, the United Kingdom and Lithuania stood up cen-
tralized national cybersecurity centers. The United States
Department of State also launched its Global Engagement
Center to counter foreign disinformation campaigns aimed
at the United States and its allies and partners. 33 The US
Congress has introduced proposals that advocate for
the creation of new structures, such as a Foreign Malign
Influence Response Center and a Social Media Data and
Threat Analysis Center, along with seed funding to support
more coherent interagency counter-hybrid efforts. Other
key national legislative initiatives have taken the form of
sanctions, which the United States, Canada, and nations of
the EU have collectively imposed on Russia, for example, in
response to its annexation of Crimea and hybrid activities
in eastern Ukraine. New US legislative proposals, including
33 See “Global Engagement Center,” United States Department of State, accessed April 10, 2020, https://2009-2017.state.gov/r/gec//index.htm.
the Defending American Security from Kremlin Aggression
(DASKA) Act and the Defending Elections against Trolls
from Enemy Regimes (DETER) Act, aim to address a wider
scope of Russia’s hybrid activities.
Indeed, all of these efforts, among others, have helped
transatlantic policymakers and publics better understand
hybrid threats, build new tools to combat them, and de-
velop the legal frameworks and mandates to take action,
especially at the tactical level. Y et, even these efforts have
failed to deter Russia and China from using hybrid activ-
ities. Despite the utility of many of these transatlantic ef-
forts, the whole is less than the sum of its parts for three
overarching reasons.
First is the lack of understanding. Transatlantic govern-
ments have each compiled different threat assessments
based on their individual experiences with hybrid ac-
tivities, which has complicated the formation of a com-
mon understanding of hybrid threats. Due to a lack of
integrated analytical capabilities, information-sharing
The Hybrid CoE launching a playbook for deterring hybrid threats at an event in March 2020. Photo: Hybrid CoE

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
11
obstacles, and sensitivities around nations revealing their
vulnerabilities, the transatlantic community has yet to de-
velop a full understanding of the impacts of hybrid ac-
tivities and how they connect across contexts. Relatedly,
nations and institutions often hesitate to use real-world
scenarios when exercising responses to hybrid threats
out of fear of publicly failing to navigate them. Opting for
imagined scenarios, which often lack sufficient nuances
and complexities, inhibits their ability to identify shortfalls
and learn which approaches work. All of this has severely
limited the effectiveness of transatlantic counter-hybrid
efforts thus far.
Second is the lack of sufficient resources. On the whole,
transatlantic counter-hybrid efforts remain far too under-re-
sourced in terms of budgets and appropriate personnel.
For example, the EU’s East StratCom Task Force has a ded-
icated budget of just three million euros with only sixteen
staff to cover counter-disinformation efforts across the en-
tire EU.34 Similarly, NATO’s quick-response CHSTs are not
resourced to be standing forces, so they require significant
time to recruit required expertise (think of white-hat hack-
ers, as opposed to one of NATO’s many policy experts), let
alone form and deploy. Even when counter-hybrid efforts
are well-funded in accordance with stated policy, complex
governmental and institutional budget requirements often
prevent funds from flowing to specific places where they
are needed most. Insufficient resourcing limits the scope
of these efforts and their larger strategic effect. In the face
of widespread, pervasive, and diverse hybrid activities, this
is a huge obstacle.
Third is the lack of coordination on the national and in-
ternational levels. Cross-cutting hybrid threats often touch
34 “Questions and Answers about the East StratCom Task Force,” European Union, 2018, https://eeas.europa.eu/headquarters/headquarters-
homepage/2116/-questions-and-answers-about-the-east-stratcom-task-force_en.
numerous parts of governments, requiring tireless coordi-
nation among various agencies on everything from intelli-
gence to responses. The national interagency process in
most countries also lacks adequate involvement from civil
society and the private sector when it comes to counter-hy-
brid efforts. If not effective at the national level, coordina-
tion at the international level is more difficult for the thirty
different countries inside NATO or the EU. Inter-institutional
cooperation between NATO and the EU becomes almost
impossible then, especially given long-standing political
and bureaucratic obstacles plaguing their relations. This
forces nearly all coordination to be informal, relying on
pragmatic personalities and creative solutions among of-
ficials to achieve results. On top of everything, there is no
single platform to convene relevant authorities from NATO,
the EU, their nations, the private sector, and civil society to
coordinate. As a result, transatlantic counter-hybrid efforts
have remained largely disjointed, producing a patchwork
effect.
In light of this, next-level actions are needed to address
the knowledge, resource, and coordination gaps outlined
above. An enhanced approach is required to meaningfully
deter and limit Russia’s and China’s further use of hybrid
actions. In the wake of the coronavirus crisis, the need
for NATO and EU nations to focus on domestic political,
health, and economic agendas will make coordination on
hybrid issues more difficult. At the same time, the crisis un-
derscores that hybrid issues—including those around pan-
demics—cannot be solved alone. This provides a stronger
impetus for cooperation among core transatlantic allies.
What is needed now is a much more comprehensive, co-
herent, and forward-leaning transatlantic strategy for coun-
tering Russian and Chinese hybrid threats.
Building a Strategic Concept for Countering
Hybrid Threats
T
o develop such a transatlantic counter-hybrid
strategy for Russia and China, two major things
need to happen. First, transatlantic policymakers
have to build a common strategic concept to guide
collective thinking on hybrid threats. Second, transatlan-
tic policymakers need to take a range of practical actions
in service of that strategic concept. The remainder of this
paper seeks to guide policymakers toward those ends.
Outlined below are five strategic priorities which, if ad-
dressed together, could form the basis of a new transatlan-
tic strategic concept for countering Russian and Chinese
hybrid threats.
1) Redefine the conceptual framework for hybrid threats.
Before outlining a counter-hybrid strategy, transatlan-
tic policymakers should reconceptualize how they think

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
12
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
about hybrid threats. As a first step, this requires an ac-
knowledgement that hybrid actions are best understood
in the full spectrum of international relations, rather than
distinctly within the scope of armed attack. In other words,
hybrid activities should be viewed as part of broader day-
to-day competition with Russia and China, as opposed
to conflict or war. As underscored above, Russian and
Chinese hybrid activities combine legitimate, undesir-
able, and illegal actions with those that could be consid-
ered more traditional military attacks. Because Russia and
China use these actions without the intention of going to
full-scale war with their targets—but, rather, to avoid it and
intentionally blur the line between peace and conflict—
the spectrum of conflict is only useful up to a point as a
framework for guiding interpretations of hybrid actions
and possible responses.
Relatedly, there is a conceptual debate within policy com-
munities over whether “deterrence,” which traditionally
stems from nuclear and conventional contexts, applies to
hybrid threats in the same way. One school of thought,
which is supported in this paper’s analysis, argues that
deterrence typically refers to preventing conflict from oc-
curring in the first place, whereas with hybrid, the conflict
is under way and a perpetual activity. Given that the threat
environment is not likely to reduce to “zero” in the hybrid
space, this line of thinking asserts that conventional wis-
dom and assumptions related to deterrence can be mis-
leading. In this vein, it is also difficult to apply deterrence,
which tends to be actor-centric, against irregular groups or
social forces that are employed throughout hybrid activi-
ties. Even when Russia or China are behind a particular hy-
brid operation, they strive to maintain plausible deniability,
making attribution challenging. In reconceptualizing how
to change an adversary or competitor’s behavior or calcu-
lations with respect to hybrid, it is perhaps more useful to
refer to dissuasion instead of deterrence. In other words,
how can transatlantic nations dissuade Russia or China
from using additional or more intense hybrid actions in the
future, or persuade them to reduce current actions? This
is not just a rhetorical adjustment; it also challenges the
way transatlantic policymakers think about escalation and
shaping norms, which has significant implications for any
counter-hybrid strategy.
Another school of thought argues that deterrence can be
used as a framework for influencing a state actor’s antago-
nistic hybrid behavior. Under this paradigm, persuasion and
dissuasion fall lower on the traditional escalation ladder
of state-to-state relations and cannot replace deterrence.
Some in this camp use the term “modern deterrence” for
hybrid threats, but only with a focus on building resilience
35 See vytautas Kersanskas, “Deterrence: Proposing a More Strategic Approach to Countering Hybrid Threats,” Hybrid Centre of Excellence, March
2020, https://www.hybridcoe.fi/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Deterrence.pdf.
(the hybrid equivalent of deterrence by denial). Y et, this
paper argues that approach does not go far enough to suf-
ficiently contain, counter, or stem the hybrid threats facing
the transatlantic community.
Despite these differences, officials and thought leaders
should work toward an interim consensus that traditional
deterrence can at least be adapted for the hybrid context
to enable short-term policymaking. The Hybrid CoE’s re-
cent report, “Deterrence – Proposing a more strategic
approach to countering hybrid threats,” makes a valuable
contribution to this debate toward that end. 35 Going for-
ward, it will be important for transatlantic policymakers to
align their thinking on this issue as much as possible to
facilitate coherent counter-hybrid efforts.
2) Forge a common, in-depth understanding of the
impact of hybrid activities. There is a pressing need
to further investigate the impact of hybrid activities on
transatlantic societies in order to understand how best
to counter them. Across the policy, civil-society, and ac-
ademic ether, there is indeed a great deal of description
of the hybrid set of issues, including the actors, tools, and
examples of actions. But there is not yet a comprehen-
sive understanding of the follow-on effects of these ac-
tivities on both the target and the adversaries, how they
are connected, and what they have actually achieved.
Nor is any such understanding shared across countries.
For example, to what extent has Russian disinformation
actually shaped views toward NATO and the EU in the
populations of the western Balkans? As another example,
if Russia shuts down a gas pipeline to Ukraine, what does
that mean for the economy in Slovakia or Germany in the
short and long terms? Understanding these questions will
be key to designing a strategy that reduces the impact
of hybrid activities and keeps transatlantic societies more
resilient and secure.
3) Articulate clear strategic goals for countering hybrid
threats. The transatlantic community needs to clearly de-
fine its strategic goals and desired end state vis-à-vis hy-
brid threats. In other words, what does it want to achieve
in countering hybrid activities, and what is realistic? This
is not yet clearly defined in most national or institutional
plans, using common language. While preventing or elimi-
nating all hybrid activities by Russia and China is not feasi-
ble, these overarching goals could be broad (for instance,
a Russia whose hybrid actions are more limited to non-EU
and non-NATO nations, or a China who generally plays by
the international rules when it comes to trade and intellec-
tual property laws). To supplement those broad goals, key
objectives could be more specific—for example, limiting

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
13
foreign direct investment in strategic sectors to no more
than 10 percent in all transatlantic countries. Transatlantic
policymakers need to consult on these goals, announce
them, and codify them in unclassified text to the degree
possible. Outlining these aims will be critical to building an
effective counter-hybrid strategy.
4) Adopt a more proactive campaign approach to count-
er-hybrid. To meet the hybrid challenges of today and to-
morrow, the transatlantic community must move toward
a more proactive campaign approach. Thus far, many of
the steps undertaken by NATO, the EU, and nations have
been largely reactive in response to Russian and Chinese
actions against the transatlantic community. But simply
reacting and building resilience against those threats is
insufficient. Policymakers need to recognize that Russia
and China are utilizing widespread, targeted campaign
approaches that require more forward-leaning campaign
responses. In that spirit, the transatlantic community
should think about how it can create insurmountable ob-
stacles for its adversaries and competitors in their hybrid
pursuits. How can it force them to change their behavior
against their key objectives in a sustained and long-term
way? In practical terms, US Cyber Command’s concepts
of persistent engagement and defend forward provide
good examples of how nations can adopt a more proac-
tive campaign approach in the cyber domain, but more
thought should be dedicated to how these concepts can
be applied across the four categories of hybrid activities
outlined at the beginning of this paper.36
To implement such an approach, policymakers need to
have a serious discussion about whether and how the
transatlantic community ought to set up its counteroffen-
sive—a controversial notion in itself. Given political sensi-
tivities and the defensive nature of the Alliance, NATO is
likely the wrong vehicle to orchestrate a counteroffensive;
instead, these efforts could be undertaken at the national
level, in a coordinated manner. Still, NATO can certainly re-
main the primary platform for discussions and consultations
to facilitate that coordination. Even if offensive hybrid is a
controversial concept, allies should agree that building a
better picture of an adversary’s weaknesses is worthwhile.
5) Build clear parameters to support joint attribu-
tion and action. To support a more proactive strategy,
36 For more, see James Miller and Neal Pollard, “Persistent Engagement, Agreed Competition, and Deterrence in Cyberspace,” Lawfare Blog, April
30, 2019, https://www.lawfareblog.com/persistent-engagement-agreed-competition-and-deterrence-cyberspace.
37 Frank Kramer and Lauren Speranza, NATO Priorities After the Brussels Summit, Atlantic Council, November 2018, 14, https://www.atlanticcouncil.
org/in-depth-research-reports/report/nato-priorities-after-the-brussels-summit/.
38 Attribution is likely one such parameter in most cases.
39 For more on this concept, see, for instance, Catherine Lotrionte, “Reconsidering the Consequences for State-Sponsored Hostile Cyber
Operations Under International Law,” Cyber Defense Review 3, 2 (2018), https://cyberdefensereview.army.mil/Portals/6/Documents/CDR%20
Journal%20Articles/CDR_v3N2_ReconsideringConsequences_LOTRIONTE.pdf?ver=2018-09-05-084840-807. For some examples of such
response options, see Lyle J. Morris, et al., “Gaining Competitive Advantage in the Gray Zone,” RAND, 2019, https://www.rand.org/pubs/
research_reports/RR2942.html.
transatlantic policymakers need to build clearer guide-
lines to establish joint attribution and, if certain parame-
ters are met, enable joint action. As mentioned above, the
very nature of hybrid activities makes attribution difficult.
Without attribution, it is even more difficult to catalyze
action unilaterally, let alone multilaterally. In this regard,
it would be useful for NATO and the EU to start outlining
shared preconditions to facilitate collective attribution in
complex hybrid scenarios. More specifically, what types of
things need to be proven, by whom, and to what degree,
in order for NATO, the EU, or a group of nations to attri-
bute different kinds of hybrid activities? While criteria will
obviously vary on a case-by-case basis, laying out these
types of requirements ahead of time, and socializing them
among policymakers and advisors, helps to build a more
coherent understanding and lays the groundwork for
more timely and effective actions.
When it comes to possible joint actions, NATO, the EU,
and the Hybrid CoE in Helsinki have all contributed to
building joint “playbooks” of potential responses to hybrid
actions. While these are extremely useful efforts, most of
the proposed options are indeed responsive and reac-
tive. Beyond sanctions, many of these actions, in practice,
have failed to impose costs sufficient enough to change
Russian or Chinese behavior. As outlined in a previous
Atlantic Council paper, the legal framework surrounding
hybrid threats—informed by customary international law
and treaty law, as well as the law of countermeasures,
pleas of necessity, and the norm of non-intervention—pro-
vides the basis for more assertive defensive and offen-
sive actions, provided certain conditions are met. 37 What
is needed is a clearer articulation of those conditions,
analogous to those suggested above for attribution. This
would help build a shared sense of what parameters must
be met in hybrid scenarios to enable joint action across
NATO, the EU, and nations. 38 From there, more preemp-
tive, forward-leaning countermeasures and “actions of
necessity” can be laid out in a robust menu of options. 39
Given the collective nature and impact of hybrid threats
across the transatlantic community, these options should
leverage NATO’s Article 5 (collective defense) and Article
3 (resilience) clauses, and the EU’s Article 42.7 (mutual
defense) clause, to give these institutions a clear mandate
to use their many counter-hybrid tools in a more coordi-
nated, unified, and powerful way.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
14
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
I
n support of the strategic concept outlined above, there
are several practical steps articulated below that Euro-
Atlantic nations and institutions can take in the short
term. While many of these recommendations address
several of the considerations above, each is presented
here in correspondence with a particular strategic priority.
The recommendations lay out specific suggestions for how
to organize at the national and international levels, offer
ideas to enhance specific counter-hybrid capabilities, and
highlight priority areas and new initiatives deserving more
attention and resources.
In the short term, the coronavirus crisis will, of course, af-
fect priorities for transatlantic nations and institutions, mak-
ing it challenging to focus on a full range of counter-hybrid
actions. Nevertheless, key counter-hybrid priorities, such
as building resilience, strengthening civil response ca-
pacities, and investing in civic education, simultaneously
serve priorities for pandemic prevention and response and
should be integrated and funded as such.
To help redefine the conceptual framework for
hybrid threats:
Selectively decouple relations with Russia and China in
specific sectors to discourage hybrid behavior. National
governments should selectively engage and disengage
with Russia and China across different policy areas to
shape their perceptions around hybrid threats. Though
not a novel concept in international relations, this is a use-
ful framework to apply as policymakers reconceptualize
hybrid activities outside the traditional spectrum of con-
flict, and as part of broader competition. In practical terms,
Russia and China may undertake illegal or undesirable
hybrid activities in one sector, to which the transatlantic
community should respond appropriately and decisively; in
most cases, however, this should not preclude cooperation
with these countries on areas of mutual interest. For exam-
ple, while the United States may use punitive economic
measures against China to limit its unfair trade practices,
Washington may simultaneously collaborate with Beijing
to address climate change. In line with the EU’s strategic
outlook for China and the “Managed Competition” strategy
proposed by Franklin D. Kramer, this dual-track approach
allows transatlantic countries to indicate which specific hy-
brid actions they deem unacceptable or acceptable with-
out escalating unnecessarily or cutting off cooperation on
40 Franklin D. Kramer, Managed Competition: Meeting China’s Challenge in a Multi-vector World, Atlantic Council, December 2019, https://www.
atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Meeting-Chinas-Challenges-Report-WEB.pdf.
41 Kramer and Speranza, Meeting the Russian Hybrid Challenge, 3.
key shared issues such as climate, environment, water, and
health, despite broader tensions.40 Such selective decou-
pling should be adopted multilaterally against Russian and
Chinese hybrid actions to help to develop norms in the hy-
brid space, while also providing a path forward for deeper
cooperation should Russia or China decide to change their
hybrid behavior.
Create a new platform for cooperation between NATO,
the EU, their nations, and the private sector. For a trans-
atlantic counter-hybrid strategy to be effective, NATO, the
EU, their member and partner nations, and the private sec-
tor need to be conceptually harmonized in how they think
about hybrid threats. But, as mentioned above, apart from
the efforts of the Hybrid CoE, no official forum currently
exists to bring these stakeholders together to coordinate
this effort. As recommended in a previous Atlantic Council
paper, to address this, a new platform could be created in
the form of a Euro-Atlantic Coordinating Council. 41 Rather
than a rigid bureaucratic structure, this platform would op-
erate as a voluntary, consensus-based organization. This
voluntary approach, based on the model of the Financial
Stability Board, provides a different forum for engagement
to avoid vetoes and political issues that hinder collective
progress on countering hybrid threats, without duplicating
existing structures. Maintaining maximum flexibility, the
organization would focus on oversight, communication,
information sharing, and best practices regarding counter-
hybrid—leaving NATO, the EU, nations, and the private sec-
tor to implement specific actions at their discretion. The
Council could form working groups based on the four cat-
egories of hybrid activities to determine the participants at
each convening and facilitate more focused discussions.
As a baseline agenda, the Council could create and adopt
a version of the strategic concept outlined in this paper,
in addition to developing shared terms of reference with
respect to hybrid. Given its unique nature and position,
the Hybrid CoE in Helsinki could consider establishing and
managing this Council as a dedicated platform under its
auspices, building on the CoE’s ongoing work in this realm.
To help forge a common, in-depth understand-
ing of the impact of hybrid activities:
Increase transparency and information sharing around
Russian and Chinese hybrid activities. An effective count-
er-hybrid approach must rest upon a shared understanding
Recommendations

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
15
of the threat environment. Diverging transatlantic threat
perceptions can only be reconciled through greater trans-
parency and information sharing around these issues.
Transatlantic countries should be more forthcoming about
the hybrid activities they are witnessing to enable collec-
tive awareness and response. Whether through NATO,
the EU, or regional frameworks; through the Euro-Atlantic
Coordinating Council proposed above; through messaging
to their publics or media; or through bilateral communica-
tion with Russia and China, transatlantic countries should
strategically name and shame Russia and China for their
specific hybrid actions and demand transparency. Calling
attention to these threats and building a shared vernacular
around them contributes to a common understanding, pro-
motes cohesion among allies and partners, and paves the
way for more consistent responses to these actions. This is
particularly crucial for Chinese hybrid activities, which are
less understood and pose a significant risk of dividing the
transatlantic policy community in the future.
Stand up national hybrid fusion centers. Understanding
widespread and diverse hybrid activities requires govern-
ments to collect various kinds of intelligence, analyze pur-
posefully ambiguous data and events, and connect them
to what may seem like unrelated outcomes. To enable this,
nations need to build more integrated analytic and opera-
tional capabilities that connect relevant ministries and de-
partments (e.g., defense, foreign affairs, interior, finance)
and combine intelligence, planning, and operational func-
tions. This typically requires a dedicated facility, such as a
national hybrid fusion center. Hybrid fusion centers should
bring together tools and representatives from political, mil-
itary (including special operations and cyber), civilian au-
thority (including border and law enforcement), economic,
and information realms. Ideally, these centers should have
a mechanism to coordinate with the private sector and
civil society, especially for civil preparedness and critical
infrastructure protection. Such hybrid fusion centers would
go beyond existing national cyber security centers, for
Total defence
Total defence
1312

If Sweden is attacked,
resistance is required
We must be able to resist various types of attack directed
against our country. Even today, attacks are taking place
against our IT systems and attempts are being made to influ-
ence us using false information. We may also be affected by
conflicts in our region. Potential attacks include:
 • Cyberattacks that knock out important IT systems.
 • Sabotage of infrastructure (e.g. roads, bridges, airports,
railways, electricity cables and nuclear power stations).
 • Terror attacks that affect a large number of people or
important organisations.
 • Attempts to influence Sweden's decision makers or
inhabitants.
 • Severed transport links that result in a shortage of
foodstuffs and other goods.
 • Military attacks, for example airstrikes, rocket attacks or
other acts of war.
If Sweden is attacked by another country, we will
never give up. All information to the effect that
resistance is to cease is false.
Heightened state of alert
The Government can decide to put the country on a
heightened state of alert in order to improve Sweden's
chances of defending itself. In a heightened state of alert,
peacetime laws apply, but other laws may also be used. For
example, the state can requisition private property that is of
particular importance to Sweden's total defence.
In a heightened state of alert, the whole of society has to
gather its collective forces in order to ensure that vital
services continue to function. In a heightened state of alert,
you may be called up to help in various ways.
Information about the heightened state of alert will be
broadcast on radio and TV. Sveriges Radio's radio station P4
is the emergency channel.
An excerpt from Sweden’s 2018 civil defense brochure, “Om krisen eller kriget kommer (If crisis or war comes),” distributed to 4.8 million
Swedish households.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
16
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
example, which are limited to one type of hybrid activity.42
These centers would help build a shared situational pic-
ture and enable officials to plan and execute coordinated
counter-hybrid actions in a whole-of-government manner.
Conduct hybrid campaign analysis. Rather than focusing
on broad Russian and Chinese objectives with respect to
hybrid, which is often the approach of larger nations and
institutions, such fusion centers should pool information
and resources to study more specific, isolated hybrid cam-
paigns across various domains. This approach would sig-
nificantly improve the ability to understand the impact of
and connections between hybrid activities across the four
categories in different contexts. It would also help build out
a more robust system of indications and warnings (I&W) for
future hybrid campaigns, which are vastly underdeveloped
compared to conventional I&W. Over time, this integrated
campaign-analysis approach would help build a shared
awareness of how to anticipate, reduce, or prevent such
activities from succeeding or achieving the desired effects
in the longer term. Ultimately, this would support a more
proactive overall counter-hybrid approach, as well.
To reinforce strategic goals for countering
hybrid threats:
Invest in civic education, media training, and civil pre-
paredness. As transatlantic countries define clear ob-
jectives for countering hybrid threats, they should com-
municate them to their publics and media to promote
awareness and compliance. A key part of this involves
investing in civic education, which plays a vital role in
enhancing understanding, creating buy-in, and building
societal resilience. Effective examples of these efforts
exist across the Nordic and Baltic countries, many of
which adopt comprehensive security concepts to involve
all parts of government and society. Such efforts include
42 The Foreign Malign Influence Response Center recently proposed in pending US legislation embodies this approach, recommending the
establishment of a fusion center under the US Director of National Intelligence designed to counter hybrid activities in a more holistic way
among the US interagency. Additional initiatives in this spirit should be supported in each transatlantic country.
43 Finland, for instance, conducts wide-reaching national and regional defense courses, which help to establish a common understanding of the
threats facing Finland and improve collaboration between different sectors of society, government, and military in emergency conditions. It also
promotes networking and cohesion between people working in different areas of comprehensive security and builds a shared inclination in support
of national defense. See “National Defence Courses,” The Security Committee of Finland, accessed March 20, 2020, https://turvallisuuskomitea.fi/
en/cooperation/national-defence-courses/. Following Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and growing hybrid activities around Europe, Sweden
and Lithuania, among others, issued civil-defense brochures to their populations calling on citizens to ensure they are prepared for a major war or
civil emergency. These booklets, which are circulated online and in all schools, libraries, universities, and local government facilities, encourage
citizens to make sure they have adequate food, water, shelter, and access to reliable information in the event of a crisis. They also outline tips and
guidance for how to spot foreign malign activity in their area, and how to report and react to these scenarios without necessarily taking up arms.
See “If Crisis or War Comes,” Swedish Civil Contingencies Agency, May 2018, https://www.dinsakerhet.se/siteassets/dinsakerhet.se/broschyren-
om-krisen-eller-kriget-kommer/om-krisen-eller-kriget-kommer---engelska-2.pdf; and “Prepare to Survive Emergencies and War,” Ministry of National
Defense of Lithuania, 2015, file:///C:/Users/LSperanza.ACUS/Downloads/ka%20turime%20zinoti%20en.pdf. Norway also maintains a special force
called the Home Guard, whose civilian members complete military training. Their activities include search-and-rescue and natural disaster clean up,
but they can also be used as a local response force in case of an attack. Almost all personnel are assigned to their home areas, which makes them
uniquely suited to notice and report subtle changes in the environment and hybrid activities missed by most people. See “Home Guard,” Norwegian
Armed Forces, accessed March 24, 2020, https://forsvaret.no/en/organisation/home-guard.
44 For instance, guidance on how to spot Russian military equipment in the Baltics would not be relevant in the United States, but tips for detecting
Russian or Chinese disinformation could be.
conducting national defense courses, issuing civil-defense
brochures for how to spot and handle hybrid contingen-
cies, organizing media capacity-building programs and
journalist training workshops, and developing special ci-
vilian authorities that receive targeted military training to
detect and respond to hybrid activities in local contexts. 43
Building on NATO’s seven baseline resilience require-
ments and EU resilience guidelines, governments should
(re)establish and (re)invest in these types of efforts in the
post-Cold War era, expanding upon existing materials,
adapting them for current hybrid challenges, and tailoring
them to national and local environments. 44
Produce key messages in different languages. Govern-
ments should also publish and promote their counter-hy-
brid goals, documents, policies, and communications in all
languages relevant to their populations. Diverse popula-
tions, with ethnic minorities or subgroups that speak dif-
ferent languages, are often at higher risk of being targeted
by Russian and Chinese disinformation and other hybrid
activities that seek to stoke divisions and manipulate gov-
ernment messages. To mitigate this risk and enhance so-
cietal resilience, governments must ensure all citizens can
understand national goals, principles, values, and policies
related to hybrid threats. Institutions, such as NATO and
the EU, should supplement translation and dissemination
efforts where possible, as they have greater resources and
more diverse personnel with multilingual capabilities. Their
resources and personnel should also be distributed in sup-
port of institutions at all levels of government, as well as
grassroots organizations, engaged in countering Russian
and Chinese narratives for local populations.
Provide guidance to the private sector to support counter-
hybrid goals. To achieve counter-hybrid goals, govern-
ments need to work with the private sector in more deliber-
ate ways. As underscored above, the private sector plays a

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
17
crucial role in countering hybrid threats—whether through
platform companies (e.g., Facebook, Google, Microsoft)
combatting disinformation online or critical infrastructure
operators (e.g., electric grids, energy pipelines) ensuring
basic functions of society through crises. Y et, without clear
guidance from governments and international institutions,
private-sector stakeholders are unlikely to sufficiently
self-regulate to support specific counter-hybrid goals.
Instead of relying solely on a market approach, transatlan-
tic policymakers should provide legislation to ensure the
private sector is equipped to help identify vulnerabilities,
build resilience, and coordinate with relevant authorities
across hybrid contingencies.
Because many of these companies are multinational, inter-
national institutions have a unique role to play—in partic-
ular the EU given its ability to legislate. Building on similar
legislation and regulations in other sensitive industries, the
EU should work directly with key private-sector stakehold-
ers to develop basic guidelines for how industry leaders
and their employees need to be thinking about, prepar-
ing for, and responding to hybrid threats. Key focus areas
should include
• detecting hybrid threats, campaigns, and incidents;
• identifying and addressing vulnerabilities;
• ensuring adequate redundancy in critical infrastructure;
• communication protocols with governments and citi-
zens;
• mechanisms to transfer authorities to government
under necessary circumstances; and
• encouraging cooperation and joint ventures to provide
competitive alternatives to foreign technology, equip-
ment, and infrastructure in strategic sectors.45
To support a more proactive, campaign
aproach to counter-hybrid:
Clarify counter-hybrid standard operating procedures
(SOPs). A major factor constraining nations’ abilities to be
proactive in their counter-hybrid efforts is that no single part
of government owns hybrid threats. As a result, it remains
challenging to catalyze responsive actions within bureau-
cracies, let alone proactive ones. The national hybrid fusion
centers recommended above would go a long way in cen-
tralizing cross-governmental tools and competencies, but
they will only function effectively if there are clear mech-
anisms for command and control. Consequently, nations
45 This is similar to what the US government has tried to do by facilitating cooperation among Dell, Microsoft, AT&T, Nokia, and Ericsson to build an
alternative to China’s Huawei 5G architecture. See Antonio villas-Boas, “The US is Making its Own 5G Technology with American and European
Companies, and Without Huawei,” Business Insider, February 4, 2020, https://www.businessinsider.com/5g-huawei-white-house-kudlow-dell-
microsoft-att-nokia-ericsson-2020-2.
46 The total defense and comprehensive security concepts adopted by Sweden, Norway, and Finland, as well as Estonia (which channels this
approach in a more digitally forward way) provide good examples for other transatlantic countries to emulate where possible, acknowledging
constraints on larger and more complex countries.
should work to clarify standard operating procedures, au-
thorities, and information-sharing protocols across depart-
ments and agencies for a wide range of hybrid activities.
This would bolster their capacity to effectively communi-
cate, coordinate, and respond in real time to, and ideally
in anticipation of, hybrid attacks. One baseline goal should
be to provide clear guidance for how forces or actors in the
field can detect hybrid activities, report their findings to the
government, and respond quickly.46
Pair highly capable nations with less capable nations to
build counter-hybrid capacities. Nations and institutions
cannot proactively address hybrid threats if they do not have
well-developed capabilities to do so. Many medium-sized
transatlantic nations have developed significant specialized
capabilities to address certain sets of Russian and Chinese
hybrid activities. For example, Estonia punches above its
weight in advanced cyber capabilities, while Denmark has
advanced special-operations forces. Drawing on NATO’s
framework nation model, and either through NATO, EU, re-
gional (e.g., Nordic Defense Cooperation, visegrád Group),
or bilateral frameworks, these capable nations should team
up with less capable nations across Europe to conduct train-
ing and capacity-building activities now, in anticipation of
future hybrid threats. Specific areas of focus should include
strengthening capacities in western Balkan and EU Eastern
Partnership countries. These efforts would improve capabili-
ties, enhance interoperability, expand situational awareness
in different contexts, and eventually equip governments to
adopt a more proactive approach. They would also help in-
stitutionalize lessons learned and pave the way for deeper
coordination during potential crises.
Review resource allocation periodically to support the
most effective counter-hybrid capabilities. Another ob-
stacle to proactive counter-hybrid is that it takes time to
determine which counter-hybrid capabilities work and se-
cure the necessary resources and personnel. Oftentimes,
cumbersome assessment procedures and complex bud-
get requirements also prohibit available resources from
reaching desired places. To address this, NATO, the EU,
and their national governments should each initiate a de-
tailed review of their budgets. This should include analyses
of how funds for specific hybrid-related programs (across
the four categories of hybrid challenges) have been used,
and the relative impact they have produced. Based on the
results, governments and institutions should supplement
the most impactful programs with additional resources

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
18
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
and expertise, and restructure budget lines as needed
to ensure funding flows to untapped areas of potential.
Governments and institutions should also explore estab-
lishing a common counter-hybrid fund that can be utilized
on an as-needed basis by multiple departments working
across organizations on hybrid issues. The release of such
funds could be contingent upon simple criteria that should
incentivize joint efforts among agencies.
Create new legislation and keep it up to date. Proactive
approaches are most effective when rooted in strong, pre-
existing legal frameworks that guard against hybrid threats.
As adversaries and competitors evolve their hybrid activi-
ties, governments and institutions must adapt their legisla-
tion and legal frameworks accordingly. One good example
of this at the national level has been Finland’s recent leg-
islation, which requires the Ministry of Defense to review
real-estate purchases by nonresidents, to mitigate foreign
malign influence based on prior incidents. 47 While NATO,
the EU, and nations are making strides, this requires con-
sistent attention. The EU should initiate periodic reviews of
hybrid-related legislation to keep it up to date. Though this
is difficult to retain over sustained periods of time across
bureaucracies facing competing demands and limited re-
sources, national parliaments and the EU should initiate
periodic reviews of hybrid-related legislation to keep it
47 “Non-EU Citizens Will Need Permission to Buy Real Estate in Finland,” Foreigner.fi, October 28, 2019, https://www.foreigner.fi/articulo/moving-
to-finland/non-european-citizens-will-need-special-permit-to-buy-real-estate-in-finland/20191028145549003298.html. For examples of prior
incidents, see Andrew Higgins, “On a Tiny Finnish Island, a Helipad, 9 Piers — and the Russian Military?,” New York Times, October 31, 2018,
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/31/world/europe/sakkiluoto-finland-russian-military.html.
48 Kramer, Managed Competition: Meeting China’s Challenge in a Multi-vector World.
updated. Key legislative focus areas pertinent to Russia
and China should include:
• creating restrictions on foreign direct investment and
engagement in strategic sectors (e.g., energy, tele-
communications, electricity, transport, finance);
• mandating governmental review of technology trans-
fers (to China in particular) to reduce pressure on com-
panies;48
• creating incentives (e.g., tax write-offs, subsidies) for
companies to do business in and with the United
States and Europe, as opposed to China or Russia;
• building regulatory standards to encourage the private
sector to build resilience, work with governments, and
protect and operate critical infrastructures adequately
in peacetime and crisis;
• building regulatory standards with the private sector to
stem the spread of Russian and Chinese disinformation;
• creating new structures (such as national hybrid fusion
centers) and transferring authorities to improve the
management of hybrid threats across governments
and institutions;
• imposing sanctions in response to Russian and Chi-
nese hybrid actions; and
• fencing off dedicated funds for counter-hybrid efforts,
among others.
The 175th Cyberspace Operations Group of the Maryland Air National Guard trains at the Warfield Air National Guard Base. Photo: US Air
Force/J.M. Eddins Jr.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
A Strategic Concept for Countering Russian and Chinese Hybrid Threats
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
19
To support joint attribution and action:
Leverage emerging technologies such as artificial intel-
ligence. Because hybrid activities take so many forms, it is
difficult to anticipate, detect, and analyze all possible threats
in all environments. This makes it particularly challenging
to identify the perpetrator of a specific hybrid action, share
that conclusion, and agree on an appropriate response by
NATO or the EU. Standing up national hybrid fusion centers
and adopting a campaign-analysis model, as suggested
above, would help to improve these capabilities in the short
term. Looking to the future, emerging technologies, such
as artificial intelligence (AI), can help policymakers achieve
faster joint attribution and determine appropriate joint action
in complex hybrid scenarios. AI has the unique ability to col-
lect massive amounts of data, including actions and events
across the four categories of hybrid threats. If employed
correctly, AI can analyze patterns and connections across
these social, political, cyber, economic, and other sectors,
which individually may appear unrelated but together indi-
cate hybrid activities at work. This data, combined with mod-
eling, games, and other theoretical frameworks, can shed
new light on Russian and Chinese hybrid behaviors. Such
insight can help analysts determine Moscow and Beijing’s
specific objectives and potentially help reveal their most
likely courses of action. This information can then be utilized
to retroactively develop I&W in service of a more proactive
approach to prevention and response.
Importantly, this can also help experts create signature
footprints, or typical characteristics and distinguishing
49 In the United States, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) was commissioned to develop an AI-enabled system for this
purpose called the Collection and Monitoring via Planning for Active Situational Scenarios (COMPASS) program, which is still in development at
the time of writing. These types of efforts can help experts create signature footprints, or distinguishing features, specific to Russian and Chinese
hybrid tactics. Access to such information about hybrid activities would drastically improve collective attribution and decision-making. NATO, the
EU, and transatlantic nations should pool resources and expertise among highly capable countries to further invest in similar innovation efforts.
50 NATO and the EU should adopt this approach for their annual crisis-management exercises (CMXs) to make their hybrid components more
realistic and effective.
51 In this spirit, the Hybrid CoE has begun training and capacity-building courses for its member governments, which should be expanded and
further resourced.
features specific to Russian and Chinese hybrid tactics,
which would be a game changer in enabling collective
attribution. Beyond attribution, military leaders, civilian au-
thorities, and governments can also use these tools to sup-
port decisions around appropriate precautions or response
measures in unilateral and multilateral contexts at new lev-
els of speed and efficiency. NATO, the EU, and transatlantic
nations should pool resources and expertise among highly
capable countries to further invest in innovation efforts in
this vein.49
Conduct national interagency exercises based on real
hybrid scenarios. To be able to quickly attribute and re-
spond to hybrid activities, governments and institutions
need to practice and sharpen these competencies. To
do this, governments should prioritize a series of train-
ings and exercises simulating complex, realistic, and di-
verse hybrid scenarios related to Russia and China. The
exercises should involve all relevant government depart-
ments and forces, and, in theory, national fusion centers,
as well as civil-society and private-sector stakeholders.
Importantly, they should test real-world hybrid scenarios
that are similar to events that have actually occurred, as
opposed to imagined scenarios which lack complexity
and nuance. Y et governments and institutions tend to
avoid this, fearing that failure to manage such scenar-
ios will result in public embarrassment. 50 As opposed to
tactical considerations, these exercises should focus on
political and strategic decision-making, civilian-military
interaction, underlying assumptions, and thresholds for
action.51
Conclusion
W
hile the transatlantic community’s response
to hybrid threats has improved over the last
five years, more progress is needed to effec-
tively deter Russia and China from using hy-
brid actions. Going forward, Euro-Atlantic governments and
institutions need to build a more effective and comprehen-
sive transatlantic counter-hybrid strategy. To that end, this
paper suggested five fundamental priorities that could form
a common strategic concept to guide transatlantic thinking
on hybrid threats. In support of that strategic concept, the
recommendations outlined above offer several constructive
steps that NATO, the EU, and nations can take, in cooper-
ation with the private sector and civil society, to enhance
their counter-hybrid capabilities against Russia and China.
These actions range from organizational initiatives at the
national and international levels to functional efforts related
to resourcing, educating, legislating, and exercising. As hy-
brid threats intensify for the foreseeable future, including in
the aftermath of the coronavirus crisis, transatlantic policy-
makers should consider this agenda as a pressing priority.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
20 ATLANTIC COUNCIL
About the Author
Lauren Speranza is the director of Transatlantic Defense and
Security at the Center for European Policy Analysis (CEPA).
Lauren is responsible for leading and developing CEPA’s work
on collective defense and NATO, regional security, and coop-
eration with allies and partners. Her areas of expertise include
transatlantic relations, defense and deterrence in Europe, hy-
brid warfare, and NATO-European Union relations. She has
authored and contributed to several articles and reports on
Russian and Chinese hybrid threats, NATO adaptation, US
force posture in Europe, and Mediterranean security, which
have garnered attention in transatlantic policy circles. She has
provided analysis and advice to senior policymakers at NATO,
in the EU, and in the US government and Congress. Her work
has been featured in several publications and media outlets, in-
cluding US News and World Report, Bloomberg, Defense One,
Newsweek, and Real Clear Defense. Prior to joining CEPA,
Lauren was the deputy director of the Transatlantic Security
Initiative at the Atlantic Council, where she managed a robust
portfolio of European security and defense programming, pol-
icy research, government engagement, and business develop-
ment. Her focus areas included Nordic-Baltic security, Europe’s
southern neighborhood, and NATO’s future. In this capacity, she
also played a leading role in managing NATO’s official public
diplomacy efforts (“NATO Engages”) around the Alliance’s 70th
anniversary and last three summits. Previously, Lauren worked
with start-up Horizon Intelligence as a political and security risk
analyst. She also worked with the International Affairs Council
in Raleigh and several North Carolina state political campaigns.
Lauren has also been a fellow with the Atlantik-Brücke program.
Lauren graduated summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa from
Elon University with a BA in Political Science and International
Studies. She also earned an MA in International Security from
the Brussels School of International Studies in Belgium, where
she graduated as valedictorian.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Board of Directors
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
CHAIRMAN EMERITUS
Brent Scowcroft
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*Richard W. Edelman
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander v. Mirtchev
*John J. Studzinski
TREASURER
*George Lund
SECRETARY
*Walter B. Slocombe
DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Odeh Aburdene
Todd Achilles
*Peter Ackerman
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Colleen Bell
Matthew C. Bernstein
*Rafic A. Bizri
Linden Blue
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
R. Nicholas Burns
*Richard R. Burt
Michael Calvey
James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
Ralph D. Crosby, Jr.
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Thomas R. Eldridge
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Courtney Geduldig
Robert S. Gelbard
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
*Amir A. Handjani
Katie Harbath
John D. Harris, II
Frank Haun
Michael v. Hayden
Amos Hochstein
*Karl v. Hopkins
Andrew Hove
Mary L. Howell
Ian Ihnatowycz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
Joia M. Johnson
Stephen R. Kappes
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Astri Kimball van Dyke
Henry A. Kissinger
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Neil Masterson
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
H.R. McMaster
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
*Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Thomas R. Nides
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Hilda Ochoa-Brillembourg
Ahmet M. Oren
Sally A. Painter
*Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Carlos Pascual
W. Devier Pierson
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell McCormick
Robert Rangel
Thomas J. Ridge
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Rajiv Shah
Stephen Shapiro
Wendy Sherman
Kris Singh
Christopher Smith
James G. Stavridis
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Gine Wang-Reese
Ronald Weiser
Olin Wethington
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Colin L. Powell
Condoleezza Rice
George P. Shultz
Horst Teltschik
John W. Warner
William H. Webster
*Executive Committee
Members
List as of June 30, 2020

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and engagement in international affairs
based on the central role of the Atlantic community in meeting to-
day’s global challenges.
© 2020 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights re-
served. No part of this publication may be reproduced or trans-
mitted in any form or by any means without permission in writing
from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of brief quotations in
news articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org
