
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
REPORT
OCTOBER 2021
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES PROGRAM
Mission
Hydrogen
Accelerating the Transition
to a Low Carbon Economy
Edited by
Nicola De Blasio
Authors
Nicola De Blasio
Fridolin Pflugmann
Henry Lee
Charles Hua
Alejandro Nunez-Jimenez
Phoebe Fallon

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Environment and Natural Resources Program
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
www.belfercenter.org/ENRP
Statements and views expressed in this report are solely those of the author(s) and do not imply
endorsement by Harvard University, Harvard Kennedy School, the Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs, the Institute for International Political Studies, the T20, or G20.
Copyright 2021, President and Fellows of Harvard College

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
REPORT
OCTOBER 2021
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES PROGRAM
Mission
Hydrogen
Accelerating the Transition
to a Low Carbon Economy
Edited by
Nicola De Blasio
Authors
Nicola De Blasio
Fridolin Pflugmann
Henry Lee
Charles Hua
Alejandro Nunez-Jimenez
Phoebe Fallon

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
ii
Mission Hydrogen
About the Program
The Environment and Natural Resources Program’s mandate is to conduct
policy-relevant research at the regional, national, international, and global
level, and through its outreach initiatives to make its products available to
decision-makers, scholars, and interested citizens.
Over the past 30 years environmental policy has changed dramatically.
Today it is an integral part of energy policy, economic development, and
security. Security means not only protection from military aggression,
but also maintenance of adequate supplies of food and water, and the
protection of public health. These problems cannot be addressed from one
discipline or from the perspective of one issue or one country. The world
of the future will demand the integration of multiple needs and values
across both disciplinary and geographic boundaries.
For more, visit belfercenter.org/ENRP
Acknowledgements
“Mission Hydrogen” is an ongoing collaboration between the Global
Energy Technology Innovation (GETI) Initiative – a project of the Belfer
Center’s Environment and Natural Resources Program and the Science,
Technology, and Public Policy Program – and the Italian Institute for
International Political Studies (ISPI) on the future of hydrogen in the
context of the 2021 G20 in Italy.
The authors owe a debt of gratitude to Minoru Aizawa, Alessandro Gili,
John Holdren, Silvio Micali, Ernie Moniz, Shigeru (Sam) Muraki, Venky
Narayanamurti, Masakazu Toyoda, and Raffaella Turatto (in alphabetical
order) for their unwavering support and steadfast friendship. Thanks go
to Amanda Sardonis for being a bright light. The editor would also like
to thank his co-authors and entire research team for their unrelenting
enthusiasm, determination, and imagination - using Enrico Mattei’s words:
“the future belongs to those who can imagine it!”

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
iii
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
To Paolo Magri and all of ISPI un “grandissimo grazie” for helping to
make Mission Hydrogen a reality and having warmly welcomed me. My
deep gratitude goes to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation. Thanks to Consul General Federica Sereni and the superb
team in Boston (plus Maria) for being my home away from home. Last but
not least, thanks to to Sharon Wilke for always keeping us in the news.
About the Author/Editor
Dr. Nicola De Blasio is a Senior Fellow leading Belfer Center research on
energy technology innovation and the transition to a low-carbon economy.
With more than 25 years of global experience in the energy sector, Dr. De
Blasio is an expert in navigating the challenges of strategic development
and technology innovation toward sustainable commercial success,
at scale. This coupled with his insight on the impact of an institution’s
development and innovation activities on other facets of business strategy,
such as environmental, social, operational, geopolitical, and governmental
factors. Dr. De Blasio spent 18 years at Eni, one of the world’s leading
energy companies, most recently as Vice President and Head of R&D
International Development. Prior to joining Harvard, Dr. De Blasio was
Senior Research Scholar in the faculty of SIPA at Columbia University and
Program Director Technology and Innovation at the Center on Global
Energy Policy, where he was also Director of Strategic Partnerships. Dr.
De Blasio holds a degree in Chemical Engineering from the Politecnico
of Milan University with a thesis in industrial catalysis. He specialized at
St. Andrews University, Scotland and then at Eni Corporate University,
where he focused on energy economics. He is author of the book Value
of Innovation, and has extensively published and lectured on energy,
innovation, project evaluation and catalysis.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
v
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ..........................................................................................1
1. Introduction ...................................................................................................5
2. The Hydrogen Rainbow ................................................................................8
 2a. The Colors of Hydrogen .............................................................................................10
3. The Geopolitics of Renewable Hydrogen ................................................. 12
4. China: The Renewable Hydrogen Superpower? .......................................16
5. The European Union at a Crossroads:
Unlocking Renewable Hydrogen’s Potential ..........................................20
6. Hydrogen Deployment at Scale: The Infrastructure Challenge ..............25
7. The Future of Sustainable Mobility: The Role of Clean Hydrogen ..........28
8. The Role of Blockchain in Renewable Hydrogen Value Chains ...............33
9. Conclusions and Recommendations .........................................................37
References .......................................................................................................41

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
vi
Mission Hydrogen
1 Photo by Shizuo Kambayashi/AP

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
1
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Executive Summary
To accelerate the global transition to a low-carbon economy, all
energy systems must be actively decarbonized. While hydrogen has
been a staple in the energy and chemical industries for decades, clean
hydrogen – defined as hydrogen produced from water electrolysis
with zero-carbon electricity – has captured increasing political and
business momentum as a versatile and sustainable energy carrier in
the future carbon-free energy puzzle. But taking full advantage of
this potential will require a coordinated effort between the public
and private sectors focused on scaling technologies, reducing costs,
deploying enabling infrastructure, and defining appropriate policies
and market structures. Only in this way can we avoid replicating the
system-wide inefficiencies of the past that have characterized regional
approaches to deploying new energy infrastructure.
Key findings include:
• Clean hydrogen could play a significant role in an accelerated
transition to a low carbon economy, particularly for hard-to-
abate sectors, and offers a path toward meeting national and
international climate and pollution goals while avoiding
reliance on imported fuels.
• The two key challenges to clean hydrogen adoption and
use at scale are currently its cost and limited infrastructure
availability. Public concerns around safety might also present
additional challenges to deployment.
• From a market perspective, clean hydrogen, like natural
gas, will initially flourish in regional markets with the
corresponding potential for geopolitical conflicts.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
2
Mission Hydrogen
• A country’s role in clean hydrogen markets will depend not
only on its ability to produce and distribute renewable hydrogen
cost-competitively and at scale, but also on its policy choices.
Nations will likely assume specific roles in future clean hydrogen
markets, which can be classified into five groups: export champions,
water constrained producers, major importers, self-sufficient
producers or regional exporters, and infrastructure constrained
producers. For example, our analysis on China (Section 4) suggests
that Beijing still has a long way to go before a hydrogen society
could reach fruition, but if the country were to replicate the success
it has had with other clean technologies (like solar PV) China could
significantly lower production costs and accelerate adoption around
the world, while emerging as a renewable hydrogen superpower.
• Clean hydrogen can help address renewable energy intermittency
and curtailment issues and open new avenues for developing
clean technology manufactured goods for both domestic and
export markets, thus providing substantial additional benefits
to local economies.
• In the mobility sector, hydrogen can complement existing efforts
to electrify road and rail transportation, especially in long-distance
and heavy-duty sectors, and provide a scalable option for
decarbonizing shipping and aviation.
• Blockchain can greatly accelerate the transition to a low-carbon
economy as technology and policy pathways to decarbonization
will need to rely on processes that accurately measure and record
emissions and green molecules across global markets characterized
by limited transparency, uneven standards, different regulatory
regimes, and trust issues. Addressing these challenges will require
managing large volumes of multi-party transactions, which need to
be settled quickly, securely, and inexpensively. These processes can
be aided greatly by blockchain.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
3
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Based on these findings, we recommend the following set of actions:
• The G20 should institute a “Technology 20” official engagement
group that brings together leading global stakeholders from the
private and public sectors across entire value chains to serve
as a technology sandbox and provide technology and policy
recommendations to accelerate innovation cycles. The case of
hydrogen highlights how adopting new clean technologies can offer
unique opportunities to accelerate the transition to a low-carbon
economy. Still, deployment at scale faces significant challenges that
neither the private nor public sector can address alone.
• Governments pursuing clean hydrogen should increase investments
in innovation, convene stakeholders across value chains, and
foster collaboration in addressing first-mover risks, strategic
barriers, and opportunities.
• Nations and regions that wish to adopt clean hydrogen at scale
should prioritize detailed analysis and planning now since the
effects of policy choices made today will be felt decades in the
future. As our research highlights, nations will need to carefully
consider their role in future clean hydrogen markets from a
geopolitical and market perspective. It will also be critical to
identify infrastructure bottlenecks and address financial gaps in
specific markets and applications. For example, building a pipeline
network to deliver hydrogen to homeowners who have yet to install
hydrogen-fueled stoves and heating systems would be financially
disastrous. Hence, synchronizing infrastructure investments with
growth in supply and demand will be essential but challenging.
• Addressing the price gap between clean and fossil-based hydrogen
will require active policy interventions. Such policies could include
measures to incentivize the value and use of clean hydrogen, such
as implementing clean hydrogen standards and carbon pricing.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
4
Mission Hydrogen
• Stakeholders must be appropriately credited for investing in the
current premium required to produce carbon-free hydrogen.
This will require concerted efforts to identify design principles,
best practices, and standards for robust blockchain platforms that
achieve shared agreement among key stakeholders (including
mandating clean blockchains) and to educate stakeholders about
blockchain technology and its value proposition.
• Nations and regions should implement market-aligning policies,
together with production and safety standards, to accelerate clean
hydrogen adoption and enable transnational trade.
Clean hydrogen offers a unique opportunity to accelerate the global
transition to a low-carbon economy, but deployment at scale faces
important challenges. We believe that only a deeper understanding of
the underlying dynamics will allow policymakers, investors, and other
stakeholders to better navigate the challenges and opportunities of a
low-carbon economy without falling into the traps and inefficiencies
of the past. Stakeholders need to thoroughly assess clean hydrogen’s
economic, environmental, and geopolitical implications, develop
strategies to address them, and define long-term implementation
plans – and it is essential to do so now.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
5
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
1. Introduction
Hydrogen and energy have a long-shared history. Despite past false
starts, hydrogen is capturing unprecedented political and commercial
momentum as a versatile, sustainable energy carrier that could serve as the
“missing link” in global decarbonization efforts. Clean hydrogen produced
from zero-carbon energy sources such as renewable and nuclear power
through a process known as water electrolysis appears ever more likely to
play a prominent role in the global transition to a low-carbon economy.
While pathways to the energy transition are visible in the power sector,
all other carbon-emitting sectors must also find ways to substantially
reduce emissions. As governments and corporations become increasingly
committed to addressing climate change, they are placing greater emphasis
on the deep decarbonization of all energy-intensive sectors; particularly
in sectors where electricity is not the preferred energy carrier and
emissions are “hard-to-abate. ” Examples include iron and steel production,
high-temperature industrial heat, aviation, shipping, long-distance road
transportation, and heating for buildings; areas where the required dual
transition – shifting to electricity as the preferred energy delivery system
while decarbonizing electricity production – may not work. Due to its
versatility, hydrogen could play this role and serve as a “link” between
emitting sectors.
It is important to note that to reap clean hydrogen’s full environmental
benefits, hydrogen must be produced from zero-carbon sources. While
hydrogen burns cleanly as fuel at its point of use, hydrogen produced
from fossil fuels simply relocates emissions from one site to another.
At the same time, the adoption of clean hydrogen at scale will depend
on more than its environmental benefits; economic, policy, technological,
and safety factors must also be addressed. Two key elements will determine
hydrogen’s rate of global growth: the competitiveness of production costs
and the deployment of enabling infrastructure at scale.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
6
Mission Hydrogen
Today, green hydrogen (produced from renewable electricity by water
electrolysis) costs two to three times as much as hydrogen produced from
fossil fuels; however, innovation, economies of scale, and carbon pricing
policies can improve its economic viability.
One of hydrogen key benefits is that it can provide carbon-free energy in
multiple sectors – transport, heating, industry, and electricity generation.
But this advantage also creates uncertainties. The infrastructure needed in
an economy in which hydrogen is primarily used as a transport fuel is very
different from one in which its primary value is as a heating fuel.
No major hydrogen pipeline networks exist today, and no liquified
hydrogen ships are in commercial operation. Here is a true chicken
and egg problem. If there is no infrastructure to move hydrogen, will
investments in supply and demand happen at the pace needed to meet
national decarbonization targets? This challenge raises an even more
pressing question: what should the respective roles of the public and
private sectors be in deploying enabling infrastructure at scale?
Clean hydrogen can be used in both stationary and mobility applications.
As a readily dispatchable means of storing energy, hydrogen can help
address growing intermittency and curtailment challenges associated with
expanded renewable energy capacity. It can serve as a fuel in stationary
systems for buildings, backup power, distributed generation, or for
high-temperature industrial heat. In mobility applications, hydrogen could
become an essential energy carrier for sustainable transportation. Whether
by powering fuel-cell electric vehicles such as hydrogen cars, trucks, and
trains or as a feedstock for synthetic fuels for ships and planes, hydrogen
can complement ongoing efforts to electrify road and rail transportation
and provide a scalable option to decarbonize shipping and aviation sectors.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
7
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Since clean hydrogen has the potential to become an essential piece in
the carbon-free energy puzzle, it is also relevant to explore its geopolitical
implications as it enables policymakers to navigate a new energy world.
Key variables to consider are technology, infrastructure, environment,
finance, global markets, and geopolitics. Focusing on renewable hydrogen,
our work described in Section 3 developed a methodology to frame
these variables, address the challenges they cause as well as the potential
opportunities they present. If hydrogen is adopted at scale, future market
dynamics will likely resemble today’s regional natural gas markets –
creating the potential for similar geopolitical dynamics.
Indeed, countries are likely to assume specific roles in future renewable
hydrogen systems based on their resource endowment and infrastructure
potential. As a result, future geopolitical realities of resource-poor
countries in Europe and Southeast Asia might look very similar to the
present realities, as energy import dependency might continue. We may
also witness an emergence of new export champions, such as Australia
and North Africa.
What are the general principles of how renewable hydrogen may reshape
the structure of global energy markets? What are the likely geopolitical
consequences such changes would cause? A deeper understanding of these
nascent dynamics will allow policymakers and investors to better navigate
the challenges and maximize the opportunities that decarbonization will
bring, without falling into the inefficient behaviors of the past.
The remainder of this report is structured as follows: Section 2 gives an
overview of the colors of hydrogen. Section 3 draws the geopolitical and
market map for renewable hydrogen. Section 4 provides a deep dive on
China and its potential to become a renewable hydrogen superpower.
Section 5 outlines the market and geopolitical implication of renewable
hydrogen adoption for the European Union. Section 6 addresses the
infrastructure challenge. Section 7 analyzes the potential role of
renewable hydrogen in the transport sector. Section 8 addresses the
role of blockchain technology and Section 9 provides an overall
conclusion and recommendations.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
8
Mission Hydrogen
2. The Hydrogen Rainbow
A rainbow of colors dominates almost every conversation on the transition
to a low-carbon economy: green, grey, blue, turquoise, pink, yellow, orange –
an ever-increasing palette to describe the same colorless, odorless, and highly
combustible molecule, hydrogen. The only difference is the chemical process
used to produce it.
Hydrogen is the most abundant element in the solar system, but on Earth it
naturally occurs only in its compound form. Therefore, it must be produced
from molecules that contain it, such as water or hydrocarbons, through
specific processes, including thermo-chemical conversion, biochemical
conversion, or water electrolysis.
Annual global hydrogen production today stands at about 75 million tons
(Mt) or 10 exajoules (EJ)1 and comes almost entirely from natural gas (steam
gas reforming) and coal (coal gasification)2. China is by far the world’s largest
hydrogen producer: its 24 Mt per year represents almost a third of the world’s
production; however, most of China’s hydrogen is produced from coal,
accounting for 5% of the nation’s total coal consumption.3 4
Although hydrogen burns cleanly as a fuel at its point of use, producing it
from fossil fuels without carbon capture simply relocates emissions. Hence,
to reap hydrogen’s full environmental benefits, it must be produced from
zero-carbon electricity through water electrolysis, an electrochemical process
that splits water into hydrogen and oxygen. Currently, however, water
electrolysis accounts for less than 0.1% of global hydrogen production.5
Hydrogen is mainly used in oil refining and the production of ammonia,
fertilizers, methanol, and steel. Y et, with a growing emphasis on its
decarbonization potential across sectors, hydrogen demand is projected to
increase considerably in the coming decades. Estimates on annual global
1 IEA (2020), “Energy Technology Perspectives 2020.”
2 IEA (2019), “The Future of Hydrogen. Seizing today’s opportunities.” Report prepared for the G20, Japan.
3 Brasington, L. (2019), “Hydrogen in China.” Cleantech Group https:/ /www.cleantech.com/hydrogen-in-china/,
accessed June 2021.
4 World Coal Association (2019), “Coal” https:/ /www.worldcoal.org/coal , accessed June 2021.
5 IEA (2019), “The Future of Hydrogen. Seizing today’s opportunities.” Report prepared for the G20, Japan.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
9
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
demand by 2050 vary significantly among scenarios. The 2017 Hydrogen
Council study estimates demand at approximately 78 EJ or around 14% of
projected total global energy demand. Studies by Bloomberg-NEF (2019),
DNV (2018), and IEA (2020) are more conservative, with estimates between
5 and 40 EJ.6 Overall two factors will determine hydrogen’s rate of global
growth: competitiveness of production costs and deployment of enabling
infrastructure at scale.7
The colors of hydrogen are crucial for the energy transition because
each production pathway generates different amounts of greenhouse gas
emissions and results in different production costs. Today, renewable (or
green) hydrogen is two to three times more expensive than hydrogen
produced from fossil fuels.8 However, thanks to innovation, economies
of scale, and carbon pricing policies, these costs are expected to decrease
over time.
Furthermore, the world’s dependence on grey hydrogen has a high carbon
cost. A shift to blue hydrogen would reduce carbon emissions by half.9
Although fossil fuel plants utilizing Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS)
are well-suited to mitigate emissions, only the adoption of green hydrogen
at scale, with its zero-carbon impact, would fully address emissions
concerns associated with the production and consumption of hydrogen.
The following section on the colors of hydrogen offers a detailed description
of each production pathway, including cost valuations provided by
Goldman Sachs10 and emissions estimates provided by IEA.11
6 De Blasio, N. (2021) “The Role of Clean Hydrogen for a Sustainable Mobility.” Harvard Kennedy School’s
Belfer Center, August 2021. https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/publication/role-clean-hydrogen-sustain-
able-mobility.
7 Ibid.
8 IRENA (2020), “Making Green Hydrogen a Cost – Competitive Climate Solution.” https:/ /www.irena.org/
newsroom/pressreleases/2020/Dec/Making-Green-Hydrogen-a-Cost-Competitive-Climate-Solution,
accessed April 2021.
9 IEA (2019), “The Future of Hydrogen. Seizing today’s opportunities.” Report prepared for the G20, Japan.
10 Goldman Sachs (2020), “Green Hydrogen: The next transformational driver of the Utilities industry, ac-
cessed June 2021. https:/ /www.goldmansachs.com/insights/pages/gs-research/green-hydrogen/report.pdf
11 IEA (2019), “The Future of Hydrogen. Seizing today’s opportunities.” Report prepared for the G20, Japan.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
10
Mission Hydrogen
2a. The Colors of Hydrogen
Black or brown hydrogen refers to hydrogen produced by coal
gasification. The black and brown colors sometimes indicate the
coal type: bituminous (black) and lignite (brown). This process
generates significant CO2 emissions (19 tCO2/tH2).
Blue hydrogen refers to hydrogen produced mainly from natural gas by
steam gas reforming, paired with carbon capture and storage (CCS). Blue
hydrogen has a much lower carbon intensity than grey hydrogen, with
estimates ranging from 1 to 4 tCO2/tH2. Although the use of CCS increases
costs, blue hydrogen currently remains the cheapest “clean” alternative to
grey hydrogen; blue hydrogen cost estimates range from
€ 1.1 to 1.6 per kg.
Green or renewable hydrogen refers to hydrogen produced from
renewable energy sources like wind and solar through a process known
as water electrolysis, where an electrolyzer splits water molecules into
oxygen and hydrogen. There are no CO2 emissions generated during the
production process. Today, green hydrogen costs are significantly more
than those of grey hydrogen, with estimates ranging from € 2.3 to 4.1 per
kg. It accounts for less than 0.1% of the world’s hydrogen production.
Grey hydrogen refers to hydrogen produced from fossil fuels mainly
by steam gas reforming or coal gasification. It generates significant CO2
emissions, between 10-19 tons of CO2 per ton of H2 (tCO2/tH2)12 and
costs between € 0.7 to 1.1 per kg. Currently, over 95% of the world’s
hydrogen consumption is grey hydrogen.13
12 10 tons of CO2 per ton of H2 (tCO2/tH2) from natural gas, 12 tCO2/tH2 from oil products, and 19 tCO2/tH2
from coal.
13 Rapier, R. (2020), “Estimating the Carbon Footprint of Hydrogen Production.” Forbes https:/ /www.
forbes.com/sites/rrapier/2020/06/06/estimating-the-carbon-footprint-of-hydrogen-produc-
tion/?sh=605c40b924bd, accessed September 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
11
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Orange hydrogen refers to emerging processes to produce hydrogen
using plastic waste as a feedstock. Orange hydrogen may offer a solution to
both the clean energy problem and issues surrounding disposal of plastic
waste. Currently, orange hydrogen remains in the early development stage,
with various technologies and production processes, including pyrolysis,
microwave catalysis, and photo-reforming under evaluation.
Pink hydrogen refers to hydrogen produced by water electrolysis powered
using nuclear power, a clean, but non-renewable source of energy. It does
not generate CO2 emissions.
Purple hydrogen refers to hydrogen produced by water electrolysis using
both nuclear power and heat.
Red hydrogen refers to hydrogen produced by high-temperature catalytic
splitting of water using the heat and steam generated from nuclear plants.
The process requires much less electricity than traditional electrolysis.
Turquoise hydrogen refers to hydrogen produced from natural gas under
a process known as methane pyrolysis, in which natural gas is decomposed
into hydrogen and solid carbon at high temperatures. Currently, turquoise
hydrogen remains in the early development stage.
Y ellow hydrogen refers to green hydrogen produced from solar energy. It
does not generate CO2 emissions. Estimates suggest that yellow hydrogen
may become the cheapest form of renewable hydrogen in the medium
term, with current cost estimates of around € 2.3 per kg

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
12
Mission Hydrogen
3. The Geopolitics of
Renewable Hydrogen
Nicola De Blasio & Fridolin Pflugmann
The transition to low-carbon energy will likely shake up the geopolitical
status quo that has governed global energy systems for over a century.
Policymakers need to rethink the role their country could play in a new
energy world.
Renewables are widely perceived as an opportunity to shatter the
hegemony of fossil fuel-rich states and democratize the energy landscape.
Virtually all countries have access to some renewable resources (especially
solar and wind power) and could thus substitute foreign supply with local
resources. Our research shows, however, that the role countries are likely
to assume in decarbonized energy systems will be based not only on their
resource endowment but also on their policy choices.
Renewable hydrogen is enjoying growing political and business
momentum as a versatile and sustainable energy carrier with the potential
to play a key role in the global transition to a low-carbon economy; and
it is often described as the ‘missing link’ in global decarbonization. This
is even more true for energy intensive sectors where emissions are hard
to abate and electrification is not the preferred solution – such as steel
production, high-temperature industrial heat, shipping, aviation and heat
for buildings. But making renewable hydrogen a significant part of the
world’s future energy mix will require defining new and innovative national
and international policies while developing appropriate market structures
aimed at spurring innovation along value chains, scaling technologies
while significantly reducing costs, and deploying enabling infrastructure
at scale. Success is possible, but this transformational effort will require
close coordination between policy, technology, capital, and society to avoid
falling into the traps and inefficiencies of the past.
Renewable hydrogen can be used for both mobility and stationary
applications. As a sustainable mobility energy carrier, it can power

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
13
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
fuel-cell electric vehicles or be the base for synthetic fuels. In stationary
applications, it can be used to store renewable energy, both at utility scale
or off-grid, hence providing backup to buffer renewable energy sources’
intermittency and serve as a carbon-free heating source.
From a geopolitical perspective, whether future renewable hydrogen
energy systems will be as concentrated as today’s oil and gas supply or as
decentralized as renewables is strongly related to future market structures,
technology, and enabling infrastructure availability.
The role a country could play in renewable hydrogen markets will
depend on its ability to produce and distribute renewable hydrogen cost
competitively and at scale. Since the production of renewable hydrogen
through electrolysis requires both renewable energy and freshwater
resources, to analyze a country’s renewable hydrogen potential, we
consider three parameters: (1) renewable energy resource endowment;
(2) renewable freshwater resource endowment; and (3) infrastructure
potential, defined as a nation’s capacity to build and operate renewable
hydrogen production, transportation, and distribution infrastructure.
Our research shows that countries will likely assume specific roles in
future renewable hydrogen systems and can be aggregated in five groups.
Countries with large renewable and freshwater resource endowments,
as well as high infrastructure potential, such as Australia and Morocco,
are well positioned to emerge as “export champions” thanks to their
superior cost positions and access to large import markets (Group 1).
Group 2 countries have abundant renewable energy resources, but limited
freshwater resources, which decreases their likelihood of becoming major
green hydrogen exporters. Countries in Group 3 will need to import
renewable hydrogen due to their limited renewables potential and/or land
availability. Most countries in this group – including Japan and parts of
the EU – are already dependent on energy imports today. Hence, energy
dependencies of these countries might perpetuate into the future as
well. Countries in Group 4 have the renewable and freshwater resource
potential to satisfy their local renewable hydrogen demand through
domestic production. While these countries are potentially self-sufficient,
they may still complement domestic production with imports due to

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
14
Mission Hydrogen
cost considerations. Hence, nations in Group 4 are typically faced with
a make-or-buy decision. Finally, countries in Group 5 have vast access
to renewable resources but are unlikely to be able to build the required
infrastructure at scale. The larger the landmass, the more complex and
costly it is to deploy a cohesive national infrastructure, hence, a likely
alternative for these countries is hydrogen production at smaller
off-grid sites.
A detailed country classification is depicted below.
Figure 1. The global renewable hydrogen map (authors’ elaboration)
The results illustrate how a global transition to low-carbon technologies
may not change the geopolitical position of importing countries, with
their reliance on foreign fossil fuels being simply replaced by dependence
on foreign renewable energy supplies. Future geopolitical realities of
resource-poor countries in Europe and Southeast Asia might therefore be
very similar to today’s and energy import dependencies continue. At the
same time, the Middle East is almost certain to play a less prominent role
in future renewable hydrogen markets than in today’s oil markets. As a
result, international political interest in the region could dwindle and shift
to regions like North Africa.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
15
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
From a policy perspective, “export champions” should define policies to
trigger innovation and infrastructure investments, thus paving the way
for a dominant positioning in future markets. However, sustaining high
renewable deployment rates will be key to achieve the needed scale. On the
other hand, importing countries would benefit from enhanced cooperation
with exporting nations to establish international standards for renewable
hydrogen. In order to increase their energy security, governments of
importing countries will also need to define long-term hydrogen strategies,
including options to diversify supply. The potential impact of interruptions
in hydrogen supply depends on how global the market will develop. If
liquefaction and shipping over thousands of kilometers were to become
cost-competitive, interruptions of supply in one part of the world could
have impact on global prices. However, we believe that hydrogen, similar
to natural gas, will initially flourish as regional markets.
Policymakers, investors, and other stakeholders need to assess the
economic, environmental, and geopolitical implications of renewable
hydrogen and examine possible courses of action. A deeper understanding
of these nascent dynamics is needed, so that policy makers and investors
can better navigate the challenges and opportunities of a low carbon
economy to avoid the traps and inefficiencies of the past.
This Section is based on the report: “Geopolitical and Market Implications of
Renewable Hydrogen: New Dependencies in a Low-Carbon Energy World”
published by the Harvard Kennedy School’s Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs in March 2020.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
16
Mission Hydrogen
4. China: The Renewable
Hydrogen Superpower?
Nicola De Blasio & Fridolin Pflugmann
President Xi Jinping’s pledge during the 2020 United Nations General
Assembly, that China would reach peak carbon dioxide emissions by
2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060, is a significant step in the
fight against climate change. Since China is the world’s top contributor
of greenhouse gases, there is no doubt that Beijing needs to be front and
center of any effort to curb global emissions.
In 2019, China accounted for almost 30% of global emissions, about twice
as much as the second largest emitter, the United States.14 But while U.S.
emissions have been on an overall decline since 2007,15 China’s have
increased, raising concerns over whether Beijing can deliver on its targets.
This reality should not distract from the fact that China is also the world’s
top developer of renewables and other clean energy technologies. For
example, China was the world’s largest installer of photovoltaics (PV) by
2013 and, in fewer than two years, also became the global leader in solar
module manufacturing. At the same time, China leveraged its industrial
might and economies of scale to drive down modules’ costs – which, by the
end of 2018, were 90% lower than only ten years before.
In this context, renewable hydrogen could significantly accelerate
China’s transition to a low-carbon economy, increasing the likelihood of
meeting its carbon neutrality goal. Renewable hydrogen offers significant
advantages for China. It can help Beijing meet its climate and pollution
goals – at a time when coal continues to dominate – while avoiding
increased reliance on imported fuels. As a readily dispatchable means of
14 Statista (2021), “Carbon dioxide emissions in 2009 and 2019 by country” https:/ /www.statista.com/statis-
tics/270499/co2-emissions-in-selected-countries/, accessed April 2021.
15 EIA (2021), “U.S. Energy-Related Carbon Dioxide Emissions” https:/ /www.eia.gov/environment/emissions/
carbon/, accessed April 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
17
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
storing energy, hydrogen can help address intermittency and curtailment
issues as renewable energy increases its share of China’s energy mix. As a
sustainable mobility energy carrier, it can power fuel-cell electric vehicles
or be the base for synthetic fuels. Finally, renewable hydrogen can open
new avenues for developing clean technology manufactured goods for both
internal and export markets.
Today, most of China’s hydrogen is produced from coal via 1,000 gasifiers,
accounting for 5% of the country’s total coal consumption. Hydrogen costs
vary significantly as a function of production technology and prices of
fossil fuels and electricity. Production from coal remains the lowest cost
option: about 30% cheaper than hydrogen from natural gas. Therefore,
reducing the carbon footprint of coal-based hydrogen will be critical
in a low-carbon economy. In the medium term, coal-based hydrogen
with carbon capture, utilization and storage will likely remain China’s
lowest-cost clean hydrogen production pathway. Hence, the underlying
question is whether Beijing will prioritize cost considerations or put its
full industrial might behind the development and deployment of
renewable hydrogen.
In March 2019, the Chinese government took a significant step forward by
announcing measures to promote the construction of hydrogen facilities
for new energy vehicles. Wan Gang, who is known as China’s “father of the
electric car” , called for China to “look into establishing a hydrogen society”
and “move further toward fuel cells. ”16 Given that Gang made a similar
call two decades ago on vehicle electrification, which played a key role in
China’s current battery electric vehicles market dominance, close attention
is warranted.
This broad vision on hydrogen has also been underpinned by significant
investments at the provincial level aimed at spurring adoption of renewable
hydrogen. In 2020, Guangdong province released a “New Energy Industry
Fostering Plan” to promote “clean energy-based” hydrogen production.
Hebei province is now home to four high-priority renewable power-to-gas
16 Bloomberg (2019), “Wan Gang, China’s father of electric cars, thinks hydrogen is the future” https:/ /www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-06-12/china-s-father-of-electric-cars-thinks-hydrogen-is-the-future,
accessed April 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
18
Mission Hydrogen
projects and Baicheng city (located in Jilin province) intends to establish a
hydrogen hub based on wind energy, supported by local renewables majors
such a SPIC and Goldwind.17 These are just a few examples. Looking
forward, in order for renewable hydrogen to become a significant part
of China’s low-carbon energy mix, Beijing will need to define new and
innovative policies while developing appropriate market structures aimed
at spurring innovation along the value chains, scale technologies while
significantly reducing costs, and deploy enabling infrastructure at scale. A
comprehensive Chinese hydrogen strategy needs to tie together all aspects
of the hydrogen value chain, ranging from research, production, storage,
and transmission, to end uses.
Figure 2. China’s annual solar and wind potential (Global Atlas 2021)
A key barrier to renewable hydrogen adoption at scale is the geographical
distribution of required renewable energy and freshwater resources. On
one hand, while China’s largest renewable potential is inland (see Figure 1),
the key industrial and urban demand centers are located on the East coast.
Similarly, while China as a whole is not water-constrained, freshwater
availability varies greatly among regions. Water scarcity is already a serious
issue in some areas, especially impacting the urban centers and industrial
zones of the North. Eleven provinces are already water-constrained:
Beijing, Gansu, Hebei, Henan, Jiangsu, Liaoning, Ningxia, Shandong,
Shanghai, Shanxi, and Tianjin. And seven more are at risk of becoming
17 Energy Iceberg (2020), “China’s Green Hydrogen Effort in 2020: Gearing Up for Commercialization”
https:/ /energyiceberg.com/china-renewable-green-hydrogen/, accessed April 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
19
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
water-constrained: Anhui, Chongqing, Guangdong, Hubei, Inner
Mongolia, Jilin, and Shaanxi.18
At a national level, renewable hydrogen could be most efficiently and effectively
produced in the Southwestern region. This region has rich renewable resources
and less constrained water resources, but is far from China’s economic
heartland, thus requiring significant infrastructure investments to connect
supply with demand, potentially making regional imports from neighboring
countries more attractive. Furthermore, if water scarcity issues are addressed,
China could become a renewable hydrogen export champion, supplying
international markets in Southeast Asia and beyond.
From a geopolitical perspective, renewable hydrogen could become a key
part of the Belt and Road Initiative, symbolizing China’s technological
prowess while increasing export opportunities and potentially enhancing
Beijing’s status as a leader in the global fight against climate change.
China still has a long way to go before a hydrogen society reaches fruition, but
if Beijing were to replicate the success it has had with other clean technologies
like solar PV , it could significantly lower costs and accelerate adoption around
the world, while emerging as a renewable hydrogen superpower.
This Section is based on the report “Is China’s Hydrogen Economy Coming?
A Game-Changing Opportunity” published by the Harvard Kennedy School’s
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs in July 2020.
18 China Water Risk Project (2020), “Who is running dry?” http:/ /www.chinawaterrisk.org/the-big-picture/
whos-running-dry/, accessed April 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
20
Mission Hydrogen
5. The European Union
at a Crossroads:
Unlocking Renewable
Hydrogen’s Potential
Nicola De Blasio & Alejandro Nuñez-Jimenez
European countries are at a crossroads on their path to carbon neutrality.
Today, they are at the forefront of the global clean hydrogen race but
going forward they would be better served by collaborating instead of
working alone.
Overall, the European Union (EU) is highly competitive in clean
technologies manufacturing and thus well-positioned to benefit from
the emergence of global hydrogen markets. But a narrow focus on
short-term cost considerations could drive member states to implement
national roadmaps with little or no coordination among themselves
and hence little or no chance of competing globally.
As a bloc, the EU has pledged to reach carbon neutrality by 2050. Clean
hydrogen is a cornerstone of this transformational effort; accordingly,
in July 2020, the EU adopted its hydrogen strategy with the ambition of
deploying open and competitive clean hydrogen markets for all energy
sectors and segments by 2050.19
Success hinges around implementing a cohesive long-term strategy to
address a fundamental question and its associated challenges: where could
the EU source competitive and secure renewable hydrogen supplies?
As Section 3 shows, all countries have access to renewable resources (such
as solar or wind), to different degrees, and could produce some renewable
hydrogen locally. However, while resource-rich countries, such as Spain,
could evolve into regional exporters, no EU member state has the potential
to become a global export champion. At the same time, North African
19 European Commission (2020), ‘A hydrogen strategy for a climate-neutral Europe’, COM(2020) 301 final, 8
July 2020. https:/ /eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52020DC0301

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
21
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
countries, such as Morocco, are well-situated to act as key suppliers to the
EU. Furthermore, imports from resource-rich regions like North America
could help to address security of supply concerns.20
Today, EU hydrogen demand stands at 7.8 million tons per year (Mt/yr),
equivalent to about 10% of global demand. Germany and the Netherlands are
the largest consumers, accounting for over a third of EU demand, followed by
Poland, Spain, Italy, Belgium, and France, which consume about 0.5 Mt/yr
each.21 According to available projections, as hydrogen use grows across all
economic sectors, EU hydrogen demand could reach 76 Mt/yr by 2050.
But while the EU strategy sets clear targets on electrolyzer deployment by
2030, it provides very few details on how the bloc could meet demand –
and at what cost – by 2050.
Reference Scenarios
We explain how the EU could meet its overall renewable hydrogen demand
through the lenses of three reference scenarios, each focusing on a key
strategic variable: energy independence, cost optimization, and energy
security.
• Hydrogen Independence: the EU prioritizes energy independence
to develop an internal, self-sufficient renewable hydrogen market.
• Regional Imports: the EU prioritizes cost optimization by
complementing the lowest-cost internal production with imports
from neighboring export champions (Morocco and Norway) and
renewable-rich countries (Iceland and Egypt).
• Long-distance Imports: the EU prioritizes energy security and
cost optimization by combining long-distance imports from export
champions (Australia and the United States) with regional imports
and internal production.
20 Pflugmann, F., and De Blasio, N. (2020) “Geopolitical and Market Implications of Renewable Hydrogen:
New Dependencies in a Low-Carbon Energy World.” Harvard Kennedy School’s Belfer Center for Science
and International Affairs. March 2020. https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/files/publication/
Geopolitical%20and%20Market%20Implications%20of%20Renewable%20Hydrogen.pdf
21 Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Observatory (FCHO) (2020), ‘Hydrogen molecule market’, FCHO Reports, https:/ /
www.fchobservatory.eu/sites/default/files/reports/Chapter_2_Hydrogen_Molecule_Market_070920.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
22
Mission Hydrogen
Each scenario analysis consists of three steps. First, overall renewable
hydrogen potentials are calculated for each country (based on renewables,
freshwater and land availability, infrastructure potential, and competing
demand for renewable electricity). Second, each country’s production cost
curves are computed (based on local renewable electricity and electrolyzers
costs). Trade optimizations are then carried out (based on production cost
curves and transportation costs).
Our analysis highlights how all three scenarios are viable pathways to meet
the projected EU renewable hydrogen demand. Still, the overall market
and geopolitical implications are significantly different in terms of the
above key strategic variables and in terms of enabling infrastructure
investment allocations.
Under the Hydrogen Independence scenario, renewable hydrogen trade
between member states would account for almost 70% (52 Mt/yr) of
EU demand.22 From an infrastructure perspective, pipelines from the
Iberian Peninsula (Spain, Portugal), the Baltic states (Estonia, Latvia,
Lithuania), and Denmark will need to be built across the continent
to resource-constrained member states, in combination with imports
terminals for shipments from Ireland (Figure 3).
Imports could reduce the cost of meeting demand by up to 12%, thanks
to the significantly lower production costs attainable outside the EU.
Under the Regional Imports scenario, renewable hydrogen imports to
the EU account for as much as 83% (63 Mt/yr) of demand, mainly from
neighboring export champions (Morocco, Norway) and renewable-rich
countries (Iceland, Egypt). From an infrastructure perspective, regional
partners will have to develop internal production at scale, and overall
investments in transportation infrastructure will increase by around 40%.
At the same time, prioritization purely on cost could result in the EU
relying on imports from Morocco for as much as 40% of demand.
22 Taking into consideration only renewable hydrogen potentials, without any cost optimization consider-
ations, needed trades between member states to meet “production gaps” would account for only 30%.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
23
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
To avoid replicating past patterns of energy dependence and security risk,
the EU could diversify supplies by leveraging imports from long-distance
export champions without increasing total supply costs. Under the Long
Distance Imports scenario, Australian imports are not cost competitive
due to the significantly higher transportation costs. At the same time,
shipments of renewable hydrogen, as ammonia, from the United States can
partly displace imports from Morocco and limit EU dependence on any
single producer to 20% of overall demand.
Figure 3. Renewable hydrogen potentials (authors’ analysis)

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
24
Mission Hydrogen
Conclusions and recommendations
In the end, today’s policy choices will determine which scenario
will unfold, but policymakers need to carefully evaluate alternative
requirements and competing needs.
Overall renewable hydrogen adoption at scale in the EU will require
policymakers to:
• Lower market risk and remove commercialization barriers to
achieve the required economies of scale.
• Define clear policies to stimulate strong renewable energy
sources growth, particularly in member states that can become
regional exporters.
• Fund innovation and pilot projects to accelerate progress towards
cost-competitive renewable hydrogen technologies.
• Coordinate enabling infrastructure development and deployment
across the continent.
• Harmonize standards and regulations, including certificates
of origin, to ensure renewable hydrogen flows seamlessly
across borders.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
25
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Implementation of the Regional Imports or Long Distance Imports
scenario(s) will also require the definition of:
• Long-term contracts and direct investments to help reduce market
risk for producers.
• Transparent regulations and long-term investments in enabling
infrastructure to send strong signals to investors in producing
nations and trigger production-capacity investments.
• International standards for renewable hydrogen production,
transportation, and use.
Renewable hydrogen offers a unique opportunity to accelerate the EU’s
transition to a low-carbon economy. Still, deployment at scale faces
important challenges that neither the private nor the public sectors can
address alone. Only by working together can the EU become a global
leader in renewable hydrogen innovation and simultaneously contribute
to its climate and energy security goals, a stronger economy, and a more
integrated union.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
26
Mission Hydrogen
6. Hydrogen Deployment at Scale:
The Infrastructure Challenge
Nicola De Blasio, Fridolin Pflugmann & Henry Lee
Clean hydrogen is experiencing unprecedented momentum as confidence
in its ability to accelerate decarbonization efforts across multiple sectors is
rising. New projects are announced almost every week. For example,
international developer – Intercontinental Energy – plans to build a plant
in Oman that will produce almost 2 million tons of clean hydrogen and 10
million tons of clean ammonia.23 Dozens of other large-scale projects and
several hundred smaller ones are already in the planning stage. Similarly,
on the demand side, hydrogen is gaining support from customers.
Prominent off-takers such as oil majors like Shell and bp, steelmakers
like ThyssenKrupp, and world-leading ammonia producers like Y ara are
working on making a clean hydrogen economy a reality.
Despite the optimism surrounding clean hydrogen, key uncertainties
remain. One of hydrogen’s attractions is that it can provide carbon-free
energy in multiple sectors – transport, heating, industry, and electricity
generation. But this advantage also creates uncertainties. The infrastructure
needed in an economy in which hydrogen is primarily used as a transport
fuel is very different from one in which its primary value is as a heating
fuel. Today no major hydrogen pipeline networks exist,24 and no liquified
hydrogen ships are in commercial operation. There is a true chicken and
egg problem. If there is no infrastructure to move hydrogen, will
investments in supply and demand happen at the pace needed to
meet national decarbonization targets? This challenge raises an even
more pressing question: what should be the respective roles of the
public and private sectors in deploying enabling infrastructure at scale?
23 The Guardian (2021), “Oman plans to build the world’s largest green hydrogen plant” https:/ /www.theguardian.
com/world/2021/may/27/oman-plans-to-build-worlds-largest-green-hydrogen-plant,
accessed June 2021.
24 Except for limited regional pipeline systems in the United States and Europe owned by merchant
producers serving captive markets.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
27
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
While market economics must be the driving force behind production
and demand decisions, regulatory incentives will play a pivotal role in
both shaping and deploying enabling infrastructure at scale. Realizing
hydrogen’s full potential will require careful policy consideration to
address competing needs. It is essential to plan for the future now,
since the effects of policy choices made today will be felt decades in
the future. For example, building a pipeline network to deliver
hydrogen to homeowners who have yet to install hydrogen-fueled
stoves and heating systems would be financially disastrous. Hence,
synchronizing infrastructure investments with growth in supply
and demand will be essential but will be very challenging.
An ongoing debate is how hydrogen will be delivered to demand centers,
or in other words, what will be the preferred energy carrier. One option
would be to generate carbon-free power and transmit it to residential,
commercial, and industrial users. The electricity would then be used to
produce hydrogen directly onsite. This approach eliminates hydrogen
transmission costs at the expense of overburdening power grids already
constrained by the need to transport increasing shares of renewable energy.
Another option would be to pipe hydrogen directly to customers. While
not impacting power grids, this approach requires upgrading existing
natural gas pipelines to allow for increasing shares of hydrogen or building
new hydrogen dedicated infrastructure.25 Each of these options would
cost billions, and each would face significant risks in the form of uncertain
markets, operations, and regulatory regimes.
Countries without existing natural gas networks will need to invest in new
hydrogen pipelines or upgrade their power grids. The most viable solution
will depend on the required volumes and the geographical distribution of
production and demand sites. In extreme synthesis, pipelines are usually
the most cost-efficient solution when volumes are large, and many demand
centers are located along the pipeline route.
Admittedly, the use of natural gas infrastructure could significantly
lower the overall cost of transporting hydrogen, both in terms of reduced
25 Unless new technologies, such as membranes able to separate natural gas from hydrogen, will become
available in the near future.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
28
Mission Hydrogen
investment in pipeline infrastructure and avoided investment in the
expansion of the electricity grid. Still, a careful case-by-case evaluation
of the technical and economic feasibility of competing options and of
the overall value chains implications of a transition from natural gas to
hydrogen will be needed.
In the early stages, hydrogen could be blended at low percentages with
natural gas in existing networks, in most cases without the need for any
upgrades. However, even this approach comes with challenges and costs
due to the regional nature of natural gas systems. While some networks
and uses can manage higher hydrogen shares, others can only deal with
limited percentages. Furthermore, from a market perspective, countries
have different blending limits, significantly hindering cross-border trade
opportunities. In later stages, either new infrastructure or the widespread
conversion of existing gas networks and end uses (industrial, commercial.
and residential) to pure hydrogen would be required.
But herein lies the ultimate challenge of operationally managing the final
step in this conversion process. It is a never-addressed point that reiterates
the importance of solid policy guidance for a hydrogen economy to fully
take off: the conversion to pure hydrogen would require all end uses in the
distribution zone – including residential appliances – to be ready almost
overnight. How this process should work from an operational point of
view is unclear. What is clear, though, is that the public and private sectors
will need to coordinate their activities at the planning, financing, and
implementation stages.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
29
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
From a global market perspective, governments will need to proactively
synchronize national regulatory regimes so that hydrogen can flow
between countries. Within countries, regulators and policymakers will
need to address key challenges, such as:
• how to define the regulatory regime, ownership, and sharing of
enabling infrastructure
• how to incentivize customers to install new uses, compensate for
rendering existing equipment worthless, and handle conflicts of
stakeholders not cooperating in the transition
• how to synchronize demand ramp-up, production build-out, and
infrastructure availability, especially given that natural gas demand
might not decline complementary to hydrogen rise
• how to ensure uninterrupted energy supply to end-users,
particularly residential consumers, during the transition process
To stimulate the needed investments from the private sector, policymakers
and regulators will need to create a leveled playing field with clear market
structures and regulations, recognizing the pros and cons of all alternatives
and a concerted effort to synchronize investments in supply, demand, and
infrastructure. Only in this way can we avoid replicating the system-wide
inefficiencies which characterized regional approaches to the deployment
of new energy infrastructure.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
30
Mission Hydrogen
7. The Future of Sustainable
Mobility: The Role of
Clean Hydrogen
Nicola De Blasio, Charles Hua & Alejandro Nunez-Jimenez
The transportation sector is the second-largest source of CO2 emissions,
after electricity and heat generation, accounting for about 25% of global
emissions.26 However, it is also one of the most challenging to decarbonize
due to its distributed nature and the advantages of fossil fuels in terms of
high energy densities, ease of transportation, and storage. Moreover, the
degree of difficulty in decarbonizing varies significantly across the sector,
making the challenge even more daunting.
So far, emissions reduction strategies have focused on improving vehicle
and system-wide efficiencies, mode switching, and electrification. The
latter is proving relatively easy for smaller vehicles that travel shorter
distances and carry lighter loads. However, sector-wide decarbonization
pathways will require a transition to low-carbon fuels and the deployment
of enabling infrastructure to support innovation at scale.
Renewable hydrogen holds promise in sustainable mobility applications,
whether by powering fuel-cell electric vehicles (FCEVs) like cars, trucks,
and trains or as a feedstock for synthetic fuels for ships and airplanes.
Fuel cells convert hydrogen-rich fuels into electricity through a chemical
reaction. FCEVs use a fuel cell, rather than a battery, to power electric
motors, and operate near-silently and produce no tailpipe emissions.
Hydrogen-powered vehicles offer key advantages, including shorter
refueling times, longer ranges, and a lower material footprint compared to
lithium battery-powered alternatives. However, high costs of ownership and
a lack of enabling infrastructure are key challenges that must be addressed
through policy support, technological innovation, and financial investment.
26 IEA (2021), “Data and statistics” https:/ /www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-browser/?coun-
try=WORLD&fuel=CO2%20emissions&indicator=CO2BySector, accessed May 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
31
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Hydrogen can complement existing efforts to electrify road and rail
transportation and provide a scalable option for decarbonizing shipping
and aviation. Figure 1 summarizes the mobility segments for which
battery electric vehicles (BEVs), FCEVs, and vehicles running on bio-or
hydrogen-based synthetic fuels are most applicable.
Figure 4. Hydrogen applications in the mobility sector. Source:
Hydrogen Council (2017)

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
32
Mission Hydrogen
Road Transportation
Motor vehicles account for about 20% of global CO2 emissions from
energy and 75% of transportation-specific emissions.27 Renewable
hydrogen competitiveness will depend on overall costs of ownership
and the availability of refueling infrastructure. Short refueling times,
lower added weight for stored energy, and zero tailpipe emissions are key
advantages. Fuel cells also show promise thanks to their lower material
footprint compared to lithium batteries. Long-distance and heavy-duty
vehicles offer the greatest potential, but investments are required to lower
the delivered price of hydrogen. Captive fleets, such as taxis, buses, and
trucks, can help overcome the challenges of low utilization of refueling
stations and spearhead the adoption of hydrogen.
Rail
Rail is one of the most energy-efficient and clean transport modes. Trains
carry 9% of global motorized passengers and 7% of freight but account
for only 3% of energy demand and 1% of CO2 emissions for the overall
transportation sector.28 Renewable hydrogen-powered trains could be most
competitive in rail freight and rural/regional lines where long distances
and low network utilization do not justify the high costs associated with
track electrification. Hydrogen trains also hold promise due to flexible
bi-mode operations, allowing them to run on electrified and conventional
lines alike. However, innovation in compressing and storing hydrogen will
be needed to improve economics and scalability.
27 IEA (2019), “Transport sector CO2 emissions by mode in the Sustainable Development Scenar-
io, 2000-2030” https:/ /www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/charts/transport-sector-co2-emis-
sions-by-mode-in-the-sustainable-development-scenario-2000-2030, accessed May 2021.
28 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
33
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Shipping
Despite being one of the most efficient forms of freight transport, shipping
remains a challenge for decarbonization efforts. The sector accounts for
about 3% of global and 11% of transportation related CO2 emissions and
has an industry goal of reducing emissions by 50% by 2050 from 2008
levels.29 Renewable hydrogen and ammonia can overcome the limitations
of battery ships. However, high costs compared to fossil fuels, the challenge
of cargo volume loss due to fuel storage (in terms of energy content parity,
while batteries require 64 times more volume than marine diesel oil,
hydrogen and ammonia only require 8 and 3 times more, respectively)30,
and the deployment of global refueling networks need to be addressed.
Aviation
In 2019, aviation accounted for around 3% of global energy-related CO2
emissions and 12% of transportation sector emissions.31 Compared to
road transportation, this seemingly small number should not be dismissed,
though, since the overall contribution to global warming is significantly
higher due to emissions other than CO2, like nitrogen oxides and soot.
Although the pandemic has caused the most extensive retrenchment in
aviation history, it also provides a unique opportunity for the sector to
restructure itself towards a low-carbon future. Drop-in synthetic liquid
fuels provide an attractive decarbonization option at the expense of higher
energy consumption and potentially higher costs. Direct hydrogen use
also shows promise, but the sector will need to borrow technologies
developed for the automotive and space industries and apply them to
commercial aircraft operations while achieving similar or better safety
targets. Due to the very long aircraft development and certification lead
times, these challenges demand urgent answers from both industry
leaders and policymakers.
29 International Maritime Organization (2018), “UN body adopts climate change strategy for shipping”
https:/ /www.imo.org/en/MediaCentre/PressBriefings/Pages/06GHGinitialstrategy.aspx, accessed May
2021.
30 ETH Zurich (2019), “Towards Net-Zero: Innovating for a Carbon-Free Future of Shipping in the North
and Baltic Sea” https:/ /fe8dce75-4c2a-415b-bfe4-e52bf945c03f.filesusr.com/ugd/0a94a7_0980799eb-
ca344158b897f9040872d36.pdf, accessed May 2021.
31 Air Transport Action Group, https:/ /www.atag.org/, accessed June 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
34
Mission Hydrogen
Conclusions
Before renewable hydrogen can truly become a game-changer in the
transportation sector, significant barriers, mainly related to storage,
infrastructure, and costs, will need to be addressed.
From an innovation perspective, it will be crucial to reduce costs and
improve performance. Technological challenges around weight and
hydrogen storage need solutions, particularly in the maritime and
aviation sectors.
From a policy perspective, renewable hydrogen adoption at scale will
require governments to:
• Establish a role for hydrogen in long-term domestic and international
energy strategies, considering geopolitical and market implications.
• Implement policy support in the form of low-carbon targets and carbon
pricing measures to stimulate commercial demand for clean hydrogen.
• Address investment risks, especially for first movers, such as
targeted and time-limited loans and guarantees.
• Focus on new hydrogen applications, clean hydrogen supply, and
infrastructure projects.
• Support research and development efforts and public-private
partnerships to accelerate innovation cycles.
• Harmonize standards and eliminate unnecessary regulatory
barriers while developing certification systems and regulations for
carbon-free hydrogen supply.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
35
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
To date, technological factors, economic considerations, and consumer
choices have hindered the adoption of hydrogen at scale in the
transportation sector. New geopolitical forces such as the challenges of
sustainable development and climate change are reshaping the playing
field. Stakeholders around the world must decide their role in the
transition to a decarbonized transportation sector.
This chapter is based on the paper “The Role of Clean Hydrogen for a
Sustainable Mobility’” published by the Italian Institute for International
Political Studies (ISPI) and McKinsey in July 2021 as part of the report
“The Global Quest for Sustainability – The Role of Green Infrastructure in a
Post-Pandemic World. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
36
Mission Hydrogen
8. The Role of Blockchain
in Renewable Hydrogen
Value Chains
Nicola De Blasio & Charles Hua
A rainbow of colors currently dominates almost every conversation on
the transition to a low-carbon economy: green, grey, blue, turquoise,
pink, yellow32 – an ever-increasing palette to describe the same colorless,
odorless, and highly combustible molecule, hydrogen. The only difference
is the chemical process used to produce it.
The colors of hydrogen are crucial for the energy transition because
each production pathway generates different amounts of greenhouse
gas emissions. For example, while grey hydrogen, produced from fossil
fuels, yields up to 20 tons of carbon dioxide per ton of hydrogen, green
hydrogen, produced from renewable energy sources like solar and
wind, yields no emissions. Furthermore, although these colors all refer
to the same molecule, production costs differ: green hydrogen remains
substantially more costly today.
With aggressive development and deployment of electrolyzers and
other hydrogen technologies at scale, green hydrogen could become
cost-competitive with blue hydrogen, produced from natural gas with
carbon capture, by 2030 in many countries.33 Overall, the rate at which
green hydrogen costs decrease will also depend on government policies
and incentives, such as carbon pricing and tax credits.
Therein lies a critical challenge for the successful transition to a low-carbon
economy. As energy systems increasingly evolve from centralized to
decentralized, from “grey” to “green, ” stakeholders will need to efficiently
account for and track emissions and green molecules in a transparent,
32 The colors of hydrogen correspond to different production pathways. Green hydrogen is produced from
renewable energy by water electrolysis, grey from fossil fuels, blue from natural gas with carbon capture
and sequestration (CCS), turquoise from natural gas pyrolysis, pink from nuclear, and yellow from solar.
33 IRENA (2020), “Green Hydrogen Cost Reduction: Scaling up Electrolysers to Meet the 1.5⁰C Climate Goal”
International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
37
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
secure, and standardized way, and must be able to do so along value chains
from production to consumption.
Tracking emissions and green
molecules along value chains
Stakeholders must be appropriately credited for investing in the current
premium required to produce carbon-free hydrogen. Therefore, the ability
to verify a hydrogen molecule’s origin from clean energy sources amidst
a dynamic energy landscape presents both a sizable challenge and a
tremendous opportunity. Addressing this dilemma will require managing
large volumes of multi-party transactions, which need to be settled quickly,
securely, and inexpensively.
Today, the origin of a commodity is certified through certificates of
origin. However, the certification process can be complex, requiring
many intermediaries that add time, labor, and cost burdens. Furthermore,
concerns over whether commodities are accurately counted and traded
pose challenges to scalability. Innovative technologies like blockchain could
significantly simplify carbon accounting and green certification processes.
A blockchain is a shared, decentralized, and immutable digital ledger that
securely stores transactions and enables the automated execution of “smart
contracts”34 among parties without a central authority or intermediaries.35
At its core, the technology consists of a distributed network of independent
computers, or nodes, that manages the blockchain; the nodes receive new
transactions, review their legitimacy based on consensus protocols, and
integrate them into a chain.
Blockchain technology is already demonstrating its innovation potential
in the financial sector, thanks to its unique structural advantages of
trust, efficiency, control, and security. These properties make blockchain
well-suited to optimize processes, enable novel business solutions,
34 Smart contracts are programs stored on a blockchain that run when predetermined conditions are met.
They are typically used to automate the execution of an agreement so that all participants can be immedi-
ately certain of the outcome, without any intermediary’s involvement or time loss. They can also automate
a workflow, triggering the next action when specific conditions are met.
35 Swan, M. (2015), “Blockchain: Blueprint for a new economy” O’Reilly Media Inc.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
38
Mission Hydrogen
and promote greater access to services for a broader range of users by
significantly reducing costs. However, significant challenges need to be
addressed to foster adoption, such as interoperability between blockchain
networks, trust among users, and energy consumption.
Many trends driving profound changes in the energy sector can also
benefit from and further unlock blockchain’s full potential. Pilot
applications are emerging in many developed and developing countries.
For example, US-based Brooklyn Microgrid runs a community energy
market within a microgrid36 where members can buy and sell energy
from each other using smart contracts on a blockchain.37
Overall, the increased adoption of distributed generation, energy storage,
and smart devices, together with the need to track emissions and green
molecules along value chains, creates new complexities and challenges
for energy markets designed for centralized control. Indeed, blockchain
technology can help policymakers and regulators address concerns over
measurement, certification, and tracking.
Conclusions and Policy Recommendations
As technology and policy pathways to decarbonization will need to rely
on processes that accurately measure and record emissions and green
molecules across global markets characterized by limited transparency,
uneven standards, different regulatory regimes, and trust issues, blockchain
can greatly accelerate the transition to a low-carbon economy. But
significant barriers to adoption remain, including policy, regulatory, and
technological hurdles.
Due to the substantial public and national security interests ingrained in
the energy sector, policymakers and regulators will need to fully assess all
opportunities and challenges, including the integrity of information on a
blockchain, rules of access, transparency issues, and privacy requirements.
36 A small network of electricity users with local sources of supply that is usually attached to a centralized
national grid but is also able to function independently.
37 Brooklyn Microgrid, https:/ /www.brooklyn.energy/, accessed October 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
39
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Furthermore, blockchain’s full potential will not be realized until a critical
mass of users embraces the technology.
Going forward, adoption at scale will require a concerted approach to:
• Convene stakeholders across the value chain and foster collaboration
in addressing first-mover risks, strategic barriers, and opportunities.
• Educate stakeholders about blockchain technology and its
value proposition, as many still have limited understanding or
misconceptions about its true potential (for example, conflating
the concepts of blockchain and cryptocurrency). Address stakeholder
concerns associated with transparency of transactions and
cybersecurity risks.
• Develop a stable regulatory framework for users and adopters
and structured markets and incentives to support key players,
particularly utilities, in adopting blockchain and investing in
digital infrastructure.
• Identify design principles, best practices, and standards for robust
blockchain platforms that achieve shared agreement among key
stakeholders (including mandating reasonable energy consumption
levels associated with blockchain adoption).
• Support research and development efforts and pursue pilot and
demonstration projects.
As governments and corporations increasingly prioritize green hydrogen in
the energy transition, and as new policy, business, and regulatory models
for a rapidly changing energy sector are developed, blockchain is poised to
play a prominent role in supporting these strategies. If blockchain succeeds
in disrupting the energy industry, stakeholders throughout the energy
value chain will reap substantial benefits for years to come.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
40
Mission Hydrogen
9. Conclusions and
Recommendations
Clean hydrogen could play a significant role in the global transition to a
low carbon economy, particularly for hard-to-abate sectors. It offers a path
toward meeting national and international climate and pollution goals
while avoiding reliance on imported fuels. It can help to address renewable
energy intermittency and curtailment issues. And it can open new avenues
for developing clean technology manufactured goods38 for both internal
and export markets, thus providing substantial additional benefits to
local economies.
At the same time, key challenges to adoption and use at scale need to be
addressed, including higher production costs compared to fossil fuel-based
hydrogen and the limited infrastructure availability. One of clean
hydrogen’s main attractions is that it can provide carbon-free energy in
multiple sectors – transport, heating, industry, and electricity generation.
But this advantage also creates uncertainties. What future hydrogen value
chains will develop is a function of the specific application being pursued.
For example, as discussed, the infrastructure needed in an economy in
which hydrogen is primarily used as a transport fuel is very different from
one in which its primary use is as a heating fuel. Public concerns around
safety might also present additional challenges to deployment.
From a geopolitical perspective, renewables are often perceived as
an opportunity to reduce the hegemony of fossil fuel-rich states and
democratize the energy landscape. Virtually all countries have access to
some renewable energy resources and could therefore substitute foreign
supplies with local resources. Our research shows, however, that the role
countries are likely to assume in decarbonized energy systems will be based
not only on their resource endowment but also on their policy choices.
Since the production of renewable hydrogen through electrolysis requires
both renewable energy and freshwater resources, we consider three
38 Clean technology manufacturing aims at minimizing the energy and environmental impacts of the pro-
duction, use, and disposal of goods, ranging from commodities such as metals and chemicals to final-use
products such as airplanes and wind turbine blades, through the use of clean energy and the development
of new materials and process technologies.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
41
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
parameters in analyzing a country’s renewable hydrogen potential: (1)
renewable energy resource endowment; (2) renewable freshwater resource
endowment; and (3) infrastructure potential, defined as a nation’s capacity
to build and operate renewable hydrogen production, transportation, and
distribution infrastructure.39 On the basis of these variables, countries
can be grouped into five archetypes: export champions, water constrained
producers, major importers, self-sufficient producers or regional exporters,
and infrastructure constrained producers. These archetypes allow us
to draw the global renewable hydrogen map (see Figure 1) and help
elucidate the geopolitical implications of renewable hydrogen adoption
at scale. From a global market perspective, clean hydrogen, if adopted at
scale (like natural gas), will initially flourish in regional markets with the
corresponding potential for geopolitical conflicts.
Our analysis of China, for example, shows that the country still has a long
way to go before a hydrogen society could reach fruition, but if China were
to replicate the success it has had with other clean technologies like solar
PV , and at the same time address its regional water scarcity issues it could
significantly lower production costs and accelerate adoption around the
world, while emerging as a renewable hydrogen superpower.
Looking at specific applications, our research on the future of sustainable
mobility shows how hydrogen can complement existing efforts to
electrify road and rail transportation, especially for long-distance and
heavy-duty sectors, and provide a scalable option for decarbonizing
shipping and aviation. Figure 4 summarizes the sectors for which battery
electric vehicles, fuel cell electric vehicles, and vehicles running on bio-or
hydrogen-based synthetic fuels are most applicable. From an innovation
perspective, technological challenges around weight and hydrogen storage
will need solutions, especially for the maritime and aviation sectors.
39 It should be noted that the evaluation of a country’s infrastructure potential includes considerations on
financial variables (e.g., access to capital markets, credit rating, cost of capital) and political stability. The
lack of these enabling factors would significantly hamper a country’s ability to develop infrastructure even
today; hence, they are indirectly accounted for in our evaluation.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
42
Mission Hydrogen
Finally, from a value chain perspective, blockchain can greatly accelerate
the transition to a low-carbon economy as technology and policy
pathways to decarbonization will need to rely on processes that accurately
measure and record emissions and green molecules across global markets
characterized by limited transparency, uneven standards, different
regulatory regimes, and trust issues. Addressing these challenges will
require managing large volumes of multi-party transactions, which need
to be settled quickly, securely, and inexpensively – processes that can aided
significantly by blockchain.
Taking full advantage of clean hydrogen’s potential will require a
coordinated effort between the public and private sectors focused on
scaling technologies, reducing costs, deploying enabling infrastructure,
and defining appropriate policies and market structures. This is the only
way to avoid replicating the system-wide inefficiencies of the past that have
characterized regional approaches to deploying new energy infrastructure.
To accelerate the global transition to a low-carbon economy and clean
hydrogen adoption at scale, we recommend the following set of actions:
• The G20 should institute a “Technology 20” official engagement
group that brings together leading global stakeholders from the
private and public sectors across entire value chains to serve
as a technology sandbox and provide technology and policy
recommendations to accelerate innovation cycles. The case of
hydrogen highlights how adopting new clean technologies can offer
unique opportunities to accelerate the transition to a low-carbon
economy. Still, deployment at scale faces significant challenges that
neither the private nor the public sectors can address alone.
• Governments pursuing clean hydrogen should increase investments
in innovation, convene stakeholders across value chains, and foster
collaboration in addressing first-mover risks, strategic barriers,
and opportunities.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
43
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
• Countries and regions that wish to adopt clean hydrogen at scale
should prioritize detailed analysis and planning now, since the
effects of policy choices made today will be felt decades in the future.
As our research highlights, nations will need to carefully consider
their role in future clean hydrogen markets from a geopolitical and
market perspective. It will also be critical to identify infrastructure
bottlenecks and address financial gaps in specific markets and
applications. For example, building a pipeline network to deliver
hydrogen to homeowners who have yet to install hydrogen-fueled
stoves and heating systems would be financially disastrous. Hence,
synchronizing infrastructure investments with growth in supply and
demand will be essential but challenging.
• Addressing the price gap between clean and fossil fuels-based
hydrogen will require active policy interventions. Such policies could
include measures to incentivize the value and use of clean hydrogen,
such as implementing clean hydrogen standards and carbon pricing.
• Stakeholders must be appropriately credited for investing in the
current premium required to produce carbon-free hydrogen. This
will require concerted efforts to identify design principles, best
practices, and standards for robust blockchain platforms that achieve
shared agreement among key stakeholders (including mandating
clean blockchains) and to educate stakeholders about blockchain
technology and its value proposition.
• Countries and regions should implement market-aligning policies,
along with production and safety standards, to accelerate clean
hydrogen adoption and enable transnational trade.
Stakeholders need to thoroughly assess clean hydrogen’s economic,
environmental, and geopolitical implications, develop strategies to
address them, and define long-term implementation plans. It is essential
to do so now.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
44
Mission Hydrogen
10. References
Air Transport Action Group, https:/ /www.atag.org/, accessed June 2021.
Bloomberg (2019), “Wan Gang, China’s father of electric cars, thinks hydrogen is the future” https:/ /www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-06-12/china-s-father-of-electric-cars-thinks-hydrogen-is-the-future,
accessed April 2021.
Bloomberg-NEF (2019) (cited in Mathis, W., and Thornhill, J. 2019) ‘Hydrogen’s Plunging Price Boosts Role
as Climate Solution’. Bloomberg. August 21. https:/ /www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-08-21/cost-
of-hydrogen-from-renewables-to-plummet-next-decade-bnef
Brasington, L. (2019), “Hydrogen in China.” Cleantech Group https:/ /www.cleantech.com/hydrogen-in-chi-
na/ , accessed June 2021.
Brooklyn Microgrid, https:/ /www.brooklyn.energy/, accessed October 2021.
China Water Risk Project (2020), “Who is running dry?” http:/ /www.chinawaterrisk.org/the-big-picture/
whos-running-dry/, accessed April 2021.
De Blasio, N. (2021), “The Role of Clean Hydrogen for a Sustainable Mobility.” Harvard Kennedy School’s
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, August 2021. https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/publication/
role-clean-hydrogen-sustainable-mobility.
De Blasio, N., and Pflugmann, F. (2020) “Is China’s Hydrogen Economy Coming?” Harvard Kennedy
School’s Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, July 2020. https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/sites/
default/files/files/publication/Is%20China%27s%20Hydrogen%20Economy%20Coming%207.28.20.pdf
DNV (2018), “Hydrogen as an energy carrier. An evaluation of emerging hydrogen value chains.” Group
Technology & Research. Position paper.
European Commission (2020), ‘A hydrogen strategy for a climate-neutral Europe’, COM(2020) 301 final, 8
July 2020. https:/ /eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52020DC0301
EIA (2021), “U.S. Energy-Related Carbon Dioxide Emissions” https:/ /www.eia.gov/environment/emissions/
carbon/, accessed April 2021.
Energy Iceberg (2020), “China’s Green Hydrogen Effort in 2020: Gearing Up for Commercialization”
https:/ /energyiceberg.com/china-renewable-green-hydrogen/, accessed April 2021.
ETH Zurich (2019), “Towards Net-Zero: Innovating for a Carbon-Free Future of Shipping in the North
and Baltic Sea” https:/ /fe8dce75-4c2a-415b-bfe4-e52bf945c03f.filesusr.com/ugd/0a94a7_0980799eb-
ca344158b897f9040872d36.pdf, accessed May 2021.
Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Observatory (2020), ‘Hydrogen molecule market’, FCHO Reports, https:/ /www.
fchobservatory.eu/sites/default/files/reports/Chapter_2_Hydrogen_Molecule_Market_070920.pdf
Goldman Sachs (2020), “Green Hydrogen: The next transformational driver of the Utilities industry, ac-
cessed June 2021. https:/ /www.goldmansachs.com/insights/pages/gs-research/green-hydrogen/report.pdf
IEA (2021), “Data and statistics” https:/ /www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-browser/?coun-
try=WORLD&fuel=CO2%20emissions&indicator=CO2BySector, accessed May 2021.
IEA (2020), “Energy Technology Perspectives 2020.”
IEA (2019), “The Future of Hydrogen. Seizing today’s opportunities. Report prepared by the IEA
for the G20, Japan.
IEA (2019), “Transport sector CO2 emissions by mode in the Sustainable Development Sce-
nario, 2000-2030” https:/ /www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/charts/transport-sector-co2-emis-
sions-by-mode-in-the-sustainable-development-scenario-2000-2030, accessed May 2021.
International Maritime Organization (2018), “UN body adopts climate change strategy for
shipping” https:/ /www.imo.org/en/MediaCentre/PressBriefings/Pages/06GHGinitialstrategy.aspx,
accessed May 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
45
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
IRENA (2020), “Green Hydrogen Cost Reduction: Scaling up Electrolysers to Meet the 1.5⁰C Climate Goal”
International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi.
IRENA (2020), “Making Green Hydrogen a Cost-Competitive Climate Solution.” https:/ /www.irena.org/
newsroom/pressreleases/2020/Dec/Making-Green-Hydrogen-a-Cost-Competitive-Climate-Solution,
accessed April 2021.
Pflugmann, F., and De Blasio, N. (2020) “Geopolitical and Market Implications of Renewable Hydrogen:
New Dependencies in a Low-Carbon Energy World.” Harvard Kennedy School’s Belfer Center for Science
and International Affairs. March 2020. https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/files/publication/
Geopolitical%20and%20Market%20Implications%20of%20Renewable%20Hydrogen.pdf
Rapier, R. (2020), “Estimating the Carbon Footprint of Hydrogen Production.” Forbes https:/ /
www.forbes.com/sites/rrapier/2020/06/06/estimating-the-carbon-footprint-of-hydrogen-produc-
tion/?sh=605c40b924bd, accessed September 2021.
Statista (2021), “Carbon dioxide emissions in 2009 and 2019 by country” https:/ /www.statista.com/statis-
tics/270499/co2-emissions-in-selected-countries/, accessed April 2021.
Swan, M. (2015), “Blockchain: Blueprint for a new economy” O’Reilly Media Inc.
The Guardian (2021), “Oman plans to build the world’s largest green hydrogen plant” https:/ /www.
theguardian.com/world/2021/may/27/oman-plans-to-build-worlds-largest-green-hydrogen-plant,
accessed June 2021.
World Coal Association (2019), “Coal” https:/ /www.worldcoal.org/coal , accessed June 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Environment and Natural Resources Program
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
www.belfercenter.org/ENRP
Copyright 2021, President and Fellows of Harvard College
Printed in the United States of America
National
Coordinator
and Chair
