
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Prepared Statement

by

Honorable Eric Rosenbach

Co-Director, Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School

Former DoD Chief of Staff; former Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense

and Global Security

Before the

United States Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation

Hearing on “China: Challenges to US Commerce”

____________________________________________

Chairman Sullivan, Ranking Member Markey, other distinguished members of the

sub-committee on security, thank you for calling this important hearing on “China’s Challenges

to US Commerce” and for the invitation to testify today.

This hearing is important: China is moving very quickly into the Information Age with a

strategic approach that bolsters their national interests. The United States, on the other hand,

seems to be standing by, beholden to large technology companies focused primarily on

connecting more people to generate more data to further bolster their profits. In the absence of a

national strategy to protect Americans’ data, promote the competitiveness of American firms,

and secure our information and technology infrastructure assets, the U.S. risks ceding its

leadership role in the future economic, military, and political landscapes.

The Information Age

This is the Information Age. And information is now the world’s most consequential and

contested geopolitical resource. The world’s most profitable businesses have understood for

years that data is the “new oil.” Political operatives – and, unfortunately, foreign intelligence

operatives as well – have shown over the past two presidential elections that data-driven social

media is the key to influencing public opinion. Leading researchers in the area of artificial

intelligence know that good data, not just algorithms, will allow companies, and nations, to gain

a competitive edge.

Data-driven innovation is not only disrupting economies and societies; it is reshaping relations

between nations, and there is no better example than the US-China relationship. The pursuit of

information power – involving states’ ability to acquire, refine, protect, and use information to

advance their interests – is changing strategic priorities. In the current US-China trade

negotiations, for example, IP theft and state-support for tech companies is on the table next to

soybean and automobile tariffs. American policymakers are questioning a long-standing tenet of

the US economic system: openness to foreign investment. In short, the pursuit of information

power is altering strategic and economic relations between nations.

1

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
In the 1990s, America’s supremacy in information technologies and the internet seemed

unassailable. Unfortunately, as the importance of information as a geopolitical resource has

waxed, US dominance has waned. States with authoritarian forms of government – and China in

particular – first recognized the strategic importance of information, and have adapted their

national laws and policies accordingly. America’s economic competitors believe they are locked

in a zero-sum competition to create, collect, buy or steal data, and to develop the talent and

technology to convert it into strategic advantage.

Data held by both corporate and government entities has more strategic value than ever before

because of its importance in developing artificial intelligence. A technical wunderkind is no

longer as critical to writing a good AI learning algorithm; instead, what developers most require

are troves of high-quality data to train and optimize algorithms over time. As a result, states

have a strong interest in developing, accessing or stealing commercial, private and government

data necessary to train and optimize AI algorithms.

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, for example, believes that “whoever acquires and

controls” data will attain “hegemony.”
​
In his recent book
​
AI Superpower
​
s,
​

​
venture capitalist

Kai-Fu Lee predicts that China’s widening lead in artificial intelligence will not only ensure the

“economic balance of power tilts in China’s favor,” but will tilt “political influence and ‘soft

power,’ towards China,” and cement its “cultural and ideological footprint around the globe.”

Most developed economies now have national “artificial intelligence”strategies. None are more

mercantilist than China’s
​
“Development Plan for a New Generation of Artificial Intelligence,”

which aims through a combination of government subsidies and incentives to push China into

leading the world in AI by 2030.

The Competitive Threat from China

Over the past decade, China has pursued a national strategy to challenge the United States’

global leadership in the Information Age through a conscious strategy of state-backed

investment, loose consumer data privacy protections, a centralized AI and technology

deployment strategy, and intelligence operations to steal crucial data and intellectual property.

The Chinese government has invested heavily in the research and development of technology

that underpins supercomputing, artificial intelligence, broadband networks and big data. Those

investments have resulted in genuine achievements. In 2016, for example, China unveiled the

world’s fastest supercomputer – and announced that it owned more of the top 500

supercomputers than any other nation in the world.
​
Chinese firms and research institutions,

nearly always supported with state funds, have made advances in artificial intelligence that some

corporate leaders believe will make China the world leader in hardware-based AI.

President Xi has also advanced his nation’s strategic plans by developing and supporting firms in

key areas of economic power with state-sponsored loans, contracts and research and

development. One of the best known of these Chinese “national champions” is Huawei, now the

largest telecommunications equipment maker in the world. The significant resources Huawei

derives from the backing of the Chinese government puts American and European

telecommunications equipment providers at a clear disadvantage, particularly when it comes to

2

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
developing and deploying some of the technology necessary for next generation broadband

networks.

The Chinese government has also devoted significant military intelligence capabilities to steal

the data and intellectual property needed to fulfill the ambitious goals established for President

Xi’s “Made in China 2025 Plan.” Over the past decade, Chinese intelligence officers from the

People’s Liberation Army (PLA) have conducted thousands of cyberattacks against both private

sector and government targets. The Chinese, for example, were almost certainly responsible for

the hacks and the theft of hundreds of millions of Americans’ data from the Office of Personnel

Management, Marriot, Anthem Health and Equifax. Although the PLA undoubtedly used this for

intelligence purposes, it’s highly likely that this high-quality data was also used to help the

government-sponsored development of AI capabilities.

Over the past decade, Chinese intelligence operatives have been equally aggressive in

systematically stealing intellectual property and trade secrets from American organizations

essential to national competitiveness.
​
“More than 90 percent of the department’s cases alleging

economic espionage over the past seven years involve China,” deputy attorney general Rod

Rosenstein said after an indictment unsealed in December 2018.

The Obama Administration’s response to these attacks was slow and initially weak, but by 2015

the Administration finally recognized the need to confront Chinese leadership with explicit

attribution, sanctions and improved cyber defenses. These actions resulted in a short-term drop

in Chinese cyberattacks against the US. Over the past 18 months, however, Chinese cyber

operations have resumed. In the most recent annual national threat assessment, for example,

Director of National Intelligence Daniel Coats said that,
​
"China will continue to use

cyber-espionage and bolster cyberattack capabilities to support [its] national security priorities.”

This past December, the FBI’s top counterintelligence official asserted that, “Our prosperity and

place in the world are at risk.”

What Congress Must Do

As the Information Age advances, the United States needs to recognize that data collection and

technology deployment are critical both from the perspective of economic competitiveness and

national security. Looking over the horizon, adversaries will greatly increase operations to steal

sensitive and valuable information in order to advance their strategic and economic advantage

over the United States. Given the richness of data held by the largest companies and research

centers in the tech, financial and healthcare sectors, it is highly likely that adversary intelligence

services will expand their traditional targets to include corporate datasets that could be used to

train AI systems and to hone information operations.

US policy responses to these threats should be centered around a few guiding principles:

1.
The Information Age demands a data-centric security and economic strategy:

America needs to develop a data-focused strategy for competitiveness. From a security

perspective, a network-centric approach to national security is failing. Focus on the threat

of a low probability catastrophic attack on critical infrastructure networks, for example,

3

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
has distracted leaders from the reality that we are not defending the nation’s most

precious resource: information. Likewise, the government has done very little to

prioritize the centers of gravity for an economy powered for the Information Age.

2.
The privacy of personal information is a national security and economic priority.

Policies aimed at bolstering US national security and promoting US economic

competitiveness must go hand-in-hand with consumer protection. Authoritarian

governments may ignore consumer rights in pursuit of acquiring information power, but

democracies cannot. Bolstering the global competitiveness of American companies

should remain a top priority, but not at the expense of allowing these companies to

collect, use, and sell information without user consent or under-invest in cybersecurity

measures.

3.
America needs a whole-of-government strategy to improve national competitiveness

in the Information Age.
​
Information geopolitics cuts across all aspects of the economy,

society and state security apparatus. Authoritarian governments have adopted a highly

centralized, mercantilist approach to protecting, acquiring and using information.

Centralization will not be the answer for democracies, but coordination must be.

Unprecedented cooperation is required, across economic, social, defense, intelligence,

state department and homeland security portfolios. For example, the American

government can no silo regulatory decisions about information-related companies

separate from foreign policy decisions on cyberspace.

4.
Even further, America needs a whole-of-nation strategy that includes coordination

with the private sector.
​
The US intelligence community needs to share threat

information about foreign intelligence organizations with the social media platforms that

so directly influence Americans’ economic and political decision. Policymakers must be

willing to work with private actors to ensure regulatory red tape does not stand in the way

of innovation, and that public-private partnerships continue to create incentives to

accelerate technology development. At the same time, American technology firms need

to understand, and be held accountable for, their role in protecting national security

interests.

These principles should be combined with forward-leaning policy action. Specifically:

●
Pass national data security and privacy legislation.
​
 Information is and will be the

nation’s most import strategic resource for the next century. Yet, even in the face of

inadequate data protection practices and damaging data breaches, the US continues to

muddle along with a complex web of state-based and industry-specific requirements.

American consumers are worse off because their data is unprotected and, in the event of a

personally costly data breach, their rights and access to legal recourse are unclear.

American companies are left to deal with competing and possibly contradictory

requirements, in particular impacting early innovators and small businesses without the

resources to navigate this complex environment.

4

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
US policymakers urgently need to pass a national law that will protect user data, reduce

regulatory complexity, and spur innovation by reconciling differences in state and federal

requirements. W
​
hile Europe’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is by no

means a perfect model and in some respects is inconsistent with other US values,
​

​
it has

been effective at driving corporate investment in data protection. Data protection

legislation passed in California in June 2018 will need fine-tuning before taking effect in

2020, but it establishes important principles that could serve as the foundation for

national legislation.

●
Promote competitiveness of American firms:
​
China undeniably has an advantage in

data collection, by virtue of its large population and weak data privacy protection

policies. While data is an important input, it is not the only determinant of

competitiveness in the information age. China’s authoritarian system also gives it a

deployment advantage, but the US can do a lot more to reduce regulatory red tape, attract

top talent, and create other incentives to spur innovation.

○
Ensure regulation supports competitiveness of American firms in critical

sectors.
​

​
A key driver of the information age has been the exponential growth of

high-speed wireless broadband infrastructure around the world. American firms

are currently locked in a tight competition with Chinese powerhouses to

determine who will dominate this important area. The US government – and the

FTC in particular – should make sure that regulations designed to protect

consumers and competition don’t inadvertently undermine the competitiveness of

American firms relative to Chinese national champions like Huawei.

○
Reduce regulatory red tape to expedite deployment of next-generation

broadband infrastructure.
​
Nationwide 5G deployment is a massive effort

requiring equipment installation and associated permits and approval processes

across thousands of localities. Yet without this foundation, the US risks falling

behind in the next generation of wireless-enabled technologies. Policymakers

must drive toward regulation that standardizes and fast-tracks local approvals,

while giving local authorities the opportunity to provide implementation

guidance.

 
 
○
Continue public-private partnerships that support advanced technology

development.
​
Within the framework of robust national data privacy and security

laws, the US government should promote more partnerships with civilian

companies and academic institutions to make progress on high-priority AI

initiatives. For example, the Defense Innovation Unit - Experimental (DIUx),

established by DoD for this purpose, provides a model for incentivizing the

private sector to develop technologies with direct national security applications.

○
Win the race for talent.
​
The US has a history of prizing and nurturing openness,

creativity, and innovation. Our university system is a springboard for raw talent;

our legal and government institutions allow new businesses to thrive; and our

5

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
sophisticated financial system enable the best ideas to be successful. To maintain

a competitive edge, the US needs a foundation of policies and practices that

continue to attract top talent, like the heads of AI at Apple, Facebook, Microsoft,

and Google’s cloud computing division, who were all born outside the US. The

visa program is a good place to start -- at minimum, Congress should ensure that

more highly skilled workers are able to obtain H-1B visas. Policymakers should

further consider special programs for students and experts in the AI and broader

set of STEM fields.

●
Protect American information and infrastructure assets:
​
Good offense that promotes

US economic competitiveness must be coupled with good defense that bolsters the US

system against foreign attacks and takeovers.

○
Incentivize use of strong encryption.
​

​
Making America the world leader in

encryption technology could advance both economic and national security

interests. Protecting the nation’s most important resource will require a

significant expansion in the use of encryption. The nation’s defense and security

agencies have relied on encryption to protect its most precious secrets for many

decades – DoD, in fact, is the largest user of encryption in the world. The US

must both clarify the legal questions around encryption and develop real

incentives to promote the use and growth of encryption products and platforms

that allow individuals and organizations to protect their data.

○
Limit foreign ownership and provide resources to support firms in key

information sectors.
​

​
Over the past decade China has systematically targeted

investment in and ownership of firms developing technology, such as AI, that will

drive strategic advantage in the Information Age. Congress took encouraging

action by reforming and passing legislation that increased limitations and

oversight of foreign ownership and involvement in data-rich sectors. This was

important, but should be supplemented with new sources of incentives to sustain

American tech firms whose technology does not have an immediate commercial

application.

●
Deter Chinese actions to steal our national resources by defending America’s

interests in cyberspace:
​
Our response to Chinese cyber-attacks that steal personal data

and intellectual property has been weak, resulting in the perception by China that an

attack on the American economy will not incur costs. The US needs a strong national

response to demonstrate that interference with American information and infrastructure

assets in any manner is unacceptable. We have to raise the cost of attacks and decrease

the benefits that our adversaries seek.

○
Publicly attribute attacks to raise costs to adversaries.
​
 The increased willingness

of the Intelligence Community, DHS, and FBI publically to attribute Chinese

cyber attacks through indictments is crucial and positive first step.

6

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
○
Develop precise and legal offensive cyber operations that change the current

dynamic of America simply sitting back and absorbing the blows of adversarial

actions
​
.
​
Good defenses are important, but defense will not alone mitigate the

threat of foreign attacks. To complement defensive measures, the U.S.

government, led by the Department of Defense, needs to bolster its capabilities to

disrupt and degrade Chinese cyber operations before they succeed.

○
Improve intelligence sharing with the private sector.
​
 The Intelligence

Community should also strive to share as much intelligence information as

possible about Chinese cyber operations. In the past, the government has too

often watched important intellectual property or data flow out of the country

without warning impacted organizations.

7
