
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
REPORT
JUNE 2024
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES PROGRAM &
SCIENCE TECHNOLOGY AND PUBLIC POLICY PROGRAM
A Just
Transition for
Coal Regions:
Learning from Two Coal
Cities in Western China
Yingxia Yang
Wenjuan Dong
Jiejie Hui

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
www.belfercenter.org
Institute of Climate Change
and Sustainable Development
Tsinghua University
30 Shuangqing Road
Haidian District, Beijing, China, 100084
https:/ /iccsd.tsinghua.edu.cn/
Statements and views expressed in this report are solely those of the author(s) and do not imply
endorsement by Harvard University, Harvard Kennedy School, the Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs, or Tsinghua University.
Copyright 2024, President and Fellows of Harvard College

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES PROGRAM &
SCIENCE TECHNOLOGY AND PUBLIC POLICY PROGRAM
A Just Transition
for Coal Regions:
Learning from Two Coal
Cities in Western China
Yingxia Yang
Wenjuan Dong
Jiejie Hui
REPORT
JUNE 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
ii
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
About the Authors
Yingxia Y ang is a researcher with the Environment and Natural Resources
Program at Harvard Kennedy School’s Belfer Center for Science and International
Affairs. She has more than 15 years of experience and expertise focusing on
technology, commercial, and public policy issues in the clean energy transition.
Her work experience includes commercial procurement of energy procurement at
Google, renewable power plant development at BrightNight Power, and economy
and policy advisory services on energy issues at consulting companies and leading
research institutes, including The Brattle Group, Charles River Associates, Electric
Power Research Institute and MIT Energy Initiative. Y ang has strong interest
in coal region economic transformation. She founded and led “The Future of
Coal Regions” study group at HKS. She has published and been quoted in MIT
Technology Review, Oxford Energy Forum, China Economic Times, Energy Observer,
and The Electricity Journal on coal region transformation and other topics in clean
energy transition.
Wenjuan Dong is an associate fellow of the Institute of Climate Change and
Sustainable Development at Tsinghua University. With over 10 years of experience
in energy transition, climate finance, and public policy consultancy and research,
she once worked as an associate fellow for Brookings-Tsinghua Center for Public
Policy from 2015 to 2019, and as a researcher for Climate Policy Initiative at
Tsinghua University from 2010 to 2014. She also served as a consultant for the
Sino-German Consortium for Village Electrification Project in Xinjiang, Qinghai,
Gansu, and Yunnan Provinces from 2006 to 2009. She is the executive editor of
Introduction to Global Climate Governance (China Association for Science and
Technology’s Carbon Peak and Carbon Neutrality Series), China’s Long-term
Low-carbon Development Strategies and Pathways (Springer & China Environment
Publishing House), and Annual Review of Low-Carbon Development in China from
2014 to 2018.
Jiejie Hui is an Edward Mason Fellow at Harvard Kennedy School. Hui has 15
years of work experience in the news media industry. She was a senior economic
news reporter at Shaanxi Broadcasting and Television Group and the producer
and news anchor of Shaanxi TV’s “Dialogue on Financial Figures” program and
the Shaanxi Channel 1 news and magazine program “Eight Tonight. ” She led
the planning, production, review and broadcast of program content, operation

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
iii
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
management, advertising resource matching of the programs. She won several
awards including 2010 Best Reporter in Shaanxi TV News Center, 2012 Shaanxi
TV Outstanding Reporter and the first prize of the 2011 Shaanxi News Awards TV
series report.
Acknowledgements and Statements
We thank Energy Foundation China and the Fairbanks Center for Chinese Studies
at Harvard University for their financial support to this project, without which it
would not have been possible. We thank the Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs at Harvard University’s Kennedy School of Government and
Tsinghua University’s Institute for Climate Change and Renewable Energy
Research for their support and assistance in this research. We sincerely thank the
interviewees in the two cities, Wuhai and Tongchuan, for their help, support and
time. Last but not least, we thank Professor Henry Lee, Professor Zheng Li,
Elizabeth Linos, Gabrielle Garneau, and Lin Wu for their tremendous help, review,
feedback, and suggestions on this paper.
The research and analysis in the report are limited by data availability. In addition,
the conclusions in the report are based on two case cities only. The development
of any industry requires a long process, and each city has its own unique and
complex situation that poses different challenges to the city’s industry. Our
analysis aims to provide some references and perspectives for the transformation
of coal cities in China and around the world.
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the authors’ organizations.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
iv
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
About the Environment and
Natural Resources Program
The Environment and Natural Resources Program’s mandate is to conduct
policy-relevant research at the regional, national, international, and global
level, and through its outreach initiatives to make its products available to
decision-makers, scholars, and interested citizens. Over the past 30 years
environmental policy has changed dramatically. Today it is an integral part of
energy policy, economic development, and security. Security means not only
protection from military aggression, but also maintenance of adequate supplies
of food and water, and the protection of public health. These problems cannot be
addressed from one discipline or from the perspective of one issue or one country.
The world of the future will demand the integration of multiple needs and values
across both disciplinary and geographic boundaries.
For more, visit belfercenter.org/ENRP
About the Science, Technology,
and Public Policy Program
The Science, Technology, and Public Policy (STPP) Program draws on
insights from scholarly and applied work in science and technology, technology
assessment, political science, economics, management, and law to research and
practice on the intersection of science and technology with public affairs. The
goal is to help develop and promote public policies that advance the application of
science and technology to improvement of the human condition.
For more, visit belfercenter.org/STPP

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
v
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
About the Institute of Climate Change
and Sustainable Development
at Tsinghua University
The Institute of Climate Change and Sustainable Development (ICCSD) at
T singhua University was founded in October 2017. Mr. Xie Zhenhua, China’s
former Special Envoy for Climate Change Affairs, serves as the inaugural
president. ICCSD is committed to building a collaborative platform for strategy
and policy research, talent cultivation, international dialogue, bridging the gap
between academic research and policy, and providing support and solutions
related to climate change and sustainable development.
ICCSD has accomplished several flagship research projects, such as China’s
Long-term Low-carbon Development Strategies and Pathways, and Synergizing
Action on the Environment and Climate: Good Practice in China and Around
the Globe, etc. Also, ICCSD has established the Methane Emission Reduction
Cooperation Platform and Nature-based Solution Cooperation Platform to foster
broader collaboration and knowledge sharing. The Institute has also launched
extensive bilateral and multilateral dialogues, including “Climate Change Global
Lectures” and “Friends of the Paris Agreement”; and provided full support
for “Global Alliance of Universities on Climate” and held two South-South
cooperation climate training programs.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ..........................................................................................2
1. A Just Transition in China’s Coal Regions: Policies and Challenges .......7
1.1 Role of Coal in China’s Energy System ........................................................................7
1.2 China’s Policies on Coal Transition ................................................................................9
1.3 Challenges with Coal Region Just Transition in China ...........................................14
2. Study Scope and Approach ......................................................................15
2.1 Concept and Practices of Just Transition .................................................................15
2.2 Study Questions and Approach ....................................................................................16
3. Case Study 1: Wuhai, Inner Mongolia ......................................................18
3.1 Overview .............................................................................................................................18
3.2 Efforts to Address the Coal Worker Unemployment Issue ................................21
3.3 Economic Diversification to Create Non-coal Jobs ..............................................25
4. Case Study 2: Tongchuan, Shaanxi .........................................................33
4.1 Overview .............................................................................................................................33
4.2 Efforts to Address the Coal Worker Unemployment Issue ................................36
4.3 Economic Diversification to Create Non-coal Jobs ..............................................40
5. Conclusions and Policy Recommendations ............................................ 45
5.1 Conclusions ........................................................................................................................45
5.2 Policy Recommendations ..............................................................................................48
Endnotes ..........................................................................................................51

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
1
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
In this Tuesday, Nov. 3, 2015 photo, workers shovel coal atop a trailer truck at a coal mine near
Ordos in northern China’s Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region. It burns 4 billion tons of coal a year,
four times as much as the United States. (AP Photo/Mark Schiefelbein)

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
2
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
Executive Summary
Countries around the world are shifting away from the use of coal to decarbonize
their economies in the fight against climate change. Y et this move away from coal
poses big challenges to regions where the economy still relies heavily on coal
and people’s jobs and lives are highly dependent on coal. How can coal mining
regions transition away from coal while remaining economically prosperous
and ensuring that people continue to have decent jobs and a good quality of life?
This is a critical question to answer since, if addressed well, a just transition will
mitigate the challenges with moving away from coal and enable faster progress on
decarbonization.
China’s coal production accounts for more than half of the world’s coal production,
and its coal industry employees account for about half of the world’s total. In 2020,
China announced that it would “peak carbon emissions before 2030 and achieve
carbon neutrality before 2060” (a.k.a. the “dual carbon targets”). In the context of
the global wave of carbon neutrality and the green industrial revolution, the “dual
carbon goals” are China’s commitment to the international community and also
an important step toward promoting high-quality development of the domestic
economy and realizing the “Beautiful China” initiative. However, limited by its
resource endowment and industrial structure, China will face more arduous just
transition challenges in the process of achieving its “dual carbon goals. ”
“Just transition” is a term coined in the 1970s by the labor movement in the
United States. Academic research on just transition started at the beginning of
this century, and there are currently no unified concept and research frameworks
for just transition. Still, the concept has played an important role in international
climate governance and national policymaking in recent years, in recognition that
a move away from coal can leave the affected workers, their families, and their
communities vulnerable and in need of support. As China has half of the coal
employment in the world, ensuring a just transition is a critical priority. Does
China have a just transition policy? If so, how does it compare to just transition
policies internationally? And what should China do to ensure a just transition as it
meets its carbon neutrality goal?

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
3
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
To answer these questions, this report examines the experiences of two coal
cities in China, Wuhai in Inner Mongolia, and Tongchuan in Shaanxi. Wuhai and
Tongchuan, both situated in western China, have relied on coal mining as their
pillar industry for many years. Both cities have been making efforts to transition
away from coal as the country has gone through different stages of economic
growth and implemented new environmental policies. Around 2010, the central
government designated both cities, among others, as resource depletion cities and
required them to shift to non-coal-based economies. In 2013, due to the severe air
pollution issue, the central government called for environmental policies including
coal consumption reduction. In 2016, the central government embarked on the
reform to reduce surplus capacity of coal production at the national level, which
led to coal workers’ potential unemployment issues that both cities had to deal
with. While the efforts were not driven by the need to decarbonize, the goal is the
same, which is to retain economic prosperity in a region less reliant on coal.
The two case studies indicate that even though “just transition” is a term that
originated in the United States and has not been widely used in China, this type
of approach is a key consideration for governments designing coal-transition
policies. Recognizing the difficulty in moving away from coal and the challenges
faced by coal regions and coal workers, the central government in China has
allocated billions of dollars of special funds toward covering the basic living
expenses of coal workers and created job training and other programs customized
to meet the needs of coal workers based on their age, education, and other
characteristics. In the state-owned enterprises, these supports and measures have
proven effective at helping ensure a just transition for coal workers and have been
well received by society.
In addition to providing compensation to individual coal workers, China’s
just transition approach focuses on economic diversification with strong
industrial policies that drive economic growth and create non-coal-mining job
opportunities. Both cities have achieved some successes in this regard. Wuhai has
become an important hub for coke chemical and chlori-alkali chemical industries
in China and is expanding to the fine chemical, biodegradable BDO materials,
and organic silicon industries. The strategic emerging industries accounted for
10% of the city’s industrial GDP in 2020 and its chemical manufacturing industry
today employs more people than the coal mining industry. Similarly, Tongchuan’s
strategic emerging industries produced 13.5% of the city’s industrial GDP in 2020.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
4
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
As the executors of central and provincial policies and the owners of local
economic development, city governments play a crucial leadership role in coal
cities’ economic transformation. The following policy framework summarizes the
experiences of Wuhai and Tongchuan to diversify coal region economies and to
develop new industries:
Figure 1: Coal Region Economic Diversification Framework
• Strategic Planning: It is critical to identify new industries by strategically
assessing the competitive advantages of the regions.
• Effectively Implementing: To attract investment from targeted new industries,
the government should be proactive in engaging the private sector, providing
the right incentives, eliminating barriers, and addressing the specific needs of
companies.
• Continued Sustaining: For a new industry to scale up and become a pillar
industry that replaces coal, prior efforts must be continuously expanded and
upgraded.
Despite the progress that has been made, Wuhai and Tongchuan’s experiences
show that developing non-coal industries at the scale required to replace coal is
extremely challenging and requires a long, continuous process. In both cities,
the share of non-coal industries is still not large, and coal remains the dominant
contributor to the industrial sector. The non-coal industries are mostly energy-
and carbon-intensive. These regions traditionally do not have the knowledge,

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
5
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
talent, and infrastructure that new industries require, nor do they have economies
of agglomeration that can compete against more developed regions. As such, even
with policy incentives or subsidies to attract investment, new businesses often
become a one-off investment and do not create the continuous funds needed to
scale up over the long term. Similarly, new industries in these cities face a dearth of
innovation, as it can be difficult to attract talent willing to relocate to these regions.
As China embarks on the path to decarbonization, the challenges faced by coal
regions are likely to intensify and, there will be a more urgent need to address the
resulting unemployment problem, due to the size of the industry, the increased
number of impacted regions, and a relatively shorter time window.
Based on the two cities’ transition experiences, we provide a few policy
recommendations on the approach to just transitions in coal regions in China:
• The central government should develop customized schedules for each coal
mining region, to allow more time for regions to consider the unique challenges
they confront.
• Local governments should consider more diversified policy tools for the
financial support to ensure a just transition. These should include not only the
fiscal approach used by the Ministry of Finance in helping coal miners’ just
transition in the past, but also financial instruments to provide continuous
support for the low-carbon transition of the economy and society at large scale.
In addition, national and provincial governments should consider requiring
coal enterprises to establish coal transition funds that can be used for just
transition in the future.
• Local governments should avoid falling once more into a “resource trap” and
tackle the challenge of being locked into low-value, high-carbon industries
when developing new industries for economic diversification. In particular,
against the current backdrop of industrial transfer from the east to the west, coal
cities in western China should shift the paradigm of development from focusing
on using resources as a competitive advantage to building a path to achieve
high-quality, green urban development.
• Provincial governments should provide all-around strategic coordination,
guidance, and support for the development of new industries that will help coal

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
6
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
cities address the challenge of not knowing how to choose new industries, the
lack of talent and technology, and head-to-head competition from neighboring
regions.
• Local governments should establish a principle that prioritizes people’s
livelihoods and promote deep changes in the social governance system.
Unemployment issues in the coal industry and the service industry to support
the workers, population contraction, loss of labor force, and the social
integration of aborigines and new citizens will all profoundly change the
societal ecosystem. Thus, in addition to promoting employment through the
economy, a new social governance system should also be considered in order
to achieve a just transition in coal cities.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
7
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
1. A Just Transition in China’s Coal
Regions: Policies and Challenges
1.1 Role of Coal in China’s Energy System
China’s resource endowment is characterized by “rich coal, poor oil and little
gas. ” For a long time, coal dominated both energy production and consumption.
Figure 1-1 shows China’s coal production, coal consumption, and employment in
coal mining and dressing from 1980 to 2021. After China joined the World Trade
Organization (WTO) in 2001, the industrialization process was accelerated, and
the surge in energy demand led to a rapid increase in coal production capacity.
The following decade (2002-2012) was regarded as the “golden period” of the coal
industry. However, the rapid expansion of coal production capacity from 2002
to 2012 soon brought about a crisis of overcapacity. At the same time, the rapid
growth of coal consumption resulted in serious environmental pollution problems.
Beginning in 2013, the Chinese government embarked on a massive effort to
address both the energy transition and air pollution control. One of its major
measures was to reduce coal consumption. Due to its limited oil and gas resources,
China has mainly adopted the practice of replacing coal with renewable electricity.
From 2012 to 2021, the proportion of coal in total energy consumption decreased
from 68.5% to 54%, and the proportion of non-fossil energy increased from 9.7%
to 16.7%.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
8
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
Figure 1-1: Coal Production, Consumption, and Employment in Coal Mining and Dressing,
China (1980-2021).
Source: National Bureau of Statistics, China Energy Statistical YearBook; CEIC, National
Bureau of Statistics.
The rapid capacity growth of the coal industry during the “golden period” also
led to a surge in employment, with the number of employees in the coal mining,
washing, and dressing industry increasing from 3.8 million in 2002 to a peak of 5.3
million in 2012. Following the Chinese government’s large-scale energy transition
and air pollution control measures in 2013, the central government introduced
an overcapacity reduction policy of coal industry in 2016. As result, the number
of employees began to decline, reaching 3.5 million by the end of 2017. Although
coal production has gradually increased since 2017, the number of coal jobs has
maintained a continuous downward trend due to productivity improvement,
falling to 2.6 million as of June 1, 2023. Despite the significant decline in the
number of employees, China’s coal industry still accounted for more than 51% of
the world’s total coal employment in 2022.1
Another characteristic of China’s energy system is the geographical mismatch
of production and consumption. Coal-producing provinces are concentrated in
the western, central, and northern regions, while coal-consuming provinces are
concentrated in the southeastern coastal region. In recent years, coal production
has been further concentrated in areas with excellent resource endowment,
good mining conditions, and low costs, while large-scale modern coal mines
have become the main coal producers. Compared with 2013, the number of
coal-producing provinces in 2021 fell from 25 to 22, and the coal production of 17
provinces fell sharply. As of 2021, coal production has been further concentrated

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
9
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
in Xinjiang, Shaanxi, Inner Mongolia, and Shanxi; these four provinces together
account for 80% of the country’s coal production. Most of these provinces
reached the peak of coal employment around 2012, with numbers declining ever
since.2 As with production, coal employment opportunities have also become
more concentrated in the major coal-producing provinces. For example, coal
employment in Shanxi province accounts for more than one-third of total coal
employment in China now. After China announced a goal of “carbon peaking by
2030 and carbon neutrality by 2060, ” these provinces will face severe social and
economic challenges related to just transition.
1.2 China’s Policies on Coal Transition
Although just transition is still a new concept in China, the policies originated
more than twenty years ago. With the continuous development of China’s economy
and society, the policies related to the just transition are also evolving into three
categories: the transformation and development policies of resource-based cities,
the coal industry policy to reduce overcapacity, and the financial policy in the 1+N
climate change policy package. The just transition was originally one dimension of
social policy for the transition of resource-depletion cities, and subsidies mainly
came from fiscal transfers. With the acceleration of the energy transition, the
financial sector is playing an increasingly important role.
1.2.1 Policies focused on the transition of coal resource-based
cities (2001-present)
• Resource-depletion city transition. China’s rapid economic growth has
led to a massive demand for coal and other minerals, as well as the gradual
depletion of resources in some cities. In order to help these cities find new
industries, the central government initiated a pilot program on the transition
of resource-depletion cities. In 2001, China approved Fuxin City in Liaoning
province as the first pilot, and six more pilot cities followed in 2005. Then, in
2007, the Chinese government promulgated a regulation named the Several
Opinions of the State Council on Promoting the Sustainable Development of
Resource-based Cities. From 2008 to 2012, China made significant progress
in implementing this regulation by identifying 69 resource-depletion cities
(including 39 coal cities) in three batches. Since then, the central government

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
10
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
has provided financial transfer funds to these cities, and the annual scale has
increased from more than 800 million RMB (USD $105 million) to more
than 23 billion RMB (USD $3.5 billion) in 2022, with a focus on improving
social security, education and health, environmental protection, etc.3 Since
2013, pilot programs have been set up to restore the mining areas with serious
environmental damage, and special funds have been allocated to support
the implementation of two policies: the Comprehensive Project for Coal
Mining Subsidence Area and the Project of Transformation and Upgrading of
Independent Mining Area (see Table 1).
• Sustainable and high-quality development of resource-based cities.
The central government then further expanded the policy object from
resource-depletion cities to all resource-based cities. In 2013, the State Council
issued the National Plan for Sustainable Development of Resource-based Cities
(2013-2020), which defined 262 resource-based cities and put forward a
classified and differentiated development model for resource-based cities. In
the 14th Five-Y ear Plan (FYP) period, a special plan was formulated with the
theme of “promoting the high-quality development of resource-based areas. ”
In general, the focus of the policy is to promote industrial transformation
and economic development in resource-based cities, not only to solve the
challenges related to employment and coal assets, but also to solve the
problems of sustainable economic and social development.4

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
11
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
Table 1: Policies for the transition and development of resource-based cities
POLICY SCOPE AND PROGRESS POLICY FOCUS
Resource-depletion city
transition
69 cities Reverse the recession,
explore new industries, and
reshape the endogenous
development.
Resource-rich city
innovation and
development
172 cities Standardize the
exploitation of resources,
explore new industries,
enhance industrial
innovation capabilities,
and optimize the benefit
distribution.
Independent mining
area transformation and
upgrading
Retrofitted more than 150
mining areas
Relocate to safe areas,
upgrade utilities, protect
people’s livelihoods, and
restore ecosystems.
Mining subsidence area
upgrading and treatment
Treated more than 100
subsidence areas
Relocate to safe areas,
upgrade utilities, protect
people’s livelihoods, and
restore ecosystems.
Source: Zhang & Yu, 2023.5 Stripped-down and translated into English by the authors.
1.2.2 Industrial policies focusing on small coal mines phase-out
(2000-2020) and coal overcapacity reduction (2016-2020)
• Small coal mines phase-out: This is a policy priority due to serious safety
issues with coal mining that arose in the early 2000s. As the result of more
than 20 years of policies and actions, the number of small coal mines (annual
capacity ≤ 300,000 tons) decreased from 22,000 in 2005 to 1,129 in 2020.
• Overcapacity reduction of coal industry: Beginning in 2012, due to the
slowdown of economic growth, the demand and prices for coal and steel kept
decreasing and the production capacity for coal and steel became significantly
higher than the demand, which resulted in severe economic challenges
for coal and steel companies and their employees. In 2016, the central

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
12
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
government called for efforts to reduce coal production capacity from 2016
to 2020, targeting a reduction of 800 million tons of coal capacity annually
while increasing more efficient coal capacity by 500 million tons annually.6 It
was estimated that the coal mining sector alone needed to lay off around 1.3
million employees nationally. The Ministry of Finance set up a special fund
of 100 billion RMB (USD $13.9 billion) dedicated to resettling unemployed
workers in the steel and coal industries.7 In addition, the Ministry of Human
Resources and Social Security launched the Special Training Program for
Employees of Enterprises with Excess Capacity.8 These policies were aimed
at solving the unemployment and retraining problems in the steel and coal
industries. By the end of 2020, around 1 billion tons of coal capacity had
closed (about 5,500 small- and medium-size coal mines) and around 1 million
employees had been resettled.9
1.2.3 Climate policies with the 1+N Package and transition fund
(2021-present)
In order to achieve the targets of carbon peaking by 2030 and carbon neutrality
by 2060, the central government began in 2021 to introduce a series of climate
policies known as the 1+N climate package. Improving the existing fiscal and
financial system and supporting large-scale low-carbon transition are important
objectives of the package. Meanwhile, the G20 Transition Finance Framework
was adopted at the G20 Leaders’ Summit in Bali in 2022, and the People’s Bank
of China, as co-chair of the G20 Transition Finance Working Group, is not only
co-leading the development of the framework with the U.S. Department of
the Treasury, but also vigorously promoting the construction of the domestic
transition finance system.10
Specific measures include:
• Transition finance: To achieve the carbon peaking and carbon neutrality
targets, it is necessary to promote the low-carbon transition of high-carbon
emission industries and economic activities in an orderly manner. The
People’s Bank of China published research on transition finance since 2021
established the principles of transition finance and organized research on
standards-making in fields such as steel, coal power, building materials, and
agriculture. The Interbank Market and the Exchange Market are formulating

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
13
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
the review rules and standards for the issuance and listing of the transition
financial instruments. In August 2023, the Postal Savings Bank of China
launched the country’s first just transition loan of 100 million RMB in Datong
City, Shanxi Province. The loan was aimed at supporting the just transition
actions of Jinneng Coal Industry Group Corporation.11 In 2023, Shanghai
issued the Shanghai Transition Finance Catalogue (Trial), and the first batch of
supported industries including water transportation, ferrous metal smelting
and rolling processing, petroleum processing, chemical raw materials and
chemical products manufacturing, automobile manufacturing, and air
transportation. Subsequently, Shanghai Pudong Development Bank launched
the first transition loan in Shanghai, providing 310 million RMB for Spring
Airlines Co., Ltd.12
• National transition fund: In May 2022, the Ministry of Finance promulgated
the Opinions on Financial Support for Carbon Peak and Carbon Neutrality,
which proposed to establish a national Low-carbon Transition Fund that
would support the green transformation of traditional industries and
resource-dependent areas. Another national investment fund established in
2020, the National Green Development Fund (USD $12.8 billion), plays an
important guiding role in the fields of green industry and green economy.
• Central bank lending: The People’s Bank of China launched two monetary
policy tools in November 2021. One is the Carbon Emission Reduction
Support Tool. The policy provides financial support for national banks at 60%
of the loan principal at an interest rate of 1.75%, encouraging national banks
to issue eligible carbon emission reduction loans to relevant enterprises in
areas such as clean energy, energy conservation, environmental protection,
and carbon emission reduction technology.13 Another policy tool is the
Special Reloan to Support Clean and Efficient Use of Coal (USD $31 billion),
which was used to guarantee the energy security during a worldwide energy
crisis. The policy supports efficiency improvement on coal mining, coal
processing, coal power, industrial combustion, industrial and civil heating, and
comprehensive utilization of coal resources and coalbed methane.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
14
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
1.3 Challenges with Coal Region Just Transition
in China
Compared with industrialized countries, China’s regional coal just transition has
the following characteristics:
• More regions and cities are involved than in any other country. Despite the
decline in recent years, as of 2021 there were still 22 coal-producing provinces
and 73 coal-based cities in China, making coal transition a challenge for many
regions, and making it very difficult to design transition support policies at
the central government level. In the long-term future, the challenges of coal
transition will be concentrated in the four big coal-producing provinces,
where the economy and industry are more dependent on coal and have greater
employment concentration compared to the rest of the country.
• The scale of coal industry unemployment is larger than that of any other
country. As of June 2023, employment in the coal mining and dressing
industry still exceeded 2.6 million, let alone that of related energy-intensive
industries. Over the past decade, about 300,000 coal industry jobs have been
lost annually, making unemployment a huge challenge for most provinces,
especially for the least economically developed ones.
• The coal region transition started later and the transition time window is
shorter. Some industrialized countries began energy transitions as early as
the 1970s, while China’s policies began in the early 2000s for the transition of
resource-exhausted cities and in 2013 for large-scale energy city transition.
Ever since the country pledged “carbon peaking by 2030 and carbon neutrality
by 2060, ” the transition time window has been greatly shortened.
• The transitions of some coal regions faces multiple challenges. For example,
cities in northern and northeastern China are facing multiple barriers, such as
mine depletion, aging populations, and economic decline (Y ang et al., 2022).14

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
15
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
2. Study Scope and Approach
2.1 Concept and Practices of Just Transition
The concept of just transition originated in the American labor movement in
the early 1970s, while scholarly debates on transition did not appear until the
2000s. In theoretical studies, scholars focusing on the historical roots of just
transition have mainly understood this concept as a labor-oriented framework
that links the energy transition to economic transition. Some studies recognized
the linkages between just transitions and other concepts of justice, particularly
environmental, climate, and energy justice, and have developed just transitions
into comprehensive frameworks on justice. These frameworks emphasize the
significance of distributive and procedural justice when taking into account
transition benefits and costs, and argue that the implementation and effects of
transitions must be fair and equitable. There are also studies that incorporate
just transition as a justice principle into the framework of socio-technological
transition, a phenomenon of governance and a perspective of public perceptions of
low-carbon energy transitions.15
At the global level, the concept of a labor-led just transition is increasingly
intertwined with calls for future-oriented climate policies and economic
development plans in fossil-fuel-dependent countries. When the adjustment costs
of the energy transition are imposed on different industries and stakeholders,
there are both winners and losers. On the supply side, the fossil energy industry
and its employees, as well as the resource cities and regions, will become
disadvantaged stakeholders. On the demand side, consumers will ultimately bear
the costs of transition, while groups that are more sensitive to cost changes, such
as low-income groups and regions, are less able to assume the risks and harms of
transition.16 Therefore, the formulation of policies for different stakeholders to
reduce transition risks and promote social equity has become a core concern of
many governments. Geographically, just transition research has mainly focused on
a small number of industrialized countries, while research on emerging economies
has gradually increased in recent years. Global just transition is still in its infancy.
While some industrialized countries have made weaning themselves off coal a
priority in their political agenda, most low- and middle-income countries still

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
16
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
see coal as a critical driver of economic growth. Some studies have examined the
different drivers, policy measures, and conditions that characterize just transitions
across countries,17 to conclude that different levels of economic development,
energy structure, transition pathways, policies, and institutional arrangements
will lead to varying paces of clean energy transition. As a result, the international
community needs to formulate distinctive policies that meet local conditions.18
As there is currently no unified concept and research framework for just transition
and the definition of just transition is not consistent under different research
scopes, in this report, we refer to “just transition” as it is defined in the Paris
Agreement: “the imperatives of a just transition of the workforce and the
creation of decent work and quality jobs in accordance with nationally defined
development priorities. ”
2.2 Study Questions and Approach
Just transition has become an important issue in global climate governance
and various countries in the low-carbon transition. Due to the constraints of
resource endowment and high proportion of heavy industry, China will face
huge just transition challenges in the process of achieving carbon neutrality. As
a labor-oriented concept with short history of scholarly debates, just transition is
still a new and foreign concept for China. Localizing this concept and integrating
it with the existing policy system is crucial. This study focuses on whether there
are policies in China that fall within the scope of just transition, especially for coal
cities. If China has just transition policies, what are the best practices and lessons
from the past? In addition, how should China enhance and improve its policies to
ensure a just transition for its coal regions, as it meets its carbon neutrality goal?
To answer these questions, this study assesses the transition experience in two coal
cities in China, Wuhai in Inner Mongolia, and Tongchuan in Shaanxi, over the
past two decades or so, driven by economic development needs and the central
government’s energy and environmental policies. While these drivers differ from
those pushing decarbonization, the purpose of the efforts is the same, that is, to
achieve sustainable economic and social development while ensuring people’s
livelihoods and employment in the process of gradually reducing dependence on
coal resources and industries. Thus, the transition experience in these two cities

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
17
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
can provide valuable insights into coal regions in China—and other countries—as
they decarbonize.
In order to study the experiences of the two coal cities, we used combined
approaches of quantitative and qualitative research: A 3E+S (Economy, Energy,
Environment, and Society) framework is applied to assess the transitional
experience in economy, energy system, environment, and society over the past
two decades or so. To obtain first-hand information, opinions, and insights, field
interviews were carried out with people who had experienced the transition. The
interviewees include government officials, coal miners, coal mining companies,
and new industries settled in these two coal cities. In this study, we focus on
two aspects related to just transition: (1) the city’s effort to address coal miners’
unemployment issues during the transition; and (2) the city’s effort to diversify the
economy to create non-coal mining job opportunities.
Figure 2-1: Evaluation Framework Used in the Study

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
18
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
3. Case Study 1: Wuhai, Inner
Mongolia
3.1 Overview
The city of Wuhai is located in southwest Inner Mongolia. It has a population of
around 560,000. Established in 1958 by the central government as a coal supplier
to a state-owned steel maker, the region was officially designated as a city in
1976.19 Wuhai’s economy has been largely dependent on coal production, with its
first two decades of development made possible by mining coal and exporting it to
other regions. In 2011, Wuhai was named by the central government as one of the
‘resource depletion’ cities and required to diversify its economy away from coal.
• Economy: Wuhai’s economy has grown rapidly over the past two decades; in
that time, its GDP has increased about twentyfold. From the perspective of
economic structure, the primary (extraction of raw materials – e.g. mining,
fishing, and agriculture), secondary (production of finished goods - e.g.
construction sector, manufacturing, and utilities), and tertiary (provision of
intangible goods and services to consumers – e.g. retail, tourism, banking,
entertainment, and I.T. services.) accounted for 1%, 73%, and 26% of GDP
in 2022, respectively. During the past two decades, the scale of the primary
industry has not changed much, and economic growth was mainly driven by
the secondary and tertiary industries. In recent years, the secondary industry
has maintained rapid growth, and the output value of the tertiary industry has
stabilized. Figure 3-1 below shows Wuhai’s GDP and its dependency on coal
production. From 2000 to 2012, coal demand surged due to the need for steel
production, cement production, and electricity to power economic growth.
Coal production in that period increased from around 5 million tons to almost
40 million tons. As a result, the city’s GDP grew at double-digit rates. The
relentless mining during the golden ten years of 2002 to 2012 resulted in severe
air pollution and environmental damage to the land. In 2013, when the central
government took measures to control air pollution, including the regulation of
coal consumption, coal production in Wuhai plummeted and the GDP stayed
stagnant between 2013 and 2016. Since 2016, as the central government took

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
19
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
on the supply-side structural reform by reducing coal production capacity and
concentrating production in a few provinces including Inner Mongolia, coal
production in Wuhai has bounced back, as has the GDP . By the end of 2022,
coal production had reached 55.25 million tons, close to the highest level in
history, about 1.4 times that of 2012.
Figure 3-1: Wuhai’s Coal Production and GDP, 2000–2022
Sources: GDP: China Data Online and Wuhai Economic and Social Development Statistical
Reports; coal production: Inner Mongolia Statistical Bureau.
• Energy: Wuhai’s economic development is reliant on energy-intensive
and resource-based industries. As a result, its energy intensity index
(energy consumption per unit of GDP) was 2.5 times the average of Inner
Mongolia and 7.2 times the national average in 2020.20 Meanwhile, Wuhai’s
energy consumption is still predominately based on coal while natural gas,
renewables, and hydro have been increasing in recent years. In 2020, coal
provided about 90% of the city’s primary energy consumption. Non-fossil-fuel
energy provided 1.8% of the primary energy consumption in 2020 while the
target for 2025 is 9%.21

In terms of electricity generation, the total installation capacity in 2021 was 4.5
GW , including about 3.9 GW of coal-fired power plants, 457 MW of solar PV ,

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
20
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
and 90 MW of hydro. The total electricity generation in 2021 was 21.7 TWh,
93.87% from coal-fired power plants, 3.21% from solar, and 2.92% from hydro.
Wuhai also announced its hydrogen industry plan in 2020.22 Because hydrogen
is a byproduct of the coke chemical and Chlor-alkali chemical industries,
Wuhai is at an advantage when it comes to establishing the upstream
production for the hydrogen supply chain.  
• Environment: Many years of mining and heavy industry development in
Wuhai has led to severe air pollution and land damage. Since 2013, under
the requirement and support of the central government, Wuhai has made
significant environmental efforts in improving air, land, and green area
coverage. Figure 3-2 below shows the environmental indicators. The PM2.5
level has decreased to 25 ug/m3 in 2022 from 40 ug/m3 in 2017. While it,
is still much higher than the international standard, it is better than China’s
average PM2.5 in 2022, which was 30 ug/m3. The green area coverage in
built-up areas also doubled and reached the national standard of above
40%. Since 2014, industrial soot emissions have decreased rapidly, and the
emission level in 2021 fell to a third of 2014 levels. During the “13th Five-Y ear
Plan” period (2015-2020), the ecological restoration of mining areas was a
policy focus, and mining enterprises invested more than 1 billion RMB to the
restoration of 39 square kilometers.23

Figure 3-2: Changes in the Main Environmental Indicators of Wuhai City
Source: China Urban Statistical Yearbook
Note: The data on volume of industrial soot emission and PM 2.5 are not available for 2019.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
21
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
• Society: Between 2004 and 2021, the population gradually increased from
around 450,000 to over 550,000. The average wage of urban workers in
non-private units and disposable income also increased during that period.
The continued growth during this time period indicates that the economic
conditions for people in Wuhai have improved largely because of coal. As a
prefecture-level city in western China, Wuhai’s population maintains a growth
trend, and the income of residents is also higher than the national average,
which reflects the city’s good employment and economic development.
Figure 3-3: Population, Average Wage and Disposable Income of Urban Residents in Wuhai
Data source: Wuhai National Economic Statistical Bulletin, China Data Online, China Urban
Statistical Yearbook.
Note: The average wage in the figure is the average wage of urban employees in non-
private units.
3.2 Efforts to Address the Coal Worker
Unemployment Issue
Because of efficiency improvement, economic slowdown, and government policies
to reduce coal production capacity, total job employment in coal mining and
dressing in Wuhai has decreased from about 40,000 in 2013 to about 10,000 in
2023, a 75% reduction.24 Coal mining and dressing employment as a percentage
of total employment in the secondary and tertiary industries dropped from 24% in
2013 to 12% in 2018.25

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
22
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
Figure 3-4: Coal Mining and Washing Job Employment, Wuhai
Source: Wuhai Statistic Bureau.26
As discussed in Section 1.2, in 2016, the central government called for a reduction
in coal capacity across the country. Wuhai is among the regions required to
reduce their coal mining capacity. From 2016 to 2020, Wuhai reduced 1.2 million
tons of production. To address the coal worker unemployment issue, the central
government worked with the provincial government and coal mining companies
to ensure workers still had the economic resources to support their families. Those
methods are discussed below.
• Support from the central government: At the central government level, the
Ministry of Finance allocated funds to support the state-owned enterprises
for the employees’ resettlement. The fund includes special transfer payments
to state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and is used to cover benefits for employees
who retire early, severance packages for the unemployed, delayed salary
payment, etc. Out of the total funds, 80% is allocated based on factors such as
the amount of production capacity reduction targets, the number of employees
to be resettled, and the degree of difficulty (such as the fiscal status of the
provincial governments). The remaining 20% is linked to the completion of the
targets and will be allocated to those who exceed the target task amount. The
fund is mainly targeted at employee settlement in state-owned enterprises but

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
23
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
is allowed to be used for qualified non-SOEs at the discretion of the provincial
governments.27
• Measures taken by a state-owned coal mining company: Shenhua Wuhai
Energy Company is one of the companies that received such funding. It is a
subsidiary of Shenhua Energy, which is the largest coal producing company in
China and owned by the central government directly. By 2016, the company
had been losing money for five consecutive years. At that time the total loss
had reached more than 9 billion RMB, with total liabilities of 21.628 billion
RMB, an asset-liability ratio of 161%, and company-wide loans totaling 16.5
billion RMB. Employees’ wages had not been paid for four months.

Shenhua had around 22,000 employees in 2016 before the resettlement;
this number decreased by 13,500 to 8,500 following the resettlement, for
a reduction of around 60%. With the funding allocated by the central
government, some funds from the Inner Mongolia provincial government, and
the company’s own financial support, Shenhua Wuhai Energy Company issued
the resettlement policy for their employees shown in Table 3-1.28

In addition, other subsidiary companies of Shenhua Energy provided some job
opportunities to Shenhua Wuhai Energy Company. Around 4,500 employees
were transferred to a company separate from Shenhua to focus on coke
production. Around 5,000 employees took the early internal retirement option.
The remaining 4,000 people took one of the other options.29

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
24
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
Table 3-1: Resettlement Policy Taken by Shenhua Wuhai Energy Company
APPLICABILITY COMPENSATION & BENEFITS
Early Internal
Retirement
Men >55 years old
Women >45 years old
•Paid at 80% of the previous year’s
salary or 60% of the average salary
for the whole company, whichever is
higher.
•Employee pays basic medical
insurance and pension insurance.
•The company pays the company
annuities and housing provident fund.
Waiting to be
Retired
Men >50 years old
Women >40 years old
•Paid at the minimum wage (1,640
RMB in 2016).
•Employee pays the insurance for
pension, medical care, work injury,
unemployment, and maternity. The
company pays the company annuity
and housing provident fund.
Furlough Mutual agreement •No salary.
•Employee pays the insurance for both
the personal and company portions.
No company annuity or housing
provident fund.
Termination Rest •Paid by the severance package
based on the number of service years
multiplied by the monthly wage,
capped at twelve months.
• Measures taken by the city government: The city government took various
measures to help the reemployment of coal workers, including (1) providing
training for reemployment; (2) providing subsidies for enterprises with no
or low layoffs; (3) providing the unemployed who want to start their own
businesses with supporting policies and encouraging these individuals to join
the incubator base; and (4) creating public interest job opportunities for those
struggling to get reemployed.30
With these efforts from the central government, the state-owned companies,
and the city government, the coal workers who worked at the state-owned coal

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
25
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
mining companies were provided with adequate support to meet basic life needs.
Some workers like the ones who took the early internal retirement option were
even better off since they didn’t have to work but received only slightly lower
compensations than before. As a result, unemployment didn’t cause social
instability and no petitions were reported.31
However, not all coal workers who were unemployed in Wuhai during this
time were given such options and benefits as the ones working for Shenhua.
Coal workers who worked at privately owned coal mining companies faced
unemployment without any severance package. This is because there was no
formal long-term contract signed between the private companies and the coal
workers, as was the case for state-owned companies. These coal workers also did
not protest or file petitions against their companies because they did not expect
the companies to solve the unemployment issue for them. 32
3.3 Economic Diversification to Create Non-coal
Jobs
3.3.1 Economic Diversification Strategies
While the designation of Wuhai as a resource-depletion city by the central
government required Wuhai to diversify away from coal mining, the city’s
diversification efforts started in the late 1990s and still continue today. Figure 3-5
below summarizes the key industries Wuhai introduced to diversify its economy
away from coal mining over the years.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
26
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
Figure 3-5: Wuhai’s Economic Diversification Strategies
• Late 1990s – Extension of Coal Mining to Energy-Intensive Industries
Relying on Coal and Electricity: In the late 1990s, the price of coal was low
and Wuhai had limited railroad transportation to export its coal to other
regions, so the city faced a severe economic quandary. To reduce its reliance
on coal exports, Wuhai started to promote the development of local industries
that consume coal locally, such as coal coking for steel production, coal-fired
power plants, and cement production. All these industries are energy-intensive
and resulted in severe air and water pollution, but economic development took
priority.
• 2010s – Further Extension to Coke Chemicals and Chlor-Alkali Chemical
Industries: The coke chemical industry is a further extension of the coal
mining-washing-coking supply chain in Wuhai and uses the waste products
of the coking process, such as coal tar and coke oven gas, to make chemical
products such as carbon materials and liquified natural gas.33 This circular
industrial process enhances the economic value of the coking industry and the
downstream chemical industries and helps to reduce the pollution associated
with the coal tar and coal gas released in the coking process. Wuhai also has
a competitive advantage in the chlor-alkali industry because it has abundant
limestone, salt sources, and cheap electricity (as the result of cheap coal mined
locally). These critical raw materials are used in the chlor-alkali industry to
produce the basic chemicals needed to make downstream products for the

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
27
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
agricultural, petrochemical, pharmaceutical, construction, and light chemical
industries.

During this period, economic development still relied on energy-intensive
and resource-based industries, and the secondary industry showed the
characteristics of high energy consumption and low added value. By 2020,
the six traditional industries altogether accounted for 96.6% of the added
value of industrial enterprises above designated size, and 99% of the energy
consumption of industrial enterprises above designated size. At the end of the
“13th Five-Y ear Plan” period, the increase in energy consumption exceeded
the control target of 3.2 million tons of coal equivalent, and the energy
consumption per unit of GDP was 2.5 times the average level of the Inner
Mongolia and 7.2 times the national average.34
• 2020s – Continued Upgrades to Strategic Emerging Industries: In more
recent years, Wuhai continues to upgrade and deepen the development of
the coke chemical and chlor-alkali industry to include strategic emerging
industries that are high-tech, more intelligent, and green. It currently aims
to build two industrial clusters at the 100-billion-RMB output level (“new
coal chemicals” and “silicon-based new materials”) and five full industrial
chain clusters at 10 billion RMB output (fine chemicals, metallurgical
building materials, equipment manufacturing, new energy, and degradable
materials).35,36 The goal for the total GDP contribution for these industries is
400 billion RMB by 2025, seven times that of the total GDP contribution from
the industrial sectors in 2022.37

In addition to the industrial sectors, Wuhai is investing heavily in its
agriculture and tourism industries by leveraging its natural and cultural
resources. As part of the Haibo Bay water conservancy project completed
in 2014, Wuhai now has an artificial lake that has improved the climate and
ecosystem and completely changed its natural landscape. The surrounding
deserts have become the site of desert races and sand games. Thanks to
supportive government policies, the city’s wine industry, which once had
almost no economic value, now employs more than 10,000 people, and four
Wuhai companies produce multiple wine brands sold in China and other
countries.38 In 2018, Wuhai received visits from 3.5 million people, and
tourism revenue reached RMB 7.6 billion (about USD $1.1 billion), a 17.5%
growth from 2017.39

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
28
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
3.3.2 Strategy Implementation
To implement their strategies and attract investments from private companies in
the identified industries, Wuhai’s government made the following efforts:
• Constructed four industrial parks to remove infrastructure barriers. In
the late 1990s, when Wuhai’s limited railroad infrastructure made it difficult
to export coal to other regions, the economically struggling city decided to
develop high energy-intensive industries as a way to diversify its economy
away from a reliance on coal mining. While the city had a competitive
advantage thanks to the cheap electricity produced from coal, there was a
“chicken-or-egg” issue. The city lacked the developed infrastructure the new
industries needed for manufacturing, such as water, electricity, transportation,
and telecommunication. By building the four industrial parks, the city was
able to quickly address this specific infrastructure problem without having to
develop infrastructure for the entire city.
• Proactively engaged investors and private companies in new industries.
Rather than waiting for new industries to come to Wuhai, the city proactively
sourced companies in each targeted industry. They first conducted due
diligence to identify the regions with the targeted industries, and then reached
out to the chamber of commerce in each identified region and organized
visits. They also worked with industrial trade associations such as China
Petro-chemical Industry Federation and asked these groups for their help in
identifying and introducing potential companies. Further, the city partnered
with local governments from other regions to hold investment promotion
conferences. At these events, reciprocal policies, incentives, planning, and
industrial foundations were introduced to attract investments from the
targeted companies.40 In the first seven months alone, Wuhai attracted 12.6
billion RMB investment and signed contracts with 62 projects worth a total of
134 billion RMB.41
• Closely partnered with the companies to help the settlement and attract
more companies. To help the new companies settle in the industrial
parks, the government assigned a management committee to each park.
The responsibilities of the management committees include planning and
development of infrastructure, planning the industrial development, providing
all administrative services to the companies, and coordinating the work of

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
29
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
different government departments in the industrial parks. The management
committees removed the burden of dealing with complicated administrative
processes from the companies, and took care of any issues and barriers the
companies may have encountered as they got settled. This arrangement
created a trusting, collaborative relationship between the government and
the companies. More importantly, once the companies were settled and
enjoying services and support from the Wuhai government, they shared
their experiences with other companies in their home regions, who later
followed them to Wuhai. These word-of-mouth endorsements have proven
very effective in bringing more companies to Wuhai, and have helped the city
become a hub for fine chemical industry with an impressive product range.42
3.3.3 Evaluation on Just Transition and Conclusion
Today, Wuhai has emerged as an important coke chemical and chlor-alkali
chemical industry base with a deep processing capacity of 900,000 tons of coal
tar each year and a PVC deep processing capacity of 200,000 tons per year as of
2018.43 Wuhai City has been further upgraded to a fine chemical center and is the
production base of about 130 kinds of fine chemical products. The fine chemical
industry’s GDP accounts for 9.5% of the industrial sectors’ GDP above designated
size.44,45 Strategic emerging industries contribute about 10% of industrial GDP ,
and Wuhai has attracted well-known enterprises to invest and build factories.46
The aforementioned diversification efforts have had a positive impact on job
creation. As seen in the following charts, the current job employment in the
chemical industry exceeds the job employment in the coal mining industry,
reaching 15,000 as of 2020.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
30
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
Figure 3-6: Number of Employees by Industry in 2021, Wuhai
Source: Statistical Yearbook of Wuhai City (2021).
While the economic and job employment impacts of the new industries are still
not sufficient to replace coal mining, Wuhai’s economic diversification efforts
show promising results. These results are driven by the city’s identification of new
industries based on its competitive advantages and its strong, consistent, and
continued efforts to implement the strategies. These achievements are benefited
from the following efforts:
• Establishing new industries based on regional competitive advantage.
Wuhai identified and attracted the coal coke chemical and chlor-alkali
chemical industries based on its competitive advantages of abundant coking
coal, low power and energy costs, and sufficient limestone resources, which
in turn will bring a price competitive advantage to these two industries. In
particular, the raw materials used in the downstream products of coal and coke
chemical industry are by-products after coking, which not only reduces the
raw material cost, but also improves the comprehensive utilization of resources
and increases added value of the coal and coke process.
• Consistency of policies for industrial extension and upgrading. The
non-mining industries developed by Wuhai in the past 20 years are mainly
concentrated in the chemical industry, including the established coal coke
chemical industry and chlor-alkali chemical industry, as well as the fine

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
31
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
chemical industry, silicon chemical industry, etc. Later, industrial upgrading
extended to the field of new energy and new materials, but it is still connected
to chemical industries. Such policy consistency has enabled Wuhai to form a
scale effect for new industries, and then form a competitive advantage. This is
invaluable in an environment with a long time span and a constantly changing
domestic and international situation.
• Creation of a good business environment to attract investment. By forming
cooperative relationships with enterprises and endeavoring to help them solve
problems, the municipal government of Wuhai earned a positive reputation
among the enterprises which helped attract other enterprises to settle in
Wuhai.
At the same time, Wuhai has also encountered challenges in the process of
economic diversification. These challenges include:
• Fierce competition with the surrounding local government. In terms of
resource endowment, Wuhai is similar to the surrounding areas, so investment
decisions often depend on the preferential policies that local government can
give to enterprises. This kind of competition makes attracting investments.
• Difficulties attracting talent. Located in the remote northwest China, it
is difficult for Wuhai City to attract high-tech talent for new industry
development. In particular, industrial parks for new industries are far away
from the city and have no recreational and entertainment facilities, making it
difficult to recruit talent even with high salaries. Therefore, industrial parks
need to be supported by living, educational, medical and other facilities.
• Constraints on water and land resources. Wuhai City is in an arid area where
water resources per capita are less than 20% of the national average. However,
water resources are important for the chemical industry. The lack of water
resources limits the potential to develop the chemical industry. At the same
time, although Wuhai has many sunny days annually, it does not have a lot
of land that can be used to develop solar power, which in turn restricts the
development of low-carbon manufacturing industries.
• Coal-dependent energy consumption and heavy industry-dependent industrial
structure. By the end of 2021, the city’s enterprises had produced a total of
46.56 million tons of raw coal,47 while the consumption of raw coal was as

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
32
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
high as 75.99 million tons.48 The transformation of Wuhai City still follows
the pathway of industry extension to coal resources and chemicals, and the
efforts to extend the economic structure to emerging industries are only
just beginning. The city will face huge challenges as China moves toward a
low-carbon economy.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
33
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
4. Case Study 2: Tongchuan,
Shaanxi
4.1 Overview
Tongchuan City is located in central Shaanxi province, with a total area of 3,882
square kilometers. The city’s coal mining area is about 1,300 square kilometers,
accounting for 33.4% of the city’s area. In 2020, the city’s resident population was
698,000. Tongchuan City is a typical resource-based city. Its residents have been
mining coal in the mountains or underground since the Tang and Song dynasties
more than one thousand years ago. After the founding of the People’s Republic
of China in 1949, Tongchuan was positioned by the new national government
as an important energy and building materials base, producing coal and cement
in the northwest; it was later designated as a city in 1958. In 2009, Tongchuan
was selected in the second batch of resource-exhausted cities, and in 2013, it
was identified as one of cities in the Adjustment and Transformation of the Old
Industrial Base in China. Since then, the economic transformation away from coal
has become the main line of Tongchuan’s economic and social development.
• Economy: Figure 4-1 shows Tongchuan’s GDP and coal production over
the past two decades. Similar to the situation in Wuhai, the output of coal
in Tongchuan rose from 2000 to 2012, reaching a peak in 2012 at around 30
million tons. After 12 years of economic growth, in 2013 coal production in
Tongchuan began to steadily decrease (other than a short increase from 2018
and 2019) due to requirements from the government in 2013 to reduce coal
consumption to address the air pollution issue. A 2016 overcapacity reduction
policy followed, further contributing to the decrease in coal production. GDP
stayed stagnant from 2013 to 2018 as coal production decreased. But from
2019 to 2022, the GDP rapidly picked up even though coal production kept
declining, an upturn largely attributed to the tertiary industry, mainly the real
estate sector. By 2022, Tongchuan’s coal production had fallen to 55% of 2012
levels.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
34
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China

Figure 4-1: Tongchuan’s GDP and Coal Production in 2000-2022
Source: Statistical Communiqué on the National Economic and Social Development of
Tongchuan City over the years; website of Tongchuan Development and Reform
Commission.
• Energy: Energy consumption in Tongchuan is predominantly based on coal,
but natural gas and renewables are increasing rapidly. Non-fossil fuel energy
provided 9.4% of the energy consumption in 2021. The industrial sector
consumed 82% of the energy, which includes the energy-intensive industries,
such as cement production, aluminum production, and coal-fired power
plants.49 Similarly, the energy supply in Tongchuan is predominantly from
coal, but renewables have rapidly increased in recent years. The total installed
capacity for coal-fired power plants is 2,600 MW , with 1,900 MW connected
to the grid and in operation as of 2022. Non-fossil fuel power plant capacity in
2022 is around 1,000 MW , including 169 MW wind, 833 MW solar, and 420
MW hydro. The total generation increased from 6.5 TWh in 2012 to 10.6 TWh
in 2021. Renewables and hydro generation increased from 0 in 2021 to 14.4
TWh in 2021, 11.6% of the total generation. Crude oil production increased
from 0 in 2021 to 39,200 tons in 2021.50 For the 14th Five Y ear Plan period, the
target for non-fossil energy consumption is 15% in 2025.
• Environment: Like other resource-based cities, Tongchuan’s industrial and
economic development came at the expense of environmental pollution and
damage. Tongchuan was once called “the city invisible on satellites” due to
severe dust and soot pollution from cement production. Large-scale coal

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
35
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
mining activities led to 267 square kilometers of goaf and subsidence areas.
Around 2009 there were 46,000 households and 130,000 people living in
shanty towns and subsidence and landslide areas in the city.51 As part of
its efforts to solve the environmental issues befalling resource-based cities,
since 2001 the central government has been providing significant financial
support to Tongchuan. As a result, Tongchuan’s environmental condition has
significantly improved, as indicated by the reduction in particulate matter and
industrial soot emissions and increases in green space. As shown in Figure 4-2,
PM2.5 has dropped from nearly 55 ug/m3 in 2017 to 36 ug/m3 in 2021, still
a little higher than the national average. Industrial dust emissions decreased
by two-thirds from 2016. Meanwhile, green coverage in built-up areas has
remained steady at 40%.

Figure 4-2: Changes in the Main Environmental Indicators of Tongchuan City
Source: China City Statistical Yearbook.
• Society: The population in Tongchuan has been declining over the past ten
years or so from around 800,000 before 2012 to around 705,000 in 2022
because of reduced coal production. As a result of the growing GDP , the
GDP per capita also has been increasing. The average disposable income
per person increased from 5,000 RMB in 2003 to 30,000 RMB in 2015. In
2016, Tongchuan closed 21 coal mines, equivalent to more than one third of
production capacity in Shaanxi province. The impact on disposable income
also can be seen in Figure 4-3.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
36
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China

Figure 4-3: Population, Average Wage and Disposable Income of Urban Residents in
Tongchuan
Source: Tongchuan Economic and Social Development Statistical Reports
Note: The average wage in the figure is the average wage of urban employees in non-
private units.
4.2 Efforts to Address the Coal Worker
Unemployment Issue
Coal mining employment in Tongchuan has seen an overall decrease over the
past 20 to 25 years due to efficiency improvements, economic slowdowns, and
government policies. In the late 1990s, Tongchuan’s coal mining employment was
between 45,000 and 78,000. At that time, coal mining workers and their families
numbered more than 200,000, accounting for a quarter of the city’s population.
But by 2019, coal mining employment had dropped to around 23,000, about a 70%
reduction from 1997 and a 30% reduction from 2013.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
37
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
Figure 4-4: Number of Mining Jobs in Tongchuan City, 1997-2019
Data source: China Data Online, Harvard University.
Note: Tongchuan mining industry includes coal mining and dressing industry, oil and gas
mining, and non-metallic mineral mining. According to Tongchuan’s 2017
Statistical Yearbook, 99% of the industry is coal mining and dressing.
In 2016, under the national policy to reduce coal overcapacity, Tongchuan closed
21 local coal mines with a total of 10.58 million tons of coal, which accounted
for 36.5% of the closed coal mine capacity in Shaanxi province that year. These
closures had a significant impact on Tongchuan’s GDP and the coal mining
workers. Tongchuan Mining Company, the largest state-owned coal mine in
Tongchuan, laid off 70% of its employees—more than 13,000 people. Multiple
factors made finding new employment challenging for these workers. The coal
mines were far away from the city, and the job market around each coal mining
area was small. Employees tended to be less educated, older, and highly dependent
on the state-owned enterprise. And their traditional, conservative mindsets meant
they were less likely to embrace change and lacked the ability and enthusiasm to
start a new business.
To address these challenges, the central government, the city government, and the
state-owned coal mining company took a series of steps to help the coal mining
workers’ resettlement.
• Support from the central government: The Ministry of Finance’s policy with
dedicated funds for coal worker resettlement, as mentioned in the section on
Wuhai, is applicable to Tongchuan as well.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
38
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
• Measures taken by the state-owned mining company: Similar to Wuhai,
under the guidance of the central government, Tongchuan provided different
options for people depending on their age or preferences, as shown in
Table 4-1. Costs were covered with the allocated funding from the central
government, support from the provincial government, and the company’s
own financial resources. In addition, the company launched several initiatives
aimed at helping the employees find new jobs, including (1) establishing a
coal mine management company and cooperating with companies in areas
rich in coal resources to provide technical services for coal production safety,
railway operations, and project contracting; (2) investing in subsidiaries under
the parent company in non-coal industries such as life science, new energy
and new industries, tourism, and agriculture; and (3) building a job transfer
and employment platform in close collaboration with the provincial and city
governments. 52
Table 4-1: Measures Taken by the State-owned Mining Company in Tongchuan
OPTIONS APPLICABILITY COMPENSATION & BENEFITS
Retirement due to
Special Reasons
Men >55
Women >45
Specialized occupation
or illness
Paid social security for
more than 15 years
•Same as normal retirement.
Resignation due to
Illness
Illness and cannot work
Paid social security for
more than 15 years
•Same as resignation under National
Labor Law.
Early Internal
Retirement
Men >55
Women >45
•Minimum wage + seniority allowance
(minimum wage is 1,190-1,480 RMB).
•The employee and the company both
pay basic medical insurance, pension
insurance, and housing provident fund.
•The employee pays social security.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
39
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
Waiting to be Retired Men >50
Women >40
•Minimum wage.
•Same benefits as above.
Self-employment People who prefer to
find their own jobs
•One-time 30,000 RMB payment if
retiring in 5-10 years
•One-time 50,000 RMB payment if
retiring in >10 years
•The employee keeps the social
security account.
Employment
Termination
•Paid a severance package based on
the number of service years multiplied
by the monthly wage, capped at
twelve months.
Source: “Interpretation of opinions and policies on the diversion and resettlement of surplus
personnel of Shaanxi Coal Chemical Group,” Tongchuan Mining Bureau, http:/ /
www.tckwj.com/info/1028/2565.htm
• Measures taken by the city government: The city government sought ways
to provide job opportunities for the unemployed coal workers and other
people in the community, including: (1) improving the job information
sharing system; (2) improving the government employment service system
to better serve the public, including organizational setup, policy support,
financial support, entrepreneurship training, and entrepreneurship services;
(3) strengthening cooperation between Jiangsu and Shaanxi to encourage
the transfer of migrant workers to cities with labor shortages in Jiangsu; (4)
optimizing the entrepreneurial environment and promoting entrepreneurship
as an employment avenue by providing guaranteed loans and improving loan
application procedures; (5) providing reemployment training within new
industries; and (6) providing job market platforms for finding temporary work.
Through the support and efforts of the central government, the local government,
and the company, most of the 13,000 coal mining workers at risk of unemployment
were able to keep their livelihoods thanks to either the compensation and benefits
provided to them or alternative job opportunities.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
40
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
4.3 Economic Diversification to Create Non-coal
Jobs
4.3.1 Economy Diversification Strategies
The founding of Tongchuan was made possible thanks to its two pillar industries:
coal mining and cement production. Over the years, aluminum smelting, ceramic
manufacturing, and apple growing also became traditional industries in the city.
However, in the late 1990s, after many years of mining activities, Tongchuan’s
coal industry faced severe challenges as coal prices fell and the companies
sustained economic losses. Tongchuan started to explore other ways to develop its
economy. Later, as coal resources were depleted and the pollution issue became
severe, the pressure to move away from coal intensified, driving more efforts for
diversification. The resulting path taken is summarized in the Figure 4-5.
Figure 4-5: Tongchuan’s Economic Diversification Strategy
• 2000s - mid-2010s: Two-horse carriage policy. Tongchuan has identified two
parallel paths—the so-called “two-horse carriage”—to address its economic
challenges and drive economic growth while addressing the land damage
caused by relentless mining in the past:53,54,55

Strengthen and expand five traditional industries. During this period,
Tongchuan attracted investments for big projects focused on coal-fired power
plants, energy efficiency technology improvements of its aluminum smelting
process, and cement production. In an effort to improve the utilization rate of
its resources, the city experimented with using methane and heat waste from

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
41
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
the cement process for power generation and explored alternative sources of
energy, such as shale oil. The city also developed a fruit plantation base for
apples, cherries, and peaches, as well as for walnuts and peppercorns.

Develop new industries that cause less environmental damage and are less
reliant on resources. These industries include Chinese medicine, tourism, food
production, and equipment manufacturing. The city secured an investment
from Wangwang food company, a leading company with wide brand
recognition in the national food market, to build a manufacturing facility. By
leveraging Tongchuan’s long history, the city is now home to a burgeoning
tourism industry. Tongchuan is where Medicine King Simiao Sun resided
during the Sui and Tang dynasties and where the famous monk Xuanzang
Tang translated Buddhist scriptures from India more than 1,500 years ago.
• 2018-present: Strategic emerging industry upgrade with more regional
coordination. In recent years, while continuing to implement the two-horse
carriage policy, Tongchuan has initiated the development of two strategic
emerging industries: the commercial space industry and the optoelectronics
industry.56,57 Both industries require advanced technologies, yet Tongchuan
lacks competitive advantages for these technologies compared to other
developed cities. However, Tongchuan is strategically taking part in the
regional planning of Shaanxi province, which has traditionally been a hub
for the country’s aerospace industry. The provincial capital Xi’an is home to
many elite universities that can provide an innovation and talent pipeline to
these two industries. By being part of Shaanxi’s plan, Tongchuan can leverage
its technology, human resources, and industry assets to develop these two
emerging industries.
4.3.2 Strategy Implementation Efforts
Tongchuan has made great progress on policy implementation, which has similar
elements to the policy in Wuhai:
• Construct industrial parks: In order to develop new industries, Tongchuan’s
city government built eight industrial parks to attract investments for large
projects hosted by these parks. The Dongjiahe industrial park is one example

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
42
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
of the circular economy in the aluminum industry. The park hosts 55
companies along the chain of coal – electricity - aluminum smelting – deep
processing of aluminum - aluminum products. Currently it has an aluminum
smelting capacity of 300,000 tons and produces different automotive parts
made of aluminum, such as wheels, axles, and brake pads, with a total output
value of 15 billion RMB.58 The park plans to extend to renewable aluminum,
which uses recycled waste aluminum to produce aluminum as a way to reduce
the carbon emissions of aluminum production.
• Proactively engage private companies to invest in Tongchuan: To attract
investment in these industries, the city government organized close to 40
conferences to promote Tongchuan and invited 300 groups of potential
business owners to visit between 2009 and 2013. Contracts or agreements
for more than 700 projects were signed during that period, with investments
totaling 211 billion RMB. Some of the companies represented in these deals
include Taiwan’s Wangwang Company in food manufacturing, Xi’an Heavy
Equipment and Daqin Aluminum Industry for equipment manufacturing, and
Fenghe and Fangzhou for pre-processed Chinese medicine.59
• Closely partner with companies to facilitate settlement and operation.
Similar to Wuhai, Tongchuan also formed management committees to provide
needed services to the new companies, reduce their administrative burden,
and brainstorm with them on additional new industries the industrial parks
could attract.
• Introduce funds and projects through inter-governmental cooperation
between Jiangsu and Shaanxi. Jiangsu and Shaanxi are partners under the
central government’s East-West Targeted Assistance Framework. Under this
framework, Tongchuan City actively introduces strong enterprises from
Jiangsu and promotes regional industrial clusters to extend and supplement
the chain. By 2021, 10 cooperation projects have been completed, including
Damei Wheel Hub, Yijun Tianxing Photovoltaic, and Shaanxi Qinjiu Cultural
Exhibition Center among others, with annual investment of 270 million RMB
and 123 rural laborers absorbed. Damei, the largest joint venture between
Jiangsu and Shaanxi, has an annual output of 6 million automobile wheels,
filling the gap in aluminum alloy wheel products in Shaanxi Province. In
addition, Jiangsu has also become a sales market for Tongchuan agricultural
products.60

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
43
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
4.3.3 Evaluation of Just Transition and Conclusion
Figures 4-6 and 4-7 show the results of years of economic diversification efforts
for the city of Tongchuan’s industrial sector. Traditional industries, including coal
mining and dressing, cement, aluminum, and power generation, still contribute
most of the industrial GDP at around 90%. The three new industries that
Tongchuan has been developing—food manufacturing, equipment manufacturing,
and medicine manufacturing—in total contributed to around 5% of the industrial
sector above designated size. These industries have not yet generated many job
opportunities. In 2021, total employment in these three industries was 3,800.
In comparison with Wuhai, Tongchuan’s economic diversification efforts so far
have produced less of an impact on the economy and job opportunities. Potential
reasons for this disparity may include:
• The lack of focused and consistent policies to support new industry
development. Tongchuan identified around ten new industries to develop,
as compared to two industries in Wuhai. An overly ambitious goal may have
created distractions and led to an inability to provide the resources needed to
make any new industry successful. Further, targeting too many industries also
created the potential for inconsistent support over time, due to changes in the
city government’s leadership. Ultimately, none of the new industries received
enough sustained support to reach the desired scale.
• The lack of strong competitive advantages for developing new industries.
For example, Tongchuan identified the bio-pharmaceutical industry as a
potential new industry. However, this industry requires highly educated
workers with specialized pharmaceutical knowledge that Tongchuan does not
have. It is unclear what competitive advantage Tongchuan has to develop the
bio-pharmaceutical industry.
• Limited efforts to extend upstream and downstream products to form
the industrial cluster and scale. Food manufacturing is one such example.
Tongchuan was able to attract investments from one of the industry leaders,
Wangwang. However, this win did not create spillover effects for the city,
such as broadening upstream or downstream product manufacturing. In
comparison, after establishing the coke chemical and chlori-alkali chemical

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
44
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
industries, Wuhai was able to build on these successes and expand to fine
chemical industries.
Figure 4-6: Percentage of New Industries in the Industrial Sector GDP
Source: Tongchuan Municipal Bureau of Statistics
Figure 4-7: Number of Employment by Industry in 2021, Tongchuan
Data source: Tongchuan 2022 Statistical Yearbook.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
45
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
5. Conclusions and Policy
Recommendations
5.1 Conclusions
Based on our research on the just transition of two coal cities, Wuhai and
Tongchuan, we draw the following conclusions:
• The two case studies indicate that even though “just transition” is a term that
originated in the United States and has not been widely used in China in
the past, this type of approach has been a key consideration for the central
government in the policymaking and implementation of the coal transition.
Recognizing the difficulty in moving away from coal and the challenges
faced by coal regions and coal workers, the central government in China
has allocated billions of dollars of special funds toward covering the basic
living expenses of coal workers and created job training and other programs
customized to meet the needs of coal workers based on their age, education,
and other characteristics. In the state-owned enterprises, these supports and
measures have proven effective at helping ensure a just transition for coal
workers and have been well received by society. On the other hand, within the
private companies, a just transition for coal workers is a concept that seems to
have received relatively little attention.
• In addition to providing compensation for individual coal workers, China’s
approach emphasizes economic diversification with strong industrial policies
to drive economic growth and create non-coal mining job opportunities.
Both cities we studied have achieved some successes in this regard.
Wuhai has become an important hub for coke chemical and chlori-alkali
chemical industries in China and is extending its reach to the fine chemical,
biodegradable BDO material, and organic silicon industries. The strategic
emerging industries contributed 10% of the city’s industrial GDP in 2020 and
its chemical manufacturing industry today employs more employees than
coal mining. Similarly, Tongchuan’s strategic emerging industries contributed
13.5% of the city’s industrial GDP in 2020.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
46
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
• China’s city governments demonstrate great leadership and entrepreneurship
and play a crucial role in developing diversified economy for coal cities. We
propose the following framework for coal regions in China and the rest of
the world to consider as they develop new industries and transition to a clean
energy future:
Figure 7: Proposed Framework for Economic Diversification
• Strategic Planning: It is critical to identify new industries by strategically
assessing the competitive advantages of the regions. As shown in Wuhai’s
and Tongchuan’s cases, developing new industries is challenging and
requires a great deal of resources, effort, and time. Without clear competitive
advantages, attracting new investments will be hard, and even when some
initial investments are made, to reaching the scale needed to have a substantial
economic and employment impact will be difficult.
• Effective Implementing: To attract investment from targeted new industries,
the government should be proactive in engaging private sectors, providing
the right incentives, eliminating barriers, and addressing the specific needs
of companies. The construction of industrial parks and the formation of
management committees in both cities provide references for effective ways to
attract new industries.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
47
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
• Continued Upgrading: For a new industry to scale up and become a pillar
industry that replace coal, prior efforts must be continuously expanded and
upgraded. In this regard, Wuhai’s case demonstrates that gaining the trust
and confidence of the new companies so that they can promote the region to
other companies in their industries and networks can be a very effective way to
attract new companies and investments.
The challenges faced by coal regions in China will likely only grow as they
continue on the path to decarbonization. Coal cities in China are mostly relying on
new energy-intensive industries that are carbon-intensive. Wuhai and Tongchuan
chose different paths for their urban transformations. Wuhai chose to develop
the coke chemical and chlor-alkali chemical industries, and further extended
and upgraded the industrial chain for silicon chemical industry, fine chemical
industry, new energy and other strategic emerging industries. Tongchuan, in
contrast, has relied on the energy advantages of coal and electricity to develop
energy-consuming industries such as aluminum and building materials as well as
light industry and high-tech industry. Tongchuan also tapped new resources such
as its history and culture, its ecological landscape, and Chinese medicine.
However, the future development of both cities still faces big challenges. Wuhai’s
industrial structure still relies heavily on energy-consuming heavy industries, and
its energy intensity seriously exceeds that of the province and the country. The
international competitiveness of coal chemical products is not optimistic in the
face of tightening global standards for carbon emissions. In the case of Tongchuan,
the high energy-consuming industries it has taken on are also facing more
pressing energy and carbon constraints in a dual-carbon context.
The experiences of Wuhai and Tongchuan show that the development of non-coal
industries to reach the economic and employment scale of coal substitution is
extremely challenging and is a long-term process. In addition, these regions
traditionally do not have the knowledge, talent, and infrastructure needed for
new industries, nor the upstream and downstream industrial agglomeration
advantages to compete with more developed regions. Finally, the decline in
indirect coal-related employment and the lack of employment opportunities in
new industries have led to a large-scale exodus of young adults from these areas,
adding the challenge of an aging population to the otherwise arduous process of
urban transformation.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
48
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
5.2 Policy Recommendations
Given the size of the coal industry, the scale of potential unemployment,
the number of regions affected, and the relatively short window of time for
transition, China’s coal regions are likely to face greater challenges on the path
to decarbonization than other countries. Based on the two cities’ experience
ensuring a just transition, we provide the following policy recommendations to
governments to address the challenges faced by coal regions as they pursue a clean
energy transition:
• The central government should develop customized schedules for each
coal mining region, to allow more time for regions to consider the unique
challenges they confront. This gives the coal mining regions adequate time to
develop new industries and address unemployment issues without affecting the
overall timetable for reaching decarbonization goals.
• The central government should consider more diversified policy tools to
provide the financial support needed for coal regions’ just transition. While
Wuhai’s and Tongchuan’s experiences show that the Ministry of Finance
provided significant financial support in the form of billions of dollars in
funds and was effective in helping coal miners’ just transition, reaching carbon
neutrality will likely require much more support given the scale of the impact.
China needs to continue to improve its fiscal policy tools and actively promote
the financial instruments with leveraging capital resources from private capital
to provide continuous support for the low-carbon transition of the economy
and society at large scale. In addition, national and provincial governments
should consider requiring coal enterprises to establish coal transition funds
that can be used for just transition in the future.
• Local governments should avoid falling once more into a “resource trap”
and tackle the challenge of being locked into low-value, high-carbon
industries. Recent years have witnessed a significant wave of cross-regional
industrial transfer from eastern to western regions which coincides with
the needs to diversify and transform the economies of the coal regions. Due
to the increasingly stringent environmental regulations, the “high energy
consumption, high pollution” enterprises in eastern coastal areas are being
transferred to resource-rich cities, including coal mining cities, such as
Tongchuan electrolytic aluminum enterprises. Many coal regions also choose

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
49
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
to develop coal chemical industries to leverage its resource advantage. All of
these make it easy for the coal regions to fall into the resource trap. Instead,
coal cities should shift the paradigm of development from focusing on
resources to ecological product value and build a path to achieve high-quality
and green urban development. When diversifying its economy, they should be
actively, systematically, and selectively undertaking cross-regional industrial
transfer, in order to transform to a low carbon economy.
• Provincial governments should provide all-round strategic coordination,
guidance and support for the development of new industries in coal cities.
Coal cities often face the challenge of not knowing how to choose new
industry, the lack of talent and technology, and the head-to-head competition
from the neighboring regions. All of these can result in the failure to develop
alternative industries at scale with differentiated development. Coal cities
should participate in the regional planning and coordination and identify
their own role function as part of the regional development strategy. This
allows them to attract high-quality development factors such as talents and
technologies by means of synergetic cooperation and resource integration.
• Local governments should establish a principle that prioritizes people’s
livelihoods and promote deep changes in the social governance system. Coal
region transformation have a direct impact on workers in the coal mining
industry, but also the indirect impact to the jobs that support the workers in
the coal industry. Further, along with the change in the employment structure
in the coal industry, population contraction, loss of labor force, and the social
integration of aborigines and new citizens will all profoundly change the
societal ecosystem. Thus, in addition to promoting employment through the
economy, a new social governance system should also be considered in order
to achieve a just transition in coal cities.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
Endnotes
1 IEA, World Energy Employment 2023 (Paris: International Energy Agency, 2023).
2 Research Institute for Global Value Chains in University of International Business and Economics and Chinese
Academy of Social Sciences City Development And Environment Institute, Research on Employment Issues Associated
with Coal Industry Transition (Beijing: Natural resources Defense Council, 2019).
3 Ministry of Finance of the People’s Republic of China, “Notice of the Ministry of Finance on the Issuance of the 2022
Budget for Central Government Transfer Payments to Local Resource-Depleted Cities,” Last modified April 10 2022. https:/ /
www.mof.gov.cn/zhuantihuigu/cczqzyzfglbf/ybxzyzf_7774/zykjcszyzf/.
4 The provincial people’s government has the overall responsibility for the sustainable development of resource-
based cities. The city government is responsible for making and implementing the plan for economic transformation. The
work of solving the unemployment problem, eradicating poverty, improving the social security system, relocating and
reconstructing shanty towns, managing coal mining subsidence areas, and addressing environmental improvement and
ecological protection is used as part of the performance evaluation for government officials across all levels.
5 Wenzhong Zhang and Jianhui Yu, “Policy Evolution and Transformation Effect Analysis of Sustainable Development
of Resource-Based Cities in China,” Journal of Natural Resources 38, no. 1 (2023): 23-38. https:/ /doi.org/10.31497/
zrzyxb.20230102
6 “The 13th Five-Year Plan for the Development of Coal Industry Is Issued, and 800 Million Tons of Overcapacity and
Backward Capacity Will Be Made Obsolete Each Year,” The Paper. Last modified December 20 2016. https:/ /www.thepaper.
cn/newsDetail_forward_1590401.
7 Jinhua Zeng, “Ministry of Finance to Strengthen the Management of Industrial Enterprise Structural Adjustment
Special Award Funds - Give Full Play to the Efficiency of Funds, Strictly Prohibit Misappropriation of False Claims and False
Claims,” Last modified June 15 2016. https:/ /www.gov.cn/xinwen/2016-06/15/content_5082297.htm.
8 Department of Vocational Capacity Construction, “Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security on the
Implementation of the Special Vocational Training Plan for Employees of Enterprises with Excess Capacity,” Ministry of
Human Resources and Social Security of the People’s Republic of China. Last modified June 15 2016. http:/ /www.mohrss.
gov.cn/SYrlzyhshbzb/jiuye/zcwj/JYzonghe/201606/t20160621_242187.html.
9 China Coal Industry Association, “Coal Industry ‘14th Five-Year’ Structural Adjustment Guidance,” Last modified June 3
2021. http:/ /www.coalchina.org.cn/uploadfile/2021/0603/20210603114643414.pdf.
10 People’s Bank of China, “The People’s Bank of China Held a Video Conference on Research Work in 2022,” Last
modified April 7 2022. http:/ /www.pbc.gov.cn/goutongjiaoliu/113456/113469/4526423/index.html.
11 “The Postal Savings Bank of China (Psbc) Has Launched the Country’s First Just Transition Loan to Help the Green
and Low-Carbon Transition,” China Economic Net. Last modified March 7 2023. https:/ /h5.drcnet.com.cn/docview.
aspx?version=integrated&docid=7055271&chnid=274.
12 “Shanghai Pudong Development Bank Landed the First Transition Finance Loan in Shanghai, Promoting the Effective
Connection between Green Finance and Transition Finance,” China Finance. Last modified January 1 2024. https:/ /finance.
china.com.cn/roll/20240101/6067278.shtml.
13 People’s Bank of China, “The People’s Bank of China Launches Carbon Emission Reduction Support Tools,” Last
modified November 8 2021. http:/ /www.pbc.gov.cn/goutongjiaoliu/113456/113469/4384182/index.html.
14 Zhou Yang, Jianjun Tu, and Nga Ngo Thuy, “Promoting the Transformation of the EU-China Coal Region: A Summary
of the 2021 EU-China Coal Transition Series Dialogue,” Agora Energy Transition Forum. Last modified June 2022. https:/ /
static.agora-energiewende.de/fileadmin/Projekte/2022/Publications_other/A-EW_265_EFC_China_ZH_WEB.pdf.
15 Xinxin Wang and Kevin Lo, “Just Transition: A Conceptual Review,” Energy Research & Social Science 82 (2021).
https:/ /doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2021.102291
16 Jonas Meckling et al., “Why Nations Lead or Lag in Energy Transitions,” Science 378, no. 6615 (2022): 31-33. https:/ /
doi.org/doi:10.1126/science.adc9973
17 Jewell, J., Vinichenko, V., Nacke, L. et al., “Prospects for Powering Past Coal,” Nature Climate Change 9, (2019): 592-
597 . https:/ /doi.org/10.1038/s41558-019-0509-6
18 Jan C Steckel and Michael Jakob, “To End Coal, Adapt to Regional Realities,” Nature 607, (2022): 29-31. https:/ /doi.
org/10.1038/d41586-022-01828-3
19 Wuhai Municipal People’s Government, “Overview of Wuhai,” Last modified April 16 2019. http:/ /www.wuhai.gov.cn/
wuhai/mlwh/whgk/548453/index.html.
20 Office of Wuhai City Government, “Notice on the Issuance of the ‘14th Five-Year Plan’ Energy-Saving Plan of
Wuhai City,” Wuhai Municipal Government. Last modified November 14 2022. http:/ /www.wuhai.gov.cn/wuhai/xxgk4/
zfxxgkzl/805465/1390298/1388923/1367349/index.html.
21 Wuhai Municipal Bureau of Ecology and Environment, “Wuhai City’s ‘14th Five-Year Plan’ to Address Climate Change,”
Last modified January 25 2023. http:/ /sthjj.wuhai.gov.cn/sthjj/1115680/1116036/1263412/index.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
52
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
22 Office of Wuhai City Government, “Wuhai Hydrogen Energy Industry Development Plan (2020-2025),” Wuhai
Municipal Government. Last modified July 27 2020. http:/ /www.wuhai.gov.cn/wuhai/xxgk4/zfxxgk5572/fdzdgknr39/
zcwj32/1022743/index.html.
23 Wuhai Municipal People’s Government, “Notice of the Wuhai City Government on Printing and Distributing the Overall
Plan for Mineral Resources of Wuhai City (2021-2025).” Last modified December 23 2022. http:/ /www.wuhai.gov.cn/wuhai/
xxgk4/zfgb/1258604/1258635/szfwj23/1382493/index.html
24 Office of Wuhai City Government, “Notice on the Issuance of the ‘14th Five-Year Plan’,” Last modified November 14
2022. http:/ /www.wuhai.gov.cn/wuhai/xxgk4/zfxxgkzl/805465/1390298/1388923/1367349/index.html.
25 Wuhai Statistics Bureau, “The National Economic Census Reports of Wuhai City in 2013,” 2013. Accessed January 30,
2024. http:/ /www.wuhai.gov.cn/tjj/682822/zfxxgk9/fdzdgknr55/tjxx39/tjgb20/702de8da-1.html; Wuhai Statistics Bureau,
“The National Economic Census Reports of Wuhai City in 2018,” 2018. Accessed January 30, 2024. http:/ /www.wuhai.gov.
cn/tjj/682822/zfxxgk9/fdzdgknr55/tjxx39/tjgb20/872014/index.html.
26 Wuhai Municipal People’s Government, “Notice of the Wuhai City Government on Printing and Distributing the Overall
Plan for Mineral Resources of Wuhai City (2021-2025).”
27 Ministry of Finance of the People’s Republic of China, “Notice on the Issuance of the ‘Measures for the Management
of Special Incentives and Subsidies for the Structural Adjustment of Industrial Enterprises’,” Government of China. Last
modified June 14 2016. https:/ /www.gov.cn/xinwen/2016-06/14/content_5082051.htm.
28 Coal Culture, “Shenhua’s Employee Resettlement Plan,” International Coal Network. Last modified November 1 2016.
https:/ /coal.in-en.com/html/coal-2408938.shtml.
29 China Coal News Network, “How to Reform and Get out of Trouble with Shenhua Wuhai Energy Company?,” CWESTC.
Last modified May 3 2017. http:/ /www.cwestc.com/newshtml/2017-5-3/458396.shtml.
30 Office of Wuhai City Government, “Wuhai Municipal Government’s Opinions on Employment and Entrepreneurship
in the Current and Future Period,” Wuhai Municipal Government. Last modified August 15 2018. http:/ /www.wuhai.gov.cn/
wuhai/xxgk4/zfxxgk5572/fdzdgknr39/zcwj32/977502/index.html.
31 Inner Mongolia Daily, “The Transition of Two Mineral Bureaus in Wuhai,” Tencent. Last modified October 11 2018.
https:/ /mp.weixin.qq.com/s?__=MjM5OTI2NjQ3NA==&mid=2650856897&idx=3&sn=2935bb8b76f35947db38cc54c80fb46
d&chksm=bcca6c048bbde512c33c3406d2b629485c4835b4c56ce297a1fb864cfa5262b33aabac5b8645&scene=27.
32 Opinions from field interviewee.
33 Wuhai Daily, “The World’s Largest Coke Oven Gas to Liquefied Natural Gas Project Successfully Put into
Operation in Wuhai,” Inner Mongolia News Network. Last modified January 4 2014. http:/ /inews.nmgnews.com.cn/
system/2014/01/08/011390008.shtml.
34 Office of Wuhai City Government, “Notice on the Issuance of the ‘14th Five-Year Plan’,” Last modified November 14
2022. http:/ /www.wuhai.gov.cn/wuhai/xxgk4/zfxxgkzl/805465/1390298/1388923/1367349/index.html.
35 “Wuhai City Has Built a Degradable Material and Organic Silicon Industrial Base,” Xinhua Net. Last modified July 7
2023. https:/ /nmg.news.cn/20230717/9737cbf55f0d4f89a90d94888fd349c7/c.html.
36 Examples of new coal chemical industries Wuhai has introduced include lithium battery anode material, Graphite
anode material, Nano superconducting carbon black and carbon-based materials.
37 Office of Wuhai City Government, “Notice on Printing and Distributing the Implementation Plan for Wuhai City to
Further Promote ‘Two 100-Billion-Level Industrial Clusters and Five Industrial Chain Clusters of over 10 Billion Yuan’,”
Wuhai Municipal Government. Last modified May 12 2023. http:/ /www.wuhai.gov.cn/wuhai/xxgk4/zfxxgk5572/fdzdgknr39/
gfxwj/1427277/index.html.
38 Inner Mongolia Daily, “Magnificent 70 Years: A New Era of Striving to Build the Beautiful Landscape of the Northern
Border of the Motherland – Wuhai City,” Last modified September 3 2019. http:/ /szb.northnews.cn/nmgrb/html/2019-
09/03/node_17415.htm.
39 Wuhai Municipal People’s Government, “Wuhai City Government 2019 Report,” Last modified February 25 2019.
http:/ /www.nmg.gov.cn/art/2019/3/7/art_4225_254843.html.
40 Examples include the conferences in Taizhou, Zhejiang, Chongqing, Sichuan, and Shenzhen: Regional Economic
Cooperation Bureau, “Wuhai City, Inner Mongolia (Taizhou, Zhejiang) Investment Promotion Meeting Was Held,” Last
modified February 2 2023. http:/ /1.31.83.179:8980/eportal/ui?pageId=250028&articleKey=1388750&columnId=250538.Inner
Mongolia New Media Association, “The 2023 ‘Wuhai Cultural Tourism Miles Travel’ Investment Promotion Conference Was
Successfully Held in Shenzhen!,” Last modified March 10 2023. https:/ /www.sohu.com/a/652127928_121066203.Qian Chen,
“The 2023 ‘Wuhai Cultural Tourism Journey’ Chongqing Investment Promotion Event Was Held in Chongqing,” CTNEWS.
Last modified March 8 2023. http:/ /www.ctnews.com.cn/cq/content/2023-03/08/content_138197.html
41 Runa Su, “Wuhai: Attract Investment and Re-Energize to Build a Warm Nest to Attract Phoenixes,” Inner
Mongolia Daily. Last modified September 29 2023. http:/ /www.wuhai.gov.cn/wuhai/xxgk4/zfxxgkzl/805465/
zcjd13/1467105/1502210/index.html.
42 Opinions from field interviewees.
43 Inner Mongolia Daily, “Magnificent 70 Years: A New Era of Striving to Build the Beautiful Landscape of the Northern

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
53
A Just Transition for Coal Regions: Learning from Two Coal Cities in Western China
Border of the Motherland – Wuhai City.” Last modified September 3 2019. http:/ /szb.northnews.cn/nmgrb/html/2019-
09/03/node_17415.htm.
44 Wuhai Municipal Bureau of Ecology and Environment, “Wuhai City’s ‘14th Five-Year Plan’ to
Address Climate Change,” Last modified January 25,2023. http:/ /www.wuhai.gov.cn/wuhai/xxgk4/
zfxxgkzl/805465/839323/1396766/1396771/1424483/index.html
45 Wuhai Municipal People’s Government, “Printing and Distributing the Implementation Plan of ‘200 Billion Industrial
Clusters and 5 Industrial Chain Groups Exceeding 10 Billion’ in Wuhai City,” Last modified May 9 2023. http:/ /www.wuhai.
gov.cn/wuhai/xxgk4/zfgb/1394298/1394310/1394312/1447629/index.html.
46 Development and Reform Commission of Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region and Institute of Urban and Rural
Planning and Design at Zhejiang University, “The ‘14th Five-Year Plan’ for Industrial Development in Wuhai City and
Surrounding Areas,” People’s Government of Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region. Last modified June 2021. http:/ /fgw.
nmg.gov.cn/zfxxgk/fdzdgknr/ghxx/202107/P020210715537654535013.pdf.
47 Wuhai Municipal Bureau of Statistics, “Statistical Report on the National Economic and Social Development of Wuhai
City in 2021,” Wuhai Municipal Government. Last modified April 12 2022. http:/ /tjj.wuhai.gov.cn/tjj/682822/zfxxgk9/
fdzdgknr55/tjxx39/tjgb20/1259471/index.html.
48 Wuhai Municipal Bureau of Statistics, “In 2021, the Industrial Raw Coal Consumption in Wuhai City Was 75.9902
Million Tons,” Wuhai Municipal Government. Last modified January 19 2022. http:/ /tjj.wuhai.gov.cn/tjj/682822/zfxxgk9/
fdzdgknr55/tjxx39/843340/1231172/index.html.
49 “Analysis of the Impact of Rising Energy Prices on the Economic Development of Tongchuan,” Kesolar. Last modified
November 4 2022. https:/ /www.kesolar.com/headline/209466.html.
50 Tongchuan Statistics, “Tongchuan Economic and Social Development Series Report - Energy Chapter,” Tencent.
Last modified September 6 2022. https:/ /mp.weixin.qq.com/s?__=MzA5NTU1ODQ4Mw==&mid=2652128156&idx=1&
sn=86d5e2d1b72fd90120360e5bcf8a3d4e&chksm=8b5d6da0bc2ae4b610dc6fca6198ef2a958fd6a2cf489f9424ac5-
12bdf847a3e553cdc7542a5&scene=27.
51 Qianjin Wu, “Achieving a New Leap in Economic Transformation - Written on the Occasion of Tongchuan Being
Designated as the Second Batch of Resource-Depleted Cities,” China’s Urban Economy, no. 5 (2009): 26.
52 Hua Xuan Mei, “Shaanxi Coal Chemical Group Surplus Personnel Relocation Opinions Policy Interpretation,”
Tongchuan Mining Co. Last modified March 14 2016. http:/ /www.tckwj.com/info/1028/2565.htm.
53 Xinjin Wu, “Achieving a New Leap in Economic Transformation - Written on the Occasion of Tongchuan Being
Designated as the Second Batch of Resource-Depleted Cities,” China Urban Economy, (2009):26-28. https:/ /doi.org/
CNKI:SUN:CHSJ.0.2009-05-005.
54 Tongchuan Development and Reform Commission, “The Transformation of Resource-Based Cities in Tongchuan City
Is in a Period of Overlapping Opportunities,” Last modified October 31 2013. http:/ /fgw.tongchuan.gov.cn/resources/site/1/
html/zl/zycszx/202109/3270.html.
55 Office of Tongchuan City Government, “Tongchuan Promotes Industrial Transformation and Upgrading According to
the ‘1+6’ Idea,” Tongchuan Municipal People’s Governments. Last modified June 22 2014. http:/ /www.tongchuan.gov.cn/
resources/site/1/html/zxzx/tcyw/201603/6537.html.
56 Tongchuan Municipal People’s Government, “Tongchuan Takes Multiple Measures to Promote the Construction
of Commercial Space City,” Last modified April 16 2020. http:/ /www.tongchuan.gov.cn/resources/site/1/html/zxzx/
tcyw/202004/249150.html.
57 Tongchuan Municipal People’s Government, “The optoelectronics industry activates the new engine of Tongchuan’s
high-quality development,” Last modified January 28 2020. http:/ /www.tongchuan.gov.cn/resources/site/1/html/zxzx/
tcyw/202201/641252.html
58 “Dongjiahe Circular Economy Industrial Park: Extending Industrial Chain for Aluminum and Exploring New Path,” Sina.
Last modified November 26 2023. https:/ /finance.sina.cn/2023-11-16/detail-imzuvtci7559016.d.html.
59 Tongchuan Development and Reform Commission, “2009-2013 City’s Investment Promotion Achievements -
Investment Promotion Has Become a Powerful Engine for Tongchuan to Speed up the Transformation and Development,”
Last modified April 10 2014. http:/ /fgw.tongchuan.gov.cn/resources/site/1/html/zl/zycszx/202109/3254.html.
60 Tongchuan Municipal Government, “Create an ‘Upgraded Version’ of Salt-Copper Cooperation,” Shaanxi Provincial
People’s Government. Last modified December 21 2021. http:/ /www.shaanxi.gov.cn/xw/ldx/ds/202112/t20211219_2204875.
html.

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
www.belfercenter.org
Institute of Climate Change
and Sustainable Development
Tsinghua University
30 Shuangqing Road
Haidian District, Beijing, China, 100084
https:/ /iccsd.tsinghua.edu.cn/
Copyright 2024, President and Fellows of Harvard College
Printed in the United States of America
