
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
In the Eye of the Storm:
Pakistan’ s Balancing Act in the
Evolving Geopolitical Order
Moeed Yusuf
MIDDLE POWERS PROJECT
JUNE 2026

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
Key Judgments
• Pakistan occupies a unique position in the evolving global order. With deeply embedded economic
and security linkages and high levels of financial indebtedness to both Washington and Beijing, the
nation sits in the eye of the storm of great power contestation. Being forced to choose one power over
the other could raise existential questions for the country’s prosperity.
• The country formally espouses a vision of “cooperative geo-economics,” which focuses on attaining
economic security by forging positive interdependencies with multiple countries. This strategy imag-
ines Pakistan as a hub of regional connectivity, moving away from economic bailouts from external
patrons and toward trade- and investment-based economic partnerships. This approach also advo -
cates for a foreign policy based on “no-camp politics.”
• Pakistan has tremendous potential as a regional connector for trade, transit, and energy between
South, Central, and West Asia. However, progress remains stalled due to a lack of regional integra -
tion. While Pakistan has made significant gains with China through the China-Pakistan Economic
Corridor (CPEC), its other neighbors are either internationally isolated (Iran and Afghanistan) or have
broken relations with Pakistan (India). To realize this connectivity vision, the region requires func -
tional north-south (China-Pakistan) and east-west (India, Pakistan, Iran, Afghanistan, and Central
Asia) axes to operate in tandem. Pakistan wants both the U.S. and China to support this vision and
co-invest in strategic economic projects in Pakistan.
• Climate diplomacy is another arena where Pakistan seeks global influence as one of the countries
most vulnerable to climate change. Requiring massive assistance to address the country’s vulnerabil-
ities, Pakistani leaders have become proactive climate advocates on behalf of the Global South. The
country is committed to middle power and other climate coalitions, despite recent U.S. opposition to
global climate investments.
• Pakistan remains a key security actor in the Global South. Its past support for the United States
in regional conflicts has been the principal factor in its global prominence, and leaders are now
maneuvering to further enhance that relevance amid a fluid international order. Pakistan has joined
President Trump’s Board of Peace initiative while simultaneously constructing non-Western middle
power security alliances and acting as a mediator in the Middle East. Pakistan also remains central
to U.S., Chinese, and regional counterterrorism efforts and expects continued international support
for domestic antiterrorism activities.
• Among prominent middle powers, Pakistan is less relevant in emerging frontiers like high-end tech -
nology. While it is positioning itself as a potential exporter of rare earth and critical minerals in
partnership with the United States, its more urgent concern is avoiding either side of the emerging
global “tech curtain.” It wants to keep avenues open to benefit from advanced technology from both
Washington and Beijing.
• Pakistan’s primary challenge is to secure multialignment despite being internally fragile and heav -
ily dependent on the United States, China, and traditional Gulf partners for economic survival.
Ultimately, the key to unlocking Pakistan’s true potential as a middle power is its relationship with its
archrival, India. Although prospects currently seem extremely grim, a breakthrough would not only
benefit the entire South Asian region but also align with broader U.S. and Chinese strategic interests,
potentially creating opportunities for collaboration between the two great powers.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
Introduction
Few countries can truly claim to have been a strategic partner to both the United States and China over the
years, and none but Pakistan can take credit for playing an instrumental role in mediating a breakthrough
in U.S.-China relations during the Cold War. In enjoying deep strategic ties with Washington and Beijing,
Pakistan has also come to depend immensely on both as it pursues its national interests. Since this mul -
tialignment has benefited Pakistan throughout much of its history, intensifying great power contestation is
causing immense concern in Islamabad. At the same time, shifting global power dynamics may create fresh
opportunities for middle powers to shape regional developments, lead the discourse on global issues like cli-
mate and the energy transition, and influence norm-making processes. Pakistan’s history of deftly balancing
on the global chessboard may position it to assume a more substantive role in regional and global politics.
The key question for Pakistani decision-makers is how they can use their country’s international leverage
to avoid a binary choice between the United States and China. Which issues can Pakistan influence — and
with what tools — to protect its equities? What implications will the choices of this important nuclear power,
situated in a critical geography, have on regional and global politics?
These are some of the questions this paper will seek to address as it situates Pakistan within the broader
debate on middle power agency and strategic autonomy in an era of intensifying geopolitical competition. It
begins by establishing Pakistan’s credentials and vision as a middle power, tracing its international partner-
ships and historical role in global politics. It then examines Pakistan’s current relevance across four major
policy domains: regional transport and energy connectivity, climate diplomacy, security partnerships and
counterterrorism, and emerging technologies. The final sections analyze Pakistan’s challenges and opportu-
nities as a middle power in the evolving global order, concluding with specific recommendations for Pakistan,
the United States, and China.
Pakistan’s Role and Importance as a Middle Power
Middle powers occupy an intermediary space between great powers and weaker states. These countries
are presumed to carry significant economic strength, military power, or geographic size, granting them an
outsized ability to shape and influence specific areas or functions in international affairs. 1 The realist per -
spective on middle powers emphasizes their agency to impact policies beyond their borders, particularly
those affecting their national security and regional dynamics.2 These states can achieve this on their own or
— more likely — through multilateralism and coalition building.3 Despite significant differences among them,
middle powers are ultimately expected to wield enough leverage in regional and global affairs to engage with
major powers strategically, not merely to extract economic and military benefits, but also to help shape the
global order on issues such as economic policy, climate change, and conflict resolution.4
Pakistan’s middle power credentials are not in doubt. It is the world’s fifth-most populous country,5 with more
than 60% of its population under age 30,6 and is one of nine possessors of nuclear weapons. Its international
clout is reinforced by its geostrategic location at the crossroads of South, Central and West Asia. Sitting at
the mouth of the Arabian Sea in the Indian Ocean and less than 200 miles from the Strait of Hormuz, Pakistan
serves as a critical hub for potential regional energy corridors. It also offers Western China critical maritime
access to the rest of the world, an important consideration for Beijing given intensifying competition in the
Indo-Pacific.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
Diplomatically, Pakistan has long positioned itself as a country capable of influencing regional and global
dynamics. As the strongest military in the Muslim world and the bloc’s only nuclear power, the country is seen
as a pivotal actor by fellow Organization of Islamic Countries (OIC) members. A traditional ally of several Arab
regimes in the Gulf, Pakistan has deployed its security forces to provide them with protection over the years.
On the global stage, the country has often punched above its weight. By serving as a front-line U.S. ally in key
conflict theaters during the Cold War and post-9/11 periods, and most recently by mediating in the war in Iran,
Pakistan has impacted the trajectory of global politics on multiple occasions while remaining a leading voice
for the Global South in the United Nations.
In recent decades, Pakistan’s Achilles heel has been its domestic political instability and weak economic per-
formance. Considered one of the most promising economies of Asia in the 1960s, Pakistan’s inability to trans-
late its international prominence and resulting financial assistance into sustained economic growth has held
it back. Today, the country’s total debt and liabilities have reached $138 billion; its debt-to-GDP ratio stood
at 48.5% of GDP (PPP) in 2025. 7 Exports lack diversification and competitiveness, as reflected in the 8.4%
export-to-GDP ratio, significantly lower than other regional countries such as India ( 19%) and Bangladesh
(15%).8 In January 2026, Pakistan’s total liquid foreign exchange reserves stood at just above $16.1 billion, 9
enough to cover less than three months of imports. This level was only achieved through an International
Monetary Fund (IMF) bailout package that offered temporary macroeconomic stability.
Still, Pakistan holds significant agency to affect its neighborhood and the regions beyond. It is the sec -
ond-most populous country in South Asia (which is home to one-fifth of the global population), a critical ally
to multiple Muslim countries, and one of China’s closest partners. It also enjoys multifaceted, albeit oscilla-
tory, ties with the United States. Despite its potential, Pakistan’s relevance worries much of the world. It is
often viewed as an unstable and fragile nuclear power, where political and economic vulnerabilities combine
with threats from homegrown and externally supported terrorism.
In 2022, Pakistan enunciated its future strategic direction through its first-ever National Security Policy
(NSP).10 Essentially a proactive response to Islamabad’s interpretation of the evolving geopolitical order and
its likely opportunities and challenges for Pakistan, the NSP anchors itself in “cooperative geo-economics.”
Pursuing this direction would further entrench Pakistan as a middle power that not only works with great
powers but also forges partnerships with other middle powers to shape its own trajectory and that of its
neighbors.
The NSP moves away from a narrow definition of national security, which previously led Pakistani deci -
sion-makers to divert disproportionate resources toward its military to protect itself against its neighbor
and archrival, India. Instead, the policy espouses the concept of “Comprehensive National Security,” which
prioritizes economic security. Geo-economics is presented as a consociational framework rather than a com-
petitive tool of statecraft, which is the concept’s more typical use. Pakistan’s geo-economic vision imagines
the country as a hub of regional connectivity between South, Central, and West Asia. It advocates a focus
on trade, investment, and human resource-based economic partnerships rather than a reliance on economic
assistance and bailouts from the United States, China, and other partner countries, supported by a foreign
policy that advocates “no-camp politics.” In essence, Pakistan seeks to foster economic interdependence
with multiple countries, especially its neighbors and the great powers, to tie their own interests to Pakistan’s
stability and economic growth.11 Some in Pakistan even nostalgically suggest their country could once again
help reduce great power tensions in its neighborhood, echoing its role in facilitating U.S.-China rapproche -
ment during the Cold War.12
Pakistani policymakers realize that such a vision contrasts with the growing use of Hobbesian geo-economics
to protect national interests. They also understand that achieving their vision remains unrealistic unless

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
Pakistan can reclaim its economic strength and reduce the external indebtedness that makes it exceedingly
vulnerable to great power pressures and compromises its foreign policy decision-making. Yet virtually every
step toward this vision will require Pakistan to reshape relationships both regionally and with its fellow middle
powers while deftly balancing between great power camps. If it succeeds, Pakistan’s bilateral and multilateral
engagements will be predominantly characterized by economic interactions: expanded trade, transnational
road and rail connectivity through Pakistan, mutual economic dependencies, and greater cooperation on
shared threats, such as climate change. If it fails, the country’s domestic political and economic weaknesses
— combined with its proximity to China — may turn it into a proxy battleground for great power contestation,
with detrimental consequences.
Pakistan already experienced being a proxy during four decades of continuous war in Afghanistan. It also
absorbed the fallout of sectarian tensions between the Gulf states and Iran, which played out in its own
multi-sectarian society following the 1979 Iranian revolution. In these instances, Pakistani leaders allowed
outsiders to use their territory as a staging ground for conflict in return for political legitimacy and monetary
assistance. This approach ultimately triggered a tremendous blowback, creating new militant groups and
accentuating the preexisting sectarian fissures in Pakistani society.
By championing cooperative geo-economics, the NSP signals an intent to avoid repeating past mistakes. It
also implies recognition that staying the failed course of the past under present geopolitical circumstances
would be even more dire, potentially turning Pakistan’s geography — long considered its prized asset — into
its binding constraint. Among today’s principal theaters of great power contestation, Pakistan is sandwiched
between the Indo-Pacific, which stretches from Japan to India; the Middle East, where Iran is locked in
strategic competition and direct or proxy warfare with Israel and the Gulf; and the Russian backyard of
Central Asia, stretching down to Afghanistan. Pakistan is the only country that sits at the intersection of
these three theaters. This geographic position ensures that the country cannot escape the implications of
great power rivalry in South Asia. It can either find ways to benefit from the fluidity and realignments induced
by the departure from unipolarity or risk being swept away by them.
Pakistan’s Role in Global and Regional Politics
Pakistan’s approach to global and regional politics has long been an extension of its hard security concerns
regarding India. Since the 1947 partition of India, Islamabad has viewed New Delhi as an existential threat.
This mindset is driven by the territorial dispute over Kashmir, the 1971 war that split Pakistan in two, and an
enduring military asymmetry. 13 As a result, the country’s foreign policy has been dictated by a fixation on
preventing India from being the sole hegemon in South Asia. To counter its neighbor’s influence, Pakistan
developed a tri-polar foreign policy, with the United States, China, and the Islamic world as its three pillars.
It joined U.S.-led defense alliances to serve Washington’s anti-communist objectives during the Cold War
era. By the 1980s, it became a front-line state against Soviet expansion, collaborating with the United States
and Gulf states to force the Soviet Union out of Afghanistan. Though successful, this decade-long campaign
had serious long-term implications for Pakistan, including the rise of domestic extremism, resulting in wide-
spread arms proliferation, drug trafficking, and an overwhelming influx of Afghan refugees.
Pakistan’s strong defense ties with the United States did not prevent it from establishing an equally robust
relationship with China. This was especially true following the 1962 Sino-Indian War, which created a shared
strategic interest between Islamabad and Beijing in countering India. 14 Pakistan’s diplomatic significance
rose further in the early 1970s, when it played a pivotal role in facilitating the opening between the United

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
States and China, enabling the two ideological adversaries — capitalist America and communist China — to
achieve a historic shift in global geopolitics.15
Pakistan’s ties with the Gulf countries have always been strong, centered on a religious bond and the
pro-Western alignment of most Gulf states during the Cold War. In the 1970s, Pakistan made a particular
effort to solidify the Islamic bloc, hosting a major Islamic summit in 1974, which was attended by 37 Muslim-
majority countries.16 The Pakistan military has played a key role in fostering these relationships, providing
training, protecting several regimes, and joining military campaigns for some of its Gulf partners. Pakistani
contingents have served in Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Kuwait, Qatar, Bahrain, and Oman. Pakistan has also main-
tained deep bilateral ties with Turkey through military and economic collaboration. Pakistan, Turkey, and Iran
established the Regional Cooperation for Development (RCD) in 1964, which later evolved into the Economic
Cooperation Organization (ECO).17 In 1998, Pakistan’s emergence as a nuclear-armed state — a response to
India’s nuclear tests — further amplified its strategic role and reinforced its position in South Asia and the
Muslim world. The strength of its relations across key Muslim capitals has been evident in its mediation
efforts in the 2026 war in Iran, which has once again put Pakistan at the center of global diplomacy.
Beyond these three pillars, Pakistan’s international outreach has lacked diversification. While Pakistan main-
tains solid trade and investment relations with the United Kingdom (U.K.) and European countries, these
have not evolved into strategic partnerships. The country has benefited from European market access and a
strong diaspora, especially in the U.K., but Europe’s engagement with Islamabad tends to mirror Washington’s
outlook.
Intrinsically tied to Pakistan’s relations with the United States, China, and the Gulf was its own survival
and growth model. Through these security-centric partnerships, Pakistani leaders secured handsome mili -
tary and economic assistance, allowing them to counter India’s military advantage while addressing domes-
tic development and socioeconomic needs. In fact, Pakistan’s entire development model was built on the
assumption that its geostrategic importance was permanent and that windfall monetary assistance would
continue accruing indefinitely.18
Between 1951 and 2011, Pakistan received nearly $67 billion in U.S. military and economic aid, making it
the third-largest recipient of U.S. assistance over time.19 However, during the 1990s, in the aftermath of the
Soviet Union’s defeat in Afghanistan, the country was also shunned by the United States – ostensibly due
to its nuclear program – abruptly transitioning from “the most allied of allies” to one of the most sanctioned
countries.20 As a result, Pakistanis have come to see the United States as an important but unpredictable
and transactional strategic partner — a “fair-weather” friend. China, on the other hand, is seen as an “all-
weather” friend, with a more natural strategic alignment. While this state-to-state relationship has tradi -
tionally been heavily security-oriented, it continues to strengthen, with China also expanding its economic
support and people-to-people engagement in recent years. Pakistan has received significant assistance from
China in the form of loans, investments, and grants, with the majority of inflows over the past decade linked
to the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC), a key artery of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI).21
However, Pakistan’s assistance-based approach suffers from a fundamental flaw: rather than using high
foreign exchange inflows during periods of geopolitical importance to propel the country economically, these
flows allowed decision-makers to avoid enacting the difficult domestic reforms needed for economic sustain-
ability. Instead, Pakistan banked on continued external patronage, trapping itself in boom-and-bust macro -
economic cycles. The economy rose when windfall foreign exchange inflows arrived courtesy of its strategic
importance, only to plummet in periods when geopolitical changes rendered that positioning irrelevant. The
result is a country that remains highly dependent on its key international partners to sustain its economy
The nation’s leaders regularly lean on creditors to roll over its debt or seek exceptions to avoid bankruptcy.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
Furthermore, Pakistan is a veteran of 25 IMF programs and is currently implementing an Extended Fund
Facility (EFF) worth $7 billion under tight conditionalities.22
Against this backdrop, China is Pakistan’s largest trading partner, accounting for over 20% of its imports in
recent years.23 Moreover, CPEC is the country’s single largest investment venture, promising $62 billion in
investments across energy, infrastructure, agriculture, and special economic zones. China alone accounts for
30% of Pakistan’s foreign direct investment (FDI). The United States, on the other hand, remains Pakistan’s
largest export market, accounting for more than 18% of total exports. Combined, the United States and China
absorb 27% of Pakistani exports.24 The United States is also a critical source of remittances for Pakistan and
holds disproportionate influence over international financial institutions like the IMF. In addition to the two
great powers, Pakistan relies on the Gulf states for economic support, including deferred oil payments, loan
rollovers, and investment in domestic infrastructure. Nearly half of Pakistan’s remittances come from the
Gulf, with 77% of its overseas workers employed in Saudi Arabia and the UAE alone. Pakistan received nearly
$20 billion in remittances between July and December 2025 alone.25
Pakistan’s dilemma within the evolving global order is clear. The country’s economy is too intertwined with
and heavily dependent on both great power camps. At the same time, its strong middle power links are over-
whelmingly concentrated in a handful of countries in the Middle East as well as Turkey and, more recently,
Azerbaijan. With South Asia becoming increasingly entangled in great power contestation, 26 the nature of
Pakistan’s external relationships — combined with its internal vulnerabilities — makes a business-as-usual
approach to the region’s evolving geopolitical dynamics untenable.
The United States views China’s increasing regional influence and military modernization as a direct threat
to its interests in the Indian Ocean and Indo-Pacific. 27 Previous U.S administrations increasingly aligned
with India, envisioning it as a “net security provider” in the region, 28 with the capacity to support broader
U.S. objectives to counter China. While U.S-India relations have encountered substantial setbacks under the
second Trump administration, including the temporary imposition of prohibitively high tariffs on Indian prod-
ucts,29 the strategic alignment between India and the United States is too deep for the negative trajectory to
hold. Most observers believe President Trump will relent after driving a hard bargain on trade and New Delhi’s
close ties with Russia. Already, there are signs of this shifting dynamic, with the two countries announcing
an interim trade agreement in February 2026. 30 For China, the United States’ growing defense partnership
with India has raised serious security concerns. Beijing views Washington’s policy posture as destabilizing
and Western opposition to its transnational infrastructure and energy projects under the BRI as attempts
to undermine its regional interests. For its part, Pakistan sees U.S. support for India as a factor that has
emboldened New Delhi to adopt an uncompromising stance toward Islamabad and shun options to improve
relations.
Following the 2021 U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan, which ended Washington’s military dependence on
Islamabad, Pakistan’s strategic importance to the United States diminished significantly. Many in Pakistan
felt their country had no choice but to align more closely with China — a view shared by Washington’s
own Pakistan watchers and amplified by champions of the U.S.-India relationship to further distance U.S.
decision-makers from Pakistan. By 2021, Pakistan-U.S. relations had deteriorated to the point that President
Joe Biden declined to speak to Prime Minister Imran Khan throughout his time in office.31 However, Pakistan’s
decades-long affinity with the United States, its reliance on the IMF, and its dependence on the U.S. market
for exports made a clean break impossible.
Pakistani leaders remained alert for any opportunity to affect a positive turnaround in relations. They
found it with the return of President Trump in 2025. Since his inauguration, Pakistani military and civilian
leadership have deftly and successfully maneuvered to build rapport with the U.S. President. This effort was

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
underscored by Pakistan becoming the first country to nominate President Trump for the Nobel Peace Prize
in recognition of his role in brokering the May 2025 India-Pakistan ceasefire. 32 Additionally, Pakistan has
repositioned itself as a critical ally by deepening counterterrorism collaboration, 33 opening new pathways
for cooperation on critical minerals and cryptocurrency, and most recently by offering its good offices to
help the United States get out of the Iran quagmire. 34 Remarkably, Pakistan has managed to do so without
impacting its equation with China. Its leadership continues to engage Beijing on key economic and security
issues and has received repeated public reassurances from China in recent months.35 In fact, the depth of the
Sino-Pakistan relationship became even more apparent as Pakistan’s armed forces demonstrated seamless
combat integration with Chinese defense technology during the 2025 conflict with India.
Thus far successful, Pakistan’s balancing act will require constant management and calibration going forward
to avoid getting caught in the crosshairs of the U.S.-China rivalry. Pakistanis fear the present window of
opportunity with the United States may close abruptly once Washington’s South Asia policy rebounds in
India’s favor. President Trump’s unpredictability and mercurial temperament make this all the more likely.
Deep down, Pakistani decision-makers realize that their best chance of successfully pursuing multialignment
— through substantive engagements with all major powers — lies in addressing the country’s chronic
economic issues, political instability, and growing social and security challenges. The framers of Pakistan’s
NSP understood this reality when they conceived the ambitious Comprehensive National Security paradigm.
However, implementing this model in a regional and global context fraught with Hobbesian geo-economics
will be no mean feat.
Major Policy Domains in Pakistan’s International Posture
To successfully pursue its model of cooperative geo-economics, Pakistan must identify the key policy domains
where it can plausibly exert influence and derive the greatest benefit. This section examines Pakistan’s rel -
evance in four arenas: regional connectivity, climate change, security and counterterrorism alliances, and
emerging technology competition.
Pakistan as the Regional Connector
South Asia remains one of the least integrated regions in the world, which carries significant opportunity costs.
Trade among South Asian countries totals just $23 billion — well below the region’s estimated potential of $67
billion. Intraregional trade accounts for only 5% of total trade, a marked contrast to ASEAN’s 25%.36 This lack
of integration persists despite the fact that the region has over 400 million people living in multidimensional
poverty.37 This stagnation is due to trade barriers, limited infrastructure, and, most importantly, perennial
animosity between the two largest countries, India and Pakistan. Currently, Pakistan’s only significant trade
relationship among its neighbors is with China, which is beyond the South Asian bloc. However, here too,
total trade worth $14 billion represents only a fraction of the potential. Moreover, while Pakistan maintains a
trade surplus with the United States, it has an $11.4 billion trade deficit with China.38
Still, South Asia and its neighborhood’s connectivity potential — and Pakistan’s centrality to it — goes
beyond trade. Pakistan’s true advantage lies in its role as a connector between South, Central, and West Asia
for transport and energy flows. While trade within the region will remain largely meaningless without the full
participation of both India and Pakistan, transit corridors and energy pipelines offer a different path. They
can foster significant mutual interdependence among multiple countries, ensuring genuine benefits for all
involved.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
The Role of CPEC as an Economic Catalyst
The most prominent node of connectivity for Pakistan is the north-south axis developed around CPEC, which
has garnered substantial attention since its inception in 2015. Pakistan has projected it as transformative,
aiming to elevate the country’s stature as a regional connectivity hub and establish a pathway toward geo-
economic ascendancy. CPEC is also critical for China, as it links Kashgar in western China to Pakistan’s
strategically located Gwadar port, providing vital access to the Indian Ocean littoral. Under CPEC, Pakistan
has already attracted direct investment from China worth $30 billion across diverse domains including
transportation, energy, and industrial sectors.39
The optimal connectivity axis for the region would link this north-south corridor with an east-west corridor
connecting Central and South Asia through Afghanistan and Pakistan. This would bridge an energy-rich but
sparsely populated and land-locked Central Asia with an energy-starved, densely populated South Asia. To
this end, Pakistan has entered into multiple trade and transit agreements with the Central Asian Republics
(CARs) to facilitate access to its warm waters through the Gwadar port.40 This represents one of the shortest
viable routes for southern Central Asian states — especially Uzbekistan and Tajikistan — to reach global mar-
kets. While road infrastructure already exists between Central Asia and Pakistan, Uzbekistan, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan remain committed to developing a trans-Afghan railway, which is currently undergoing feasibil-
ity studies.41 Uzbekistan has championed the project to diversify its transit routes. While India and Pakistan’s
differences still prevent a truly synergetic amalgamation between CPEC and the east-west corridor — a union
that could transform the South Asian region — this connectivity network remains viable even without India’s
participation. For Pakistan, it could bring significant revenue and provide an alternative set of middle power
partnerships.
Besides its economic potential, road and rail connectivity holds great strategic importance. It would strengthen
Pakistan’s position in regional power dynamics and potentially grant it increased economic leverage vis-à-vis
China and Central Asia by fostering the positive interdependence the NSP envisions.
Regional Energy Connectivity
The regional energy corridor is equally promising in its potential to align the interests of neighboring states
and great powers with Pakistan’s stability. Given rising energy demands, acute dependence on energy imports,
and market volatility in South Asia, establishing energy corridors would yield significant collective benefits,
potentially forcing reconsideration of political differences between countries. Pakistan is strategically posi -
tioned to facilitate this connectivity.
Important transnational projects like the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) gas pipeline, the
Central Asia-South Asia (CASA-1000) electricity transmission project, and — potentially — the Iran-Pakistan
gas pipeline could be key drivers of this vision. While these projects are complex and carry significant geopo-
litical overtones, the involved parties have formally signed on to join them.
The TAPI pipeline, stretching over 1,600 kilometers (1,000 miles), is projected to transport 33 billion cubic
meters of natural gas annually from Turkmenistan to Afghanistan, Pakistan, and India. Afghanistan would
receive 5% of this supply, while Pakistan and India would receive 47.5% each.42 Turkmenistan’s state-owned
company, Turkmengaz, has committed $8.5 billion toward the total $10 billion cost of the project — an 85%
stake.43 In September 2024, Afghanistan and Turkmenistan inaugurated the construction of the pipeline’s
150-kilometer (93-mile) segment between those countries. 44 However, the project has faced considerable
obstacles, including delays, investor hesitation, and shifting security dynamics within Afghanistan. The Asian

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
Development Bank suspended its involvement following the fall of Kabul in 2021, citing a lack of recognition
of Afghanistan’s Taliban administration and raising concerns about the pipeline’s future funding.45
CASA-1000 aims to transmit 1,300 megawatts of surplus hydroelectric power from Tajikistan and the
Kyrgyzstan to Afghanistan and Pakistan. 46 Although the project was paused in 2021 after the Taliban took
power in Afghanistan, the World Bank resumed its support in 2024. CASA-1000 is at a more advanced stage
of development than TAPI. According to the World Bank, construction activities are nearly complete in the
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Pakistan, with work ongoing on the Afghanistan portion. 47 Besides improving
regional connectivity and meeting consumer energy needs, the project would contribute to the region’s clean
energy goals by utilizing hydroelectric power.
Although the Iran-Pakistan gas pipeline has faced stagnation, disputes, and legal challenges, it still holds
significant potential to provide western Pakistan — so critical for CPEC — with cheap energy and establish
another transnational energy corridor in the region. Initially conceived as a tripartite peace pipeline between
Iran, Pakistan, and India, the project was scaled down to a bilateral agreement in 2008 after India withdrew
due to U.S. sanctions. 48 In 2009, Iran and Pakistan signed a 25-year contract to export gas from Iran via
an approximately 1,500-mile pipeline, which was to be jointly constructed by both countries. 49 While Iran
successfully completed its part of the pipeline, Pakistan has failed to develop its section due to financial
constraints and U.S. sanctions on Iran. Iran has threatened to impose penalties on Pakistan and initiate inter-
national arbitration proceedings against it for failing to uphold its end of the bargain.50
From a development perspective, these energy projects could create a win-win scenario for Pakistan and
its neighbors by bolstering energy security, fostering economic interdependence, and providing mutual eco-
nomic benefits. Pakistan currently imports 49% of its primary energy, a situation that is expected to worsen
as the country’s population continues to grow.51 Already, massive seasonal variation leaves Pakistan in need
of energy during specific months, which align neatly with surpluses in Central Asia.52 This natural opportunity
for regional integration could save Pakistan precious foreign exchange. In fiscal year 2025 (July 2024-June
2025), the country spent nearly $16 billion on energy imports.53
Energy security will also bring additional benefits, both domestically and regionally. A UNICEF report esti -
mates that strengthening energy resilience in Pakistan could prevent up to 175,000 deaths by 2030. 54
Additionally, Pakistan stands to benefit economically by becoming a crucial transit state. For Afghanistan,
TAPI could bring much-needed revenue through transit fees and stimulate economic activity, while for India,
it offers a more stable and affordable energy supply. India is one of the fastest-growing economies glob -
ally, and its energy demands are expected to increase by 35% over the next decade. 55 For the Central Asian
Republics (CARs), this transnational energy corridor provides an opportunity to diversify their export energy
market.
Yet the future of these initiatives hinges more on geostrategic considerations than on their economic merits.
CPEC is a geostrategic live wire because it offers China access to the Indian Ocean and bolsters its energy
security by reducing its reliance on the Malacca Strait. 56 Although the United States initially expressed
cautious support for CPEC, 57 it has grown increasingly wary of the potential long-term implications of
China’s investments in Pakistan. It has raised concerns about a lack of transparency in CPEC contracts and
the potential use of Western monetary assistance to Pakistan for debt repayment to China. However, the
primary U.S. concern is that China could leverage these investments to advance its geopolitical interests and
potentially expand its military presence in the region, specifically using Pakistan’s Gwadar port as a Chinese
naval base. While categorically denied by both China and Pakistan, these concerns are likely to rise as U.S.-
China competition intensifies. India also opposes the project and has consistently raised sovereignty issues
regarding CPEC’s route through territory contested by India and Pakistan.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
Pakistan, however, is banking heavily on CPEC’s success to spur its economic revival. Abandoning the project
without a viable alternative — and none has been proposed by the West — would not only be economically
detrimental but would also imply a major breakdown in Pakistan-China relations. At the same time, Pakistan’s
reliance on the West for the majority of its exports and multilateral financial assistance compels it to respect
Washington’s interests. To navigate this geopolitical landscape effectively and avoid incentivizing the United
States to further embolden India, Pakistani decision-makers are understandably striving to retain strong
economic ties with both global powers. This explains their dual approach: a continued emphasis on CPEC as
an economic lifeline while seeking avenues to engage the United States, including in regional connectivity
projects, as part of the effort to revive the partnership with the Trump administration. Recently, Pakistan
proposed developing a $1.2 billion deep-sea port 60 miles from Gwadar for exclusive use by the United States
to export critical minerals.58 Although exploratory, the proposal indicates the Pakistani leadership’s intent to
accommodate both great powers in the country’s geo-economic framework.
Similarly, Washington and Beijing’s positions on the Iran-Pakistan gas pipeline will continue to diverge, bar-
ring a dramatic improvement in U.S.-Iran relations. China, with its own 25-year, $400 billion megadeal with
Iran — part of an economic and strategic partnership 59— may support the pipeline to reinforce its energy
corridor strategy. However, Pakistan recognizes that this may cross a red line for Washington. As a result, the
project will likely stall unless U.S.-Iran relations improve. While the Middle East and Iran are beset by excep-
tional uncertainty and conflict, Western and Israeli pressure could loosen should the United States agree to
ease sanctions against the current or a successor Iranian regime. This could allow some connectivity projects
to be reconsidered, an outcome that would benefit Pakistan. However, until the situation changes, Pakistan
can only fend off Iranian penalties for its unwillingness to complete the project.
On other major initiatives linked to CARs, the United States and China may converge, though their logic
may differ. Despite concerns about Afghanistan, the United States does not oppose connectivity projects
flowing through the country. Beyond the universal objective of preventing total collapse in Afghanistan, the
United States would stand to benefit from an easing of Russia’s chokehold over Central Asia’s global access.
Furthermore, CARs’ use of Pakistan as a transit route would ensure multicountry commercial stakes in the
Gwadar port, a welcome development for Washington, which remains concerned about a Chinese monopoly
there. Previously, the United States has supported the TAPI pipeline and shown no opposition to CASA-1000,
as both projects would bolster east-west connectivity without involving China directly. Additionally, they
would help reduce regional dependency on Iranian energy and, at least theoretically, could moderate Taliban
behavior, given their economic benefits.
China is positively disposed toward transport and energy connectivity in general. Having already made signif-
icant investments in Central Asia, it is now the largest investor in Afghanistan.60 Providing CARs with access
to the Indian Ocean will require using the road infrastructure developed under CPEC, thereby interlocking
Central Asia’s interests with the corridor’s vitality. This would also practically operationalize China’s recent
decision to formally extend CPEC to Afghanistan and potentially create Western stakes in the stability of
Pakistan’s restive Balochistan province, through which the CPEC passes. Moreover, China has little reason
to oppose projects like TAPI and CASA-1000; they align with its infrastructure investments and interest in
extracting greater economic benefits from the region. Beijing has always been extremely pragmatic in its
regional economic relations, even when it comes to India. It is therefore unlikely to oppose India’s inclusion
in these energy initiatives if it generates greater economic opportunities and expands Beijing’s export and
investment market. Still, both China and India will retain their hardnosed stance on bilateral disputes and
their strategic competition.
For Pakistan, success lies in ensuring that the United States, China, and India all see the benefits of allowing
north-south and east-west connectivity corridors to operate in tandem. Pakistan must channel great power

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
competition constructively to attract investment from China while promoting regional stability in line with
U.S. interests. Including India could be a game changer, helping to mitigate some of the differences between
India and Pakistan and unlocking other avenues for cooperation across South, Central, and West Asia.
Unfortunately, India continues to block all cooperation with Pakistan. Any breakthrough in energy connectivity
will, at the very least, require collective pressure on India from CARs and Afghanistan. Simultaneously, both
the U.S. and China must be convinced that opposing South Asia’s connectivity web risks handing a strategic
advantage to their rival. Indeed, supporting Pakistan’s geo-economic paradigm would yield shared benefits
and maintain a stable equilibrium for the great powers. Ideally, this approach would reduce the intensity
of great power contestation in the neighborhood by aligning U.S. and Chinese geostrategic interests with
regional connectivity and positive interdependence.
Unfortunately, amid a total breakdown of Pakistan-Afghanistan relations, progress has become increasingly
unlikely. Over the past two years, heightened tensions between the two countries over anti-Pakistan terrorism
originating from Afghan soil have disrupted bilateral economic engagement and connectivity to Central Asia.
Consequently, CARs have increasingly used Iran and are investing further in the Eurasian route for transit in
the absence of sustained progress on the South Asian route. The situation has deteriorated to the point that
Pakistan is working to bypass Afghanistan in connecting to Central Asia (through China and Iran), but CARs
are unlikely to support these cumbersome and less economical routes.
Pakistan’s Climate Change Diplomacy
The global climate agenda is in disarray. Under President Trump, the United States has signaled abandonment
of its climate commitments, marked most obviously by its unilateral withdrawal from the Paris Agreement. 61
Washington’s opposition to global climate investments has cast a serious shadow over the future of the green
transition.
Despite emitting less than 1% of global greenhouse gasses, Pakistan is one of the world’s top 10 most
vulnerable countries to climate change.62 Over the past 50 years, the annual mean temperature has increased
by approximately 0.5°C (0.9°F), while the frequency of heatwave days has risen nearly fivefold since the
mid-1990s. Although annual precipitation has historically shown considerable variation, it has seen a slight
increase in the past five decades. Additionally, the sea level along the Karachi coast has risen by about
10 centimeters (4 inches) over the last century. According to one dire prediction, Pakistan’s annual mean
temperature is projected to increase by 3-5°C (5.5-9°F) by the end of this century.63
Exacerbating this crisis, Pakistan’s 7,000-plus glaciers — the largest collection outside the polar regions
—are melting rapidly, contributing to rising river levels, an increased risk of floods downstream, and more
frequent glacial lake outbursts. 64 These glaciers provide crucial water resources for domestic use and the
agricultural sector, which employs about 37.4% of Pakistan’s labor force.65 As the glaciers melt, it threatens
people’s livelihoods and food security. Already, the incidences of extreme weather events, such as the 2022
floods that submerged a third of the country and displaced 33 million people, 66 have increased, further
underscoring Pakistan’s vulnerability to climate-induced disruptions. At the same time, droughts have
become more frequent and enduring, particularly in the southern Sindh and Balochistan provinces.67 About
92% of Pakistan is characterized as semi-arid to arid, and as of 2026, per capita water availability in Pakistan
has declined to water-scarcity level of 1,000.68 This looming shortage will likely deepen economic disparities
and exacerbate already-high interprovincial tensions. Meanwhile, Pakistan’s atmospheric pollution levels
have risen sharply, with Lahore, its second-largest city, regularly ranking as the most polluted in the world.69

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
To address climate-related threats, Pakistan introduced its National Climate Change Policy in 2012, aimed
at driving resilience by integrating climate considerations into the country’s most economically and socially
vulnerable sectors.70 Between 2010 and 2014, approximately 6% of Pakistan’s federal budget was allocated to
climate-related expenditures, primarily in the energy and transport sectors. 71 Moreover, under its Nationally
Determined Contribution to the Paris Agreement, Pakistan committed to reducing its projected greenhouse
gas emissions by up to 50% by 2030. Of this target, 15% is unconditional while 35% is contingent on interna-
tional financial support.72Additionally, Pakistan’s NSP lists climate security as a national security imperative.73
Pakistan has also worked to expand its capacity in the renewable sector, increasing solar capacity from a mere
40 megawatts in 2014 to 1,244 megawatts in 2023.74 Despite baseload limitations linked to renewable energy,
long-term planning and a strategic vision can enable Pakistan to increase the share of renewable energy,
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and fulfill its climate responsibilities, all while successfully balancing
energy security and sustainability.
Pakistan is also home to one of the world’s largest mangrove restoration projects in the Indus River Delta. 75
Mangroves, absorb more carbon dioxide than other forests, and play a crucial role in preventing floods and
supporting marine ecosystems. Initiated in 2021 and spanning approximately 350,000 hectares, the project
is expected to absorb around 142 million tons of carbon dioxide over the next 60 years. 76 What’s more, the
initiative has generated significant revenue for both the government and the private sector through carbon
credits, with estimates suggesting it had earned the government around $40 million by 2023. 77 The govern-
ment is targeting $12 billion in carbon credit afforestation sales by 2075.78
However, Pakistan’s climate challenge remains monumental. Its ability to achieve its climate goals — essential
for reducing its vulnerability — depends on securing sizable international grants to cover the estimated $40
billion associated with these efforts.79 Pakistan’s adaptation needs alone have been assessed at between $7
billion and $14 billion annually.80 Unfortunately, only about 25% of global climate finance goes to the Global
South,81 despite developing countries’ urgent need for substantial investments in infrastructure and energy
access. Climate diplomacy plays a critical role here. By collaborating with other states, particularly those in
the Global South, vulnerable countries can push developed countries — which are historically responsible
for the majority of greenhouse gas emissions — to take greater responsibility and provide both technological
and financial support to help the developing world tackle climate change challenges.
In this context, Pakistan has emerged as a vocal advocate for climate justice. Recognizing that the burden of
climate change should not fall disproportionately on vulnerable countries, Pakistan has pushed for a more
equitable global response. It advocated for the establishment of the Loss and Damage Fund at COP27 in
2022, which marked a step forward for climate justice. As chair of the Group of 77 (G77) and China negotiating
group, which represents over 130 countries, Pakistan played a key role in securing the agreement to establish
the Fund.82 While questions remain about its funding and management, this initiative created an opportunity
for climate-vulnerable middle powers — like Pakistan, South Africa, Brazil, and India — to come together and
advance a common position on shared challenges and threats.
These countries occupy a unique space in global climate diplomacy; they can exert influence and represent
the concerns of both vulnerable and emerging economies. By forming coalitions within the Fund, these nations
have an opportunity to amplify their voices, shaping climate action to benefit a wider array of developing
countries. Beyond immediate climate resilience, they could cooperate in technology transfer, green finance,
and sustainable development. In addition to the G77 and China coalition, Pakistan is a prominent member
of two other major negotiating blocs at international climate talks: the Like-Minded Developing Countries
(LMDCs) group and the Coalition for Rainforest Nations (CfRN).83 These blocs also allow Pakistan to amplify

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
the voices of the Global South, advocate for climate justice, and strengthen collective action on global climate
challenges.
All of this, however, now depends on how the world adjusts to Washington’s departure from the climate arena.
As the natural successor to U.S. leadership, Europe must lead climate action, ensuring the agreed-upon
emissions cuts and global investments to achieve these goals. 84 While vulnerable countries like Pakistan
face an even more daunting challenge in a world disunited over climate change, Pakistani leaders and other
vulnerable middle powers must continue to press the Global North for support. For Pakistan, this is no less
than a question of long-term survival.
Bridging Political Divides Through Climate Diplomacy in South Asia
One extremely challenging but highly rewarding avenue for climate cooperation that Pakistan should explore
is with its archrival, India. Pakistan is far from the only South Asian country affected by climate change.
According to a World Bank report, approximately 750 million people in South Asia have been affected by
climate vulnerability. 85 According to the Council on Energy, Environment and Water, India ranks as the
seventh most likely country to experience extreme weather events,86 and approximately 80% of the population
lives in districts frequently affected by climate extremes. 87 Given South Asia’s dense populations, fragile
infrastructure, and resource constraints, climate-induced disasters can have catastrophic consequences for
both India and Pakistan. Their shared vulnerability begs for a mature discussion between the two neighbors.
Even their militaries should welcome such a conversation, as they are directly affected by glacial melting
and the resulting glacial lake outburst floods. For instance, a massive avalanche in 2012 killed over 120
Pakistani soldiers deployed at the Siachen glacier, the highest battleground in the world. The episode led the
Pakistan army chief to call for a permanent resolution to the Pakistan-India faceoff there, given the location’s
vulnerability to climate-induced disasters.88
An even more compelling reason to initiate bilateral climate diplomacy is the immediate, mutual crisis of
annual smog engulfing both Lahore and New Delhi. The air quality index in these cities hits dangerous levels
during the winter months, directly impacting millions and creating an environmental and health emergency.89
The threat is truly shared; emissions cross the border between the two countries, meaning that air quality in
one affects the other. While vehicular and industrial emissions play their part, stubble-burning by farmers in
both India and Pakistan is a significant contributor to this environmental catastrophe.90
Smog presents a unique opportunity for collaboration between these two adversaries, not only at the national
level but between the provinces of Pakistani and Indian Punjab, where the problem is most acute. By pooling
resources, sharing data, and conducting joint research, the neighbors can mitigate the immediate health
impacts of smog while paving the way for broader climate initiatives. Scientists and policymakers from both
countries could partner to develop innovative solutions to stubble-burning, such as alternative agricultural
practices or more efficient waste management systems, and curtail other sources of emissions.91 Successful
models could also be shared with other countries suffering from smog.
Moreover, there is potential for unified action from India and Pakistan on climate justice and reparations. 92
By aligning their voices with other South Asian countries, they could amplify the Global South’s demand for
reparations for climate change impacts. A hint of such alignment —though not yet active collaboration —
emerged during the COP27 and COP28 meetings in 2022 and 2023, where both sides found common ground
regarding the establishment of the Loss and Damage Fund. 93 Such cooperation is now even more essential
given recent U.S. actions. Washington’s opposition to climate efforts has effectively eliminated the possibility
of any joint U.S.-China efforts to promote resilience against climate-induced risks in South Asia. In the past,

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
15
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
Washington and Beijing might have eventually backed efforts to improve infrastructure for climate adaptation
and mitigation, support disaster response capabilities, and contribute to climate resilience projects in the
region. Quadrilateral dialogue between the United States, China, Pakistan, and India could have addressed
aspects of climate adaptation and mitigation that are not politicized.
Today, such collaboration is unrealistic not only due to the U.S. position, but also because prospects for
bilateral climate cooperation between India and Pakistan have dimmed following India’s unilateral announce-
ment in April 2025 that it was forcing the Indus Waters Treaty (IWT) into abeyance. 94 The IWT is a World
Bank-brokered water division treaty between the two countries that protects the overwhelming majority of
Pakistan’s water supply. After India’s announcement amid heightened tensions between the two nations, the
Pakistani National Security Committee — the apex consultative body on national security — immediately
responded by declaring that Pakistan would consider any Indian effort to starve Pakistan of water as an “act
of war.”95 This issue of Pakistan’s water lifeline will have to be addressed before broader questions of climate
cooperation can return to the table.
Pakistan’s Security and Counterterrorism Cooperation
Pakistan’s regional and global security relevance can be categorized into three domains: its role as a security
provider, as a recipient of military technology and equipment, and as a counterterrorism partner.
Pakistan as a Security Provider
Throughout its history, Pakistan has had an outsized influence on the global security architecture. For nearly
half of its 78-year existence, its earlier-recounted role as a front-line U.S. ally placed it at the center of
international affairs. Its policies have profoundly shaped global politics, whether during the Afghan jihad
of the 1980s or the post-9/11 War on Terror. While the country’s NSP seeks to disentangle the country from
such regional conflicts, its present leadership has enthusiastically joined President Trump’s Board of Peace,
signaling its intent to reenter the U.S.-led security orbit. Pakistan also joined the small group of Muslim states
proactively urging the U.S. President to force a ceasefire in Gaza in late 2025.96
Simultaneously, Pakistan has signaled its recognition of the importance of constructing non-Western middle
power security alliances in response to perceived American retrenchment. Leveraging its military prowess
and experience in security diplomacy — specifically its history of supporting partner regimes in the Gulf —
Pakistan signed a Strategic Mutual Defense Agreement (SMDA) with Saudi Arabia in September 2025. The
agreement transforms a strong, but informal and episodic, pattern of military cooperation between the two
sides into a binding mutual defense treaty, with the explicit provision that both countries will defend each other
in case of any aggression against them. 97 Given Pakistan’s nuclear capability, the agreement’s significance
extends beyond the bilateral relationship to encompass broader questions of regional deterrence. While there
is ambiguity over the agreement’s true intent and operationalization, the development underscores Pakistan’s
(and Saudi Arabia’s) appreciation for hedging strategies amid an increasingly uncertain global security order.
Since finalizing the agreement, Pakistan has found itself at the center of the regional mediation efforts to end
the 2026 U.S.-Israeli war in Iran, playing a deft balancing act to bring U.S. and Iranian interlocutors together
and receiving global praise in the process. 98 The war in Iran has, however, also exposed a major faultline in
the Gulf, with the UAE’s diplomatic proximity to Israel and rift with Saudi Arabia not only causing tensions
within the members of the Gulf Cooperation Council but also leading to a rupture of the UAE-Pakistan
relationship.99 While Israel has touted a “hexagon of alliances” with the UAE and other countries beyond the

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
Middle East, Turkey has expressed keen interest in joining the Pakistan-Saudi pact, and other nations may
find the agreement attractive for securing their interests in a chaotic Middle East.100 Egypt also seems to be
leaning towards this geopolitical grouping.101 This potential expansion has led some to see the Pakistan-Saudi
agreement as a fundamental restructuring of security arrangements spanning South and West Asia.
Beyond these recent developments, Pakistan has demonstrated its value as a security actor through its
longstanding contributions to multilateral security engagements. It has been a major contributor to UN
peacekeeping operations, with over 200,000 Pakistani peacekeepers serving in nearly 50 UN missions since
1960, and more than 180 losing their lives in the line of duty. 102 Pakistan was also one of the first countries
to achieve the UN goal of deploying 15% female officers.103 The country actively participates in key maritime
security initiatives, including the Combined Maritime Forces, a 47-nation partnership based in Bahrain. 104
Pakistan has also collaborated with regional organizations to combat terrorism and separatism. It is a key
member of the Regional Anti-Terrorism Structure (RATS) under the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO).105 Pakistan’s multilateral role in security cooperation is likely to continue regardless of the larger
geopolitical currents affecting global collaboration.
Pakistan’s Evolving Balancing Act in Its Quest for Military Modernization
The Pakistan military owes much of its strength to Western and, more recently, Chinese equipment and
technology. Historically, Pakistan’s security assistance relationship with the United States has been rather
bizarre, shifting from being a leading recipient of U.S. military assistance during the Cold War to facing
outright sanctions almost immediately afterward. While Pakistan received significant assistance post-9/11,
that aid dried up again, driven by India’s reservations as Washington and Delhi drew closer. Still, the Pakistan
military’s Western orientation has not disappeared. If the United States agreed to supply advanced military
technology, imports would continue today. Pakistan has also benefited from U.S. military training programs
and intelligence-sharing arrangements that have helped bolster its counterterrorism efforts.
China has filled the vacuum created by fluctuating U.S. support, emerging as Pakistan’s largest defense
supplier and offering a steady flow of conventional arms and advanced platforms. From 2019 to 2023, it
supplied 82% percent of Pakistan’s arms, up from 69% from 2014 to 2018. 106 China has also integrated
into Pakistan’s military-industrial complex through joint ventures such as JF-17 fighter jet production and
various technology transfers, providing Pakistan with greater self-reliance in arms production. 107 While this
partnership has offered Pakistan a lifeline to maintain some semblance of strategic balance against India,
which continues to expand its defense capabilities with support from Western powers as well as Russia,
Chinese equipment may increasingly become Pakistan’s technology of choice even if Western equipment
becomes available again. In this regard, the 2025 conflict between India and Pakistan may have been the
watershed moment. During the crisis, Chinese fighter jet technology made global headlines as Pakistan’s
air force downed the much-touted French Rafale and other Indian jets. 108 Pakistan’s military demonstrated
that its collaboration with China was not merely situational; it offered Pakistan a qualitative advantage over
its adversary in critical domains. Such demonstrations of technological superiority in a combat environment
offered a wakeup call for the West.
To address other specific defense needs and further diversity its options, Pakistan has also turned to Turkey,
whose defense sector has rapidly expanded in recent years. According to the Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute (SIPRI), Turkey emerged as Pakistan’s second-largest arms supplier in 2023, accounting
for 11% of Pakistan’s total arms imports,109 a significant increase from 2007, when Turkey’s contribution was
only 3.5%.110

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
17
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
Although Pakistan remains a minor supplier in global defense equipment, it has a growing defense export
sector. It views this sector as a potential source of fresh security partnerships and foreign exchange
earnings. The country’s bid to raise its profile among defense exporters received a major boost following
the performance of its air force during the 2025 crisis with India. Multiple countries have since expressed
interest in purchasing the Chinese-designed JF-17 thunder jet from its Pakistani production line. 111 While
these avenues are likely to expand, Pakistan’s conventional defense needs will also continue to grow, driven
by India’s exponential increase in its defense expenditure over the past two decades. The country will still
need to source much of its advanced military technology and platforms from external suppliers — another
reason to maintain strong partnerships with both China and the West.
Ideally, Pakistan could somehow convince both the West and China to continue supplying arms and technology
even as they engage as competitors in the defense industry, wary of transferring technological know-how —
especially from the West to China — through recipients like Pakistan. If the West’s post-Cold War reluctance
to fulfill Pakistan’s demands continues, it will inevitably open up even greater space for China to increase
Pakistan military’s dependence on its technology.
Counterterrorism Cooperation
While defense deals remain important in a conflict-prone South Asia, the India-Pakistan military competition
is not the primary reason for Pakistan’s relevance in the regional security landscape. Rather, it is Pakistan’s
role in the counterterrorism domain that compels the United States, China, and other countries to engage
with Islamabad in this area, even though the specific groups that threaten each external power vary widely.
India and Western countries have often accused Pakistan of being part of the terrorism problem. For years,
Pakistan’s claims of Indian human rights abuses in the disputed territory of Kashmir, as well as Indian sup -
port for terrorism within Pakistan, have been overshadowed by India’s accusations of Pakistan’s support for
violent militancy in the region. In the early 2000s, despite being highly dependent on Pakistan in the War
on Terror, the United States constantly accused the country’s military of playing a double game — support -
ing the Afghan Taliban while purporting to be a U.S. ally. 112 In response, Pakistan blamed the United States,
highlighting how its initial support of the Afghan mujahideen — the predecessors of the Taliban — began in
the 1980s under Washington’s tutelage. 113 Pakistan’s more vociferous critique centers on what it perceives
as global indifference to the thousands of casualties it suffered as a direct fallout of the post-9/11 U.S.-led
military campaign in Afghanistan.114
Despite these clashing perspectives, all major powers in the South Asian neighborhood recognize Pakistan’s
critical role in the global fight against terrorism. As a result, Pakistan’s own vulnerability to terrorism is a
source of immense concern. No country — irrespective of its relationship with Pakistan — wants to see
Pakistan destabilize irreversibly at the hands of terrorists.
Today, there is genuine cause for concern. After claiming victory over terrorism in the past decade, Pakistan’s
periphery is yet again in the grips of rising violence. From Balochistan province in the west, where militant
groups are fighting a secessionist movement, to the onslaught of the Pakistani Taliban in the northwest,
Pakistan experienced a 34% increase in terrorist attacks in 2025 compared to the previous year, reporting
over 1,000 casualties.115 Domestic political turmoil is adding to regional instability. Pakistan blames India for
using these groups as proxies to perpetrate terrorism. In the past, it has shared evidence to substantiate its
claims.116

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
For China, terrorism within Pakistan has assumed a personal and urgent dimension. Since 2017, 21 Chinese
citizens have been killed or injured in terrorist attacks within the country. 117 Most of these attacks have
been claimed by the Balochistan Liberation Army (BLA), ostensibly in opposition to CPEC. China has been
uncharacteristically vocal about the safety of its citizens, prioritizing their well-being in its relationship with
Pakistan.118 China’s public posturing creates a perverse incentive for further attacks, as the perpetrators’
primary objective is to create a rupture in the Pakistan-China relationship. In response, China has demanded
a provision for its own private security presence in Pakistan to protect its citizens, 119 which Pakistan has
denied for fear that the presence of a larger number of Chinese could be potential terrorist targets. It is also
wary of further Chinese ingress within Pakistan and the reactions this would elicit from the United States.
Regionally, too, Pakistan’s counterterrorism role is undeniable. The Afghan Taliban’s return to power — and
increasing evidence of their continued linkages with Al Qaeda and support to the Pakistani Taliban — have
caused fresh alarm in the West. Furthermore, the presence of ISIS on Afghan soil, even if in opposition to the
Afghan Taliban, has deepened these concerns. While the United States is no longer invested in transforming
Afghanistan into a modern democracy, it retains a keen interest in ensuring that anti-Western terrorist groups
do not find sanctuary there. ISIS, Al Qaeda, and the Pakistani Taliban — also housed in Afghanistan — are
seen as a transnational threat.
In contrast, the East Turkestan Islamic Movement (ETIM), a Muslim separatist group founded by militant
Uighurs, remains a primary security concern for Beijing. The group targets China’s restive Xinjiang region. 120
It has operated over the decades in the Pakistan-Afghanistan border region and has established links with
terrorist organizations, such as Al-Qaeda. China is also concerned with Baloch militant groups like the
BLA, which target Pakistani security personnel, Chinese citizens, and CPEC infrastructure in Balochistan. 121
However, the United States and other Indian partners remain focused on ensuring Pakistan continues to
prevent operations by anti-India militant groups that have been active for years in Kashmir. Despite the West
and China’s differing perceptions and interests, efforts to counter the militant presence in Pakistan and
Afghanistan — at least to prevent terrorism from spreading to other regions — remain their common interest.
Irrespective of the mistrust between Pakistan and the West on terrorism and China’s frustration regarding
Pakistan’s inability to protect Chinese citizens, Pakistan’s extensive experience in counterterrorism makes
it an indispensable player. Its geographical proximity to Afghanistan and shared history with the country
uniquely positions Pakistan to influence regional security dynamics and prospects for stability. No other
country wants to reenter Afghanistan with a broad military-backed agenda, which makes Pakistan’s role even
more central. Through intelligence-sharing, border security cooperation, and counterterrorism assistance,
Pakistan should continue cultivating its essential role in regional counterterrorism efforts.
The Pakistani military has already raised concerns about the rapid resurgence of terrorism in the region and
called for U.S. reengagement.122 Pakistan’s relevance in this arena is such that it received a positive response
from Washington, despite the Trump administration’s reduced emphasis on counterterrorism partnerships.
In fact, the recent turnaround in the U.S.-Pakistan relationship was triggered by a Pakistani intelligence
operation — based on a U.S. tip — that led to the arrest and subsequent extradition of the mastermind behind
the 2021 Abbey Gate bombing in Afghanistan, which killed 13 U.S. servicemembers. 123 Pakistan’s actions
elicited public praise from Trump in his address to the U.S. Congress, and U.S. officials have continued to
praise Pakistan as a counterterrorism partner since. In August 2025, the U.S. State Department formally
designated BLA as a Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO), fulfilling a longstanding Pakistani demand. The
U.S. administration also publicly defended Pakistan’s recent military campaign against the Afghan Taliban,
launched to punish them for their unwillingness to prevent cross-border terrorism by the Pakistani Taliban.124

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
19
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
Counterterrorism efforts are set to become even more important for Pakistan and the United States as they
embark on planned joint ventures in critical minerals. These projects are primarily located in Pakistan’s
western region, which borders Afghanistan — the areas most affected by terrorism. Critical mineral exploration
will need to go hand in hand with counterterrorism to protect against terrorist attempts to undermine U.S.
investments. Given that China also invests in this part of Pakistan, this could serve as an area of potential
cooperation among the United States, China, and Pakistan, aligning with Pakistan’s geo-economic vision to
create common U.S. and Chinese economic stakes within its territory.
Admittedly, forging such cooperation between the two great powers will not be easy. While the United States,
China, and even Gulf states like Saudi Arabia — all desperate to avoid any economic disruptions — may
provide monetary support to Pakistan to bolster its counterterrorism efforts, inherent contradictions in
their specific approaches will continue. Both the United States and China may pressure Pakistan for results
against outfits that oppose them specifically while looking the other way when it comes to activities of groups
targeting the other. Meanwhile, countries like India may not feel threatened by terrorism within Pakistan if the
violence is not flowing toward them.
For Pakistan, such a differentiated approach to terrorism on its soil will not be beneficial. It must find a way
to align the relevant countries’ interests so they see greater value in sincerely supporting Pakistan’s efforts
against all terrorists. By emphasizing the current severity of the threat and the ease with which these militant
groups co-exist, Pakistan can drive home to U.S. and Chinese policymakers that selective counterterrorism
approaches are ultimately counterproductive. The United States should understand this logic given that
it claimed to be a victim of Pakistan’s selective approach against terrorism in its post-9/11 campaign in
Afghanistan and vociferously opposed a good-versus-bad-terrorists distinction. In addition, Pakistan must
look to regional mechanisms like SCO’s RATS to broaden buy-in against terrorism among member states,
especially that emanating from Afghanistan.
Regional collaboration also holds promise in curbing the illicit drug trade. Narco-trafficking has an intrinsic
link to terror financing, 125 and Afghanistan has long been a major producer of opium. The notorious “hash
highway” originates in Afghanistan, passes through Pakistan, and ends in Europe. 126 Virtually all countries
affected by Afghan opium production — directly or indirectly — have a stake in addressing narco-trafficking
and stand to gain from closer coordination in this regard.
In all likelihood, counterterrorism will keep Pakistan relevant to the global security architecture for years to
come. The United States, other Western countries, and China are expected to remain engaged and continue
supporting Pakistan’s efforts to suppress the ability of transnational groups to act regionally or globally. The
outcome of this collaboration will inevitably impact evolving geopolitics, as it could be the difference between
a region defined by an unstable Pakistan and a collapsed Afghanistan and one where Pakistan contributes to
a safer world by keeping terrorist threats in check.
Pakistan: A Non-Player in the Global Technology Game
In today’s global economy, technological strength has become increasingly integral to national power,
alongside traditional pillars such as a strong economy, military capability, political influence, and geographic
location. The U.S.-China technological rivalry has become a defining feature of contemporary geopolitics ,
with each side vying for an advantage in chip-making, artificial intelligence, 5G technologies, and related
areas. The United States passed the CHIPS and Science Act in 2022, authorizing billions of dollars to bolster
domestic semiconductor production while curtailing exports to a handful of countries. 127 It has also taken

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
measures to limit China’s access to semiconductor technology. 128 China, on the other hand, is investing
aggressively to develop its own expertise in semiconductor research, design, and development.129
While the United States has long dominated the technology sector, China has recently emerged as a major
competitor, striving to expand its tech exports to African and Asian nations by offering more affordable alter-
natives.130 Over the last few years, the intensifying technology competition between the two nations has trig-
gered fears of technological decoupling,131 with significant implications for the developing world, which fears
that a “tech curtain” will force a binary choice and risk cutting them off from one of the two supply chains.
Pakistan is essentially a non-player in the high-end technology space, despite the substantial expansion
of its tech landscape since the COVID-19 pandemic and the notable growth of its digital service exports. 132
In comparison to its peers, Pakistan’s tech sector is miniscule. It relies heavily on imports and does not
participate in strategic tech alliances, manufacturing, and supply chains. 133 High-technology products
make up only 2% of the country’s total exports. 134 In January 2022, Pakistan unveiled the Pakistan National
Semiconductor Plan (PNSP), aimed at positioning the country as a potential hub for chip design and light
fabrication.135 Little progress has been made to date.
According to recent figures, Pakistan has 111 million internet users, translating to less than 50% internet
penetration across the country.136 Unlike many other middle powers, Pakistan currently lacks access to 5G
coverage.137 In 2023, the country ranked 45th out of 52 in the World Internet Development Index, 138 and 99th
out of 139 economies in the Global Innovation Index.139 In the Global AI Vibrancy Tool — which ranks countries
across eight key pillars of artificial intelligence — Pakistan ranks 76th out of 83 countries. 140 Pakistan has
also consistently ranked low on important digital metrics, such as the Global Connectivity Index and the
E-Government Development Index.141
For now, Pakistan’s only channel to gain technological relevance is through its rare earth and critical minerals
resources, which are essential to the emerging and future global economy. In September 2025, Islamabad
signed a $500 million agreement with Washington to export rare earth and critical minerals. 142 If Pakistan is
able to attract U.S. investment to develop this sector, it may position the country as a key player in the critical
minerals supply chain, creating fresh interdependencies between the two nations. However, this is a long-
term vision. At present, the urgent question for Pakistan is how to benefit from advanced technologies from
China and the United States in the context of a global “tech curtain.”
Given Pakistan’s dependence on both economies, falling on either side of the tech divide would be detrimen-
tal; it risks losing access to a primary supply chain or increasing production costs in the few export sectors
where Pakistan remains competitive. To navigate this, Pakistan must work to increase scientific cooperation
with China while simultaneously reviving its past collaboration with the United States in this area. In 2003,
Pakistan and the United States signed the comprehensive U.S.-Pakistan Science and Technology Cooperation
Agreement. Between 2005 and 2017, 110 projects were funded across health, water, agriculture, and energy.
However, no new projects have been initiated since 2017, suggesting an opportunity for both sides to revisit
and revitalize this framework.143 Pakistan could also explore relocating high-end technology manufacturing
from China that has been affected by U.S. sanctions. By offering lucrative arrangements to international
companies (or Chinese companies with a Pakistani parent or joint venture), Pakistan could incentivize them
to establish a local presence. This would not only drive export gains but also foster local capacity building
over time. However, to attract such companies, Pakistan needs to strengthen domestic digital infrastructure,
enhance data privacy measures, and improve its regulatory environment. Moreover, it must resolve domestic
security challenges and the energy crisis, both major deterrents to foreign investment.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
21
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
Another area of potential — though not strictly in the high-end technology space — is digital connectivity.
China’s Digital Silk Road (DSR), which launched in 2015 as part of the BRI, includes investments in tele -
communications, artificial intelligence, cloud computing, and smart cities. DSR also lends technical assis -
tance through which Pakistan could modernize its tech sector.144 Additionally, the Pakistan-China Fiber Optic
Project aims to become an “international gateway route for the voice/data traffic by providing connectivity
between China and Central Asian States with Middle East, Africa, Europe and beyond, also linking neighbor-
ing countries through direct connectivity.”145 Finally, the Digital Cooperation Organization (DCO), co-founded
by Pakistan in 2020, seeks to accelerate the advancement of the digital economy.146 With Saudi Arabia cham-
pioning this initiative, it could open doors for Pakistan-Gulf collaboration in digital connectivity, including
potential links between China and the Gulf through Pakistan.
Pakistan’s Vision and Challenges as a Middle Power
The growing U.S.-China rivalry lies at the heart of the gradual waning of the post-Cold War unipolar moment.
For countries like Pakistan, this intensifying contestation presents the daunting prospect of being forced to
pick a side, a situation complicated by the fact that its security and economic fundamentals are intrinsically
tied to both great powers and its geography precludes the option to remain a mere bystander. Pakistan’s
challenge is especially acute because its most meaningful international partnerships lack diversification. In
terms of great powers, Russia has had an antagonistic relationship with Pakistan for much of its history, and
despite a thaw in recent years, Islamabad remains peripheral to Moscow’s calculus. India, a rising power, is
Pakistan’s principal enemy. Meanwhile, its other middle power partnerships remain limited to the Gulf and
Turkey. While Pakistan is working to strengthen these ties, India’s influence continues to overshadow all
other regions. The U.K. and Europe remain important economic partners, but they are far more aligned with
India on strategic issues. These powers have further bolstered their ties with New Delhi through major trade
agreements in the wake of President Trump’s diplomatic onslaught against Europe.147
Pakistan’s challenge is to secure multialignment despite internal fragility and heavy dependence on its major
external partners. It must retain strong ties with the United States — not least to access Western financing
— while managing its relationship with India to avoid a strategic imbalance in South Asia and maintaining its
robust economic and security relationship with China. How Pakistan fares in this exercise in simultaneity will
drive the country’s future trajectory.
Four years ago, the NSP provided a blueprint for Pakistan to turn these challenges into opportunities. Political
and military leaders have since reaffirmed this vision in various policy statements. The NSP envisions the
country as a bridge between major powers and a center for regional connectivity, avoiding entanglement in
adversarial geopolitics and strict alignment with any great power bloc. However, Pakistan’s current regional
context makes this goal especially difficult to achieve. Among its neighbors, Afghanistan and Iran are inter -
nationally isolated and sanctioned to varying degrees. Relations with Afghanistan are broken, while India
appears intent on stalling any possibility for forward movement. Furthermore, while Pakistan-China relations
are extremely strong, the closer Pakistan gets to China, the warier Western capitals become of Chinese
designs in the region. Finally, Pakistan’s successful hedging through fresh security partnerships, like the one
with Saudi Arabia, offer benefits but also risk embroiling the country in new conflicts in the Middle East.
The Elephant in the Room: The India-Pakistan Relationship
The key to resolving Pakistan’s regional dilemma — and opening the most promising window for positive
economic interdependence — lies in rectifying its most broken relationship: India.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
A turnaround in this relationship is necessary to optimize any connectivity corridor in South Asia; without an
east-west axis, the Chinese-led north-south corridor remains limited in reach. New Delhi’s own self-interest
should dictate openness toward improving ties with Pakistan, as activating the east-west connectivity cor -
ridor will provide direct access to Central and West Asia. Washington’s propensity of recent years to view
Pakistan as an inevitable member of the China camp — and an opponent of its partner, India — may also
dampen if it sees India benefiting from a more regionally integrated Pakistan. This shift is even more likely
now that President Trump is actively trying to rebalance relations between India and Pakistan, seeing a bene-
fit in their improved ties. The United States’ own appetite for investing in major regional initiatives may grow,
if only as a means of maintaining its influence in the region. Consequently, Pakistan’s propensity to under -
mine India and India’s fears of Pakistan acting as a Chinese proxy may both be tempered. As these interests
become intertwined in a complex web, all sides may recognize the benefits of avoiding hard camp politics.
Pakistan would be forced to avoid moves that cross either great power’s red lines, while the United States and
China would find reason not to demand such extreme decisions in the first place.
Unfortunately, under Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the Indian government has closed all doors for meaning-
ful dialogue with Pakistan. While both countries have missed opportunities for forward movement in recent
years, India currently seems consumed by a hardnosed policy anchored in the belief that the fast-growing
military and economic differential between the two will soon allow New Delhi to force Pakistan into a lop -
sided political settlement of their outstanding disputes. Despite President Trump’s hardline position on India
over the past year, and his calls for India and Pakistan to avoid conflict, India remains unwavering, with offi-
cials repeatedly signaling their intention to maintain pressure on Pakistan.148
In May 2025, the Modi government escalated tensions significantly by directly engaging Pakistan through
kinetic action. In response to a terrorist attack in Kashmir, India launched a military campaign, employing
new platforms and selecting highly escalatory targets.149 The conflict concluded in a military stalemate after
Pakistan’s equally uncharacteristic and forceful response; India exited the crisis expressing its resolve to
take future military action.150 This crisis may prove to be a watershed moment, as it could make it politically
untenable for Pakistani leaders to continue asking for dialogue, potentially leading them to mirror India’s
stance of dismissing diplomatic avenues entirely.
This would compound the larger diplomatic reality that India’s global rise and its pointed efforts to cast a
negative shadow on Pakistan have already narrowed Pakistan’s circle of trusted partners. Until recently,
there was bipartisan consensus in Washington favoring India. Most in the U.S. capital continue to accept
India’s characterization of Pakistan as a state sponsor of terrorism and a Chinese proxy in South Asia. It is
also no coincidence that Pakistan remains excluded from virtually every successful regional or multilateral
grouping of which India is a member. Apart from the Organization of Islamic Countries, India has managed
to prevent Pakistan’s inclusion in all meaningful regional partnerships — from ASEAN to the Indian Ocean
Rim Association to all sub-regional South Asian arrangements. The entire Indo-Pacific is also all but closed
to Pakistan due to the anti-China nature of U.S.-led regional groupings there. While both India and Pakistan
are integral parts of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), India-Pakistan relations
have rendered the grouping ineffectual, with Prime Minister Modi sidelining SAARC in favor of bilateral and
sub-regional arrangements.151 The few multilateral arrangements in which Pakistan and India are both mem -
bers, like the Shanghai Corporation Organization (SCO), hold some promise but refuse to broach bilateral
issues that could help ease South Asia’s political divide.152
Unfortunately, for now, the two sides seem destined to remain at an impasse that will keep the region locked.
Both lose out, but for Pakistan, the regional and global consequences may become truly unsustainable. India
recognizes this and seems to be playing for time precisely for this reason.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
23
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
Finally, to state the obvious, Pakistan’s middle power aspirations will remain just that regardless of its exter-
nal relations unless it can ensure internal political and economic stability. Its recurring economic crises,
political instability, and security challenges impede its ability to undertake a proactive and robust foreign
policy in pursuit of cooperative geo-economics. While many of its internal challenges are linked to its exter -
nal realities, it is equally true that multiple internal reforms are needed to incentivize positive international
reactions. Pakistan must undertake significant domestic reforms to increase its foreign exchange earnings
and attract greater investments, even from friendly countries. CPEC continues to suffer from bureaucratic
hurdles and poor implementation, much to the dismay of Chinese investors. Furthermore, the resurgence of
terrorism is causing domestic and international alarm but also discouraging partner countries from focusing
serious positive attention on Pakistan. Pakistan’s perennial political instability triggered by a civil-military
divide and parochial power politics is at the heart of the entire situation, preventing a stable government and
making policymaking unpredictable and self-serving. These domestic challenges weaken Pakistan’s agency
as an influential and constructive middle power.
Looking ahead, Pakistan may be in the eye of the storm more than any other middle power as the U.S.-China
competition intensifies. Successfully navigating the evolving geopolitical landscape in line with its geo-eco-
nomic vision could once again elevate Islamabad’s stature as a bridge builder in international politics, but
failure to do so will only exacerbate its internal challenges and geopolitical vulnerabilities, eventually forcing
a hard choice between the United States and China. It is a moment Pakistani decision-makers are desperate
to avoid.
Recommendations
For Pakistan
• Domestically, Pakistan must assemble the necessary ingredients for a revived economy. This includes:
o Broadening its export base, focusing on sectors that also help create regional and extra-re -
gional stakes in a stable Pakistani economy.
o Removing hurdles to export-oriented FDI and opening up key sectors with high potential, like
rare earth and critical minerals.
o Increasing domestic revenues to be reinvested in human capital and incentivizing economic
growth.
• A prerequisite for sustained economic revival and the serious pursuit of cooperative geo-economics
is a return to political consociationalism that ensures predictable politics and economic policies.
• As the only major initiative with the potential to transform Pakistan’s economic output, CPEC must
be pursued in earnest, and projects must be completed in a timely manner. This is also necessary to
ensure all required transport infrastructure is in place for broader regional connectivity.
• To ease Western concerns about CPEC, Pakistan and China should offer maximum transparency on
the project terms, including the debt burden — and subsequent dependency — placed on Pakistan.
This addresses a longstanding Western demand and will allay concerns about any diversion of
Western funds to pay off Chinese debt.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
• Pakistan should actively create conditions to attract manufacturing units no longer able or willing
to operate in China, ensuring the arrangement remains permissible under current U.S. restrictions.
Special focus should be placed on tech-sector companies that can help Pakistan build local capacity
and gradually develop its own footprint in emerging technologies.
• Equally, Pakistan should continue to incentivize the Western private sector to invest in domestic and
regional initiatives, ideally including projects with Chinese investment, to keep Western interests tied
to Pakistan’s economy. Western technology has already powered some CPEC energy projects, but
these have been one-off exceptions.
• Pakistan should consider serving as a bridge between the United States and China by engaging with
both the BRI and the G7-led Build Back Better World (B3W). While the two initiatives are often posi-
tioned as rivals, Pakistan has a unique opportunity to explore their coexistence. Participating in both
would dilute direct pressure to make a binary choice between great power camps while addressing
Pakistan’s infrastructure gaps. Washington, in turn, could benefit from using Pakistan as a re-export
hub, allowing U.S. companies to access Chinese markets indirectly through local manufacturing.
• For these efforts to succeed, the Pakistani state must ensure protection of all foreign companies,
their employees, and connectivity projects. Beyond administrative and policy measures to improve
the rule of law in general, there is a need to reinvigorate counterterrorism efforts within the country
to quash any possibility of a return to Pakistan’s troubled post-9/11 era and to sustain international
support for its geo-economic vision.
• In terms of regional connectivity, Pakistan must remain a committed champion of the transport and
energy connectivity projects in which it is a partner. It should also continue exploring opportunities
for new initiatives regardless of India’s position on any particular project. While India’s involvement
would benefit the entire region, Pakistan cannot afford to wait for a change of outlook in New Delhi.
Pakistan’s increased collaboration with CARs and its support for China-led initiatives are crucial in
their own right. However, a prerequisite to this is an improvement in Pakistan-Afghanistan relations.
Despite Pakistan’s genuine misgivings regarding the Afghan Taliban’s reluctance to quell cross-bor-
der terrorism, Pakistan must reconsider its present hardnosed approach to find a balance that man-
ages security challenges while allowing bilateral economic engagement and connectivity with Central
Asia to continue.
• Digital connectivity is another promising space, but Pakistan must broaden its partnerships beyond
China to avoid falling on the wrong side of the U.S.-China “tech curtain.” It should continue tapping
into the interest of Gulf countries and CARs to bolster digital connectivity through Pakistan.
• In terms of its diplomatic footprint, Pakistan must expand its partnerships among peer countries
while reinforcing its ties with traditional middle power partners to accrue greater economic and dip-
lomatic benefits. Proactive efforts are needed to cement relations with CARs, like Uzbekistan and
Kazakhstan; Southeast Asian powerhouses, like Singapore, Indonesia, and Malaysia; and key players
in the Global North, like Japan and South Korea, among others.
• Arguably the most challenging aspect of Pakistan’s diplomacy remains its relationship with India.
While a significant breakthrough seems unlikely for the foreseeable future, these two countries have
created openings at equally improbable moments in the past. To break the current impasse, the
United States and other Western countries may need to encourage India to recognize the advantages
of moving past its dogmatic stance and entertaining Pakistan’s offers for dialogue. While U.S. support

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
25
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
can no longer be guaranteed in this domain, one possible approach could involve engagement on
issues related to the environment. Pressing climate-related challenges may offer a unique entry point
for a gradual return to conversations on more contentious issues. However, for any progress to occur,
Pakistan is likely to demand India’s adherence to the IWT as a prerequisite.
• Relatedly, Pakistan’s exclusion from potent regional political and economic groupings is affecting
its ability to access lucrative markets and solicit diplomatic support from key countries. It should
continue pressing its case and find ways to circumvent Indian opposition in seeking admission into
groupings like ASEAN and economic Indo-Pacific partnerships.
• As one of the leaders of the Global South, Pakistan should continue to champion climate diplomacy
despite U.S. opposition. It should also use climate as a vehicle to diversify and enhance its middle
power partnerships.
• In addition, Pakistan should maintain its relevance as a middle power through middle power security
partnerships, multilateral forums, and peacekeeping roles. Over the next two years, it must also use
its position as a non-permanent member of the UNSC to champion global cooperation and peace,
including in its neighborhood — despite Pakistan’s involvement in President Trump’s Board of Peace,
which skeptics see as the U.S. President’s attempt to create a parallel platform for global diplomacy
outside the UN auspices. While doing so, however, it should be careful not to become entangled in
regional conflicts.
• Finally, Pakistan should continue to express its willingness to remain a partner in regional and global
counterterrorism efforts and continue seeking support for its endeavors.
For the United States and China
The United States and China recognize Pakistan’s potential as a stabilizing regional partner, as well as the
dangers of a relatively isolated and increasingly unstable Pakistan. However, their clashing regional inter -
ests and divergent preferences for regional allies increasingly threaten to force Pakistan into a “with-us-or-
against-us” dilemma, which none of the three parties would want.
To find an acceptable equilibrium that avoids a binary future for Pakistan — which would jeopardize a more
balanced, peaceful, and prosperous South Asia — the great powers must reconsider their approaches toward
Pakistan.
• Pressuring Pakistan to align with either side in the U.S.-China rivalry and using it as a proxy in the
next phase of great power contestation entails huge opportunity costs and risks making the nuclear
state even more unstable. Both great powers should continue avoiding the temptation to put Pakistan
to the test and should identify ways to pursue their regional interests through Pakistan’s geo-eco -
nomic vision instead.
• The United States and China must understand that connectivity within South Asia — and between
South Asia and its neighboring regions — ultimately serves their strategic interests, even if specific
individual projects do not. Promoting only their preferred initiatives while scuttling others essentially
maintains a broken, siloed, and unintegrated nuclear-armed region. Such a status quo prevents both
India and Pakistan from achieving their full potential and keeps the region unstable, with the specter
of escalating tensions and transnational terrorism ever present.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
• China should remain committed to supporting the timely completion of CPEC and digital connectivity
projects, despite frustrations regarding security lapses and poor execution. Following expansion to
Afghanistan, China should also actively push for extension of the CPEC to CARs. Pakistan, for its
part, must work with China to find an acceptable mechanism to protect Chinese citizens and projects.
• China and Pakistan should agree to high levels of transparency on CPEC projects to counter con -
cerns about servicing of loans through IMF’s lending and alleged strategic motives behind its con -
nectivity projects.
• China could also benefit by promoting its partnership with Pakistan in high-tech sectors such as
artificial intelligence, robotics, and semiconductors, specifically under the Digital Silk Road initiative.
In these sensitive fields, transparency would also be critical to assuage any Western concerns, espe-
cially in the semiconductor industry.
• The United States should aggressively pursue its intended investment in Pakistan’s rare earth and
critical minerals sector. Meanwhile, both great powers could assist Pakistan in adopting advanced
technologies, especially in agriculture and energy.
• Counterterrorism remains an obvious arena of potential collaboration. Rather than narrowly focus -
ing on outfits that threaten them directly, the United States and China should support Pakistan in
preventing and countering terrorism of all types. Only then can the region expect the ultimate eradi-
cation of this menace.
• Washington, Beijing, and multilateral institutions hold the overwhelming majority of Pakistan’s exter-
nal debt. While they are well within their rights to use this as leverage to force progressive domestic
economic reforms in Pakistan, using debt for diplomatic arm-twisting — a tactic the United States
has frequently employed in the past — is ill-conceived. External powers should continue showing
leniency regarding Pakistan’s debt payments as long as the country is sincerely implementing the
bold reforms needed for stabilization.
• Pakistan will continue to require monumental assistance for the foreseeable future. The interna -
tional community, led by the United States and China, should be prepared to assist Islamabad, more
through trade and investment than loans and handouts, focusing their conditionalities on economic
reforms and performance. Simultaneously, they should encourage other Pakistani partners in the
Gulf and elsewhere to stimulate the country’s economy by doing the same.
• One of the historic strengths of Pakistan’s relationships with the United States has been the peo -
ple-to-people connection. These ties have sustained the relationship through the most difficult of
times and helped it grow organically in better moments. Cultural and educational exchanges must
be enhanced further. While China has begun to invest heavily in this sphere, visa barriers remain
for Pakistanis. The same challenge has affected Pakistani citizens wishing to travel to the United
States in recent years. Moreover, travel from the United States and China to Pakistan has reduced
to a trickle due to safety concerns. More safe opportunities must be created to preserve this critical
strength of both relationships.
• U.S. policymakers must weigh the costs of any steps that might cut Pakistan loose and force it
squarely into the Chinese camp despite its reluctance to choose a side. Similarly, if China shuns India
completely, it will only strengthen New Delhi’s ties with Washington and further harden bloc politics
in China’s backyard. Such a scenario keeps India’s interest in isolating and weakening Pakistan alive,

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
27
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
leaving China with a greater responsibility to support and protect Pakistan. This is also a potent
reason for India to rethink its self-defeating strategy of isolating Pakistan. The more it pushes, the
closer Pakistan and China will become, particularly in terms of military support. Instead, the United
States, China, and other relevant middle powers should facilitate dialogue between India and Pakistan
and among regional states more broadly. The India-Pakistan relationship holds the key to unlocking
the region’s potential and reducing the risk of conflict. In this regard, President Trump’s rebalancing
of U.S. relations with India and Pakistan is a positive development that signals that Washington does
not intend to bank exclusively on India against China and Pakistan.
• The United States and China should also facilitate Pakistan’s entry into regional and multilateral eco-
nomic groupings to allow the country to gain preferred access to markets and investment opportuni-
ties. Neither India nor Pakistan should be allowed to use a veto to prevent the other from benefiting
from economic opportunities.
Statements and views expressed in this commentary are solely those of the authors and do not imply
endorsement by Harvard University, the Harvard Kennedy School, or the Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
Endnotes
1 Carsten Holbraad, Middle Powers in International Politics (Macmillan, 1984).
2 Dong-min Shin, “A Critical Review of the Concept of Middle Power,” E-International Relations, December 4,
2015, https://www.e-ir.info/2015/12/04/a-critical-review-of-the-concept-of-middle-power/.
3 Adam Chapnick, “The Middle Power,” Canadian Foreign Policy Journal 7, no. 2, 1999: 73–82, https://doi.org/10.1
080/11926422.1999.9673212.
4 S’thembile Cele, “BRICS Gets Boost as Saudi Arabia Joins Group of Emerging Nations,” Bloomberg, January
31, 2024,https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-01-31/brics-gets-boost-as-saudi-arabia-joins-group-of-
emerging-nations; Ali Tauqeer Sheikh, “Pakistan’s Climate Victory: A Seat at the Table, But is the Funding Enough?”
Dawn, October 18, 2024, https://www.dawn.com/news/1865358 ; Sansom Milton, Ghassan Elkahlout, and Sana Tariq,
“Qatar’s Evolving Role in Conflict Mediation,” Mediterranean Politics 30, no. 1, 2025: 53–77, https://doi.org/10.1080/1362
9395.2023.2266665.
5 Amin Ahmed, “Pakistan to Enter 2026 as the Fifth-most Populous Country,” Dawn, December 31, 2025,
https://www.dawn.com/news/1964235 .
6 Adil Najam, “Pakistan’s Moment of Youth,” Dawn, May 5, 2024, https://www.dawn.com/news/1831567 .
7 “MOF Explains External Debt Profile”, Business Recorder, February 23, 2026, https://www.brecorder.com/
news/40408533; “Pakistan’s Debt-to-GDP Ratio,” World Economics, https://www.worldeconomics.com/Debt/Pakistan.
aspx.
8 “Exports of Goods and Services (Percent of GDP) – Pakistan,” World Bank Open Data, accessed June 19, 2025.
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NE.EXP.GNFS.ZS?locations=PK.
9 “SBP-held Reserves rise by $13m to $16.10 billion,” Business Recorder, January 29, 2026, https://www.brecord-
er.com/news/40404734 .
10 National Security Policy of Pakistan 2022–2026, National Security Division, 2022, https://nsd.gov.pk/SiteIm-
age/Misc/files/NSP%20summary.pdf
11 “Pakistan’s Geoeconomic Pivot: Conversation with Dr. Moeed Yusuf,” Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung Asia, August 19,
2024, https://asia.fes.de/news/conversation-moeed-yusuf.html.
12 Henry Kissinger, “On China” Penguin Press, 2011.
13 Ayesha Jalal, The State of Martial Rule: The Origins of Pakistan’s Political Economy of Defence, Cambridge
University Press, 1990: 373.
14 Manjari Chaterjee Miller, “How China, Pakistan Forged Close Ties,” Hindustan Times, October 2, 2022, https://
www.hindustantimes.com/opinion/how-china-pakistan-forged-close-ties-101664721640366.html.
15 Henry Kissinger, “On China” Penguin Press, 2011: 199-200.
16 “Spirit of ’74,” Dawn, February 26, 2024. https://www.dawn.com/news/1817111.
17 Rahim Hayat Qureshi, “Pakistan and Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO),” Islamabad Institute of Stra-
tegic Studies, June 13, 2023, https://issi.org.pk/pakistan-and-economic-cooperation-organization-eco/.
18 Moeed Yusuf and Rabia Akhtar, “Pakistan’s Geoeconomic Pivot: Strategies, Opportunities, and Challenges,”
Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung Asia, 2023, https://asia.fes.de/news/pakistan-geoeconomic-pivot-report.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
29
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
19 Center for Global Development, “Aid to Pakistan by the Numbers,” accessed June 19, 2025, https://www.cgdev.
org/page/aid-pakistan-numbers.
20 Rabia Akhtar, The Blind Eye: U.S. Non-Proliferation Policy Towards Pakistan from Ford to Clinton, University of
Lahore, 2018.
21 “CPEC Brings $25.4bn Investment, Creates 236,000 Jobs in Pakistan, says Chinese Envoy,” Business Recorder,
December 14, 2024, https://profit.pakistantoday.com.pk/2024/12/14/cpec-brings-25-4bn-investment-creates-236000-
jobs-in-pakistan-says-chinese-envoy/ .
22 “Pakistan: IMF Reaches Staff-Level Agreement with Pakistan on Economic Policies Under a 37-Month Ex-
tended Fund Facility Arrangement,” International Monetary Fund, July 12, 2024, https://www.imf.org/en/News/Arti-
cles/2024/07/12/pr-24273-pakistan-imf-reaches-agreement-on-economic-policies-for-37-month-eff.
23 “China Remains Pakistan’s Largest Trading Partner in 2022-23,” Pakistan Today, March 6, 2023, https://www.
pakistantoday.com.pk/2023/03/06/china-remains-pakistans-largest-trading-partner-in-2022-23-2/
24 “Annual Analytical Report External Trade Statistics of Pakistan FY-2023,” Pakistan Bureau of Statistics, 2023,
https://www.pbs.gov.pk/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Annual_Analytical_Report_on_External_Trade_Statistics_of_Paki-
stan_FY2023-3.pdf
25 State Bank of Pakistan, “Economic Data,” accessed February 28, 2026, https://www.sbp.org.pk/ecodata/in-
dex2.asp
26 Tanvi Madan, “Major Power Rivalry in South Asia,” Council on Foreign Relations, October 21, 2021, https://
www.cfr.org/report/major-power-rivalry-south-asia.
27 Lin, Bonny, Michael S. Chase, Jonah Blank, Cortez A. Cooper III, Derek Grossman, Scott W. Harold, Jennifer D.
P. Moroney, Lyle J. Morris, Logan Ma, Paul Orner, Alice Shih, and Soo Kim, “U.S. Versus Chinese Powers of Persuasion:
Does the United States or China Have More Influence in the Indo-Pacific Region?”, CA: RAND Corporation, November
12, 2020. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_briefs/RB10137.html .
28 Samir Bhattacharya, “India is Embracing a ‘Net Security Provider’ Role in the Indian Ocean Region,” The Dip-
lomat, March 8, 2024, https://thediplomat.com/2024/03/india-is-embracing-a-net-security-provider-role-in-the-indian-
ocean-region/.
29 Callum Jones and Penelope MacRae, “Trump Imposes 50% on India as Punishment for Buying Russian Oil,”
Guardian, August, 27, 2025, https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/aug/27/trump-tariff-india-russian-oil-pur-
chase. The 50% rate was among the highest tariffs the United States charged any trading partner.
30 Jarret Ranshew, David Lawder, and Manoj Kumar, “US, India Unveil Interim Trade Framework, Move Close to
Broad Pact,” Reuters, February 7, 2026, https://www.reuters.com/world/india/us-india-release-framework-an-interim-
trade-deal-2026-02-06/ .
31 Kamran Yousaf, “Islamabad Turns to Pakistani American for Biden-Imran Call,” Express Tribune, October 4,
2021, https://tribune.com.pk/story/2323212/islamabad-turns-to-pakistani-american-for-biden-imran-call .
32 “Pakistan to Recommend Trump for Nobel Peace Prize over India Ceasefire,” Guardian, June 21, 2025, https://
www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/jun/21/pakistan-trump-nobel-prize-recommendation-india-ceasefire .
33 “Joint Statement on U.S.-Pakistan Counterterrorism Dialogue.” U.S. Department of State, August 12, 2025,
https://www.state.gov/releases/office-of-the-spokesperson/2025/08/joint-statement-on-u-s-pakistan-counterterror-
ism-dialogue .

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
34 Abid Hussain, “Strategic Handshake’: How Pakistan is Wooing Trump with Critical Minerals,” Al Jazeera,
September 25, 2025, https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2025/9/25/strategic-handshake-how-pakistan-is-woo-
ing-trump-with-critical-minerals; Ariba Shahid, “Pakistan to Partner with Affiliate of Trump family’s World Liberty
Financial on USDI Stablecoin,” Reuters, January 15, 2026, https://www.reuters.com/business/finance/pakistan-part-
ner-with-world-liberty-financial-dollar-linked-stablecoin-source-2026-01-14/ .
35 “China, Pakistan Reaffirm Ties as US Outreach to Islamabad Deepens,” Reuters, January 5, 2026, https://www.
reuters.com/world/china/china-pakistan-reaffirm-ties-us-outreach-islamabad-deepens-2026-01-05/; “China Affirms
Commitment to Working with Pakistan on Regional Peace and Stability,” Dawn, August 21, 2025, https://www.dawn.
com/news/1932287 .
36 ““Why #OneSouthAsia,” World Bank, https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/south-asia-regional-integration/
trade.
37 “Global Multidimensional Poverty Index 2024: Poverty Amid Conflict,” United Nations Development Pro-
gramme and Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative, https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/
files/2024-10/2024_global_multidimensional_poverty_index.pdf .
38 Mubarak Zeb Khan, “Trade Deficit with Nine Regional Countries Widens 35pc,” Dawn, May 22, 2025, https://
www.dawn.com/news/1912485.
39 “ “Pakistan Misses $8bn SEZ Investment, 500,000-Job Targets: Minister,” Dawn, May 5, 2026, https://www.
dawn.com/news/1997769.
40 Mohiuddin Aazim, “Trading with Central Asia,” Dawn, February 16, 2026. https://www.dawn.com/news/1973614
41 “Pakistan, Uzbekistan Set $2bn Trade Goal, Push for Trans-Afghan Railway,” Profit by Pakistan Today, Febru-
ary 27, 2025, https://profit.pakistantoday.com.pk/2025/02/27/pakistan-uzbekistan-set-2bn-trade-goal-push-for-trans-
afghan-railway.
42 “Regional: TAPI Gas Pipeline Project (Phase 1),” Asian Development Bank, accessed June 18, 2025, https://
www.adb.org/news/tapi-pipeline-help-afghanistan-rebuild-ties-silk-road-neighbors.
43 Zafar Bhutta, “TAPI Gas Pipeline Makes Headway,” The Express Tribune, March 13, 2019, https://tribune.com.
pk/story/1928241/tapi-gas-pipeline-makes-headway.
44 Syed Fazl-e-Haider, “Turkmenistan Resumes Work on TAPI Pipeline Despite Geopolitical Hurdles,” The James-
town Foundation 21, no. 135, September 19, 2024, https://jamestown.org/program/turkmenistan-resumes-work-on-ta-
pi-pipeline-despite-geopolitical-hurdles/.
45 “ADB Suspends TAPI Project Until IEA Gains International Recognition,” Ariana News, March 10, 2022, https://
www.ariananews.af/adb-suspends-tapi-project-until-iea-gains-international-recognition/.
46 “About CASA-1000,” CASA-1000, accessed June 19, 2025, https://www.casa-1000.org/about-casa-
1000/#about2.
47 World Bank, “Q&A: CASA-1000 Resumption in Afghanistan,” February 23, 2024, https://www.worldbank.org/
en/news/statement/2024/02/23/casa1000resumptionafghanistan.
48 “Pakistan Shelves Multi-billion Dollar Gas Pipeline Project with Iran under Pressure from US: Report,” The
Times of India, August 7, 2023, https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/world/pakistan/pakistan-shelves-multi-billion-dol-
lar-gas-pipeline-project-with-iran-under-pressure-from-us-report/articleshow/102492596.cms.
49 “Iran-Pakistan Gas Pipeline Project,” Inter State Gas Systems (ISGS), accessed June 19, 2025, https://www.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
31
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
isgs.com.pk/index.php/iran-pakistan-ip-gas-pipeline-project/.
50 Michael Kugelman, “Iran Puts Pakistan on Notice,” Foreign Policy, September 4, 2024, https://foreignpolicy.
com/2024/09/04/iran-pakistan-pipeline-gas-arbitration-economy-sanctions/.
51 Afia Malik, “Preface,” in Readings in Pakistan’s Energy Challenges, Pakistan Institute of Development Eco-
nomics, 2024, https://file.pide.org.pk/pdfpideresearch/book-50-00a-preface-readings-in-pakistans-energy-challenges.
pdf.
52 Khalid Iqbal, “Solutions for Energy Crisis in Pakistan,” Islamabad Policy Research Institute, December 17, 2014,
https://www.ipripak.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/sfecpii.pdf
53 “Pakistan’s Trade in Goods Data (July-June FY’2025 VS July-June FY’2024),” Pakistan Business Council,
https://www.pbc.org.pk/wp-content/uploads/Pakistan-Trade-in-Goods-Data-FY25-Vs.-FY24.pdf
54 “Improving Energy Resilience in Pakistan Can Avert 175,000 Child and Adult Deaths,” UNICEF Pakistan, May
31, 2024, https://www.unicef.org/rosa/press-releases/improving-energy-resilience-pakistan-can-avert-175000-child-
and-adult-deaths
55 “World Energy Outlook 2024,” International Energy Agency, 2024, https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/
c036b390-ba9c-4132-870b-ffb455148b63/WorldEnergyOutlook2024.pdf.
56 Abdullah Khan, “The Malacca Dilemma: A Hindrance to Chinese Ambitions in the 21st Century,” Berkeley
Political Review, August 26, 2019, https://bpr.studentorg.berkeley.edu/2019/08/26/the-malacca-dilemma-a-hindrance-
to-chinese-ambitions-in-the-21st-century/.
57 Daniel Markey, “How the United States Should Deal with China in Pakistan,” Carnegie Endowment for Inter-
national Peace, April 8, 2020, https://carnegieendowment.org/research/2020/04/how-the-united-states-should-deal-
with-china-in-pakistan?lang=en.
58 Humza Jilani, “Pakistan Courts US with Pitch for New Arabian Sea Port,” Financial Times, October 5, 2025,
https://www.ft.com/content/9f7c7bf2-76ed-4eb6-bb9a-f628d05b0068 .
59 Farnaz Fassihi and Steven Lee Myers, “China, With $400 Billion Iran Deal, Could Deepen Influence in Mid-
east,” New York Times, March 27, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/27/world/middleeast/china-iran-deal.html.
60 Makhdum Karam Shah, “Mining for Influence: China’s Mineral Ambitions in Taliban-led Afghanistan,”, Wood-
row Wilson International Center, August 19, 2024, https://www.wilsoncenter.org/blog-post/mining-influence-chi-
nas-mineral-ambitions-taliban-led-afghanistan.
61 Lisa Friendman, “America Officially Leaves the Paris Climate Agreement. For the Second Time,” New York
Times, January 26, 2026, https://www.nytimes.com/2026/01/27/climate/paris-climate-agreement-withdrawal.html.
62 “Pakistan Country Report 2023,” UN-Habitat, 2023, https://unhabitat.org/sites/default/files/2023/06/4._paki-
stan_country_report_2023_b5_final_compressed.pdf
63 Qamar Uz Zaman Chaudhry, “Climate Change Profile of Pakistan,” Asian Development Bank, 2018, https://
www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/357876/climate-change-profile-pakistan.pdf.
64 Mohammed Khaja Qutubuddin, “Melting Glaciers in Pakistan: A Call to Action for the G20 Summit to Address
the Situation,” Earth.Org, April 24, 2023, https://earth.org/melting-glaciers-in-pakistan/; Nazalea Kusuma, “What Melt-
ing Glaciers Mean for Pakistan,” Green Network Asia, August 9, 2022 https://greennetwork.asia/gna-knowledge-hub/
what-melting-glaciers-mean-for-pakistan/
65 Food and Agriculture Organization, “Pakistan at a Glance,” FAO in Pakistan, accessed June 19, 2025, https://

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
www.fao.org/pakistan/our-office/pakistan-at-a-glance/en/.
66 “Consolidated Emergency Report, 2023,” UNICEF, March, 2024. https://www.unicef.org/pakistan/media/5846/
file/UNICEF%20Pakistan%20Consolidated%20Emergency%20Report%20for%202023.pdf.pdf
67 Amin Ahmed, “Drought Conditions in Sindh, Balochistan Worsening,” Dawn, January 29, 2019, https://www.
dawn.com/news/1460484.
68 “Pakistan Must Move from Water Crisis Management to Water Security Planning: Federal Minister for Plan-
ning,”, April 29, 2026. https://pc.gov.pk/web/press/get_press/1688 ; Jo-Ellen Parry, Anika Terton, Hisham Osman,
Christian Ledwell, Saeed Asad, “Making Every Drop Count”, IISD, September 29, 2016 https://www.iisd.org/articles/
insight/making-every-drop-count-pakistans-growing-water-scarcity-challenge.
69 “Record High Air Pollution Shuts Schools in Pakistan’s Lahore,” Al Jazeera, November 4, 2024. https://www.
aljazeera.com/gallery/2024/11/4/record-high-air-pollution-shuts-schools-in-pakistans-lahore.
70 “National Climate Change Policy Report,” Ministry of Climate Change, Government of Pakistan, 2012, https://
www.gcisc.org.pk/National_Climate_Change_Policy_2012.pdf
71 Qamar Uz Zaman Chaudhry, “Climate Change Profile of Pakistan,” Asian Development Bank, 2018, https://
www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/357876/climate-change-profile-pakistan.pdf.
72 Ministry of Climate Change, Islamabad, “Pakistan’s Biennial Transparency Report (BTR) 2024 to the UNFC-
CC,” January 2025, https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/Pakistan%27s%20Biennial%20Transparency%20Re-
port%20%28BTR%29%202024.pdf
73 National Security Policy of Pakistan 2022–2026, National Security Division, 2022, https://nsd.gov.pk/SiteIm-
age/Misc/files/NSP%20summary.pdf
74 “Pakistan Solar Energy - Market Share Analysis, Industry Trends & Statistics, Growth Forecasts (2025 -
2030),” Research and Markets, January 1, 2025, https://www.researchandmarkets.com/reports/5552651/pakistan-so-
lar-energy-market-share-analysis.
75 “Pakistan Restores Mangroves for Economy and Ecosystem Benefits,” UNEP, January 10, 2025, https://www.
unep.org/news-and-stories/story/pakistan-restores-mangroves-economy-and-ecosystem-benefits.
76 Diaa Hadid, “Pakistan is Planting Lots of Mangroves, but It’s Upsetting Some Environmentalists,” NPR,
October 4, 2023, https://www.npr.org/2023/10/04/1203733018/pakistan-is-planting-lots-of-mangroves-but-its-upset-
ting-some-environmentalists.
77 Zulfiqar Kunbhar, “Pakistan’s Mangrove Carbon Credit Sales Hit $40 mn, Boosts Target to $12bn by 2075,”
Arab News, August 18, 2023, https://www.arabnews.com/node/2357126/pakistan.
78 Ibid.
79 Pakistan, Updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) 2021, Government of Pakistan, 2021, https://
unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-06/Pakistan%20Updated%20NDC%202021.pdf.
80 Some projections suggest that annual climate adaptation costs for developing countries could rise to $300
billion by 2030 and potentially escalate to $500 billion by 2050 if mitigation targets are not met. See “Scaling Up Adap-
tation Finance Must Be on the Table at UN COP26,” UNCTAD, October 28, 2021, https://unctad.org/news/scaling-adap-
tation-finance-must-be-table-un-cop26.
81 “Shaping Cooperation in a Fragmenting World,” World Economic Forum, January 2024, https://www3.weforum.
org/docs/WEF_Shaping_Cooperation_in_a_Fragmenting_World_2024.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
33
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
82 Ephrem Kossaify, “How G77 Group of Developing Nations Helped Advance Climate Justice Cause under Paki-
stan’s Presidency,” Arab News, December 28, 2022, https://www.arabnews.pk/node/2223146/pakistan.
83 Coalition for Rainforest Nations, “All Our Countries,” accessed June 10, 2025, https://www.rainforestcoalition.
org/all-our-countries/.
84 “Taking the Lead on Climate Change,” Consilium Europa, https://www.consilium.europa.eu/es/eu-climate-
change/ .
85 World Bank Group, Climate Change Action Plan 2021–2025: South Asia Roadmap, World Bank, June 22, 2021,
https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-reports/documentdetail/262891632949399367/world-
bank-group-climate-change-action-plan-2021-2025-south-asia-roadmap.
86 Abinash Mohanty and Shreya Wadhawan, “The State of Extreme Events in India,” Council on Energy, Environ-
ment and Water, August 2022, https://www.ceew.in/publications/state-extreme-events-india.
87 Abinash Mohanty and Shreya Wadhawan, Mapping India’s Climate Vulnerability: A District-Level Assess-
ment Council on Energy, Environment and Water, October 26, 2021, https://www.ceew.in/publications/mapping-cli-
mate-change-vulnerability-index-of-india-a-district-level-assessment.
88 Ayaz Gul, “Pakistan Army Chief Calls for Demilitarization of World’s Highest Battleground,” Voice of America,
April 17, 2012, https://www.voanews.com/a/pakistans-army-chief-calls-for-demilitarization-of-world-highest-battle-
ground-147974215/180479.html.
89 According to the latest World Health Organization’s report, Pakistan and India were among the top five most
polluted countries. The air quality index in Pakistan was 3.7 µg/m3, more than 14 times higher than the WHO PM2.5
annual guideline. While in India, the air quality index was 54.4 µg/m3m, more than 10 times higher than the WHO guide-
line. See: IQAir, “2023 World Air Quality Report,” accessed June 18, 2025, https://www.iqair.com/in-en/newsroom/waqr-
2023-pr.
90 “Satellite Shows how Smoke from the Stubble Burning Choked India, Pakistan in 2023,” India Today, February
23, 2024, https://www.indiatoday.in/science/story/satellite-shows-how-smoke-from-stubble-burning-choked-india-pa-
kistan-in-2023-2506264-2024-02-23 .
91 Anurit Kanti, Muhammad Hassan Dajana, and Syeda Hamna Shujat, “How Collaborative Action on Smog
Could Cast New Light on India-Pakistan Relations,” World Economic Forum, January 29, 2024, https://www.weforum.
org/stories/2024/01/smog-india-pakistan-collaboration/.
92 Michela Muscufo, “Are Climate Reparations Finally on the Way for Vulnerable Countries?” Al Jazeera, August
28, 2023, https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/8/28/are-climate-reparations-finally-on-the-way-for-vulnerable-coun-
tries.
93 Michael Kugelman, “South Asia Unites Around ‘Loss and Damage’ at COP27,” Foreign Policy, November 10,
2022, https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/11/10/cop27-south-asia-loss-damage-climate-pakistan-india/; Sherry Rehman,
keynote speech at Roundtable on Pakistan-India Relations, Institute of Regional Studies, Islamabad and Beaconhouse
National University, Islamabad, Pakistan, July 5, 2024. https://www.nation.com.pk/07-Jul-2024/irs-bnu-hold-dia-
logue-on-pakistan-india-relations
94 “Indus Waters Treaty to Remain in Abeyance until Pakistan Ends Cross-border Terrorism: Jaishankar,” Hin-
dustan Times, May 15, 2025, https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/indus-waters-treaty-to-remain-in-abey-
ance-until-pakistan-ends-cross-border-terrorism-jaishankar-101747305908143.html. https://www.deccanherald.com/
india/indus-water-treaty-to-remain-in-abeyance-until-pak-ends-cross-border-terrorism-jaishankar-3542752 alternate
source

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
95 “Any Attempt to Block Pakistan’s Water will be Considered an Act of War: NSC,” The Express Tribune, April 24,
2025, https://tribune.com.pk/story/2541974/nsc-meets-amid-tensions-over-indias-action-after-pahalgam-attack.
96 “Pakistan Joins US, Arab States in Urging Swift UN Approval of Gaza Peace Plan Resolution,” Arab News Paki-
stan, November 14, 2025, https://www.arabnews.pk/node/2622636/pakistan .
97 Kabir Taneja, “The Saudi Arabia–Pakistan Defence Agreement: Perspectives from India and the Middle East,”
Observer Research Foundation Middle East, November 2025, https://orfme.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/11/the-sau-
di-arabia-pakistandefence-agreement.pdf.
98 Arhama Siddiqa, “The Islamabad Opening: How Pakistan Became Washington and Tehran’s Key Mediator,”
Al Jazeera Centre for Studies, May 3, 2026, https://studies.aljazeera.net/en/analyses/islamabad-opening-how-paki-
stan-became-washington-and-tehran%E2%80%99s-key-mediator.
99 Imran Khurshid, “The Rise and Fall of United Arab Emirates-Pakistan Relations?” Middle East Forum, May 11,
2026, https://www.meforum.org/mef-observer/the-rise-and-fall-of-united-arab-emirates-pakistan-relations.
100 Elis Gjevori, “What’s Netanyahu’s Planned ‘Hexagon’ Alliance – and Can it Work?” Al Jazeera, February 23,
2026, https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2026/2/23/whats-netanyahus-planned-hexagon-alliance-and-can-it-work;
Tim Chattell, “Talk of a Turkish Military Alliance with Saudi Arabia and Pakistan Reflects Ankara’s Opportunistic ‘Hedg-
ing’ Strategy,” Chatham House, January 30, 2026, https://www.chathamhouse.org/2026/01/talk-turkish-military-alli-
ance-saudi-arabia-and-pakistan-reflects-ankaras-opportunistic.
101 Hassan Alhasan, “A New Middle Eastern Quadrilateral is Taking Shape,” International Institute of Strategic
Studies, May 6, 2026, https://www.iiss.org/online-analysis/online-analysis/2026/05/a-new-middle-eastern-quadrilater-
al-is-taking-shape/.
102 “Saving Lives Under Fire: Pakistani Peacekeepers,” United Nations Information Centre in Pakistan, May 28,
2024, https://pakistan.un.org/sites/default/files/2024-05/UNIC%20-%20PR%20-%20Saving%20lives%20under%20
fire%20-%20Pakistani%20peacekeepers%20-%2028%20May%202024.pdf.
103 “Saving Lives Under Fire: Pakistani Peacekeepers,” United Nations Information Centre in Pakistan, May 28,
2024, https://pakistan.un.org/sites/default/files/2024-05/UNIC%20-%20PR%20-%20Saving%20lives%20under%20
fire%20-%20Pakistani%20peacekeepers%20-%2028%20May%202024.pdf.
104 “Pakistan Assumes Command of Combined Maritime Forces’ Combined Task Force 150,” Combined Mari-
time Forces, July 22, 2024, https://combinedmaritimeforces.com/2024/07/22/pakistan-assumes-command-of-com-
bined-maritime-forces-combined-task-force-150/.
105 Rizwan Zeb, “Pakistan in the SCO: Challenges and Prospects,” Central Asia-Caucasus Institute & Silk Road
Studies Program, February 8, 2018, https://www.cacianalyst.org/publications/analytical-articles/item/13496-pakistan-
in-the-sco-challenges-and-prospects.html.
106 Pieter D. Wezeman et al., Trends in International Arms Transfers, 2023, Stockholm International Peace Re-
search Institute, March 2024, https://www.sipri.org/sites/default/files/2024-03/fs_2403_at_2023.pdf.
107 Sameer P. Lalwani, “A Threshold Alliance: The China-Pakistan Military Relationship,” United States Institute
of Peace, March 22, 2023, https://www.usip.org/publications/2023/03/threshold-alliance-china-pakistan-military-rela-
tionship .
108 Brandon J. Weichert, “How Chinese Missiles Routed India’s Air Force Over Pakistan,” The National Interest,
May 7, 2025, https://nationalinterest.org/blog/buzz/how-chinese-missiles-routed-indias-air-force-over-pakistan; Leela
Jacinto, “Chinese Weapons Pass Combat Test in India-Pakistan Clash – with Flying Colours,” France 24, May 14, 2025,

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
35
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
https://www.france24.com/en/asia-pacific/20250514-chinese-weapons-pass-combat-test-in-india-pakistan-clash-
%E2%80%93-with-flying-colours; Gordon Arthur, “Pakistan Wields Chinese Weapons against India, and Analysts Take
Notes,” Defense News, May 15, 2025, https://www.defensenews.com/global/asia-pacific/2025/05/15/pakistan-wields-
chinese-weapons-against-india-and-analysts-take-notes/.
109 Wezeman et al., Trends in International Arms Transfers, 2023 https://www.sipri.org/publications/2024/sipri-
fact-sheets/trends-international-arms-transfers-2023 .
110 SIPRI Arms Transfers Database, accessed June 18, 2025, https://armstransfers.sipri.org/ArmsTransfer/CSVRe-
sult.
111 Abid Hussain, “Saudi to Sudan: Can Pakistan Expand Military Footprint across Arab World?” Al Jazeera,
January 16, 2026, https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2026/1/16/saudi-to-sudan-can-pakistan-expand-military-footprint-
across-arab-world .
112 Carlotta Gall, “The Wrong Enemy: America in Afghanistan, 2001–2014”, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014: 289.
https://www.cia.gov/resources/csi/static/Review-The-Wrong-Enemy.pdf
113 Steve Coll, “Ghost Wars: The Secret History of the CIA, Afghanistan, and Bin Laden, from the Soviet Invasion
to September 10, 2001”, Penguin Press, 2004. https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/nwc-review/vol58/iss3/15/
114 “80,000 Pakistanis Killed in US War on Terror: Report”, The Express Tribune, April 25, 2015, https://tribune.
com.pk/story/860790/80000-pakistanis-killed-in-us-war-on-terror-report.
115 Iftikhar A. Khan, “Country Witnessed 34pc Rise in Terrorism in 2025,” January 2, 2026, https://www.dawn.
com/news/1964537 .
116 “Pakistan Gives UN a Dossier on India, New Delhi Dubs it ‘Lies’”, Al Jazeera, November 25, 2020, https://www.
aljazeera.com/news/2020/11/25/pakistan-gives-un-a-dossier-on-india-new-delhi-dubs-it-lies.
117 Ayaz Gul, “China Presses Pakistan to Ensure Protection of Citizens After Fatal Bombing,” Voice of America,
October 7, 2024, https://www.voanews.com/a/massive-blast-outside-karachi-airport-in-pakistan/7812504.html.
118 Baqir Sajjad Syed, “Security Threats Endanger Future of CPEC, Warns Chinese Official,” Dawn, June 22, 2024,
https://www.dawn.com/news/1841194.
119 “Beijing Pushes for Own Security Staff to Provide Protection to Citizens in Pakistan,” Arab News, November
12, 2024, https://www.arabnews.com/node/2579002/pakistan.
120 Chris Zambelis, “Uighur Dissent and Militancy in China’s Xinjiang Province,” Combating Terrorism Center 3,
no. 1, January, 2010, https://ctc.westpoint.edu/uighur-dissent-and-militancy-in-chinas-xinjiang-province/.
121 Riccardo Valle and Lucas Webber, “Rising Anti-China Sentiment in Balochistan Threatens Increased Attacks
on Chinese Interests in Pakistan,” Jamestown Foundation, January 12, 2024, https://jamestown.org/program/rising-an-
ti-china-sentiment-in-balochistan-threatens-increased-attacks-on-chinese-interests-in-pakistan/.
122 “Joint Statement on U.S.-Pakistan Counterterrorism Dialogue,” U.S. Department of State, August 12, 2025,
https://www.state.gov/releases/office-of-the-spokesperson/2025/08/joint-statement-on-u-s-pakistan-counterterror-
ism-dialogue .
123 Sarah Zaman, “USPakistan Operation to Capture Top Terrorist Signals Deep Counterterrorism Cooperation
despite Cold Ties, Experts Say,” Voice of America, December 1, 2025, https://www.voanews.com/a/us-pakistan-opera-
tion-to-capture-top-terrorist-signals-deep-counterterrorism-cooperation-despite-cold-ties-experts-say-/7998510.html
124 Callum Jones, “US Backs Pakistan’s ‘Right to Defend Itself’ Against Taliban After Strikes on Afghanistan,” The

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
Guardian, February 28, 2026, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/feb/28/us-backs-pakistans-right-to-defend-it-
self-against-taliban-after-strikes-on-afghanistan.
125 “Drug Trafficking and the Financing of Terrorism,” United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, accessed June
19, 2025, https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/frontpage/drug-trafficking-and-the-financing-of-terrorism.html.
126 “HMS Dragon: Three Tonnes of Hashish Seized in the Gulf,” BBC News, November 26, 2018, https://www.bbc.
com/news/uk-46346367.
127 “US Rolls Out New Export Controls Aimed at Restricting China’s Chip Industry,” Al Jazeera, September 6,
2024, https://www.aljazeera.com/economy/2024/9/6/usroll-outs-new-export-controls-aimed-at-hobbling-chinas-chip-
industry.
128 Ana Swanson, “U.S. Tightens China’s Access to Advanced Chips for Artificial Intelligence,” New York Times,
October 17, 2023, https://www.nytimes.com/2023/10/17/business/economy/ai-chips-china-restrictions.html.
129 Laura He, “China Is Pumping Another $47.5 Billion into Its Chip Industry,” CNN, May 28, 2024, https://edition.
cnn.com/2024/05/27/tech/china-semiconductor-investment-fund-intl-hnk
130 Peter Engelke and Samantha Wong, “Toward a Coherent Framework for US-China Tech Competition in the
Global South,” Atlantic Council, October 18, 2024, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/report/
toward-a-coherent-framework-for-us-china-tech-competition-in-the-global-south/.
131 Jon Bateman, “ U.S.-China Technological ‘Decoupling’: A Strategy and Policy Framework,” Carnegie Endow-
ment for International Peace, April 25, 2022, https://carnegieendowment.org/research/2022/04/us-china-technologi-
cal-decoupling-a-strategy-and-policy-framework?lang=en.
132 “IT Exports Up 30pc,” Dawn, June 10, 2022, https://www.dawn.com/news/1694045.
133 “Semiconductor Devices (HS: 8541) Product Trade, Exporters and Importers,” accessed April 15, 2025, https://
oec.world/en/profile/hs/semiconductor-devices.
134 “High Tech Exports, Percent of Manufactured Exports - Country Rankings,” TheGlobalEconomy.com, accessed
April 2025, https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/rankings/High_tech_exports_percent_of_manufactured_exports/.
135 “SIFC to Implement Plan to Develop Semiconductor, Chip Design Industry,” Profit, March 28, 2024. https://
profit.pakistantoday.com.pk/2024/03/28/sifc-to-implement-plan-to-develop-semiconductor-chip-design-industry/.
136 Simon Kemp, “Digital 2024: Pakistan”, DataReportal, February 23, 2024, https://datareportal.com/reports/
digital-2024-pakistan.
137 GSMA, Mobile Connectivity Index, accessed April 15, 2025, https://www.mobileconnectivityindex.com/index.
html#year=2023&dataSet=indicator.
138 Tahir Amin, “UNDP Report: Pakistan in Moderate Digital Development Category,” Business Recorder, April 24,
2024, https://www.brecorder.com/news/40300028.
139 “Overview of Pakistan’s Rankings in the Seven Areas of GII of 2025,” WIPO, https://www.wipo.int/gii-ranking/
en/pakistan/section/area-rankings.
140 “AI Index,” Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI), accessed April 15, 2025. https://
hai.stanford.edu/ai-index.
141 Alina Khan, Hiba Fatima, and Naeha Rashid, “Digital Now: A Guide to Pakistan’s Digital Transformation,”
Tabadlab Working Paper 13, April 2023, https://tabadlab.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/Tabadlab-Working-Paper-

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
37
In the Eye of the Storm: Pakistan’s Balancing Act in the Evolving Geopolitical Order
13-Digital-Now.pdf.
142 “US Metals Company Signs $500 Million MoU with Pakistan on Critical Minerals,” Dawn, September 8, 2025,
https://www.dawn.com/news/1940515 .
143 Namra Naseer, “Breaking the Mold: The Evolution of US-Pakistan Cooperation Beyond Security,” Stimson
Center, March 29, 2024, https://www.stimson.org/2024/evolution-of-us-pakistan-cooperation-beyond-security/.
144 “Assessing China’s Digital Silk Road Initiative,” Council on Foreign Relations, accessed June 19, 2025, https://
www.cfr.org/china-digital-silk-road/
145 Tahir Amin, “Rs38bn Pak-China OFC Phase II project: Delay in Execution to Result in Escalation of Cost,”
Business Recorder, November 9, 2021, https://www.brecorder.com/news/40132139/.
146 “IT Ministry, DCO Agree to Enhance Cooperation in IT & Telecom Field Between Member Countries,” Ministry
of Information Technology & Telecommunication, November 26, 2020, https://moitt.gov.pk/NewsDetail/ZGZjM2VlNmUt-
M2U5MC00YTk1LTkzNzItZWI3NGQxZTE0MTQ1
147 Rachel Hagan, “Trump Criticizes ‘Decaying’ European Countries and Weak Leaders,” BBC News, December 10,
2025, https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/clydlwldkvko; Abhishek Dey, Arunoday Mukharji, and Jessica Parker, “India
and EU Announce ‘Mother of All Deals,” BBC News, January 26, 2026, https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/crrnee01r-
9jo; Abby Rogers, “Modi, Starmer Hail UK-India Trade Deal as New Investment Revealed,” Al Jazeera, October 9, 2025,
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2025/10/9/modi-starmer-hail-uk-india-trade-deal-as-new-investment-revealed
148 Rajesh Kumar Thakur, “PoK is Ours and We Will Take It: Amit Shah,” The New Indian Express, April 9, 2025,
https://www.newindianexpress.com/nation/2025/Apr/09/pok-is-ours-amit-shah-reaffirms-indias-claim-over-re-
gion;”Operation Sindoor: Pak Would Have Been Divided into 4 Parts If Navy Joined,” NDTV, May 30, 2025, https://
www.ndtv.com/india-news/operation-sindoor-pak-would-have-been-divided-4-parts-if-rajnath-singh-on-navys-
strength-8544578; “IMF Must Rethink Assistance to Pakistan: Rajnath,” The Hindu, November 26, 2018, https://www.
thehindu.com/news/national/imf-must-rethink-assistance-to-pakistan-rajnath/article69582791.ece.
149 Christopher Clary, “Four Days in May: The India-Pakistan Crisis of 2025,” Stimson Center, May 28, 2025,
https://www.stimson.org/2025/four-days-in-may-the-india-pakistan-crisis-of-2025/.
150 “Operation Sindoor Created a ‘New Normal’: PM Modi’s Strong Warning to Pakistan,” The Times of India, May
13, 2025, https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/operation-sindoor-created-a-new-normal-pm-modis-strong-war-
ning-to-pakistan/articleshow/121116161.cms.
151 Anirban Bhaumik, “India Cold-Shoulders Latest Move by Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan to Revive SAARC,”
Deccan Herald, September 29, 2024, https://www.deccanherald.com/india/india-cold-shoulders-latest-move-by-nepal-
bangladesh-pakistan-to-revive-saarc-3212145.
152 “Declaration on the Establishment of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,” Shanghai Cooperation Organi-
zation, June 15, 2001, https://eng.sectsco.org/20010615/1626670.html.
