
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
JANUARY 2025
DEFENSE, EMERGING TECHNOLOGY, AND STRATEGY PROGRAM
The
Autonomous
Arsenal in
Defense of
Taiwan
Technology, Law, and Policy
of the Replicator Initiative
Eric Rosenbach
Ethan Lee
Bethany Russell

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
www.belfercenter.org
Statements and views expressed in this report are solely those of the author(s) and do not imply
endorsement by Harvard University, Harvard Kennedy School, or the Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs.
Copyright 2025, President and Fellows of Harvard College

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
DEFENSE, EMERGING TECHNOLOGY, AND STRATEGY PROGRAM
The
Autonomous
Arsenal in
Defense of
Taiwan
Technology, Law, and Policy
of the Replicator Initiative
Eric Rosenbach
Ethan Lee
Bethany Russell
JANUARY 2025

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
ii
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
About the Defense, Emerging
Technology, and Strategy Program
The Defense, Emerging Technology, and Strategy Program examines defense
policy and the role of emerging technologies in shaping international security. For
more, visit belfercenter.org/programs/defense-emerging-technology-and-strategy.
About the Authors
Eric Rosenbach is a Senior Lecturer at the Harvard Kennedy School and is the
Director of the Defense, Emerging Technology, and Strategy Program at the Belfer
Center for Science and International Affairs. He previously co-led the Belfer Center
with former Secretary of Defense Ash Carter. Rosenbach currently serves on the
Secretary of State’s International Security Advisory Board and on the Secretary of
Defense’s Defense Business Board.
Rosenbach teaches graduate courses in policy development, strategy execution, and
emerging technology. He also teaches two online courses for HarvardX on managing
cyber risk and public sector strategy execution.
Rosenbach previously held several senior-level appointee jobs in government. As
the Chief of Staff to the Secretary of Defense from 2015-2017, Rosenbach served as
Secretary Ash Carter’s closest strategic advisor on key policy initiatives, such as the
war to defeat ISIS, the “rebalance” to Asia, and the effort to check Russian aggression.
Rosenbach also led the Department’s efforts to improve innovation by forging
and managing key initiatives such as the Defense Digital Service and the Defense
Innovation Unit.
Before serving as Chief of Staff, Rosenbach was the Senate-confirmed Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Global Security and Homeland Defense. His diverse
portfolio as Assistant Secretary included cyber, space, countering the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, antiterrorism, continuity of government, and defense
support to civil authorities. Earlier, Rosenbach served as Deputy Assistant Secretary
for Cyber Policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
iii
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Rosenbach previously served as national security advisor for then-Senator
Chuck Hagel and as a professional staff member on the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence, where he led oversight of Intelligence Community
counterterrorism programs. A former Army intelligence officer and commander of
a telecommunications intelligence unit, Rosenbach led a team that worked closely
with the NSA to provide strategic intelligence in direct support of commanders in
Bosnia and Kosovo.
Rosenbach has published widely and authored several books, including Confronting
Cyber Risk: An Embedded Endurance Strategy. The LA Times called his book Find,
Fix, Finish: Inside the Counterterrorism Campaigns that Killed bin Laden and
Devastated Al Qaeda, co-authored with Aki Peritz, “an important volume in the
secret history of a nasty war. ”
As a Fulbright fellow, he conducted research on privatization programs in Eastern
Europe. He holds a Juris Doctor from Georgetown, a Master of Public Policy from
the Harvard Kennedy School, and a Bachelor of Arts from Davidson College.
Ethan Lee is a Research Assistant to Eric Rosenbach in the Defense, Emerging
Technology, and Strategy Program at the Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs.
Previously, he was an Assistant Editor and David M. Rubenstein Editorial Fellow at
Foreign Affairs. Ethan holds a Bachelor of Arts in Political Science with honors in
International Security Studies from Stanford University. His work has appeared in
the Georgetown Journal of International Law, Survival, and Things That Go Boom.
Bethany Russell is a joint Masters in Public Policy and Business Administration
candidate at Harvard Kennedy School and Harvard Business School. Prior to
attending Harvard, Bethany served for six years as an Army Intelligence officer.
She deployed once to Iraq with special operations forces and worked with the
First Multi-Domain Task Force analyzing adversary anti-access/area denial in the
Indo-Pacific.
Bethany graduated from the U.S. Military Academy with a Bachelor of Science
in International Relations and Chinese and from Schwarzman College, Tsinghua
University with a Master of Management Science in Global Affairs. Her research
interests include the Indo-Pacific, U.S. foreign policy, and economic security.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ..........................................................................................2
Introduction ......................................................................................................5
Strategies of Disruption ..........................................................................................................5
The Defense Innovation Unit and Replicator ....................................................................7
Addressing the Challenge ......................................................................................................7
Scenarios ......................................................................................................... 12
Overview and Assumptions ..................................................................................................12
Blockade or Quarantine .........................................................................................................13
Full-Scale Invasion ...................................................................................................................17
The Technology ...............................................................................................22
Levels of Autonomy ...............................................................................................................22
Technology Requirements for Full Autonomy ...............................................................26
Data and Training ....................................................................................................................28
Platform and Computing Hardware ...................................................................................31
Law and Policy ................................................................................................33
War and Peace in the Strait .................................................................................................33
Rules in War ..............................................................................................................................34
U.S. Policy ..................................................................................................................................38
Strategy, Risk, and the Security Dilemma ........................................................................41
Endnotes .........................................................................................................44

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
1
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
AI Generated/Midjourney

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
2
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Executive Summary
China’s military expansion and threats to forcibly reunify with Taiwan undermine
U.S. interests in the Indo-Pacific. Fully autonomous weapon systems, designed
to be attritable and complete missions without human control in denied
electromagnetic environments where communications are impossible, are
necessary to support the U
.S. military defense of Taiwan.
To accelerate innovation and the fielding of fully and semi-autonomous weapon
systems, the U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense, Dr. Kathleen Hicks, launched
the Replicator Initiative in August 2023. This effort, which aims to deploy
thousands of “all-domain attritable autonomous systems” and other advanced
capabilities, is currently helping the United States strengthen its military
deterrent against China. The Department of Defense is making important
progress in addressing autonomous weapon systems’ unavoidable and interrelated
risks spanning strategy, technology, and law. Continued leadership from the
Deputy Secretary of Defense, Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, Defense
Innovation Unit, and Indo-Pacific Command is crucial to mitigate these risks and
preserve the current momentum for the development of advanced autonomous
systems.
Key Assessments:
• The fully autonomous weapon systems necessary for the defense of Taiwan
are at least five years away from operational maturity and fielding. The
research, development, and operational testing of advanced AI models and
hardware needed for autonomous weapon systems have advanced significantly
over the past several years. But, similar to the commercial development
of autonomous vehicles, technology optimists often underestimate the
technological and operational challenges of fielding fully autonomous weapon
systems.
• The United States is unlikely to utilize fully autonomous weapon systems
against China’s most likely strategy: a blockade of Taiwan. Given the risk of
escalation and the inherent lack of transparency in advanced AI models, senior
policymakers will likely limit the use of autonomous weapon systems in a
blockade scenario to missions such as intelligence collection or the deployment
of advanced smart mines.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
3
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
• Recent advances in counter-drone technologies will likely limit the efficacy
of attritable semi-autonomous weapons and increase the urgency of
developing fully autonomous weapons. Since late summer of 2024, the overall
efficacy of autonomous platforms on the battlefield in Ukraine has diminished
because of increasingly effective counter-UAV capabilities, including electronic
warfare and GPS spoofing. Similarly, China’s network of defensive capabilities,
including anti-aircraft guns, directed energy, and jamming systems, would limit
the efficacy of U.S. autonomous weapon systems in a conflict.
• Replicator will fuel the U.S.-China security dilemma in the context of
autonomous weapon systems. The U.S. fielding of autonomous weapon
systems will likely stoke the production and fielding of autonomous platforms
and defensive systems, or precipitate an arms race in autonomous weapons
systems. This dynamic could ultimately favor Beijing due to its industrial
capacity, industrial capacity and strength in commercial drone manufacturing,
lower production costs, and consistent disregard for international law.
• Senior military leaders must continue to develop and exercise realistic,
sophisticated concepts of operations for autonomous weapon systems
that are fully integrated into any formal military plans for the defense of
Taiwan. These plans will both drive operational innovation and bolster the
requirements process necessary for the sustainable fielding of autonomous
weapon systems. Without detailed concepts of operations, the production and
fielding of autonomous weapon systems may stall.
• The Department of Defense should prioritize accuracy and traceability
over explainability due to the “black box” trade-off. Ideally, AI models for
autonomous weapon systems would provide explanations for their decisions,
but the advanced deep learning algorithms necessary for fully autonomous
weapon systems are too complex to offer semantic explanations understandable
to humans. Given these constraints, traceability and accuracy must take priority
over explainability to ensure that autonomous weapon systems are effective in
combat and comply with the law of armed conflict.
• Limited real-world data will require the Department of Defense to manage
the risk of using synthetic data for the development of fully autonomous
weapon systems’ advanced AI models. The Department of Defense must
continue to identify and gather the data necessary to develop underlying
AI models for autonomous weapon systems. However, limited real-world

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
4
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
intelligence data from PLA exercises is not sufficient to train autonomous
weapon systems for large-scale conflicts in the defense of Taiwan. Generative
Adversarial Network models are useful for creating comprehensive synthetic
environments to train autonomous weapon systems, refine the underlying AI
model and its ability to identify targets, detect anomalies during missions, and
navigate complex terrain.
• Fielding fully autonomous weapon systems will require advancements
in battery and edge computing technologies. Due to the challenges of
exchanging information with cloud computing resources in denied electronic
environments, autonomous weapon systems must utilize parallel computing
on the edge. The advanced AI models used in autonomous weapon systems
will also come with other limitations and drawbacks, such as high energy
use, compelling developers to make trade-offs between speed, efficiency, and
performance.
• The Department of Defense’s interpretation of international law will be
embedded in the AI algorithms for fully autonomous weapon systems,
effectively serving as a codification of the United States’ approach to the
laws of war. Fully autonomous weapon systems operating in denied electronic
environments will need to independently interpret and apply the law of
armed conflict, maritime legal regimes, and rules of engagement. The training
process for autonomous weapon systems’ AI models in these scenarios would
represent the codification of the U.S. interpretation of the law. To ensure that
fully autonomous weapon systems operating without direct human oversight
can reasonably interpret the law of armed conflict, the Department of Defense
should assemble a team of experienced targeting specialists, military lawyers,
scientists, and engineers to comprehensively incorporate legal training into AI
model development.
• The Department of Defense’s publicly released policy sets a high
international standard for transparency on the development and
deployment of autonomous weapon systems. In contrast to the secrecy
characterizing other countries’ policies on autonomous weapon systems, the
Department of Defense has created explicit guidelines for their responsible
development and use. This established a critical foundation for accountability
and better positions the United States as a leader in international discussions on
autonomy in warfare.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
5
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Introduction
“Now is the time to scale, with systems that are harder
to plan for, harder to hit, and harder to beat than those of
potential competitors. And we’ll do so while remaining
steadfast to our responsible and ethical approach to AI
and autonomous systems… We must ensure the PRC
[People’s Republic of China] leadership wakes up every
day, considers the risks of aggression, and concludes,
‘today is not the day’—and not just today, but every day,
now and for the foreseeable future. ”
— Kathleen Hicks, September 2023.1
Strategies of Disruption
The United States and China are locked in an economic and security
competition. Since the mid-1990s, Beijing has invested the equivalent of
hundreds of billions of U.S. dollars to expand the capabilities of the People’s
Liberation Army (PLA).2 It has expanded the People’s Liberation Army
Navy (PLAN) into the world’s largest by ship count, built the largest aviation
force in Asia, and established an extensive network of overlapping air
defense and long-range artillery systems.3 Beijing is also increasing Chinese
military strength through investments in artificial intelligence and quantum
computing, which will likely improve the PLA ’s ability to track and strike
adversaries.4 These new military capabilities are not just for show; the PLA has
intensified its military activities around Taiwan since August 2022, rehearsing
blockades and long-range strikes, conducting regular violations of Taiwan’s Air
Defense Identification Zone, sailing vessels near Taiwan’s waters, and allegedly
launching cyberattacks against Taiwan’s digital infrastructure.5
While the United States still holds an overall advantage in military technology
and capabilities, China does not need to execute its actions perfectly or
simultaneously to undermine key elements of U.S. strategy and level the
playing field.6 Wargames suggest that in a conflict over Taiwan today,

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
6
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Washington could lose dozens of ships—including its forward-deployed aircraft
carriers in the region—and run out of long-range munitions within the first
week.7 A “fair fight” often means barely coming out ahead, a dangerous prospect
given China’s proximity to key U.S. allies and Washington’s competing interests in
Europe and the Middle East.8
To counter the PLA ’s growing threat against Taiwan, the U.S. Department of
Defense (DoD) has increased its investment in traditional military capabilities
such as guided missile destroyers and advanced manned aircraft.9 Given the
time and capital necessary to build these platforms, however, the DoD is
also aggressively pushing the acquisition and deployment of large numbers
of autonomous weapon systems.10 This report defines fully autonomous
weapon systems as a nascent class of military systems that, once activated, can
independently conduct missions without human intervention. The DoD’s most
notable investment in autonomy has advanced through the Replicator Initiative,
announced in 2023 by Dr. Kathleen Hicks, the Deputy Secretary of Defense.
Along with many other capabilities, Replicator aims to deploy thousands of
low-cost and attritable autonomous platforms across different warfighting
domains and military branches.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
7
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
The Defense Innovation Unit and Replicator
The Defense Innovation Unit (DIU) is a key stakeholder in Replicator.
More broadly, it collaborates with other components of the DoD to
accelerate U.S. forces’ fielding of new commercial technology in areas such
as AI, cyberspace, energy, and space.11
Established in 2015 by then-Secretary of Defense Ash Carter as the
Defense Innovation Unit Experimental, DIU connects the DoD with the
private sector to bring new commercial technologies for military use.12
DIU is headquartered in Silicon Valley and has expanded its presence
by opening offices in Austin, Boston, Chicago, and Arlington.13 In 2023,
Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin realigned DIU to have it report directly
to the Office of the Secretary of Defense.14
The DoD’s Innovation Steering Group and the Defense Innovation
Working Group oversee Replicator, with DIU providing principal staff
support to the Steering Group and chairing the Working Group. To date,
Replicator has engaged over 500 commercial firms and awarded contracts
to more than 30 hardware and software companies, 75% of which are not
traditional defense contractors.15
Addressing the Challenge
Autonomous weapon systems cannot fully replace the firepower and capabilities
of more traditional military assets. However, they present one promising option
for addressing key challenges posed by the PLA in a Taiwan contingency.16 U.S.
autonomous weapon systems across various warfighting domains could act as
a force multiplier, serving as a cost-efficient and more expendable alternative to
manned systems.17 Their smaller footprint and lower manning requirements likely
make it easier for American commanders to employ them closer to mainland
China, and they hold the promise of processing information and making decisions
at speeds beyond human capacity. They could also compel China to make difficult
trade-offs; Beijing would need to decide how to allocate resources against a wider
spread of U.S. platforms, including highly lethal swarms of dispersed autonomous

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
8
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
weapon systems.18 Beyond their advantages in warfighting, the DoD seeks to use
Replicator’s fast-tracked deployment as a way of accelerating innovation in the U.S.
defense industrial base, expediting the development, production, and acquisition
of emerging technologies for future military needs.19
Lessons from the war in Ukraine are also driving the DoD’s push to develop
autonomous weapon systems. Since Russia’s 2022 invasion of Ukraine, Kyiv
has developed a wide array of unmanned systems (UxS)—more specifically,
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), unmanned surface vehicles (USVs), and
unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs)—against Russian tanks, artillery, and
warships.20 Drone warfare is nothing new, but Ukrainian and Russian forces
have employed expendable drones at an unprecedented scale, enhancing their
battlefield reconnaissance and providing a more cost-effective way to strike targets.
Both parties have also developed and deployed counter-UxS technologies to detect
and neutralize enemy drones. This includes the use of electronic warfare systems
to jam, disrupt, or spoof drone communications and the deployment of kinetic
systems to physically intercept and destroy unmanned threats. This has driven
new adaptations on the frontlines; Ukrainian forces, for example, have reverted to
using wired-guided controls for UAVs due to communications-denied electronic
environments.21 The integration of AI in UxS is still nascent, but as technology
continues to evolve, advancements in AI could enable faster, more efficient, and
cost-effective approaches to warfare.
The DoD has intentionally kept details about Replicator vague; for instance, it
maintains secrecy around the autonomous weapon systems selected through
the Initiative and the ways that they will be employed. This opacity is important
to protect strategic advantage, safeguard sensitive technologies, and encourage
commercial vendors to innovate beyond traditional developmental constraints.
Though DoD has maintained secrecy in its approach, publicly available
information indicates it has made significant progress thus far by accelerating
the acquisition process for new military platforms, advancing the underlying
technology necessary to successfully field autonomous weapon systems, and
developing the production capabilities necessary to deploy them at scale. As a
result, Replicator is an important milestone in U.S. defense innovation, enabling
the rapid deployment of cutting-edge platforms necessary to counter the PLA and
helping undermine Beijing’s confidence in its ability to favorably alter the status
quo by force.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
9
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Public Timeline of the Replicator Initiative
(August 2023 - November 2024)
August 28, 2023: Deputy Secretary of Defense Kathleen Hicks announced
the Replicator Initiative at the Emerging Technologies for Defense
Conference and Exhibition.22
May 6, 2024: The DoD publicly unveiled the first tranche of Replicator
capabilities, focusing on acquiring attritable UxS platforms for the U.S.
military.23
September 27, 2024: Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin announced
Replicator 2, aimed at countering U.S. adversaries’ small UxS.24
November 13, 2024: The DoD unveiled Replicator 1.2. This new tranche
publicly introduced additional air and maritime systems and integrated
software for autonomy.25
November 20, 2024: DIU announced the selection of software vendors to
support Replicator; more specifically, improving command and control for
UxS and enabling autonomous platforms to collaborate with each other.26
December 5, 2024: Building on Replicator 2, the DoD announced that
Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin approved a classified strategy for the
U.S. military to counter UxS.27
Y et there is still considerable work remaining in order for the United States to
effectively field fully autonomous weapon systems—complete adoption will
likely take five or more years for the DoD to field a fully mature operational
capability. To rapidly and responsibly employ fully autonomous weapon systems,
the DoD must focus on three sets of critical challenges. The first is technological.
Current technological constraints such as power and AI model development have
prevented the DoD from fielding fully autonomous weapon systems as of yet—
those with the range and levels of autonomy necessary to effectively contribute to
Taiwan’s defense are likely five or more years away. To train advanced AI models

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
10
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
for fully autonomous weapon systems, the DoD needs extensive real-world data
collection and realistic synthetic datasets. Scientists and engineers need to use
advanced machine learning techniques to develop fully autonomous weapon
systems with advanced capabilities, such as determining when and how to perform
specific tasks, interpreting intent, prioritizing new data to collect, and identifying
causal factors in a battlespace. In addition, advanced AI models require significant
energy, and fully autonomous weapon systems need to rely on edge computing
architectures to operate effectively. These demands will impose constraints on
autonomous weapon systems’ capabilities, thereby forcing the DoD to make
trade-offs between their speed and performance.
The second and third sets of challenges relate to the law of armed conflict and
the policies governing the use of autonomous weapon systems. As autonomous
weapon systems operate in increasingly austere environments, particularly in
denied electronic environments where direct human control is not possible,
their AI models will need to independently apply international law and the rules
of engagement. To ensure that fully autonomous weapon systems make lawful
decisions on the battlefield, their underlying AI models must incorporate legal
training from experienced military lawyers, engineers, and targeting specialists.
Because the deep learning AI models needed for autonomous weapon systems
are too complex to provide semantic explanations that humans can understand,
developers must prioritize accuracy over explainability to ensure that they are as
effective as possible in combat and comply with the law of armed conflict.
U.S. leaders also need to manage the development and deployment of autonomous
weapon systems through Replicator in the context of the U.S.-China security
dilemma. Beijing could perceive the U.S. buildup of attritable autonomous weapon
systems as provocative and respond by intensifying its current military buildup,
including its development of systems built specifically to counter autonomous
weapon systems. This cycle risks accelerating the proliferation of UxS and
measures meant to counter autonomous weapon systems, fueling a U.S.-China
arms race in the quantity and quality of each country’s arsenal of autonomous
weapon systems, and heightening tensions that could inadvertently trigger
the conflict Washington seeks to prevent. The U.S. must focus on rapidly and
responsibly fielding autonomous weapon systems to mitigate the destabilizing
effects of this dynamic, ensuring these systems strengthen deterrence without
provoking unnecessary escalation.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
11
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
To ensure that autonomous weapon systems are a reliable operational capability,
U.S. Indo-Pacific Command must develop clear concepts of operations that outline
how, where, and against what these systems will be deployed. These concepts of
operations should consider where autonomous weapon systems will be positioned
prior to conflict or how they might enter the theater once conflict has begun.
Without detailed concepts of operations that fully integrate into any existing plans
for the defense of Taiwan, autonomous weapon systems may prove ineffective
and underutilized, lacking the confidence of U.S. commanders and policymakers.
The requirements outlined in these plans are essential to drive the innovation
and acquisition process over the next several years. Moreover, the operational
effectiveness of autonomous weapon systems must be realistically assessed against
their limitations, including their vulnerability to electronic warfare and the
constraints of autonomy in contested environments.
Following this introduction, Section Two of the report analyzes two potential
cases that could lead to a U.S.-China conflict: a naval blockade and subsequent
conflict over control of Taiwan’s surrounding waters, and a full-scale PLA invasion
of Taiwan. Section Three examines the nature of the underlying technologies
powering autonomous weapon systems, and Section Four explores related legal
and policy considerations.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
12
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Scenarios
“War, however, is not the action of a living force upon a
lifeless mass… but always the collision of two living forces. ”
— Carl von Clausewitz, On War.28
Overview and Assumptions
This report frames its analysis of autonomous weapon systems in the context
of two potential Taiwan contingencies: a blockade in the waters around the
island and a full-scale PLA invasion. These scenarios are not intended as exact
predictions of the campaigns that Beijing is most likely to pursue. Instead,
they aim to contextualize the threat environment and highlight challenges that
autonomous weapon systems could help address.
This report bases its analysis on a few critical assumptions. Chief among them is
the belief, often expressed by U.S. officials, that the PLA seeks the capability to
invade Taiwan by 2027.29 The adoption of this assumption does not suggest that
2027 is the most probable date for China to invade Taiwan; while a blockade or
invasion by China is more likely after 2027, using this year as a reference point
underscores the pressing need for Replicator to help confront the most immediate
and severe threat. This framing provides a benchmark for U.S. commanders and
policymakers to take the necessary steps, preparing autonomous weapon systems
ahead of any potential aggressive action by China.
The second key assumption is that the United States, informed by intelligence on
Chinese President Xi Jinping’s intentions and PLA planning, would have sufficient
warning of actions against Taiwan. This intelligence should clarify whether Beijing
intends to impose a naval blockade or launch a full-scale invasion.30 If these
indicators do not materialize or Washington has less time to react than anticipated,
the DoD would likely be limited in its ability to deploy U.S. assets like autonomous
weapon systems in the region.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
13
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Blockade or Quarantine
China could apply coercive pressure against Taiwan and test U.S. and international
resolve by initiating a maritime quarantine or blockade with the PLAN. In this
scenario, Beijing would strive to remain below the threshold of a kinetic conflict.
Instead, it would rely on its Maritime Militia, Maritime Safety Administration (MSA),
and China Coast Guard (CCG) to exert economic and transportation pressure against
Taiwan. China’s goal would be to encroach into Taiwan’s space, erode its sovereignty,
impose economic hardship, and compel unification without ever crossing a clear red
line.31
To support this pressure, the PLA would mobilize its Navy and deploy Surface Action
Groups—comprised of destroyers, support vessels, and frigates—west of Taiwan into
the East China Sea and Philippine Sea. It could augment these forces with one or both
of its aircraft carriers. Rather than provide kinetic assistance, these Groups would
serve as strategic signals to deter foreign intervention or international support for
Taiwan, as well as provide intelligence against approaching adversaries. Positioning
destroyers east of Taiwan would also enable a rapid PLA response if Beijing chooses
to escalate.32
The main force that Beijing would utilize in this scenario would be China’s maritime
law enforcement, particularly the CCG and MSA. Beijing would likely announce
“enhanced customs inspections rules” on shipping to Taiwan, rather than labeling
the operation a blockade.33 To enforce these rules, Beijing would position vessels
from the CCG and MSA within Taiwan’s territorial waters and near major ports,
particularly Taipei, Taichung, and Kaohsiung.34 The PLA and CCG have already
rehearsed this positioning in its “Joint Sword 2024B” exercises in October 2024,
involving 153 aircraft and 43 ships.35 In a quarantine or a blockade, China’s law
enforcement personnel would then board commercial carriers, inspecting cargo,
questioning personnel, and controlling what ships—if any—were allowed to transit
to and from Taiwan. Should Beijing wish to escalate, it could order the CCG and
MSA to indefinitely impound ships at ports in mainland China under the pretext of
customs inspections. At the same time, Beijing would likely deploy large numbers
of Maritime Militia ships into the Strait and around the island. The Maritime Militia
would restrict the freedom of navigation for Taiwanese ships and complicate Taiwan’s
maritime domain awareness by making it harder to distinguish between quarantining
military vessels and fishing vessels that increase “grey zone” pressurization.36

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
14
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Hypothetical Employment Scenario of Two Publicly Announced
Replicator Platforms: the Altius and C-100
Two key platforms publicly unveiled as part of Replicator 1.2 are
Anduril’s Altius-600 and Performance Drone Works’ C-100.37 The
Altius-600 is a fixed-wing UAV designed for surveillance, reconnaissance,
counterintelligence, communications, and cyber warfare missions. It can
launch from fixed-wing aircraft, helicopters, ground vehicles, or ships.
The Altius-600M variant can function as a loitering munition, capable
of identifying and striking targets such as armored vehicles or fortified
positions.38 The C-100 is a quadcopter UAV capable of carrying a payload
of up to five kilograms—for instance, sensors, supplies, electronic warfare
systems, and munitions. It can fly for more than an hour and has a range
exceeding 10 kilometers.39
These platforms could be used to support Taiwanese forces defending
Taiwan-controlled islands near the Chinese mainland. For instance, if
Beijing decided to escalate beyond a maritime blockade with an offensive
operation falling short of launching a complete invasion of Taiwan, it
might authorize units from the PLAN Marine Corps and PLA Special
Operations Forces to conduct an assault to seize Taiwan-controlled
Kinmen Island, located less than four kilometers from China at its nearest
point. To impose costs on Beijing without directly escalating to an overt
shooting war between U.S. military personnel and PLA forces, the United
States and Taiwan could both deploy Altius-600s and C-100s from ground
vehicles prepositioned nearby or USVs and UAVs in the Strait.40
Altius-600s and C-100s could then travel to Kinmen, an environment
where traditional aerial platforms—such as MQ-9B SeaGuardians or
AH-64 Apaches—would not be survivable. They could collect intelligence
or use electronic warfare kits to jam PLA communications, thereby
disrupting the coordination of attacking PLA forces. Taiwanese

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
15
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
commanders directing the defense of Kinmen could also utilize the C-100’s
lift capability to deliver critical supplies, such as medical equipment, to
troops fighting in forward positions. To deliver lethal effects, Altius-600Ms
could receive orders from Taiwanese commanders to conduct precision
standoff strikes, while C-100s could drop 13-kilogram fragmentation
explosives on enemy positions and be restocked with munitions and fresh
battery packs by Taiwanese forces.
This plan would be far more complex in practice—many attritable
autonomous weapon systems would fall victim to PLA electronic warfare
and air defense systems before fully completing their missions. At the same
time, uncertainty on future battlefields will likely increase as degraded
communications, adversarial countermeasures, and the deployment of
autonomous weapon systems by multiple belligerents intensify the fog of
war. Kinmen would almost certainly fall if the PLA committed enough
forces to overwhelm it, but the critical question is how much effort such an
operation would demand. The coordinated swarming of these platforms
can create multiple dilemmas for the PLA, shaping the battlefield favorably
and allowing tripwire forces to resist more effectively.
China’s goal with a quarantine or blockade would be to pursue reunification
through coercion rather than outright force. By disrupting and limiting the flow
of goods into Taiwan, Beijing could pressure private companies to delay or reroute
their shipping to the island. Taiwan is more geographically and economically
vulnerable compared to China, and thus likely possesses a limited ability to sustain
itself under such conditions.41 Even if China allows the majority of traffic to flow
through Taiwan’s ports, Beijing’s imposition of a blockade or quarantine could
demonstrate that Taiwan does not control maritime areas it claims as its sovereign
space. Compliance by shipping companies would reinforce Beijing’s narrative that
it controls Taiwan. A lack of U.S. intervention to disperse Chinese maritime law
enforcement would further bolster these claims.42

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
16
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
In addition, a blockade or quarantine would provide Beijing with scalable options.
China could choose to board every ship, a few ships, or only ships from select
countries. It might attempt to quarantine Taiwan’s entire coastline or merely target
major ports. Ships could face detentions ranging from hours to days, and Beijing
might limit ships potentially carrying weapons but allow those carrying food.
China could block the entirety of the Strait or continue to permit commercial
shipping. Beijing could also order the PLA Aviation Force to fly continuous
sorties above the island to extend the blockade, disrupting air travel and transport.
The PLA would likely conduct electronic warfare and cyberattacks against the
Taiwanese government and American forces throughout the blockade, and it could
scale the breadth, length, and severity of these communications disruptions.43
Should a quarantine or blockade fail to achieve Beijing’s goals, China could
threaten Taiwan by undertaking additional military actions such as cyberattacks
against critical infrastructure or live-fire training exercises near the island. If all
actions short of full-scale war are wholly unsuccessful, Beijing could then have
the option of transitioning to an invasion of the island.44 The United States would
likely have less time to detect this shift under crisis circumstances; after all, the
PLAN assets that would defend the invasion would already be underway and
positioned east of Taiwan to support the blockade.
At the brink of such a crisis, the President is unlikely to authorize the use of
fully autonomous weapon systems, as they offer no clear operational or strategic
advantages in a blockade scenario. Potential U.S. responses to a Chinese blockade
could include surveillance, escorting maritime shipping into Taiwanese ports, and
counter-blockades; as is reasonably foreseeable, fully autonomous weapon systems
do not offer novel, concrete advantages over manned or remotely piloted U.S.
assets in these contingencies. It would also likely be challenging to program fully
autonomous weapon systems’ actions to achieve military objectives in a manner
that is neither overly escalatory nor excessively passive. If both belligerents aim to
pressure the other to back down while avoiding full-scale war, U.S. policymakers
and commanders would be unlikely to trust fully autonomous weapon systems
to decide when to use armed force. Instead, they will likely opt to determine
themselves whether a red line has been crossed and decide on the appropriate
response.45 In addition, it is difficult for the United States to credibly demonstrate
that American commanders have specifically instructed U.S. fully autonomous
weapon systems to act as a tripwire under certain conditions, such as engaging

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
17
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Chinese vessels that enter into Taiwanese territorial waters.46 If Beijing believes
that Washington is bluffing and that U.S. commanders have not pre-delegated
such authority to the AI models behind fully autonomous weapon systems,
Chinese forces may begin to test the limits of that commitment incrementally.
While the DoD is unlikely to utilize fully autonomous weapon systems in a
blockade scenario, they may choose to employ semi-autonomous weapon
systems with oversight from senior policymakers and military leaders. U.S.
commanders could use semi-autonomous weapon systems as a force multiplier
directly assisting and taking orders from manned assets or human operators.
They could conduct intelligence gathering missions, escort tankers and early
warning aircraft behind the front lines, or deploy advanced smart mines in
defensive positions.
Full-Scale Invasion
If China decides to launch a full-scale invasion of Taiwan, the PLA would almost
certainly begin these efforts by launching cyber and electronic warfare attacks
targeting Taiwan and its defending forces.47 The ability of modern states to
coordinate their forces depends on a complex network of communication and
navigation systems linking sensors, shooters, and decisionmakers—systems
that often operate through predictable and vulnerable nodes.48 Accordingly,
Chinese doctrine directs the PLA to conduct cyberspace and electronic warfare
operations. By targeting U.S. command and control networks, the PLA threatens
American power projection and limits U.S. and Taiwanese forces’ ability to track
and engage targets even if they have the necessary munitions to do so.49 Beijing
already has substantial experience conducting cyberattacks against Taiwan’s
networks.50 It would likely begin launching cyberattacks against Taiwan’s key
infrastructure and government sites early in an invasion, sustaining these efforts
throughout the conflict to disrupt information flow and prevent Taipei from
mounting a strong defense.51

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
18
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Some of the PLA ’s cyber and electronic attacks would also likely target U.S. assets
in space.52 For instance, the PLA would likely jam U.S. satellite uplinks and
downlinks to disrupt communication and navigation satellites critical to both the
United States and Taiwan.53 In addition, Chinese doctrine prioritizes jamming the
U.S. global positioning system (GPS) to interfere with American precision-guided
munitions and conducting offensive cyberattacks to disrupt U.S. satellite
networks.54 Should Beijing opt for further kinetic escalation in space, it could
direct the PLA to use anti-satellite weapons against U.S. assets in orbit, though
this would be a highly escalatory step. The PLA demonstrated this capability in
January 2007, when it used a missile to destroy a Chinese weather satellite,55 and it
continues to test other anti-satellite weapons, including ground-based lasers.56
Chinese doctrine repeatedly emphasizes the importance of different PLA services
synchronizing strikes across warfighting domains.57 In conjunction with its attacks
in space and cyberspace, Beijing would likely order the PLA to launch a “joint
firepower strike campaign” against Taiwan.58 Coordinated precision artillery
strikes would likely target government and military facilities in Taiwan, aiming to
cripple allied command and control.59 To execute these efforts, the PLA Rocket
Force already has positioned approximately one thousand mobile short-range
ballistic missiles across the Strait, capable of reaching the island in eight minutes.60
It also has approximately one thousand medium-range ballistic missiles likely
intended to strike targets beyond Taiwan, such as U.S. assets stationed near

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
19
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Guam.61 This long-range arsenal includes the DF-26, a ballistic missile that can
strike moving ships beyond the Second Island Chain, and the DF-17, which carries
a hypersonic glide vehicle capable of reaching U.S. forces past the First Island
Chain.62 Although U.S. carrier battle groups have hundreds of interceptor missiles,
they can be overwhelmed by large-scale missile barrages and must stay far from
the Chinese mainland.63
U.S. forces lack sufficient stocks of long-range munitions for a conflict of this
scale. American commanders would rely heavily on long-range weapons—such
as Tomahawk cruise missiles and Long-Range Anti-Ship Missiles (LRASMs)—to
strike PLA assets, but current inventories are limited.64 The DoD has worked to
invest more in long-range munitions and ramp up production; for instance, it
directed Lockheed Martin to substantially increase its production rate of LRASMs
in 2023.65 However, LRASMs take two years to produce, cost $3 million each,
and are only compatible with two types of U.S. aircraft.66 This shortcoming in
Washington’s arsenal of long-range munitions, along with the PLA ’s vast arsenal of
them, has created a “range gap, ” with China possessing longer-range weapons in
greater quantities compared to the United States.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
20
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
As Beijing subjects Taiwan to a barrage of artillery, it would likely position its
PLAN fleet of 153 major naval surface combatants throughout the East and South
China Seas.67 Central to its plans are Renhai Guided Missile Cruisers and Luyang
III Guided Missile Destroyers. Beijing has commissioned 25 Luyang III destroyers,
each outfitted with 64-cell vertical launch systems capable of firing surface-to-
air missiles, cruise missiles, and anti-submarine missiles. Additionally, eight
Renhai cruisers are currently in service, each with 112 vertical launch systems
cells designed to launch anti-submarine weapons, anti-ship missiles, surface-to-
air missiles, and land-attack cruise missiles.68 These ships would likely form
Surface Action Groups near Taiwan and shield invasion forces during amphibious
landings.69 Their extensive firepower would extend China’s anti-surface, air
defense, and anti-submarine warfare capabilities further into the Pacific, creating
new dilemmas for American and Taiwanese forces.70
Civilian roll-on/roll-off (RORO) ferries complement the PLAN’s conventional
warfighting capabilities. Despite China’s significant investments in shipbuilding,
the PLAN acknowledged in 2015 that it lacked enough amphibious landing ships
to transport a PLA Army invasion force across the Strait. To address this gap,

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
21
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Beijing began mandating that all civilian vessels be constructed to meet “national
defense requirements. ”71 By 2019, the PLA had access to at least 63 civilian ROROs
capable of supporting military operations, giving it the capacity to transport and
land more troops than the U.S. Navy.72 In 2022, the PLA began incorporating
ROROs into large-scale military exercises.73 While it would be unlikely for
Beijing to activate all of these dual-use ships for an invasion of Taiwan, they add
to China’s amphibious capabilities and would provide PLA commanders with a
greater number of options to transport soldiers and equipment across the Strait to
beachheads.74
The PLA has also developed an extensive air defense network to protect its forces
and restrict enemy air operations. Ground-based systems in this network can
engage targets up to 556 kilometers from the Chinese mainland.75 The PLAN
also contributes to the network—for instance, its destroyers are equipped with
surface-to-air missiles capable of engaging targets up to 200 kilometers away.76
These air defense systems would likely target Taiwanese and American aircraft
conducting surveillance and attack operations near Taiwan and China, as well as
defend military installations and population centers on the Chinese mainland.77
Adding to this threat are advancements in the PLA ’s counter-drone capabilities,
including high-power microwaves capable of destroying even small drones near its
forces.78
All of these capabilities are meant to support the main spearhead of China’s
invasion strategy: the Joint Island Landing Campaign. The PLA Army has six
amphibious combined arms brigades, four of which fall under Eastern Theater
Command near Taiwan.79 Their annual training includes individual and joint
large-scale exercises designed to closely replicate the conditions of an amphibious
landing on Taiwan.80 In addition, they are positioned near ports of embarkation
to facilitate rapid deployment with all necessary equipment and integrated tank,
artillery, and infantry elements.81 After landing, they would likely prioritize
capturing and holding one of the few limited beachheads in Taiwan. If successful,
the PLA would then face a challenging and costly campaign across Taiwan’s
mountainous and urban terrain, with the ultimate goal of seizing Taipei.82

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
22
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
The Technology
“The art of war teaches us to rely not on the likelihood of the
enemy’s not coming, but on our own readiness to receive him. ”
— Sun Tzu, The Art of War.83
Levels of Autonomy
As outlined in Section 2, China poses a significant threat to Taiwan given its ability
to conduct complex naval operations around the island, coordinate multi-domain
strikes on key targets, and transport invasion forces across the Strait using both
military and civilian vessels. PLA attacks aimed at inflicting heavy losses on
opposing forces and crippling allied surveillance and communication networks
are central to Beijing’s strategy. In this context, many U.S. defense officials consider
autonomous weapon systems and the Replicator Initiative as critical to countering
China’s military threat. Autonomous weapon systems, if attritable, could help
match the PLA ’s scale while also decreasing risk to U.S. military personnel and
reducing the DoD’s manpower requirements. As previously noted, the PLA will
likely use electronic warfare to disrupt all forms of communication, underscoring
the operational requirement for fully autonomous weapon systems that can operate
without human guidance. Autonomous weapon systems could also theoretically
execute tasks more efficiently and with quicker reaction times compared to remotely
piloted or manned platforms. In other words, autonomous weapon systems promise
to enhance both the mass and precision of U.S. forces—two critical qualities for
degrading China’s ability to seize Taiwan by force.84
Autonomy in warfare is not a new concept, nor is it specific to Replicator. Weapons
designed to act without real-time human guidance have existed for centuries
in one form or another, beginning with simple devices such as booby traps
and mines triggered by tripwires. By World War II, belligerents developed and
employed increasingly sophisticated weapons, such as homing torpedoes that
could independently track targets after launch. The Cold War and information
age fueled further advancements, such as “fire-and-forget” missiles and fully
centralized systems such as the Aegis Combat System, which can detect, track, and
engage air and surface threats with minimal human input. But with technology

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
23
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
advancing toward even greater levels of autonomy at the turn of the 21st century, the
Office of the Secretary of Defense began evaluating policy guardrails and appropriate
limitations for their deployment.85
In November 2012, the DoD established its policy on autonomous weapon
systems, DoD Directive 3000.09 (“ Autonomy in Weapon Systems”).86 It created a
department-specific definition of autonomous weapon systems as weapons that “once
activated, can select and engage targets without further intervention by a human
operator. This includes, but is not limited to, operator-supervised autonomous
weapon systems that are designed to allow operators to override operation of the
weapon system, but can select and engage targets without further operator input after
activation. ”87 The policy also defines semi-autonomous weapon systems as those “that,
once activated, is intended to only engage individual targets or specific target groups
that have been selected by an operator. ”88
Sea drones are among some of the first autonomous weapon systems that the
DoD is deploying under Replicator. Early reporting on platforms pursued by the
DoD through the Initiative include Anduril’s Dive-LD, a portable USV capable of
performing multi-week missions with minimal logistical support.89 But even before
Replicator, the DoD pursued maritime autonomous platforms for years; these
include Sea Hunter, a USV tested in 2016 under DARPA ’s Anti-Submarine Warfare
Continuous Trail Unmanned Vessel program, and Orca, a large UUV developed
by Boeing and Huntington Ingalls Industries for missions including surveillance,
anti-submarine warfare, electronic warfare, and minesweeping.90 Although not
publicly announced as part of Replicator, the DoD could pursue new minelaying
platforms or acquire new naval mines as part of the Initiative. Currently, the U.S. Navy
fields the Quickstrike family of air-dropped mines and the Submarine-Launched
Mobile Mine, both equipped with fusing systems that detonate upon detecting vessel
signatures. These mines are being upgraded with new GPS guidance and pop-out
wing kits.91 General Dynamics is also developing the Hammerhead, a modular mine
capable of launching a homing torpedo after independently analyzing the signatures
of nearby ships to identify whether they are hostile.92
In addition to Replicator’s maritime systems, the DoD is pursuing a variety of
airborne autonomous weapon systems. As an example, Hicks confirmed in May
2024 that the DoD would deploy the Switchblade 600 loitering munition system
as part of the Initiative.93 First produced by AeroVironment in 2011, an American

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
24
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
defense contractor, Switchblades can be pre-programmed against specific
targets.94 After launch, they use an internal navigation system, along with infrared
and electro-optical sensors, to identify and engage their target.95 Steve Gitlin,
AeroVironment’s Chief Marketing Officer, noted that the Switchblade “could
lock in on a target, and the aircraft will basically maintain position on that target
autonomously. ”96
Ukrainian forces have employed Switchblade loitering munitions and other
kamikaze drones equipped with AI systems in their war against Russia. But these
systems cannot operate without human intervention—in Ukraine, their role has
been confined to target identification, navigation support, and countering electronic
interference.97 Switchblade requires operators to pre-program targets and allows
“wave-off ” commands when communications are uninterrupted. Human operators
must manually direct kamikaze drones to a target area, after which they can be
activated to independently pilot themselves in spite of electronic countermeasures.98
These systems are thus likely assessed as semi-autonomous under DoD Directive
3000.09, falling at most into the category of level two or level three autonomy, as this
report outlines in the table below.99

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
25
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Fully autonomous weapon systems would utilize onboard sensors to identify,
navigate to, and engage targets without human intervention. Human operators
decide when and how to deploy level five autonomous weapon systems, but
the systems do not require any human guidance once they are underway.100
As previously noted, this enables autonomous weapon systems with level
five autonomy to be effective in environments where adversaries are denying
communication and navigation networks, which are essential to the operation of
manned or lower-autonomy systems.101 For level five autonomy, a critical criterion
is an AI model’s grasp of situational development: identifying causal factors in
a battlespace and the ways that they could shift and change the battlefield. To
achieve this, the AI models behind autonomous weapon systems with level five
autonomy must prioritize which new data to collect. They must also be able
to consistently interpret the intent of different objects and individuals on the
battlefield based on their behavior.
Level five autonomous weapon systems remain under development in the United
States and abroad; those with the power, range, and intelligence necessary
to defend Taiwan are likely five or more years away. They hold considerable
near-term potential, however, for a wide range of offensive and defensive
applications in a U.S. conflict against China. While U.S. defense officials have not
disclosed the autonomy levels of Replicator platforms, the DoD needs to develop
autonomous weapon systems with high levels of autonomy (level four or level
five) to counter PLA tactics aimed at disrupting traditional U.S. military assets.
In a full-scale conflict over Taiwan, these systems would need to operate in large
numbers, function in a denied electronic environment, and adapt to a rapidly
changing battlespace.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
26
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Technology Requirements for Full Autonomy
The AI models powering autonomous weapon systems with level five
autonomy must:
1. Enable navigation, target identification, and an adaptive understanding
of military objectives in a contested combat environment;
2. Network with other autonomous weapon systems and UxS to
coherently work interoperably in swarms;
3. Reliably execute an operational mission, namely delivering weapons
payloads on the battlefield (for instance, attacking targets as a one-way
attack drone or as a reusable platform that can deliver multiple
munitions);
4. Make reliable, traceable decisions using incomplete information and in
spite of an adversary’s defenses and countermeasures;
5. Comply with domestic and international law, as well as operational
requirements and rules of engagement from U.S. commanders.
To meet the requirements of level five autonomy, machine learning engineers,
data scientists, and computer vision specialists can employ several advanced
approaches to develop the underlying AI models. This report reviews four of
these; the first is convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which are a type of
supervised learning frequently utilized to help make predictions based on different
data types. CNNs utilize a mathematical operation called convolution to analyze
small portions of input data, such as parts of an image, in successive pieces.
Information is then automatically simplified and condensed, helping to identify
patterns regardless of their location in the data. This process enables AI to detect
basic features from data—such as edges or variations of color in an image—and
use them to recognize more complex features in detected objects, such as the
body of a submarine or naval vessel.102 For example, companies such as Tesla and
Waymo leverage CNNs to process and interpret video data from autonomous
vehicle sensors in real time.103 The U.S. defense industrial ecosystem launched
initial experimentation with CNNs in 2019, when the Defense Advanced Research

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
27
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Project Agency developed an AI algorithm called AlphaDogfight that successfully
controlled a fighter aircraft in a simulation against a real human pilot and won in
five one-on-one dogfights.104
Second are generative adversarial networks (GANs), deep learning models
incorporating unsupervised learning and aspects of supervised learning. They
have gained significant attention in the U.S. defense community for their ability
to generate realistic synthetic data, which makes them particularly valuable for
situations where real-world data is insufficient or not available (the importance of
high-quality data is discussed later in this section). GANs consist of two contesting
systems: a generator and a discriminator. The generator produces synthetic data,
and the discriminator tries to identify what is “real” data—as designated by the
DoD—against the synthetic data created by the generator.105 Outcomes from
these competitions, whether the discriminator correctly identified the real data or
incorrectly identified synthetic data, are fed back to both systems, which iteratively
improves both the generator’s effectiveness in producing high-quality synthetic
data and the discriminator’s capacity to distinguish between real and synthetic
data. This makes GANs a useful component for creating comprehensive synthetic
environments to train autonomous weapon systems; for example, refining the
underlying AI model and its ability to identify targets, detect anomalies during
missions, and navigate complex terrain.106 Despite their utility, using GANs and
synthetic data entails significant risks and limitations. Any potential flaws in the
synthetic data would be amplified, leading to large-scale inaccuracies, and the
models would require ongoing human oversight for fine-tuning and evaluation,
thereby reducing rapid scalability.
Third are recurrent neural networks (RNNs), a type of supervised deep learning
that can identify trends in sequences of data by maintaining a form of memory of
previous inputs. This capability makes RNNs particularly effective for tasks where
the order, context, and interdependence of data points are critical.107 Researchers
have demonstrated that RNNs have the potential to improve autonomous vehicles’
ability to detect and identify man-made objects, even underwater.108 This could,
for instance, enable an underwater autonomous weapon system to track the
movements of PLA Navy submarines and aid targeting based on predictions of
their future positions. RNNs can also help manage autonomous weapon systems’
interactions with nearby platforms and translate sensor data directly into driving
instructions.109

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
28
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Fourth are liquid neural networks. These AI models, a type of RNN, differ from
traditional models like CNNs and GANs by continuously adjusting their behavior
in real time based on incoming data.110 The term “liquid” reflects the network’s
flexible structure, with each connection point in the AI model modifying its
settings on the fly. This adaptability allows the system to evolve and respond to
new patterns or anomalies, enhancing its ability to handle unexpected situations
and sequential data.111 For example, research at MIT supported by the U.S.
Air Force demonstrates that liquid neural networks can enable drones to apply
learning from how to locate objects in a forest during summer to locating the same
objects in winter or urban settings, in conjunction with varied tasks like seeking
and following.112
Data and Training
Given the potential risks and unintended consequences of deploying autonomous
weapon systems with U.S. forces during crises or wartime, policymakers and
legal advisors must understand the processes for designing and developing their
underlying AI models. This process begins with the collection of multimodal data
on terrain and an adversary’s military assets—such as vehicles, infrastructure, and
personnel—to create large, high-quality datasets. Relevant intelligence collection
methods include imagery and electronic intelligence, such as high-resolution
satellite images of military facilities in China, synthetic aperture radar scans
of concealed PLA assets, acoustic and infrared signatures from PLAN ships in
emissions control status, and radar signals from PLA air defense systems.113
Much of this real-world data will likely come from PLA exercises simulating
potential Chinese actions against Taiwan. For instance, U.S. and allied forces
almost certainly collected extensive intelligence on the PLA ’s full-scale military
exercises conducted in May 2024 around Taiwan and its islands near the
Chinese mainland.114 Order-of-battle datasets on PLA military assets will also
be important; although some of this information may come from open-source
imagery providers, most of it will likely be collected using classified sources. Given
the classification of both the training data and the imagery, AI models will also
have to be classified at the same level. This classification will affect the model’s
development—all developers must have the necessary clearances, and the models
must be stored on government-approved systems.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
29
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
The next step is to transform this data; in other
words, pre-processing the data by cleaning,
organizing, and labeling it. This is essential in
training AI models to recognize, for example,
the signatures of PLA naval vessels through
a process of trial and error. As former DoD
Chief Digital and AI Officer Craig Martell
emphasized, “If we’re going to beat China in AI, we have to find a way to label at
s c a l e .”115 Data transformation also includes augmentation—flipping, rotating,
cropping, scaling, or adding noise to the data. Through data transformation that
creates training datasets reflecting a broader combination of environments and
conditions, AI models for autonomous weapon systems will be more generalizable
and robust across different contexts.
Scientists and engineers then use this transformed data to train baseline AI models
for autonomous weapon systems, with CNNs supporting sensor fusion and RNNs
enhancing the processing of temporal data for tasks such as object detection and
predictive analysis, respectively.116 The creation of many of these AI models can
benefit from transfer learning, a technique used to leverage pre-trained AI models
originally optimized for one task to form the basis of a model built to address a
distinct but similar task. This method applies general patterns from initial training
to create a robust foundation to start from, reducing training time and the need
for extensive real-world data while also improving accuracy. It is especially useful
when data is limited.117 For example, the software behind U.S. autonomous
weapon systems intended for a fight against China could leverage AI models
created for environments like Ukraine or Syria. As with other AI techniques,
transfer learning can be used alongside methods such as CNN training.
From here, the AI models can refine their decisionmaking through supervised
learning, a common method of training that provides the model with label
datasets of targets and then receives direct feedback from a targeting expert.
For example, a typical model for autonomous weapon systems would start
development with a labeled set of several thousand images of PLA military
hardware. During training, the model would receive new data, which it would
then attempt to confirm as a valid target. At that point, a human targeting expert
would confirm whether the model had correctly identified the target, allowing it to
adjust and improve. Developers can also use unsupervised learning to bolster the
“Level five autonomous
weapon systems with
the power, range, and
intelligence necessary to
defend Taiwan are likely
five or more years away. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
30
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
AI models’ ability to process sensor data—such as radar or infrared signatures—to
distinguish PLA military targets from non-combatants. Unsupervised learning
does not use labeled data; the model analyzes vast amounts of unlabeled data
to identify unusual groupings or communication patterns of objects that, for
example, likely represent a formation of PLA targets. Likewise, these models can
be used to help autonomous drone swarms navigate without GPS to targets within
a specific geographic box and provide optimal approaches for an attack.118
Another important machine learning technique used could be reinforcement
learning: the AI model trains by testing actions in its environment and being
rewarded or penalized accordingly. Through this process of trial and error,
akin to how humans learn from experience, it trains on which actions yield the
most favorable outcomes based on its incentives over time, gradually improving
its performance per the incentives. For instance, researchers from the Dalian
University of Technology in China have proposed using a special kind of
reinforcement learning using deep neural networks to make an AI model that
can use basic fighter maneuvers to win a dogfight in a simulated environment.119
Researchers from the U.S. Army Engineer Research and Development Center
have used reinforcement learning techniques in mission engineering and combat
simulations to train agents that can interpret environments and make informed
decisions without direct human intervention.120
Once these AI models achieve satisfactory levels of performance, they can be
deployed and integrated into autonomous weapon systems. However, as with
manned weapon systems, the development and training of autonomous weapon
systems will be an ongoing process that never truly ends. To maintain reliability
and adaptability, engineers and scientists must continuously integrate, test, and
deliver changes for autonomous weapon systems’ AI models. This includes testing
and monitoring the performance of autonomous weapon systems with new AI
models in real-world environments, an important step to detect performance
degradation over time and assess whether their training data still reflects the
environments in which they operate. The DoD must also ensure that these AI
models are scalable to manage large data volumes and high traffic without losing
performance or precision. At the same time, it should prioritize developing and
testing alternative AI models for autonomous weapon systems as a contingency to
preempt foreseeable issues that could arise in primary AI models.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
31
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Platform and Computing Hardware
In most cases, autonomous vehicles for commercial or military applications rely
on wireless communications to access databases and computing power hosted
on distant servers. In the context of autonomous weapon systems operating in
defense of Taiwan, however, PLA electronic warfare will result in contested,
communication-denied areas. To address this challenge, autonomous weapon
systems must utilize edge computing; for a fight in the Indo-Pacific against
the PLA, AI model processing would need to largely occur locally inside the
autonomous weapon system itself rather than relying on cloud-based systems.121
By eliminating dependence on data transmissions to distant external servers,
particularly those that the PLA can readily weaken or disrupt, edge computing
can enable AI models for autonomous weapon systems to rapidly process data and
make decisions.122
AI models operating on edge within autonomous weapon systems platforms
require energy-efficient computing to process large volumes of real-time data for
tasks such as object detection and avoidance. Most military platforms currently
in service, however, lack the resources necessary to handle multiple complex
tasks simultaneously for extended periods as is often required in combat. One of
the greatest limitations is the significant electric power required for autonomous

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
32
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
weapon systems.123 As a hypothetical example, consider a 20-kilogram hexacopter
designed to drop explosives, powered by a lithium-ion battery with an energy
density of 250 watt-hours per kilogram.124 A 6-kilogram battery pack—making
up 30% of the hexacopter’s total weight—would provide it with a total energy
capacity of 1,500 watt-hours.125 If the hexacopter consumes power at a rate of
3,000 watts (for flight and running the AI algorithm), flying at an average speed of
50 kilometers per hour, it could theoretically operate for 30 minutes and cover up
to 25 kilometers before depleting its battery.126 These calculations are approximate;
real-world performance would depend on various factors, including the
autonomous weapon systems’ payload, power management system, environmental
conditions, and specific mission profile. Researchers are also actively developing
new battery technologies with the potential for much higher energy densities
than current lithium-ion batteries. In 2023, for instance, scientists at the Chinese
Academy of Sciences’ Institute of Physics reportedly created a rechargeable
pouch-type lithium battery capable of achieving 711 watt-hours per kilogram.127
But despite new innovations such as this, scaling production of this technology to
be cost-effective and suitable for autonomous weapon systems will take many years
or decades.
The computational, memory, and energy requirements of advanced AI models
running in fully autonomous weapon systems also impose limitations, requiring
developers to make trade-offs between the speed and accuracy of underlying AI
models. This is because precise AI models often demand more power resources
and time, while faster, lower-power AI models may compromise in terms of their
levels of accuracy.128 Techniques like compression, which reduces the number of
bits required to store or transmit data, and pruning, which involves removing less
significant parts of the AI model to make it more efficient without significantly
affecting performance, can help improve the efficiency of AI models. In addition,
parallel computing has the potential to help address computational and memory
limitations by improving efficiency; by dividing tasks among multiple processors
for simultaneous execution, parallel computing can reduce execution time and
decrease power consumption per computation, thereby minimizing total energy
use.129 Using these techniques, scientists and engineers must collaborate with
military personnel, working together to find an optimal balance between the AI
models’ speed and accuracy.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
33
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Law and Policy
“Until wars are really fought with pawns, inanimate objects
and not human beings, warfare cannot be isolated from
moral life. ”
— Michael Walzer, Just and Unjust Wars: A Moral Argument with Historical Illustrations.130
War and Peace in the Strait
Long-standing debates over the strategy, policy, and legality of U.S. military
intervention would be central to White House decisionmaking in a Taiwan
contingency. The deployment and use of autonomous weapon systems, however,
would also introduce new legal and policy considerations, altering the crisis’s
overall character. Under what conditions would the recourse to military force be
justified? If a state of armed conflict exists, what actions by autonomous weapon
systems would be permissible under the international laws on the conduct of
warfare? What U.S. domestic laws and policies would govern American forces’
employment of autonomous weapon systems in the defense of Taiwan? And in
what ways would the governance of autonomous weapon systems differ from that
of manned military assets?
Legal analysis for the kinetic use of autonomous weapon systems would begin
at the international level, focusing on a U.S. recourse to military force under
international law as rooted in binding treaties and customary state practice.
Article 2(4) of the United Nations Charter prohibits member states of the
organization from using or threatening force “against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
Purposes of the United Nations. ”131 The Charter recognizes two exceptions to this
rule: the right of member states to self-defense—individually or collectively—in
response to an armed attack (Article 51), and the use of force as authorized by the
United Nations Security Council (Article 42).132 Although the Charter applies
only to United Nations member states and Article 51 permits self-defense only
after an armed attack has taken place, customary international law recognizes
a fundamental right of legitimate polities to self-defense, including preemptive
self-defense in cases of “instant, overwhelming” necessity, with “no choice of

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
34
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
means, and no moment for deliberation. ”133 In other words, Washington could
plausibly invoke customary international law as justification to use force in
defense of Taiwan after an armed attack has begun or to preemptively use force in
anticipation of an imminent and unavoidable attack.
As previously highlighted in this report, China’s most likely initial military course
of action against Taiwan would be the imposition of a swift maritime blockade in
the waters around the island, something which Beijing could escalate into a full
invasion. Although blockades are an act of war under contemporary international
law, Washington likely would refrain from immediately recognizing a blockade
by China as the start of an armed conflict to preserve potential pathways for
deescalation. The United States could likely find adequate legal justification for
using force—including the direct employment of autonomous weapon systems—
to try and break China’s grip over the island. That noted, if Washington opted for
limited military actions in an attempt to compel China to stand down, senior U.S.
leaders would likely avoid using autonomous weapon systems because of the risk
that even small miscalculations on the use of kinetic force could lead to dramatic
conflict escalation.
Rules in War
Assuming the United States has legal grounds to use force in the defense of an
invasion of Taiwan, legal analysis of U.S. options would then shift to examining
the application of the Law of Armed Conflict (LOAC).134 This framework,
which refers to the international legal regime governing conduct in war and
the protection of those not actively engaged in hostilities, directly applies to
any potential U.S. employment of autonomous weapon systems—the DoD’s
interpretation of LOAC will be codified in the AI algorithms for autonomous
weapon systems. The U.S.-led Political Declaration on Responsible Military Use
of Artificial Intelligence and Autonomy, endorsed by 54 states as of March 2024,
provides a framework of non-binding principles to ensure that militaries’ uses of
AI, including autonomous weapon systems, align with LOAC.135
Autonomous weapon systems will be better suited to comply with LOAC for a U.S
defense against an invasion of Taiwan compared to other combat environments.
Unlike counterinsurgency and counterterrorism operations in the Middle East,
where combatants often conceal themselves among civilians, PLA forces and

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
35
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
PLAN warships would primarily operate in the waters around Taiwan. Rising
tensions would likely prompt shipping companies to reroute away from the region,
leaving primarily ships that are actively involved in hostilities.136 This maritime
setting, characterized by a limited number of noncombatants and clearly defined
military targets, would simplify the task of autonomous weapon systems identifying
and engaging PLA assets.
Attacking targets on the Chinese mainland, however, would be considerably more
complex from both the operational and the international legal perspective. Due to
concern over escalation, the President is unlikely to authorize any preemptive strikes
against targets on the Chinese mainland unless an invasion appears inexorable
and imminent. If a PLA amphibious invasion of Taiwan is clearly underway, the
President would almost certainly authorize such strikes using both traditional
military assets and autonomous weapon systems. Even so, using autonomous
weapon systems to attack targets in mainland China would raise many more legal
concerns due to the presence of noncombatants and civilian infrastructure.
Any evaluation of the employment of
autonomous weapon systems necessitates
a thorough evaluation of the application
of LOAC—this report analyzes four of its
core principles.137 The first is distinction,
which requires belligerents to discriminate
between civilian objects and legitimate military targets such as enemy combatants,
weapons systems, or infrastructure serving a military purpose. To ensure that
fully autonomous weapon systems can meet this standard, developers must use
supervised learning with carefully labeled real and synthetic data that is then
reviewed by LOAC experts. Through this process, the DoD can train AI models
for autonomous weapon systems to recognize the differences between military and
noncombatant objects, adjusting their actions accordingly. For example, using real
and synthetic data, developers can run simulations that have AI models determine
whether a ship is a combatant or noncombatant. Algorithms weighed by the
developers would then assess strike decisions made in this simulated environment
for compliance with the principle of distinction, thereby providing feedback for
training the AI models. Through this process, the AI model will evolve to assess
distinction using the same criteria applied by human lawyers and operators.
“The DoD’s interpretation
of international law would
be embedded in the AI
algorithms for autonomous
weapon systems. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
36
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Another key principle relevant to autonomous weapon systems is proportionality—
for any military action, unintended harm to noncombatants and civilian objects
cannot exceed the anticipated military advantage.138 The DoD Law of War Manual
mandates that proportionality assessments focus directly on an attack’s expected
civilian casualties; by limiting consideration to effects that are “both expected and
not too remote, ” commanders must weigh collateral damage against immediate
tactical gains, preventing justification for civilian casualties based on strategic
objectives and long-term consequences.139 Under many circumstances, the
platforms that the Replicator Initiative aims to field could ease these concerns,
as their smaller warheads and greater precision likely reduce their kill radius
compared to conventional munitions such as Hellfire missiles with 100-pound
explosive warheads. Given the need for AI models to make legal interpretations,
core aspects guiding assessments of the principle of proportionality will be coded
across fully autonomous weapon systems, rather than simply being assessed by
human operators on an individual target-by-target basis.140
Closely related to proportionality are two additional LOAC principles: necessity
and precaution. Under the principle of necessity, military action is permitted only if
it is essential to achieve a legitimate military objective under LOAC, i.e., weakening
an adversary’s military capacity.141 Under the principle of precaution, belligerents
must take all feasible measures to minimize harm to civilians.142 In applying both
of these principles, U.S. commanders must evaluate whether the use of autonomous
weapon systems would minimize harm compared to more traditional weapon
systems. For instance, if U.S. forces needed to target a PLA command center in
an urban area, intelligence might indicate that a swarm of autonomous weapon
systems would have a 90% chance of destroying the command center but would
incur 100 civilian casualties. Employing a strike package of manned fighters, by
contrast, might have a 60% success rate, with half the civilian casualties but also
the loss of several U.S. pilots. Would the use of autonomous weapon systems in
this scenario align with the principle of precaution? Alternatively, if autonomous
weapon systems showed significantly greater precision than manned aircraft, would
the principle of precaution compel their use?

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
37
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
As stated earlier, the DoD will need to use synthetic and real-world data for
training autonomous weapon systems to be effective in combat and adhere to
established norms of acceptable conduct in war. This very likely involves the
training of AI models in simulated environments to ensure their actions align with
international law, much like a jury determines facts and renders a verdict in court.
Lawrence Lessig’s assertion that “code is law” is consistent with this notion; just as
the software and hardware of cyberspace shape online behavior in ways similar to
legal codes, the DoD’s interpretation of international law would be embedded in
the AI algorithms for fully autonomous weapon systems, effectively serving as a
codification of the DoD’s approach to the laws of war.143
A rare combination of technical, operational, and legal expertise is necessary for
the creation and modification of training data on LOAC assessments. Few military
lawyers possess the necessary proficiency or regular experience with real-world
targeting decisions to ensure reliable assessments. Even fewer understand the
precise sequencing and timing needed to strike mobile targets in complex, urban
environments. To ensure that fully autonomous weapon systems comply with
LOAC, the DOD must continue to assemble experienced operators, military

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
38
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
lawyers, scientists, and engineers. This group must collaborate to evaluate
simulated targeting decisions for AI models and label data, ensuring this process
informs the development of software from its inception.144
When interpreting LOAC principles, military personnel and the AI algorithms
behind autonomous weapon systems face the challenge of comparing apples
to oranges; with the principle of proportionality, for instance, potential harm
to noncombatants cannot be empirically weighed against the unquantifiable
concept of military advantage. This reflects the inherent challenges of applying
normative standards to the conduct of war. Much of LOAC was deliberately
codified as qualitative standards rather than strict rules to avoid the arbitrary and
unjust application of fixed ratios alone to assess compliance . Such interpretations,
however, are inherently subjective. When interpreting LOAC principles, the AI
models for fully autonomous weapon systems will be held to the same standard
of reasonableness as humans. Therefore, the critical question is how to ensure AI
models for fully autonomous weapon systems can interpret subjective principles
with relative consistency despite identical inputs resulting in different outputs—a
defining feature of all AI systems. The technical challenge of ensuring consistent
LOAC interpretation is more complex than refining relatively straightforward
foundational tasks such as target recognition.145
U.S. Policy
Given the novelty of autonomous weapon systems and the risk that an AI-powered
weapon could inadvertently escalate a crisis between the United States and China,
the final decision approval for the operational use of such weapons would almost
certainly rest with the President. Thus, it is important to distinguish between the
broader legal authority to take military action and the President’s strategic decision
of whether to employ a novel weapon system.
At the departmental level, DoD Directive 3000.09 establishes the policy framework
and requirements for designing, developing, and deploying autonomous weapon
systems. This includes guidance for ensuring that autonomous weapon systems
comply with international legal regimes such as LOAC and U.S. domestic law.
By creating a supplemental review process to introduce autonomy in the U.S.
military, the original 2012 version of DoD Directive 3000.09 is distinguished in its
transparency. In contrast to the secrecy characterizing other countries’ policies on

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
39
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
autonomous weapon systems, it created explicit guidelines for their responsible
development and use, establishing a critical foundation for accountability and
positioning the United States as a leader in international discussions on autonomy
in warfare.
The 2012 version of DoD Directive 3000.09 did not specifically authorize
autonomous weapons systems to take lethal action without human oversight.
Carter affirmed this stance in 2016, stating that “whenever it comes to the
application of force, there will never be true autonomy, because there’ll be human
beings (in the loop). ”146 The January 2023 version updated an already rigorous
approval process, including required adherence to the DoD Principles for Ethical
Artificial Intelligence. Prior to the “formal development” of autonomous weapon
systems as defined by the DoD, approvals are required from the Under Secretary of
Defense for Policy, the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering,
and the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.147 Additional approvals are
needed from the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, Under Secretary of
Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, and Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff “before fielding” autonomous weapon systems as defined by the DoD.148
Fielding refers to the distribution and integration of a weapon into the U.S.
military’s operational inventory, marking its readiness for use beyond testing,
exercises, or experiments.149 Deployment, in contrast, involves the assignment and
movement of a fielded weapon to specific operational areas or their use in military
missions. After the DoD has approved such a system for fielding, its deployment
around Taiwan would likely require additional national-level approvals from
the Secretary of Defense and the President due to the sensitivities and strategic
implications of using it.
The need for fully autonomous weapon systems to comply with international and
domestic law highlights the challenge of addressing the “Black Box Dilemma”
posed by advanced AI systems.150 Ideally, all AI systems should possess
explainability, allowing humans to understand and interpret the decisions of
the underlying AI model. Similar to deep learning algorithms in commercial
autonomous systems, however, the decisionmaking processes of AI models for
fully autonomous weapon systems will be too complex to provide semantic
explanations understandable by humans. From a technical perspective, experts
recognize the trade-off between accuracy and explainability in advanced AI

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
40
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
models, including those used for fully autonomous weapon systems. In short, a
more simplistic AI model might produce explainable results, but lower levels of
sophistication would result in less accurate and reliable outcomes.151 Current U.S.
defensive weapon systems—such as the Aegis Combat System and the Patriot
surface-to-air missile system—already operate at levels of autonomy that are not
explainable; they have the capability to independently identify and engage threats,
often without human operators fully understanding their decisionmaking.152
Since the AI models powering fully autonomous weapon systems will make
decisions about lethal action, engineers should prioritize greater accuracy over
explainability to ensure that these systems comply with LOAC to the greatest
extent possible.153 Given the challenge of deep learning models providing semantic
explanations for lethal actions, most advanced models now strive for “traceability. ”
A model with strong traceability allows leaders to trace the processes of an AI
model—such as the underlying data, algorithms, and final choices—essential for
holding leaders accountable for the use of autonomous weapon systems and lethal
military actions.154 With this in mind, DoD Directive 3000.09 thus mandates that
autonomous weapon systems, as defined by the DoD, “will go through rigorous
hardware and software” validation and testing to ensure that they are “traceable”
and “reliable. ”155
At the operational level, DoD Directive 3000.09 requires that military AI systems
“allow commanders and operators to exercise appropriate levels of human judgment
over the use of force in the envisioned planning and employment processes for
the weapon. ”156 Although this may initially seem to suggest that decisions to
employ autonomous weapon systems against China could be pushed down to the
tactical level (as suggested by “commanders” and “operators” exercising judgment),
the Secretary of Defense ultimately needs to approve all rules of engagement—
including those relevant to autonomous weapon systems—developed by the
Commander of Indo-Pacific Command. Therefore, autonomous weapon systems’
underlying AI algorithms must be capable of aligning their decisionmaking with
directives from commanders, particularly as it relates to LOAC and the rules of
engagement. Rules of engagement for autonomous weapon systems will likely
operate at two levels; foundational rules codifying LOAC and DoD policy will be
deeply embedded in the AI model, while commanders will develop operational
rules of engagement when deciding how to employ autonomous weapon systems in
specific areas of operations and within specific tactical contexts.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
41
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Strategy, Risk, and the Security Dilemma
Three additional conditions are necessary to successfully employ autonomous
weapon systems in a Taiwan contingency. First, U.S. military planners must
continue to develop mature concepts of operations that integrate autonomous
weapon systems into existing war plans. Second, the United States must ramp up
its production of autonomous weapon systems. Third, U.S. autonomous weapon
systems must be prepositioned in theater to enable rapid deployment when
needed.
Beyond policies governing the use of AI-enabled systems in armed conflicts,
U.S. officials must also weigh the potential long-term strategic consequences of
developing and deploying autonomous weapon systems. The most consequential
of these strategic consequences is the potential for autonomous weapon systems
to exacerbate the U.S.-China security dilemma, fueling the proliferation of
autonomous weapon systems or stoking an arms race that ultimately favors
Beijing due to its industrial capacity, lower production costs, and consistent
disregard for international law.157 The large-scale deployment of U.S. autonomous
weapon systems could prompt China to mass produce weapons meant to counter
autonomous weapon systems, more conventional military hardware, or its own
autonomous weapon systems in response, further fueling the security dilemma
and increasing the likelihood of conflict. China’s ability to field larger quantities of
autonomous weapon systems could offset any qualitative advantage achieved by
U.S. systems.158

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
42
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
The Security Dilemma and U.S.-China Military Competition
The security dilemma is an international relations concept describing how
states seeking to enhance their security by undertaking certain actions—
such as amassing arms stockpiles or conducting military drills—often
provoke rivals to do the same, creating a cycle of mutual hostility that
increases the likelihood of conflict.159 Many theories attempt to explain the
behaviors of revisionist powers that drive security dilemmas. One theory
argues that power-hungry states fuel the security dilemma in pursuit of
nationalist, ideological, or authoritarian motives.160 Contrasting theories
suggest that the security dilemma arises from states seeking protection
or buffers against perceived threats due to security-based motives.161 The
balance between offensive and defensive military capabilities can affect the
severity of the security dilemma; states are more likely to engage in military
competition or conflict when offense is easier than defense, whereas
stronger defensive capabilities tend to make states more secure and reduce
military competition.162
Generally speaking, military innovation is a constant cycle of competition, where
no technology, including autonomous weapon systems, provides a permanent
advantage. Each advancement spurs the development of countermeasures, shifting
the advantage between the offense and defense.163 Replicator reflects this reality
through its focus on improving and expediting the development, production,
and acquisition of autonomous weapon systems, along with a wide array of
other advanced military technologies necessary to improve overall warfighting
capability.
If China’s industrial capacity remains strong, Beijing will likely have the capability
to produce a larger quantity of autonomous weapon systems compared to the
United States, produce systems meant to counter autonomous weapon systems
faster than the United States grows its arsenal of autonomous weapon systems,
or produce more traditional military platforms than U.S. autonomous weapon
systems can help counter. The key questions, then, are whether the United States
can sustain its lead in the next evolution of military advancements, whether the
United States or China will have better quality autonomous weapon systems, and

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
43
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
whether the PLA ’s defensive systems can effectively counter autonomous weapon
systems. For the latter, the closest parallels to mass deployments of autonomous
weapon systems are Iran and Russia’s recent UAV attacks against Ukraine and
Israel respectively, neither of which were effective in themselves due to strong
air defenses.164 As noted earlier in this report, Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin
recently introduced counter-UxS as a new tranche of Replicator to address the
evolving need for defensive systems. Similarly, China’s advanced air defense and
counter-UAV systems are likely to reduce the effectiveness of U.S. autonomous
weapon systems in a conflict. Regardless, Beijing will likely begin integrating
PLA-fielded autonomous weapon systems as a central component of any military
operation China takes against Taiwan.
In the far future, if autonomous weapon systems or other AI-enabled military
systems enable quicker and more effective warfighting compared to traditional
manned platforms, a state that employs them aggressively at the onset of a conflict
could have a decisive advantage. This offense-dominant dynamic could incentivize
belligerents—particularly those with weaker conventional forces not employing
autonomous weapon systems—to threaten vertical escalation.165 However, this
pattern of states seeking offset strategies to asymmetrically counter adversaries
in response to their military innovation is not new. Rather, it is a normal part
of interstate military competition and offset strategies. Autonomous weapon
systems will likely not immediately meet the high expectations of technology
optimists. It will take time for developers to hone the AI models for autonomous
weapon systems and improve their performance, and the current limitations of
autonomous weapon systems mean they are unlikely in the near term to alter the
U.S.-China military balance.
The gradual advancement of technology in the Ukraine War is a clear illustration
of this dynamic. Even if autonomous weapon systems eventually have the
capability to successfully degrade a PLA invasion force crossing the Taiwan Strait,
the PLA will maintain significant capabilities with its artillery, aviation, and air
defenses that autonomous weapon systems cannot defeat alone. As is the case with
most new military platforms, autonomous weapon systems will likely catalyze
evolutionary changes in the character of conflict, rather than instantly conferring
Washington with an untouchable edge in conventional warfighting.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
44
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
Endnotes
1. “Deputy Secretary of Defense Kathleen Hicks’ Remarks: “Unpacking the Replicator Initiative” at the Defense News
Conference (As Delivered),” U.S. Department of Defense, September 6, 2023, https:/ /www.defense.gov/News/
Speeches/Speech/Article/3517213/deputy-secretary-of-defense-kathleen-hicks-remarks-unpacking-the-replicator-ini/.
2. “SIPRI Military Expenditure Database,” Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, https:/ /doi.org/10.55163/
CQGC9685.
3. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, Office of the Secretary of Defense,
October 19, 2023, V-VII, https:/ /media.defense.gov/2023/Oct/19/2003323409/-1/-1/1/2023-MILITARY-AND-SECURITY-
DEVELOPMENTS-INVOLVING-THE-PEOPLES-REPUBLIC-OF-CHINA.PDF.
4. Ryan Fedasiuk, Chinese Perspectives on AI and Future Military Capabilities, Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, August 2020, 15, https:/ /cset.georgetown.edu/publication/chinese-perspectives-on-ai-and-future-military-
capabilities/; Jacob Stokes, Military Artificial Intelligence, the People’s Liberation Army, and U.S.-China Strategic
Competition: Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Center for a New American
Security, February 1, 2024, https:/ /www.cnas.org/publications/reports/u-s-china-competition-and-military-ai.
5. Center for Preventive Action, “Confrontation Over Taiwan,” Council on Foreign Relations, updated July 1, 2024, https:/ /
www.cfr.org/global-conflict-tracker/conflict/confrontation-over-taiwan.
6. Heather R. Penney, “Scale, Scope, Speed & Survivability: Winning the Kill Chain Competition,” Mitchell Institute Policy
Paper 40, May 2023, 8-10, https:/ /mitchellaerospacepower.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/Scale_Scope_Speed_
Survivability_-KillChain_-Policy_Paper_40-New.pdf.
7. Mark F. Cancian, Matthew Cancian, and Eric Heginbotham, The First Battle of the Next War: Wargaming a
Chinese Invasion of Taiwan, Center for Strategic and International Studies, January 9, 2023, 88-137, https:/ /
csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/230109_Cancian_FirstBattle_NextWar.
pdf?VersionId=WdEUwJYWIySMPIr3ivhFolxC_gZQuSOQ; Stacie L. Pettyjohn, Becca Wasser, and Andrew Metrick, Bad
Blood: The TTX for the House Select Committee on Strategic Competition Between the United States and the Chinese
Communist Party (CCP), Center for a New American Security, April 26, 2023, https:/ /s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/files.
cnas.org/documents/Pettyjohn-Wasser-Metrick-Statement-for-the-Record-for-House-Select-Committee-on-China.
pdf?mtime=20230427122552&focal=none.
8. J.D. Leipold, “Innovation, technology keys to Army maintaining ‘overmatch,’” U.S. Army, September 21, 2015, https:/ /
www.army.mil/article/155576/innovation_technology_keys_to_army_maintaining_overmatch.
9. C. Todd Lopez, “Competition With China Drives FY 2024 Budget Request,” U.S. Department of Defense, March 28,
2023, https:/ /www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/Article/3343663/competition-with-china-drives-fy-2024-
budget-request/.
10. “Deputy Secretary of Defense Kathleen Hicks Keynote Address: ‘The Urgency to Innovate,’” U.S. Department of
Defense, August 28, 2023, https:/ /www.defense.gov/News/Speeches/Speech/Article/3507156/deputy-secretary-of-
defense-kathleen-hicks-keynote-address-the-urgency-to-innov/.
11. “Defense Innovation Unit (DIU),” Defense Innovation Unit, https:/ /www.diu.mil/about.
12. “DIU Turns 7!,” Defense Innovation Unit, August 25, 2022, https:/ /www.diu.mil/latest/diu-turns-7.
13. “Defense Innovation Unit (DIU),” Defense Innovation Unit, https:/ /www.diu.mil/about.
14. “Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III Announces New Director of the Defense Innovation Unit,” U.S. Department of
Defense, April 4, 2023, https:/ /www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/3351281/secretary-of-defense-lloyd-j-
austin-iii-announces-new-director-of-the-defense-i/.
15. “Replicator,” Defense Innovation Unit, https:/ /www.diu.mil/replicator; “Deputy Secretary of Defense Kathleen Hicks
Announces Additional Replicator All-Domain Attritable Autonomous Capabilities,” U.S. Department of Defense,
November 13, 2024, https:/ /www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/3963289/deputy-secretary-of-defense-
kathleen-hicks-announces-additional-replicator-all/.
16. Kelley M. Sayler, DOD Replicator Initiative: Background and Issues for Congress, Congressional Research Service,
updated November 1, 2024, https:/ /crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF12611.
17. Stacie Pettyjohn, Evolution Not Revolution: Drone Warfare in Russia’s 2022 Invasion of Ukraine, Center for a New
American Security, 2024, https:/ /www.cnas.org/publications/reports/evolution-not-revolution; Joseph Clark, “Defense
Officials Report Progress on Replicator Initiative,” U.S. Department of Defense (2023), https:/ /www.defense.gov/News/
News-Stories/Article/Article/3604459/defense-officials-report-progress-on-replicator-initiative/.
18. Sayler, DOD Replicator Initiative.
19. Sayler, DOD Replicator Initiative.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
45
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
20. Mariano Zafra, Max Hunder, Anurag Rao, and Sudev Kiyada, “How drone combat in Ukraine is changing warfare,”
Reuters, March 26, 2024, https:/ /www.reuters.com/graphics/UKRAINE-CRISIS/DRONES/dwpkeyjwkpm/; H. I. Sutton,
“Exclusive: New Ukrainian Underwater Drone Project To Dominate The Black Sea,” Naval News, January 24, 2024,
https:/ /www.navalnews.com/naval-news/2024/01/exclusive-new-ukrainian-underwater-drone-project-to-dominate-
the-black-sea/; Tayfun Ozberk, “Ukraine’s new underwater drone Marichka breaks cover,” Naval News, August 23,
2023, https:/ /www.navalnews.com/naval-news/2023/08/ukraines-new-underwater-drone-marichka-breaks-cover/.
21. Kateryna Zakharchenko, “Ukraine’s Revolutionary Fiber-Optic Drone: An Electronic Warfare Game-Changer,” Kyiv
Post, December 9, 2024, https:/ /www.kyivpost.com/post/43272.
22. “Deputy Secretary of Defense Kathleen Hicks Keynote Address: ‘The Urgency to Innovate’ (As Delivered),” U.S.
Department of Defense, August 28, 2023, https:/ /www.defense.gov/News/Speeches/Speech/Article/3507156/
deputy-secretary-of-defense-kathleen-hicks-keynote-address-the-urgency-to-innov/.
23. “Deputy Secretary of Defense Hicks Announces First Tranche of Replicator Capabilities Focused on All Domain
Attritable Autonomous Systems,” U.S. Department of Defense, May 6, 2024, https:/ /www.defense.gov/News/
Releases/Release/Article/3765644/deputy-secretary-of-defense-hicks-announces-first-tranche-of-replicator-
capabil/.
24. Lloyd J. Austin, Replicator 2 Direction and Execution, U.S. Department of Defense, September 27, 2024, https:/ /
assets.ctfassets.net/3nanhbfkr0pc/1dkJGhMeAgPldz1nnIwabK/abf85531a4281cddab6b0d8c953440e2/REPLICATOR-
2-MEMO-SD-SIGNED__1_.pdf.
25. “Deputy Secretary of Defense Kathleen Hicks Announces Additional Replicator All-Domain Attritable Autonomous
Capabilities,” U.S. Department of Defense, November 13, 2024, https:/ /www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/
Article/3963289/deputy-secretary-of-defense-kathleen-hicks-announces-additional-replicator-all/.
26. “Defense Innovation Unit Announces Software Vendors to Support Replicator,” Defense Innovation Unit, November
20, 2024, https:/ /www.diu.mil/latest/defense-innovation-unit-announces-software-vendors-to-support-replicator.
27. “DoD Announces Strategy for Countering Unmanned Systems,” U.S. Department of Defense, December 5, 2024,
https:/ /www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/3986597/dod-announces-strategy-for-countering-
unmanned-systems/.
28. Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1984), 77.
29. Jude Blanchette, Briana Boland, and Lily McElwee, “What is Beijing’s Timeline for ‘Reunification’ with Taiwan?”
Center for Strategic and International Studies, May 26, 2023, https:/ /interpret.csis.org/what-is-beijings-timeline-
for-reunification-with-taiwan/; Brad Dress, “China will be ready for potential Taiwan invasion by 2027, US admiral
warns,” The Hill, March 21, 2024, https:/ /thehill.com/policy/defense/4547637-china-potential-taiwan-invasion-2027-
us-admiral-warns/; Noah Robertson, “How DC became obsessed with a potential 2027 Chinese invasion of Taiwan,”
Defense News, May 7, 2024, https:/ /www.defensenews.com/pentagon/2024/05/07/how-dc-became-obsessed-
with-a-potential-2027-chinese-invasion-of-taiwan/; Mallory Shelbourne, “Accelerated Chinese Timeline to Seize
Taiwan Raises Questions on Pentagon Priorities, Says Gallagher,” USNI News, October 18, 2022, https:/ /news.usni.
org/2022/10/18/accelerated-chinese-timeline-to-seize-taiwan-raises-questions-on-pentagon-priorities.
30. John Culver, “How We Would Know When China Is Preparing to Invade Taiwan,” Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace, October 3, 2022, https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/posts/2022/10/how-we-would-know-when-
china-is-preparing-to-invade-taiwan?lang=en.
31. Isaac Kardon and Jennifer Kavanagh, “How China Will Squeeze, Not Seize, Taiwan,” Foreign Affairs, May 21, 2024,
https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/china/how-china-will-squeeze-not-seize-taiwan.
32. Bonny Lin et al., How China Could Quarantine Taiwan: Mapping Out Two Possible Scenarios, Center for Strategic and
International Studies, June 5, 2024, https:/ /www.csis.org/analysis/how-china-could-quarantine-taiwan-mapping-out-
two-possible-scenarios.
33. Lin et al., How China Could Quarantine Taiwan, 7.
34. Lin et al., How China Could Quarantine Taiwan, 7.
35. Erik Green and Meia Nouwens, “China’s Joint-Sword B exercise: a calculated follow-on,” International Institute for
Strategic Studies, October 23, 2024, https:/ /www.iiss.org/online-analysis/online-analysis/2024/10/chinas-joint-sword-
b-exercise-a-calculated-follow-on/.
36. Lin et al., How China Could Quarantine Taiwan.
37. “Deputy Secretary of Defense Kathleen Hicks Announces Additional Replicator All-Domain Attritable Autonomous
Capabilities,” U.S. Department of Defense; Noah Robertson, “Pentagon announces new batch of drones for Replicator
program,” Defense News, November 13, 2024, https:/ /www.defensenews.com/unmanned/2024/11/13/pentagon-
announces-new-batch-of-drones-for-replicator-program/.
38. “Altius,” Anduril Industries, accessed December 10, 2024, https:/ /www.anduril.com/hardware/altius/; “Area-I/Anduril
ALTIUS-600M and 700M,” Automated Decision Research, accessed December 10, 2024, https:/ /automatedresearch.
org/weapon/area-i-anduril-altius-600m-and-700m/.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
46
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
39. “Performance Drone Works,” Doodle Labs, accessed December 10, 2024, https:/ /doodlelabs.com/case-studies/
performance-drone-works/; “C100 Heavy-Lift Quadcopter,” Unmanned Systems Technology, accessed December 10,
2024, https:/ /www.unmannedsystemstechnology.com/company/performance-drone-works-pdw/c100-heavy-lift-
quadcopter/; Joe Saballa, “US Army Selects Two Firms for Company-Level ISTAR Drone Program,” The Defense Post,
September 12, 2024, https:/ /thedefensepost.com/2024/09/12/us-army-drone-program/.
40. Justin Katz, “Saronic unveils latest, largest unmanned vessel, with eye on mass production,” Breaking Defense,
October 23, 2024, https:/ /breakingdefense.com/2024/10/saronic-unveils-latest-largest-unmanned-vessel-with-eye-
on-mass-production/; “Vessels,” Saronic, https:/ /www.saronic.com/vessels.
41. Bonny Lin et al., How China Could Blockade Taiwan, Center for Strategic and International Studies, August 22, 2024,
https:/ /features.csis.org/chinapower/china-blockade-taiwan/.
42. Lin et al., How China Could Quarantine Taiwan.
43. Lin et al., How China Could Quarantine Taiwan, 7-10; Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s
Republic of China, 140-141.
44. Lin et al., How China Could Blockade Taiwan.
45. Bruno Tertrais, “Drawing Red Lines Right,” The Washington Quarterly 37, no. 3 (2014), 7-24, https:/ /doi.org/10.1080/01
63660X.2014.978433.
46. Michael C. Horowitz, “When speed kills: Lethal autonomous weapon systems, deterrence and stability,” Journal of
Strategic Studies 42, no. 6 (2019), 764-788, https:/ /doi.org/10.1080/01402390.2019.1621174.
47. Kristin Burke, PLA Counterspace Command and Control, China Aerospace Studies Institute, December 2023, 46,
https:/ /www.airuniversity.af.edu/Portals/10/CASI/documents/Research/PLASSF/2023-12-11%20Counterspace-%20
web%20version.pdf.
48. Penney, “Scale, Scope, Speed & Survivability,” 10.
49. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, 146; Jeffrey Engstrom, Systems
Confrontation and System Destruction Warfare: How the Chinese People’s Liberation Army Seeks to Wage Modern
Warfare, RAND Corporation, February 1, 2018, 16-18, https:/ /www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_
reports/RR1700/RR1708/RAND_RR1708.pdf; Penney, “Scale, Scope, Speed & Survivability,” 5-12; Ian Williams,
“Catching Up: China’s Developing Military Power,” Georgetown Journal of International Affairs, January 6, 2020,
https:/ /gjia.georgetown.edu/2020/01/06/chinas-developing-military-power/; Anthony P. Carrillo, “Surface Crews
Need More Tools to Navigate without GPS,” Proceedings 148, no. 7 (July 2022), https:/ /www.usni.org/magazines/
proceedings/2022/july/surface-crews-need-more-tools-navigate-without-gps; Robert O. Work and Greg Grant,
Beating the Americans at their Own Game: An Offset Strategy with Chinese Characteristics, Center for a New
American Security, June 6, 2019, 5, https:/ /s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/files.cnas.org/hero/documents/CNAS-
Report-Work-Offset-final-B.pdf.
50. Sarah Wu and Eduardo Baptista, “From 7-11s to Train Stations, Cyber Attacks Plague Taiwan Over Pelosi Visit,”
Reuters, August 4, 2022, https:/ /www.reuters.com/technology/7-11s-train-stations-cyber-attacks-plague-taiwan-over-
pelosi-visit-2022-08-04/
51. Seamus Boyle, “In a Crisis, Could China Coerce Taiwan Through Cyberspace?” The Diplomat, February 29, 2024,
https:/ /thediplomat.com/2024/02/in-a-crisis-could-china-coerce-taiwan-through-cyberspace/.
52. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, VII-12; Mark Stokes, Gabriel Alvarado,
Emily Weinstein, and Ian Easton, China’s Space and Counterspace Capabilities and Activities, U.S.-China Economic and
Security Review Commission, March 30, 2020, https:/ /www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2020-05/China_Space_and_
Counterspace_Activities.pdf, 39.
53. Burke, PLA Counterspace Command and Control, 34.
54. Burke, PLA Counterspace Command and Control, 34-47.
55. Carin Zissis, “China’s Anti-Satellite Test,” Council on Foreign Relations, February 22, 2007, https:/ /www.cfr.org/
backgrounder/chinas-anti-satellite-test.
56. Patrick Tucker, “China, Russia Building Attack Satellites and Space Lasers: Pentagon Report,” DefenseOne, February
12, 2019, https:/ /www.defenseone.com/technology/2019/02/china-russia-building-attack-satellites-and-space-lasers-
pentagon-report/154819/.
57. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, 41.
58. Casey, “Firepower Strike, Blockade, Landing,” 118-23.
59. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, VII-141.
60. “How Are China’s Land-based Conventional Missile Forces Evolving?” ChinaPower, September 21, 2020, https:/ /
chinapower.csis.org/conventional-missiles/; Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
China, 67.
61. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, 67; Ian Williams and Masao Dahlgren,
“More Than Missiles: China Previews Its New Way of War,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, October 1,
2019, https:/ /www.csis.org/analysis/more-missiles-china-previews-its-new-way-war.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
47
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
62. “DF-26,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, updated April 23, 2024, https:/ /missilethreat.csis.org/
missile/dong-feng-26-df-26/; Jeffrey N. McCormick, 2024 Hypersonic Threat Assessment, United States House of
Representatives (2024), https:/ /www.congress.gov/118/meeting/house/116949/witnesses/HHRG-118-AS29-Wstate-
McCormickJ-20240312.pdf.
63. Lague and Lim, “New missile gap leaves U.S. scrambling to counter China.”
64. Seth G. Jones, Empty Bins in a Wartime Environment: The Challenge to the U.S. Defense Industrial Base, Center
for Strategic and International Studies, January 23, 2023, https:/ /csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-
public/2023-01/230119_Jones_Empty_Bins.pdf?VersionId=y_iEwCalRVFiVedETHwrcuwDaenf7zez, 20.
65. Chris Gordon, “Lockheed Martin Looks to Boost LRASM Production as US Rushes to Buy Anti-Ship Weapons,”
Air & Space Forces Magazine, April 4, 2023, https:/ /www.airandspaceforces.com/lockheed-martin-double-lrasm-
production/.
66. Gordon, “Lockheed Martin Looks to Boost LRASM Production as US Rushes to Buy Anti-Ship Weapons;” Jones,
Empty Bins in a Wartime Environment, 11.
67. U.S. Naval Institute Staff, “Document: Office of Naval Intelligence’s Chinese People’s Liberation Army Navy, Coast
Guard Ship Identification Guide,” USNI News, April 30, 2024, https:/ /news.usni.org/2024/04/30/document-office-of-
naval-intelligences-chinese-peoples-liberation-army-navy-coast-guard-ship-identification-guide-2; Richard Thomas,
“New US Government chart outlines scope of China’s naval power,” Naval Technology, April 30, 2024, https:/ /www.
naval-technology.com/news/new-us-government-chart-outlines-scope-of-chinas-naval-power/?cf-view; Ronald
O’Rourke, China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities—Background and Issues for Congress,
Congressional Research Service, January 30, 2024, 2-3, https:/ /crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/RL/RL33153/277.
68. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, 56.
69. Cancian, Cancian, and Heginbotham, The First Battle of the Next War, 112.
70. Daniel Caldwell, Joseph Freda, and Lyle J. Goldstein, China Maritime Report No. 5: China’s Dreadnought? The PLA
Navy’s Type 055 Cruiser and Its Implications for the Future Maritime Security Environment, China Maritime Studies
Institute (February 2020), 17-18, https:/ /digital-commons.usnwc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1004&context=cmsi-
maritime-reports.
71. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, 142.
72. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, 142.
73. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, 143.
74. Matthew P. Funaiole, Brian Hart, Jaehyun Han, and Jennifer Jun, “China Accelerates Construction of ‘Ro-Ro’ Vessels,
with Potential Military Implications,” ChinaPower, October 11, 2023, https:/ /chinapower.csis.org/analysis/china-
construct-ro-ro-vessels-military-implications/.
75. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, VII.
76. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, 144.
77. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, 145.
78. Hayley Wong and Amber Wang, “Swarming drones and counter-drone systems dazzle at China’s Zhuhai air show,”
South China Morning Post, November 14, 2024, https:/ /www.scmp.com/news/china/military/article/3286520/
swarming-drones-and-counter-drone-systems-dazzle-chinas-zhuhai-air-show; Amber Wang, “China drones can
counter US ‘hellscape’ in Taiwan Strait: analysts,” South China Morning Post, June 12, 2024, https:/ /www.scmp.com/
news/china/military/article/3266295/china-drones-can-counter-us-hellscape-taiwan-strait-analysts;
79. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, 145.
80. Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, 145.
81. Casey, “Firepower Strike, Blockade, Landing,” 174-177.
82. David Sacks, “Why China Would Struggle to Invade Taiwan,” Council on Foreign Relations, June 12, 2024, https:/ /
www.cfr.org/article/why-china-would-struggle-invade-taiwan.
83. Sun Tzu, The Art of War, trans. Lionel Giles (Project Gutenberg, 1994), 52, https:/ /www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/132.
84. Michael C. Horowitz, “Battles of Precise Mass: Technology Is Remaking War—and America Must Adapt,” Foreign
Affairs 103, no. 6 (November/December 2024), 34-40, https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/world/battles-precise-mass-
technology-war-horowitz.
85. Robert O. Work, Principles for the Combat Employment of Weapon Systems with Autonomous Functionalities,
Center for a New American Security, April 28, 2021, https:/ /s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/files.cnas.org/documents/
Principles-for-Combat-Employment-of-Weapon-Systems_FINAL.pdf.
86. Kelley M. Sayler, Defense Primer: U.S. Policy on Lethal Autonomous Weapon Systems, Congressional Research Service,
updated February 1, 2024, https:/ /crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF11150.
87. DoD Directive 3000.09: Autonomy in Weapon Systems, U.S. Department of Defense, updated January 25, 2023, 21,
https:/ /www.esd.whs.mil/portals/54/documents/dd/issuances/dodd/300009p.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
48
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
88. DoD Directive 3000.09, 23.
89. Brandi Vincent, “Second Replicator tranche to include Anduril’s autonomous underwater drones,” Defense Scoop,
August 14, 2024, https:/ /defensescoop.com/2024/08/14/replicator-tranche-anduril-dive-ld-autonomous-underwater-
drones/; “Dive-LD,” Anduril, https:/ /www.anduril.com/hardware/dive-ld/.
90. “Autonomous Vessels,” Vigor, vigor.net/projects/sea-hunter; Xavier Vavasseur, “First Look at the US Navy’s Orca
XLUUV with Massive Payload Module,” Naval News, June 12, 2024, https:/ /www.navalnews.com/naval-news/2024/06/
our-first-look-at-the-us-navys-orca-xluuv-fitted-with-payload-module/.
91. “US Navy Mines,” United States Navy, updated October 8, 2021, https:/ /www.navy.mil/Resources/Fact-Files/Display-
FactFiles/Article/2167942/us-navy-mines/; Joseph Trevithick, “U.S. Is Betting Big On Naval Mine Warfare With These
New Sub-Launched and Air-Dropped Types,” The Warzone, June 28, 2021, https:/ /www.twz.com/25235/the-u-s-is-
getting-back-into-naval-mine-warfare-with-new-sub-launched-and-air-dropped-types.
92. Kyle Mizokami, “Ambush! The Navy’s New Hammerhead Mine is a Submarine Killer,” Popular Mechanics, October 23,
2020, https:/ /www.popularmechanics.com/military/weapons/a34451548/navys-new-hammerhead-mine/.
93. “Deputy Secretary of Defense Hicks Announces First Tranche of Replicator Capabilities Focused on All Domain
Attritable Autonomous Systems,” U.S. Department of Defense, May 6, 2024, https:/ /www.defense.gov/News/
Releases/Release/Article/3765644/.
94. Product Catalog, AeroVironment, May 2, 2024, https:/ /www.avinc.com/images/uploads/product_docs/
ProductCatalog.pdf.
95. Kelsey D. Atherton, “Everything to know about Switchblades, the attack drones the US gave Ukraine,” Popular
Science, July 31, 2023, https:/ /www.popsci.com/technology/switchblade-drones-explained/.
96. Tyler Rogoway, “We Talk Suicide Drones And The Future Of Unmanned Warfare With AeroVironment’s Steve Gitlin,”
The Warzone, July 8, 2020, https:/ /www.twz.com/34414/we-talk-killer-drones-and-the-future-of-unmanned-warfare-
with-aerovironments-steve-gitlin.
97. Vasco Cotovio, Clare Sebastian, and Allegra Goodwin, “Ukraine’s AI-enabled drones are trying to disrupt Russia’s
energy industry. So far, it’s working,” CNN, April 2, 2024, https:/ /www.cnn.com/2024/04/01/energy/ukrainian-drones-
disrupting-russian-energy-industry-intl-cmd/index.html.
98. William Power et al., “Autonomous Navigation for Drone Swarms in GPS-Denied Environments Using Structured
Learning,” Artificial Intelligence Applications and Innovations 584 (2020), 219-231, https:/ /doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
49186-4_19; Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “The revolution that wasn’t: How AI drones have fizzled in Ukraine (so far),”
Breaking Defense, February 20, 2024, https:/ /breakingdefense.com/2024/02/the-revolution-that-wasnt-how-ai-
drones-have-fizzled-in-ukraine-so-far/.
99. This report created this new taxonomy for categorizing autonomous weapon systems after interviewing experts
and reviewing the following sources: Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for
On-Road Motor Vehicles, SAE International, April 30, 2021, https:/ /www.sae.org/standards/content/j3016_202104/;
Hui-Min Huang, “Autonomy Levels for Unmanned Systems (ALFUS),” lecture presented at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, 2008, https:/ /www.nist.gov/system/files/documents/el/isd/ks/ALFUS-BG.
pdf; Millie Radovic, “Tech Talk: The 5 Levels of Drone Autonomy,” Drone Industry Insights, March 7, 2019, https:/ /
droneii.com/drone-autonomy?srsltid=AfmBOoptdzkcviS3rhoWG_zd7CVL49_HUE0GmSImde-NELlxrXNyV7xy; Paul
Scharre and Michael C. Horowitz, An Introduction to Autonomy in Weapon Systems, Center for a New American
Security, February 2015, https:/ /s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/files.cnas.org/hero/documents/Ethical-Autonomy-
Working-Paper_021015_v02.pdf; Shayne Longpre, Marcus Storm, and Rishi Shah, “Lethal Autonomous Weapons
Systems & Artificial Intelligence: Trends, Challenges, and Policies,” MIT Science Policy Review 3 (2022), 47-56, https:/ /
doi.org/10.38105/spr.360apm5typ.
100. Sayler, Defense Primer: U.S. Policy on Lethal Autonomous Weapon Systems.
101. Sayler, Defense Primer: U.S. Policy on Lethal Autonomous Weapon Systems.
102. Mohammad Mustafa Taye, “Theoretical Understanding of Convolutional Neural Network: Concepts, Architectures,
Applications, Future Directions,” Computation 11, no. 3 (2023), 52, https:/ /doi.org/10.3390/computation11030052;
Laith Alzubaidi et al., “Review of Deep Learning: Concepts, CNN Architectures, Challenges, Applications, Future
Directions,” Journal of Big Data 8, no. 53 (2021), 1-15, https:/ /doi.org/10.1186/s40537-021-00444-8.
103. Nilesh Barla, “Self-Driving Cars With Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN),” neptune.ai, April 22, 2024, https:/ /
neptune.ai/blog/self-driving-cars-with-convolutional-neural-networks-cnn; Abhishek Gupta, Alagan Anpalagan,
Ling Guan, and Ahmed Shaharyar Khwaja, “Deep Learning for Object Detection and Scene Perception in Self-Driving
Cars: Survey, Challenges, and Open Issues,” Array 10 (July 2021), 100057, https:/ /doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2021.100057.
For more on Tesla autopilot crash data, see “Tesla Vehicle Safety Report,” Tesla, https:/ /www.tesla.com/
VehicleSafetyReport. For AV research from Waymo, see “Research,” Waymo, https:/ /waymo.com/research/.
104. Christopher T. Cannon and Stefan Goericke, Using Convolution Neural Networks to Develop Robust Combat Behaviors
Through Reinforcement Learning (Monterey: Naval Postgraduate School, June 2021), https:/ /apps.dtic.mil/sti/trecms/
pdf/AD1150887.pdf.
105. Martin Keen, “What are GANs (Generative Adversarial Networks)?,” IBM Technology, November 11, 2021, https:/ /www.
youtube.com/watch?v=TpMIssRdhco; Ian Goodfellow et al., “Generative Adversarial Networks,” Communications of
the ACM 63, no. 11 (2020), 139-144, https:/ /doi.org/10.1145/3422622.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
49
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
106. Leila Haj Meftah, Asma Cherif, and Rafik Braham, “Improving Autonomous Vehicles Maneuverability and Collision
Avoidance in Adverse Weather Conditions Using Generative Adversarial Networks,” Array 12 (2024), https:/ /doi.
org/10.1016/j.array.2024.100057; Sergey I. Nikolenko, “Synthetic Data for Deep Learning,” arXiv 1909.11512, September
25, 2019, https:/ /doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1909.11512.
107. Sajid A. Marhon, Christopher J. F. Cameron, and Stefan C. Kremer, “Recurrent Neural Networks,” in Handbook on
Neural Information Processing, ed. Monica Bianchini, Marco Maggini, and Lakhmi C. Jain, vol. 49 (Heidelberg: Springer,
2013), 29-65, https:/ /doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-36657-4_2; Claus Metzner and Patrick Krauss, “Dynamics and
Information Import in Recurrent Neural Networks,” Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience 16 (April 2022), 876315,
https:/ /doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2022.876315.
108. S.W. Perry and Ling Guan, “A Recurrent Neural Network for Detecting Objects in Sequences of Sector-Scan Sonar
Images,” IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering 29, no. 3 (July 2004), 857–871, https:/ /doi.org/10.1109/JOE.2004.831616;
Alankrita Aggarwal, Mamta Mittal, and Gopi Battineni, “Generative Adversarial Network: An Overview of Theory
and Applications,” International Journal of Information Management Data Insights 1, no. 1 (April 2021), 100004,
https:/ /doi.org/10.1016/j.jjimei.2020.100004; Preeti Sharma, Manoj Kumar, Hitesh Kumar Sharma, and Soly Mathew
Biju, “Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), Introduction, Taxonomy, Variants, Limitations, and Applications,”
Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024), https:/ /doi.org/10.1007/s11042-024-18767-y; Luis E. Velazquez, “Harnessing
Deep Learning for Enhanced Military Simulations: A Comprehensive Approach,” MODSIM World 2024, Paper No. 8,
https:/ /modsimworld.org/papers/2024/MODSIM_2024_paper_8.pdf.
109. Yonghwan Jeong, “Interactive Lane Keeping System for Autonomous Vehicles Using LSTM-RNN Considering Driving
Environments,” Sensors 22, no. 24 (2022), https:/ /doi.org/10.3390/s22249889; Gabriel Andersson and Santiago
Martin Favre, “Analysis and Evaluation of Recurrent Neural Networks in Autonomous Vehicles,” KTH Royal Institute
of Technology, 2017, https:/ /www.edgeimpulse.com/blog/content/files/smash/get/diva2:1155735/fulltext01.pdf;
Yonghwan Jeong, “Interactive Lane Keeping System for Autonomous Vehicles Using LSTM-RNN Considering Driving
Environments,” Sensors 22, no. 24, (2022), 9889, https:/ /www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/22/24/9889.
110. Gaudenz Boesch, “What are Liquid Neural Networks?,” viso.ai, May 17, 2024, https:/ /viso.ai/deep-learning/what-are-
liquid-neural-networks/.
111. Ramin Hasani et al., “Liquid Time-constant Networks,” arXiv, June 8, 2020, https:/ /doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2006.04439; Makram Chahine et al., “Robust Flight Navigation Out of Distribution with Liquid Neural
Networks,” Science Robotics 8, no. 77 (April 2023), https:/ /doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.adc8892.
112. Rachel Gordon, “Drones Navigate Unseen Environments with Liquid Neural Networks,” MIT News, April 19, 2023,
https:/ /news.mit.edu/2023/drones-navigate-unseen-environments-liquid-neural-networks-0419.
113. Jacob Suppiah et al., “Infrastructure Developments for Training China’s Army,” Tearline, April 8, 2022, https:/ /
www.tearline.mil/public_page/pla-joint-training; Lars M. H. Ulander, “VHF-Band SAR for Detection of Concealed
Ground Targets,” RTO-MP-SCI-145 (2004), 19-4-19-6, https:/ /www.sto.nato.int/publications/STO%20Meeting%20
Proceedings/RTO-MP-SCI-145/MP-SCI-145-19.pdf; J. Michael Dahm, Offensive and Defensive Strike, Johns Hopkins
University Applied Physics Laboratory, March 2021, 45-48 https:/ /www.jhuapl.edu/sites/default/files/2022-12/
OffensiveDefensiveStrike.pdf.
114. Bonny Lin and Brian Hart, “Analyzing China’s Escalation After Taiwan President William Lai’s National Day Speech,”
ChinaPower, October 29, 2024, https:/ /chinapower.csis.org/china-taiwan-joint-sword-2024b-coast-guard/.
115. Colin Demarest, “Pentagon’s AI chief says data labeling is key to win race with China,” C4ISRNet, January 26, 2023,
https:/ /www.c4isrnet.com/artificial-intelligence/2023/01/26/pentagons-ai-chief-says-data-labeling-is-key-to-win-
race-with-china/.
116. Abhishek Thakur and Sudhansu Kumar Mishra, “An In-Depth Evaluation of Deep Learning-Enabled Adaptive
Approaches for Detecting Obstacles Using Sensor-Fused Data in Autonomous Vehicles,” Engineering Applications
of Artificial Intelligence 133 (July 2024), https:/ /doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2024.108550; Qiping Chen, Yinfei Xie,
Shifeng Guo, Jie Bai, and Qiang Shu, “Sensing System of Environmental Perception Technologies for Driverless
Vehicle: A Review of State of the Art and Challenges,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical 319 (March 2021), https:/ /doi.
org/10.1016/j.sna.2021.112566.
117. Karl Weiss, Taghi M. Khoshgoftaar, and DingDing Wang, “A Survey of Transfer Learning,” Journal of Big Data 3,
no. 9 (2016), 9, https:/ /doi.org/10.1186/s40537-016-0043-6; Asmaul Hosna et al., “Transfer Learning: A Friendly
Introduction,” Journal of Big Data 9, no. 102 (2022), https:/ /doi.org/10.1186/s40537-022-00652-w; Mohammadreza
Iman, Hamid Reza Arabnia, and Khaled Rasheed, “A Review of Deep Transfer Learning and Recent Advancements,”
Technologies 11, no. 2 (2023), 40, https:/ /doi.org/10.3390/technologies11020040.
118. Nerya Ashush, Shlomo Greenberg, Erez Manor, and Yehuda Ben-Shimol, “Unsupervised Drones Swarm
Characterization Using RF Signals Analysis and Machine Learning Methods,” Sensors 23, no. 3 (2023), 1589, https:/ /
doi.org/10.3390/s23031589.
119. Xinwei Wang et al., “Deep reinforcement learning-based air combat maneuver decision-making: literature review,
implementation tutorial and future direction,” Artificial Intelligence Review 57, no. 1 (2024), https:/ /doi.org/10.1007/
s10462-023-10620-2.
120. Althea Henslee et al., “Data-Driven Reinforcement Learning for Mission Engineering and Combat Simulation” in
Proceedings of the IUTAM Symposium on Optimal Guidance and Control for Autonomous Systems 2023, ed. Dilmurat
Azimov (Cham: Springer, 2024), 347-360, https:/ /doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39303-7_21.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
50
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
121. Marc Novakouski and Grace Lewis, “Operating at the Edge,” SEI Blog, November 29, 2021, https:/ /insights.sei.cmu.
edu/blog/operating-at-the-edge/.
122. Joshua Landman and Praveen Rajagopalan, “Edge Computing—Challenges and Opportunities for Enterprise Cloud
Architects,” Google Cloud Blog, November 22, 2021, https:/ /cloud.google.com/blog/topics/hybrid-cloud/edge-
computing-architectural-challenges-and-pitfalls; Taryn Plumb, “Edge Data Is Critical to AI — Here’s How Dell Is
Helping Enterprises Unlock Its Value,” VentureBeat, November 12, 2024, https:/ /venturebeat.com/ai/edge-data-is-
critical-to-ai-heres-how-dell-is-helping-enterprises-unlock-its-value/.
123. Soumya Sudhakar, Vivienne Sze, and Sertac Karaman, “Data Centers on Wheels: Emissions From Computing Onboard
Autonomous Vehicles,” IEEE Micro (January/February 2023), 30, https:/ /ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9965950; U.S.
Government Accountability Office, Artificial Intelligence: Status of Developing and Acquiring Capabilities for Weapon
Systems, GAO-22-104765 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Accountability Office, February 2022), 26, https:/ /
www.gao.gov/products/gao-22-104765; Brian Wang, “Nvidia AI and Multi-PetaOps Chips for Class 5 Automated
Cars Within 4 Years,” NextBigFuture, October 27, 2017, https:/ /www.nextbigfuture.com/2017/10/nvidia-ai-and-multi-
petaops-chips-for-class-5-automated-cars-within-4-years.html.
124. Stéphane Melançon, “Solid State Batteries Vs. Lithium-Ion: Which One is Better?” Laserax, October 28, 2024, https:/ /
www.laserax.com/blog/solid-state-vs-lithium-ion-batteries.
125. Ellis Gibson, “How Much Should a Drone Battery Weigh? Guidelines for Optimal Performance and Flight Time,”
PoweringAutos, December 4, 2024, https:/ /poweringautos.com/how-much-should-a-drone-battery-weigh/.
126. “How to Calculate Quadcopter Power Consumption,” RC Drone Good, accessed December 11, 2024, https:/ /www.
rcdronegood.com/calculate-quadcopter-power-consumption/.
127. Quan Li et al., “The Road Towards High-Energy-Density Batteries,” The Innovation Energy 1, no. 1 (2024), 100005,
https:/ /doi.org/10.59717/j.xinn-energy.2024.100005.
128. Michael Konopik et al., “The Fundamental Energy Cost of Finite-Time Parallelizable Computing,” Nature
Communications 14, 447 (2023), https:/ /doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36020-2; Chris Porter, “Energy Efficiency in
High-Performance Computing: Balancing Speed and Sustainability,” NVIDIA Developer Blog, November 14, 2023,
https:/ /developer.nvidia.com/blog/energy-efficiency-in-high-performance-computing-balancing-speed-and-
sustainability/.
129. Mesh Flinders and Ian Smalley, “What Is Parallel Computing?” IBM Think, July 3, 2024, https:/ /www.ibm.com/think/
topics/parallel-computing.
130. Michael Walzer, Just and Unjust Wars: A Moral Argument with Historical Illustrations, 5th ed. (New York: Basic Books,
2015), 64.
131. U.N. Charter art. 2(4).
132. U.N. Charter art. 51; U.N. Charter art. 42. China will almost certainly have a different international legal interpretation
to any U.S. justification to the recourse to force in defense of Taiwan.
133. Matthew Waxman, “The ‘Caroline’ Affair in the Evolving International Law of Self-Defense,” Lawfare (2018), https:/ /
www.lawfaremedia.org/article/caroline-affair.
134. Office of General Counsel, Department of Defense Law of War Manual, U.S. Department of Defense, updated July
2023, https:/ /media.defense.gov/2023/Jul/31/2003271432/-1/-1/0/DOD-LAW-OF-WAR-MANUAL-JUNE-2015-
UPDATED-JULY%202023.PDF.
135. “Political Declaration on Responsible Military Use of Artificial Intelligence and Autonomy,” U.S. Department of State,
November 4, 2024, https:/ /www.state.gov/political-declaration-on-responsible-military-use-of-artificial-intelligence-
and-autonomy/; “Political Declaration on Responsible Military Use of Artificial Intelligence and Autonomy,” U.S.
Department of State Bureau of Arms Control, Deterrence, and Stability, November 9, 2023, https:/ /www.state.gov/
political-declaration-on-responsible-military-use-of-artificial-intelligence-and-autonomy-2/.
136. Matthew P. Funaiole et al., “Crossroads of Commerce: How the Taiwan Strait Propels the Global Economy,”
ChinaPower, October 10, 2024, https:/ /features.csis.org/chinapower/china-taiwan-strait-trade/.
137. Michael Press, “Of Robots and Rules: Autonomous Weapon Systems in the Law of Armed Conflict,” Georgetown
Journal of International Law 48, no. 4 (2017), 1337-1366, https:/ /www.law.georgetown.edu/international-law-journal/
wp-content/uploads/sites/21/2018/05/48-4-Of-Robots-and-Rules.pdf.
138. Nik Hynek and Anzhelika Solovyeva, Militarizing Artificial Intelligence: Theory, Technology, and Regulation (London:
Routledge, 2022), https:/ /doi.org/10.4324/9781003045489; Markus Wagner, “The Dehumanization of International
Humanitarian Law: Legal, Ethical, and Political Implications of Autonomous Weapon Systems,” Vanderbilt Journal of
Transnational Law 47 (2014), 1371-1409, https:/ /scholarship.law.vanderbilt.edu/vjtl/vol47/iss5/4.
139. Michael W. Meier, “The Principle of Proportionality in the DoD Law of War Manual,” Just Security, January 18, 2024,
https:/ /www.justsecurity.org/91319/the-principle-of-proportionality-in-the-dod-law-of-war-manual/.
140. This unprecedented level of constancy and uniformity for autonomous weapon systems’ AI models would reflect
a combination of means-ends interpretations of the jus ad bellum principle of proportionality and the jus in bello
principle of proportionality. For more on the jus ad bellum principle of proportionality, see Office of General
Counsel, Department of Defense Law of War Manual, 86; David Kretzmer, “The Inherent Right to Self-Defence and
Proportionality in Jus Ad Bellum,” European Journal of International Law 24, no. 1 (2013), 238, https:/ /doi.org/10.1093/
ejil/chs087.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
51
The Autonomous Arsenal in Defense of Taiwan
141. Office of General Counsel, Department of Defense Law of War Manual, 52-60.
142. International Committee of the Red Cross, “Rule 22. Principle of Precautions against the Effects of Attacks,”
International Humanitarian Law Databases, https:/ /ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule22.
143. Lawrence Lessig, Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace (New York: Basic Books, 1999), https:/ /lessig.org/images/
resources/1999-Code.pdf.
144. Special thanks to Ben Zeskind for the excellent thoughts he provided on this issue.
145. Press, “Of Robots and Rules,” 1358.
146. Colin Clark, “Killer Robots? ‘Never,’ Defense Secretary Carter Says,” Breaking Defense, September 15, 2016, https:/ /
breakingdefense.com/2016/09/killer-robots-never-says-defense-secretary-carter/.
147. DoD Directive 3000.09, 15.
148. DoD Directive 3000.09, 15-17.
149. DoD Directive 3000.09, 22.
150. Ashley Deeks, “The Double Black Box: AI Inside the National Security Ecosystem,” Just Security, August 14, 2024,
https:/ /www.justsecurity.org/98555/the-double-black-box-ai-inside-the-national-security-ecosystem/.
151. Pantelis Linardatos, Vasilis Papastefanopoulos, and Sotiris Kotsiantis, “Explainable AI: A Review of Machine Learning
Interpretability Methods,” Entropy 23, no. 1 (2021), 18, https:/ /doi.org/10.3390/e23010018.
152. Kenneth Anderson, Daniel Reisner, and Matthew Waxman, “Adapting the Law of Armed Conflict to Autonomous
Weapon Systems,” International Law Studies 90.3 (2014), 386-411, https:/ /digital-commons.usnwc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=1015&context=ils.
153. Scott Sullivan and Iben Ricket, “Targeting in the Black Box,” in CyCon 2024: Over the Horizon, eds. C. Kwan, L.
Lindström, D. Giovannelli, K. Podiņš, and D. Štrucl (Tallinn: NATO CCDCOE Publications, 2024), 207-220, https:/ /ccdcoe.
org/uploads/2024/05/CyCon_2024_Sullivan_Ricket-1.pdf.
154. Edward Hunter Christie, Amy Ertan, et al., “Regulating Lethal Autonomous Weapon Systems: Exploring the Challenges
of Explainability and Traceability,” AI Ethics 4 (2024), 229–245, https:/ /doi.org/10.1007/s43681-023-00261-0.
155. DoD Directive 3000.09, 3-6; “Political Declaration on Responsible Military Use of Artificial Intelligence and Autonomy.”
156. DoD Directive 3000.09, 15.
157. For distinctions between proliferation, competition, and arms races, see Samuel P. Huntington, “Arms races:
prerequisites and results” Public Policy 8 (1958), 41-86.
158. Heather Somerville and Brett Forrest, “How American Drones Failed to Turn the Tide in Ukraine,” Wall Street Journal,
April 10, 2024, https:/ /www.wsj.com/world/how-american-drones-failed-to-turn-the-tide-in-ukraine-b0ebbac3; Paul
Mozur and Valerie Hopkins, “Ukraine’s War of Drones Runs Into an Obstacle: China,” New York Times, September 30,
2023, https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2023/09/30/technology/ukraine-russia-war-drones-china.html.
159. Charles L. Glaser, “Fear Factor: How to Know When You’re in a Security Dilemma,” Foreign Affairs 103, no. 4 (July/
August 2024), 122-128, https:/ /www.foreignaffairs.com/united-states/fear-factor-security-charles-glaser.
160. Jack L. Snyder, Myths of Empire: Domestic Politics and International Ambition (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
1993), 1-65.
161. Charles L. Glaser, Rational Theory of International Politics: The Logic of Competition and Cooperation (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2010); Randall L. Schweller, “Neorealism’s Status-Quo Bias: What Security Dilemma?”
Security Studies 5, no. 3 (1996), 90-121, https:/ /doi.org/10.1080/09636419608429277; Dale C. Copeland, A World Safe
for Commerce: American Foreign Policy from the Revolution to the Rise of China (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2024), 27-32.
162. Robert Jervis, “Cooperation Under the Security Dilemma,” World Politics 30, no. 2 (1978), 167-214, https:/ /doi.
org/10.2307/2009958.
163. John Frederick Charles Fuller, Armament and History: A Study of the Influence of Armament on History from the Dawn
of Classical Warfare to the Second World War (New York: C. Scribner’s Sons, 1945).
164. Alistair MacDonald and Jane Lytvynenko, “Inside Ukraine’s Battle for the Skies as Russian Bombardments Hit
Records,” Wall Street Journal, December 9, 2024, https:/ /www.wsj.com/world/ukraine-russia-war-skies-winter-
35aa1fb5?mod=hp_lead_pos8.
165. Horowitz, “When speed kills,” 770-788.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
www.belfercenter.org
Copyright 2025, President and Fellows of Harvard College
Printed in the United States of America
