
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
India:
Leaning to One Side
(Cautiously)
C. Raja Mohan
MIDDLE POWERS PROJECT
NOVEMBER 2025

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
Key Judgments
• India’s sheer economic scale and population size give it the potential to become a global power, yet
its persistent challenges, such as low per capita income and ongoing nation-building issues, place
significant limitations on its international leverage. Tensions between India’s aggregate national strength
and its developmental challenges mean that it must carefully navigate this paradox to have a meaningful
influence on global affairs. 
• India needs to skillfully balance relationships among the world’s leading powers, particularly the United
States and China, against a backdrop of increasing rivalry and competition. India’s ability to harness
its growing economic and political clout depends on its diplomatic agility — leveraging its importance
without becoming unduly dependent on, or antagonistic toward, any one major power. This balancing act
is seen as crucial for India’s pursuit of prosperity and security. 
• India hopes to create a multipolar Asia and position itself as a leader of the Global South, competing
with China while maintaining a distinct identity from the West, especially as U.S. policy toward India
becomes less predictable under President Trump. To achieve this, India could revamp coalitions like
India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) as outreach to other middle powers is seen as both a strategic necessity
and a challenge.
• The volatility of U.S. domestic and foreign policy has significant implications for India. Rapid oscillations
in American priorities — especially under divergent administrations — complicate its efforts to sustain
a consistent strategic partnership. This creates a perpetual need for India to hedge its bets, reassess
alliances, and remain vigilant to changes that could affect its security environment and development
trajectory. 
• India views the global order as being reshaped by an intensifying clash between liberal internationalism
and resurgent nationalism, highlighting that shifts in Western — and especially American — values have
created new dynamics for countries like India. As debates over sovereignty, nationalism, and the nature
of international cooperation evolve, India must continually reassess how to position itself amid these
ideological crosscurrents, identifying opportunities for collaboration as well as managing new sources of
tension across different regions and blocs. 
India’s Role and Importance as a Middle Power
India’s fast-growing economy and expanding comprehensive national power make it more than a middle
power; in fact, it has the potential to be a great power, albeit one facing significant constraints. As of early
2025, India’s aggregate gross domestic product (GDP) stands at just under $4 trillion in U.S. dollars and is
growing at around 6% to 7% annually. It is on track to become the world’s third-largest economy by the end
of the decade, but its low per capita GDP, at about $2,900, ranks 141st among about 190 countries. The vast
divergence between India’s aggregate strength and per capita income is a result of its massive population
of roughly 1.5 billion people. India’s challenges of nation-building are real and unlikely to disappear any time
soon. Still, in global politics, aggregate size does matter, and it gives India a growing international salience.
The strategic challenge for Delhi lies in leveraging its size to accelerate prosperity for its citizens amid
intensifying competition between the world’s great powers.
Perceptions of India, both at home and abroad, began to change at the turn of the century as the country’s

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
economic underperformance in the second half of the 20th century yielded higher growth rates generated by
market reforms initiated in the early 1990s. The idea of India as a “developing” or “third-world” nation has
given way to an image of a “rising India” that will inevitably take its “natural place” at the global high table.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government has set itself an ambitious goal to become a “developed nation”
by 2047 — the centennial year of India’s independence.1 Reaching a per capita income of $12,000 to $15,000
(the lower threshold for developed status) by 2047 will be a demanding job, 2 given the objective constraints
India faces. These include the unfinished tasks of nation-building, a federal polity, a political class wedded
to welfarism, and entrenched resistance to economic reform. Still, the country’s aspiration and commitment
to its goal are likely to drive continuing growth and reinforce India’s upward trajectory in the international
system, even if change comes at a measured pace.
Already one of the fastest-growing major economies, India is close to overtaking Japan to become the fourth-
largest global economy, and it is projected to overtake Germany to become the third largest by the end of
this decade.3 Although low per capita income constrains its great power ambitions, its status as the largest
middle power is assured for the foreseeable future. It is now difficult for the United States and China to
ignore India, thanks to its large population, market size, impressive technological talent, and growing military
capabilities. In fact, the United States has actively promoted India’s potential over the last two decades,
promised to assist in its global rise, and made Delhi central to its plans to rearrange the Asian security order.
Although China tends to dismiss India’s power, it sees the dangers of an India aligned with the United States.
Delhi continues to surprise Beijing with its advances amid seemingly insurmountable external obstacles
and what the Chinese see as disorder and anarchy at home. India resists Chinese military pressures on the
border, openly rejects China’s signature initiatives such as the Belt and Road Initiative, and presents itself as
an alternative destination for growth, trade, and investment in the region and worldwide.
However, despite India’s rising profile in the international system, it is likely to remain a distant third to the
United States and China for the foreseeable future. Given its large population size and growing economy,
India is set to join the ranks of world powers, measured in terms of aggregate GDP, military manpower,
defense spending, and technological capabilities. In fact, some projections into the later part of the century
suggest that India could overtake even the United States in aggregate GDP.4 Such projections, however, have
limited analytical value for understanding India’s current policies today, and given its aforementioned low per
capita income and many unfinished domestic development and nation-building tasks, its progress remains
constrained. Still, these estimates highlight India’s massive, unrealized potential as a major power. In the
interim, India’s substantial gap in comprehensive national power relative to China and the United States will
heavily influence its policy choices.5
India’s entrenched conflict with China, coupled with its growing tilt toward the United States, makes it
different from most other middle powers. At the same time, Delhi shares common interests with other middle
powers in preventing the U.S.-China competition from weakening its strategic autonomy and freedom of
action. This duality will be a hallmark of India’s international politics, but it is not the only one. Segments
of the Indian elite continue to nurture post-colonial resentments against the U.S.- and Western-dominated
international system and continue to harbor ambitions of leading the Global South.
Yet as a rising middle power and potential great power, Delhi increasingly sees itself as a participant in
managing regional and global order. On the economic front, the demands of poverty alleviation and protecting
vulnerable populations at home continue to clash with demands for trade liberalization and collective solutions
for climate change. On the political front, the shared ideology of democracy and political pluralism does
not always translate into alignment with the West when it comes to values. The need to maintain domestic
stability in a diverse society that is still recovering from the 1947 religious partition of the nation contrasts

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
with the rights-based approach of Western liberal internationalists, which fails to take into account history
or context.6 Fear of Western meddling in domestic affairs prevents India from fully aligning with the United
States and Europe on issues of democracy promotion, sometimes pushing it closer to China, Russia, and the
Global South on issues of sovereignty and self-determined development paths.
There is much intellectual support within India for a “multipolar world,” reflecting both lingering anti-Western
suspicions among the foreign policy elite and recognition of the United States’ persistent unilateralism.
However, this rhetoric is increasingly tempered by the reality of growing Chinese dominance over Asia and
its negative impact on India, leading to a new emphasis on the need to build a “multipolar Asia.” There is also
widespread, though often uncritical, domestic support for India’s effort to reclaim leadership of the Global
South.7 This, too, is a legacy of the nonaligned movement, long romanticized by the Indian political elite. This
stance is driven by an acute desire to retain a separate identity from the West as well as compete with China
for the affections of the non-Western world.
U.S. and China Ties
As the strongest of the middle powers, India differs in many ways from other middle power countries. In
addition to its size and economic potential, India’s geopolitical situation is unique. Unlike many nations,
it does not view U.S.-China competition in the abstract; it responds to the rivalry’s economic and security
impact in real time. Because China is a neighbor with which India has multiple territorial and other disputes,
Delhi does not view China-U.S. relations solely from the perspective of a great power rivalry. At the same
time, while India has various issues with the United States, it is a “distant power” with no direct, first-order
disputes with India.
Delhi has now graduated from navigating between the United States and China to a closer alignment with
Washington to cope with the deep structural challenges posed by Beijing. It remains to be seen if this tilt will
survive the second term of President Donald Trump’s administration, which focuses less on partnerships and
more on great power bargains with Russia and China.8 Trump’s “trade-first” approach and his bullying tactics
have also cast a shadow over U.S. security partnerships in Asia. Delhi’s confidence in the relationship with
Washington, built painfully over the last two decades, has certainly been shaken. Still, despite Trump imposing
combined tariffs of 50% on India, displaying new warmth toward Pakistan, and repeatedly publicly criticizing
Delhi, India has chosen not to exacerbate the situation by confronting him. Delhi’s decision to continue trade
and security discussions with the new administration highlights the high stakes in the relationship and the
importance of preserving it.
For now, the structural contradictions between the United States and China, and between India and China, are
likely to endure, providing the basis for a long-term partnership between Delhi and Washington in maintaining
an Asian balance of power. However, managing the new volatility in U.S. engagement with China and India
has emerged as an important concern for Delhi. As Chinese power becomes a generational challenge for
India in the 21st century, Delhi leans on an eager and willing Washington. Stronger economic, technological,
and military ties with the United States are crucial for bridging the massive power gap with China, enabling a
peaceful coexistence with its northern neighbor, and elevating India’s regional and global standing.
Relations with China and the United States are at the forefront of India’s political, economic, and foreign
policy debates. While the strategy of cultivating deeper ties with the United States to counter China enjoys
broad support, suspicion about the United States and its tendency to meddle in India’s internal affairs persists
across party lines. Anti-American sentiment endures in the liberal and left sections of the Indian political and

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
intellectual elite. At the same time, a new strain of anti-American resentment has emerged from the nativist
right. On both sides of the political spectrum, there is strong support to maintain an “independent” foreign
policy that lends Delhi considerable room for strategic autonomy and prevents India from being seen as a
“junior partner” of America. Unlike the left, the right celebrates India’s rise and its great power ambitions but
worries about the United States and China coming together in a G2 framework.
The deepening U.S.-China rivalry has coincided with sharpening military, political, and economic tensions
between Delhi and Beijing, providing new possibilities for India’s cooperation with the United States and the
West. To be sure, India began the post-Cold War era wary about the “unipolar moment” and its impact on
core national security interests. Over the past two decades, India’s ties with the United States have improved
and problems with China have worsened, shifting entrenched sentiments of nonalignment and neutrality
among the Indian foreign policy elite and political class. The new dynamic has also softened anti-American
sentiment and hardened attitudes toward China. Delhi is now focused on deepening ties with Washington
while managing its relationship with Beijing, aiming to restore peace on the border through patient military
dialogue, avoid provoking Beijing into a wider conflict, and ensure the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (“the
Quad,” which includes Australia, India, Japan, and the United States) does not become a military alliance.
Delhi is acutely aware that it must live with China as a powerful neighbor and seeks to balance resisting
Chinese dominance and avoiding a needless military conflict.
Modi’s two meetings with Xi Jinping in Kazan, Russia, in 2024 and Tianjin, China, in 2025 have eased the
military standoff in Ladakh that began in the early summer of 2020, when Beijing moved a large number of
troops across the disputed frontier in violation of previous agreements and India responded in kind. Modi-Xi
talks paved the way for a slow normalization of bilateral relations. At Kazan, the two leaders approved a
carefully negotiated agreement to disengage troops at points of contact and restore patrolling rights in
disputed areas along the border. Full de-escalation and troop withdrawals remain incomplete, 9 but the
agreement provided sufficient political space for Modi and Xi to move forward on resetting ties. At Tianjin,
the two sides agreed that India and China were “development partners and not rivals” and insisted that their
relationship should not be viewed through a “third-country lens.” They also committed to expanding bilateral
contact and exchanges at all levels.10
Policy Objectives
Foreign Policy/Security
When it first became independent, India hoped to assert regional leadership and began its foreign policy by
reaching out to Asia, only to find itself marginalized by the end of the Cold War. Since then, reconnecting with
Asia has been one of the central themes of India’s foreign policy. Economic reforms, institutional integration
with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) structures, and greater military engagement
have laid the groundwork for India’s return to the region. India’s trade with the ASEAN region has grown
significantly since the launch of the Look East Policy of the 1990s. India now participates in all major regional
institutions except the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, and it has intensified military and
security cooperation during this period. India’s comprehensive power ranking in the region has steadily risen,
placing it third, after the United States and China and just ahead of Japan.11
Although India’s relative weight in the region has grown, it has done so under China’s shadow, limiting its

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
impact. China’s sheer economic and military size make it difficult for India to carve out an effective regional
role for itself. India often presents itself as an alternative source of technology and capital, but it cannot
compete with China in broader Asia. India has sought to compensate by working closely with the United
States and its Asian allies like Australia and Japan.
On global issues, India has limited interest in the anti-Western agenda of Russia and China. To be sure, fear
of the U.S.-dominated unipolar world order pushed India closer to Russia and China in the 1990s and led
to the creation of the BRICS platform, a group of major emerging economies that has grown from Brazil,
Russia, India, China, and South Africa to include 11 members. In the early 1990s, the United States declared
its intention to cap, roll back, and eliminate India’s nuclear weapons and missiles. It also questioned the
accession of the state of Jammu and Kashmir to India. All of this led Delhi to join forces with Moscow and
Beijing in the late 1990s to promote a “multipolar world.” But today, India sees China as the largest threat
to its core national security interests — on territorial disputes, Pakistan, regional stability in South Asia
and the Indian Ocean, and Delhi’s desire for a larger role in the international system. Today, its rhetoric on a
multipolar world is coupled with an emphasis on a multipolar Asia.
While India has not walked out of the forums led by Russia and China, it has become a less enthusiastic
partner in BRICS and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO). Meanwhile, it participates in U.S.-led
like-minded groups, such as the Quad, Mineral Security Partnership, and Artemis Accords. In addition, India
is regularly invited to the annual G7 summits of leading Western nations. To reclaim its traditional equities
in the non-Western world, Delhi has resumed its activism with the Global South, but without the past anti-
Western posturing and with an intent to compete with China for influence. Even more importantly, Delhi has
increased its independent engagement with major actors in Latin America, Europe, the Middle East, and the
Indo-Pacific — actions that speak to its great power ambitions.
India-Russia
Even as it turns to the United States to balance China, India is eager to maintain its historical ties to Russia.
While Moscow’s relative weight in terms of great power relations has decreased, Delhi seeks to maintain the
partnership as insurance against continuing volatility in great power relations. India withstood considerable
political pressure from the United States and Europe to condemn the Russian invasion of Ukraine in February
2022. Although it avoided violating Western sanctions against Russia, it took advantage of gaps in energy
sanctions to purchase large quantities of crude oil from Moscow at discounted prices. At the same time,
Delhi recognized the dangers of siding with Russia on a critical issue of European security and sought
to compensate for its lack of criticism by stepping up strategic engagement with Europe. This has seen
intensified talks on a free trade agreement, greater cooperation on technology, and new consultations on
maritime and other security issues.
India’s approach to Russia is rooted in the recognition of Russia’s relative decline in the great power
constellation, its deepening confrontation with the West, and its growing partnership with China. Radical
foreign policy shifts are not India’s style, especially given Russia’s continued dominance of India’s military
inventory. While India is diversifying its arms supplies and emphasizing indigenous production of weapons
systems, it will take time before Delhi can free itself from dependence on Russian weapons systems. Delhi
does not see Moscow as a major source of capital and technology, but it sees considerable potential for
Russia to supply raw materials to power India’s industrial transformation. In the past, Delhi saw Moscow as
a natural balancer against both the West and China. Today, India’s warming ties with the West make Russia
more of a problem than a force multiplier in dealing with the United States and Europe. Delhi no longer sees

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
Russia as the main balancer against China either, given the shared anti-Western agenda of Moscow and
Beijing. Moscow is also moving away from its unambiguous tilt toward Delhi as it cultivates a new relationship
with Islamabad amid its confrontation with the West. Even so, Delhi continues to see value in maintaining the
partnership as a hedge against turbulence in the international system and volatility in U.S. foreign policy. In
sum, India’s relations with Russia are seeing a “managed decline.”12 While India does not seek to “decouple”
from Russia, the growing economic, technological, and military weight of Western engagement overshadows
its ties with Moscow.
Political Values: Non-Intervention
Political values remain an important factor in shaping the international order and have always held particular
significance for middle powers. Since the Russian Revolution of 1917, political and economic ideological issues
have been critical in global politics, when the anti-imperialist and emancipatory rhetoric of communism and
socialism drew many non-Western elites away from the West. In the post-colonial era, many middle powers
were gripped by different transcendental ideologies: communism, socialism, Pan-Asianism, Pan-Islamism,
and Pan-Arabism, to name a few. Though they varied in substance, they shared a common thread in targeting
Western imperialism and its post-colonial forms. Communist powers, like Russia and China, were quick to
tap into these resentments.
Over time, many middle powers reconciled their ideological aspirations with the realities of power politics,
but the public discourse retained a strong anti-Western and anti-American tinge. The collapse of the Soviet
Union and the wave of economic globalization in the early 1990s appeared to render the question of values
irrelevant. The easing of great power rivalry after the Cold War was accompanied by a sense that economic
and political ideas among the major powers had converged. But that appearance turned out to be deceptive.
At the turn of the 21st century, great power bonhomie dissipated, and ideological arguments returned as
values once more took center stage. China and Russia feared that the United States would promote color
revolutions and regime changes, and they loudly defended each nation’s right to choose its own path and
urged resistance to U.S.-led Western values as central to their internationalist narratives. In a joint state-
ment issued by Presidents Vladimir Putin and Xi in February 2022, on the eve of the Russian invasion of
Ukraine, they conceded that democracy is a “universal value” but denounced the U.S. tendency to present
itself as its champion. The statement also denounced “certain states” for attempting to impose their own
“democratic standards” on other countries, saying that to monopolize the right to assess the level of com-
pliance with democratic criteria “is nothing but the brazen exercise of political hegemony.”13
Many emerging middle powers, including democracies like India, deeply resent Western meddling in their
domestic affairs in the name of human rights—ranging from the political, religious and gender. For many
non-Western powers, the liberal internationalist agenda clashes with social and religious conservatism at
home while also challenging their sovereignty through doctrines like “right to protect” and “humanitarian
intervention.”
During the Cold War, the West hailed India as a democratic alternative to communism in Asia and the
non-Western world. However, under Modi, liberals in the United States and the West have widely criticized
India’s “democratic backsliding,” citing the growing insecurity of caste and religious minorities, mounting
pressures on the free press and judiciary, and the empowerment of Hindu vigilante groups that seek social
and cultural control.14 Although criticism from Western democracy activists has acquired a sharper tone
during the Modi years, governments in the United States and Europe have not made it a point of contention

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
in their engagement with India. Instead, they have competed to build productive relations with India, seen
as a growing market as well as a key partner in Asian security politics.
Former President Joe Biden’s administration, which saw the conflict between democracies and autocracies
as the defining global contradiction, took several steps to consolidate the strategic partnership with India.
Crucially, Biden gave Modi a prominent position in his democracy summits. Still, Western criticism of the
Modi government generates a backlash on the Indian right, that reflectively accuses the West of meddling
in India’s domestic politics. Even Indian liberals, who think Indian democracy is under threat, find it hard to
align with the Western liberal critique, given the America’s perceived hypocrisy on political values. Unsur-
prisingly, Indian elites often find it more comfortable to engage with China and Russia, which do not ques-
tion its internal orientation. This is true of most non-Western powers, which prefer the Chinese and Russian
approach to political values and non-intervention in the internal affairs of states.
However, a new situation is emerging in the second term of the Trump administration: internal pushback
against liberal hegemony and intervention. As the United States lessens its promotion of liberal values
abroad and eases its interventionist impulses, it could help remove many of the long-standing irritants
between the United States and non-Western elites in powers like India. Trump’s new emphasis on interests
over values alters the salience of liberal ideology for the global order and creates more possibilities for the
United States to engage with middle powers.
In his speech at Riyadh in May 2025, Trump spoke about the unfolding economic transformation of the
Gulf region and denounced past U.S. policies of intervention, stating, “In the end, the so-called [American]
nation-builders wrecked far more nations than they built, and the interventionists were intervening
in complex societies that they did not even understand themselves.”15 The new American message of
non-intervention also figured prominently weeks later in Singapore, at the annual Shangri-La Dialogue.
Addressing the Asian defense community, U.S. Secretary of Defense Pete Hegseth emphasized, “We’re not
here to impose our will on you. We’re all sovereign nations. We should be able to choose the future we want
to build.”16 
Meanwhile, the mainstream right in India remains skeptical that the U.S. has truly shifted its approach to
non-intervention in other societies. Many view Washington’s continued bullying of other nations as more
offensive than the liberal condescension they have long known. For now, the U.S. battle over values is
largely focused on Europe. Trump and his allies have been brazen in their attempt to intervene and reshape
the politics of America’s European cousins. This, in turn, has helped create — at least temporarily — a level
playing field between the United States and China on the question of political values.
Alliances and Coalitions
The question of alliances, coalitions, and how Delhi deals with them has long been central to both domestic
and global discourse on Indian foreign policy. Historically, India’s approach has been shaped by its relations
with the great powers, especially China, Russia, and the West (including the United States and Europe). The
debate over great power politics and how to navigate them can be traced back to the interwar period, when
the Indian National Congress refused to take sides between colonial Britain and the Axis powers, Germany
and Japan. That early position evolved into a strategy of nonalignment in the Cold War, as India sought to
maintain autonomy between the East and the West. This nonalignment strategy did not, however, stop India’s
realpolitik — such as its tilt toward the United States (during and after the 1962 war with China) and toward
the Soviet Union (after the Sino-American rapprochement in the 1970s). Given its own great power aspirations,

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
India also offered security alliances to smaller neighbors in the subcontinent — especially Bhutan, Nepal,
and Sikkim — soon after independence, offering protection to those that looked to Delhi.17
The collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War in the early 1990s marked a turning point
in India’s approach to alliances and coalitions. The evolution reflected the new orientation of its economy
and the changing nature of its security challenges. As it opened its economy toward internal liberalization
and external globalization, its commercial ties with the West rapidly expanded, driving economic growth
and increasing trade volumes. Meanwhile, trade with post-Soviet Russia waned, but arms ties endured. A
1990s border accord with Beijing opened channels for commerce, which surged as China became the world’s
second-largest economy, deepening India’s economic exposure.
During that same period, India’s geopolitical orientation evolved in a more complex fashion. The 1990s fear
of a unipolar moment saw India join hands with Russia and China to hedge against potential U.S. hostility.
Fueled by the United States’ relentless pressure on India’s economic restructuring and American meddling
in security issues, including India’s nuclear program and Kashmir disputes with Pakistan, the Indian political
class and policy establishment partnered with Russia and China to promote a multipolar world. This led to the
Russia-India-China forum that eventually became the BRICS in the 2000s and BRICS Plus in the 2020s. Later,
India also joined the SCO, which sought to limit U.S. interference in Eurasia. This hedging strategy coincided
with expanding commercial, technological, and political engagement with the United States beginning in the
1990s. While it navigated the unipolar moment, India also stressed the creation of middle power coalitions,
such the India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA), while deepening outreach to its South Asian neighbors. At the
same time, Delhi made a special effort to connect with adjacent regions in East Asia, Central Asia, and the
Middle East.18
The steady evolution of India’s policies, from nonalignment to multi-alignment, began to face challenges in
the 2010s. China’s rapid rise and growing assertiveness over territorial disputes was reflected in four military
crises—during 2013, 2014, 2017, and 2020—that shattered nearly two decades of peace and tranquility on
the disputed border. As it became the dominant power in the region, Beijing’s policies inevitably undermined
India’s presumed primacy in the subcontinent. Beijing refused to yield space for India, leading Delhi to
strengthen its ties with Washington. Amid the deterioration of U.S.-China relations, Washington was more
than happy to oblige. By early 2025, India had moved closer than ever to the United States. However, there
is now uncertainty about the relationship given the radical shifts in U.S. foreign policy under Trump’s second
term. While the February 2025 summit between Modi and Trump signaled continuity in the partnership, the
situation quickly turned. By the summer, Trump’s tariff war against India, Delhi’s effort to reset ties with
Beijing, and growing speculation about a deal with Xi Jinping had introduced new complexities into the
triangular dynamic among India, the United States, and China.
Shifts in great power relations are bound to result in significant changes in the global economic system, the
rules governing technological production and flows, and international political institutions. Multilateralism
is expected to take a back seat in the near term, creating space for minilateral groups and coalitions of like-
minded states to address global challenges. Indeed, minilateralism has become a central theme in India’s
international relations in the 21st century.
In recent years, India has joined several minilateral coalitions with the United States. These include the
Quadrilateral Security Dialogue, which was revived during the Trump administration’s first term and energized
during the Biden administration. Despite U.S. pressure, Delhi’s reluctance to make the Quad a military alliance
led Washington to shape it as a forum for public goods in the Indo-Pacific, facilitating its wider acceptance.19
If the Quad was about new forms of engagement with East Asia, the I2U2 (which brings together India, Israel,

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
the United Arab Emirates, and the United States) is the new forum to promote minilateral cooperation in the
Middle East.20
India’s engagement with the Quad and other U.S.-led minilateral institutions, along with its continuing
participation in BRICS despite growing tensions with China, has had one unintended consequence: the
marginalization of India’s initial enthusiasm for middle power coalitions. The IBSA, originally conceived as
a coalition of non-Western middle power democracies, has largely been subsumed by BRICS, despite the
eagerness of its three members to retain an independent identity. Equally challenging for India’s middle
power coalition strategy is the fact that the United States and China are now far ahead of other major powers.
Whether the world is bipolar or multipolar, the dominance of the U.S.-China dynamic is a reality that India and
other middle powers cannot ignore.
Since becoming independent, the nature of U.S.-China relations has had a profound effect on India’s foreign
policy.21 Right now, there is a shared interest between Delhi and Washington in managing the challenges
presented by China. However, this could change in the event of a new Sino-American entente (G2) or a Sino-
Indian rapprochement (A2). Both Washington and Delhi continue to seek improved bilateral ties with China,
and despite repeated territorial conflict with China in the last decade, Delhi has insisted on maintaining
engagement with Beijing and preserved space for regional and multilateral collaboration.
As India draws closer to the United States, segments of the political elite in Delhi are apprehensive about
losing the country’s traditional identity as an independent actor within the non-Western world. The United
States’ volatile approach to alliances and partnerships under Trump 2.0 is likely to sharpen these anxieties,
further incentivizing Delhi to strengthen its strategic autonomy, reboot its middle power engagement, and
emphasize its equity in the Global South.
Three and a half decades after the Cold War, India is less anti-Western and more open to military cooperation
with the United States, while avoiding formal security alliances due to its deep structural contradictions
with China. However, the new uncertainty in U.S. engagement with the world, accentuated during the Trump
era, is likely to prompt India to rethink its approach of leaning toward one side. While Delhi will not abandon
its investments in Washington, it will likely intensify efforts to coexist peacefully with China and broaden
partnerships across the wider West.
Technology and Trade
Technology issues have been at the heart of the relations between India and the United States in good times
and in bad. If technological denial was at the center of the India-U.S. divergence from the 1970s through the
early 2000s, expanding cooperation has become the driver of a new strategic partnership in the 21st century.
As China emerges as a technological powerhouse and controls key manufacturing inputs required for India’s
industrial modernization, it is becoming increasingly important for India’s technology sector. 22 The Soviet
Union was once an important source of technology, a role that modern day Russia now only maintains in
limited sectors such as nuclear and defense. Delhi has long championed technology sharing with developing
countries. Even when India was among the poorest countries in the world, it sought to shape global governance
of atomic energy in the immediate aftermath of World War II. Since then, its focus on promoting just and
equitable regimes and limiting military use has persisted in relation to advanced technologies.
India’s engagement with the United States on technology predates its 1947 independence. While much of the
emerging Indian middle class sent their children to England to become barristers, a segment of the emerging

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
industrial class in western India preferred to send their children to the United States, particularly to MIT. The
proto-industrial class in India recognized the importance of technological mastery in India’s modernization. In
his first visit to the United States in 1949, Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru visited MIT and later launched the
Indian Institutes of Technology, which now produce top technical talent for India and the world.23 In the 1950s
— the era of “scientific internationalism” and “developmentalism” — the United States actively promoted
technological cooperation with India in advanced sectors such as nuclear energy and space. The first Indian
reactors and satellites were American, reflecting Washington’s effort to promote high-tech cooperation with
India in the 1950s and 1960s.
As nonproliferation concerns replaced scientific internationalism in the 1970s, Delhi became the subject of
several technology sanctions that increased after India refused to join the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and conducted a nuclear test in 1974. Mounting U.S. sanctions in the 1970s saw the Soviet
Union gain a foothold in India’s nuclear and space sectors, and by 1998, India declared itself a nuclear power.
India-U.S. relations simmered for several years before the nuclear disputes resolved between 2005 and
2008.24 Then, technological cooperation soared, especially under the Biden administration, which unveiled
the Initiative on Critical and Emerging Technologies (iCET) in 2023. The iCET is part of the U.S. effort to
rebalance Asia, reduce economic reliance on China, and rearrange global technological supply chains, 25
boosting India’s technological and industrial capabilities. After initial skepticism, Delhi has approached
technological collaboration with Washington in a more productive and engaged way.
For India, the iCET supports the modernization of its techno-industrial base while advancing its strategic
autonomy by reducing reliance on Russian defense systems and Chinese civilian technologies. Traditionally,
India’s idea of strategic autonomy meant keeping a safe political distance from the United States, particularly
when resisting U.S. dominance in the region. On both fronts, the United States and the West are eager to
facilitate India’s transition away from Russia and China. However, India does not want to replace military
dependence on Russia with dependence on the West. Its emphasis is on producing weapons domestically,
which the United States supports, encouraging U.S. industry to invest in Indian defense manufacturing. The
challenge is no longer U.S. political willingness but India’s capacity to create the right policy and regulatory
environment for American industrial participation. 
American allies in Europe and Asia are now more amenable to deeper technological ties with India. In fact,
technological cooperation is a major element of the Quad agenda, facilitating more interactions between
India, Japan, and Australia. Europe has followed the United States in integrating technology into their
partnership with India through a newly formed Trade and Technology Council. 26 The United States has also
initiated a trilateral forum for technological cooperation with South Korea and India. 27 Under the Biden and
Modi administrations, Washington urged U.S. private capital to deepen techno-industrial collaboration in
areas like semiconductors and jet engines, while Delhi urged its public and private sectors to partner with
U.S. industry. Undergirding this political warmth between Washington and Delhi is the strong connection
between India’s emerging technological hubs — Bangalore, Chennai, Hyderabad, and Pune — with Silicon
Valley, staffed by a growing number of Indian and Indian American professionals. India’s expanding startup
ecosystem is also deeply tied to U.S. venture capital. This success in leveraging technological talent is
beginning to influence other Western countries, which are seeking to attract Indian engineering manpower
despite broader challenges with immigration.
The United States is also supportive of India using its technological resources to compete with China in the
Global South. Washington looks positively on Delhi’s independent initiatives to promote a “digital public
infrastructure” developed in India, worldwide. Still, India and the United States remain some distance apart
when it comes to developing a common approach to the global governance of advanced technologies, including

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
digital systems, outer space, and artificial intelligence. While U.S.-China competition has strengthened
technological collaboration between Delhi and Washington, India’s ties with Russia have cast a shadow over
the partnership.28 U.S. concerns about potential technology leaks from India to Russia are driving Washington
to impose restrictions in sensitive high-technology areas. 
The Biden administration’s decision in January 2025 to put India on a lower tier for liberal exports of AI chips
underscores the continuing constraints on India-U.S. technology cooperation. 29 The situation has become
even more complicated with Trump’s “America First” policy, which undermines the Biden administration’s
approach to leveraging alliances and partnerships in AI and other advanced technologies. Strong opposition
in the MAGA movement to temporary tech workers under the H-1B visa program — for which India is the
biggest source — along with a $100,000 fee for new H-1B applicants and rising racism against Indians,
also threatens the otherwise robust technology relationship between India and Silicon Valley. 30 India is not
in a position to hedge against renewed U.S. hostility in advanced technology cooperation. Russia has little
presence in new sectors like AI and semiconductors, while China’s impressive leadership remains more of a
challenge than an opportunity.  
As technology and trade become increasingly intertwined amid geopolitical fragmentation, India has begun
to recalibrate its policies to enhance supply chain resilience and competitiveness. As the United States
and Europe de-risk their exposure to China in key sectors, India seeks to position itself as a reliable partner
for Western democracies while simultaneously advancing domestic capabilities. The iCET exemplifies this
realignment, facilitating cooperation in semiconductors, AI, quantum computing, and defense tech. India’s
full potential in Western corporations’ “China-plus-one” strategies — or the desire to diversify away from
Chinese market — has yet to be realized due to the continuing challenges of doing business in India. For
example, Apple has made significant investments in diversifying its production from China to India, but
Trump prefers “onshoring” to the Biden administration’s “friend-shoring.” This would severely undermine
India’s strategy of deepening trade and technological cooperation with the United Sates.
While managing the turbulence of the Trump administration, India is also looking to Europe through the
India-EU Trade and Technology Council (TTC), which aims to align regulatory frameworks, secure supply
chains, and promote trusted technologies. India has also established a Technology Security Initiative and
signed a trade liberalization agreement with the United Kingdom in early 2025. Trade talks with the EU
have accelerated, but it remains unclear when they might successfully conclude. During Trump’s second
term, India has prioritized negotiating a trade treaty with Washington that integrates more closely with its
main Western trading partners. However, the talks have stalled over U.S. demands to open India’s protected
agricultural sector — a contentious issue in EU discussions as well. As a late economic modernizer with many
protected sectors, India faces difficult choices in making trade concessions, with significant internal political
consequences.
At home, India is simultaneously trying to expand domestic industrial capabilities through policy such as the
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) program and reduce dependence on China for critical manufacturing inputs.
The PLI scheme seeks to attract, through financial incentives, large scale domestic and foreign investment to
widen the base of domestic manufacturing, integrate with global value chains, enhance exports, and promote
technological upgrading. It was unveiled in early 2020 and followed through with several supplementary
initiatives.31

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
Energy and Climate Change
India’s approach to climate change reflects the full range of political and ideological perspectives that have
evolved over the past five decades, from “third worldism” to the sensibility of a responsible major power. The
last few years have seen a shift from a narrow North-South lens to a more pragmatic approach focused on
resolution in cooperation with other powers. At home, India continues to emphasize fossil fuels as critical for
growth, while simultaneously committing to expand renewable energy production. At the same time, there
is a lingering emphasis on financial transfers from developed to developing countries — a demand that is
unlikely to materialize given growing resistance in Europe to the costs of climate action.32 Furthermore, there
is massive pushback against green policies in the United States in Trump’s second term.33
India’s early responses to climate change concerns emphasized the primacy of growth while recognizing
the importance of sustainable development. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi articulated this stance at the
1972 Stockholm Conference, embedding it into Indian climate diplomacy through the principle of “common
but differentiated responsibility.” This principle highlighted the historic emissions of developed countries
and low per capita consumption of developing countries, including India. These propositions led to the
widespread perception of India as a naysayer on climate change. While India’s limited mobilization within
the Global South bought some time and space for a future green transition, there was no effort to actively
pursue energy efficiency or the development of green technologies. As a result, India found itself in a dead-
end rhetorical battle against the North, without enhancing its internal capacity to address the imperatives
of a green transition. Modi has since shifted course, insisting India be a “part of the solution” in climate
negotiations. This includes domestic initiatives to expand green energy generation and build new multilateral
groups, such as the International Solar Alliance and the Coalition for Disaster Resilience. In 2021, Modi set
the goal of achieving net-zero carbon emissions by 2070. While these initiatives boosted India’s climate
diplomacy, challenges quickly followed.
Soon, India faced steep divisions within the Global South, with island nations demanding immediate limits on
fossil fuel use while hydrocarbon-producing countries resisted the transition. In addition, India’s attempt to
coalesce with China and other middle powers to bargain with the West on climate change unraveled as Beijing
chose to negotiate bilaterally with Washington, with then-President Barack Obama dubbing climate change a
strategic priority in U.S.-China relations. Far more consequential was Beijing’s massive investment in green
technologies and associated natural resources, securing its global dominance on solar energy, batteries, and
electric vehicles. India now faces significant dependence on China to meet its own green energy targets, as
Indian businesses urge the government to lift import restrictions on China and avoid a $100 billion trade
deficit.34 India’s climate diplomacy has seen some successes in the form of expanding cooperation with
Europe, especially with Scandinavian countries, and the slow but continuous functional cooperation with the
United States on climate issues, advanced under the Obama and Biden administrations.
Under the Trump administration’s second term, however, the prospects for such cooperation look dim, as
the administration signals vigorous opposition to climate change efforts. While the Global South has long
been divided on climate change, deep cracks across the Atlantic are now evident. Republicans in the United
States and several conservative parties across Europe have rejected the liberal and centrist focus on climate
change, and it is unclear whether European actors have the clout to counter the new U.S. stance. Even
as climate change demands urgent action, political dynamics make the current framework of negotiations
unsustainable. If future efforts focus on new technological solutions, India is likely to rely on its most valuable
technological partner, the United States.
While not abandoning its climate goals in the Trump era, Delhi must navigate several competing objectives

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
in its climate and energy policies — increasing per capita energy consumption while limiting emissions
and promoting growth while ensuring sustainability. Unlike in the past, Delhi is not dismissing the need to
address climate change, given its growing impact on society and the economy. At the heart of this strategy
is the five-point action plan, announced at COP26, which outlines key targets for 2030: achieving 500
gigawatts (GW) of non-fossil fuel energy capacity, generating 50% of electricity from renewables, reducing
emissions intensity of GDP by 45%, cutting 1 billion tons of CO₂, and reaching net-zero emissions by 2070.35
The expansion of renewable energy, especially solar, is central to this ambition. India’s solar capacity
has grown significantly, reaching over 350 GW in 2025, supported by financial incentives as well as
government programs, including an initiative to install rooftop solar panels on 10 million homes. Wind
energy, particularly offshore projects in Tamil Nadu and Gujarat, and the 2023 National Green Hydrogen
Mission are also part of this strategy. Additionally, Delhi has introduced incentives for key industries to
decarbonize their production. A major new initiative is India’s expansion of nuclear energy, particularly
through Small Modular Reactors (SMRs). Delhi aims to deploy at least five SMRs by 2033 and reach 100
GW of nuclear capacity by 2047. External partnerships with the United States, France, and Russia are key
to realizing these goals, and several private players, like the Tata Group, L&T, Reliance Industries Limited,
and Adani Group, are exploring investments in the sector. Before significant progress can be made, India
must modify its legal and regulatory framework governing atomic energy, which has long blocked private
and foreign investment.36 Amid the U.S. retreat on climate action, Delhi is doubling down on partnerships
with the EU, UK, and Japan to mobilize climate finance and technology. It is also pressing ahead with the
aforementioned international initiatives, including the International Solar Alliance and the Coalition for
Disaster Resilience.
Conclusion and Recommendations
By most metrics that define comprehensive national power, India will remain a distant third to the United
States and China for the foreseeable future. Yet its growing economic heft and geopolitical salience make it a
“swing state” that can influence great power politics, particularly amid the U.S.-China rivalry.37 India’s impact
varies from issue to issue, but it is most significant in the Asian balance of power and Indo-Pacific security.
The parallel rise in tensions between the United States and China and between India and China has put Delhi
and Washington on the same side of Asian geopolitics since the mid-20th century.
For India, addressing the gap with China will likely remain a generational challenge. 38 China, whose relative
power in relation to India has dramatically grown in the 21 st century, has undermined India’s traditional
approach to stabilizing their disputed border through a set of confidence building measures, retaining its
primacy in the subcontinent, expanding its influence across the Indo-Pacific, and securing a seat at the top
tier of the international system. On the economic front, reducing dependence on Chinese imports is now
central to its strategy of self-reliance — a strategy that was once aimed at Western capital. Since the mid-
2010s, cooperation with the United States and its allies has emerged as a critical pillar of India’s national
strategy.
Still, India’s commitment to strategic autonomy prevents it from aligning too closely with the United States.
It seeks to secure favorable terms of collaboration that protect its interests without sacrificing freedom
of action. At the same time, given the massive power differential and changing military balance along the
border, Delhi has no desire to provoke a conflict with Beijing. It needs to secure sustainable terms of peaceful
coexistence with China — now the second largest economy in the world and a major military power. Although

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
15
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
India is leveraging the U.S.-China rivalry to its benefit, it does not want an escalation of tensions between
Washington and Beijing that could lead to an unwanted war with Beijing. India has a vested interest in a
stable and predictable U.S.-China relationship, though its ability to control that relationship remains limited.
Ultimately, it has no option but to adapt to its consequences.
During Trump’s first term and the Biden administration, U.S. policy favored India by lifting technological
restrictions, promoting resilient supply chains, and cultivating cooperation among trusted geographies.
However, in Trump’s second term, the administration is focused on reshoring over friend-shoring, aiming
to draw foreign investment into the United States and gain unilateral technological advantage rather than
building frameworks centered on alliances and partnerships. It remains to be seen if Trump will focus on
negotiating a “big and beautiful” deal with Beijing or strengthening economic ties with allies and partners.
Delhi will also watch to see if the Trump effect influences how Beijing interacts with its neighbors and whether
it becomes more willing to accommodate their concerns. In other words, there is much uncertainty in the
global economic order, which India will have to navigate in the years ahead. Many of the answers lie at home,
and India has not yet fully leveraged the “China plus one” strategies pursued by Western powers to reduce
economic dependence on Beijing.
Along with other middle powers, India must navigate growing volatility — not only in the bilateral relationship
between the United States and China but also in the potential shifts in their internal orientation. While churn
in the United States is overt, India and its peers must also expect change within China. Even if Xi Jinping has
reversed many policies of his predecessors, it would be unwise to assume that his successors will simply
continue his approach to domestic and international politics. Managing this uncertainty will be the greatest
challenge for India and other middle powers.
When it comes to values, India has remained closer to China and Russia on issues of national sovereignty,
reflecting wariness about the interventionist impulses of Western liberal internationalism. However, the Biden
administration’s framing of the world order as a conflict between democracies and autocracies has limited
resonance in Trump’s world. What we see today in the United States — and increasingly in Europe — is a
rising conservative challenge to liberalism at home and liberal internationalism abroad. Ideas that seemed
immutable — open borders, open markets, and global rule of law backed by international institutions — are
now under siege. If sovereignty has long been an important part of the lexicon of India and other middle
powers, Trump and his counterparts in Europe highlight their commitment to nationalism and sovereignty. It
is not clear how deeply rooted this tendency is and how vigorously the old liberal establishments will fight it.
Nevertheless, the West’s new war of values between liberalism and nationalism could open space for cross-
cutting engagement between the United States and China (and Russia), East and West, and North and South.
At the same time, the rise of nationalism could trigger new conflicts both within the West and South as well
as between the North and the South.
In this context, this case study offers five broad recommendations to India and other middle powers.
• India must closely track domestic political churn within the major powers that has seen the rise of many
radical political forces challenging the post-War and post-Cold War conventional wisdom. This internal
change has emerged as a critical variable shaping the post-Cold War order. At the same time the middle
powers must remain alert to the significant structural shifts underway in great power relations among the
United States, Europe, China, and Russia.
• Trump’s current approach to world politics and to India’s neighborhood have raised doubts about a long-
term strategic partnership with the United States. Coping with volatility in U.S. policy has become an
urgent priority for Indian foreign and security policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
• Given the renewed uncertainty in U.S. foreign policy and U.S.-India relations, Delhi must continue to
explore the terms of a peaceful coexistence with China.
• Looking beyond the North-South and East-West axes that have long dominated Indian political thinking,
Delhi should also recognize sharpening tensions within the Transatlantic alliance and strengthen its
partnership with Europe, which can significantly contribute to the accelerated accretion of India’s
comprehensive national power. A stronger partnership with Europe also requires India to rethink the
costs of its current engagement with Russia.
• Unlike in the 20 th century, middle powers now have greater room to navigate global changes through
mutual collaboration and coalition building with the great powers. But they must resist the old temptations
of anti-Western crusades now being promoted by Russia and China for their own interests. Moscow and
Beijing are open to bilateral deals with Washington and will abandon their gullible followers among the
middle powers. At the same time, there are limits to bandwagoning with the United States. India needs to
revive middle power coalitions, like IBSA, that it built in the early 2000s but abandoned in favor of BRICS.
Statements and views expressed in this commentary are solely those of the authors and do not imply
endorsement by Harvard University, the Harvard Kennedy School, or the Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
17
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
Endnotes
1 “India Needs 8% Growth for Two Decades to Achieve Viksit Bharat by 2047, Says Economic Survey,” The
Economic Times, January 31, 2024, https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/indicators/india-needs-8-
growth-for-two-decades-to-achieve-viksit-bharat-by-2047-says-economic-survey-2024/articleshow/117779983.cms.
2 “EY Projects India to Become a US$26 Trillion Economy by 2047 with a Six-Fold Increase in per Capita Income to
US$15,000,” EY India, January 18, 2023, https://www.ey.com/en_in/newsroom/2023/01/ey-projects-india-to-become-a-
us-dollor-26-trillion-economy-by-2047-with-a-six-fold-increase-in-per-capita-income-to-us-dollor-15000. 
3 “India on Track to Surpass Japan’s GDP, Could Overtake Germany by 2027: IMF,” India Today, March 26, 2025,
https://www.indiatoday.in/business/story/india-gdp-growth-105-percent-overtake-japan-fourth-largest-germany-by-
2027-imf-data-2699195-2025-03-26.
4 “How India Could Rise to the World’s Second-Biggest Economy,” Goldman Sachs, July 6, 2023, https://www.gold-
mansachs.com/insights/articles/how-india-could-rise-to-the-worlds-second-biggest-economy.
5 Shyam Saran, “Delhi’s Moment as Voice of Global South,” Asia-Pacific Leadership Network, September 11, 2023,
https://www.apln.network/news/member_activities/delhis-moment-as-voice-of-global-south. 
6 India’s independence in 1947 from nearly two centuries of British colonial rule was accompanied by its traumatic
partition along religious lines. The creation of India and Pakistan set the stage for entrenched and intractable conflicts
in the post colonial subcontinent. For the making of the South Asian partition, see Yasmin Khan, The Great Partition:
The Making of India and Pakistan (Yale University Press, 2007); see also Ian Talbot and Gurharpal Singh. The Partition
of India (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009).
7 For a criticism of the concept, see: C. Raja Mohan, “Is There Such a Thing as a Global South?” Foreign Policy,
December 9, 2023, https://foreignpolicy.com/2023/12/09/global-south-definition-meaning-countries-development/ .
8 Edward Wong, “Trump’s Vision: One World, Three Powers?” New York Times, May 26, 2025, https://www.nytimes.
com/2025/05/26/us/politics/trump-russia-china.html.
9 Tanvi Madan, “Has India Made Friends with China After Modi-Xi Agreement?” Brookings Institution, October 29,
2024.
10 See the Indian press release after Modi’s meeting with Xi at Tianjin at: “Prime Minister’s bilat-
eral meeting with Chinese President Xi Jinping (August 31, 2025),” Ministry of External Affairs:
Government of India, August 31, 2024, https://www.mea.gov.in/press-releases.htm?dtl/40072/
Prime_Ministers_bilateral_meeting_with_Chinese_President_Xi_Jinping_August_31_2025.
11 Lowy Institute, Asia Power Index 2024 (Sydney: Lowy Institute for International Policy. https://power.lowyinsti-
tute.org
12 Chietigj Bajpaee, “Managing a Managed Decline: The Future of Indian-Russian
Relations,” War on the Rocks, February 27, 2024, https://warontherocks.com/2024/02/
managing-a-managed-decline-the-future-of-indian-russian-relations/ .
13 “China-Russia Joint Statement on International Relations Entering a New Era,” Moscow, February 4, 2022,
https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/Portals/10/CASI/documents/Translations/2022-02-04%20China%20Russia%20
joint%20statement%20International%20Relations%20Entering%20a%20New%20Era.pdf>
14 Chietigj Bajpaee, How India’s Democracy Shapes Its Global Role and Relations with the West, Research Paper
(Chatham House, 2024). See also: Christophe Jaffrelot, “A De Facto Ethnic Democracy? Obliterating and Targeting the
Other, Hindu Vigilantes, and the Ethno-State,” in Majoritarian State: How Hindu Nationalism is Changing India, eds.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
Angana P. Chatterji, Thomas Blom Hansen, and Christophe Jaffrelot (Oxford University Press, 2019).
15 “Full Text of Trump’s Speech in Riyadh,” Times of Israel, May 16, 2025, https://www.timesofisrael.com/
full-text-of-trumps-speech-in-riyadh-dawn-of-the-bright-new-day-for-the-great-people-of-the-middle-east/ .
16 “Remarks by Secretary of Defense Pete Hegseth at the 2025 Shangri-La Dialogue in Singapore,” U.S.
Department of War, May 31, 2025, https://www.defense.gov/News/Speeches/Speech/Article/4202494/
remarks-by-secretary-of-defense-pete-hegseth-at-the-2025-shangri-la-dialogue-in/ .
17 C. Raja Mohan, “India’s Regional Security Cooperation: The Nehru Raj Legacy,” ISAS Working Paper, no. 168
(2013), https://www.isas.nus.edu.sg/papers/168-indiaocos-regional-security-cooperation-the-nehru-raj-legacy/ .
18 Many of these themes are covered in David Malone, C. Raja Mohan, and Srinath Raghavan, eds., Oxford
Handbook of Indian Foreign Policy (Oxford University Press, 2016).
19 Dhruva Jaishankar and Tanvi Madan, “How the Quad Can Match the Hype,” Foreign Affairs, April 15, 2021, https://
www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2021-04-15/how-quad-can-match-hype. See also: Leszek Buszynski,
Geopolitics and Strategy: China, the Quad, and the Southeast Asian Pivot (Springer, 2025).
20 Anil Wadhwa, “I2U2: Strategic Prospects and Challenges Amid Geopolitical Shifts,” India’s World, May 14, 2025,
https://indiasworld.in/i2u2-strategic-prospects-and-challenges-amid-geopolitical-shifts/ .
21 See: Tanvi Madan, Fateful Triangle: How China Shaped US-India Relations during the Cold War (Penguin India,
2022).
22 Amit Kumar, “De-Risking India’s Trade with China: Identifying Strategic and Critical Vulnerabilities,” Takshashila
Institution, January 1, 2025, https://static1.squarespace.com/static/618a55c4cb03246776b68559/t/6777794fcdeecb-
2fa7a84bb9/1735883128275/De-risking+India%27s+Trade+with+China+-+Amit+Kumar.pdf. 
23 See: Ross Bassett, The Technological Indian (Harvard University Press, 2019).
24 See: Jayshree Bajoria and Esther Pan, “The U.S.-India Nuclear Deal,” Council on Foreign Relations, November 5,
2010, https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/us-india-nuclear-deal.
25 Rudra Chaudhuri and Konark Bhandari, “The U.S.–India Initiative on Critical and Emerging Technology (iCET)
from 2022 to 2025: Assessment, Learnings, and the Way Forward,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace,
October 23, 2024, https://carnegieendowment.org/research/2024/10/the-us-india-initiative-on-critical-and-emerging-
technology-icet-from-2022-to-2025-assessment-learnings-and-the-way-forward?center=india&lang=en.
26 “First EU-India Trade and Technology Council Focused on Deepening Strategic Engagement on Trade and
Technology,” European Commission, May 16, 2023, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_2728.
27 “Readout of the United States-India-Republic of Korea Trilateral Technology Dialogue,” U.S. Embassy & Consulate
in the Republic of Korea, March 13, 2024, https://kr.usembassy.gov/031324-readout-of-the-united-states-india-re-
public-of-korea-trilateral-technology-dialogue/. See also: “India, US, South Korea Commit to Co-ordinate Measures to
Protect Sensitive Technologies in Region and Globally,” The Print, March 14, 2024, https://theprint.in/world/india-us-
south-korea-commit-to-co-ordinate-measures-to-protect-sensitive-technologies-in-region-and-globally/2000785/ .
28 Ravi Dutta Mishra, “Dual-Use Goods: US Alerts Indian Companies on Export of Defence Tech to
Russia,” The Indian Express, August 20, 2024, https://indianexpress.com/article/business/economy/
dual-use-goods-us-alerts-indian-companies-on-export-of-defence-tech-to-russia-9522738/ .
29 Soumyarendra Barik, “New US AI Export Rule Excludes India from Benefits of Closest Allies. What Could Be
the Impact?” The Indian Express, January 16, 2025, https://indianexpress.com/article/explained/explained-sci-tech/

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
19
India: Leaning to One Side (Cautiously)
us-ai-export-rule-india-9780103/. Note: These rules were scrapped by the Trump administration.
30 “MAGA Split over H-1B Visas Sparks Row among Republicans, Who Stands Where,” The Economic Times,
December 31, 2024, https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/nri/latest-updates/maga-split-over-h-1b-visas-sparks-row-
among-republicans-who-stands-where/articleshow/116786756.cms.
See also: Stephen Collinson, “What the Visa Feud Says About the Coming Trump Administration,” CNN, December 30,
2024, https://edition.cnn.com/2024/12/30/politics/trump-musk-h1b-visa-analysis/index.html.
31 See Surendar Singh and Bibek Ray Chaudhuri. “Assessing India’s Production-Linked Incentives: A Case for
Realignment of Objectives.” Economic and Political Weekly 59, no. 49 (2024): 12–15; available at. https://www.epw.in/
journal/2024/49/commentary/assessing-indias-production-linked-incentives.html; see also PwC India, “India’s PLI
Schemes for Manufacturing Sectors.” PwC Research & Insights, 2024; available at https://www.pwc.in/research-in-
sights/advantage-india/pli-schemes.html
32 Szymon Kardaś, “Power to the People: How the EU’s Energy Transition Can Help Fight the ‘Greenlash,’”
ECFR, October 1, 2024, https://ecfr.eu/publication/power-to-the-people-how-the-eus-energy-transition-
can-help-fight-the-greenlash/#:~:text=The%20focus%20of%20the%20greenlash,as%20a%20“green%20
bully”. 
33 David Dodwell, “Trump’s ‘Drill, Baby, Drill’ Vision Adds to the Global Climate Nightmare,” South
China Morning Post, February 7, 2025, https://www.scmp.com/opinion/world-opinion/article/3297674/
trumps-drill-baby-drill-vision-adds-global-climate-nightmare.
34 Soumyarendra Barik and Ravi Dutta Mishra, “Govt Looks at Options as Business Mounts Pressure for China
Dealings Again,” The Indian Express, October 23, 2024, https://indianexpress.com/article/india/govt-looks-at-op-
tions-as-business-mounts-pressure-for-china-dealings-again-9633750/. See also: Vikas Dhoot, “Industry for Rethink
on Chinese FDI Curbs, High Import Tariffs,” The Hindu, June 23, 2024, https://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/
industry-for-rethink-on-chinese-fdi-curbs-high-import-tariffs/article68324737.ece.
35 “India’s stand at COP 26,” Government of India, Press Information Bureau, February 3, 2022, https://www.pib.gov.
in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1795071.
36 David Dalton, “India Pushes Ahead with Plans to Open Up Nuclear Sector,
Deploy More Reactors,” NucNet, February 4, 2025, https://www.nucnet.org/news/
india-pushes-ahead-with-plans-to-open-up-nuclear-sector-deploy-more-reactors-2-2-2025.
37 Cliff Kupchan, “6 Swing States Will Decide the Future of Geopolitics,” Foreign Policy, June 6, 2023, https://for-
eignpolicy.com/2023/06/06/geopolitics-global-south-middle-powers-swing-states-india-brazil-turkey-indonesia-sau-
di-arabia-south-africa/ .
38 Manoj Joshi, “Comprehensive National Power,” Observer Research Foundation, May 8, 2017, https://www.orfon-
line.org/research/comprehensive-national-power.
