
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
PAPER
MAY 2018
POLICY ANALYSIS EXERCISE
Debtbook
Diplomacy
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its
Newfound Economic Influence and the
Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
Sam Parker
Master in Public Policy Candidate, Harvard Kennedy School
Gabrielle Chefitz
Master in Public Policy Candidate, Harvard Kennedy School

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
www.belfercenter.org
Statements and views expressed in this report are solely those of the authors and do not imply
endorsement by Harvard University, the Harvard Kennedy School, or the Belfer Center for Science
and International Affairs.
This paper was completed as a Harvard Kennedy School Policy Analysis Exercise, a yearlong
project for second-year Master in Public Policy candidates to work with real-world clients in
crafting and presenting timely policy recommendations.
Design & layout by Andrew Facini
Cover photo: Container ships at Y angshan port, Shanghai, March 29, 2018. (AP)
Copyright 2018, President and Fellows of Harvard College
Printed in the United States of America

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
POLICY ANALYSIS EXERCISE
PAPER
MARCH 2018
Debtbook
Diplomacy
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its
Newfound Economic Influence and the
Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
Sam Parker
Master in Public Policy Candidate, Harvard Kennedy School
Gabrielle Chefitz
Master in Public Policy Candidate, Harvard Kennedy School

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
ii
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
About the Authors
Sam Parker is a Master in Public Policy candidate at Harvard Kennedy
School. Sam previously served as the Special Assistant to the Assistant
Secretary for Public Affairs at the Department of Homeland Security.
As an academic fellow at U.S. Pacific Command, he wrote a report on
anticipating and countering Chinese efforts to displace U.S. influence in
South Asia and Oceania.
Gabrielle Chefitz is a Master in Public Policy candidate at Harvard
Kennedy School. Gabrielle previously served as a Research Assistant at
the Washington Institute for Near East Policy and worked for the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
iii
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Table of Contents
1. Executive Summary .......................................................................1
2. Introduction .................................................................................. 3
3. Debtbook Diplomacy and China’s Geoeconomic T oolkit ..........6
Debtbook in Action: Anatomy of a Deal .....................................................................9
4. U.S. Interests at Stake .................................................................11
5. Criteria for Assessing Strategic Vulnerabilities ........................13
6. Country Vulnerability Assessment ............................................15
7 . Strategic Outlook ....................................................................... 16
Debtbook West/String of Pearls ................................................................................17
Debtbook South/SCS Influence .................................................................................18
Debtbook East/Second Island Chain and Beyond ...................................................19
8. Case Study Country Analysis .....................................................21
8.1 Debtbook West: String of Pearls ....................................................................21
8.2 Debtbook South: ASEAN and Southeast Asia Maritime Influence .............36
8.3 Debtbook East: The Second Island Chain and Beyond ................................41
9. Recommendations .....................................................................46

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
1
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
1. Executive Summary
Over the past decade, China has extended hundreds of billions of
dollars in loans to countries that often can’t afford to repay them.
Through a process the authors have termed “debtbook diplomacy, ”
China has begun to leverage this accumulated debt to achieve its stra-
tegic aims.
Three primary strategic goals the authors believe China could target
with this technique are: filling out a “String of Pearls” to solve its
“Malacca Dilemma” and project power across vital South Asian trad-
ing routes; undermining and fracturing the U.S.-led regional coalition
contesting Beijing’s South China Sea (SCS) claims; and enabling the
People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) to push through the “Second
Island Chain” into the blue-water Pacific.
The goal of this report is to analyze the future of debtbook diplomacy:
which countries are vulnerable to Chinese coercion; how U.S. strategic
interests will be impacted; and how U.S. policymakers can mitigate the
effects of this strategy.
This paper identifies 16 potential targets of China’s debtbook diplomacy,
grouped into three primary categories based on the three strategic goals
outlined above: Debtbook West/String of Pearls; Debtbook South/SCS
Influence; and Debtbook East/Second Island Chain and Beyond.
For Debtbook West, Pakistan, Djibouti, Myanmar, and Sri Lanka
are identified as priority concerns: countries that have already ceded
either a key port or military base to China, are continuing to sink
deeper into its debt trap, and where U.S. interests are at stake.
In the second category, Debtbook South, no single country con-
stitutes an immediate primary concern, given a lack of individual
diplomatic clout, favorable relations with U.S., and/or relatively
stable debt situations. However, the cumulative effects of Chinese
debt holdings in Cambodia, Laos and the Philippines may give
China a proxy veto in ASEAN, depriving the U.S. of regional support

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
2
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
to contest Chinese SCS claims as China challenges the legitimacy of the
U.S.-led, rules-based international order.
Finally, in the third category, Debtbook East, the Compact of Free Associa-
tion (COFA) states pose the most immediate challenge, with the expiration
of Compact funding threatening to drive these countries into China’s orbit.
This would threaten the unfettered basing access and right of strategic
denial the U.S. has enjoyed since World War II, and help the Chinese navy
extend its reach past the First Island Chain into the blue-water Pacific.
For more than a half-century, U.S. interests in Asia have been underpinned
by an effective naval monopoly over the Strait of Malacca and other key
regional trading routes, a united coalition of South Asian partners, and
an unfettered and exclusive presence in the Second Island Chain to proj-
ect power and contain China’s navy. Debtbook diplomacy may play an
important role in China’s multifaceted campaign to erode these strategic
advantages and shift the balance of power in Asia.
To help the U.S. and its allies offset these consequences, this report pro-
poses three sets of U.S. government recommendations for targeting and
streamlining investment, strengthening alliances, and managing debt
burdens. Targeting and streamlining investment should include contin-
ued efforts to coordinate U.S. private-public partnerships overseas by
consolidating the Overseas Private Investment Corporation and USAID’s
Development Credit Authority into a single entity, to recruit allies into
joint investment ventures, and to focus limited resources in areas of com-
parative advantage like digital infrastructure. To strengthen alliances,
the U.S. should bolster India’s role as a regional leader and and revitalize
Quad- the loose U.S.-India-Japan-Australia network of maritime Asian
democratic powers- by clarifying its mission as a rules-based collective
and enhancing economic and maritime security cooperation amongst its
members. To manage debt burdens, the U.S. should consider leveraging
tariff relief and support for the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
(AIIB) as bargaining chips to entice China into becoming a more-respon-
sible creditor—through initiatives like the Paris Club and G20’s Sustainable
Financing Agenda—and provide support for debt assistance and best-prac-
tice facilities hosted by multilateral institutions like The World Bank.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
3
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Beyond these tactical steps, the U.S. will need to answer difficult strategic
questions about the shifting regional balance of power, prioritizing its truly
vital interests and coordinating its finite resources to meet the most press-
ing challenges posed by debtbook diplomacy.
2. Introduction
In its 2018 National Defense Strategy, the U.S. warned that China is lever-
aging “predatory economics” as a means to achieve both regional and
global strategic ends.1 One such type of predatory economics is what the
authors have termed “debtbook diplomacy, ” the coercive leveraging of debt
to acquire strategic assets or political influence over debtor nations.
Debtbook diplomacy is by itself neither an economic tool nor a strategic
end. Rather, it is an increasingly valuable technique deployed by China to
leverage accumulated debt to advance its existing strategic goals. Three
strategic targets for debtbook diplomacy would be: filling out a “String of
Pearls” to project power across vital South Asian trading routes; under-
mining U.S.-led regional opposition to Beijing’s contested South China Sea
claims; and supporting the PLAN’s efforts to break out of the First Island
Chain into the blue-water Pacific.
The U.S. government is beginning to acknowledge the power of debtbook
diplomacy as a new instrument in China’s geo-economic arsenal. In March
2018, then-Secretary of State Rex Tillerson warned that Chinese economic
diplomacy “encourages dependency using opaque contracts, predatory
loan practices, and corrupt deals that mire nations in debt and undercut
their sovereignty, denying them their long-term, self-sustaining growth. ”2
This was the case in Sri Lanka, where China converted large debt holdings,
brought about by opaque lending practices and questionable commer-
cial viability, into an 85 percent stake in a major port in Hambantota on
1 U.S. Department of Defense. Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of The United States
of America, 19 Jan. 2018.
2 Tillerson, Rex W. “U.S.-Africa Relations: A New Framework. ” 6 March 2018, George Mason University,
Fairfax, VA.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
4
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
a 99-year lease. This has sparked fears that Hambantota could one day
become a Chinese naval hub, and sent a worrying signal to other debt-
strapped developing nations.
Hambantota also alarmed U.S. and Indian security experts. In March, U.S.
Pacific Fleet Commander Admiral Scott Swift addressed this new appli-
cation of economic power, warning that China would “increase debt in a
given country and then turn around and ask for something in return that
was not part of the original negotiation. ”3
China has, thus far, employed rather consistent methods to accrue and
exert its debt leverage, making it possible to delineate different stages of
the debtbook diplomacy cycle and identify countries that may follow Sri
Lanka’s trajectory. First, there is the investment stage. China has greatly
expanded its infrastructure investments under its signature Belt and Road
Initiative (BRI). Working primarily through the China Development
Bank and Export-Import (EXIM) Bank of China—which together hold
more assets than the combined sum of all Western-backed multilateral
development banks4—China is able to provide extended grace periods
and longer-term loans than other institutions. These terms are partic-
ularly appealing to economically weaker countries less able to access
international financing and to corrupt or authoritarian leaders looking
for political legitimacy and personal financial gain. These politicians have
tended to sign opaque contracting and financing arrangements on projects
of questionable economic viability knowing they will be out of office long
before the bill comes due.
The second phase is construction and operation. Chinese projects have a
reputation for running over budget, with poor construction quality and
lax safety standards. Once completed, many of these projects have yielded
underwhelming returns, which are mostly routed back to China, making
debt repayment all the more challenging. In countries such as Sri Lanka
and Myanmar, public protests have erupted over projects prioritizing
Chinese interests, failing to create local jobs, worsening environmental
conditions, exacerbating corruption or compromising state sovereignty. In
3 Moriyasu, Ken. “China’s Economic Coercion Worries Retiring US Navy Commander. ” Nikkei Asian
Review, 7 Mar. 2018.
4 “China Goes Global with Development Banks. ” Bretton Woods Observer. 5 April 2016.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
5
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
certain cases, this public pressure has led governments to freeze or cancel
Chinese contracts.
The final phase is debt collection. When countries prove unable to pay
back their debts, China has already and is likely to continue to offer debt
forgiveness in exchange for both political influence and strategic equities.
As analyst Xiaochen Su describes “by ensuring that these debts are paid
in some form or the other, whether it is economic concessions, political
agreements, or a combination of both, China may in the long term formu-
late a new kind of diplomatic relationships with these foreign countries. ”5
Of course, this strategy carries costs and risks for China. Dr. Joel Wuth-
now of the Institute for National Strategic Studies cautions that continued
debt forgiveness could put “a strain on [Chinese] government coffers and
underscore the poor decision-making that contributed to non-performing
BRI loans. ”6 These non-performing loans could exacerbate China’s growing
domestic debt burden, which has risen to from 141 to 256 percent of its
GDP since 2008.7 In the short run, however, these long-term risks are likely
to be overlooked given the substantial leverage China gains by holding bil-
lions of dollars in sovereign debt.
This paper will seek to identify countries at various stages of the debtbook
diplomacy cycle in order to understand which debtor nations may become
vulnerable to this kind of pressure; what assets, resources or influence
Beijing is likely to target; which cases will be most consequential for Amer-
ican strategic interests; and, finally, how the United States and its allies can
address this challenge.
5 Su, Xiaochen. “Why Chinese Infrastructure Loans in Africa Represent a Brand-New T ype of Neoco-
lonialism. ” The Diplomat. 9 June 2017 .
6 United States.Cong. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission. Hearing on China’s
Belt and Road Initiative: Five Y ears Later. 25 Jan. 2018. (Statement of Dr. Joel Wuthnow, Research
Fellow, Center for the Study of Chinese Military Affairs, U.S. National Defense University).
7 Orlik, T om, et al. “Sizing Up China’s Debt Bubble: Bloomberg Economics. ” Bloomberg Markets. 8
Feb. 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
6
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
3. Debtbook Diplomacy and
China’s Geoeconomic Toolkit
“How do you deal toughly with your banker?”
 —then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton8
China is aggressively seeking to deploy its newfound economic power to
advance its national interests. In their 2016 book, War by Other Means: Geoeco-
nomics and Statecraft, Robert Blackwill and Jennifer Harris argue that China
“is the world’s leading practitioner of geo-economics, but it has also been per-
haps the major factor in returning regional or global power projection back to
an importantly economic (as opposed to political-military) exercise. ”9
Beijing has accumulated a broad portfolio of economic instruments—
trade, loans, investment, tourism, etc.—and has demonstrated a willingness
to use them coercively to achieve its strategic ends of securing energy
supplies, increasing power projection capabilities, challenging the U.S.-led
international order, and displacing the U.S. as a regional hegemon.
China’s portfolio of economic instruments continues to broaden and deepen.
China’s GDP (in PPP) more-than tripled in the decade leading up to 2014
when it surpassed the U.S. as the world’s largest economy.10 It overtook
the U.S. as the world’s largest trading nation in 2013, and—while the two
countries have competed for that title over the past several years— it has
expanded its dominance over the U.S. in regional trade.11 In 2016, Chinese
tourists spent $260 billion overseas, more than double the total of any other
country.12 And Xi Jinping has promised more than $1 trillion in loans and
investment for his Belt and Road initiative, which will stretch to nearly 70
countries. As developing countries deepen their reliance on Chinese goods
and infrastructure funding, this portfolio will only continue to deepen.
8 MacAskill, Ewen. “WikiLeaks: Hillary Clinton’s Question: How Can We Stand up to Beijing?” The
Guardian, 4 Dec. 2010.
9 Blackwill, Robert D., and Jennifer M. Harris. War by Other Means. Harvard University Press, 2016.
10 Allison, Graham. “The Thucydides T rap: Are the US and China headed for war?. ” The Atlantic 24
(2015).
11 Hara, Katsuhiko, and Issaku Harada. “US Overtook China as T op T rading Nation in 2016. ” Nikkei
Asian Review, 13 April 2017
12 Chen, T racy. Chinese T ourists Are Reshaping World Economy. Bloomberg, 29 Jan. 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
7
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
China’s political and economic structure provides it with unique advan-
tages for directing these growing economic resources towards a national
geo-economic strategy. Companies in traditional market economies like
the U.S. operate independently of government direction, have limited
capacity to absorb debt, and concern themselves solely with profitability
and their bottom line. But China’s state-owned enterprise (SOE) system
offers effective government guarantees for Communist Party-led compa-
nies to take on massive debts and operate at losses that would bankrupt
independent companies.13 China Railway Corporation, for example, car-
ries nearly $600 billion in debt but survives because the Party believes the
national benefits its railways provide justify perennial financial losses.14 In
the context of debtbook diplomacy, this system allows SOEs to go where
purely profit-motivated companies will not, providing government-backed
financing for major international infrastructure projects, where strategic
collateral can justify questionable financial viability.
13 Kynge, James, et al. “China’s Railway Diplomacy Hits the Buffers. ” Financial Times, 17 July 2017 .
14 Ibid.
Australia
US $35.90B
CN $112.25B
Brunei
US $0.15B
CN $1.54B
Philippines
US $18.11B
CN $56.37B
Vietnam
US $45.06B
CN $106.67B
New Zealand
US $7 .91B
CN $12.61B
Indonesia
US $26.70B
CN $59.27B
Malaysia
US $46.12B
CN $113.40B
Singapore
US $46.89B
CN $118.66B
Thailand
US $39.84B
CN $92.92B
Japan
US $193.60B
CN $329.08B
South Korea
US $115.33B
CN $305.13B
Asia’s Trade with
US vs. China
Trade volume, 2015
Source: IMF

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
8
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
Already, Beijing has demonstrated a willingness to creatively and coercively
leverage every instrument in its economic portfolio, from banning Chinese
tour groups from visiting South Korea to protest THAAD deployment,
to squeezing Norwegian salmon exports after a Chinese dissident was
awarded a Nobel Prize.15 Carnegie Endowment’s Evan Feigenbaum cate-
gorizes Beijing’s use of economic leverage into five types: passive, active,
exclusionary, coercive, and latent.16
Passive leverage relies largely on China’s size and market power, counting
on foreign entities with a stake in China’s economy to pressure their home
governments to pursue friendly relations with China. Active leverage
involves a more direct role, using that economic power or BRI investment
to push countries into adopting China-friendly conditions or political
stances. Exclusionary leverage wields access to China’s domestic market
as a cudgel, recently demonstrated by Beijing effectively expelling South
Korean companies to protest THAAD deployment. Coercive leverage is
targeted active leverage imposing discrete punishments for offenses, like
throwing the whole toolbox at countries that host the Dalai Lama to dis-
courage others from considering it. Finally, Feigenbaum categorizes latent
leverage as the coercive cards China holds but has chosen not to play yet,
like its broad economic sway over North Korea.
Within this typology, debtbook diplomacy sits mostly at the transition
from passive to active leverage, depending on whether the “ask” is implicit
or explicit. Some countries deeply indebted to China may recognize their
economies’ dependence on Beijing’s goodwill and debt forgiveness, and
move proactively to adopt China-friendly policies. Laos or Cambodia
proactively supporting China’s SCS claims without China applying direct
pressure (as far as we know) would fall under this category. But China’s
most consequential and controversial gains from debtbook diplomacy will
likely result from Beijing’s use of active leverage to pry strategic equities
from indebted countries.
15 Feigenbaum, Evan A. “Is Coercion the New Normal in China’s Economic Statecraft?” Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace, 25 July 2017 .
16 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
9
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Debtbook in Action: Anatomy of a Deal
It can be tempting to compare some of China’s troubling, debt-intensive
projects to a predatory student or car loan: a bank offering a low-income
worker a high-interest loan to buy a car he can’t afford, expecting to end up
repossessing the car when the lessee defaults. But this analogy doesn’t quite
fit, as no common commercial loan example stretches beyond a pure profit
motive to capture the strategic dynamics at play.
The easiest way to explain the dynamics of debtbook diplomacy is to walk
through what has become the case study example. The construction and
transfer of Sri Lanka’s Magampura Mahinda Rajapaksa Port in Hamban-
tota serve as a template both to understand the financial dynamics of these
deals and to identify potential future “Hambantotas” that could be lever-
aged by China.
China stepped into Hambantota in 2007, during the final years of a brutal
Sri Lankan civil war that cut the country off from diplomatic allies and
financiers. Sri Lanka had reached out to Japan, India, the IMF , the World
Bank, and the Asia Development Bank to fund the construction of a major
port in the undeveloped backwater of Hambantota (the hometown of Pres-
ident Rajapaksa), but was denied funding amidst concerns about human
rights and commercial viability.17
China then offered to provide the funding, not as foreign direct invest-
ment, but as a Sri Lankan project financed by Chinese loans and built by
a Chinese company—with Sri Lanka’s government on the hook for the
project’s debt obligations.18 The original price tag was only $361 million
in near-market-rate loans, but the port’s failure to generate revenue after
opening in 2010 trapped Sri Lanka into seeking additional funding in the
hopes of achieving commercial viability.19 From 2009-2014, Sri Lanka
tapped China for an additional $1.9 billion in loans to upgrade the port
17 Freymann, Eyck. “The Invention of the New Silk Road: Mapping Xi Jinping’s Strategic Vision. ” Har-
vard Kennedy School Working Paper, 2018.
18 Ibid.
19 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
10
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
and build a nearby airport (now infamous as “the world’s emptiest”) and
economic zone.20 The port has still yet to generate a profit.21
By 2017, with Sri Lanka owing more than $8 billion to Chinese-controlled
firms, the Sri Lankan government handed over the port to China on a
99-year lease, granting a Chinese-led joint venture an 85 percent stake
in an opaque and contentious deal valued at $1.1 billion.22 Sri Lanka’s
parliament also granted the joint venture tax concessions for further devel-
opment of the port.23
The port had become a debt trap. Once Sri Lanka made the initial commit-
ment, the sunk cost and need to generate profit to pay off the original loans
drove it to take out additional loans, a cycle that repeated itself until it gave
up the port in a debt-for-equity swap.
Each of these debtbook cases is unique, but the template fits—at various
stages—for a number of countries analyzed in this report. The goal of this
analysis is to determine what projects could become the next Hambantota,
and how they might impact U.S. strategic interests.
20 Ibid.
21 Ibid.
22 Ibid.
23 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
11
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
4. U.S. Interests at Stake
U.S.-China geo-economic competition is not zero-sum, nor is Chinese
infrastructure investment in developing countries inherently against U.S.
or global interests. China’s debtbook diplomacy becomes cause for con-
cern when it A) creates leverage that China can use to achieve strategic
aims counter to U.S. interests and/or B) saddles a host country, where the
U.S. has strategic interests, with unsustainable debt that undermines the
country’s domestic stability. Analyzing why this issue matters for the U.S.
and where it matters most is an important first step in directing limited
U.S. resources and bandwidth towards protecting the most important U.S.
national security interests at stake.
1. Maintain Advantageous Strategic Balance vis-a-vis China: China’s
expanding regional influence and access to South Asian and Pacific
Island ports has the long-term potential to alter the regional
balance of power away from effective U.S. naval dominance. A
successful String of Pearls strategy could expand Chinese power
projection capabilities in South Asia and around the Strait of
Malacca, while engagement with the Pacific Island Countries
(PICs) could erode the U.S. ’ ability to contain China’s navy to the
First Island Chain. U.S. power projection capabilities will remain
well ahead of China’s for the foreseeable future, but China’s acqui-
sition of strategic infrastructure overseas could help it narrow the
gap.
2. Prevent China from diminishing U.S. leverage with key partners:
China’s loans undermine the U.S. ’ ability to use its own economic
assistance to promote U.S. security objectives. This assistance has
provided the U.S. a powerful means to advance its nuclear security
and counterterrorism interests in Pakistan. It has also underwritten
the U.S. ’ relationship with the PICs. If these countries were to turn
to China, it could undermine U.S. strategic denial and exclusive
basing rights, eroding U.S. advantage in any future U.S.-China
conflict.
3. Ensure viability and stability of trade routes and energy markets: A
significant driver of China’s debtbook diplomacy strategy is its need

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
12
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
to solve its “Malacca Dilemma, ” which China knows would be its
Achilles Heel in the event of a conflict with India or the U.S. Estab-
lishing alternative routes for its energy imports and expanding its
naval footprint could make China more willing and able to interfere
with this critical artery in the event of a conflict, which would have
wide-reaching implications for global markets.
4. Promote U.S.-India relations: When it comes to China, U.S. and
Indian strategic interests are increasingly aligned. China’s recent
port acquisitions in Sri Lanka and Pakistan have stoked India’s fears
of encirclement, and after decades of non-alignment, New Dehli is
warming to a closer strategic partnership with the U.S. In the long
run, no Asian country will play a larger role than India in checking
Chinese continental ambition. Therefore, a strong partnership will
be crucial to countering debtbook diplomacy and implementing
the U.S. ’ Indo-Pacific strategy more broadly.
5. Encourage acceptance and legitimacy of international rule of law:
The legitimacy of international law and peaceful dispute resolution
are key pillars of the rules-based international order. China’s disre-
gard for the UN tribunal ruling on its SCS claims threatens to erode
that legitimacy. Despite losing its case, Beijing is attempting to use
debt to buy diplomatic support for its claims and acquiescence to
its militarization of disputed territories. A successful campaign
to splinter the U.S.-led coalition supporting the UNCLOS ruling
would set a worrisome precedent for future disputes.
6. Discourage massive human rights violations: China’s offer of
conditions-free financing offers an attractive funding alternative
to countries isolated by the international community. This practice
undercuts the U.S. ’ ability to use its own economic and diplomatic
leverage to promote human rights and good governance abroad,
insulating countries like Myanmar from international pressure.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
13
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
5. Criteria for Assessing
Strategic Vulnerabilities
To assess the likelihood and effectiveness of China’s debtbook diplomacy
strategy and the implications for U.S. interests, this report examines where
Chinese efforts could: provide China with the greatest strategic benefit; sig-
nificantly undermine U.S. interests (sometimes, but not always, a zero-sum
game); be enabled by economic largesse or debt leverage; appear to already
be underway; or be facilitated by disrupted or weak U.S. relations with the
target country.
These criteria are separated into five primary categories:
1. Strategic Desirability for China
 ■ Strategic location (e.g. Strait of Malacca; Second Island
Chain).
 ■ Potential port or base/airfield access, or valuable natural
resources.
 ■ Value as a diplomatic ally (e.g. ASEAN voting rights).
2. Strategic Value for U.S.
 ■ Location near key trade routes or military bases.
 ■ Support for U.S. diplomatic initiatives and military opera-
tions in the region.
 ■ Role in allied coalitions (e.g. ASEAN).
3. Long-Term Debt Trends
 ■ Total existing debt, maturity schedule, ability to pay, and
overall financial health.
 ■ Loans owed specifically to China and Chinese-controlled
companies.
 ■ Magnitude and financial viability of announced Belt and
Road Projects.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
14
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
4. Debtbook Progression
 ■ Intended project announced, loan agreement signed,
construction, operation, debt-for-equity or other strategic
consideration.
5. Balance of Relations
 ■ Treaties, access allowed, guaranteed aid, military
cooperation.
 ■ UN voting patterns, Taiwan recognition.
 ■ Level of satisfaction with U.S. partnership vs. relations with
China.
 ■ Identifiable foreign policy reevaluation or inflection points
(e. g. end of Compact of Free Association funding).

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
15
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
6. Country Vulnerability
Assessment
The table below reflects the authors’ scoring of each country in the analy-
sis based on the given criteria. Scores range from 1 (lowest concern) to 5
(highest).
The scores are not scientific and the weighted average generated for “overall
concern” is not a perfect representation of the authors’ assessment of each
country. Each case study is analyzed in depth in section VIII, but these
scores and rankings are designed to offer a high-level, comparative over-
view of debtbook risk.
Country Vulnerability Assessment
Country Desirability
for PRC
Value for
U.S.
Long-term
Debt Trends
Debtbook
Progression
Balance of
Relations
Overall
Concern
Debtbook West / String of Pearls
Pakistan 3.5 5 4.5 4 4.5 4.3
Djibouti 3 4 5 5 2.5 3.9
Sri Lanka 4 2.5 4 4.5 4 3.8
Malaysia 5 3 2 3 4 3.4
Myanmar 4 3 3 3 4 3.4
Thailand 3 2.5 2 1 2 2.1
Kenya 2 2 2 1.5 2.5 2
Debtbook South / SCS Influence
Laos 3 2.5 5 3 3.5 3.4
Cambodia 3 2.5 3.5 2 5 3.2
Philippines 3 3 4 2 3 3
Debtbook East / Second Island Chain and Beyond
COFA States 4 4 4.5 2.5 3 3.6
Tonga 2 2 5 3 3 3
Vanuatu 3 2 3 2 4 2.8
PNG 2.5 1.5 3 1.5 3 2.3

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
16
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
7. Strategic Outlook
This report analyzes 16 countries that meet the criteria for potential targets
of Chinese debtbook diplomacy. This list is not exhaustive, but rather rep-
resents key cases in three strategically important sub-regions of the Asia
Pacific.
In some countries, the debtbook process is at an advanced stage, with
China having already secured control of a strategic asset (Sri Lanka/Dji-
bouti); in others, China has amassed debt leverage but not yet utilized it
(Thailand/PNG); and, finally, some countries are currently in stable debt
situations, but the long-term economic trends point to a future accumula-
tion of Chinese debt influence that might still be avoided (COFA states/
Philippines).
The authors have grouped these countries into three primary categories
based on China’s aforementioned strategic goals: Debtbook West/String of
Pearls; Debtbook South/SCS Influence; and Debtbook East/Second Island
Chain and Beyond.
BANGLADESH
CHINA
EGYPT
GREECE
INDONESIA
INDIA
BAY OF
BENGAL
INDIAN OCEAN
ARABIAN SEA
SOUTH
CHINA
SEA
IRAN
KENYA
CAMBODIA
LAO PDR
SRI LANKA
MYANMAR
MALAYSIA
PAKISTAN
PHILIPPINES
SAUDI ARABIA
SUDAN THAILAND
TURKEY
DJIBOUTI
Hong Kong
Dhaka
Hambantota
Kuala
Lumpur
Kuantan
Sihanoukville
Kyaukpyu
Chittagong
Karachi
Gwadar
Port Sudan
Malé
China’s Maritime Silk Road Existing ports
Planned ports or
under construction
“String of Pearls” route
Maritime Silk Road
Source: Merics / CNN

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
17
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Debtbook West/String of Pearls
This category covers seven South Asian and African countries where China
could use debtbook diplomacy to fill out its String of Pearls and solve its
Malacca Dilemma, eventually providing China’s navy strategic footholds to
reach into the Indian Ocean and beyond to either secure or disrupt Asia’s
critical trading arteries. The Pentagon estimates that more than 80% of
Chinese oil imports pass through the Strait of Malacca, and since World
War II the U.S. Navy has had an effective monopoly to protect and—if
necessary—cut off trade through this strategic chokepoint.24 A significant
Chinese naval footprint in the Indian Ocean would challenge this control,
potentially eroding a massive advantage in the case of potential U.S./China
conflict. Even without U.S. involvement, Chinese conflict with a regional
neighbor resulting in Chinese interference with shipping routes could still
significantly damage U.S. trade and global markets.
24 Bender, Jeremy, and Armin Rosen. “This Pentagon Map Shows What’s Really Driving China’s Mili-
tary and Diplomatic Strategy. ” Business Insider, 13 May 2015.
BANGLADESH CHINA
INDONESIA
CAMBODIA
VIETNAM
TAIWAN
LAO PDR
BRUNEI
MYANMAR
MALAYSIA
PHILIPPINES
THAILAND
SOUTH
CHINA
SEA
Paracel Is.
Spratley Is.
Natuna Is.
Scarborough
Shoal
Philippines
Vietnam
Malaysia
Brunei
Indonesia
China’s “nine-dash line”
Exclusive Economic Zone Claims
Source: The Economist
Competition in the
South China Sea

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
18
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
In this category, Pakistan, Djibouti, Myanmar, and Sri Lanka are identified
as priority concerns: countries that have already ceded either a key port or
military base to China, are continuing to sink deeper into its debt trap and
where U.S. interests are at stake. Malaysia is not as far along in the debt-
book cycle, but its strategic location, economic ties to China, and rapidly
accumulating loan burden create causes for concern. For now, Thailand
and Kenya are less worrisome concerns but should be monitored as poten-
tial targets for a Chinese naval base or the development of a discussed
canal through Thailand.
Debtbook South/SCS Influence
 China is continuing its construction on disputed SCS territories in defi-
ance of UN rulings. While the U.S. firmly opposes its claims, China’s
strategy is to use construction to change the facts on the ground while
leveraging economic influence to silence other claimants and stifle regional
opposition.
Laos and Cambodia have become so dependent on Chinese trade and
burdened by mounting debt obligations that they’ve proven willing to act
as Beijing’s proxies in ASEAN, blocking resolutions, reaching external set-
tlements (despite not being SCS claimants), and undermining the bloc’s
collective exercise of influence. Philippine President Duterte is negotiating
with Beijing for massive infrastructure investments that his own Vice Pres-
ident has warned could sink it firmly in China’s debt trap, and has recently
ordered his military to stop construction on a disputed reef.25 In an Asia
without a U.S.-led Trans-Pacific Partnership, ASEAN provides the U.S.
with valuable coalitional support to counter China’s expansion. As China
sinks the debt hook deeper into these ASEAN members, they will continue
to weaken the organization’s cohesion and potentially isolate the U.S. on
the South China Sea and other regional issues.
25 Villamor, Felipe. “Philippines Halts Work in South China Sea, in Bid to Appease Beijing. ” The New
Y ork Times, 8 Nov. 2017 .

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
19
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Debtbook East/Second Island
Chain and Beyond
In the 1980s, PLAN commander Admiral Liu Huaqing set “command
of the sea out to the First Island Chain” as the initial goal for moderniz-
ing China’s navy.26 Historically, this First Island Chain—stretching from
South Korea down past Taiwan and the Philippines to Malaysia—has
constituted a U.S.-dominated outer barrier for significant Chinese naval
presence. But as China’s navy continues to modernize, Australian Strategic
Policy Institute’s Eli Huang writes that “China’s maritime strategy is clearly
moving beyond the traditional ‘island chain’ boundary, ” potentially creat-
ing a “more contested security outlook for Taiwan” among other concerns
regarding Chinese power projection.27
26 Huang, Eli. “China’s PLAN-Breaking out to Blue Waters. ” The Strategist, Australian Strategic Policy
Institute, 17 May 2017 .
27 Ibid
CHINA
INDONESIA
JAPAN
CAMBODIA
VIETNAM
TAIWAN
LAO PDR
BRUNEI
MYANMAR
MALAYSIA
PHILIPPINES
PAPUA
NEW
GUINEA
THAILAND
Guam
Zhanjiang
Ningbo
Qingdao
Sasebo
Okinawa
YokosukaChinhae
SOUTH
CHINA
SEA
EAST
CHINA
SEA
PACIFIC OCEANFIRST ISLAND
CHAIN
SECOND ISLAND
CHAIN
Chinese ﬂeet headquarters
Major American navy bases
Source: IISS / The Economist

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
20
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
U.S. Pacific Command planners express concern that a permanent Chinese
presence in the Second Island Chain could offer the PLAN a springboard
past the U.S.-dominated first chain into the Pacific, potentially compro-
mising U.S. sea lines of communication and the security of U.S. bases on
Guam and in the Marianas.
The Compact of Free Association states (Micronesia, Palau, and the Mar-
shall Islands) have offered the U.S. military unfettered basing access and
the right of strategic denial since World War II. But the U.S. funding that
buys this support is set to expire in 2023, potentially crippling these econ-
omies just as China dramatically increases its trade and investment. As of
now, Tonga and Vanuatu do not have strategic assets of significant concern
to the U.S but are already deeply in debt to China and some experts suggest
they have the potential to become China’s bridge to South America. Papua
New Guinea has historically been in Australia’s orbit and is not yet a signif-
icant concern, but it has been rapidly taking on Chinese loans it can’t afford
to pay and offers a strategic location in addition to significant LNG and
resource deposits.
The following section will explore each of these countries and sections in
detail.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
21
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
8. Case Study Country Analysis
8.1 Debtbook West: String of Pearls
Country Desirability
for PRC
Value for
U.S.
Long-term
Debt Trends
Debtbook
Progression
Balance of
Relations
Overall
Concern
Debtbook West: String of Pearls
Pakistan 3.5 5 4.5 4 4.5 4.3
Djibouti 3 4 5 5 2.5 3.9
Sri Lanka 4 2.5 4 4.5 4 3.8
Malaysia 5 3 2 3 4 3.4
Myanmar 4 3 3 3 4 3.4
Thailand 3 2.5 2 1 2 2.1
Kenya 2 2 2 1.5 2.5 2
South Asia/Indian Ocean Region
In the Indian Ocean region, debtbook diplomacy provides China the eco-
nomic leverage to achieve several geopolitical goals, including filling out
its String of Pearls, addressing its Malacca Dilemma and projecting power
over significant South Asian trading routes. By ramping up investment
in commercial ports with dual-use potential, China is well positioned to
challenge U.S. regional interests and traditional spheres of U.S. and Indian
influence. Sri Lanka’s Hambantota port and Pakistan’s Gwadar port provide
a blueprint of China’s tactics but also a warning to other regional countries,
such as Malaysia, Thailand, and Myanmar, which are teetering on the edge
of the debt trap. In all five of these cases, China has been able to exploit a
vacuum created by deteriorating relations with the U.S. and/or the West
and provide a no-strings-attached funding alternative. This approach has
undermined the potency of U.S. human rights and democracy promotion
while undercutting U.S. strategic leverage in South Asia and Africa.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
22
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka offers one of the clearest and most advanced examples of debt-
book diplomacy in action. A decade ago, when China began to offer
massive loans for infrastructure projects, Sri Lanka met all of what we now
recognize as the warning criteria for debtbook diplomacy: a poor coun-
try desperate for investment and infrastructure development; shunned by
the international community over its civil war; and sitting in a strategic
location astride the Indian Ocean trade routes that China depends on. Eco-
nomic need, diplomatic isolation, and valuable assets combined to make
Sri Lanka a prime target.
Beijing has offered nearly $15 billion in loans, including more than $1
billion to develop a major port in the then-president’s hometown of Ham-
bantota.28 The port proved wholly unprofitable, and with Sri Lankan debts
to China exceeding $8 billion, its government ceded control of the port to
China in a debt-for-equity swap. Carnegie Endowment analyst Constantino
Xavier characterized this as part of “a larger modus operandi by China in
the region, ” where “Beijing typically finds a local partner, makes that local
partner accept investment plans that are detrimental to their country in the
long term, and then uses the debts to either acquire the project altogether
or to acquire political leverage in that country. ”29 China is not necessarily
structuring deals purposely detrimental to host countries, but those coun-
tries’ financial stability is often not China’s primary or even secondary
concern.
India was particularly alarmed by the deal and—panicked that Hamban-
tota could one day become a Chinese naval hub in the region—has since
been attempting to outbid China for control of a nearby (Chinese-built)
airport derided as “the world’s emptiest. ”
28 American Enterprise Institute Global Investment T racker. http:/ /www.aei.org/china-global-invest-
ment-tracker/
29 Stacey, Kiran. “China Signs 99-Y ear Lease on Sri Lanka’s Hambantota Port. ” Financial Times, 11 Dec.
2 0 1 7.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
23
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Sri Lanka’s ports and shipping minister justified the Hambantota deal by
saying “we had to make a decision to get out of this debt trap. ”30 But Sri
Lanka’s predicament also highlights the durability of China’s debt trap.
New Sri Lankan President Maithripala Sirisena ran for office promising to
distance the country from China, but has found it nearly impossible to do
so and is likely to sink the country deeper into debt. Paikiasothy Saravana-
muttu, executive director of the Centre for Policy Alternatives in Colombo,
warned that “given the agreements entered into by the previous regime and
the colossal debt incurred, I do not think the government has much choice
but to continue with Chinese investment. ”31 Chinese companies are in the
midst of a $1.4 billion development of Colombo Port City, continuing to
develop the Hambantota port, and are in discussions to build a $3 billion
oil refinery nearby.32
These debt are taking a toll on Sri Lanka’s economy. Economic growth
has slowed to its weakest rate in 16 years, and the Sri Lankan rupee has
depreciated to its weakest point ever—creating a cycle where debt con-
cerns cause investors to devalue the rupee, increasing the country’s debt
obligations (half of its loans are denominated in foreign currency).33 This
year, debt repayment costs are expected to reach 14.1 percent of GDP;
government revenue is only 14.4 percent.34 With its revenue tied up in
debt repayment, Sri Lanka is forced to borrow more to finance infrastruc-
ture costs. In May 2018, it signed on to a new $1 billion loan from China’s
EXIM bank to build a highway. Far from escaping China’s debt trap, Sri
Lanka continues to sink deeper.35
30 Kuronuma, Yuji. “Sri Lanka’s Currency Suffers as Debt T rap Deepens. ” Nikkei Asian Review, 29 Apr.
2018.
31 Blinch, Russell. “China’s Lucrative Embrace of Sri Lanka Stirs Unease. ” The Straits Times, 16 Oct.
2 0 1 7.
32 Ibid.
33 Kuronuma, Yuji. “Sri Lanka’s Currency Suffers as Debt T rap Deepens. ” Nikkei Asian Review, 29 Apr.
2018.
34 Ibid.
35 “China Approves $1 Bln Loan for Sri Lanka Highway - Sri Lanka PM’s office. ” Reuters, 14 May 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
24
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
Outlook
Sri Lanka’s debt position with China is likely to deteriorate further. That
growing debt leverage could help China push for expanded control of the
port, potentially leading to a Chinese naval foothold in the Indian Ocean,
either as a logistics hub or eventual full-fledged base. If China can con-
vert its debt leverage to gain a naval presence in regional ports, it will be
in striking distance of the worlds’ trade artery, potentially challenging the
U.S. navy’s effective monopoly and worrying Asian neighbors dependent
on those routes. The U.S. is still rebuilding ties with Sri Lanka and has
minimal direct leverage. Hambantota served as a wake-up call for India
on Chinese aims in their backyard, but without support from the U.S., it’s
unlikely that they have the financial resources to protect against Chinese
debtbook diplomacy.
Pakistan
China’s expansive entrenchment in the Pakistani economy makes Gwadar
Port a possible target for China’s second overseas naval base. A more per-
manent presence at Gwadar could enable China to project power across
the Arabian Sea and Gulf of Oman, while further elevating India’s fears of
encirclement.
China has thus far pledged up to $62 billion dollars for the China-Pakistan
Economic Corridor (CPEC), funding that is opaque to even some of Paki-
stan’s top officials. The governor of the State Bank of Pakistan admitted in
2015 that he was unsure out of the total funding “how much is debt, how
much is equity and how much is in kind. ”36 This question of payment “in
kind” is most relevant when considering the Gwadar Port and Industrial
Free Trade Zone.
Under the build-operate-transfer contract, signed April 2017, the China
Overseas Port Holding Company (COPHC) will manage the port for 40
years, until 2059. Under the agreement, COPHC will receive a 91 percent
36 Houreld, Katherine. “Pakistan should be more transparent on $46 bn China deal, state bank head
says. ” Reuters. 4 Dec. 2015

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
25
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
share of the port’s gross revenue and an 85 percent share from the sur-
rounding “free zone. ”37
While the port’s revenue will flow almost entirely to the Chinese company,
Pakistan is on the hook for repaying Gwadar’s debt obligations. According
to Pakistan’s federal minister for ports and shipping, Mir Hasil Bizenjo,
Pakistan is obligated to pay back $16 billion in loans obtained from Chi-
nese banks for the development of Gwadar port, the free-trade zone, and
all communications infrastructure, at interest rates exceeding 13%, inclu-
sive of 7% insurance charges.38 In July 2017, the IMF warned these and
other CPEC loans were creating “rising medium-term external repayment
obligations, ” nearly 7.5% of Pakistan’s GDP .39
Along with high interest rates and minimal revenue shares, there are sev-
eral other factors straining Pakistan’s ability to pay back its debts. Pakistan
granted COPHC a 23-year exemption from income and sales taxes and
federal excise duties, further undercutting its potential revenue.40 Further,
by the time the port is returned to Pakistan, its 40-year-old facilities will
likely require significant maintenance. If Pakistan is set on regaining con-
trol of the port, it may have to go back to China to finance these repairs,
further solidifying the cycle of debt entrapment. Pakistan’s significant
debt obligations and its limited stake in the port’s revenue put China in
an increasingly favorable position to one day offer debt forgiveness in
exchange for extending its lease on Gwadar or negotiating access for its
naval vessels and aircraft.
Chinese and Pakistani officials have both repeatedly denied that China
plans to one day convert the commercial deep-water port for military
use. However, in 2017, a senior foreign ministry official in Islamabad told
the FT that “as Gwadar becomes more active as a port, Chinese traffic
both commercial and naval will grow to this region. There are no plans
37 Jorgic, Drazen. “Hoping to Extend Maritime Reach, China Lavishes Aid on Pakistan T own. ” Reuters.
16 Dec. 2017 .
38 Shakil, F.M. “Bad terms: Pakistan’s Raw Deal with China over Gwadar Port. ” Asia Times. 29 Nov.
2 0 1 7.
39 International Monetary Fund. Middle East and Central Asia Dept. “Pakistan : 2017 Article IV Consul-
tation-Press Release; Staff Report; Informational Annex; and Statement by the Executive Director
for Pakistan. ” Country Report No. 17/212. 13 July 2017 .
40 Shakil, F.M. “Bad terms: Pakistan’s Raw Deal with China over Gwadar Port. ” Asia Times. 29 Nov.
2 0 1 7.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
26
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
for a permanent Chinese naval base. But the relationship is stretching out
to the sea. ”41
There are some signs that Pakistani policymakers are slowly realizing
CPEC’s negative long-term financial implications and may move to slow
the country’s debt accumulation, which the IMF has warned could reach
upwards of 70 percent of GDP in the event of an adverse shock.42 In No-
vember 2017, Pakistan withdrew its request to include the $14 billion
Diamer-Bhasha dam project in CPEC—citing lack of transparency and
strict monetary conditions43—instead opting to rely on local resources.44
While this episode alone does not signal CPEC’s collapse, it is significant
that Pakistan was willing to prioritize long-term sovereignty concerns over
its immediate energy needs.
Outlook
In the short run, Chinese loans can be a much-needed lifeline for Pakistani
economic development, serving both Chinese and U.S. interests. However,
Chinese investment also dilutes the potency of U.S. security assistance,
weakening U.S. leverage to address its nuclear security and counterterror-
ism interests in country.
In the long run, the sheer magnitude of Chinese loans, coupled with high
interest rates, insufficient infrastructure revenue, and shrinking access to
international markets and institutions—a result of a recent Financial Action
Task Force decision to put Pakistan back on its terrorist financing watch
list—is likely to create Pakistani dependence on Chinese debt restructuring
or forgiveness.45 This deepening Chinese involvement will continue to crowd
out limited U.S. leverage while jeopardizing Pakistan’s long-term financial
health.
41 Kynge, James, et al. “How China Rules the Waves. ” Financial Times. 12 Jan. 2017
42 Hurley, John, Scott Morris, and Gailyn Portelance. “Examining the Debt Implications of the Belt and
Road Initiative from a Policy Perspective. ” Center for Global Development. CGD Policy Paper 121.
March 2018.
43 Jamal, Umair. “What Pakistan’s Decision to Pull Out of a Mega Dam Project T ells Us About the
Future of CPEC. ” The Diplomat. 11 Jan. 2018
44 Rana, Shahbaz. “After Much Delay Diamer-Bhasha Dam Wins Approval. ” The Express T ribune. 20
March 2018.
45 Masood, Salman. “At U.S. Urging, Pakistan to Be Placed on T errorism-Financing List. ” The New Y ork
Times. 23 Feb. 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
27
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Malaysia
China’s increased investments in Malaysia may enable it to expand its
influence over the strategically-situated country, a crossroads between the
Malacca Strait and the South China Sea.
Under former Prime Minister Najib Razak, Malaysia significantly
expanded its economic relationship with Beijing, and in 2017, was the
fourth-largest recipient of China’s overseas direct investment.46 Najib
secured $34.2 billion in BRI-related infrastructure projects, spark-
ing accusations he was “selling” Malaysia’s sovereignty for his own
self-preservation.47
This sentiment was shared by many Malaysian voters, who in early May
2018 voted out Najib’s ruling party in favor of opposition leader Mahathir
Mohamad. The new Prime Minister has promised to swiftly review all Chi-
nese deals and “renegotiate the terms” of any “unequal projects” to prevent
Malaysia from taking on unsustainable levels of debt.48 “We have made it
clear that we are going to look into all these contracts again because they
are very costly for the government and will incur huge debts which we
cannot pay, ” said Mahathir.49
The East Coast Rail Link is one such contract that has faced particular
scrutiny. The $14bn project—which launched last year and received 85
percent of its funding from China’s EXIM bank50—would connect two
strategic access points: Malaysia’s east coast on the South China Sea and
the west coast along the Strait of Malacca. However, members of Malaysia’s
new government have questioned the project’s economic potential. “This
thing is not going to be economically viable, it is not going to pay for itself, ”
46 Ming, Cheang and Huileng T an. “The shocking Malaysian election result could hit Chinese invest-
ments. ” CNBC. 10 May 2018.
47 “Malaysia may renegotiate some deals with China- Mahathir. ” Reuters. 10 May 2018.
48 Bland, Ben. “China’s south-east Asia push threatened by new Malaysia regime. ” Financial Times. 15
May 2018.
49 Jaipragas, Bhavan. “Malaysia’s Chinese Projects: Mahathir to Respect all Agreements. ” South China
Morning Post. 17 May 2018.
50 Bland, Ben. “China’s south-east Asia push threatened by new Malaysia regime. ” Financial Times. 15
May 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
28
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
said Jomo Kwame Sundaram, a veteran Malaysian economist, in an inter-
view just before he was appointed to Mahathir’s advisory council.51
The Melaka Gateway Port and Industrial Zone is another project which
has seen its commercial viability called into question. The $11 billion
harbor project, which began construction in 2016, is being financed and
constructed by state-owned Chinapower in partnership with local KAJ
Development,52 which holds a 51% stake in the project.53 A 2015 World
Bank study, commissioned by Malaysia’s government, found that a new
port on its west coast, where Melaka is located, is “not necessary, as exist-
ing facilities had yet to reach capacity. ”54 Mahathir echoed this sentiment in
March 2017, saying “we have adequate facilities in this country. We already
have enough ports and the necessary infrastructure to attract tourists. This
[Melaka Gateway] is unnecessary. ”55
Outlook
It remains to be seen whether the Mahathir government will act on this
criticism and fulfill its promises to reassess several China-funded projects.
Similar to Sri Lankan President Sirisena, Mahathir may find that its simply
too late. The sheer scale of Chinese investments leaves Malaysia in a weak
bargaining position to renegotiate the terms of the East Coast Rail Link.
Further, should Mahathir attempt to freeze the project all together, it would
likely incur penalties providing China additional negotiating leverage, as
Myanmar found when it canceled the Myitsone Dam project. This sce-
nario would put China in an even more favorable position to bargain for a
majority stake in the Melaka Port. A controlling stake in Melaka Port could
eventually provide China with direct power projection capability across
the Strait of Malacca, challenging U.S.-Singaporean military predominance
over the strait. More broadly, China’s entrenchment within Malaysia could
51 Ibid.
52 Maresca, Thomas. “China’s Growing Ambitions in Malaysia Raise Questions about Beijing’s T rue
Motives. ” USA Today. 5 July 2017 .
53 Choo, Ching Y ee. “Malaysia and China Ink $7 .3bn Melaka Gateway Project. ” Nikkei Asian Review. 3
Sept. 2016.
54 T eoh, Shannon. “Malacca harbour plan raises questions about China’s strategic aims. ” Straits
Times. 14 Nov. 2016.
55 Jaipragas, Bhavan. “Can China Really Deliver Malaysia’s Singapore Slayer?” South China Morning
Post. 15 April 2017 .

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
29
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
be used to further undermine ASEAN cohesion and gain another foothold
along the South China Sea.
Myanmar
Myanmar’s increasing isolation from the west over the Rohingya crisis
constrains its international financing options, creating a vacuum for China
to expand its economic ties to the Suu Kyi government. Beijing is accruing
significant economic leverage that could one day be used to push for a stra-
tegic foothold along the Bay of Bengal.
China has promised large-scale financing to build roads, railways, ports,
and oil pipelines in Myanmar.56 Its largest such pledge is $10 billion dollars
to finance Kyaukpyu Port and surrounding special economic zone,57 which
will be built by the Chinese state-run CITIC Group Corporation. CITIC has
negotiated a 70 percent stake in the port and, under the build-operate-trans-
fer deal, will run Kyaukpyu for 50 years with a possible extension of another
25 years.58 The port, which serves as the entry point for two cross-border
oil and gas pipelines, will help secure Beijing’s energy needs and allow it to
reduce its dependence on energy imports through the Strait of Malacca.
Myanmar is expected to contribute $2.2 billion for its 30 percent share of
the port,59 raising concern it may have to turn to Chinese loans to finance
its portion of the project. This would increase the country’s significant debt
burden, which already includes some $800 million in penalties for freez-
ing the (Chinese-built) $3.6 billion Myitsone Dam project in 2011.60 Greg
Poling, director of the Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative at the Center
for Strategic and International Studies, notes that “the real danger of the
port is that its extreme expense could lead the Myanmar government to
take out an unsustainable level of debt, ” which “in combination with other
56 Zhen, Liu. “Myanmar Eyes China’s T rade Plan as Crisis in Rakhine Goes On. ” South China Morning
Post, 6 Oct. 2017 .
57 Sun, Yun. “Winning Projects and Hearts? Three Cases of Chinese Mega-Infrastructure Projects in
South Asia. ” The ASAN Forum, 3 Nov. 2017 .
58 Ibid.
59 Ibid.
60 Lee, Yimou, and Shwe Y ee Saw Myint. “China May Scrap Divisive Dam in Myanmar to Advance
Other Interests: Sources. ” Reuters. 5 April 2017 .

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
30
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
current and future projects in Myanmar, could in the coming years lead to
a debt trap. ”61
While China has spent years pushing for the resumption of the dam proj-
ect, it has recently softened its stance,62 signaling that it may be willing
to trade debt forgiveness on the dam project for preferential access or an
extended contract for Kyaukpyu port. According to Mohan Malik, pro-
fessor at the Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies, Myanmar now faces
“intense pressure” to raise China’s stake as high as 85 percent and lease it
for 99 years.63 This arrangement would give China more autonomy in the
development and potentially the use of the strategic port, including as a
naval or dual-use facility.
Outlook
Facing diplomatic and economic isolation from the West over its human
rights abuses, Myanmar is likely to drift further into China’s orbit. Deepen-
ing China-Myanmar ties could undermine international efforts to push for
an end to the Rohingya crisis, provide China with a potential pearl astride
the Strait of Malacca, and further weaken ASEAN cohesion on South
China Sea disputes. As long as Myanmar continues its persecution of the
Rohingya, there are very few carrots the U.S. and its allies can or should
offer to blunt the expansion of Chinese influence.
Thailand
China is capitalizing on Thailand’s lagging post-coup economic recovery
and a downturn in U.S.-Thai relations to increase its infrastructure invest-
ments. In the short run, these investments will strengthen China’s ties to
Thailand’s military junta and may further increase its influence within
ASEAN. In the long run, they could give China leverage to assert influence
over signature projects such as the proposed Kra Canal. While it’s unlikely
61 Koutsoukis, Jason. “The Fishing Port That May Become a $10 Billion Chinese Debt Bomb.:
Bloomberg, 10 May 2018.
62 Ibid.
63 Jennings, Ralph. “China’s Expansion Will Lift Three Countries in 2018 and Anger One. ” Forbes. 8 Jan.
2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
31
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
the U.S. will “lose” Thailand to Chinese influence any time soon given the
depth of the military relationship, U.S.-Thai disagreements over the direc-
tion of Thailand’s government have moved Thailand closer to China.
For China, Thailand is another natural bridge to ASEAN, given that Thai-
land does not have any SCS claims but is a strong voice within the body.
Meanwhile, the military junta has touted its relations with the Asian super-
power and promoted Chinese-financed infrastructure projects to shore
up its legitimacy. These investments, including China’s $5 billion for the
Thai-Chinese railway project,64 which began construction this December,65
are particularly impactful given total FDI in Thailand was just $1.55 billion
in 2016, down 70% from the year prior.66
Nonetheless, the railway and other investment projects could just be Chi-
na’s foot in the door to securing a much bigger prize down the line: the
Kra Canal. Reports have recently resurfaced 67that Thailand, with Chinese
financing, is planning to build the canal—linking the Gulf of Thailand
and the Andaman sea. The estimated $28 billion project would provide
an alternate route to the Strait of Malacca and cut up to three days’ sailing
time for ships passing between the Indian and Pacific Oceans.68 The idea
has been around for centuries, repeatedly dismissed on both economic and
environmental grounds. However, China has recently expressed interest in
revisiting the project as part of its Maritime Silk Road. 69 If the project were
to get off the ground it would allow ships to bypass Singapore, threatening
Singapore’s supremacy in providing shipping services and undermining
U.S.-Singaporean control over the Strait. Thailand remains hesitant to
greenlight the project, mindful of the ramifications for Singapore’s econ-
omy and wary of undercutting ASEAN unity.
64 Zhen, Liu. “Thailand approves long-delayed US $5.2b rail link to China. ” South China Morning Post.
11 July 2017 .
65 “After delays, ground broken for Thailand- China railway project. ” Reuters. 21 Dec. 2017 .
66 Ono, Yukako. “Thai Junta Beseeches Foreign Investors: ‘Please Come Now. ’” Nikkei Asian Review. 23
June 2017 .
67 Brewster, David. “The Kra Canal: Double Bypass. ” The Lowy Institute. 14 Aug. 2017 .
68 Ibid.
69 Shira, Dezan and Associates. “Kra Canal Project Revisited As Part Of China’s Maritime Silk Road. ”
ASEAN Briefing. 11 Sept. 2017 .

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
32
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
Outlook
Going forward, Thailand is likely to continue to balance between the
two powers: expanding its economic and military ties with China while
broadening its military alliance with the U.S. In the short run, this poses a
limited risk to U.S. interests, beyond the further erosion of ASEAN cohe-
sion. However, China may one day choose to leverage its growing debt
holdings, along with its strengthened ties to the regime, to finally get the
canal project off the ground, but it remains too soon to tell.
Africa
China’s long-standing economic ties to Africa are paying newfound strategic
dividends as China cashes in on decades of accumulated debt and further
expands its infrastructure investments under the BRI umbrella. In 2016,
China established a $60 billion fund to finance infrastructure projects across
Africa, providing no-strings-attached loans that in the long run are likely to
saddle impoverished countries, which already have weak economic gover-
nance and underdeveloped financial systems, with crippling debt.70
As Xiaochen Su put it, “given the ballooning amount of debt from more and
more loans taken on to finance infrastructural developments in the future,
African states are likely to require more than just portions of their limited
budgets to complete repayment. More likely than not, many states will have
to resort to payments in kind. ”71 We’ve already seen this play out in Djibouti,
where China used its economic entrenchment to help negotiate its first over-
seas naval installation. China may be looking to follow this model in other
African states, trading debt forgiveness for both commercial and strategic
assets, along with continued support for China’s policy positions on Taiwan
and at the United Nations. While a Chinese military presence in Africa may
contribute to the common good by supporting China’s expanding peace-
keeping and anti-piracy efforts, it also provides China the ability to project
power further from its shores and in ways counter to U.S. interests.
70 Su, Xiaochen. “Why Chinese Infrastructure Loans in Africa Represent a Brand-New T ype of Neoco-
lonialism. ” The Diplomat. 9 June 2017 .
71 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
33
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Djibouti
Djibouti is the most advanced example of passive Chinese debtbook diplo-
macy in action.
Just four years after entering Djibouti under the guise of commercial gain,
China announced in 2016 it was building its first overseas naval base,
signing a 10-year, $20 million a year contract. By that point, China had
invested $1.4 billion—the equivalent of 75% of Djibouti’s GDP72—into
critical infrastructure, including three ports, two airports, the Ethio-
pia-Djibouti railway and a pipeline to bring water from Ethiopia.73 By 2016,
Djibouti’s public external debt had risen from 50 to 85 percent of GDP
in two years, with 77 percent of total government-guaranteed public debt
owed to China’s EXIM Bank.74 Djibouti’s debt obligations are likely to grow
further. Last November, Presidents Guelleh and Xi signed a new agreement
for China to provide an undisclosed amount of loans.75
These debt holdings have given China a favorable position to capitalize
on Djibouti’s February seizing of the Doraleh Container Terminal from
Dubai-based DP World. Initial reports indicated that the government
intended to strike a deal with a Chinese-state controlled company to run
the port.76 Meanwhile, in March, the government signed an agreement with
a Singapore-based company that works closely with China Merchants Port
Holdings Co., already a large stakeholder in the nearby Doraleh Multipur-
pose Port.77
Marine General Thomas Waldhauser, the top U.S. general for Africa, told
the House Armed Services Committee in March that if China took over
72 Hurley, John, Scott Morris, and Gailyn Portelance. “Examining the Debt Implications of the Belt and
Road Initiative from a Policy Perspective. ” Center for Global Development. CGD Policy Paper 121.
March 2018
73 Jacobs, Andrew. “Joyous Africans T ake to the rails, With China’s Help. ” The New Y ork Times. 7 Feb.
2 0 1 7.
74 “Djibouti: Staff Report for the 2016 Article IV Consultation- Debt Sustainability Analysis. ” Interna-
tional Monetary Fund. 7 Feb. 2017.
75 Zheng, Sarah. “China Offers Loans to Djibouti As They Vow to Establish Closer Ties. ” South China
Morning Post. 23 Nov. 2017 .
76 Lohande, Nikhil and Matina Stevis-Gridneff. “Djibouti Seizes Strategic DP World Container T ermi-
nal. ” The Wall Street Journal. 23 Feb. 2018.
77 Manek, Nizar. “Djibouti Sees China Involvement in Port as No Threat to U.S. ” Bloomberg Politics. 14
March, 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
34
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
the port, “the consequence could be significant, ” pointing to its potential
effects on resupplying the U.S. base in Djibouti, refueling U.S. Navy ships
and enabling greater Chinese control over the vital Bab el-Mandeb strait.78
The U.S. has long been concerned about the two militaries operating in
such close quarters, fears substantiated by a May 2018 incident in which
Chinese military personnel targeted U.S. flight crews using high-power
lasers. 79 Richard D. Fisher, a Senior Fellow at the International Assessment
and Strategy Center, recently speculated before Congress that the incident
may have even been “intended to spark a U.S. response that China could
then use to further pressure Djibouti to reduce the U.S. presence. ”80
In March, Djibouti’s Inspector General, Hassan Issa Sultan, insisted the
port will stay in state hands as it seeks new investment. 81 For now, the
U.S. will have to wait and see whether China will attempt to use its passive
influence or actively apply pressure to gain a controlling stake in the con-
tainer port.
Outlook
Djibouti is a microcosm of the larger tension between cooperation and
competition in the U.S.-China relationship. While China’s presence
provides new opportunities for joint anti-piracy, demining and naval
deconfliction exercises, the U.S. will also need to hedge against any
attempts to undermine its Djibouti-based operations to counter a range of
terrorist threats and secure energy routes along the Horn of Africa.
78 Ali, Indrees and Phil Stewart. “‘Significant’ consequences if China takes key port in Djibouti: U.S.
general. ” Reuters. 6 March 2018.
79 Lubold, Gordon and Jeremy Page. “Laser From Chinese Base Aimed at U.S. Military Pilots In Africa’s
Skies, Pentagon Charges. ” The Wall Street Journal. 3 May 2018.
80 United States. Cong. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence. Hearing on China’s
Worldwide Military Expansion. 17 May 2018. (Statement of Richard D. Fisher Jr.., International
Assessment and Strategy Committee.)
81 Fick, Maggie. “Djibouti Says its Container Port to Remain in State Hands. ” Reuters. 14 March, 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
35
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Kenya
Kenya provides China a gateway to East and Central Africa, a symbol
of the expansive reach of BRI and another potential access point to the
Indian Ocean.
Between 2010 and 2015, China provided $6.3 billion in loans to the
Kenyan government, making it Kenya’s largest creditor and82 accounting
for 57% of Kenya’s total external debt of $4.51 billion.83 In 2016, the World
Bank warned that Kenya “has a heavy debt burden and China’s loans can
bring debt to unsustainable levels. ”84
Exacerbating these debt concerns is the $3.6 billion in loans—equivalent
to a fifth of Kenya’s national budget85—provided by China’s EXIM bank
to finance the Mombasa-Nairobi Standard Gauge Railway.86 The project
was built by the state-owned China Road and Bridge Corporation, which
will operate the railway for the first five years. Since its inauguration, in
May 2017, the railway has seen significantly less cargo traffic than needed
to begin paying down the debt. While in 2013 the World Bank warned
the railway would only be feasible if it moved all Mombasa Port’s cargo,87
in its first month, the line moved just 1,600 containers of the 80,000 pro-
cessed at Mombasa.88 If the railway does not make enough to even cover its
operating costs, Kenya may have to go back to China to fund railway main-
tenance, further sinking Kenya into China’s debt trap.
82 China Africa Research Initiative.“Data: Chinese Loans to Africa. ” Johns Hopkins University School of
Advanced International Studies.
83 Sanghi, Apurva and Dylan Johnson. “Deal or No Deal: Strictly Business for China in Kenya?” World
Bank Group, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice Group. March 2016.
84 Ibid.
85 Kaiman, Jonathan. “‘China has Conquered Kenya’: Inside Beijing’s New Strategy to Win African
Hearts and Minds. ” Los Angeles Times. 7 Aug. 2017 .
86 Pilling, David. “Chinese Investment in Africa: Beijing’s T esting Ground. ” Financial Times 13 June
2 0 1 7.
87 Ibid.
88 “Did Kenya get a loan to build a railway, or vice versa?” The Economist. 22 Mar. 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
36
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
Outlook
Relative to other countries in this analysis, Kenya’s limited strategic assets
and long debtbook timetable do not rise to the level of a priority concern
for U.S. interests.
Underwhelming railway returns and recent political instability—likely to
hamper Kenya’s economic growth— will make it increasingly difficult for
Kenya to service its debt payments. But it remains to be seen what exactly,
if anything, China will want when loans for the railway and other projects
become due in 15 to 20 years. In the short run, China is likely to continue
to accumulate political influence, with Chinese loans undermining the
U.S. ’ ability to use its own aid and investment as leverage to improve Ken-
ya’s worsening human rights situation. In the long run, China may be able
to exert greater influence over Mombasa Port, but at this stage, this is still
largely a speculative assessment.
8.2 Debtbook South: ASEAN and
Southeast Asia Maritime Influence
Country Desirability
for PRC
Value for
U.S.
Long-term
Debt Trends
Debtbook
Progression
Balance of
Relations
Overall
Concern
Debtbook South / SCS Influence
Laos 3 2.5 5 3 3.5 3.4
Cambodia 3 2.5 3.5 2 5 3.2
Philippines 3 3 4 2 3 3

In Southeast Asia, China’s debt leverage provides a means to serve multiple
strategic ends: control of strategic resources and access to ports, but also
political influence in international institutions like ASEAN and acquies-
cence on contested issues like its South China Sea claims. China already
has significant leverage over Laos and Cambodia’s economies and is nego-
tiating large-scale infrastructure loans with the Philippines. It is likely to
use debtbook diplomacy to attempt to isolate the U.S diplomatically in this
important region.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
37
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Laos and Cambodia
Former Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans recently characterized
Laos and Cambodia as “wholly owned subsidiaries of China. ”89 These coun-
tries’ relatively poor economies are deeply dependent on Chinese trade
and investment and have been accumulating unsustainable debt loads.
While they do not offer obvious, physical strategic equities like resources
or ports that China might covet, their membership in ASEAN makes them
diplomatically valuable. Prodded by China, Laos and Cambodia have
already undermined the U.S./ASEAN position on disputed SCS territories.
As China’s debt leverage continues to grow, so too will its ability to coerce
these countries to create and exploit cracks in regional coalitions hoping to
manage China’s rise.

As of 2016, China was involved in 760 projects—primarily infrastructure
and hydropower—in Laos worth a total of $6.7 billion, in a country with a
GDP of barely $12 billion.90 Laos’ debt will continue to grow as it becomes
more deeply involved in a $6 billion rail project linking the two countries.
A 2013 IMF analysis of the proposed project warned that “the additional
external borrowing amounts to US$ 6.7 billion over 5 years” and would
cause “total external debt [to] surpass 125 percent of GDP . ”91 While Laos
renegotiated the terms somewhat before reaching an agreement last year,
both countries refused to disclose the interest rates. China owns more than
40% of Laos’ public debt, and a new IMF report released last year warned
that the risk of “external debt distress” in Laos has risen from moderate to
high.92

Laos has also long been engaged in “land-for-development” schemes, that
have seen the government “pay back” its accumulated debt by conceding
more than a million hectares of state land to foreign-backed investors.93
In recent years, Vientiane has been working to curb this practice, but the
89 Class Lecture, Harvard Kennedy School. 7 Feb, 2018.
90 Corben, Ron. “Can Obama Help Laos Emerge from China’s Shadow?” South China Morning Post, 5
Sept. 2016.
91 “Lao People’s Democratic Republic: Staff Report for the 2013 Article IV Consultation—Debt Sus-
tainability Analysis. ” International Monetary Fund. 31 Oct. 2013.
92 “Lao People’s Democratic Republic: 2016 Article IV Consultation—Press Release; Staff Report; and
Statement by the Executive Director for Lao People’s Democratic Republic. ” International Monetary
Fund. Feb. 2017.
93 “Lao Prime Minister Moves to Stop Land-for-Capital Deals. ” Radio Free Asia. 16 Dec. 2016.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
38
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
precedent of essentially small-scale debtbook diplomacy bears watching as
the country’s debts continue to mount.

Cambodia’s debt situation is not yet as severe, but its economy may be
even more dependent on China. Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen has
called China Cambodia’s “most trustworthy friend, ” and the two countries
have been increasing joint military exercises a year after Cambodia sus-
pended exercises with the U.S. indefinitely, saying it was too busy holding
elections.9495 The U.S. and EU have condemned a crackdown on political
opposition by Chinese-backed Prime Minister Hun Sen, who responded
by accusing the U.S. of staging a “color revolution” to overthrow his
government.96
Between 2011 and 2015, Chinese firms provided Cambodia nearly $5
billion in loans—70% of the latter’s total industrial investment—and last
December, Chinese companies pledged an additional $7 billion in invest-
ments.97 They have also proposed a massive highway plan that would
cost an estimated $26 billion.98 China owns about half of Cambodia’s $6.5
billion in public debt,99 and Ou Virak, president of the Cambodian think
tank Future Forum, warned that continuing to accrue debt could push
Cambodia into a “Chinese trap, ” that could pose “a danger to [the] national
security, politics, and the economy” of Cambodia.100

While China holds immense influence over these two countries, they have
few desirable strategic assets that would be obvious debtbook diplomacy
targets. The strategic value of these countries is not in assets but in influ-
ence over institutions. Both are ASEAN members and have been working
on China’s behalf to undermine the group’s unity on South China Sea
issues. Cambodia, which has been described as China’s proxy in ASEAN,
94 Peel, Michael, et al. “FT Investigation: How China Bought Its Way into Cambodia. ” Financial Times. 8
Sept. 2016.
95 Thul, Prak Chan. “Cambodia Kicks off Drills with ‘Great Friend’ China as U.S. Ties Sour. ” Reuters. 17
Mar. 2018.
96 Ibid.
97 “Why Cambodia Has Cosied up to China. ” The Economist. 21 Jan. 2017 .
98 Spiess, Robin. “Belt and Road Could Bring Risks for Cambodia Debt. ” Phnom Penh Post, 27 Mar.
2018.
99 Ibid.
100 Kimseng, Men. “Rising Debt to China ‘Worrying’ , Analyst Says. ” VOA Khmer. 6 Dec. 2017 .

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
39
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
has repeatedly blocked ASEAN statements criticizing China’s SCS claims,
and in 2016 joined with Laos to make a pact with China on SCS consensus
that ASEAN’s former Secretary General said amounted to “interfering with
the domestic affairs of [ASEAN]. ”101
Outlook
With the demise of TPP , ASEAN has become even more important as a
regional framework to help balance and manage China’s growing influence,
providing its smaller rivals a forum to strategize and exercise collective
power. Y et the organization relies on consensus, and the presence of one or
two Chinese satellites would effectively give Xi veto power on any ASEAN
statements or actions viewed as detrimental to Beijing’s interests. The dis-
integration of ASEAN unity on the South China Sea issue has undermined
U.S.-led opposition to China’s territorial claims and an ineffective ASEAN
could continue to deprive the U.S. of regional support for efforts to protect
U.S. strategic interests and counter Chinese expansion.
Philippines
The Philippines is another ASEAN member pursuing Chinese loans that
could mire its economy in a debt trap. President Duterte has promised his
people $167 billion in infrastructure spending for his “Build, Build, Build”
campaign, likely to be financed by Chinese loans at such high interest rates
that Corr Analytics founder Anders Corr warns they could balloon to $452
billion in 10 years, which could lead “to virtual Philippine debt bondage
to China. ”102 Corr’s analysis warned that “the Philippines will have to give
political and economic concessions to China in order to repay annual
interest, ” which could include concessions on oil rights or territory in the
South China Sea or agreements to sell exports to China at below-market
rates.103
101 Ismail, Saifulbari. “China’s pact with Cambodia, Laos an interference in ASEAN’s domestic affairs:
Former Sec-Gen. ” Channel News Asia. 25 April 2016.
102 Corr, Anders. “New Philippine Debt of $167 Billion Could Balloon T o $452 Billion: China Will Benefit. ”
Forbes. 13 May 2017 .
103 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
40
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
Speaking on just one $3 billion project of Duterte’s initiative, Philippines
Vice President Leni Robredo recently warned that “our fear is we might get
stuck in a debt trap like the one experienced by Sri Lanka. ”104 Gary Alejano,
an opposition lawmaker, warned against a borrowing spree, cautioning
that states “trapped in debt with China are at risk of losing not only their
valuable natural resources and strategic assets but also their sovereignty.
We may end up giving up our rights to our territory in the West Philippine
S e a .”105 The West Philippine Sea is known by China as the South China Sea.
Outlook
The Philippines is still in the very early stages of a debtbook diplo-
macy cycle, but may soon ramp up its Chinese loan intake dramatically.
U.S.-Philippine relations have rebounded in the past year, but the U.S.
cannot feasibly offer an alternative to Chinese infrastructure funding.
Concessions, or at least silence, on South China Sea issues would be an
obvious Chinese “get” in exchange for debt relief. As Duterte courted Chi-
nese loans, last November he ordered his military to stop construction on
a disputed South China Sea territory. The Philippines is the largest SCS
claimant outside of China and won a major 2016 UNCLOS ruling that
China has a refused to recognize. Any agreements China could extract
from the Philippines on disputed territory would further diminish regional
support for U.S. efforts to contest Chinese claims.
104 Nonato, Vince. “Robredo Warns of China Debt T rap, Cites Sri Lanka. ” Philippine Daily Inquirer. 22
Oct. 2017 .
105 Morallo, Audrey. Philippines May Be T rading Natural Resources for China Funds, Alejano Warns. The
Philippine Star, 8 May 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
41
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
8.3 Debtbook East: The Second
Island Chain and Beyond
Country Desirability
for PRC
Value for
U.S.
Long-term
Debt Trends
Debtbook
Progression
Balance of
Relations
Overall
Concern
Debtbook East / Second Island Chain and Beyond
COFA States 4 4 4.5 2.5 3 3.6
Tonga 2 2 5 3 3 3
Vanuatu 3 2 3 2 4 2.8
PNG 2.5 1.5 3 1.5 3 2.3
By increasing its economic influence in the Second Island Chain, China
is positioning itself to capitalize on the impending fiscal distress of Pacific
Island Countries. Such an influence shift in countries like the Compact
of Free Association (COFA) states (Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, and
Palau) Tonga, and Vanuatu could jeopardize U.S. strategic denial and
exclusive basing rights, while potentially providing China with both a
springboard to the “Far Sea” beyond and a foothold to threaten sea lines of
communication and shipping to U.S. bases on Guam and the Marianas.
Compact of Free Association States
To China, U.S. influence and military positioning in the “Second Island
Chain” represents a remnant of U.S. Cold War containment strategy
designed to block the PLAN’s eastward reach and development as a
blue-water navy, while serving as a staging point for current U.S. military
operations. The COFA states are particularly valuable, offering the U.S.
exclusive and unfettered military access.
But while the U.S. and the COFAs have been steadfast allies for 70 years,
new economic developments are threatening to undermine the rela-
tionship. Just as Chinese economic influence–through growing trade,
investment, aid, and tourism—threatens to displace America’s, the COFA
states are beginning to panic about the prospect of the U.S. shutting off
the aid tap propping up their economies and underwriting the strategic
partnership.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
42
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
The 2023 expiration of this defined U.S. funding could throw these
countries into fiscal distress overnight, providing a catalyst for them to
reevaluate their long-term superpower relations. In the Federated States of
Micronesia, $130 million in U.S. Compact aid is equivalent to nearly half
of GDP . An updated Compact Agreement signed with Palau in 2010 had
promised roughly $16 million per year, but it took eight years for Congress
to appropriate the funding. And when that funding runs out in 2023, half
of Palau’s government revenue could disappear overnight.106
Outlook
Perceived U.S. inattention and tenuous commitment have stoked these
countries’ frustration and panic. Meanwhile, Beijing has positioned itself
to step in as an enthusiastic replacement, wooing leadership with state
visits and no-strings-attached aid, offering the funding, political support,
and recognition that these nations crave. Since World War II, the Com-
pact Agreements have provided the U.S. with cheap leases on valuable real
estate; with U.S. rent payments set to expire, American strategic thinkers
should consider the cost of allowing a new tenant to move in.
Indebted Pacific Island Countries
Over the past decade, Chinese loans have financed a construction boom in
Oceania. As the grace periods begin to expire, these countries are finding
themselves financially distressed. While these smaller PICs may not yet be
able to offer strategic assets of significant concern to the U.S., their deep
ensnarement in China’s debt trap raises long-term concerns about potential
Chinese naval facilities in the Second Island Chain and beyond—staging
points that could help the PLAN cover key trading routes and U.S. lines of
communication and supply.
“The Chinese will take over running the country in a few years time, ” said
Tongan Prime Minister Akilisi Pohiva in a May 2018 press conference.107
Back in 2013, Prime Minister Pohiva had warned that “our hands and feet
106 2013 Investment Climate Statement - Palau. U.S. Department of State. Feb. 2013.
107 Fonua, Pesi. “‘Chinese Will T ake over the Country’ PM Pohiva Proclaims, While Digging Canals at
Popua. ” Matangi T onga Online, 15 May 2017 .

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
43
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
have already been tied” and that one of the few possible remedies could
be that “China might say well we can write off your loan, but Tonga must
agree to have a Chinese naval base. ”108 From 2008-2010, Tonga—with a
current GDP under $400 million—borrowed $311 million from China.109
When the first payments came due in 2013, the IMF had to step in and
declare Tonga at risk of “debt distress” to convince China to extend a five-
year grace period.110 That grace period expires this year, and Tonga now
faces even higher payments on a debt they have little means to repay.
Vanuatu is in a similar—if less extreme—position. From 2008-2004, it
took $270 million in Chinese loans, worth nearly 35% of its $775 million
G D P.111 Its debts are still relatively manageable, but growing; Vanuatu’s
Finance Ministry expects foreign debts to grow from 18% of GDP to 33%
by 2022—with nearly half that debt owed to China.112 It has been forced to
establish a debt management unit, raise its value-added tax, and consider
introducing a first-ever income tax—which could have major implications
for a country that serves as an international tax haven.
The Luganville Wharf bears monitoring as Vanuatu’s potential mini-Ham-
bantota; financed by Chinese loans and shoddily built by a Chinese
company, it is the largest wharf in the region, yet struggling to generate
revenue. The business case for its development was based on tourism
from cruise ships, however, a shipping tracking service recorded only four
cruise ships docking in the first three months of this year.113 The CEO of
the wharf ’s stevedoring company defended its fundamental viability, but
acknowledged that it wasn’t meeting revenue expectations, saying that “the
investment in cruise ships hasn’t panned out the way they would have liked
it. That’s a pure and simple fact, ” and that “it’s just not working out at this
point in time. ”114
108 Latu, Kalino. “‘Akilisi Pohiva: T onga Is Lost to China. ” Kaniva T onga. 12 May 2013.
109 Klan, Anthony. “Pacific Nations Drowning in Chinese Debt. ” The Australian. 29 Jan. 2018.
110 Ibid.
111 Ibid
112 Ibid
113 Wroe, David. “The Great Wharf from China, Raising Eyebrows across the Pacific. ” The Sydney Morn-
ing Herald, 12 Apr. 2018.
114 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
44
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
Earlier this year, Australia’s Fairfax Media reported that there had been
“preliminary discussions between the Chinese and Vanuatu governments”
about a potential Chinese “full military base” in Vanuatu—specifically
citing the Luganville Wharf.115 The report suggested that “Beijing’s military
ambition in Vanuatu would likely be realised incrementally, possibly begin-
ning with an access agreement that would allow Chinese naval ships to
dock routinely and be serviced, refuelled and restocked. This arrangement
could then be built on. ”116 China and Vanuatu denied the reports, but they
were taken seriously by Australia, where Prime Minister Malcolm Turn-
bull expressed “great concern” about the prospect of a Chinese base in the
region.117
Outlook
These countries do not pose significant strategic risks to the U.S. in the
short-term, but their deep indebtedness to China creates concerns that
Beijing could extract dual-use facilities or other concessions in the long
run. The U.S. should monitor Chinese debt loads in these countries and
encourage Australian engagement, but they do not rise to the level of an
immediate priority.
Papua New Guinea (PNG)
PNG occupies valuable strategic real estate at the intersection of South-
east Asia and the South Pacific and holds massive deposits of gold, nickel,
and natural gas. Since Australia granted PNG’s independence in 1975, it
has served as its primary partner and patron. But in recent years PNG
has readily accepted conditions-free Chinese funding as an alternative to
restricted Australian aid and investment. China imports large quantities
of natural gas from PNG and has invested heavily in LNG development, as
115 Wroe, David. “China Eyes Vanuatu Military Base in Plan with Global Ramifications. ” The Sydney
Morning Herald, 10 Apr. 2018.
116 Ibid.
117 “Chinese Military Base in Pacific Would Be of ‘Great Concern’ , T urnbull T ells Vanuatu. ” ABC News, 10
Apr. 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
45
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
well as major nickel mines and hydro projects, and a Chinese company has
been redeveloping Lae Port facilities.118
PNG’s debts to China are opaque, but growing rapidly. In 2017, PNG
admitted that its public debt had reached $6.6 billion, a 258 percent
increase since 2012.119 But this figure obscures debt owed by state-owned
companies, including a $1.8 billion loan from China’s EXIM Bank and a
$900 million loan from UBS.120 Total debt has been estimated at $9 bil-
lion, and the IMF has warned that PNG’s “debt servicing costs now exceed
national spending on either education or health. ”121 Those costs of servic-
ing its debts to China have exploded from $2m to $26m in the past five
years and will likely continue to rise.122
Increasing Chinese influence and leverage in PNG alarms Australia more
than it does the U.S., but it remains to be seen whether Australia will make
a concerted attempt to strengthen ties and keep PNG in its orbit. To China,
PNG is attractive as a regional leader in Oceania, for its LNG and other
strategic resources, and potentially someday for its ports.
Outlook
China’s pursuit of key natural resources and strategic infrastructure in PNG
represent primarily long-term strategic challenges, unlikely to directly
impact U.S. interests in the short-term. But the speed and scale with which
China is acquiring natural resources and amassing debt raise long-term
concerns.
118 Tlozek, Eric. “Infrastructure Investment Has Australia Uneasy over Chinese Influence in PNG. ” ABC
News Australia. 12 Feb. 2017 .
119 Blades, Johnny. “Papua New Guinea’s Economy Has ‘Fallen off a Cliff’ . ” Radio New Zealand. 3 April
2 0 1 7.
120 Ibid.
121 “Papua New Guinea: Staff Report for the 2016 Article IV Consultation- Debt Sustainability Analysis. ”
International Monetary Fund. 11 Nov. 2016.
122 Tlozek, 2017 .

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
46
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
9. Recommendations
Since World War II, the U.S. has enjoyed effectively unchallenged U.S.
economic and military dominance in the Pacific, buttressed by a strong
alliance system and an unparalleled basing network to support American
power projection. But China’s rise is upending that favorable landscape. It
has compromised and may overtake America as a regional—and poten-
tially global—economic power. Over the next ten, twenty, and fifty years,
the great power game in the Asia-Pacific will look very different, the board
increasingly unfavorable to U.S. interests.
This report will not delve deeply into the complex future of the U.S.-China
relationship or propose what America’s grand strategy should be to con-
front a rising China. But it will offer recommendations for how the U.S.
should respond specifically to Chinese debtbook diplomacy, within the
context of the shifting balance of power in the Pacific.
In responding to debtbook diplomacy, the authors believe America must
be cognizant that in many areas it no longer holds the upper hand. On a
macro level, the U.S. lacks the will and the resources to remotely challenge
the massive scale of Chinese BRI investment. Developing countries des-
perate for infrastructure funding will continue to seek out Chinese loans,
and China will continue to accumulate and leverage this debt coercively
to advance its strategic goals. There is little the U.S. or its allies can do to
interfere with this cycle.
The U.S. can, however, offset some of the most harmful consequences of
debtbook diplomacy. This will first require a tough assessment of which
interests are truly vital, in order to maximize the effectiveness of America’s
own finite resources. Vital American interests in play are the stability of
the rules-based international order, the viability of global trading arteries
and financial markets, and the well-being and security of major regional
partners, such as India, Japan, South Korea, and Australia. Other interests
often considered vital—a naval monopoly in the Strait of the Malacca;
leverage over Pakistan; upholding rule of law in the South China Sea; and
the promotion of democracy and human rights—are extremely important,
but they are not vital to American security and stability. Over the past 70

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
47
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
years, the U.S. could devote resources to preserving all of these interests at
once, but in the coming decades, it will be forced to make tough choices on
where it can afford to outbid and outcompete China, and where it cannot.
In the coming decades, debtbook diplomacy could—in a worst-case sce-
nario—help China acquire several active naval bases across South Asia and
the Strait of Malacca; force tacit or overt acquiescence from U.S. allies on
militarized SCS islands; enable continued human rights abuses in Myan-
mar and elsewhere; and extend its naval reach deep into the Second Island
Chain and beyond. This will unquestionably present a darker strategic pic-
ture for U.S. interests and the U.S. military, and the U.S. government should
make a concerted effort to keep these developments from unfolding. But it
is unclear that any truly core U.S. interests will be irreparably damaged.
The interests at play do still range from important to extremely important,
and the U.S. can and should take a number of steps to protect them. A
concerted, but proportional application of American economic, diplo-
matic, and military power can demonstrate regional commitment and
contain the worst damage to U.S. interests. To that end, this report offers
three sets of U.S. government recommendations to target and streamline
investment, strengthen alliances, and manage debt burdens.
Target and Streamline Overseas Investment
The U.S. and its allies cannot offer public-private investment at anywhere
the scale of Chinese BRI funding. But they can take significant steps to
align U.S. investment with foreign policy interests, coordinate resources
among partner nations, and focus limited resources in areas of comparative
advantage like digital infrastructure.
Pass and Implement Legislation Creating the Development Finance Corpora-
tion (DFC)
• Bills pending in both Houses of Congress would combine the
Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) and USAID’s
Development Credit Authority (DCA), Enterprise Funds, and

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
48
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
Office of Private Capital and Microenterprise to create the DFC, a
single entity charged with leveraging private sector investment to
advance U.S. foreign policy interests.123
• While the DFC would not be able to rival the scale of Chinese-state
directed investment, consolidating development finance under a
single entity would allow the U.S. government to more efficiently
harness private investment as an alternative to high-risk Chinese
projects.
Coordinate Limited Resources with Partner Nations
• Last November, President Trump announced that OPIC would join
with Japanese partners “to offer high-quality United States-Japan
infrastructure investment alternatives in the Indo-Pacific region. ”124
• These multilateral initiatives employ partner resources as a force
multiplier, allowing for more efficient coordination and focus on
comparative advantages.
• The U.S. should work to expand this initiative and to include other
regional partners like Australia, South Korea, and India.
Focus on Comparative Advantages in Digital Infrastructure125
• U.S. investment should capitalize on American companies’ compar-
ative advantage in the digital domain.
• The U.S. and its partners should consider launching a Digital
Development Bank, offering digital financing to businesses and
governments in Asia, which could help developing governments
in reducing opportunities for corruption, targeting spending more
precisely, and improving tax collection.126
123 Hill, Thomas M. “On Development Finance, T rump’s Budget Request Makes Sense. ” Brookings Insti-
tution. 13 Mar. 2018,
124 “President Donald J. T rump’s Visit to Japan Strengthens the United States-Japan Alliance and
Economic Partnership. ” White House Fact Sheet. 6 Nov. 2017 .
125 Kliman, Daniel. “Responding to China’s Belt and Road Initiative. ” Center for New American Security.
13 Nov. 2017 .
126 Manyika, James, and Rodger Voorhies. “What Digital Finance Means For Emerging Economies. ”
Fortune. 24 Oct. 2016.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
49
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
• Digital financing could be high-yield—McKinsey assesses that
digital accounts can be 90% cheaper than conventional ones to
maintain. It could and also be high-impact, growing American soft
power by spreading financing to thousands of low-income individ-
uals or businesses for the same cost as one traditional infrastructure
project.127
• This digital infrastructure proposal was first suggested by Daniel
Kliman of the Center for a New American Security.
Strengthen Alliances
China has no true strategic allies. This makes America’s most signifi-
cant enduring advantage in Asia-Pacific competition will be its robust,
interwoven alliance and partner network. Key U.S. partners like India,
Japan, and Australia are increasingly concerned by China’s efforts to
acquire strategic infrastructure and buy allies as part of a larger cam-
paign to upend the region’s balance of power. The U.S. should capitalize
on this concern and deepen these partnerships by reviving the Quad and
strengthening its ties to India.
The resurgence of the Quad, the loose U.S.-India-Japan-Australia network
of maritime Asian democratic powers, provides a powerful new resource
in the effort to combat debtbook diplomacy. But considerable challenges
remain to unlocking the full potential of this regional collective: balancing
members’ security ties to the U.S. with economic ties to China; defining
a mission that serves the needs of all parties without provoking Chinese
backlash; and overcoming trust deficits and members’ differing operation
capabilities. While the U.S. addresses these challenges, it should also work
to expand its bilateral partnership with New Delhi as it begins to grow into
a significant leadership role.
Frame the Quad’s Role as a Rules-Based Partnership
• The Quad must first define what it is and what it is not. It should
not define itself or be seen as solely a counter-China coalition.
127 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
50
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
Rather, it should frame its role as a rules-based collective promot-
ing a “free and open Indo-Pacific” , open to all countries willing to
play by the rules.
• The U.S. should encourage economic and maritime security coop-
eration amongst Quad members to foster high-quality, transparent
regional connectivity initiatives and ensure free and open sea lanes
to the benefit of all, including China.
• The reformation of the Quad provides a mechanism to build trust,
boost partner interoperability, and develop a foundation of regional
cooperation. It should focus on lower-profile, more tangible initia-
tives, rather than on large, symbolic gestures to achieve these aims.
Expand Quad Cooperation
• Make the Asia-Africa Growth Corridor (AAGC) a Quad Initiative.
In May 2017, the Indian and Japanese governments jointly pre-
sented a vision document for the AAGC- an initiative to establish
several sea corridors linking Africa to South and South-East Asia.
Increased funding and coordination amongst Quad members could
help get the proposed project off the ground.
• Create a Quad Indo-Pacific humanitarian assistance and disaster
response cell to build partner capacity in addressing future regional
challenges.128
• Encourage Quad members to engage in joint-venture investments
with China on select BRI projects. While it may be politically
untenable for the U.S. to join itself, Quad member involvement
could enable allies to shape projects from within and ensure higher
quality investment and construction standards.
128 Ayres, Alyssa. “Creating an India-US advantage in the Indo-Pacific: Four steps that would boost
security cooperation and regional stability. ” The Times of India. 1 March, 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
51
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Support India’s Growing Economic and Military Role in the Region
• Support India’s efforts to join the Asia-Pacific Economic Coopera-
tion forum.129
• Bolster Indian operational awareness by fast-tracking negotia-
tions to sign the Communications, Compatibility and Security
Agreement (COMCASA) and Basic Exchange and Cooperation
Agreement (BECA) to expand technology, communication, and
intelligence sharing.
• Expand U.S.-India coordination in the western Indian Ocean
region by inviting Indian Navy liaisons to CENTCOM and
AFRICOM and establishing anti-piracy/humanitarian relief
exercises.130
Manage Debt Burdens
Diplomatic, Creditor-Focused Debt Management
The U.S. should push China to become a more responsible creditor. Most
unprofitable BRI projects offer China no real strategic collateral, and the
U.S. should advocate that it’s in Beijing’s interest to adopt more restrained
and transparent lending standards. Three suggested goals for Chinese
behavior are: entry into the Paris Creditors Club; create buy-in for Chi-
na-led G-20 sustainable financing agenda; and encourage adherence to
World Bank standards for more BRI projects.131 U.S. bargaining chips could
include leveraging tariffs/tariff relief as carrots and sticks, as well as offi-
cial recognition and potential support for Asian Infrastructure Investment
Bank (AIIB).
129 Moore, Evan. “Strengthen the U.S.-India Relationship. ” The National Review. 1 Feb. 2018.
130 Lalwani, Sameer. “T ake Small Steps to Advance the US-India Relationship. ” Defense One. 21 Dec.
2 0 1 7.
131 Hurley, John, et. al. “Examining the Debt Implications of the Belt and Road Initiative from a Policy
Perspective. ” Center for Global Development. March 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
52
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
Negotiate Chinese entry into the Paris Club132
• The Paris Club is an informal group of official creditors whose role
is to find coordinated and sustainable solutions to the payment
difficulties experienced by debtor countries.133
• China has engaged with the group on an ad hoc basis, but
momentum towards membership appears to have subsided. China
may appreciate the collective action and reputational benefits of
membership, and including China may help the U.S. dissuade
Beijing from seeking strategic assets as debt repayment.
Push to Implement China-led G-20 Sustainable Financing Agenda
• The “G-20 Agenda Toward a More Stable and Resilient Inter-
national Financial Architecture” was passed by the G-20 under
China’s 2016 presidency. Desire for G-20 prestige may make China
more amenable to provisions because it’s nominally their agenda
and their leadership.
• The agenda calls for:
 ■ “enhanced information sharing with respect to debt
sustainability, including signaling to IFIs’ staff if large public
liabilities appear not to be included in the DSA of a debtor
country”;
 ■ “as a general policy, information on past debt restructurings
from official and private creditors should be made public”;
 ■ a shared responsibility between borrowing countries and
sovereign lenders in maintaining debt on a sustainable path,
including recognition of the “applicable requirements of the
IMF’s Debt Limit Policy and of the International Develop-
ment Association’s Non-Concessional Borrowing Policy. ”
• This would be a modest step, but offering China an opportunity for
high-profile international leadership may motivate Beijing to make
some concessions on loan terms and debt repayment.
132 The recommendations on the Paris Club, G-20 agenda, and World Bank standards were drawn from
the March 2018 Center for Global Development report cited in the previous footnote.
133 Paris Club website. Accessed on 25 March 2018. http:/ /www.clubdeparis.org/

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
53
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School
Encourage Adherence to World Bank Standards for BRI projects
• Multilateral development banks (MDBs), such as the World Bank,
ADB, AIIB, and European Bank for Reconstruction and Develop-
ment currently lend their imprimatur to BRI, but only insist that
it meets their standards on the small fraction of projects that they
finance.
• Push China and MDBs for a more detailed agreement requiring
more BRI projects to meet MDB standards.
Support for AIIB as a Carrot to Achieve these Goals
• The U.S. has opposed the AIIB since its inception, but diplomatic
efforts to discourage allies from joining have largely proved unsuc-
cessful. Nearly 90 states have signed on to AIIB, and by this point,
the U.S. gains little for its tacit opposition. China may be willing to
bargain for the U.S. “acquiescence” to the AIIB, which could take
several forms: removing opposition to remaining allies (like Japan)
from joining; observer status; or full membership.
• Council on Foreign Relations Elizabeth Economy argues that
membership would allow the United States a seat inside the tent as
an advocate for best governance practices and an internal critic if
things go awry. Membership would also likely help ensure that U.S.
companies have fair access to AIIB’s bidding opportunities.134
• This report does not recommend an immediate push for full mem-
bership. But the U.S. should at least assess the pros and cons and
take China’s temperature on whether there is a bargain to be made.
T echnical, Debtor-Focused Debt Management
The recommendations in this section are largely drawn from The Center on
Global Development’s March 2018 report on BRI debt implications.135 While
the U.S. cannot compete on a large scale with Chinese BRI investment,
134 Economy, Elizabeth. “The AIIB Debacle: What Washington Should Do Now. ” Asia Unbound Blog.
Council on Foreign Relations, 16 Mar. 2015.
135 Hurley et al., 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
54
Debtbook Diplomacy:
China’s Strategic Leveraging of its Newfound Economic Influence and the Consequences for U.S. Foreign Policy
it can—with its partners—support initiatives by multilateral institutions
designed to help debtor countries manage their debt loads, share informa-
tion about predatory practices, and develop higher-quality projects.
Fund an International Legal Support Facility for Debtor Nations
• Support the creation of MDB-hosted (potentially Asian Develop-
ment Bank-hosted) facility that would secure expert counsel to
advise debtor nations on the negotiation of debt operations.
• Model after the African Development Bank’s African Legal Support
Facility (ALSF). The ALSF provides assistance to African countries
to strengthen their legal expertise and negotiating capacity in debt
management and litigation, natural resources and extractive indus-
tries management and contracting, investment agreements, and
related commercial and business transactions. The ALSF also grants
and advances funds to African countries for legal advice from top
legal counsel in these areas.136
Increase Donor Support and Encourage Partner Nations to Support Debt
Management Facilities
• Facilities could include the World Bank-IMF Debt Management
Facility and UNCTAD’s Debt Management and Financial Analysis
System. Both initiatives provide technical support to developing
country governments to improve debt management practices.
Support “Best Practice” Initiatives Run by Multilateral Institutions
• The ADB’s Asia Pacific Project Preparation Facility works to
improve the preparation, structuring, and placement of high-
er-quality projects and public-private partnerships.
• The G-20’s Global Infrastructure Hub works to promote better
knowledge sharing, highlighting reform opportunities and
facilitating connections between the public and private sectors on
infrastructure development.
136 African Development Bank Group website. Accessed on 25 March 2018. https:/ /www.afdb.org/en/
topics-and-sectors/initiatives-partnerships/african-legal-support-facility/

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
Harvard Kennedy School
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
www.belfercenter.org
Copyright 2018, President and Fellows of Harvard College
Printed in the United States of America
