
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
A generalised political consensus appears to exist on the European Union’s
overarching goal of a competitive and green European economy. The question of how
to achieve this, however, is hard to answer. Comprehensive policy packages reflecting
many of the trade-offs needed to reach the goal have been put forward by two former
Italian prime ministers in reports commissioned to steer the next EU policymaking
cycle (2024-2029; Draghi, 2024; Letta, 2024) . But do their prescriptions align with
other expert preferences and opinions?
We conducted a modest experiment on this, taking advantage of an annual gathering
of EU economic and policy experts – the Bruegel Annual Meetings (BAM) in Brussels  –
to capture via a survey a small snapshot of expert views on trade-offs related to EU
industrial and climate policy. The objective was to shed some light on the policy mood
in Brussels, especially in the context of the reports by Mario Draghi (2024) and Enrico
Letta (2024), which are likely influence the EU policymaking agenda for the next five
years.
Experiment set-up and results
At the 2024 BAM, we asked attendees to evaluate two different policy packages that
combine different trade-offs within specific policy fields. We set up two experiments
covering, first, industrial policy and, second, climate and energy policy . 
The industrial policy experiment
1
2
3
European industrial policyat a crossroads? Evidencefrom an expert survey
A modest experiment shows that a specialised Brussels
policy audience broadly agrees with Mario Draghi’s
report on EU competitiveness
Marie-Sophie Lappe, Francesco Nicoli
ANALYSIS 39/2024 / 27 November 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
European industrial policy at a crossroads? Evidence from an expert survey 2
In this experiment, the policy package involved three different trade-offs relevant to
EU-level policy:
The policy packages presented to respondents included one of the options from each
trade-off. From the twelve possible combinations (2x2x3), two highly consistent policy
combinations can be identified. The first is a digiriste economic plan, including
provision of financial support for industries, prioritising the creation of European
champions and protectionism to support domestic industrial build-up. The second was
a ‘frugal’ and market liberal package, prioritising fiscal discipline, market competition
and global market openness. Through repetition of the experiment and random
assignment of policy packages across respondents, we can infer preferences for
single trade-offs and of overall policy packages. Figure 1 shows the results.
Figure 1: Preferences in the industrial policy experiment
Whether to maintain fiscal discipline or provide financial support to strategic
industries;
Whether to focus on ensuring market competition through competition and merger
policy or to stimulate the creation of large ‘European champions’;
Whether to (i) maintain global trade integration or (ii) build and protect domestic
industry or (iii) adopt a policy aimed at maintaining trade openness while favouring
politically aligned countries (‘friendshoring’).
Source: Bruegel. Notes: The ranges show 90 percent confidence intervals. Effective N is 196 and R  of 0.077. The
red dots refer to point estimates and are to be read in relative terms within one question. A red dot at zero refers to
the ‘baseline’ answer (eg strategic industries). Red dots deviating from zero show preferences relative to the
baseline answer (eg fiscal discipline is about 20 percent less preferred relative to strategic industries).
2
Bruegel analysis 39/2024 / 27 November 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
European industrial policy at a crossroads? Evidence from an expert survey 3
Respondents were about 20 percent less likely to favour fiscal discipline over
investment in strategic industries, while support for market competition was on
average about 11 percent higher than support for advocating for European champions.
Both these effects were statistically significant at a five percent level, indicating a clear
preference. On supply chains for strategic industries, respondents were relatively split:
marginally (but not statistically significantly so) favouring ‘friendshoring’ over domestic
industrial build-up or global market integration.
Figure 2: Preferences for policy packages in the industrial policy experiment
Source: Bruegel.
Figure 2 shows that the most supported policy package was a hybrid that deviated
from both the pure dirigiste and the pure frugal positions, while mixing characteristics
of both: a willingness to spend to support strategic industry, a view that maintaining
competition is more important than creating European champions and a belief that
friendshoring is preferable to both continued full global market integration and
protectionism. The least preferred package also constituted a downward compromise
of sorts, mixing policy features that lacked widespread support among respondents.
Letta (2024) and Draghi (2024) both recognise these trade-offs. They acknowledge the
constrained fiscal space at EU member-state level and argue for an expansion of EU-
level funding. Draghi advocates increased public investment – which he states “will
have some impact on public finances” – which mirrors survey respondents’ views.
On competition, the views of respondents also reflect Draghi’s recommendations. He
suggested simplifying mergers to scale up European companies and also that such
mergers must enhance innovation and maintain competition in the market. Letta (2024)
Bruegel analysis 39/2024 / 27 November 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
European industrial policy at a crossroads? Evidence from an expert survey 4
similarly outlined the need for an EU economic model that fosters large European
champions while maintaining competition involving a larger number of smaller firms.
On supply chains, Draghi argued for both the build-up of domestic supply and the
diversification of international supply chains (mirrored by the Letta’s call for “fostering
strategic partnerships”). The policy package most supported by our survey
respondents is close to the line taken by both Letta (2024) and Draghi (2024) .
Forthcoming EU initiatives, in particular a clean industrial deal promised by the new
European Commission, will show how many of these recommendations will be picked
up.
The climate and energy policy experiment
In this experiment, one policy package consisting of four trade-offs was presented:
The energy and climate transition experiment thus allowed for 16 combinations (4x4),
two of which are ‘pure’ and fully consistent policy stances. The first pure policy stance
is a fully ‘climate-oriented’ stance, combining an MFF focused on decarbonisation,
businesses financing the transition, which should override concerns about fiscal
space, and additional regulatory measures. On the opposite side of the spectrum,
there is a ‘frugal’ and market-oriented approach, that sees competitiveness as the
focus of the next MFF, assigns green transition costs to households to avoid
overburdening firms, prioritises fiscal discipline and prefers no additional regulatory
burden (Figures 3 and 4).
4
Whether the overall objective of the future EU budget (the Multiannual Financial
Framework, MFF) should be decarbonisation or competitiveness;
Whether the long-term distribution of the costs of the energy transition should be
borne by households or firms;
Whether to maintain fiscal discipline or prioritise expenses related to the energy
transition;
Whether additional regulation is necessary or not, for example introducing green
conditions in public procurement.
Bruegel analysis 39/2024 / 27 November 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
European industrial policy at a crossroads? Evidence from an expert survey 5
Figure 3: Preferences in the climate policy experiment
In terms of the focus of the MFF, competitiveness and decarbonisation were rated
similarly. This could imply two things: first, the opinions of experts are mixed, with an
equal split between decarbonisation or competitiveness for a given set of other
attributes. Or it could imply that respondents are indifferent to the topic and choose
the option at random, possibly because of lack of recognition that there is a trade-off
in the first place.
For the second option (Figure 3), there seems to be a preference for protecting
households over businesses from the cost of the energy transition, though the result is
only marginally statistically significant. The third option is whether fiscal discipline or
the energy transition should be prioritised. The result is similar to the experiment in
industrial policy, with fiscal discipline around 18 percent less favoured than investment
in the energy transition. With respect to the last option, tighter regulation is less
favoured when examining the policy in isolation.
Source: Bruegel. Notes: The ranges show 90 percent confidence intervals. Effective N is 208 and R of 0.089. For
explanations, see note to Figure 1.
2 
Bruegel analysis 39/2024 / 27 November 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
European industrial policy at a crossroads? Evidence from an expert survey 6
Figure 4: Preferences for policy packages in the climate policy experiment
The most popular total policy bundle among our respondents was a ‘climate-oriented’
package, in which decarbonisation takes precedence over firm competitiveness and
fiscal discipline, while additional regulation is also included and the costs are borne by
firms rather than households. Consistent with this, the least-supported package is the
‘frugal’ package, which has the opposite priorities. Although respondents preferred
less regulation in isolation, they were more open to regulation in combination with
other policies that support decarbonisation. 
These preferences appear broadly consistent with Draghi (2024), who noted that
decarbonisation can enhance competitiveness by lowering energy costs in the
medium and long run. Hence, there might not be a perceived trade-off between one or
the other. On the distribution of costs, Draghi seems to advocate for cost-sharing
among all consumers, even potentially shifting costs away from energy-intensive firms
– a view not shared by our respondents, which reflects some of the criticism Draghi’s
report has received . The preference for additional (or at least a change of) rules on
public procurement is again reflected in both Letta (2024) and Draghi (2024), and in our
most-favoured package.
Limitations and conclusions
First, the number of respondents to our survey was relatively low . As a result, our
results are not very precise.
Second, our sample was possibly not fully representative of the BAM attendance. The
survey invitation was included in the post-BAM ‘thank-you’ email and so only
Source: Bruegel.
5
6
Bruegel analysis 39/2024 / 27 November 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
European industrial policy at a crossroads? Evidence from an expert survey 7
particularly attentive attendees who read the email participated in the survey. In
addition, BAM attendees are of course a selected crowd, skewed towards the
economic profession, academia and European institutions, and not fully representative
of the overall policy-expert population with a professional interest in industrial and
climate policy. While the experiment remains internally valid, its external validity is
limited.
Third, we focused on relatively simple experiments with few options and combinations,
while still pertaining to complex issues, which might have hampered overall
understanding by respondents.
Nonetheless, the results offer an overview of preference tendencies of a certain expert
audience linked to Brussels. We find statistically significant and intuitive results for
both experiments and that many recommendations in Letta (2024) and Draghi (2024)
hit the spot in expressing much of the general EU policy mood: ambition on climate
policies, while opting for compromises in industrial policy, reflecting the lack of
coherence and clarity of the subject.
References
Draghi, M. (2024) The future of European Competitiveness, European Commission,
available at https://commission.europa.eu/topics/strengthening-european-
competitiveness/eu-competitiveness-looking-ahead_en
Letta, E. (2024) Much more than a market, report to the European Council, available
at https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/ny3j24sm/much-more-than-a-market-
report-by-enrico-letta.pdf
Nicoli, F., D. Van der Duin and B. Burgoon (2023) ‘Which Energy Security Union? An
experiment on public preferences for energy union alternatives in 5 western European
countries’, Energy Policy 183: 113734, available
at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2023.113734
Bruegel analysis 39/2024 / 27 November 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
European industrial policy at a crossroads? Evidence from an expert survey 8
Endnotes
1 See also Simone Tagliapietra, ‘Draghi’s industrial masterplan has decarbonisation at
its core’, First Glance, Bruegel, 9 September 2024, https://www.bruegel.org/first-
glance/draghis-industrial-masterplan-has-….
2 See https://www.bruegel.org/BAM2024.
3 Our experiment was a conjoint experiment, or a survey-based research method used
to measure how people weigh up different attributes of a decision by having them
evaluate a series of choices in which the attributes are systematically varied. See for
example Nicoli et al (2023).
4 Note that the responses to the survey were submitted after the release of both
reports.
5 Georg Zachmann, ‘Draghi’s pitch to improve the competitiveness of energy-
intensive industry’, First Glance, Bruegel, 12 September 2024,
https://www.bruegel.org/first-glance/draghis-pitch-improve-competitiven….
6 Our sample across both experiments consisted of 49 individual participants. Many
opted to respond to both experiments, resulting in 35 responses for the industrial
policy experiment and 38 for the climate and energy policy experiment (24
individuals answered both). Given that every respondent rated multiple packages,
this yields an effective N of 196 for the industrial policy experiment and 210 for the
climate and energy policy experiment.
Bruegel analysis 39/2024 / 27 November 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
© Bruegel 2026. All rights reserved. Short sections, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted in the original language without explicit
permission provided that the source is acknowledged. Opinions expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) alone.
Bruegel
Rue de la Charité
33,
B-1210 Brussels
(+32) 2 227 4210
info@bruegel.org
Bruegel.org
