
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
WORKING PAPER | ISSUE 09/2026 | 15 MAY 2026
Western Balkan economic integration with the European Union has advanced
significantly over the past two decades, driven by trade liberalisation and significant
EU foreign direct investment in the region. Yet integration remains incomplete. Though
tariffs have been eliminated, firms in the region continue to face substantial trade costs
to access the EU market. These costs stem from a range of non-tariff barriers, regulatory
requirements and border-related frictions, which have become more pronounced over
time.
This paper identifies the critical barriers currently shaping the trade relations between
the EU and the Western Balkans. These include non-tariff measures, particularly
sanitary and phytosanitary and technical regulations, inefficient cross-border
infrastructure and the new EU regulatory frameworks, including the carbon border
adjustment mechanism, the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive and the
Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence Directive.
Building on this analysis, the paper assesses the extent to which the current EU
framework addresses these barriers. It shows that existing instruments, including
Stabilisation and Association Agreements with Western Balkan countries, and the
New Growth Plan for the Western Balkans, amount to an incomplete and ambiguous
framework for reducing non-tariff barriers prior to full membership. A more targeted
and differentiated approach is needed, allowing for a more flexible integration into EU
value chains, alongside increased support for regulatory alignment, border efficiency
and infrastructure improvements.
We thank Bruegel Senior Fellow Ignacio García Bercero for his review, participants in the
Bruegel research meeting for their comments and discussion, and Marko Mandić, Central
European Free Trade Agreement trade expert, for his valuable insights.
This Working Paper was produced with financial support from Open Society
Foundations Western Balkans.
Madalena Barata da Rocha (madalena.barata-rocha@bruegel.org) is a Research Analyst
at Bruegel
Niclas Poitiers is a Research Fellow at Bruegel
Nina Vujanović (nina.vujanovic@bruegel.org) is an Affiliate Fellow at Bruegel
Recommended citation:
Barata da Rocha, M., N. Poitiers and N. Vujanović (2026) ‘Challenges to the integration
of the Western Balkans into European Union supply chains’ , Working Paper 09/2026,
Bruegel, available at https://doi.org/10.64153/GYLY9147
WORKING PAPER | ISSUE 16 | 2025
CHALLENGES TO THE
INTEGRATION OF THE
WESTERN BALKANS INTO
EUROPEAN UNION SUPPLY
CHAINS
MADALENA BARATA DA ROCHA, NICLAS POITIERS, NINA VUJANOVI Ć

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
1 Introduction
Russia’s 2022 invasion of Ukraine and the geopolitical situation more broadly have given the European
Union enlargement process a new dynamic. Several countries neighbouring the EU have begun to
reconsider their relationships with the bloc to secure their strategic positions through closer economic
ties. The EU meanwhile has given more importance to the integration of its neighbourhood. This
provides a new opportunity for the integration into the EU of the Western Balkan countries. In this
paper, we assess the state of play of Western Balkan trade integration with the EU single market, the
trade barriers that impede further economic integration and how they could be alleviated.
The Western Balkan countries have been increasingly integrated into EU supply chains, also because
of their geographic location as close neighbours of EU member states. Their integration into EU supply
chains has been substantial and is underpinned by growing EU foreign direct investment (FDI) in the
region, particularly from Germany, targeting manufacturing. All six Western Balkan economies
(Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Montenegro, North Macedonia and Serbia) have had
structured economic ties with the EU since the mid-2000s through Stabilisation and Association
Agreements, which practically eliminated tariﬀs on industrial goods. Non-tariﬀ barriers with the EU
remain high, creating increasing economic costs for both local and foreign ﬁrms in the region. Long
waiting times at borders and increasing numbers of EU regulations add to the diﬃculties caused by the
current insuﬃcient regulatory alignment with the single market.
To facilitate the economic growth of these countries, deeper integration with European supply chains is
called for. We highlight two separate sets of issues. The ﬁrst relates to the frontrunners in the EU
accession process (Montenegro and Albania), which, at the time of writing, are already progressing
strongly on their EU accession paths and thus full integration into the single market. The second set of
issues relates to the remaining Western Balkan economies, which demand a more multifaceted policy
approach, requiring not only adoption of regulatory reforms but also investment in (cross-border)
infrastructure and customs controls, especially at identiﬁed transit bottlenecks with the EU.
In what follows, we unpack the EU-Western Balkans FDI-trade nexus, focusing on diﬀerent barriers to
integration into EU supply chains, and how these could be addressed through the current legal
framework with the EU and beyond.
2 Integration of the Western Balkans into EU supply chains
Foreign direct investment plays a central role in the growth model of the Western Balkans. Beyond
providing capital, FDI facilitates the region’s integration into European and global value chains,
supports capital formation and can generate productivity-enhancing spillovers to domestic ﬁrms
(Vujanović et al, 2022, 2023). The Western Balkans have relatively high levels of FDI inﬂows as a share
of GDP, compared to the EU average and to EU countries along the eastern borders of the bloc,

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
according to World Bank data1. This underlines the importance of FDI as a driver of economic activity
and integration of the Western Balkans into European supply chains.
The EU is the dominant source of FDI in the region, with Germany in particular accounting for a
substantial share of inﬂows to Western Balkan economies (Ruer and Vujanović, 2025). The share of
EU-origin FDI increased between 2014 and 2024 in most countries (Figure 1). As of 2024, the EU FDI
share in the recipient countries’ GDP (excluding oﬀshore ﬁnancial centres, OFCs) ranged from 2.7
percent in Albania to 5.7 percent in Montenegro. Serbia was a notable exception: the relative
importance of non-OFC EU investment declined from 1.6 percent of GDP in 2014 to 0.4 percent in
2024, and was eﬀectively replaced by FDI from China and from EU-based OFCs (the Netherlands,
Luxembourg, Malta, Ireland and Cyprus; see note to Figure 1). Other non-EU investors also played a
role in speciﬁc cases. In Montenegro, for instance, Russia was a signiﬁcant source of FDI, accounting
for 1.3 percent of GDP in 2024.
Meanwhile, intra-regional investment has gained importance. FDI originating from Western Balkan
economies themselves increased across all countries over the 2014–2024 period, suggesting a
gradual strengthening of regional economic linkages.
Figure 1: FDI inﬂows (% of GDP)

Source: Bruegel based on national central banks and World Bank. Note: OFC (EU) includes the Netherlands, Luxembourg,
Malta, Ireland and Cyprus, according to Zoromé (2007).
Part of the investments in the region could be less productive, however. OFC FDI reﬂects conduit FDI
from third (possibly non-EU) countries routed through an EU OFC country, often for tax purposes. These

1 In 2024, average FDI net inﬂows into the EU were equivalent to 1.5 percent of EU GDP . For comparison, the values for
Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia were 3.1 percent, 1.9 percent and 4.9 percent, respectively. See World Bank, ‘Foreign direct
investment, net inﬂows (% of GDP) - European Union, Romania, Bulgaria, Croatia’,
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/BX.KLT.DINV.WD.GD.ZS?locations=EU-RO-BG-HR.
-4,0%
-2,0%
0,0%
2,0%
4,0%
6,0%
8,0%
10,0%
12,0%
14,0%
2014
2024
2014
2024
2014
2024
2014
2024
2019
2024
2014
2024
North
Macedonia
Serbia Kos ovo Albania Montenegro Bosnia
Herzegovina
RoW FDI,% GDP China FDI% GDP Russia FDI% GDP
WB FDI % GDP EU FDI,% GDP OFC (EU) FDI % GDP

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
investments are considered less productivity-enhancing than investments originating from the
ultimate EU investor (Casella, 2019; Vujanović et al, 2021).
The sectoral composition of FDI has evolved over time. Estrin and Uvalic (2016) showed that in 2010,
inward FDI was predominantly directed towards non-tradable services, such as banking,
telecommunications and real estate. More recent developments, however, point to the growing
importance of manufacturing as a target for foreign investment, particularly in Serbia and North
Macedonia (Krasniqi et al, 2022), reﬂecting a gradual shift toward export-oriented activities and
suggesting deeper integration into supply chains. According to Western Balkan central bank statistics,
from 2015 to 2024, roughly a ﬁfth (20 percent) of FDI inﬂows into Serbia were directed to
manufacturing only. A growing share is linked to Chinese FDI, which is concentrated in industrial
activities, particularly in automotive and related supply chains2. In North Macedonia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, 30 percent of FDI goes to manufacturing. The exceptions to these FDI industrial shifts are
the smaller and more tourism service-oriented Western Balkan economies, Montenegro and Albania.
According to data from their central banks, Montenegro hosts nearly half (48.9 percent) and Albania a
quarter of FDI into real estate, with Albania also still attracting signiﬁcant FDI into banking (18 percent
of total)3.
The strong presence of EU ﬁrms in the Western Balkans is partly explained by the region’s cost
competitiveness: labour costs in the Western Balkans remain substantially below EU levels, with
average monthly gross wages typically amounting to less than one-third of the EU average, and still
below those in lower-income EU member states including Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia. This creates
strong incentives for EU ﬁrms to locate labour-intensive activities in the region4.
The importance of EU investment in the Western Balkans is mirrored by the region’s trade patterns. The
EU is by far the largest trading partner of the Western Balkan countries, consistently accounting for
more than 60 percent of total goods exports. This share has remained relatively stable, underscoring
the persistent orientation of the region’s exports towards EU markets (Figure 2). According to the 2024
Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) trade portal, the main EU export market for the
Western Balkans is Germany (18.8 percent of total exports), mostly accounted for by exports from
Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and North Macedonia, for which Germany accounts for substantial
export shares (15.5 percent, 14.4 percent and 32.3 percent of individual country’s total exports,
respectively)5. Other important EU export markets for the region are Italy (8 percent of exports),

2 Branimir Jovanović, ‘What’s driving Chinese FDI in the Western Balkans – and what should be done about it?’, wiiw, 12
June 2025, https://wiiw.ac.at/what-s-driving-chinese-fdi-in-the-western-balkans--and-what-should-be-done-about-it-n-
685.html; Stefan Vladisavljev, ‘How Did China Become the Largest Investor in Serbia?’ Choice, 8 August 2023,
https://chinaobservers.eu/how-did-china-become-the-largest-investor-in-serbia.
3 Data for Montenegro refers to 2025 balance-of-payments data and for Albania to sectoral FDI data inﬂows for 2024.
4 Average gross monthly earnings are €2868 in the EU, €933 in Bulgaria, €1220 in Hungary, €1259 in Romania, €1397 in
Croatia and €829 for the Westen Balkans (simple average for North Macedonia, Albania, Serbia and Bosnia Herzegovina) ;
Eurostat, 2022 values.
5 Germany is also an important export market for Kosovo, accounting for about 11 percent of its exports. Albania’s main
export market is Italy, with 43.7 percent of its exported goods shipped to Italy, while Germany takes a modest share of 5.9

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Croatia (5 percent), Hungary (4 percent) and Austria and Slovenia (3 percent each). These ﬁgures
suggest more diversiﬁed export markets than countries with more liberal trade agreements with the EU
(deep and comprehensive free trade agreements, DCFTAs). Moldova exports to the EU, for example, are
heavily concentrated in a single neighbouring market: Romania6.
Other Western Balkan countries as a group represent the second most important export destination for
individual Western Balkan countries. In contrast, exports to partners such as Russia remain
comparatively limited, while China has recently emerged as a smaller export market, partly reﬂecting
the presence of Chinese multinational ﬁrms operating in Serbia.
Figure 2: Shares of Western Balkan exports by main partners, 2012–2024

Source: Bruegel based on UNCTAD.
Exports of manufactured goods are an important gauge to measure the extent to which Western Balkan
countries have integrated into European supply chains, rather than being just providers of basic
materials. According to CEFTA (2024), manufactured goods accounted for roughly two-thirds (69
percent) of Western Balkan exports to the EU, with machinery and transport equipment alone
comprising nearly one-third (32.1 percent).
Figure 3 shows that manufacturing export growth was robust in the early 2000s, before slowing
sharply after the Global Financial Crisis in 2008-2009. Since then, growth has resumed but remains
moderate and uneven, with no sustained acceleration. This reﬂects the EU’s trade policy towards the
region. Liberalisation started in the early 2000s and was later formalised through Stabilisation and
Association Agreements signed between the EU and individual Western Balkan countries (see section
3.1). Beyond liberalisation of tariﬀs, EU trade policy towards the region has remained largely intact
ever since, reﬂected in the relatively stable growth of its manufacturing exports. Figure 4, Panel B

percent. Montenegro’s export good market is more regional , with about a third of exported goods going to Serbia. See CEFTA,
‘Total Trade in Goods – CEFTA 2025’, https://transparency.cefta.int/TradeStatistics/TradeInGoods.
6 Romania takes roughly a third of Moldovan goods exports, while more distant markets from Moldova take substantially
lower shares, for example Italy (6.7 percent), Germany (4.8 percent) and Bulgaria (3.2 percent).
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
China Russia Rest of th e world Western Balkan s European Union

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
shows that export growth has not been limited to low-tech manufacturing activities but has also
included growing exports from the higher-tech sectors of auto-moto machinery and equipment, the
shares of which have increased.
Figure 3: Exports of manufactured goods to EU

Source: Bruegel based on OECD. Note: manufacturing sectors included in the high -tech category: manufacture of chemicals
and chemical products, manufacture of basic pharmaceutical products and pharmaceutical preparations, manufacture of
computer, electronic and optical products, manufacture of electrical equipment, manufacture of machinery and equipment,
manufacture of motor vehicles trailers and semi-trailers, manufacture of other transport equipment (Eurostat). The low -
tech category contains all the other industrial activities.
To assess more directly the extent of integration of Western Balkan countries into EU supply chains, we
examine the value added generated in these countries that is embedded in EU exports. This measure
captures the extent to which production in the Western Balkans is an input into EU exports to third
markets, and therefore, can be interpreted as an indicator of participation in cross-border value chains.
A modest upward trend as a share of total domestic value added suggests a gradual increase in
integration into supply chains over time, particularly for Serbia and North Macedonia (Figure 4). At the
same time, the levels observed for Western Balkan countries are broadly comparable to those of other
European economies closely integrated with the single market, including Türkiye, Switzerland and the
United Kingdom. This points to the importance for Western Balkan countries of trade with the EU, and
also of barriers to trade with the single market.

0
5E+09
1E+10
1,5E+10
2E+10
2,5E+10
3E+10
3,5E+10
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2024
High tech manufacturing Low tech manufacturing
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina
North Macedonia Serbia

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Figure 4: Valued added embedded in EU exports (% GVA)

Source: Bruegel based on Eurostat.
Taken together, these patterns point to a model of integration that is increasingly based on
manufacturing activities embedded in European value chains, often driven by foreign investors. This
type of integration relies on the timely cross-border movement of inputs across multiple production
stages. As a result, it is sensitive to trade frictions including non-tariﬀ barriers and border delays. These
tend to increase costs and reduce the attractiveness of the region as a location for investment.
3 Trade barriers
Stabilisation and Association Agreements (SAAs) between the EU and Western Balkan countries have
removed most traditional trade barriers, including tariﬀs on most products, except for certain
agricultural and ﬁshery products. However, non-tariﬀ barriers (NTBs), new trade regulations and
waiting time at the border continue to pose signiﬁcant challenges to the region’s proper integration into
EU supply chains.
Trade costs arising from trade barriers pose challenges not only to regional exporters but also to
European investors in the region that export abroad. Figure 10 shows the extent to which German
foreign ﬁrms active in Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and North Macedonia perceive trade barriers as
a signiﬁcant risk to their business operations. This risk is particularly pronounced in North Macedonia,
where almost one-third (28 percent) of German ﬁrms in late 2025 viewed trade barriers as a major
business risk – an increase of 21 percentage points compared to spring 2023. Similar concerns are
evident in Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, where 13 percent of surveyed German ﬁrms identify

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
trade barriers as a business risk (based on German Chamber of Commerce surveys; AHK, 2025). As
shown in Figure 10, the perception of risks has increased over time.
Figure 5: German companies in Western Balkans stating that trade barriers pose business risks to
their operation, % of total

Source: Bruegel based on German Chamber of Commerce (AHK) World Business Outlook editions, 2022 -2025.
While AHK (2025) (Figure 5) does not specify explicitly which trade barriers ﬁrms face when exporting
outside the Western Balkans, it is clear from the following analysis that these primarily consist of NTBs,
as trade with the EU is tariﬀ-free across most sectors.
3.1 T ariﬀs
With few exemptions, tariﬀs have ceased to be a signiﬁcant barrier to Western Balkan integration with
the EU. Figure 6 shows the simple average of tariﬀs applied on Western Balkan exports to the EU for
four Western Balkan countries. While in 2000, tariﬀ rates were still substantial, they have been largely
eliminated since the mid-2000s.
Initially, the move to eliminate EU tariﬀs came not through comprehensive free trade agreements with
Western Balkan countries, but rather through unilateral EU tariﬀ reductions. Under normal
circumstances, World Trade Organization rules do not allow for such unilateral reductions as they
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2023 spring 2023 aut um n 2024 spring 2024 aut um n 2025 spring 2025 aut um n
Serbia North Macedonia Bosnia and Herzegovina

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
would violate the most-favoured nation (MFN) principle. However, the EU received a waiver from the
WTO membership in order to apply tariﬀ reductions7.
Since then, the EU has concluded conventional free trade agreements as part of the SAAs. The ﬁrst SAA
was concluded with North Macedonia in 2004, followed by Albania (2006), Montenegro (2010), Serbia
(2013), Bosnia and Herzegovina (2015) and Kosovo (2016). These free trade agreements eliminated
all tariﬀs with a few exemptions for agricultural goods8. Furthermore, intra-regional trade in order to
strengthen supply chain integration has been facilitated through the Central European Free Trade
Agreement (CEFTA), brokered by the EU and in place since 2007 (see Steinbach et al, 2025).
Figure 6: EU tariﬀs on Western Balkan countries, simple average

Source: Bruegel based on WITS.
3.2 Trade costs related to non-tariﬀ measures are high
While tariﬀs have been mostly eliminated, substantial trade barriers are still in place, especially
through NTBs. These are sector-speciﬁc regulations designed to ensure the circulation of high-quality
(import) products within a market (in this case the single market). The most prominent NTBs include
sanitary and phytosanitary measures (SPSs) and technical barriers to trade (TBTs). SPSs primarily
apply to food and agricultural imports, with the objective of protecting human, animal and plant health.
TBTs relate primarily to manufacturing imports and set rules on product characteristics (including
packaging, labels and terminology), production processes and methods to safeguard national
security, the environment and consumer safety.

7 See WTO decision of 28 July 2021, ‘European Union request for an extension of the waiver for the application of
autonomous preferential treatment to the Western Balkans’,
https://docs.wto.org/dol2fe/Pages/SS/directdoc.aspx?ﬁlename=q:/WT/L/1114.pdf.
8 In some cases, these tariﬀs have been waived through autonomous tariﬀ measures.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
NTBs do not necessarily hamper trade, but diﬀerences between trade partners in terms of NTBs
increase compliance costs, bureaucratic hurdles and transaction costs (Ghodsi et al, 2025; Castelli et
al, 2025). UNECE (2021), based on a survey carried out in Serbia, found that compliance requirements
(eg laws and regulations) have outpaced the ability of agencies to conduct quality checks, of small
and medium sized enterprises (MSMEs) to keep up with obligations. Consequently, thus far, it is
mostly large ﬁrms operating in the Western Balkans that are able to take advantage of the
opportunities oﬀered by the better access to the EU single market. UNECE (2021) reported that there
are “explanatory costs” related to diﬃculties in understanding the regulatory requirements, especially
in times of more intensive activity to align with the EU acquis: “micro and small size ﬁrms allocate 40
per cent of their weekly working hours to achieve compliance with documentary requirements”
(UNECE, 2021, 69). This illustrates that even if a Western Balkan country’s regulatory framework is
aligned with the EU acquis, implementation is challenging in practice.
Figure 7: Trade costs associated with sanitary and phytosanitary and technical barriers to trade
imposed on Western Balkan imports by the EU (ad-valorem equivalents)

Source: Bruegel, based on Ghodsi et al (2025).
To better understand the economic impact of NTBs, using the methodology of Ghodsi et al (2025)9, we
calculate the ad-valorem equivalents – expressed as percentage tariﬀ equivalents – of TBTs and SPSs
faced by Western Balkan ﬁrms exporting to the EU. The costs incurred by exporting ﬁrms to comply

9 The ad-valorem equivalents of TBTs and SPSs are calculated in four steps, from very granular level (product HS 6-digit
product level) to regional level. The ﬁrst step involves calculating import demand elasticities . The second step involves
ﬁnding instruments to identify NTBs (TBTs and SPSs) with an empirical model. These instrumented NTMs are used in the
third step as independent variables to estimate the eﬀects of NTMs (elasticity) on trade. The fourth step involves using two
elasticities (calculated in the ﬁrst and third steps) for measuring ad-valorem equivalents of NTMs at product level, which we
then aggregate to trade-partner level (EU) and then average for the Western Balkans. Each step is empirical and explained
in detailed in Ghodsi et al (2025), and in intuitive way in Box 1 of Steinbach et al (2025).
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
3,5
4
4,5
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Sani tary and p hytosanitary
Technical barriers to trade

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
with EU regulations are signiﬁcant and rising (Figure 7), partly because of the growth in exports to the
EU of products that are more heavily regulated.
Our results suggest that from 2012 to 2017, for Western Balkan exporters to the EU, trade costs
associated with TBT compliance were on average four times higher than those associated with SPS
compliance. However, between 2017 and 2022 (the most recent year available), these costs
converged to roughly the same level. Over this period, compliance with TBTs and SPSs generated
regulatory costs equivalent to an additional tariﬀ of around 3 percentage points on import prices,
highlighting the substantial impact of regulatory compliance costs when exporting to the EU.
3.3 Non-tariﬀ barriers are taking on new forms
While the EU accession process leads to regulatory convergence and facilitates a reduction in SPS and
TBT-related costs, emerging EU trade policies are simultaneously increasing the cost of trade. Such
policies try not just to regulate the characteristics of a traded good, but its production processes. They
target broader concerns such as environmental and labour standards across global supply chains.
Examples include the EU carbon border adjustment mechanism (CBAM, Regulation (EU) 2023/956), in
place as of 1 January 2026, the EU Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence Directive (CSDDD, Directive
(EU) 2024/1760) and Corporate Social Responsibility Directive (CSRD, Directive (EU) 2022/2464). All
three laws impose compliance obligations primarily on large ﬁrms operating in or supplying the EU
market
10.
CBAM is intended to mitigate carbon leakage related to certain goods covered by the EU emissions
trading system (ETS), including electricity, aluminium, cement, fertilisers, chemicals and iron and
steel. The Western Balkan countries are among the most exposed to CBAM-related products because
their geographical proximity and strong trade linkages with the EU (Bahí et al, 2026). Based on 2024
data, total trade exposure to CBAM-covered goods ranged from 7.16 percent in North Macedonia to
29.9 percent in Montenegro. However, when electricity – partly sourced from renewables in most
countries except Kosovo (Vujanović et al, 2025) and traded through the regional grid – is excluded, the
share of CBAM-aﬀected goods in total EU goods trade falls to between 4.4 percent in Serbia and 9
percent in Bosnia and Herzegovina (Figure 8).

10 Small or micro ﬁrms are not excluded explicitly from CBAM in the legislation, but a 50-tonne annual threshold introduced
in late 2025 eﬀectively exempts most small importers. See European Commission news of 20 October 2025, ‘Oﬃcially
published: Simpliﬁcations for the Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM)’, https://taxation-
customs.ec.europa.eu/news/oﬃcially-published-simpliﬁcations-carbon-border-adjustment-mechanism-cbam-2025-10-
20_en.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Figure 8: CBAM-product (excluding electricity) exposure by country, % of total exports to the EU

Source: Bruegel based on CEPII. Note: electricity is excluded as it is traded through the transmission system (grid) and not
via freight transport.
While the coupling of the Western Balkan and EU electricity markets, as planned in the European
Commission’s ‘New growth plan for the Western Balkans’, covering 2024-2027 (Vujanović et al, 2025;
European Commission, 2023), will eﬀectively lead CBAM electricity trade-related costs drop to zero by
2028, exporters of other goods – aluminium, iron, steel and cement – will have to bear these costs
when exporting to the EU unless ETSs are established in the Western Balkans. Though geographical
proximity and closer trade links should justify the sooner-than-later implementation of ETSs, only
Montenegro at time of writing has an ETS, priced below EU levels11. This suggests diﬃculties not only in
implementing ETSs but also in imposing carbon price levels comparable to those EU, owing to the lower
levels of economic development of these countries.
The CSDDD requires ﬁrms to identify, prevent, mitigate and remedy adverse human rights and
environmental impacts across their supply chains. Likewise, the CSRD requires EU companies to report
on the sustainability impacts of their activities, in line with the 2019 European Green Deal. The CSDDD
will apply in phases from 2028–2029, while the CSRD is at time of writing being implemented. Unlike
CBAM, which targets speciﬁc carbon-intensive industries, these regulations operate across all
industries, but are limited to large EU and non-EU companies operating in the EU.
For Western Balkan exporters, CSDDD and CSRD imply compliance with these standards must be
demonstrated in both their own operations and across their lower-tier suppliers, since non-compliance
can eﬀectively exclude upstream suppliers from European value chains. As these regulatory

11 Montenegro, the smallest Western Balkan economy, has an ETS with a carbon price of €24/tonne, compared to the EU
level of about €80. Under CBAM, importers pay the diﬀerence between the two prices to the EU.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Moldova North
Macedonia
Serbia Ukraine Albania Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Montenegro
Aluminium Cement Fertilisers Iron and steel Chemicals

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
requirements are new, there are so far no assessments of their trade-related costs. While they could
lead to some additional bureaucratic costs, they also provide an opportunity as Western Balkan
suppliers can build trust with EU customers and replace competitors that exit supply chains because
they cannot or do not meet these standards.
3.4 Cross-border infrastructure
Beyond compliance costs, NTBs also create additional trade costs via necessary customs, veterinary
and sanitary inspections, including border checks. At the Western Balkan-EU (Schengen) border,
checks are conducted twice, once on the Western Balkan side and once on the EU side, leading to
longer clearance times (Figure 9). This is coupled with diﬀerent working hours at the border and
diﬀering procedural approaches on both sides, making the process highly ineﬃcient (UNECE, 2021).
Figure 9: Double cross-border checkpoints between the Western Balkans and the EU

Source: CEFTA (see https://greencorridors.cefta.int/assets/Waiting_Time_Methodology.pdf).
In addition to phytosanitary, veterinary and customs checks, truck drivers undergo police controls on
both sides of the border. These have been digitalised through the Entry/Exit System (EES), part of the
EU’s integrated border management framework applicable to all non-EU citizens, including truck
drivers12. While this tool oﬀers better control of migration ﬂows and Schengen area border control,
through digital tracking of exact entry and exit, its introduction has implications for freight trade as the
rules tighten enforcement of visa rules for professional truck drivers. This has implications for supply-
chain integration in the region as it increases the operational costs for the region’s transport industry,
increasing pressure on trade with the EU too (Box 1).

12 See ‘Entry/Exit System (EES)’, https://travel-europe.europa.eu/en/ees.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Box 1: EES prolongs waiting times and faces discontent from the region’s suppliers
The EES has been operational since 12 October 2025 and has been fully applied since 10 April
2026.
The EES electronically records the time and place of entry and exit for third-country nationals,
enabling precise calculation of their permitted stay in the Schengen area. For truck drivers from the
Western Balkans, this stay is limited to 90 days within any 180-day period. Although the 90/180-
day rule was already in place, replacing passport stamps with a digital register makes enforcement
stricter and reduces ﬂexibility when planning trips, as the calculation period is based on the exact
hours rather than exact day. This comes in addition to the Schengen area being expanded to three
countries bordering the Western Balkans – Croatia (since 2023), Romania and Bulgaria (since
2024) – signiﬁcantly enlarging the territory where the 90/180-day rule applies. If the 90-day rule is
broken, truck drivers face potential deportation, ﬁnes and entry bans
13.
The EES also entails biometric data collection and photographing, which increases waiting times at
border crossings. Longer delays and less ﬂexible use of truck drivers raise transport costs for the
region’s manufacturing sector. Overall, there is concern that the Western Balkan transport sector
could shrink as a result
14. The issue has led to protests by truck drivers across the Western
Balkans15. Options being considered by the European Commission include limited facilitation for
cross-border workers, which do not cover most transport routes, and extended work visas to replace
reliance on short-term visas16.
Border waiting times vary depending on the crossing point. Freight transport along northern Serbia’s
borders with Hungary and Croatia faces particularly long delays compared to other crossings. The
Transport Community17 calculated (though during the COVID-19 pandemic) that waiting at the border
can last from half an hour for the North Macedonia-Greece border crossing, to as long as 3.5 hours for
the Serbia-Croatia and Serbia-Hungary border crossings. The wait at the border in the ﬁrst quarter of
2026 was much longer – up to seven hours for these two Serbian border crossings. According to
Gómez et al (2024), reducing waiting time at Western Balkan borders by three hours would be

13 Fatos Bytyci, ‘Western Balkan truck drivers block border cargo terminals over EU entry rules’, Reuters, 26 January 2026,
https://www.reuters.com/world/western-balkan-truck-drivers-block-border-cargo-terminals-over-eu-entry-rules-2026-01-
26/.
14 New Union Post, ‘Schengen rules at EU borders risk seriously aﬀecting producers in the Western Balkans’, 6 February
2026, https://newunionpost.eu/2026/02/06/western-balkans-eu-border-rules-risks/.
15 Truck drivers from Montenegro, Serbia, North Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina blocked freight border crossings
into the Schengen area in early January 2026. Protests have been called oﬀ and resumed on several occasions. See EWB ,
‘Montenegrin truck drivers end the blockades of the border terminals towards the Schengen Area’, 29 January 2026,
https://europeanwesternbalkans.com/2026/01/29/montenegrin-truck-drivers-end-the-blockades-of-the-border-terminals-
towards-the-schengen-area/.
16 Nikola Radišić, ‘Iz Brisela bez rješenja za prevoznike: Vize ili “prilagodite se pravilma EES-a!”’, N1, 30 March 2026,
https://n1info.ba/vijesti/iz-brisela-bez-rjesenja-za-prevoznike-vize-ili-prilagodite-se-pravilma-ees-a/.
17 The Transport Community is a treaty-based international organisation in the ﬁeld of transport and mobility . Its members
are six Western Balkan parties: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Montenegro, North Macedonia and Serbia , and
the EU, while observers include Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia. See https://www.transport-community.org.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
equivalent to a 2 percent reduction in tariﬀs, indicating a high economic charge, as in the case of
regulatory misalignment related to SPSs and TBTs.
Figure 10: Transport infrastructure through the region and identiﬁed bottlenecks

Source: Bruegel based on Transport Community.
The position of the Balkans as a crossroads between the EU and the eastern Mediterranean, and
between southern Europe (Greece) and central-eastern Europe, makes road transport in the region
important well beyond the Western Balkan–EU trade nexus. The highway running through North
Macedonia and Serbia (Skopje-Belgrade-Budapest), known as Pan-European Corridor-X, belongs to the
TEN-T network and is the shortest and fastest route connecting Greece and central Europe. For Turkey
and the wider Middle East, the highway through Bulgaria and Serbia is the main route for transport to
the EU. Western Balkan roads carry intensive transit between Greece and Turkey and central Europe
under the Common Transit Convention18 (covering the EU and eight partners, including North
Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro), straining customs capacity and lengthening queues, especially
at Serbia’s borders with Hungary and Croatia, which are the two main crossing points between the
region and the EU (Figure 10).

18 The Common Transit Convention permits goods to be transported across third countries under the authority of customs
bodies, setting out the obligations on traders and customs authorities and allowing common supervision between the
contracting parties. It involves the EU and EFTA states, Türkiye, North Macedonia, Serbia, the United Kingdom, Georgia,
Ukraine, Moldova and Montenegro. See EUR-Lex, ‘Convention on a common transit procedure’, https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/summary/convention-on-a-common-transit-procedure.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
4 The current framework for alleviating non-tariﬀ barriers is incomplete
The EU has recognised the need to integrate the Western Balkans better into EU value chains – an
objective stated explicitly in the European Commission ‘New growth plan for the Western Balkans’
(NGP) for the 2024-2027 period (European Commission, 2023). The NGP ties progress in integrating
with the value chain with “full alignment with the EU acquis”. Free movement of goods could be
facilitated using the clause in SAAs on Agreement on Conformity Assessment and Acceptance (ACAA)
of Industrial Products (ACAA), conditional on “alignment with the relevant horizontal EU product acquis”
(European Commission, 2023). However, the NGP refers only indirectly to part of the acquis
(discussed in section 4.1), without an explanation of how the process should be sequenced in
practice. The European Commission recognises that for further goods-market integration, SAAs should
be amended to selectively extend EU single market rules and related rights to the Western Balkans
once “conditions are met” (European Commission, 2023)19.
This ambiguity allows multiple interpretations, including treating the opening of all clusters in the EU
accession negotiation as a de-facto precondition for lowering non-tariﬀ barriers, making the target of
integrating the region into EU supply chains before the Growth Plan expires in December 2027
unrealistic. The approach potentially equates EU membership with integration into the EU single
market (Mihajlovic and Macek, 2024).
The NGP adds another layer of conditionality by linking these beneﬁts to the simultaneous opening of
“the relevant sectors and areas to all their neighbours at the same time, in line with the Common
Regional Market” (European Commission, 2023). This creates further ambiguity in relation to
integration of the Western Balkans into the EU supply chain, as the region’s biggest trade partner is the
EU, while furthering regional trade would materially beneﬁt Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia, which, because of political obstacles, have had lower capital ﬂows. It is unclear how such
Common Regional Market-based conditionality, especially outside the Bosnia–Serbia–Kosovo
triangle, would materially advance single market integration, especially as the entire region is
positioned at the lower end of the supply chain (Steinbach et al, 2025).
4.1 Regulatory alignment
Given that further opening of the single market to the Western Balkan countries is conditional on
regulatory alignment, we examine the degree to which this is true in the regulatory framework
indirectly assessed as important for integration into EU supply chains. These reforms relate to
alignment with the EU’s body of law (the acquis communautaire) as part of accession negotiations.

19 The NGP states that “Once it has been determined by the Commission that there is acquis alignment and the rules are
being eﬀectively implemented – and also that there is no signiﬁcant risk to the level-playing ﬁeld in the EU single market...
a decision could be taken by the institutions of the SAA to grant reciprocal internal market treatment in the speciﬁc area
concerned” (European Commission, 2023). This creates ambiguity as there is no deﬁnition of ‘eﬀectively implemented’ or
‘speciﬁc area’.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
They cover several key policy areas, each organised into ‘chapters’ for the purposes of the negotiation
process:
• Free movement of goods (chapter 1) and capital (chapter 4), which aim to remove barriers to trade
and investment;
• Non-tariﬀ barriers (chapter 12), focusing on regulatory requirements such as standards,
certiﬁcations, and sanitary and phytosanitary rules;
• Transport and connectivity (chapters 14 and 21), including improvements to the road network to
better link with the EU single market;
• Customs and border infrastructure (chapter 29), to facilitate smoother trade ﬂows;
• Climate policy (chapter 27), particularly alignment with the EU ETS;
• Company law (chapter 6), including sustainability reporting and accountability requirements,
such as those under the CSRD (see section 3.3).
T able 1: Alignment with the EU acquis relevant for the EU supply-chain integration

Albania
Montenegro
North Macedonia
Serbia
BH
Kosovo

Moldova
1. Free movements of goods
4. Free movement of capital
12. Food Safety, veterinary & phytosanitary policy
14. Transport policy
21. Trans-European networks
29. Custom Union
27. Environment and climate change
6. Company law
Source: Bruegel, based on European Commission (2025) staﬀ reports available at
https://enlargement.ec.europa.eu/enlargement-policy/strategy-and-reports_en. Note: numbers in the ﬁrst column show
negotiating chapter numbers.
Table 1 presents, in a colour-matrix format, each country’s level of preparedness in relation to the EU
acquis and these reform packages. The darker the colour, the greater the progress made, with white
representing an early stage of preparation, shades of green diﬀerent levels of moderate regulatory

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
alignment, and blue showing advanced regulatory alignment20. Moldova, which has concluded a DCFTA
with the EU, is included for comparison.
The matrix shows that the countries are least aligned with the ‘environment and climate change’ part of
the acquis, including the ETS, suggesting that CBAM burdens may stay in place for some time.
Alignment is much better for regulation related to NTBs relevant for movement of goods, infrastructure
and accounting standards, with Montenegro, Serbia and North Macedonia having similar levels of
preparedness.
Serbia is the only Western Balkan EU candidate for which the European Commission (2025) can
credibly talk about concrete next steps on an ACAA or ACAA-like agreement; for others, the reports still
focus on more basic alignment and institutional capacity in relation to the free movement of goods.
As neither Serbia nor North Macedonia is identiﬁed as a frontrunner in the 2025 European Commission
reports, their relatively strong progress in regulatory alignment appears to reﬂect the importance for
them of the EU as a trade partner. This is particularly evident in areas such as TBTs and SPS (Chapter
12) and the free movement of goods (Chapter 1), where alignment is closely linked to supply-chain
integration. Comparing these chapters on NTBs with Moldova’s alignment under the DCFTA, Serbia and
North Macedonia show similar levels of preparedness, with North Macedonia outperforming both in
food safety and phytosanitary policy.
This underscores the role of the EU as a key trade partner in driving regulatory alignment in trade-
related areas, even when progress on accession is constrained by democratic backsliding (Serbia) or
political vetoes (North Macedonia). Thus, economic links are important drivers of regulatory alignment
even with SAAs. For Albania, most of the chapters are also above, below or at moderate level of
preparedness, while Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina are at an earlier stage of preparedness.
Interestingly, though Kosovo is not a candidate country, it is better aligned with the EU acquis than the
EU candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, showing that alignment is not necessarily tied to actual
candidate status. Likewise, Albania is considered a frontrunner, but it is behind North Macedonia and
Serbia in terms of alignment on internal market reforms.
5 Policy recommendations
For the Western Balkan countries, integration into European supply chains is the most promising route
to economic development. As the EU represents the vast majority of trade and foreign investment
activities in Western Balkan countries, reducing trade barriers with the EU would be highly
economically beneﬁcial. The NGP recognises this, and it is a motivating factor driving economic

20 European Commission (2025) staﬀ reports apply the following preparatory statuses: early stage of preparation, between
early and some level of preparedness, some level of preparation, between some and moderate level of preparation,
moderate level of preparation, between moderate and good level of prepa ration, good level of preparation, between good
and well advanced, and well-advanced alignment. The last three stages usually correspond to provisionally closed
chapters.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
reforms in the Western Balkans, but it oﬀers no clear path to the elimination of non-tariﬀ barriers and
barriers remain substantial. Infrastructure, border procedures and the substantial non-tariﬀ barriers
impede further integration, tied with high economic costs in the region.
Given the nature of some of the non-tariﬀ barriers, such as regulatory discrepancies, the reduction of
many non-tariﬀ barriers will have to come in lockstep with EU membership process and reforms that
explicitly address cross-border regulatory diﬀerences. Western Balkan countries diﬀer greatly in their
ability to make further progress in this regard. For these reasons, the future should bring diﬀerent
policy designs to further countries’ progress towards the EU.
For Albania and Montenegro, given their current progress and commitment to EU-related reforms, it
could be all about reforms, which would ‘guarantee’ integration into the EU and thus into European
value chains21. Yet, these countries are the least aﬀected by non-tariﬀ barriers, given that their
economies and FDI are more services-oriented. By contrast, countries that are further away from EU
membership but also more heavily dependent on trade in goods with the EU demand a diﬀerent policy
approach.
This distinction becomes more pronounced in light of potential EU accession dynamics. As the only
two Western Balkan economies with sea access, the accession of Albania and Montenegro would leave
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, North Macedonia, and Serbia eﬀectively EU-landlocked. Though
Albania and Montenegro are not expected to join the Schengen area on their eventual EU accession,
and would remain outside the EES system for some time (Box 1), border controls between these two
and the other Western Balkan countries will become stricter. Furthermore, with the potential EU
accession of Albania and Montenegro, trade with the EU would rise signiﬁcantly for the remaining four
Western Balkan economies: from 65 percent to 70 percent, as calculated from 2024 data. This will
make it even more important to alleviate non-tariﬀ barriers. This challenge is particularly acute for
Kosovo, for which regional trade is heavily concentrated with Albania (Steinbach et al, 2025).
For Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, North Macedonia and Serbia, the challenge is rather the limited
and uneven progress on regulatory alignment needed to tackle non-tariﬀ measures. While an
Agreement on Conformity Assessment and Acceptance of Industrial Products (ACAA) is being
discussed with Serbia for selected industrial sectors, this remains at an early stage for other Western
Balkan countries and does not follow automatically from the existing SAAs. To improve the situation,
countries should focus on regulatory alignment, including by providing adequate resources for
sanitary and phytosanitary inspections. But even then, MSMEs will struggle to comply with the rules,
risking longer-term exclusion from EU supply chains. The adoption of new production processes, in line
with EU regulations, must be supported by further EU technical assistance and human capital
development.

21 At the time of writing, Montenegro and Albania are ‘front runners’ in the EU accession process, while an ad-hoc working
group is discussing drafting of the Accession Treaty with Montenegro.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Beyond traditional trade barriers, CBAM aﬀects a signiﬁcant share of the Western Balkan goods trade
with the EU and creates strong incentives for Western Balkan countries to introduce their own
emissions trading systems (Bahí et al, 2026). The introduction of ETSs should be actively supported
and ﬁnancially facilitated by the EU. CBAM revenues from the region could be used to help build the
necessary regulatory and administrative capacities. EU ﬁnancial assistance could support MSMEs with
regulatory-alignment costs, especially exporters of cement, aluminium and fertilisers (Figure 8),
which will still face CBAM even if electricity market coupling occurs around 2028 (Vujanović et al,
2025).
In terms of infrastructure, Serbia is a particularly diﬃcult case. It is the largest Western Balkan
economy with central infrastructure in the region, handling the majority of third (and EU)-country
goods moving through the region. Yet, Serbia has exhibited democratic backsliding that puts it among
the laggards in the Western Balkan enlargement countries. As trade becomes more geopolitical, Serbia
should focus on fundamental reforms and trust-building with the EU, including in the context of trade
and EU investment. The country already has a moderate level of preparedness on internal market
regulation and is even ahead of one enlargement frontrunner – Albania – in this respect. Thus,
unlocking progress in reforms tackling the rule of law is a bigger obstacle in Serbia than regulatory
alignment related to integration into the single market. The EXPO 2027 trade fair to be held in Serbia
22
should be used to highlight the attractiveness of the country for EU foreign investors, as the event is
expected to attract a large number of visitors and EU stakeholders.
More investment in cross-border infrastructure – especially highways, which remain underdeveloped
– is needed. Such investment could be supported by international organisations, EU funds and the
Western Balkans Investment Framework (WBIF)23, particularly as potential future EU-landlocked
status should facilitate rather than hinder trade-driven growth. The same framework should also
support rail freight infrastructure, which as of early 2026 is properly developed only along the
Hungary–Serbia corridor, largely as a consequence of Chinese investment24.
The EU and Western Balkans should also improve the eﬃciency of border procedures at every crossing
into the EU. The ‘Green Lanes’ initiative25, under the umbrella of the Regional Cooperation Council,
CEFTA and the Transport Community, is important. Green Lanes has established a legal and technical
framework for one-way electronic exchange of customs data on EU-bound consignments, allowing
border authorities to complete risk analysis and clearance before goods reach the border. However, its
implementation has been limited to border crossings between North Macedonia and Greece, and
between Serbia and Bulgaria, where waiting times are lower than at border crossings between Serbia
and Hungary and Croatia (see Figure 10). Hence, the Green Lanes initiative needs to be implemented

22 See https://expobelgrade2027.org/en/about.
23 The WBIF is the EU’s main regional instrument for designing and funding major investment projects in the Western
Balkans, with a particular focus on infrastructure and sectors linked to the green transition. See https://www.wbif.eu/.
24 The Economist, ‘China’s ﬁrst railway project in the EU is open at last’, 5 March 2026,
https://www.economist.com/china/2026/03/05/chinas-ﬁrst-railway-project-in-the-eu-is-open-at-last.
25 See CEFTA, ‘Green Corridors/ Green Lanes’, undated, https://cefta.int/what-we-do/cross-cutting-trade-areas/green-lanes/.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
eﬀectively, with priority given to the Serbia/Hungary and Serbia/Croatia crossing, the two identiﬁed
bottlenecks. Furthermore, the EU should facilitate smoother border procedures through technical
measures and administrative cooperation.
Infrastructural bottlenecks must be addressed not only for EU-Western Balkans trade, but also
because the Western Balkans is a major transit corridor for freight from Greece and Bulgaria going to
central Europe. One long-term solution would be to build highway infrastructure across Romania and
Bulgaria, eﬀectively removing the need for this freight to transit Serbia and North Macedonia. In the
medium term, Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania, should sign the Common Transit
Convention with the EU (see section 3.4) to allow transit of EU freight and to alleviate the concentrated
transit pressure.
The Western Balkans is at the crossroads. The renewed political momentum for EU enlargement and
progress made in some candidate countries create the conditions for further integration into European
supply chains. But this requires the momentum to be maintained, the EU to remain credible in its
willingness to enlarge and Western Balkan countries to build trust and show that they are serious
about the necessary reforms.
References
AHK (2025) World Business Outlook Spring 2025, available at
https://www.dihk.de/resource/blob/131718/a7fe5a9b84d57c5f05367619c9e63b60/ahk-world-
business-outlook-spring-2025-data.pdf
Bahí, A., M. Fuchs and C. Reverdy (2026) ‘Carbon pricing beyond borders: assessing climate policy
spillovers from the EU carbon border adjustment mechanism’, Working Paper 05/2026, Bruegel,
available at https://doi.org/10.64153/QIJX8741
Casella, B. (2019) ‘Looking through conduit FDI in search of ultimate investors – a probabilistic
approach’, Transnational Corporations 26(1): 109–146, available at
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3622003
Castelli, C., R.B. Davies, J. Flórez Mendoza, M. Ghodsi, F. Guadagno, F. Micocci and A. Rungi (2025)
'Harnessing FDI for innovation and green growth in the EU: Some evidence-based policy
recommendations', wiiw Policy Note/Policy Report 97, Vienna Institute for International Economic
Studies, available at https://wiiw.ac.at/harnessing-fdi-for-innovation-and-green-growth-in-the-eu-
some-evidence-based-policy-recommendations-p-7346.html
Estrin, S., and M. Uvalic (2016) ‘Foreign Direct Investment in the Western Balkans: What Role Has it
Played During Transition?’ Comparative Economic Studies 58(3), available at
https://doi.org/10.1057/ces.2016.10

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
European Commission (2023) ‘New Growth Plan for the Western Balkans’, COM(2023) 691, available at
https://neighbourhood-enlargement.ec.europa.eu/2023-communication-new-growth-plan-
westernbalkans_en
European Commission (2025) ‘Serbia 2025 Report’, SWD(2025) 755 ﬁnal, available at
https://enlargement.ec.europa.eu/serbia-report-2025_en
Ghodsi, M., M. Landesmann and N. Vujanović (2025) ‘Can multinational subsidiaries withstand growing
trade barriers?’ Review of World Economics 161(4): 1307-1375, available at
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10290-025-00585-5
Krasniqi, B., J. Ahmetbasić and W. Bartlett (2022) ‘Foreign Direct Investment and Backward Spillovers
in the Western Balkans: The Context, Opportunities and Barriers to the Development of Regional Supply
Chains’, Southeastern Europe 46(1): 1–22, available at https://doi.org/10.30965/18763332-4601000
Mihajlovic, M. and M. Macek (2024) ‘New Growth Plan’, Policy Brief, Institut Jacques Delors, available at
https://institutdelors.eu/content/uploads/2025/04/PB_240318_New_Growth_Plan_Macek_EN.pdf
Ruer, N. and N. Vujanović (2025) ‘Migration ﬂows from the Western Balkans to Germany: implications
and recommendations’, Working Paper 19/2025, Bruegel, available at
https://www.bruegel.org/sites/default/ﬁles/2025-09/WP%2019%202025.pdf
Steinbach, A., N. Vujanović and A. Fiore (2025) ‘Intra-Western Balkans dynamics: stocktaking and ways
ahead’, Working Paper 10/2025, Bruegel, available at https://www.bruegel.org/sites/default/ﬁles/2025-
05/WP%2010%202025.pdf
Steinbach, A. (2024) ‘The rocky road to EU accession for Western Balkan countries: obstacles and
lessons from the Eastern European Partnership’, Working Paper 08/2024, Bruegel, available at
https://www.bruegel.org/system/ﬁles/2024-03/WP%20Western%20Balkans%20270324%23.pdf
UNECE (2021) Regulatory and Procedural Barriers to Trade in Serbia, United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe, available at https://unece.org/sites/default/ﬁles/2021-06/ECE-TRADE-
460_0.pdf
Vujanović, N., B. Casella and R. Bolwijn (2021) ‘Forecasting global FDI: a panel data approach’,
Transnational Corporations Journal 28(1), available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=3906374
Vujanović, N., I. Hashi, M. Hisarciklilar, S. Radošević and N. Stojčić (2022) ‘FDI spillover eﬀects on
innovation activities of knowledge-using and knowledge-creating ﬁrms: Evidence from an emerging
economy’, Working Paper 213, Vienna Institute for International Economic Studies, available at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2022.102512

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Vujanović, N., N. Stojčić and I. Hashi (2021) ‘FDI spillovers and ﬁrm productivity during crisis: Empirical
evidence from transition economies’, Economic Systems 45(2): 100865, available at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecosys.2021.100865
Vujanović, N., R. Stubbe and M. Catarina-Louro (2025) ‘The Western Balkan energy sector: between
Russia, the European Union and the green transition’, Working Paper 33/2025, Bruegel, available at
https://doi.org/10.64153/KTCC2593
Vujanović, N., S. Radošević, N. Stojčić, M. Hisarciklilar and I. Hashi (2022) ‘FDI spillover eﬀects on
innovation activities of knowledge using and knowledge creating ﬁrms: Evidence from an emerging
economy’, Technovation 118: 102512, available at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2022.102512
Zoromé, A. (2007) ‘Concept of Oﬀshore Financial Centers: In Search of an Operational Deﬁnition’, IMF
Working Paper No. 2007/087, International Monetary Fund, available at
https://doi.org/10.5089/9781451866513.001

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
© Bruegel 2026. Bruegel publications can be freely republished and quoted according to the
Creative Commons licence CC BY-ND 4.0. Please provide a full reference, clearly stating the
relevant author(s) and including a prominent hyperlink to the original publication on Bruegel’s
website. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the author(s)
or Bruegel endorse you or your use. Any reproduction must be unaltered and in the original
language. For any alteration (for example, translation), please contact us at press@bruegel.org.
Publication of altered content (for example, translated content) is allowed only with Bruegel’s
explicit written approval. Bruegel takes no institutional standpoint. All views expressed are the
researchers’ own.
Bruegel, Rue de la Charité 33, B-1210 Brussels
(+32) 2 227 4210
info@bruegel.org
www.bruegel.org
WORKING PAPER | ISSUE 16 | 2025
