
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW
INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
A policy for net zero,
growth and resilience
Edited by Simone T agliapietra and Reinhilde Veugelers
BLUEPRINT SERIES 33

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW
INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
A policy for net zero,
growth and resilience
Edited by Simone Tagliapietra
and Reinhilde Veugelers

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT SERIES
SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
A policy for net zero, growth and resilience
Simone Tagliapietra and Reinhilde Veugelers
Editor: Stephen Gardner
Layout and cover design: Hèctor Badenes Rodríguez
© Bruegel 2023. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted in the original language without explicit permission provided that the source is acknowledged.
Opinions expressed in this publications are those of the authors alone.
Bruegel
33, rue de la Charité, Box 4
1210 Brussels, Belgium
www.bruegel.org
ISBN: 978-9-07-891055-8

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Contents
About the authors .....................................................................................5
Foreword ..................................................................................................11
1 Industrial policy in Europe: past and future ....................................13
Simone T agliapietra and Reinhilde Veugelers
2 An innovation-driven industrial policy for Europe .........................29
Philippe Aghion
3 Productivism and new industrial policies: learning from the past, ..
 preparing for the future .....................................................................42
Dani Rodrik
4 Industrial policy and technological sovereignty .............................72
Uwe Cantner
5 Cooperation or conflict? A transatlantic look at whether industrial ...
 policy will produce solutions or generate unmanageable conflicts ..90
Laura Tyson and John Zysman
6 Green industrial policy: the necessary evil to avoid a climate ..........
 catastrophe ....................................................................................... 107
Alessio Terzi
7 Industrial strategies for Europe’s green transition ........................123
Chiara Criscuolo, Antoine Dechezleprêtre and Guy Lalanne

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
8 A more globally-minded European green industrial policy .........153
Ricardo Hausmann and Ketan Ahuja
9 Europe’s green industrial policy .....................................................166
Simone T agliapietra, Cecilia Trasi and Reinhilde Veugelers
10 Smart green industrial policy ..........................................................187
Ben McWilliams and Georg Zachmann
11 Industrial policy for electric vehicle supply chains and the US-EU ..
 fight over the Inflation Reduction Act ............................................211
 Chad Bown
12 A new pharma industrial policy for Europe? Lessons from COVID-19
 ................................................................................................................257
Mathias Dewatripont

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
About the authors
Philippe Aghion is a Professor at the College de France and at the London
School of Economics, and a Fellow of the Econometric Society and of
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. His research focuses on
the economics of growth. With Peter Howitt, he pioneered the so-called
Schumpeterian Growth paradigm, which has been used to analyse the
design of growth policies and the role of the state in the growth process.
Ketan Ahuja leads a research programme on green growth at Harvard’s
Growth Lab and is a DPhil student in law at the University of Oxford. His
research focuses on how to regulate market competition in ways that
reduce inequality, share power more broadly and support innovation and
economic growth.
Chad P . Bown is Reginald Jones Senior Fellow at the Peterson Institute for
International Economics. His research examines international trade laws
and institutions, trade negotiations and trade disputes. He was previously
a senior economist for international trade and investment in the White
House on the Council of Economic Advisers, and most recently was a lead
economist at the World Bank. Previously, he was a tenured professor of
economics at Brandeis University.
Uwe Cantner is Professor of Economics at Friedrich Schiller University
Jena, where is also is Vice President for Young Researchers and Diversity
Management. He is Professor of Economics at the University of Southern
Denmark/Odense and Chairman of the Federal German Government
Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
6 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Chiara Criscuolo is Head of the Productivity and Business Dynamics
Division in the Directorate for Science, Technology and Innovation of
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. She
is also one of eleven economists appointed to the French National
Productivity Board and a Research Associate at the Centre for
Economic Performance at the London School of Economics.
Antoine Dechezleprêtre is a Senior Economist in the Productivity,
Innovation and Entrepreneurship Division, Directorate for Science,
Technology and Innovation, OECD. He works on the role of innovation
and technology diffusion for the green transition and the impact of
environmental policies on innovation, technology adoption, carbon
emissions, productivity and firm performance. Before joining the
OECD, he was an Associate Professor at the Grantham Research
Institute, London School of Economics, and then headed the Green
Growth work stream at the OECD.
Mathias Dewatripont has been a Professor at Université Libre de
Bruxelles since 1990. Between 1991 and 2001, he co-directed ECARES,
which is now part of the Solvay Brussels School of Economics and
Management of ULB. Between 1998 and 2011, he was Research
Director of CEPR and Visiting Professor at MIT . He was also previously
Executive Director of the National Bank of Belgium.
Ricardo Hausmann is the founder and Director of Harvard’s Growth
Lab, and is the Rafik Hariri Professor of the Practice of International
Political Economy at Harvard Kennedy School. Previously, he was first
Chief Economist of the Inter-American Development Bank. He was
Minister of Planning of Venezuela and a member of the Board of the
Central Bank of Venezuela. He also served as Chair of the International
Monetary Fund-World Bank Development Committee.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
7 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Guy Lalanne is a Senior Economist at the Directorate for Science,
Technology and Innovation Directorate of the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development. Previously, he held several
positions in the French Treasury, notably as Secretary General of the
macroprudential authority and Head of the Industrial Policy, R&D and
Innovation Division, and in the French National Statistical Institute.
Ben McWilliams is an Affiliate Fellow at Bruegel. His work involves
data-driven analysis to inform European public policy, specifically in
relation to the energy sector and its decarbonisation. He has an MSc in
Economic Policy from Utrecht University and a BSc Economics from
the University of Warwick.
Dani Rodrik is the Ford Foundation Professor of International Political
Economy at Harvard’s John F . Kennedy School of Government. He is
a co-director of the Economics for Inclusive Prosperity network and
president of the International Economic Association. He is affiliated
with the National Bureau of Economic Research and the Centre for
Economic Policy Research (London), among other research organi-
sations. His research focuses on globalisation, economic growth and
development, and political economy.
Simone Tagliapietra is a Senior Fellow at Bruegel. He also is a profes-
sor of energy and climate policy at the Catholic University of Milan and
at The Johns Hopkins University – School of Advanced International
Studies (SAIS) Europe. He is the author of Global Energy Fundamentals
(Cambridge University Press, 2020). He also is a Member of the Board
of Directors of the Clean Air Task Force.
Alessio Terzi is the author of Growth for Good (Harvard University
Press, 2022). He is an Economist in the European Commission’s
Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs, and an
Adjunct Professor at Sciences Po and HEC Paris. Previously, he was

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
8 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
an Affiliate Fellow at Bruegel and a Fulbright Scholar at the Harvard
Kennedy School.
Laura Tyson is a Distinguished Professor of the Graduate School
at the Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley.
She also chairs the Board of Trustees at UC Berkeley’s Blum Center
for Developing Economies, and is a Senior Fellow at the Berggruen
Institute. She is an expert on trade and competitiveness and was the
chair of the President’s Council of Economic Advisers and chair of the
National Economic Council during the Clinton Administration.
Cecilia Trasi is a Research Assistant at Bruegel. She completed a BSc
in Economics at Università Cattolica in Milan, and then a Master’s in
Public Policy at the Hertie School in Berlin. Before joining Bruegel,
Cecilia pursued a Blue Book traineeship at the European Commission
focusing on renewable energy and green hydrogen and cooperation
with countries in sub-Saharan Africa.
Reinhilde Veugelers is a Senior Fellow at Bruegel. She also is a
professor at KULeuven in the Department of Management, Strategy
and Innovation, and a non-resident senior fellow at the Peterson
Institute for International Economics. She is a Centre for Economic
Policy Research Research Fellow, and a member of the Royal Flemish
Academy of Belgium for Sciences and of the Academia Europeana.
Georg Zachmann is a Senior Fellow at Bruegel. His work focuses on
regional and distributional impacts of decarbonisation, the analysis
and design of carbon, gas and electricity markets, and EU energy and
climate policies. Previously, he worked at the German Ministry of
Finance, the German Institute for Economic Research in Berlin, the
energy think tank LARSEN in Paris, and the policy consultancy Berlin
Economics.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
9 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
John Zysman is Professor Emeritus at UC Berkeley and co-founder/
co-director of the Berkeley Roundtable on the International Economy.
He received his BA from Harvard and his PhD from MIT . His work
covers the implications of platforms and intelligent tools for work,
entrepreneurship and international competition, and the economic
challenges and opportunities of climate change and the green
economy.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Foreword
Economic policymaking in Europe has become a lot more compli-
cated. It was hard enough when European Union policies focused on
reconciling growth and efficiency with cohesion and social protec-
tion. But now – after a pandemic, a war, droughts and heatwaves, and
soaring energy prices – there is a new focus: to forestall disaster. This
requires fast decarbonisation not just in the EU but internationally.
It also requires greater resilience in the face of shocks, particularly
shocks related to trade and geopolitical conflict.
There is broad consensus that an economic model based solely on
competition, open trade, emissions taxes and industrial polices benefit-
ing all sectors – through skill formation and innovation, for example – is
insufficient to meet this challenge. New problems and policy objectives
require additional policy instruments, including new industrial policies.
There is no consensus, however, on the form that these policies should
take. Many in the EU worry that state intervention in support of specific
industries and projects could hurt the EU’s main engines of prosperity:
the single market and rules-based international trade. Furthermore,
state intervention often involves public spending. But money is always a
touchy subject in the EU. Who pays and who exercises control?
In this Bruegel Blueprint, we have asked some of the finest minds
in economics how the new state intervention should be designed. Not
surprisingly, there is no agreement – economists never agree fully. But
the ideas, principles and trade-offs articulated in this volume do allow
us to narrow down the set of policies that the EU should consider, while
helping to avoid mistakes.
They also help answer some basic questions. Is it possible to deploy

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
12 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
industrial policies that strengthen green growth and economic security
without hurting competition, economic openness and cohesion in
the EU? Is it possible to do so without stronger EU-level governance,
backed by financial resources? To me, the answer to the first question
is ‘yes’ , and to the second, ‘no’ . But please read the Blueprint and draw
your own conclusions.
My thanks goes to all authors for their contributions, to Simone
Tagliapietra and Reinhilde Veugelers for pulling them together, and to
Stephen Gardner and Hèctor Badenes for a formidable editorial and
production job. I am also particularly grateful to the European Climate
Foundation for generous financial support.
Jeromin Zettelmeyer, Director of Bruegel
Brussels, July 2023

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
1 Industrial policy in Europe:
 past and future
Simone T agliapietra and Reinhilde Veugelers
1 Europe’s industrial policy debate: a brief history
The debate about industrial policy has traditionally been about the
role of the state in the economy, driven by difficult questions such
as: why and to what extent should governments intervene in steering
market mechanisms? When they intervene, how should they do it?
Should governments pick ‘winners’ to be supported?
Over time, Europe’s approach to industrial policy has evolved
depending on different political and policy cycles.
After the Second World War, when the process of European recon-
struction began, the focus was notably on the strategic industries of
coal, steel, electricity and railways. Between the early 1950s and the
mid 1970s, referred to as the heyday of industrial policy (Owen, 2012),
most European countries were concerned with closing the income gap
and reducing their dependence on the United States. During those
years, some European governments, most notably France, ventured
into interventionist, winners-picking sectoral policies, also defined as
vertical industrial policies. These policies targeted sectors thought to
be strategic and promising for the future, including steel, chemicals,
machinery, communications and technology, aircraft and nuclear
power. Europe went through a wave of nationalisation and strong
intervention involving state-owned enterprises and other state-pow-
ered initiatives. It was during this period that France, for example,
launched a programme to promote its national computer industry –
the ‘Plan Calcul’ – and engaged in ‘Grands Projets’.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
14 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
The European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) was set up in
1952 with the goal of reducing overcapacity and modernising coal
production. This first European-level industrial policy was considered
a success, both in terms of outcome and coordination between partic-
ipating states. The ECSC provided an interventionist framework within
which national companies had to modernise.
The European Economic Community (EEC), established after
the ECSC, progressively reduced tariffs in European markets. The
first technology policy initiative at European Community level was
PREST (Politique de Recherche Scientifique et Technologique), aimed
at facilitating common European research projects. The motivation
for this initiative was fear of European technology lagging behind the
US. A notable milestone in this era was the Davignon Plan, adopted
in 1977, under which European-wide solutions were sought for the
so-called ‘sunset’ industries, while keeping national control of ‘sunrise’
industries, such as computers. It was in this context that the Airbus
consortium was established, as a European industrial alliance for the
production of aircraft.
The 1980s saw a new phase of liberalisation with market-oriented
industrial policies, limited to setting the right framework within which
economic processes could take place (horizontal industrial policy).
Countries liberalised markets, trying to avoid the government failures
of the typically vertical industrial policy and winner-picking initiatives
of the past.
At European level, the inefficiencies of uncoordinated national
industrial policies became clear, leading to the development of two
important instruments at EU level: the internal market and competi-
tion policy, including state aid. The Single European Act (1986) laid the
legal basis for affirmative action of the state in the area of research and
development. During this period, different initiatives were undertaken
at European Community level to promote cooperation on research and
innovation. One example was ESPRIT (European Strategic Programme
for Research and Information Technology), a five year-programme

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
15 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
focused on collaborative research with the aim of “bringing together
companies, universities and research institutes across Europe” with a
specific focus on information technology (Owen, 2012). ESPRIT was
born as an attempt to respond to the government-led initiatives that
the Japanese Ministry for International Trade and Industry undertook,
initiatives that successfully enabled Japan to catch-up quickly with the
United States as a technological and economic leader, particularly in
the field of semiconductors. ESPRIT is typically considered the precur-
sor of the European Commission’s framework programmes (starting in
1984), through which the Commission carries out science, technology
and innovation policy and collaborative research initiatives. The cur-
rent framework programme is Horizon Europe.
During the 1990s and early 2000s, liberalisation programmes
continued in Europe. A consensus emerged at EU level on the pref-
erence for a more holistic, integrated and ‘horizontal’ approach to
industrial policy. The role of the EU was to ensure the right framework
conditions, focusing on the use of internal market and competition
instruments, and stimulating R&D and innovation. This cumulated in
the 2000 Lisbon Strategy: a programme “to transform the EU into the
most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world
capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs
and greater social cohesion” (European Council, 2000). Its goal was to
implement a comprehensive strategy of structural reforms by boosting
innovation and investment in R&D and creating a more integrated and
competitive internal market.
2 Europe’s industrial policy revival
The Great Recession of 2008 marked the start of a new era, character-
ised by an industrial policy revival across Europe.
In 2012, the European Commission published a new industrial
policy communication, ‘ A Stronger European Industry for Growth and
Economic Recovery’ (European Commission, 2012), which started
from the premise that “Europe needs industry” and sets out a roadmap

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
16 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
for reindustrialising Europe, with the aim of “raising the share of
industry in GDP from the current level of around 16 percent to as much
as 20 percent in 2020” . Although the Commission stressed the need for
a comprehensive vision “mobilising all the levers available at EU level,
notably the single market, trade policy, SME policy, competition policy,
environmental and research policy in favour of European companies’
competitiveness” , the communication returned to a more targeted
approach, identifying six priority action lines, including key enabling
technologies, clean vehicles and smart grids. The communication was
followed by action plans for specific sectors, such as steel (European
Commission, 2013)1.
The increasing pressure to put Europe on a trajectory towards
climate neutrality and the need to respond to growing international
tensions added to the significance of this policy development. This has
been particularly the case since the adoption in 2019 of the European
Green Deal as Europe’s flagship programme or, as the European
Commission defines it, as its “new growth strategy”2. In March 2020,
the Commission presented a ‘New Industrial Strategy for Europe’ ,
built on the twin objectives of managing the green and digital tran-
sitions while avoiding external dependencies in a new geopolitical
context, especially with China considered a “systemic rival” (European
Commission, 2019). Among the key policy goals in the strategy were
securing the supply of clean technologies and critical raw materials,
stepping up investment in green research, innovation, deployment
and up-to-date infrastructure, and creating lead markets in clean tech-
nologies by making more strategic use of single-market regulations,
public procurement rules and competition policy.
On the day after the publication of the new strategy, the World
Health Organisation declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic.
1 See also Veugelers (2013).
2 See European Commission press release of 11 December 2019: https://ec.europa.
eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_19_6691.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
17 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
That shock, with all the issues related to the emergency procurement
of personal protective equipment and vaccines, triggered a substan-
tial revision of the new industrial strategy, which came in May 2021.
The updated strategy centered on the strengthening of the resilience
of the single market. It did so by putting a strong focus on the need to
improve Europe’s “open strategic autonomy” in key areas including
health and green and digital technologies by diversifying international
partnerships, developing Europe’s strategic industrial capacities and
monitoring strategic dependencies (European Commission, 2021).
Since then, the issue of ‘open strategic autonomy’ has became more
and more central to Europe’s industrial policy debate, also as a result
of the war in Ukraine, the subsequent energy crisis and the overall
increase in international tension linked to the geopolitical decoupling
of the United States and China. At the core of this issue stand the risk
of supply disruption for critical items (including vaccines during a
pandemic, natural gas during a major energy crisis, and critical raw
materials and clean technologies during the green transition) and the
consequent quest for ‘de-risking’ .
This paradigm change first became evident with the European
Chips Act proposed by the European Commission in February 2022 to
address the shortage of chips during the COVID-19 crisis. The Act has
the double objective of improving the resilience of the semiconduc-
tor ecosystem in the EU to minimise future supply chain disruptions
and increasing Europe’s domestic capacity for chip production. It
rests on three pillars: research and innovation policies, subsidies for
cutting-edge chip manufacturing plants, and measures to monitor and
intervene in chip-supply crises. The Act seeks to attract foreign invest-
ment and coordinate with global partners (European Commission,
2022). Yet, it has also raised concerns about its emphasis on protec-
tionism and its potential to create competition distortions (Poitiers
and Weil, 2022).
When it comes to resilience in the face of supply risks associated
with the green transition, the European Commission published in

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
18 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
March 2023 two legislative proposals reflecting its new policy frame-
work in this area: the Critical Raw Materials Act (CRMA) and the Net-
Zero Industry Act (NZIA).
The CRMA is an attempt to respond to the supply disruption risk in
critical raw materials, mainly by boosting their domestic production,
refining and recycling. The proposed Act identifies a list of strategic
raw materials that are considered crucial for the manufacturing of
green, digital and defence technologies, and then sets precise domes-
tic targets to be achieved by 2030. The CRMA aims to make the issuing
of permits to relevant industrial projects subject to a common EU
deadline. The proposed act also includes provisions on supply chain
monitoring, stockpiling and improving the recyclability of CRMs. The
CRMA acknowledges that, while important, domestic actions will
never make the EU self-sufficient in critical raw materials. The Act
thus also puts forward an international strategy to diversify the EU’s
imports of critical raw materials and strengthen its global partnerships
with emerging markets and developing economies, and to consider a
‘critical raw materials club’ for like-minded countries.
The proposed NZIA meanwhile aims to tackle the supply disruption
risk in clean technologies by:
1. Listing the net-zero technologies that are considered to be strategic:
solar photovoltaic and solar thermal technologies; onshore wind
and offshore renewable technologies; battery/storage technologies;
heat pumps and geothermal energy technologies; electrolysers and
fuel cells; sustainable biogas/biomethane technologies; carbon
capture and storage (CCS) technologies; grid technologies.
2. Adopting an overall headline target of reaching a manufacturing
capacity for these technologies of at least 40 percent of the EU’s
annual deployment needs by 2030. It also proposes a target for an
annual injection capacity in CO2 storage of 50 million tonnes of
carbon dioxide by 2030, to spur the development of CCS.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
19 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
3. To achieve these targets, EU countries can identify Net-Zero Strate-
gic Projects (NZSPs) that will be granted priority status at national
level and fast-tracked in permitting procedures.
3 Europe’s industrial policy trilemma
The final shape of the NZIA and CRMA will ultimately emerge from the
EU legislative process, ongoing at the time of writing (Tagliapietra et al,
2023). However, both proposals are clearly underpinned by a de-risk-
ing approach, that has recently become an integral part of policy for
both the EU (Von der Leyen, 2023) and G73.
The historical discussion in section 1 shows how such concerns are
not new to Europe or the world. Discussions about the economic and
security challenges posed by China’s emergence as a global economic
power mirror the unease felt by European governments in the 1970
and 1980s about the technological leadership of the United States and
Japan.
Old industrial policy questions are emerging again, yet with a new
level of complexity because of the urgent need to move forward with
the green transition. In a globalised world grappling with the impacts
of climate change, industrial policy needs to address multiple objec-
tives, including global decarbonisation, world competitive economic
value and job creation, and strategic autonomy. When these objec-
tives conflict, they present policymakers with a challenging trilemma:
how to combine decarbonisation with economic growth and jobs and
world competitiveness, while also reinforcing resilience and sover-
eignty/autonomy/security of supply? What is the best way socio-eco-
nomically to achieve decarbonisation and resilience? How and how
far to go in moving towards sovereignity/autonomy/resilience, and
3 See Council of the European Union press release of 20 May 2023: https://www.con-
silium.europa.eu/fr/press/press-releases/2023/05/20/g7-hiroshima-leaders-com-
munique/.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
20 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
what does this means in terms of moving away from the traditional
economic efficiency paradigm? How far to move away from a hori-
zontal policy approach to shaping of framework conditions, such as
through strong competition policy and open trade? To what extent can
technologies and projects deemed to be strategic be selected, requir-
ing resilience/autonomy to secure supplies? How can these trade-offs
be minimised, for example by fostering technological innovation to
substitute critical inputs, rather than investing in expensive import
substituting local projects? How can resilience be turned into an
opportunity to create quality jobs and accelerate, rather than impede,
the decarbonisation process?
This book tries to tackle some of these difficult questions. In the
volume, a consensus emerges on the legitimacy and significance of
revitalising industrial policy. Authors agree that governments have
a pivotal role to play in managing the transition from fossil fuels
to low-carbon energy systems, while addressing social challenges.
Leaving the challenges to market forces is not an option in view of the
externalities and path dependencies that can slow down or inter-
rupt the course of private actions. The focus lies on the necessity of a
future-proof industrial policy infused with strong ‘green’ elements. The
question is what such an industrial policy should look like.
Although the details of such an industrial policy are not yet clearly
laid out, there is a consensus in this volume’s chapters that a mix of
policy instruments is needed. Effective industrial policies should
recognise the complementary nature of both supply- and demand-
side instruments, combining public support with regulatory frame-
works, target setting and carbon pricing. In the contributions, there is
a strong consensus that priority should be given to support for inno-
vation capacity building. Authors concur that governments can and
should shape technological progress in line with societal needs and
should enhance the skills of the workforce. The objective is to ensure
that industrial policies coexist with competition, facilitating struc-
tural change and business dynamics. Safeguarding competition and

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
21 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
enabling the entry of new firms to challenge less efficient incumbents
is crucial.
There is also agreement on the need for more directionality in
industrial policymaking. Ex-ante choices will have to be made about
technologies and projects that contribute most to the multidimen-
sional objectives, but which are impeded by market, system and transi-
tion failures, even if the risk of selection failures is high. Managing this
risk of government failure calls for a good mix of vertical and horizon-
tal instruments, bottom-up and top-down selection, limiting support
in time and the importance of ensuring competition as a level playing
field. Recommendations range from establishing agencies modelled
after the United States Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) to conducting complexity analysis of value chains, all with
the goal of developing flexible policies that can be evaluated regularly
and adjusted accordingly.
The success of industrial policy will be defined ultimately by
whether it succeeds in unleashing private-sector investment to meet
society’s targets in a globally competitive and resilient manner, putting
public-private partnerships at the core of industrial policymaking. The
authors in this volume call for explicit policies and continuous collab-
oration between firms and governments to establish objectives that
promote the creation of ‘good jobs’ .
Building coalitions at domestic and international levels, even
among countries that may be rivals in other areas, is of paramount
importance to navigate the green transition and other transformative
processes effectively. The regional dimension is particularly crucial
for a ‘smart industrial policy’ , whether focused on green initiatives or
not. While some argue that efficiency and a region’s inherent compar-
ative advantage should guide industrial policy, others caution against
straying too far from industry economics. Caution is also advised when
pursuing national interests through industrial policy, as this may trig-
ger an international race for subsidies, adversely affecting developing
countries and potentially accelerating deglobalisation. Overall, this

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
22 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Blueprint offers recognition of the benefits of an industrial policy that
supports international coordination and even cooperation, rather than
adopting a short-sighted Europe-first approach. These reflections are
addressed in different ways by the contributing authors, as follows:
Chapter 2, An innovation-driven industrial policy for Europe
(Philippe Aghion), asserts that industrial policy is essential for the
competitiveness of EU industry and to catch up with the technology
frontier. The core question is how to redesign the governance of indus-
trial policy to make it more compatible with competition and innova-
tion-led growth. Governments should focus support on skill-intensive
sectors or sectors subject to high competition, to stimulate produc-
tivity growth more efficiently. However, by subsidising incumbent
firms, governments should not deter new, higher-performing firms
from entering the market. The author also calls for updated interpre-
tations of the Stability Pact, competition policy and the single market,
and EU borrowing to enhance Europe’s investment capacity, make it
more competitive at the global level and avoid irreversible decline. The
author also advocates a European DARPA to ensure the competitive-
ness of EU industry, with projects funded from participating nations’
budgets and by joint-EU borrowing.
Chapter 3, Productivism and new industrial policies: learning from
the past, preparing for the future (Dani Rodrik), turns to the labour
aspect of industrial policymaking. The author proposes a new para-
digm of ‘productivism’ to enhance the productivity of all parts of soci-
ety through a collaborative effort involving government agencies and
private firms. Productivism focuses on incentivising worker-friendly
technologies and improving the quantity and quality of jobs available
for less-educated and less-skilled members of the workforce. Industrial
policies should encourage improvements on both the demand and
supply sides of the labour market. This requires customised and tar-
geted business incentives, and dialogue between government agencies
and companies to identify constraints and opportunities and design
interventions accordingly. To help create ‘good jobs’ , regional business

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
23 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
bureaux should be set up – or strengthened – to work alongside public
employment services to provide customised services to local firms and
investors.
Chapter 4, Industrial policy and technological sovereignty (Uwe
Cantner), focuses on the main driver of industrial policy at EU level:
innovation and how to assure that innovation works as driver for
industrial policy while assuring strategic autonomy or sovereignity
in technology. The chapter discusses what obtaining technological
sovereignty entails, what policies could be needed to achieve this, and
when it is better to leave it to the market. The chapter sets this discus-
sion in the context of relevant key technologies and of radical change
and innovation.
Chapter 5, Cooperation or conflict? A transatlantic look at whether
industrial policy will produce solutions or generate unmanageable
conflicts (Laura Tyson and John Zysman), outlines how international
collaboration among allies is essential for the success of industrial pol-
icies. The authors discuss the implications for the global economy and
the international political economic order of US industrial policies,
including the CHIPS and Science Act and green industrial policies. The
argue that the success of these policies will depend on US cooperation
with its allies, but the policies are likely to raise tensions precisely with
those allies, even though industrial policies need not disadvantage
foreign firms relative to domestic firms, and success will require allies
to adopt complementary policies. Meanwhile, building domestic coa-
litions for industrial policies and rewarding local constituencies may
generate conflicts between nations, whether allies or not. Competing
national industrial policies, while well motivated, can quickly lead to
counterproductive and wasteful bidding wars.
Chapter 6, Green industrial policy: the necessary evil to avoid a
climate catastrophe (Alessio Terzi), offers an economic-development
perspective on green industrial policy. The author considers industrial
policy an essential but imperfect tool to tackle climate change. Market
imperfections and distributional concerns imply that instruments

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
24 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
such as carbon pricing will be insufficient to ensure speedy decar-
bonisation. The use of industrial policy in the service of national
interest may lead to an international subsidy race, to the detriment of
developing countries. Moreover, policymakers need to be aware of the
negative effects of industrial policy on innovation, particularly at the
technological frontier. Protectionist approaches might slow technolog-
ical innovation in a time when speed is of the essence.
Chapter 7, Industrial strategies for Europe’s green transition (Chiara
Criscuolo, Antoine Dechezleprêtre and Guy Lalanne), postulates that
green industrial policy should go beyond carbon pricing and should
leverage the complementarities of supply- and demand-side instru-
ments. The current pace of innovation is too slow to face the challenge
of climate change; a range of barriers and market failures remain at
the root of the problem. To resolve these, a mission-oriented industrial
strategy for the green transition is needed. The authors suggest a tax-
onomy of industrial policy instruments to deploy in concert. Effective
green industrial policy should make strategic use of different policy
instruments supporting innovation and technology adoption, carbon
pricing and framework instruments (such as standards and regulations
and policies to encourage skills). Industrial policies are not necessarily
incompatible with competition and should be designed so that they do
not slow down structural change and business dynamics.
Chapter 8, A more globally minded European green industrial policy
(Ricardo Hausmann and Ketan Ahuja), further enlarges the scope of
the discussion by providing a Global South perspective on Europe’s
green industrial policy, illustrating how a more global European indus-
trial policy would be better suited to deal with the trade-offs the conti-
nent faces. The authors argue that Europe should not pursue a ‘Europe
first’ approach, but should only engage in strategic competition over
the parts of the value chain in which Europe holds a comparative
advantage. Bottom-up techno-economic cost modelling and eco-
nomic-complexity analysis of emerging clean supply chains can help
identify these parts. EU green industrial policy should also recognise

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
25 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
the economic reality of energy distribution, and relocate accordingly
the production steps that can be more efficiently decarbonised. This
means helping third countries build clean-tech value chains and
developing economic constituencies and political forces behind green
industries in Europe’s trading partners, to counterbalance fossil-fuel
interests that resist change in those countries. Finally, Europe should
focus on growing the overall global green economy and increasing
overall demand for the green products and services in which Europe
has a comparative advantage. A global green industrial policy would
benefit European workers, shareholders and consumers, as well as the
rest of the world.
Chapter 9, Europe’s green industrial policy (Simone Tagliapietra,
Cecilia Trasi and Reinhilde Veugelers), gives an overview of the
green industrial policy measures being implemented in Europe. The
authors argue that the current fragmentation of policy measures
calls for a new approach to green industrial policymaking at EU
level. A new and effective EU green industrial policy should aim at
an overall improvement in the attractiveness of the EU single market
as a location for green investment, via both horizontal measures
to enhance market functioning and specific measures in support
of clean technologies. Examples of these measures include better
regulation, better green procurement rules and EU-level financing to
promote new or earlystage clean tech, in which EU firms can achieve
sustainable competitive positions. An EU-scale green industrial policy
will require a stronger governance model to ensure better coordination
and longer-term commitment.
Chapter 10, Smart green industrial policy (Ben McWilliams and
Georg Zachmann), takes a regional development perspective to
illustrate how regions should develop a smart green industrial policy.
Drawing upon empirical and theoretical literature, the authors argue
that regions have unique technological, knowledge and institu-
tional capacities, and that these are a crucial indicator of the ability
of a region to absorb new knowledge. It is possible to identify these

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
26 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
comparative advantages at a regional level. Policymakers can map
desirable green technological capacities against existing regional
capabilities, and thus increase the likelihood that a region will respond
successfully to green industrial policy.
Chapter 11, Industrial policy for electric vehicle supply chains and
the US-EU fight over the Inflation Reduction Act (Chad Bown), exam-
ines how the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) of 2022, its implementing
regulations, policy decisions on leasing and potential critical minerals
agreements all have the potential to affect the electric vehicle supply
chain. This case study showcases the political-economic complica-
tions involved in US and EU attempts to cooperate over clean energy
transition policy to address the global externality of carbon dioxide
emissions. Electric vehicles are one example of the challenge facing
partners with integrated supply chains and similar levels of economic
development that share concerns about climate change, rising ine-
quality, workers, other social issues and democracy itself. The author
argues that the electric vehicles conflict laid bare the differing US and
EU prioritisation of these issues relative to economic efficiency, World
Trade Organisation rules, the approach to non-market economies and
national security vulnerabilities
Chapter 12, Developing a European industrial policy: lessons from
COVID-19 (Mathias Dewatripont), focuses on the innovation part of
industrial policy by bringing into the analysis Europe’s experience
with COVID-19 vaccines. While Europe has a solid foundation in the
health sector, it suffers from suboptimal coordination between parties,
especially between providers of funding. The author argues that the
EU should put in place a renewed support strategy for the develop-
ment and commercialisation of innovative technologies modelled on
DARPA. This approach would enhance competition, mix top-down
and bottom-up approaches, and support innovation while prioritising
affordability. Industrial policy should also aim at improving bargain-
ing positions through EU-wide coordination of negotiations with
pharma companies, to limit their ability to play countries off against

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
27 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
one another. This would be valuable particularly for rare diseases, for
which pan-EU purchasing could offer higher sale volumes to compa-
nies and make lower prices more sustainable for the industry.
References
European Commission (2012) ‘ A
Stronger European Industry for Growth
and Economic Recovery Industrial
Policy Communication Update’ ,
COM/2012/0582 final, available at
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/
EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A52012DC0582
European Commission (2019) Strategic
Outlook, JOINT/2019/5 final, available at:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/
EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX%3A52019JC0005
European Commission (2020) ‘ A
New Industrial Strategy for Europe’ ,
COM/2020/102 final, available at https://
eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52020DC0102
European Commission (2021) ‘Updating
the 2020 New Industrial Strategy:
Building a Stronger Single Market for
Europe’s Recovery’ , COM/2021/350
final, available at https://eur-lex.
europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=COM:2021:350:FIN
European Commission (2022) ‘ A
Chips Act for Europe’ , COM/2022/45
final, available at https://eur-lex.
europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=CELEX:52022DC0045
European Council (2000) ‘Presidency
conclusions, Lisbon European Council, 23
and 24 March 2000’ , available at https://
www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_
data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/00100-r1.
en0.htm
Owen, G. (2012) ‘Industrial Policy
in Europe since the Second World
War: What Has Been Learnt?’ ECIPE
Occasional Paper 1/2012, European
Centre for International Political
Economy, available at https://www.
econstor.eu/handle/10419/174716
Poitiers, N. and P . Weil (2022) ‘Is the
EU Chips Act the right approach?’
Bruegel Blog, 2 June, available at
https://www.bruegel.org/blog-post/
eu-chips-act-right-approach
Tagliapietra, S., R. Veugelers and J.
Zettelmeyer (2023) ‘Rebooting the
European Union’s Net Zero Industry Act’ ,
Policy Brief 14/2023, Bruegel, available at
https://www.bruegel.org/policy-brief/
rebooting-european-unions-net-zero-
industry-act

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
28 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Veugelers, R. (ed) (2013) Manufacturing
Europe’s future, Blueprint Series
Volume XXI, Bruegel, available at
https://www.bruegel.org/book/
manufacturing-europes-future
Von der Leyen, U. (2023) ‘Speech on
EU-China relations to the Mercator
Institute for China Studies and the
European Policy Centre’ , 30 March,
available at https://ec.europa.eu/
commission/presscorner/detail/en/
speech_23_2063

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
2 An innovation-driven industrial
 policy for Europe
Philippe Aghion
1 Introduction
With the stated objective of both curbing inflation and fighting global
warming, the American administration has enacted the so-called
Inflation Reduction Act (IRA). This law gives the green light to a consid-
erable increase in public spending of $737 billion over ten years, includ-
ing $369 billion in tax credits and subsidies.
The protectionist consequences of the IRA are fairly obvious. In
particular, it provides for a subsidy of up to $7500 for any American
consumer who purchases an electric car assembled in the United States,
and that has batteries relying on at least 40 percent US input compo-
nents. It also offers generous tax exemptions to any producer of solar
panels that chooses to operate on American soil, and it heavily subsi-
dises green research and development activities that are being carried
out in the United States. Consequently, some companies have decided
to freeze projects elsewhere and relocate to the US.
The IRA penalises not only European producers of electric cars, such
as BMW or Fiat, but also European firms that operate already in the US
but which rely on production chains partly located in other countries.
How can Europe react to the IRA and preserve its competitiveness
worldwide? How can it stop and hopefully reverse the declining trend
in its industrial production and exports? How can it avoid being leap-
frogged by China and becoming an innovation laggard? European
industrial policy is part of the answer, provided it is adequately designed
and financed.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
30 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
2 The case for industrial policy
In the years following the Second World War, national industrial
champions were at the forefront of industrial policy in many devel-
oped countries. In France, this pro-champion policy was a pillar of
the reconstruction of the economy and of the thirty years of post-war
growth. In the United States, it played a decisive role in particular
for the defence, aeronautics and aerospace industries in pursuit of
supremacy over the Soviet Union. At the same time, the World Bank,
under the direction of Robert McNamara, supported trade protection
and import substitution in developing countries, to allow them to nur-
ture their infant industries.
The infant industry doctrine can be summarised as follows (List,
1841). Consider a developing country with two sectors of activity: a
large agricultural sector and a nascent domestic manufacturing sector.
This country wishes to develop its manufacturing sector because of
the resulting positive technological externalities on the economy as a
whole. Manufacturing, however, entails high initial fixed costs that will
decrease over time thanks to experience and learning-by-doing. Total
and immediate liberalisation of international trade would lead this
country to import manufactured products from developed countries,
where they are initially cheaper to produce. This in turn would lead to
less local manufacturing activity, less learning-by-doing, and thus less
technological progress and domestic growth. To avoid these repercus-
sions, proponents of the infant industry argument endorse temporary
protectionist policies, such as provisional tariff barriers, so that infant
industries can grow and catch up to the technological frontier.
Over time, industrial policy fell out of favour. Little by little, econ-
omists became aware of the problems it creates in practice. First, it
favours existing large domestic firms – the national champions – thus
limiting or distorting competition. But we know that product market
competition is key for innovation and productivity growth: more com-
petition induces firms to innovate more intensely in order to surpass
their rivals (Aghion et al, 2005). Second, governments are not great

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
31 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
at picking winners, that is, choosing which firms they should support
with subsidies or tariffs, as they do not have access to all of the relevant
information. Furthermore, they may be receptive to lobbying by large
incumbent firms. The larger the resources of these firms, the more they
are in a position to influence public policy. Anne Krueger (1993, 1995)
was among the most forceful and vocal opponent of industrial policy.
This challenge led to a preference for what are known as ‘horizon-
tal’ policies for stimulating innovation and growth, meaning policies
that apply to all sectors of the economy (Acemoglu et al, 2006; Aghion
and Howitt, 2006). Among the main vectors of horizontal policy are:
1) investing in the knowledge economy (especially higher education
and research); 2) reforming labour and product markets to make
them more dynamic, through appropriate policies for competition,
unemployment insurance and professional training; and 3) developing
venture capital and private equity to provide funding for innovation.
Are these horizontal measures enough? Or does the state still have a
role to play in industry, and if so, what is that role? Objections to indus-
trial policy from the 1950s through the 1980s are difficult to counter,
especially because later work, such as that of Laffont and Tirole (1993),
pointed to several sources of inefficiency in state intervention, because
of asymmetric information or the potential for collusion between
some private actors and the state. Still, this alone does not disqualify
state intervention, which remains legitimate for several reasons. One
reason is the existence of positive knowledge externalities, such as pat-
ents, that individuals do not take into account. An individual deciding
whether to invest in education or in R&D does not take into account
the positive externalities on his or her co-workers, or on the economy
as a whole. As a consequence, individuals tend to underinvest in edu-
cation and in R&D. Credit constraints exacerbate this tendency. Still,
this does not justify state intervention that is not purely horizontal.
A first argument in support of a non-horizontal industrial policy is
the phenomenon known as path dependence. A quintessential exam-
ple is green innovation. For example, car manufacturers that innovated

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
32 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
in combustion engine technology in the past will tend to innovate in
combustion engine technology in the future because of path depend-
ency (Aghion et al, 2016). Imposing a carbon tax or subsidising green
innovation makes it less costly to adopt a new technology and redirects
the innovation activities of car manufacturers to electric engines. This
example shows that governments have a role to play, not only in stimu-
lating innovation in general, but also by directing innovation through
targeted interventions.
Another argument has to do with problems of coordination. Bolton
and Farrell (1990), and Rob (1991), suggested that government action
can help resolve coordination problems, thereby enabling or acceler-
ating entry into strategic sectors where the initial fixed costs of entry
are high. Consider a new potential market for which entry is costly
and where future profits are uncertain and depend on information
(such as the level of consumer demand) that cannot be known until
the market is active. No single firm wants to be the first to pay the fixed
costs of entry. Every firm prefers to let other firms bear the fixed costs
first, and then to benefit from the information they generate, without
bearing the risk and cost of acquiring this information. In other words,
the absence of state intervention leads to the free-rider phenomenon,
which results in delay or even an impasse in creating the market. To
solve this problem, the state can subsidise the first entrant, which
encourages other firms to follow its example.
This coordination argument explains the success of state interven-
tion in the aeronautics industry (Boeing, Airbus), where fixed costs are
high and demand is uncertain. It also explains the success of the US
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), established in
1958 to facilitate the transition from basic research to applied research
and marketing for breakthrough innovations (‘tough technologies’),
where this transition entails substantial fixed costs and requires coor-
dinated efforts by various economic actors (Azoulay et al, 2019). We
discuss DARPA in more detail below.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
33 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
3 Governing industrial policy
Once we recognise that industrial policy can be useful, how can we
determine in which sectors the state should intervene? Policymakers
should first address economic and social priorities including fight-
ing climate change and developing renewable energies, health, and
defence. After that, they should focus on sectors that use highly skilled
labour or have a high degree of competition. Thus, a study analysing
international microeconomic data showed that public investments
targeting skill-intensive sectors are more effective in stimulating
productivity growth (Nunn and Trefler, 2010). Similarly, a study based
on Chinese data showed that targeting more competitive sectors helps
stimulate productivity growth (Aghion et al, 2015).
The question then arises of the governance of industrial policy
and sectoral state aid. A priority is for industrial policy to be competi-
tion-friendly. Thus, Aghion et al (2015) showed that sectoral aid stimu-
lates productivity growth more when it is not concentrated on a single
firm or a small number of firms – in other words if the aid operates to
maintain or increase competition in the sector.
Equally important is to minimise the extent to which subsidising
incumbent firms discourages the entry of new, higher-performing
firms (Acemoglu et al, 2018). Subsidising established firms can hinder
the entrance of new, more innovative firms as a result of a reallocation
effect: incumbent firms increase the demand for skilled labour and
other factors of production, thereby increasing their cost. This extra
cost in turn reduces the profits that potential new entrants can expect,
discouraging them from entering the market.
Aghion et al (2019) illustrated this reallocation effect in an analysis
of how the Eurosystem’s Additional Credit Claims (ACC) programme,
implemented in February 2012 by the European Central Bank, affected
firm dynamics in France. Mario Draghi, ECB president at the time,
created this programme to prevent a recession in the euro area follow-
ing the 2008-2009 financial crisis. The idea was as follows: in the euro
area, banks could pledge high-quality corporate loans as collateral for

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
34 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
refinancing from the ECB. These loans thus enabled banks to obtain
additional liquidity. Firms that are most likely to repay their debt have
a rating of 1. They are followed by the firms rated 2, then 3, then 4, then
5, with decreasing probabilities of repaying their debt. A rating of P
means the firm is close to bankruptcy. Before February 2012, commer-
cial banks could use only loans to firms rated better than 4 as collateral
for refinancing from the ECB. The ACC programme extended eligibility
to firms rated 4.
What happened after implementation of the ACC programme? The
first consequence was that loans to firms rated 4 increased relative
to loans to firms with a rating worse than 4, in particular those one
step below, at 5+. The second consequence was that the productivity
growth of firms rated 4 increased. In other words, relaxing credit con-
straints on these firms allowed them to invest, in particular in inno-
vation. But this positive effect was offset by a reallocation effect: the
implementation of the ACC programme reduced the fraction of firms
rated 4 that exited the market, and the biggest impact was on the low-
est-performing firms in terms of initial productivity. In other words,
the ACC programme impeded the replacement of the lowest-perform-
ing firms rated 4 by new, potentially higher-performing firms.
The existence of a reallocation effect pointed out by the above-men-
tioned studies suggests that any public policy to subsidise firms should
take into account the impact of the policy not only on existing firms,
but also on potential new entrants to the sector.
Next, sectoral state aid should be regularly reassessed to avoid the
perpetuation of programmes that prove ineffective. Co-financing by
state and private investors, such as development banks, can facilitate
the establishment of adequate exit mechanisms.
Overall, industrial policy is not a ‘yes or no’ issue; the question is
rather to redesign the governance of industrial policy to make it more
compatible with competition and, more generally, with innovation-led
growth.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
35 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
4 The DARPA model
The so-called DARPA model is a successful attempt at reconciling
industrial policy with competition and entry. DARPA is a research
agency within the US Department of Defense, responsible for inno-
vations with military applications. The history of DARPA ’s success
demonstrates that a well-managed industrial policy can successfully
foster rather than inhibit innovation. DARPA was created after the
United States lost a battle in the space race against the Soviet Union: in
October 1957, the Soviet satellite Sputnik became the first artificial sat-
ellite to orbit the earth. This event had a huge international impact. It
substantiated the advance of the Soviet space programme and stunned
the American public. Lyndon B. Johnson, then a senator, wrote of “the
profound shock of realising that it might be possible for another nation
to achieve technological superiority over this great country of ours”
(Johnson, 1971). Within five months, in February 1958, even before
the creation of NASA, President Eisenhower established DARPA as
America’s primary tool in the military race and the space race against
the Soviet Union.
DARPA still exists, and its novel model has been studied in detail
(Azoulay et al, 2019). In areas such as defence and space exploration,
it is difficult to make the transition from basic research to implemen-
tation and marketing. This can be represented by an S curve. The
beginning of the curve represents the origin of a concept to which not
much development effort has been devoted because the returns on
such efforts are low. The median part of the curve corresponds to the
take-off phase: returns on development efforts are higher, enabling
the technology to advance more quickly. Lastly, the phase of matu-
rity implies diminishing returns to development efforts and slower
improvements to the technology. Because the initial phase requires
substantial efforts, the anticipated social gains from future exploita-
tion must be considerable in order for the project to generate interest
and be eligible for DARPA funding. Accordingly, DARPA projects have
three characteristics: they are midway between basic and applied

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
36 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
research; it is possible to organise research toward a precise objective;
and the existence of coordination problems makes large-scale funding
and testing of the technology difficult without public intervention.
This model of scientific development enabled the United States
to catch up steadily with the Soviet Union in the space race. Even
though in the initial years after DARPA was created the USSR had a
series of successes, thanks to an equally ambitious space programme
(for example, the first animal in space in 1957, the first man and first
woman in space in 1961 and 1963, respectively, and first unmanned
lunar landing in 1966), the United States ultimately won the race
in 1969, when it first landed humans on the moon. Today, DARPA ’s
annual budget is over $3 billion, and it funds over one hundred pro-
grammes. DARPA has played a decisive role in the development of
high-risk projects with high social value, such as the internet, origi-
nally called Arpanet (at the time DARPA had been renamed ARPA),
and GPS.
The DARPA model is particularly interesting because it combines
a top-down approach with a bottom-up approach4. On the top-down
side, the Department of Defense funds the programmes, selects the
programme heads and hires them for a three- to five-year period. On
the bottom-up side, the programme heads, who come from academia
or the private sector, or who are investors, have full latitude to define
and manage their programmes. They can freely organise partnerships
between start-ups, university labs and large industrial firms, and they
enjoy great flexibility in recruiting collaborators.
And most importantly, programme heads elicit new competing pro-
jects. A good example is BARDA (the Biomedical Advanced Research
and Development Authority), which is the equivalent of DARPA for
the US biotech sector. During the COVID-19 crisis, BARDA financed
4 The top-down approach refers to a hierarchical process in which the state is the
decision maker and imposes its decision on decentralised actors. Conversely, in a
bottom-up approach, the state sets out the broad lines of a policy, but allows local
actors flexibility to determine how to implement it.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
37 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
several competing vaccine projects, including BioNTech and Oxford-
AstraZeneca, which were initiated outside the US.
5 The case for European DARPAs
Having to compete with the US and China, both of which are promot-
ing very assertive industrial and innovation policies, why not create
European DARPAs? A first reason for creating European DARPAs is to
enable Europe to assume greater responsibility for its own defence.
A more fundamental motive is that Europe faces major technological
challenges, in particular in the energy and environment, digital and
healthcare sectors. The projects of these European DARPAs would be
funded directly from participating nations’ governmental budgets, and
also from borrowing by the European Union as a whole.
Most importantly, as it is already the case for the funding of basic
research by the European Research Council (ERC), the selection of
projects by these European DARPAs should escape the juste retour
principle, according to which each member state expects to receive,
in monetary returns, at least as much as it contributes. Project selec-
tion by European DARPAs should also avoid member states’ obses-
sion with veto rights. Some EU countries have expressed the fear that
European DARPAs would systematically favour larger EU members
at the expense of the smaller. Here again, governance is the adequate
response and there are at least two models one can build upon. First,
BARDA during the COVID-19 crisis: it included labs located outside
the US when selecting which vaccines to push for mass production;
in particular it took BioNTech and Oxford-AstraZeneca. Second, the
European Research Council and its international jury panels: excel-
lence, not nationality, is the primary criterion for selecting those
research projects that receive ERC funding.
Who should take part in these European DARPAs? Our preference
would be for an open ‘coalition of the willing’ , with the possibility for
the United Kingdom to also join, given their academic and industrial
expertise in defence, health and energy.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
38 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
6 Moving beyond Hayek
Our call for establishing EU-funded European DARPAs is somewhat at
odds with what mainstream European policy advisers would advocate.
Thus, Kleimann et al (2023), on responding to the US IRA, wrote: “the
EU should not just seek to protect its competitiveness relative to the US
but to pursue broader aims, including competitiveness in general ...
these aims imply that the EU should not impose local-content require-
ments of its own, should not loosen state-aid rules and should not
mimic the IRA’s approach to manufacturing subsidies. Rather, it should
focus on boosting its structural competitiveness”.
In other words, in response to the IRA and the climate challenge,
Europe should not change its doctrine, in particular it should not
contemplate the possibility of new sectoral state aid – those are seen
as being anti-competitive a priori – but should instead deepen its reli-
ance on structural reforms and adequate carbon taxes and regulations.
A contrasting view is that, in the face of fiercer competition from
China and the United States, both of which implement forceful
industrial policies, the EU should rethink its economic doctrine: not
to throw it away, but rather to adapt it to the new circumstances. The
EU doctrine took shape in the late 1980s. Centred around the idea of
a large single market and a broad set of regulations, but with a very
small EU budget, this paradigm is directly inspired by Hayek. The
basic idea, well explained in The Road of Serfdom (Hayek, 1944), was
that Europe and its institutions should be thought of primarily as a
federation, with the main objective of preventing member states from
yielding to local political and social pressures. Hence the three pil-
lars of European economic governance: 1) the single market and the
European Commission’s primacy with regard to competition policy
– in particular it is up to the Commission to detect and punish sectoral
state aid in member states; 2) the Maastricht Stability and Growth Pact,
which limits the budgetary power of individual member states – the
Commission ensures the compliance with the 3 percent deficit rule;
and 3) an EU budget of only 1 percent of European GDP .

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
39 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Interestingly, following the enactment of the IRA, some new ideas
have been put forward by the European Commission, which depart
from a literal interpretation of the Hayekian doctrine. A first suggestion
is to soften the rules governing sectoral state aid. This has raised strong
criticisms from some countries, including the Netherlands and Sweden,
which see it as a threat to the single market, and something that would
favour large countries at the expense of smaller member states5. This
objection should not be disregarded, yet in the previous section we
argued that suitable governance of European DARPAs would help avoid
such an undesirable outcome. A second idea is to use the €750 billion of
the post-COVID-19 Resilience and Recovery Fund and to even increase
Europe’s investment capacity by creating a European Sovereign Fund
for Industry, which, like the Recovery Fund, would be financed by a loan
directly contracted by the European Union. This second idea met strong
reluctance from countries such as the Netherlands6, for which this is just
a trick to circumvent the budgetary rules of the Union.
We are not calling here for a phase-out of the existing rules. In par-
ticular, in Aghion et al (2005), we provided strong empirical evidence
of the importance of competition and the single-market as the main
drivers of innovation-led growth. We also strongly support the Growth
and Stability Pact, which underlies the credibility of the euro and guar-
antees macroeconomic stability in the euro area, both of which can
only favour innovation-led growth. Yet, the current circumstances call
for an updated interpretation of the rules.
• Stability Pact: countries that successfully engage in structural
reforms and show seriousness in the use of public funds, should
5 See for example Euractiv.com with Reuters, ‘Eleven EU countries urge ‘great caution’ in
loosening state aid rules’ , 15 February 2023, https://www.euractiv.com/section/econo-
my-jobs/news/eleven-eu-countries-urge-great-caution-in-loosening-state-aid-rules/.
6 Sam Fleming, ‘Netherlands opposes new EU money to counter US green subsidies’ ,
Financial Times, 24 January 2023, https://www.ft.com/content/f1cfc042-2620-453d-
b0c0-585c79571d9a.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
40 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
be granted an entry ticket to invest more and better in education,
innovation and energy transition.
• Competition policy and the single market: rather than a priori for-
bidding any kind of sectoral state aid ex ante, an ex-post approach
should be adopted and sectoral aid should be tolerated as long as
it does not result in a decline in product market competition or in
obstacles preventing the entry of new innovative firms.
• EU borrowing: Europe’s investment capacity should be enhanced
using EU borrowing, to fund new – and properly governed – Eu-
ropean DARPAs aimed at making Europe more competitive in the
world economy.
Without any accommodation of the rules and any evolution in the
underlying doctrine, Europe runs the risk of an irreversible decline.
References
Acemoglu, D., P . Aghion and F . Zilibotti
(2006) ‘Distance to Frontier, Selection,
and Economic Growth’ , Journal of the
European Economic Association 4(1)
Acemoglu, D., U. Akcigit, H. Alp, N.
Bloom and W. Kerr (2018) ‘Innovation,
Reallocation, and Growth’ , American
Economic Review 108(11): 3450–3491
Aghion, P ., N. Bloom, R. Blundell, R.
Griffith and P . Howitt (2005) ‘Competition
and Innovation: An Inverted-U
Relationship’ , Quarterly Journal of
Economics 120: 701-728
Aghion, P . and P . Howitt (2006)
‘ Appropriate Growth Policy: A Unifying
Framework’ , Joseph Schumpeter Lecture,
Journal of the European Economic
Association 4(2–3): 269–314
Aghion, P ., J. Cai, M. Dewatripont, L.
Du, A. Harrison and P . Legros (2015)
‘Industrial Policy and Competition’ ,
American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 7(4): 1–32
Aghion, P ., A. Dechezleprêtre, D. Hemous,
R. Martin and J. Van Reenen (2016)
‘Carbon Taxes, Path Dependency, and
Directed Technical Change: Evidence
from the Auto Industry’ , Journal of
Political Economy 124(1): 1–51
Aghion, P ., A. Bergeaud, G. Cette, R. Lecat
and H. Maghin (2019) ‘The Inverted-U
Relationship between Credit Access and
Productivity Growth’ , Economica 86: 1–31

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
41 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Azoulay, P ., E. Fuchs, A.P . Goldstein and
M. Kearney (2019) ‘Funding Breakthrough
Research: Promises and Challenges of the
“ ARPA Model” ’ , Innovation Policy and the
Economy 19: 69–96
Bolton, P . and J. Farrell (1990)
‘Decentralization, Duplication, and
Delay’ , Journal of Political Economy 98(4):
803–826
Hayek, F . (1944) The Road to Serfdom,
University of Chicago Press
Johnson, L.B. (1971) The Vantage Point:
Perspectives of the Presidency, 1963–1969,
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston
Kleimann, D., N. Poitiers, A. Sapir, S.
Tagliapietra, N. Véron, R. Veugelers and J.
Zettelmeyer (2023) ‘How Europe should
answer the US Inflation Reduction Act’ ,
Policy Contribution 04/2023, Bruegel
Krueger, A.O. (1993) Political Economy of
Policy Reform in Developing Countries,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Krueger, A.O. (1995) ‘Policy Lessons
from Development Experience since
the Second World War’ , in J. Behrman
and T .N. Srinivasan (eds) Handbook
of Development Economics, vol. 3B:
2497–2550, Amsterdam: Elsevier
Laffont, J.-J. and J. Tirole (1993) A
Theory of Incentives in Procurement and
Regulation, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
List, F . (1841) Das nationale System der
politischen Ökonomie, Stuttgart: J.G. Cotta
Nunn, N. and D. Trefler (2010) ‘The
Structure of Tariffs and Long-Term
Growth’ , American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 2(4): 158–194
Rob, R. (1991) ‘Learning and Capacity
Expansion under Demand Uncertainty’ ,
Review of Economic Studies 58(4): 655–675

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
3 Productivism and new
 industrial policies: learning
 from the past, preparing for
 the future
Dani Rodrik
1 Introduction7
Throughout history, economic ideology has swung from one end of the
pendulum to the other, from the reification of markets to reliance on states
and then back again. Superficially, we appear to be in the midst of one of
these periodic realignments. It was perhaps inevitable that the excesses
of neoliberalism – the increase in inequality, concentration of corporate
power, neglect of the threats to the physical and social environment –
would cause a backlash.
But new paradigms get established by developing novel approaches
and not by just emulating the old. When after the 1930s, the New Deal
and the welfare state replaced the freewheeling capitalism that preceded
them, they did not simply revert to the mercantilist practices of old. They
established new modes of regulations, new institutions of social insurance
and explicit macroeconomic management in the form of Keynesianism.
Similarly, if the new turn to ‘productivism’8 is to be successful, it
7 This chapter is based on, and draws heavily from, Rodrik and Stantcheva (2021) (a
report for French President Emmanuel Macron), and from Dani Rodrik, ‘Getting
Productivism Right’ , Project Syndicate, 8 August 2022, https://www.project-syndicate.
org/commentary/will-productivism-supersede-neoliberalism-by-dani-rodrik-2022-08.
8 Dani Rodrik, ‘The New Productivism Paradigm?’ Project Syndicate, 5 July 2022,

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
43 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
will have to move beyond conventional social protection, industrial
policies and macroeconomic management. It will have to internalise
lessons learned from the failures of some of those policies in the past,
and adapt to fundamentally new challenges.
State intervention aimed at reshaping the structure of an economy
– so-called industrial policy – has traditionally been faulted for being
ineffective and getting captured by special interests. ‘Governments
cannot pick winners’ , as the old adage goes. In reality, much of this
criticism is overdone. While there have been notable failures, system-
atic recent studies find that industrial policies incentivising investment
and job creation in disadvantaged regions have often done surpris-
ingly well (Criscuolo et al, 2019).
Public initiatives have been behind some of the most startling high-
tech successes of our time, including the internet and GPS. For every
Solyndra – a solar cell manufacturer that failed spectacularly after half
a billion dollars in government loan guarantees – there is often a Tesla,
the phenomenally successful electric battery and vehicle manufac-
turer that also received government support at a critical phase of its
development.
Nevertheless, there is much room for improvement. The most effec-
tive industrial policies are those that entail close, collaborative interac-
tion between government agencies and private firms, through which
firms receive critical public inputs – financial support, skilled workers
or technological assistance – in return for meeting soft and evolving
targets on investment and employment. This kind of industrial policy
is likely to work much better – whether in promoting local economic
development or in directing major national technological efforts –
than open-ended subsidies or tax incentives.
As the name suggests, productivism focuses on enhancing the
productive capabilities of all segments and regions of a society. While
https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/new-productivism-economic-poli-
cy-paradigm-by-dani-rodrik-2022-07.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
44 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
traditional forms of social assistance, especially better access to edu-
cation and healthcare, can help in this regard, connecting people with
productive employment opportunities requires interventions that go
beyond these. It requires improvements on the demand side of the
labour market as well as the supply side. Policies must directly encour-
age an increase in the quantity and quality of jobs that are available for
the less-educated and less-skilled members of the workforce, where
they choose (or can afford to) live.
In the future, most of these jobs will come not from manufacturing,
but from services such as health and long-term care and retail. Even
if policy succeeds in reshoring manufacturing and supply chains, the
impact on employment is likely to remain limited. The experience of
East Asian manufacturing superstars such as South Korea and Taiwan
provides a sobering example. These two countries have managed to
rapidly increase the share of manufacturing value added in GDP (at
constant prices), yet they have experienced steady declines in manu-
facturing employment ratios.
This is important since so much of the policy effort in the United
States and Europe is focused on promoting high-tech manufacturing
and digital industries. For example, the US CHIPS and Science Act
provides $52 billion in funding for semiconductors and related man-
ufacturing. The initiative is aimed at both enhancing national security
vis-à-vis China and creating good jobs. Unfortunately, even if the first
objective is met, the second objective is likely to remain elusive. A sim-
ilar point can be made about the subsidies to green technologies that
are a core component of President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act.
Without question, the green transition is an urgent priority that the
new paradigm needs to tackle. But here too, governments cannot kill
two birds with one stone. Policies that target climate change are not a
substitute for good-job policies, and vice versa.
Shoring up the middle class and disseminating the benefits of tech-
nology broadly through society requires an explicit good-jobs strategy.
Such a strategy would not be so fixated on competition with China; it

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
45 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
would target services instead of manufacturing, and it would focus on
incentivising worker-friendly technologies.
2 Business incentives with a good-jobs focus
Economists tend to be cautious, if not downright hostile, towards
industrial policies. This attitude derives less from economic theory
than from practical considerations. The externalities and market
failures that industrial policy aims to fix – learning spillovers, coor-
dination failures, agglomeration effects and, increasingly, the social
benefits of good jobs – are widely understood to be widespread in
contemporary economies. The concern is that governments lack the
knowledge to identify accurately where these market failures are (‘gov-
ernments cannot pick winners’), or that they will be subject to political
lobbying and capture once they put themselves in a position to select
industries to support.
In recent years, policymakers have articulated the need for industrial
policy more explicitly and forcefully. The challenges of transition to a
green economy, geographic divides, digitalisation and, increasingly, the
perceived threat of Chinese competition in high-tech industries, have
highlighted the urgency of public action to stimulate investment and
innovation in particular industries and regions. The European Union
acknowledged the importance of industrial strategy explicitly in the
Juncker Plan of 2014. The European Commission’s Horizon 2020 Report
targeted an increase in the manufacturing share of GDP in the EU from
16 percent to 20 percent (a target that was missed). The EU is already
a massive provider of business incentives through a variety of funds.
While the bulk of the EU’s structural and cohesion funds are invested
in infrastructure, about 10 percent takes the form of direct grants to
firms, which makes the programme “one of the largest enterprise subsidy
schemes in the world” (Murakosy et al, 2020).
In France, business incentives centre on three schemes. First, there
are tax credits for R&D spending (Crédit d’Impôt Recherche), the stated
objective of which is to increase the competitiveness of the country

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
46 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
through innovation. Second, there is investment support for SMEs
(through the Banque Publique d’Investissement, BPI), which chan-
nels government and EU funds to support investment and innovation
through various financial instruments (credits, credit guarantees or
buying shares). The BPI works closely with client firms through the
life cycle of projects, providing counselling and management training.
Third, there are publicly funded ‘competitiveness poles’ (Pôles de com-
petitivité). These are designed to promote clusters in specific regions or
industries – bringing together small and large firms, training organisa-
tions and research labs – through financial support and tax incentives.
It is fair to say that while employment is almost always a subsidiary
goal of these programmes, they are rarely designed with employment
as the key objective9. In the main, they target increased productivity
and global competitiveness and try to foster new digital and green
industries. In the EU Industrial Strategy Package (2020), for example,
high-quality jobs and employment are occasionally referred to, but the
emphasis is clearly on digital innovation and green tech. Employment
is generally viewed as part of the social agenda, distinct from the pro-
ductivity and economic growth agendas.
A second consideration is that business incentives work best when
they are customised and targeted to specific needs of firms, and when
they are part of an iterative dialogue between firms and government
agencies. The traditional conception of industrial policy is represented
by the East Asian caricature: bureaucrats independently choose a set
of economic activities to be promoted, select pre-determined incen-
tives (tax rebates or subsidised credit), and then impose hard condi-
tionality on the receiving firms (they either perform or else). This type
of policy hardly works well, and in fact was never quite how industrial
9 This is a general feature of business promotion schemes. In a global review of such
programmes, Robalino et al (2020) wrote: “In practice, projects are seldom selected
for public support based on the jobs impacts the investments are likely to generate …
Often, the beneficiaries of demand-side programs are selected, subject to the size of
the firm, on a first-come-first-serve basis.”

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
47 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
policy was actually implemented in Japan, Taiwan, South Korea or
China. Successful programmes tend to revolve around a process of
strategic collaboration in which firms’ needs, market opportunities,
and appropriate remedies are discovered over time, with policies
revised as learning takes place.
Tim Bartik of the Upjohn Institute has been a long-term observer
of business incentives in the US, and his synthesis of the evidence
provides a valuable perspective that applies equally well to Europe
(Bartik, 2019, 2020). In summary: public policy focusing on job growth
in distressed areas can be effective and generate persistent gains in
employment-to-population ratios, but current systems are not very
effective. They are based on significant tax breaks that often go to large
corporations and are not properly targeted or designed. He makes
several recommendations. First, business incentives should focus on
areas that are distressed – that is, areas that truly need them. Second,
the incentives should focus on sectors or firms that are likely to have
high job-creation multipliers. Third, public assistance should focus
less on tax incentives (and encouraging physical investment) and
more on specific public services needed by firms, such as customised
business services, zoning or infrastructure policies, local amenities
and skills training. Fourth, business assistance should be viewed as a
portfolio of services rather than a particular incentive, with the actual
mix attuned to local conditions. The second, third and fourth of these
recommendations are especially relevant to France (and Europe more
broadly).
Bartik’s recommendations echo ideas that have developed over
the last couple of decades into a new conception of industrial policy
(Evans, 1995; Hausmann et al, 2008; Rodrik, 2007, 2008; Sabel, 2007;
Fernández-Arias et al, 2016; Ghezzi, 2017). Under this conception, the
government is not presumed to know where the market failures are
beforehand and, therefore, does not determine ex ante what the spe-
cific policy instruments are. Industrial strategy consists of a collabora-
tive process of ‘discovery’ involving business and agencies of the state,

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
48 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
where the objective is to identify the constraints and opportunities
over time, and to design interventions appropriately. As learning takes
place, policies are revised, refined and sometimes reversed.
Rodrik and Stantcheva (2021), in relation to France, proposed the
setting up of regional business promotion agencies that operate along-
side existing public employment services (PES, pôle emploi) and cover
the same territories. These could be called “regional business bureaux”
(RBB). The main thrust is to create a structure for job-enhancing pro-
ductivity assistance to firms that runs in parallel (and in cooperation)
with the worker-oriented pôle emploi.
The objective of RBBs (or their equivalent) would be to provide a
portfolio of services to local firms or prospective investors with the
overarching goal of assisting them to increase productivity while cre-
ating good jobs10. Many of these services would normally be admin-
istered by other agencies, in which case the role of the RBBs would be
mainly to coordinate those agencies and help firms navigate through
them. For example, RBBs may cooperate with the PBI to help SMEs
get access to financing or business advice. They may coordinate with
the local PES to identify suitable workers and help recruit them. They
may organise training providers to ensure the requisite skills are built
up. They may help with infrastructure needs of SMEs, for example with
respect to internet and cloud services where pooling of fixed costs
could be an advantage. They may also act as a go-between with the
local bureaucracy as regards local regulations such as zoning. And they
could be provided with additional resources to provide other services
as well, as the needs reveal themselves. In general, RBBs would be
in a position to assist with the financing (through their own or other
agencies’ resources) of any productivity and employment-increasing
10 One question is whether EU state aid rules are sufficiently flexible to permit the
kind of scheme we describe. We note that those rules allow a substantial number of
exceptions, particularly with respect to smaller enterprises, funding of innovation
and disadvantaged regions. ‘Disadvantaged’ regions presently cover about a quar-
ter of the French population (European Commission, 2013).

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
49 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
spending or reorganisation on the part of firms. Investment subsidies
would not be prioritised over other incentives.
The RBBs would take a customised, individualised approach to
their relationship with firms, on the understanding that different
firms/sectors have different needs. They would maintain an open-
ended relationship with them, trying to understand their problems
and opportunities.
Firms would make proposals to the RBB for use of one or more
particular services, say a training programme or purchase of a particu-
lar advanced technology system. In return, they would make commit-
ments on specific quantities of jobs they will create at different qualifi-
cation levels (ie low-salaried employees, medium-salaried employees,
etc). Firms would be encouraged to pool proposals when they make
use of common inputs, as would be the case for workers with particu-
lar skills or infrastructure.
It is particularly important that the process of soliciting proposals
be open to new or young firms. In particular, new firms may be
deterred by regulations or sectoral agreements that act as entry
barriers. In addition to encouraging proposals from such firms, RBBs
might also be empowered to grant young firms certain temporary
exemptions from sectoral regulations or agreements, in order to ease
business formation. This would obviously have to be done in exchange
for good-job conditionalities and in agreement with social partners.
Failing agreement with social partners, new firms might be provided
with financial incentives that compensate for the cost of the relevant
regulations.
RBBs would then screen proposals for suitability. They would evalu-
ate the overall desirability of the proposed project, paying attention to
the quality of the project, its feasibility and plausibility, the additional-
ity of the jobs that are to be created and the likelihood that the RBB can
deliver the services needed on the timescale required. Larger, more
expensive proposals might be evaluated by outside consultants. At this
stage, the RBB might also negotiate additional requirements with the

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
50 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
firm. For example, the firm might be asked to work with its local sup-
pliers to improve their management or technological capabilities. Or a
firm that is considering outsourcing part of its production to a foreign
county might be asked to delay doing so for a number of years, in case
productivity improvements at home render those plans unnecessary.
The firm could be required to arrange for additional training for some
of its employees. The project would then be given an overall score, to
compare with others on a single scale.
Once projects are approved and launched, there would be periodic
audits designed to check whether firms are making sufficient progress
towards their commitments, especially on employment. It would be
understood that there is a certain provisionality – inevitable in light of
uncertainty and unforeseen circumstances – to both the targets and
the package of assistance being deployed. The audits would reveal that
some projects are clearly not working out. Those would be terminated.
Some other projects may underperform because of unanticipated
changes but may still be salvageable with existing (or revised) support.
Those would continue to receive support. In other words, the audits
would be as much an opportunity to revise policies and targets as they
would be an occasion to make binary, up-or-down decisions.
To the greatest extent possible, the proceedings of the RBB would
be open and transparent. Packages of support and targets agreed to by
firms would be public information. Any revision of supports or targets
would also be carried out in a transparent fashion, with firms’ justifi-
cations for revising targets open to public scrutiny. Transparency over
these matters would be essential both to limit public corruption and to
ensure firms have limited ability to game the bureaux.
Finally, at the end of the first five years (and each subsequent five
years) a certain number of RBBs would be subject to rigorous evalua-
tion. The objective would be to see whether the bureaux are achieving
their central objective: creation of productive job opportunities. If
the bureaux were being phased-in gradually, such evaluations could
be carried out initially using randomisation or synthetic-control

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
51 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
(comparing each région with a synthetic control group) methods.
Subsequently, evaluations could be carried out within régions using
regression discontinuities (comparing firms just below and above the
cutoffs on the overall score).
We note that much of the resources which the bureaux would help
coordinate and direct are already allocated via other programmes,
such as the BPI, pôle emploi or municipal budgets. Additional
resources may well be needed for new initiatives along the lines we
have suggested.
3 Governance considerations for RBBs
It is worth saying a bit more about the regulatory model that underlies
this approach, since it differs from the standard, arm’s length regula-
tion model of economists11. In the conventional regulatory approach
to the mitigation of externalities, firms have to meet clear guidelines,
and consultation between the regulator and firms is limited typically
to resolving differences. The costs of mitigation are known to firms but
not to the regulator. Firms use this informational edge to minimise
their adjustment costs while regulators devise ways of eliciting the cost
information without being captured by the firms. There are fixed limits
on permissible behaviour and a schedule of fines for violating them.
This model does not apply well to the present context because the
objective itself (‘good jobs’) is imprecise and multi-dimensional; it
needs to be operationalised in a way that is both evolving and con-
text-dependent. Furthermore, creating good jobs depends on a wide
array of decisions on investment, technological choice and business
organisation, the consequences of which are unknowable ex ante.
Technological and operational possibilities are highly uncertain, and
neither firms nor government agencies have the information needed
to devise concrete behavioural schedules from the outset. Hence the
interaction between RBBs and firms must take as its starting point the
11 The discussion here follows closely Rodrik and Sabel (2019).

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
52 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
provisionality of ends and means and the need for disciplined review
and revision. Targets and instruments for good-job creation must
remain provisional, to be revised as new information comes in. The
task of governance is to establish an information exchange regime that
induces firms to cooperate with RBBs and adjust their strategies in the
desired direction in a context of extreme uncertainty.
Instead of defining each party’s obligations precisely, our proposed
governance system would establish broad goals and a regime for
evaluating their achievement. Such practices have become established
in industries as diverse as biotechnology, IT and advanced manufac-
turing, and in policy regimes such as food safety, water quality, civil
aviation and the promotion of advanced technologies (Gilson et al,
2009; Rodrik and Sabel, 2019). They entail:
“regular, joint reviews of progress towards interim targets or
milestones, procedures for deciding whether and with what exact
aim to proceed or not, and mechanisms for resolving disagree-
ments. The information exchanged under such a regime allows
the parties to develop a more and more precise idea of the shared
goal while allowing each to assess with increasingly reliability the
capacities and good faith of the other: to observe if the capable
stranger can become a reliable partner and the long-trusted
partner is capable of innovative tasks. As collaboration pro-
gresses, each party comes to rely increasingly on the capacities
of the other, deterring opportunistic defection and generating or
activating norms of reciprocity. Joint regular review and deliber-
ate consideration of the interim results thus create the conditions
in which informal norms and self-interested calculations bind the
parties to continue promising collaboration in good faith. Trust
and mutual reliance are the result of agreement to collaborate,
not its precondition, just as the precise aims of cooperation are the
outcome, not the starting point of joint efforts” (Rodrik and Sabel,
2019).

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
53 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
In our specific context, the RBBs would consult local firms exten-
sively and then establish an ambitious, open-ended outcome: ‘good
jobs, ’ as measured by a number of metrics that reflect community
preferences and national standards. Firms would be encouraged to
enter into partnerships with the RBB to gain access to RBB services (of
the type discussed previously) customised to their needs. In return,
they would be required to make plans to achieve ‘good job’ targets
and to report their results regularly. RBB benefits would continue as
long as firms report their progress (or lack thereof ) accurately, and
they make certifiable good-faith efforts to meet their targets. Targets
would remain soft, and failure to meet them would not necessarily
call for withdrawal of support during the early stages, as long as there
is demonstrable progress and good-faith efforts. The objective of the
regime would be to incentivise cooperation, information sharing and
ongoing revision of instruments and targets. In the words of Rodrik
and Sabel (2019), “fostering good jobs is likely to depend on solving
highly idiosyncratic, place-specific problems: failures of coordination
between local firms and training institutions; between firms and their
(potential) supply-chain partners; and the managerial breakdowns or
skill gaps within individual firms and institutions to which the coordi-
nation problems point. ” With enough success on some of these aspects,
more firms could be drawn into such schemes, generating a virtuous
cycle of new production practices and learning spillovers.
Beyond these broad governance principles, there is no how-to
manual that can guide government officials in this work. Discretion on
the part of government bureaucrats remains an integral part of such
incentive regimes. But it is disciplined, on one side, by requirements
of transparency and professional norms and, on the other, by the
demands and needs of firms. Since experimentation by RBBs can add
value, local autonomy is useful and can trigger learning across regions.
Ultimately, success depends on the development of organisational cul-
tures that internalise the behavioural norms of this type of governance.
Like all public policies, the proposed scheme may fail or turn out to

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
54 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
be ineffective. However, it is important to be clear that key elements of
what we have sketched out exist already in the public-policy arsenal.
For example, the BPI already has considerable experience of working
closely with SMEs, using a wide range of instruments (loans, guaran-
tees, equity participation, export credits, training, management coun-
selling, access to technology and networks). The BPI has the capacity
to screen firms, monitor their progress and intervene at various stages
of their lifecycle. Effectively, the BPI acts as a public equivalent of ven-
ture capital. The proposed RBBs could leverage this capacity with addi-
tional instruments and resources, and in a more employment-friendly
manner.
The RBB proposal does not entail a significant increase in capac-
ity compared to institutional arrangements that have already proved
feasible in other, similar contexts. The novelty, to the extent there
is any, lies in the focus and orientation of the business-promotion
programme: a closer coordination of business incentives with labour
market/training policies, more customised business services instead of
ex-ante tax incentives, explicit targets for employment and job upgrad-
ing (‘good jobs’), greater room for revision in light of changing circum-
stances and more intensive evaluation.
4 Labour-friendly innovation policies
In 2016, Elon Musk announced that Tesla’s Model 3 would be built in
a new, fully automated car factory. Codenamed ‘ Alien Dreadnought, ’
with obvious connotations of science fiction and hyper-advanced
technology far beyond current practice, the project would enable
essentially workerless production. Complete automation would allow
the factory to operate beyond human speed: “raw materials would go
in one end and finished cars would roll out the other. In between, robots
would do everything, at very high speed – speeds too dangerous to risk
around frail human bodies”12. Only a few human experts would be
12 Matthew DeBord, ‘Tesla’s Future Is Completely Inhuman — and We Shouldn’t Be

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
55 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
needed to ensure everything was running smoothly.
The factory was supposed to become fully operational by the end of
2018. But the plans proved hard to implement, and by mid-2018 it was
clear that production bottlenecks would not be solved easily. The oper-
ation was experiencing “production hell” and was “within single-digit
weeks of death, ” in Musk’s words. The dire situation forced the com-
pany to launch a new assembly line inside a sprung structure (what
Musk described as a “tent”) on the grounds of the factory. Built in three
weeks, the new assembly line increased production by 50 percent and
returned the company to financial health.
When CBS News correspondent Leslie Stahl visited the “tent” some-
time later, accompanied by Musk, she observed that the new Model 3
factory was in fact full of human workers. Musk laughed, responding
“people are way better at dealing with unexpected circumstances than
robots”13. On Twitter, he conceded that “excessive automation at Tesla
was a mistake … Humans are under-rated”14.
Tesla’s automation mistake is revealing for several reasons. First, it
highlights how production techniques relying on human labour can
still dominate automation when it is impossible to fully account for
uncertainty and routinise all tasks. Second, it is indicative of the exces-
sive faith many business leaders often place on new technologies.
Third, it reminds us that technology adoption is a choice: businesses
face a range of options about what kind of innovations to use and
deploy – choices that have significant implications for the workforce
but are not typically internalised in the decision-making process.
In his magisterial book Inequality, the late Anthony Atkinson
stressed that there are three reasons why the direction of technological
Surprised’ , Business Insider, 20 May 2017, https://www.businessinsider.com/tes-
la-completely-inhuman-automated-factory-2017-5?r=UK.
13 Simon Alvarez, ‘Inside Tesla’s ‘Tent’-Based Model 3 Line That Set a Path to
Profitability’ . Teslarati, 10 December 2018, https://www.teslarati.com/inside-tes-
la-tent-based-model-3-production-assembly-line-profitability/.
14 See https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/984882630947753984.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
56 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
change cannot be left to firms and innovators alone (Atkinson, 2015,
pp. 115-118). First, technology choices have distributional implica-
tions – the share of capital in value added and the level of wages – to
which society may not be indifferent. Second, the replacement of
labour with robots and other modes of automation typically entails the
substitution for a joint product – a human service alongside manual
labour – and there is no guarantee that laissez-faire is efficient in the
presence of joint supply. Third, today’s innovations have long-range
implications for the future and may foreclose technological paths that
are more friendly to human workers. The social benefits of good jobs
we have already discussed can be considered a fourth broad reason.
Technological change is probably the single most important force
that has been driving the polarisation of labour markets. As automa-
tion, AI and other new technologies alter the type and composition of
skills demanded in labour markets, workers with skills that are in less
demand face significant challenges.
The usual discussion around the labour-market implications of new
technologies is curiously one-sided. The direction of technological
change – whether it augments or replaces labour – is taken to be essen-
tially exogenous and out of our control. All the adjustment, therefore,
falls on the labour force. Typical statements exhort workers to acquire
better education and training to ensure they have the skills required by
new technologies. Here is, for example, how a McKinsey report (2020)
on the future of work in Europe puts it:
“ Automation will require all workers to acquire new skills. About
94 million workers may not need to change occupations but will
especially need retraining, as technology handles 20 percent of
their current activities. While some workers in declining occupa-
tions may be able to find similar types of work, 21 million may
need to change occupations by 2030. Most of them lack tertiary
education. Newly created jobs will require more sophisticated
skills that are already scarce today” (McKinsey, 2020, p. iv).

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
57 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
What is striking in such statements is the degree of technological
determinism. It is as if technological innovations and their likely impacts
on future jobs are completely exogenous, shaped by forces outside the
economy, institutional arrangements and government policy.
In reality, the kind of innovations that are fostered depend on several
conditions that may be amenable to control.
First and most directly, government-funded and directed innovation
programmes make decisions about what kind of innovations to pro-
mote. Those priorities are often shaped by considerations about which
activities are the industries of the future (eg Programme d’investisse-
ments d’avenir in France), or what specific societal goals need to be ful-
filled (eg green technologies in the context of the European Green Deal,
or defence-related technologies at the national level). These priorities in
turn determine what kind of research projects are funded and devel-
oped. Employment-friendly technologies – those that augment rather
than replace labour – could be part of those priorities, though they are
not at present.
Second, private-sector innovation incentives can be skewed because
of prevailing financing methods or policies. Venture capital, for exam-
ple, plays a relatively important role in financing innovation in the US.
VC naturally seeks areas where the returns can be capitalised relatively
quickly by investors. As Lerner and Nanda (2020) pointed out, this
may exclude innovations where the gains are longer term or reaped by
society at large. There are also many policies that indirectly shape pri-
vate-sector technological investments because of the market incentives
they generate. For example, most advanced economies subsidise capital
formation (through depreciation allowances and various incentives
of the type we discussed previously) and tax labour (through personal
income taxes and labour charges). An unintended consequence of the
tax system is to induce firms to economise on labour by investing in
machinery, to an extent that may be socially suboptimal. Acemoglu et al
(2020) found that a shift to an “optimal” system of factor taxation would
increase US employment by nearly 6 percent. There is no reason why

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
58 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
such indirect and unintended consequences on the direction of tech-
nical change could not be taken into account if tax (and other) policies
were subject to a fuller evaluation.
Third, beyond the economic incentives they face, there is an informal
set of norms that guide innovators’ decisions. The high-tech commu-
nity often operates under a shared set of values and expectations with
respect to what is a desirable direction for technological change. In
the US, groupthink is aggravated by the very high concentration of VC
funding in a small number of firms and cities (such as San Francisco,
Boston and New York City). “Venture firms based in other cities might
have chosen very different firms to invest in given their perspectives on
their local economies, ” wrote Lerner and Nanda (2020)15. Automation
and replacing human labour or ingenuity can be prized beyond the true
economic value. Elon Musk’s misplaced confidence in the benefits of
full automation was perhaps a reflection of such values. Such norms
might be amenable to change as society begins to attach specific value
to employment-friendly technologies. An analogy might be drawn
here with the growing ecological consciousness households and firms
have exhibited in recent decades, as the climate change challenge has
become part of the everyday consciousness.
Finally, the direction of technological change also depends on the
balance of power between employers and employees. When workers
have a say in the workplace, management has to get buy-in from them
before major technologies are deployed and work is restructured. This
can reflect itself in a modern version of Luddism – aversion to any kind
15 Those who finance innovation are very unrepresentative of the societies in which
they live. Lerner and Nanda (2020) reported about top venture firms: “Eighty
percent of partners are male; among the set of partners with at least one board seat,
91 percent are male. Three-quarters of partners with at least one board seat attended
either an Ivy League school, or one of Caltech, MIT , or Stanford; moreover, nearly
30 percent of these individuals are graduates of just Harvard Business School or the
Stanford Graduate School of Business. In terms of location, 69 percent are based in
the Bay Area alone and over 90 percent are based in either the Bay Area, Greater
Boston, or New York.”

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
59 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
of innovation that appears to threaten jobs. But it can also be a useful
counterweight to adverse incentives in the system encouraging too
much automation or the adoption of what Acemoglu and Restrepo
(2019) called so-so technologies. For example, businesses that take stake-
holders’ interests into account are more likely to deploy new technolo-
gies in a manner that empowers workers, rather than replace them or
reduce them to mechanical, routine work. Sophisticated technologies
can allow managers to monitor their workers’ every movement and
measure their efficiency, enabling companies to set ever-more demand-
ing standards of productivity, at some cost to workers’ physical and
mental health. Alternatively, new technologies can empower workers to
increase their autonomy and control their work environment.
In short, there are reasons to believe that the direction of technolog-
ical change, in addition to its rate, depends on a wide range of factors,
many of which could be influenced by societal and governmental
decision-making. And if so, it may be possible to direct technology to
better serve the existing workforce’s needs, in addition to preparing the
workforce to match the requirements of technology.
5 Margins of technological choice
Firms faced with the challenge of upgrading productivity face all kinds
of decisions. Their options may range from installing robots (which
kind?) to modernising existing capital equipment, to using advanced
analytics to optimise performance. The technology that will work best
is unclear ex ante, and rarely comes in ready-made, off-the-shelf form.
These choices create the margins around which better or worse deci-
sions can be made.
Technology choices that firms make are closely linked to the
organisation of production and the degree to which employees benefit
from autonomy and a learning environment. Under Taylorist pro-
duction, workers perform repetitive tasks on the assembly line: jobs
may be plenty, but they are hardly satisfying. Under lean production,
machines replace routine human labour, but work remains under

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
60 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
hierarchical control and offers little autonomy.
In ‘learning organisations, ’ by contrast, workers take part in deci-
sion-making, have considerable autonomy, and are engaged in prob-
lem-solving and continuous learning. The learning mode of produc-
tion not only increases worker satisfaction, it is also more conducive to
increased productivity and dissemination of innovations over time16.
In particular, the introduction of new technologies along with organ-
isational changes can allow less-skilled workers, such as shop floor
operators, to identify productivity improvements and engage in appro-
priate actions. There are plenty of examples of firms that have made a
conscious choice to move towards this learning form of organisation17.
16 Based on data from European Conditions of Work Surveys (ECWS), France Stratégie
(2020) reported highest levels of job satisfaction in ‘learning organisations. ’ Also,
rates of innovation seem to be correlated with proportion of learning firms at the
national level.
17 A joint programme between the World Economic Forum and McKinsey focused on
“lighthouses, ” firms that are introducing new technologies that have the potential to
revolutionise production in a human-centred way, empowering workers and giving
them greater agency in the process of introducing innovations (WEF/McKinsey,
2019b). Studying these lighthouses provides many valuable insights. For example,
the French company Schneider Electric “is implementing, testing and rolling out
ideas for innovation in an organized approach in a ‘Smart Factory Program’ A
strong focus on workforce engagement ensures that the changes and new technolo-
gies are supported by employees and therefore adopted quickly. For instance, at the
company’s Le Vaudreuil site in France, it has created a 3D virtual reality model of the
entire factory to use in testing and validating innovative ideas. This is then used to
engage operators so they can see how their day-to-day work will change… ” . In anoth-
er example, “a large manufacturer had deployed autonomous mobile robots (AMRs)
for a point-to-point material transfer workflow moving parts from kitting stations
to an assembly cell. Workers in another cell noted that their colleagues experienced
fewer delays waiting for parts, and they also noticed that the robots would wait in an
idle queue between tasks. They approached the floor supervisor and requested that
the robots also be assigned to support their cell…. As a result of their independent and
collaborative action, the workers and local staff were able to increase their produc-
tivity and also increase the utilization of the robot, making it a win for all involved” .
In the words of a machine operator at Foxconn, “my role has changed from loading
and other manual tasks to monitoring, diagnostics and problem-solving” (WEF/
McKinsey, 2019b).

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
61 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Firms will have diverse motives in choosing among these modes:
management capacity, organisational culture, relations with work-
ers and not least imagination. Technological features themselves are
rarely the sole determinant. A France Stratégie (2020) study noted that
learning organisations have become common in Nordic countries but
are still scarce in France18. The study highlighted the need for public
policies that pay attention to how firms make choices over production
modes, instead of treating firm organisation as a black box.
Moreover, different technologies can survive side-by-side. In a study
of small and medium-sized manufacturers in Ohio, Waldman-Brown
(2020) found her respondents took two different approaches to the com-
petitive challenges they faced. One approach was to build new green-
field plants that were fully automated, typically in a different country,
with the intention of phasing out existing operations. In her sample,
one company was building a plant in Mexico and another in Romania.
This strategy naturally resulted in job losses in Ohio (and did not create
many new jobs in the outsourced countries in view of the extent of
automation). But a second group of firms were engaged with “ongoing
tinkering with existing plants, ” and this did not seem to result in much
job loss. The retrofitting and modernisation of existing plants seemed to
be a profitable strategy for those firms that took this path. The majority
of the SMEs Waldman-Brown (2020) interviewed “claimed to have found
robust competitive niches” and “very few of these legacy firms seemed
to be laggards. ” Firms pursuing the tinkering strategy “were constantly
18 The report cites a rare French example, Favi, an automotive subcontractor: “As
early as the mid-1980s, [Favi] chose to focus its strategy on product quality and the
use of innovative technologies, with a focus on the health and safety of its employees.
It also focused on the autonomy of its employees – especially the workers – by creating
‘self-organized units, ’ i.e., mini-plants of 5 to 25 employees, each taking charge of a
production line in a customer/supplier approach. As at Volvo, employees developed
their own methodological tools for monitoring and improving production processes.
The operators themselves made contact with customers instead of the sales staff, thus
acquiring greater control over their work and a cross-functional view of the produc-
tion line” (France Strategie, 2020).

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
62 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
on the lookout for new technologies that could meet their demands for
affordability and versatility, and most were not concerned about being
out-competed by automation at home or cheaper labor abroad.” Such
studies suggest the possibility of different technological paths to firm
success, with sharply varying consequences for labour.
An important series of papers by Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018,
2019) argued that it is possible to resist present technological trends
and push innovation in a direction that creates new, labour-absorbing
tasks. They cited three areas. First, they suggested AI could be used in
education to create more specialised tasks for teachers, personalise
instruction for students, and increase effectiveness of schooling in the
process. They noted that individual students have different learning
styles, which requires teaching to be adapted to their specific needs. By
generating real-time information on learning and making recommen-
dations, AI tools can enable customised, smaller-group teaching. They
can also allow instruction to respond more rapidly to evolving tech-
nologies and labour-market needs. Such tools are unlikely to replace
teachers; they might in fact increase the demand for teachers (as well
as redefine their roles) by enhancing the return to individual or small
group instruction.
Second, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2019) noted a similar potential in
healthcare, which is perhaps closer to realisation. AI tools can signif-
icantly enhance the diagnostic and treatment capabilities of nurses,
physicians’ aides and other medical technicians. They can, in effect,
allow “less skilled” practitioners to perform tasks that only physicians
with many more years of professional education have traditionally
undertaken. The same logic also applies to other areas to boost job
opportunities for those without the most advanced skills. For example,
AI systems already enable the drawing up of simple contracts (such
as wills) and the provision of many other services without the actual
involvement of lawyers. To date, such systems have replaced primarily
paralegals rather than lawyers themselves, but more advanced sys-
tems could enable paralegals to perform more advanced tasks, such as

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
63 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
document review, due diligence and document drafting (Remus and
Levy, 2016). Machine learning and neural networks can enable mid-
level finance professionals to do financial risk assessment, loan under-
writing and fraud detection tasks that would otherwise be undertaken
by more senior professionals (McKinsey, 2018).
Third, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2019) mentioned the use of aug-
mented and virtual reality technologies in manufacturing, enabling
humans and robots to work together in performing precision tasks
(rather than the latter replacing the former). Such technologies are
based on smaller, more nimble robots that also enable greater custo-
misation of production in response to specific customer needs. “This
will not just help workers keep some of the tasks that might have other-
wise been automated; it could also create new tasks in which humans,
augmented by digital technology and sensors, can be employed and con-
tribute to productivity” (Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2019). More broadly,
shop floor apps augment relatively unskilled labour by allowing
workers to carry out operations that more-skilled employees typically
perform. A WEF/McKinsey white paper (2019a) noted that such apps
“enable manufacturers to bridge the skill gap. ” Real-time performance
feedback and guidance through manufacturing analytics allow “expe-
rienced and new operators [to] work side by side with manufacturing
apps” (WEF/McKinsey, 2019a).
Product customisation is one of the imperatives that have pushed
some car companies to moderate their ambitions with respect to
automation. Beyond Tesla, companies including BMW and Mercedes
are building their automation plans around human work, which they
have found allows both greater reliability and more customisation in
production. McKinsey (2018) reported:
“after years of building robotic factories, BMW in South Carolina
is ramping up hiring of human workers. [BMW] says that com-
bining people with machines on its automotive assembly lines
increases the flexibility to build multiple models in smaller

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
64 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
batches and thus respond to shifting customer demands more
quickly. ”
In new BMW factories, lightweight robots (‘cobots’), which do
not have to be physically separated from workers, allow humans and
machines to perform complementary tasks. For example, to install the
insulation inside a door, a worker may first put in place the foil with the
adhesive bead, and then the robot applies the heavy pressure needed to
seal it19. Similarly Mercedes-Benz has replaced some of its older gener-
ation robots with AI-enabled cobots, redesigning its processes around
human-machine collaboration. This allows the company to build more
customised S-class sedans, something that older systems could not do
as well. In the plant, human workers customise cars on the fly using
hand-held tablets, with the automated work being performed by the
light-weight robots (Wilson and Dougherty, 2018). In general, lightweight
robots have opened up new potential for human tasks that cannot be
routinised.
In sum, there are many margins of technological choice. First, the kind
of automation that amounts to replacement of labour, pure and simple,
is far from destiny. Second, investing in ‘learning organizations’ can pay
off in terms of both worker satisfaction and productivity. Third, many AI
systems have the potential to complement low and middle-skilled labour
instead of high skills. Fourth, appropriately steered innovation can lead
to an increase in labour-requiring tasks through greater customisation in
manufacturing and individualisation of services. Some of the examples
we have provided suggest that firms can make innovation decisions that
are simultaneously labour-friendly and profitable. But the mix of incen-
tives they face is distorted by existing policies as well as by their lack of
internalisation of the social benefits of good jobs.
19 BMW Group Press Release, ‘Innovative Human-Robot Cooperation in BMW Group
Production, ’ 9 October 2013, https://www.press.bmwgroup.com/global/article/
detail/T0209722EN/innovative-human-robot-cooperation-in-bmw-group-produc-
tion?language=en.

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
65 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
6 Is there a role for policy?
“The direction of technological change should be an explicit concern
of policy-makers, encouraging innovation in a form that increases the
employability of workers and emphasizes the human dimension of service
provision, ” wrote Atkinson (2015). The question is what this implies for
specific policies.
First, it would be useful to review the prevailing fiscal regime with a
view to ascertaining whether there are excessive incentives for invest-
ment in automation (as appears to be the case in the US; Acemoglu et al,
2020). If the answer is yes, corrective instruments may need to be put in
place. Possibilities would include an increase in the taxation of capital
that directly substitutes for labour (eg robots), providing tax preferences
for cobots over traditional robots and, of course, reducing labour charges.
Second, it may be possible to incorporate employment considera-
tions directly into the existing regime of tax incentives for R&D. In the
presence of a good-job objective, traditional R&D externalities have
to be modified to take into account the likely employment effects of
innovation. The selection criteria could revolve around the margins
of choice we discussed previously: innovations such as automation
that directly replace labour would be favoured the least, and innova-
tions that augment labour of low and medium skills and create new,
labour-absorbing tasks would be favoured the most.
While it may be difficult to ascertain those employment conse-
quences, especially of different types of work, research does provide
some rough guidelines. For example, Webb (2020) provided a mapping
from different kinds of research in AI (measured through patents) to
the employment structure. This kind of work could guide policymakers
in providing a more differentiated structure of R&D incentives, favour-
ing the kind of R&D that is more labour-friendly. Acemoglu (2021) sug-
gested policymakers should look at the labour share of value added.
None of the existing methods are likely to be particularly reliable at
the outset. The expectation is that paying attention to employment
in this context might lead eventually to the development of better

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
66 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
measurement frameworks regarding labour-market implications.
Third, and in a similar vein, governments could apply a ‘prospective
employment test’ when determining their public-spending priorities
for innovation. At the EU level, for example, employment consider-
ations appear to play virtually no direct role in the construction of
the innovation portfolio. Horizon Europe has identified five specific
research and innovation missions for the 2021-2027 period: adap-
tation to climate change; cancer; climate-neutral and smart cities;
healthy oceans, seas, coastal and inland waters; soil health and food20.
No doubt each of these areas is important. But encouraging labour-
friendly innovation is no less important. Its absence from the list
reflects an unwarranted determinism about the direction of techno-
logical change21.
The European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI) partners with the
European Investment Bank (EIB) to finance investment in innovation.
The areas it lists as priorities are “infrastructure, energy efficiency and
renewable energy, research and innovation, environment, agriculture, dig-
ital technology, education, health and social projects. ” It also provides risk
finance to small businesses to help them innovate. One possibility would
be to devote a portion of EFSI funds experimentally to developing labour-
friendly technologies – just as in the case of green technologies.
The European Green Deal (EGD) provides a more specific oppor-
tunity for making employment a focus of innovation. The social
component of the EGD consists almost entirely of ‘compensation, ’ the
idea being that those regions and groups of workers that are adversely
affected by investments in decarbonisation should be made whole
20 See European Commission, ‘Horizon Europe (HORIZON), ’ https://ec.europa.eu/
info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/programmes/horizon.
21 Atkinson (2015) provided another example: “Did the European-based Euroka con-
sortium [in autonomous vehicles] consider the distributional issues when launching
PROMETHEUS (Programme for a European Traffic System with Highest Efficiency
and Unprecedented Safety)? The fact that ‘efficiency’ is picked out in its title suggests
that ‘equity’ was not at the forefront.”

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
67 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
in some way22. An equally important strategy might be to take good-
job considerations explicitly into account in selecting investment
priorities within the EGD. In particular, different decarbonisation
strategies may have different implications for labour markets. Some
programmes, such as retrofitting building and transport systems,
waste management, and public transportation, tend to be much more
labour-friendly than others, such as carbon capture and storage (CCS)
or nuclear energy. Employment considerations may yield a different
portfolio of innovations and investments within the EGD than would
be selected in their absence.
Fourth, the government can directly encourage the introduction
and dissemination in the private sector of learning organisations that
empower workers. The goal would be for such organisational forms –
based on teamwork, development of cognitive, social, and soft skills,
workers’ autonomy and continuous learning – to replace Taylorist or
lean organisational models where feasible. Along these lines, France
Stratégie (2020) recommended the creation of a French national
programme for managerial and organisational innovation to raise
awareness of firms and to assist in the implementation of the requisite
organisational changes. Since the requisite investments may require
both public assistance and skills training, it would be natural for such a
programme to work together with the public employment services and
the regional business bureaux we discussed previously.
Finally, public policy can play a role in shaping public conscious-
ness about the social and employment consequences of innovation.
A public that is more aware of the choices we have is likely to expect
more from innovators. Acemoglu (2021) drew an analogy with envi-
ronmental consciousness and concerns about nuclear weapons: “in
22 The EGD includes a Just Transition Mechanism to raise and transfer funds to re-
gions dependent on coal, lignite, oil shale and peat, and greenhouse gas-intensive
industries. Region-specific ‘territorial just transition plans’ are contemplated for
reskilling, development and regional rehabilitation needs, though plans remain
vague at time of writing.

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
68 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
the same way that millions of employees demand that their companies
reduce their carbon footprint and in the same way that many nuclear
physicists would not be willing to work on developing nuclear weap-
ons, AI researchers should become more aware and more sensitive to
the social consequences of their actions. ” One might also add to these
examples the increasing concerns about privacy that digital innova-
tions have created. The requisite change in public norms will have to
come from within society at large. But the government can play an
important role as well in articulating the appropriate narrative on the
need for labour-friendly innovation.
The public narrative we might need is one that qualifies the sin-
gle-minded focus on the imperative of adjustment by workers and
their skills to new technologies. This is an oddly one-sided remedy.
As a matter of logic, the gap between skills and technology can be
closed in one of two ways: either by increasing education to match the
demands of new technologies, or by redirecting innovation to match
the skills of the current (and prospective) labour force. The second
strategy, which gets practically no attention in policy discussions,
might be worth a shot too.

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
69 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
References
Acemoglu, D. And P . Restrepo (2019) ‘The
Wrong Kind of AI? Artificial Intelligence
and the Future of Labor Demand’ ,
Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy
and Society, available at https://doi.
org/10.1093/cjres/rsz022
Acemoglu, D. And P . Restrepo (2018)
‘ Artificial Intelligence, Automation and
Work’ , Working Paper 24196, National
Bureau of Economic Research, available
at https://doi.org/10.3386/w24196.
Acemoglu, D., A. Manera and P . Restrepo
(2020) ‘Does the U.S. Tax Code Favor
Automation?’ BPEA Conference Drafts,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Spring
Acemoglu, D. (2021) ‘ AI’s Future
Doesn’t Have to Be Dystopian’ , Boston
Review, 20 May, available at https://
www.bostonreview.net/forum/
ais-future-doesnt-have-to-be-dystopian/
Atkinson, A.B. (2015) Inequality: What
Can Be Done? Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA
Bartik, T .J. (2020) ‘Using Place-Based Jobs
Policies to Help Distressed Communities’ ,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 34(3):
99–127
Bartik, T .J. (2019) ‘Should Place-Based
Jobs Policies Be Used to Help Distressed
Communities?’ W.E. Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research, 1 August
Criscuolo, C., R. Martin, H.G. Overman
and J. Van Reenen (2019) ‘Some Causal
Effects of an Industrial Policy’ , American
Economic Review 109(1): 48-85
European Commission (2013) ‘Guidelines
on Regional State Aid for 2014-2020’ ,
2013/C 209/01, Official Journal of
European Union, 23 July
Evans, P .B. (1995) Embedded Autonomy:
States and Industrial Transformation,
Princeton University Press
Fernández-Arias, E., C. Sabel, E.H. Stein
and A. Trejos (2016)Two to Tango: Public-
Private Collaboration for Productive
Development Policies, Inter-American
Development Bank, Washington DC
France Stratégie (2020) Promoting
Learning Work Organizations: Issues and
Challenges for France, available at https://
www.strategie.gouv.fr/sites/strategie.
gouv.fr/files/atoms/files/note_de_
synthese_-learning_organisation.pdf.
Ghezzi, P . (2017) ‘Mesas Ejecutivas
in Peru: Lessons for Productive
Development Policies’ , Global Policy
8(3): 369–80, available at https://doi.
org/10.1111/1758-5899.12457
Gilson, R.J., C.F . Sabel and R.E. Scott
(2009) ‘Contracting for Innovation:
Vertical Disintegration and Interfirm
Collaboration’ , Columbia Law Review,
2009: 431–502, available at https://doi.
org/10.2139/ssrn.1289428.

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
70 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Hausmann, R., D. Rodrik and C. Sabel
(2008) ‘Reconfiguring Industrial Policy: A
Framework with an Application to South
Africa’ , Working Paper No. RWP08-031,
Harvard Kennedy School, available at
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=1245702
Lerner, J. And R. Nanda (2020) ‘Venture
Capital’s Role in Financing Innovation:
What We Know and How Much We Still
Need to Learn’ , Journal of Economic
Perspectives 34(3): 237–61
McKinsey (2020) The Future of Work
in Europe: Automation, Workforce
Transitions, and the Shifting Geography of
Employment, McKinsey Global Institute
McKinsey (2018) Skill Shift: Automation
and the Future of the Workforce, McKinsey
Global Institute
Remus, D. And F . Levy (2016) ‘Can Robots
Be Lawyers? Computers, Lawyers, and
the Practice of Law’ , mimeo, available at
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=2701092
Robalino, D., J.M. Romero and I. Walker
(2020) ‘ Allocating Subsidies for Private
Investments to Maximize Jobs Impacts’ ,
Jobs Working Paper No. 45, World Bank
Rodrik, D. And S. Stantcheva (2021)
Economic Inequality and Insecurity:
Policies for an Inclusive Economy, Report
Prepared for Commission Chaired by
Olivier Blanchard and Jean Tirole on
Major Future Economic Challenges,
Republic of France
Rodrik, D. (2022) An Industrial Policy for
Good Jobs, Policy Proposal, The Hamilton
Project
Rodrik, D. And C. Sabel (2019) ‘Building
a Good Jobs Economy’ , Faculty Research
Working Paper No. RWP20-001, Harvard
Kennedy School
Rodrik, D. (2007) ‘Industrial Policies
for the Twenty-First Century’ , in D.
Rodrik, One Economics, Many Recipes:
Globalization, Institutions, and Economic
Growth, Princeton University Press
Rodrik, D. (2008) ‘Normalizing Industrial
Policy’ , Working Paper No. 3, Commission
on Growth and Development, available at
https://drodrik.scholar.harvard.edu/files/
dani-rodrik/files/normalizing-industrial-
policy.pdf
Sabel, C. (2007) ‘Bootstrapping
Development: Rethinking the Role of
Public Intervention in Promoting Growth’ ,
in V . Lee and R. Swedberg (eds) On
Capitalism, Stanford University Press
Waldman-Brown, A. (2020)
‘Redeployment or Robocalypse? Workers
and Automation in Ohio Manufacturing
SMEs’ , MIT Work of the Future Working
Paper 03-2020, MIT
Webb, M. (2020) ‘The Impact of Artificial
Intelligence on the Labor Market’ , mimeo,
available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=3482150

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
71 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Wilson, H.J. and P .R. Daugherty (2018)
‘Collaborative Intelligence: Humans and
AI Are Joining Forces’ , Harvard Business
Review, 1 July, available at https://hbr.
org/2018/07/collaborative-intelligence-
humans-and-ai-are-joining-forces
WEF/McKinsey (2019a) Fourth Industrial
Revolution: Beacons of Technology and
Innovation in Manufacturing, White
Paper, World Economic Forum (in
collaboration with McKinsey), available
at https://www3.weforum.org/docs/
WEF_4IR_Beacons_of_Technology_
and_Innovation_in_Manufacturing_
report_2019.pdf
WEF/McKinsey (2019b) Global
Lighthouse Network: Insights from
the Forefront of the Fourth Industrial
Revolution, White Paper, World Economic
Forum (in collaboration with McKinsey),
available at https://www3.weforum.org/
docs/WEF_Global_Lighthouse_Network.
pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
4 Industrial policy and
 technological sovereignty
Uwe Cantner
1 Introduction
In times when the prosperity and welfare of an economy depend on
mastering and using the latest technologies and, if necessary, also gen-
erating them, the question of the extent to which an economy has the
skills and knowledge to succeed in doing so becomes important. If an
economy has and maintains such capabilities and knowledge, then it
can make sovereign decisions about the use of the latest technologies.
This sovereignty and its preservation have gained attention in
politics, media and in the broad public. It started with so-called digital
sovereignty which has been closely related to the topic of cybersecurity
– mainly driven by the significant increase in cyberattacks worldwide.
Meanwhile it is not only the digital sphere that is concerned with the
issue of sovereignty. Sovereignty is also important in the spheres of raw
materials and energy, electronic devices, international value chains
and key technologies. The sources of constraints on technological
sovereignty are various, ranging from new geopolitics and economic
wars, to intense technology competition and vicious-virtuous cycles of
development. Trajectories of technological and economic divergence,
patterns of severe economic inequality and noticeable structural
changes arising from radical changes that broadly affect – positively
and negatively – all sectors and industries, give rise to political consid-
erations and concepts that seek to preserve and regain technological
and, in particular, digital sovereignty.
Policymakers have been quick to identify intervention points and

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
73 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
to arm themselves with industrial and foreign trade policy tools. The
belief that the markets can solve these problems is fading, and forces
are gaining ground that see active government intervention via indus-
trial policy measures as the silver bullet. The Inflation Reduction Act in
the United States, the European Green Deal and China’s Belt and Road
Initiative are examples. Industrial policy flourishes.
Against this background, the question remains of whether these
policies are conceptually appropriate to cope with the issue of tech-
nological sovereignty. This issue takes on particular importance in
phases of far-reaching structural change and fundamental transfor-
mation processes. Radically new technologies come into play, new
key technologies emerge and the question is which economies can
best contribute to these processes and occupy prominent positions
(economically, technologically and in terms of driving the Sustainable
Development Goals). Particularly in relation to key technologies, new
constellations of international technological leadership will emerge,
which may lead to dependencies and restrictions on technological
sovereignty.
This chapter introduces the concept of technological sovereignty as
a microeconomic issue. It then discusses this sovereignty and restric-
tions on it, in the context of a technology-gap trade model with endog-
enous processes of generating new knowledge and hence innovation.
The chapter ends with a brief dive into industrial policy and measures
to cope with and prevent technological sovereignty.
2 Technological sovereignty: the concept
The concept of technological sovereignty is described and defined in
varying ways. The common denominator is that technological sov-
ereignty is about the degree to which one can master a certain tech-
nology in its application and use, and also about the degree to which
that technology is available or the degree to which one has access to
it. Mastery is measured on a spectrum of the existing know-how and
competencies that must be built up and kept ready for the production

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
74 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
of a technology or its use. Availability results from a positioning on a
spectrum from pure self-production to complete procurement.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition of techno-
logical sovereignty is used (EFI, 2022):
“ A national economy has technological sovereignty if it can itself
provide and further develop a technology it deems critical for its
welfare, competitiveness and ability to act, and if it can partici-
pate in its standardisation and is able to apply and to source this
technology from other economic areas without one-sided struc-
tural dependency” (translated from German).
2.1 Technological sovereignty as a microeconomic problem
The use of technologies in the production and use of goods and
services is subject to the decisions of companies, whether private or
public, public institutions and infrastructures, and users, especially in
the household sector. Sovereignty in the use of technologies thus first
and foremost concerns microeconomic actors.
At the micro-level, operators or users are sovereign in a technol-
ogy (i) when they master it, and (ii) when it is available to them. As to
mastery, a sovereign approach to technologies means that they are
well understood by their operators and users in accordance with the
respective objectives. For that understanding, proper technological
knowledge, comprising know-how and competencies, is required.
One is not sovereign in these technologies if one does not have the
knowledge to master them (lack of mastery). As far as availability is
concerned, one is sovereign in dealing with a technology if one has it
at hand and can use it. The availability of a technology is limited if one
cannot afford it or does not have access to it for other reasons (lack of
availability).
Lack of mastery and lack of availability – alone or together – mean
that one is dependent on others to use a certain technology and,

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
75 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
hence, is no longer sovereign in this respect. Such dependence is asso-
ciated with high usage costs, which can be so high that one does not
use a certain technology at all, although it is useful in its own right.
2.2 Technological sovereignty: between autarky and division of labour
How do operators and users of certain technologies achieve tech-
nological sovereignty? Well, the greatest degree of sovereignty in a
technology is achieved when one generates this technology oneself
and makes it available to oneself. In such cases, one is autarkic in this
technology with full technological sovereignty.
This argument, however, neglects the positive effects of the divi-
sion of labour – or the underlying managerial decision to ‘make or
buy’ . Individual economic autarky does not guarantee that the best
technology is available, but only the quality of technology that one is
able to provide oneself. And this quality may well not be at the top of
the range. In such a case, it may make sense to acquire better tech-
nology in the marketplace. If there are suppliers of a corresponding
technology, then a calculation of the advantages according to the
‘make-or-buy’ principle must be made, in the sense of comparative
performance-price ratios. In doing so, the price of procuring the
technology needs to include the costs of building up and maintaining
the corresponding competences and skills needed to operate and use
the purchased technology, so-called absorptive abilities (Cohen and
Levinthal, 1989). Comparing the performance-price ratios of buying
and of making comprises the make-and-buy decision.
If this comparison leads to the decision to buy, then the degree of
technological sovereignty of the buyer results from the quality of the
absorptive capabilities (mastery) on the one hand, and the possibil-
ity of acquiring the technology on national or international markets
(availability) on the other. Risks and resulting costs that may limit tech-
nological sovereignty must be contrasted with the costs and disadvan-
tages that would arise if opportunities from the division of labour were
not exploited and autarky were pursued.

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
76 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
2.3 Restrictions on individual economic sovereignty
Restrictions on individual technological sovereignty are not likely to
occur in the case of in-house production of technologies. If technol-
ogies are acquired from others, then restrictions on individual tech-
nological sovereignty can be caused by two factors: restrictions on
the ability to acquire the technology (lack of availability) and lack of
technological knowledge (lack of mastery).
When companies acquire technologies on markets, there may be
constraints on the procurement side. For example, it is possible that
the supplier of a technology encounters problems that lead to sup-
ply-chain disruptions, delays, quality degradation or even a complete
supply stoppage. If the acquiring company has not diversified its
procurement and instead relies entirely on one or a few suppliers, its
sovereignty is compromised by a lack of availability. In the interna-
tional context, trade embargoes and other trade restrictions, however
justified, can limit the technological sovereignty of companies. Even
though the problem of availability is primarily caused by the supply
side, it is really triggered by the lack of a corporate diversification
strategy on the part of the procuring company. Obviously, such a strat-
egy is not costless as the firm has to manage numerous procurement
relationships, with different prices and qualities of the technology
concerned.
As an alternative to diversifying procurement, a firm’s willingness to
reshore a technology when sovereignty constraints arise can also help
maintain or restore its sovereignty. Costs are involved in this decision
too. Significant factors influencing these costs are the know-how and
the competences to generate and develop the technology for which
reshoring is considered. To the extent that the necessary know-how
and competences are lacking, they must first be invested in.
In case the reshoring firm’s level of know-how and competence is
close to that of a supplier of the ‘critical’ technology, costs of reshoring
are comparatively low – an expression of technological sovereignty.
However, if the supplier’s know-how and competence in the critical

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
77 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
technology are far ahead, then the reshoring firm’s own provision of
the technology is associated with potentially high costs. These include
the time costs of building up the know-how and competences related
to the technology, or losses in the quality and performance of the tech-
nology – cost related to a lack of mastery. Hence, retaining sovereignty
in the mastery of a technology via reshoring is costly, and these costs
express the degree of dependency on the supplier.
2.4 Technological sovereignty and its policy relevance
Technological sovereignty at the individual economic level is one of
the problems that the management of every firm has to cope with.
Being able to successfully counter restrictions on technological sover-
eignty in a preventive manner and anticipating associated problems at
an early stage depends on the quality of management. It is part of the
normal business reality that in this context management is also subject
to misjudgements and, viewed ex post, can make wrong decisions
that sometimes lead to considerable losses, and even to company
bankruptcy. When markets are efficient, they ensure that these errors
are detected and evaluated. This problem of firm management is of
political relevance, if at all, only if the markets do not fulfil their tasks
accordingly. Seen in this light, technological sovereignty must be
regarded as a problem of individual economic actors. It is not relevant
to the economy as a whole, and thus possibly not relevant to economic
policy.
At the aggregate level, however, the assessment may be different
if many companies and users in an economy, entire industries and
sectors, are restricted in their technological sovereignty. This can occur
with systemically relevant technologies that are of great importance to
a broad spectrum of industries, companies and users. These include
digital technologies in particular, along with other so-called key tech-
nologies from new manufacturing, bio- and life sciences, or the field of
new materials. These represent important input factors in a number of
industries and are the key to further developments. Furthermore, they

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
78 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
are not easily substitutable by alternative technologies in the short and
medium terms. A restriction of sovereignty in a key technology thus
has negative consequences not only for the supplier and/or buyers of
this technology, but also for many other players who depend on this
technology. Digitalisation technologies, especially memory chips and
semiconductors, show these characteristics.
Key technologies are of outstanding importance for the devel-
opment of an economy and the international competitiveness of its
industries. For this reason, the problem of technological sovereignty
in key technologies is of particular importance. If the companies in an
economy do not master a certain key technology, or have only limited
access to it, dependencies arise because of a lack of technological
sovereignty. Because of the systemic nature of such technologies, a
problem arises for the economy as a whole, and not just a problem
of individual economic actors. And accordingly, technological sover-
eignty becomes an issue relevant to economic policy.
3 Conceptual foundations of technological sovereignty in an
international context
Policy interventions to establish and secure technological sovereignty
can be justified in the context of industrial policy and trade policy
considerations. The relevant theoretical basis is provided by technol-
ogy-gap growth models (eg Fagerberg, 1987; Verspagen, 1992; Stiglitz,
2015) and models of technology-gap foreign trade (eg Krugman, 1985,
Cantner, 1989; Dosi et al, 1990). Both model types have in common the
concept of the so-called technology gap.
The comparison of actors on the basis of their respective tech-
nological knowledge, comprising know-how and competences, can
be expressed as a technology gap. Technology gaps depend on two
characteristics of the knowledge generating activities: (1) new (tech-
nological) knowledge is, instead of being treated as pure public good
accessible to everyone, considered as a latent public good that offers
innovators considerable protection against immediate imitation; (2)

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
79 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
new (technological) knowledge is endogenously generated and used,
hence differs between actors, and is not distributed evenly among all
actors.
The characterisation of new knowledge as a latent public good
(Nelson, 1991) implies that its widespread use after invention occurs
only after a certain period, during which users and imitators need
to build up appropriate absorptive capacities (Cohen and Levinthal,
1989). Accordingly, such new knowledge is not immediately availa-
ble to all actors to the same extent. This gives rise to technology gaps
between actors. These gaps can change over time, depending on the
relative rate of knowledge accumulation between economies, and
technological spillovers between them.
Endogenous modelling of the generation of new knowledge is asso-
ciated with external learning effects (positive dynamic scale effects):
the stock of technological knowledge built up – or what has been
learned so far – has a positive influence on its further development, ie
on its improvement through new technological knowledge. Because of
such learning, knowledge differences between actors, however small
they may be, increase continuously.
3.1 Technology-gap growth models
Technology gap growth models are based on the endogenous formu-
lation of the growth of economies. The core driving factor is techno-
logical knowledge, which grows endogenously over time. This gives
rise to innovation and productivity growth. Models of this kind are
suitable to explain non-converging comparative growth of economies.
Based on the aforementioned learning dynamics, an economy with a
higher volume of production (Stiglitz, 2015) or a higher accumulated
knowledge level (Verspagen, 1992) than another, exhibits compara-
tively stronger growth of productivity or knowledge stock, and thus of
GDP . Accordingly, the leading economy grows faster than the following
economy – a diverging dynamic.
An economy lagging in terms of this growth dynamic may learn

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
80 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
from or imitate the leading economy by tapping into its superior or
more advanced stock of knowledge. This use of external knowledge,
so-called spillover effects, creates the potential for catching-up via
additional growth of knowledge and hence innovation and productiv-
ity growth. This counteracts the tendency for the lagging economy to
fall further behind in growth. The magnitude of the addressed learning
effect depends on the level of the technological gap between economies
in two ways. First, the larger the gap, the more can be learned. Second,
the larger the gap the more difficult it is for the lagging economy to
understand (absorptive capacities) the latest knowledge of the leading
economy. The combination of both relationships results in an inverted
U-shaped pattern of exploitable spillovers. Accordingly, up to a certain
threshold value of the technological gap, a lagging economy can increas-
ingly take advantage of spillovers and catch up through external learn-
ing. Above this threshold value, however, spillover effects diminish in
potency, leading to reduced catching up or even falling further behind.
3.2 Technology-gap trade models
Comparative advantages in the production of tradeable goods (includ-
ing services and technologies) determine – in combination with factor
prices – the foreign trade structure of an economy. In technology-gap
trade models, these comparative advantages arise from internationally
differing technological knowledge entering production and application
of these goods, and are therefore directly related to the technology gaps
between trading economies.
In a multi-goods context, the comparative advantages of one econ-
omy over another in these goods can be ranked in ascending order. This
so-called comparative advantage function is a measure of how much
the two countries differ in the level of technological knowledge that goes
into their production of goods: it thus stands for the technological gap.
The function takes the value 0 if there is no gap. As the deviation from 0
increases, there is an increasing gap. With negative values, one country
leads, with positive values the other leads. The slope of this function

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
81 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
indicates how much the technological gap changes as one moves from
one good to the next.
Some goods, such as raw materials or rare earths, cannot be deliv-
ered by all trading countries, and substitutes for them do not exist. With
these goods, the supplying economy has an absolute advantage. In
terms of the comparative advantage function in these goods, the slope
is infinite, implying an infinite technology gap. In cases in which both
economies could provide a certain good, the comparative advantage
can be so great that it comes close to an absolute advantage on the part
of the technology-leading economy.
The conversion of the comparative advantages of an economy into
competitive advantages takes place via the relative factor prices com-
pared to another economy. These competitive advantages in turn deter-
mine the trade structure of an economy. The higher the relative factor
prices of an economy, the greater the technological lead in producing a
given good has to be, in order to be competitive in that good. This means
that economies with relatively high factor prices tend to export goods in
which they have a larger technological lead. Economies with low relative
factor prices are able to export goods for which the other economy’s
technological lead is much less pronounced (or even reversed).
Technological change and changes in relative factor prices between
economies affect the patterns of foreign trade. By applying the above
model of endogenous new knowledge generation based on learning
effects, the comparative advantages in the production of goods in
which an economy has a technological lead will improve continuously.
Relative factor prices are affected via the trade balance adjustment.
In case of an export surplus of the technologically leading economy
over another economy – due to, for example, new knowledge leading
to goods of improved quality-price ratio – relative factor prices of the
technology leader need to increase. This changes the trade structure
by shifting the production of some goods to the lagging economy, thus
restoring the trade balance.
The strength and the direction of the combined effect of new

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
82 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
knowledge generation and changes in relative factor prices depend
on the demand structure in the trading economies and on the pattern
of technology gaps between them (function of comparative advan-
tages). Assuming stable demand structures, in case the increase in
the technological lead is stronger than the increase in relative factor
prices, the range of goods the technology leader produces and exports
will increase. In case of a reverse relationship between changes in
the technology gap and relative factor prices, the range of goods the
lagging country is able to take over in terms of production and export
will increase.
3.3 Dynamic positioning and sovereignty of a country in a technology-gap context
On the basis of the endogenous learning-driven process of generating
new knowledge, a country that gained through its technological lead a
comparative advantage in some goods will not lose, but rather reinforce
that advantage over time. Four trade-technology constellations are inter-
esting in this respect:
North-North: In the North-North trade context, the trading countries
will each have a technological lead on some goods but a lag on others. As
more new knowledge is generated in all of these economies, and goods
are improved accordingly, the basic structure of comparative advantage
will change little, but will become more pronounced for each good. The
changes in relative factor prices required to restore trade balances in such
a constellation are rather modest, so the terms of trade of the economies
do not change much. In terms of technological sovereignty, the speciali-
sation of each economy in certain goods where its respective technolog-
ical advantage is increasing means a weakening of the other economy’s
ability to master those technologically advanced goods. Dependencies
can arise for both economies, so they are mutual in nature. In the event
of availability problems due to strategic trade policies, the ‘attacked’
economy has a bargaining chip at its disposal: the goods in which it has a
technological lead allow to it to counteract the strategy.
North-South: In a North-South context however, countries in the

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====
83 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
North have technological leads in all high tech-based goods, whereas
the South has advantages in no- or low-tech goods. As high-tech will
increasingly be important in the North’s economies, the North will be at
an advantage, while the South will be at a disadvantage. With the gener-
ation of new knowledge in the North and in the South, high-tech goods
will be more improved in the North than in the South, and high-tech
goods will be improved more than low-tech goods. Hence, the struc-
ture of comparative advantages will change in favour of the North and
deteriorate for the South, leading to trade imbalances. To restore this
balance, factor prices in the North need to increase relative to the South.
This increase is usually not large enough to compensate for the increas-
ing technological lead of the North, inducing a continuous improvement
of North’s terms of trade and worsening of South’s. The increase in the
North economy’s technological lead in a rather broad range of goods
weakens the South economy’s ability to master them. In case of availa-
bility problems induced by strategic trade policy, the South has few tools
to counteract. Bargaining chips via goods the South in which has a tech-
nological lead are rare and presumably not powerful enough. However,
retaliatory trade policy could be implemented.
Old technologies-new technologies: While generating new knowl-
edge to upgrade and further develop existing technologies might limit
opportunities to existing incumbents that have long mastered these
technologies, in new technologies for new goods there are still major
opportunities. In a trade structure in which one economy is rather spe-
cialised in old goods and another in new goods, comparative advantages
in old goods do not change much in response to newly generated knowl-
edge. For new goods, however, comparative advantages change quite
intensely and may reach a level close to absolute advantage. In such
cases, changes in relative factor prices leave the specialisation structure
more or less unaffected. The terms of trade of the economy producing
new goods improve, whereas those of the other economy worsen. Over
time, technological sovereignty becomes an issue: for the economy spe-
cialised in old goods, the ability to master new goods and the technology

===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
84 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
behind them tends to weaken, as does the power of old goods to serve as
bargaining chips in case of availability issues.
Key technologies: Key technologies are a crucial input into innova-
tive development of a large number of technologies. The importance
of mastery and availability of key technologies thus goes way beyond
their own industries. In an international trade context with an endoge-
nous process of generating new knowledge, further development of key
technologies has impacts in three ways. First, if an economy does not
specialise in a key technology, its technological gap in that technology
increases and so does its lack of mastery of it. Second, the comparative
advantage of the economy producing and exporting the key technology
increases because of its growing technological lead. Changes in interna-
tional relative factor prices required to restore trade equilibrium lead to
a higher international price for the key technology. As the terms of trade
of the lagging economies deteriorate, it becomes increasingly expen-
sive for them to acquire the key technology. This reduces the ability of
these economies to acquire a key technology – availability becomes
increasingly limited and technological sovereignty declines. Third, in
the lagging economies, the reduced availability of the key technology
and its higher price will constrain the process of improving goods in all
industries that use the key technology as an input. Consequently, the
process of generating new knowledge in these industries slows, leading
to a further deterioration of the terms of trade.
The interrelationships described above and the associated loss of
technological sovereignty of an economy in a key technology apply in
particular if lagging economies do not themselves specialise in a key
technology, and thus do not seek related comparative advantages.
However, key technologies are quite broad and often represent a bundle
of different individual technologies. In this case, there may be an inter-
national division of labour and thus a specialisation structure within a
key technology. In such a context, the question of technological sover-
eignty may arise less.

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
85 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
3.4 Dynamic comparative advantages
In an environment of endogenous, learning-driven processes of gen-
erating new (technological) knowledge, the main outcome is a pattern
of divergent development. Applied to international trade, this results
in an uneven distribution across economies of the welfare-enhancing
effects of new knowledge. The concept of comparative advantage – or,
in conjunction with factor prices, competitive advantage – determines
this outcome because it establishes a particular pattern of interna-
tional trade that is difficult to escape under endogenous learning.
Hence, for an economy attempting to position itself in interna-
tional trade more favourably, following this principle of compara-
tive advantages will not be helpful. These comparative advantages
determine the structure at a given point in time and are thus static.
To overcome that problem, an economy could look at dynamic or
created comparative advantages. They are relevant for the goods for
which an economy can change the comparative advantages in its
favour over time through its own research and innovation activities –
and thus also its positioning.
In a dynamic context, what matters for a country is not simply
to specialise, but in which goods it specialises. In order to prevent
the technology gap in an economy from becoming too large over
time, the aim should be to specialise in goods with high potential for
improvement through new knowledge, science and innovation.
In these, the economy may not yet have comparative advantages at
a given point in time. In such a situation, moving via static compara-
tive advantage into a trade structure in which the economy specialises
in established but less-dynamic goods would be statically efficient but
dynamically inefficient (eg Stiglitz, 2015; Cypher and Dietz, 1998). In
order to comply with dynamic efficiency, static inefficiencies must be
accepted, ie specialisation must take place in goods that do not (yet)
have comparative advantages, but for which there is high technolog-
ical innovation potential. In this way, the technology gap of an econ-
omy can at least be kept small. This has positive effects on income and

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
86 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
prosperity, and on the level of knowledge required to be able to use
high-tech goods manufactured abroad.
The focus on dynamic comparative advantages is especially
significant in situations of major structural upheaval and transfor-
mation, driven by radical new technologies, and in which new tech-
nological leadership is emerging. Concepts of free trade based on
certain assumptions, including the non-existence of external learning
effects (knowledge accumulation), are less helpful here (for example,
Greenwald and Stiglitz, 2014).
4 Industrial policy to establish and safeguard technological
sovereignty of an economy
Decreasing technological sovereignty, as illustrated by the endogenous
processes of generating new knowledge described above, and thus
increasing the technological dependence of an economy on other econ-
omies, is a problem of political relevance. For an economy to avoid such
vicious circles, a way out is to choose a trade structure consisting of goods
with high potential for further innovative development. Such an ambition
might go against its static comparative or competitive advantages, but
can be justified by dynamic comparative advantages. To maintain such a
specialisation requires industrial and foreign trade policy interventions
to protect the chosen patterns of trade until they become self-sustaining.
Lack of mastery: Key to technological sovereignty is the knowledge to
master technologies. Decreasing innovation capacity and technological
know-how should be an alarm bell for firms. And it should also be so
for policymakers, as this can in aggregate be seen as a systemic failure
at national level. In terms of the mastery of goods and technologies,
measures are needed to build up knowledge and hence know-how and
as competencies. For key technologies, this needs to apply to the area
of the key technology itself, but also, and especially, to the areas of
user industries. The promotion of science and research, of training,
further education and academic education, of transfer activities to the
economy and society, and of innovation activities in these fields are

===== PDF_PAGE 89 =====
87 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
primarily to be thought of here. Hence the large toolbox of research
and innovation policies is applicable, with two reservations. First, the
effects of these measures will be seen only after some years. Second,
the knowledge required to create, develop and use the goods and tech-
nologies concerned will probably not be built up to the required qual-
ity entirely without in-house production. In order to counter this, it is
then necessary to think about measures to keep or even build up the
production and further development of these goods and technologies
in the domestic market – even against static comparative advantages.
Mastery through availability: Industrial and foreign trade policy
measures are suitable for keeping the process of generating new knowl-
edge and the production of goods in a national economy. These could
include subsidies for selected goods and (key) technologies or other
means of export promotion, protectionist measures against imports of
superior goods and technologies, and support for reshoring and even
for building up facilities of production and of entirely new development
in the domestic economy. Such measures ensure that these goods and
technologies are produced and further developed domestically (availa-
bility) and that learning effects can be generated and used (mastery).
This has two consequences for policy implementation. First,
these measures should be implemented for a limited period – at
most until international competitiveness in the good or technology
is achieved. Second, as far as can be identified, the measure should
be implemented when a good or (key) technology is still young, the
rate of exploitation of its technological and economic potential is still
high, and the technology gap compared to the technology leader not
too large. Particularly in the young phase of a new (key) technology,
the risk is still quite high of being left behind internationally right
from the start. Arguments in favour of young-industry protection or
young-technology protection are relevant here.
However, the more mature and established a good or a technology
is at the international level, the less one should think of bringing their
production home. In such circumstances, other concepts for maintaining

===== PDF_PAGE 90 =====
88 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
technological sovereignty need to be considered. Industrial policy
support can also be thought of as supporting goods and technologies
only in selected areas. This addresses the structure of an intra-industry
and intra-technological specialisation. Several economies are technol-
ogy leaders in an industry or a (key) technology, but each in a different
subsector or niche. This contributes to mastery and availability, albeit in
specialised areas. In principle this calls for a portfolio view, implying the
technological sovereignty of an economy depending on its mastery of a
balanced portfolio of (key) technologies – in some a comparative advan-
tage is achieved, in others not.
Special availability concerns: Availability concerns are an issue when it
comes to rigid strategic trade policy and trade wars. The factor of mastery
is rather a side aspect here. In such cases, the solution depends on the
balance of power. If each of the involved economies has a bargaining
chip at hand, any ‘attack’ on sovereignty can be reciprocated. If such
an interdependency does not exist, and on the contrary a situation of
overdependency exists, then a country might be tempted to opt for an
industrial policy directed towards self-sufficiency and import substitu-
tion to cut its over-dependency. However, this is not as straightforward as
is looks. In case the availability issue is credible and expected to last, the
price of the blocked good or technology goes to infinity, creating domes-
tic business opportunities. Domestic but also international investors
may jump in. Public support is not necessary here, or could involve only
complementing certain research infrastructure (research organisations,
universities, etc). This has the advantage that in case the original private
investment pulls out the research infrastructure can be continued in the
same or a different direction.
In view of these various measures, industrial policy appears to offer
a toolbox that can effectively cope with lack of technological sovereignty
and can preserving technological sovereignty. Governments around the
world are increasingly resorting to this type of measure. It is to be hoped
that this does not open the door to the widespread use of industrial
policy, under the guise of preserving technological sovereignty.

===== PDF_PAGE 91 =====
89 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
References
Cantner, U. and H. Hanusch (1993)
‘Process and Product Innovations in an
International Trade Context’ , Economics of
Innovation and New Technology 2: 217-36
Cantner, U. (1990) Technischer Fortschritt,
neue Güter und internationaler Handel,
Physica-Verlag HD
Cohen, W.M. and D.A. Levinthal (1989)
‘Innovation and learning: the two faces
of R&D’ , The Economic Journal 99(397):
569-596
Cypher, J.M. and J.L. Dietz (1998) ‘Static
and Dynamic Comparative Advantage:
A Multi-Period Analysis with Declining
Terms of Trade’ , Journal of Economic Issues
32(2): 305-314
Dosi, G., K. Pavitt and L. Soete (1990)
The Economics of Technical Change and
International Trade, Harvester Wheatsheaf
EFI (2022) Gutachten zu Forschung,
Innovation und technologischer
Leistungsfähigkeit Deutschlands 2022,
Expertenkommission Forschung und
Innovation
Fagerberg, J. (1987) ‘ A technology gap
approach to why growth rates differ’ ,
Research Policy 16: 87-99
Greenwald, B. and J.E. Stiglitz (2013)
‘Industrial policies, the creation of
a learning society, and economic
development’ , in J.E. Stiglitz and J. Y. Lin
(eds) The Industrial Policy Revolution I,
Palgrave Macmillan, London
Krugman, P . (1985) ‘ A ‘technology gap’
model of international trade’ , in D. Hague
and K. Jungenfeldt (eds) Structural
adjustment in developed open economies,
Palgrave Macmillan, London
Nelson, R.R. (1991) ‘Why do firms
differ, and how does it matter?’ Strategic
Management Journal 12(S2): 61-74
Stiglitz, J.E. (2015) ‘Leaders and followers:
Perspectives on the Nordic model and the
economics of innovation’ , Journal of Public
Economics 127: 3-16
Verspagen, B. (1992) Uneven Growth
between Interdependent Economies, UPM

===== PDF_PAGE 92 =====
5 Cooperation or conflict?
 Will industrial policy
 produce solutions or generate
 unmanageable conflicts?
Laura Tyson and John Zysman
1 The core of the matter
Industrial policy is back on the political agenda in the United States. The
CHIPS and Science Act (Chips Act), the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA)
and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Bill pursue significant national policy
goals, in particular national security and climate goals, by nurturing
particular sectors. The tools used – subsidies and tax credits to promote
business activity, investment and demand – are standard industrial
policy tools, designed to foster research, production and employment
by the private sector in the United States in the targeted sectors. In this
chapter, we examine the implications for the global economy and for the
international political economic order of the move to overt industrial
policy by the US.
We argue that the return of American industrial policy – which we
classify into the two categories of ‘chips’ and ‘green’ – raises several
potential tensions with US allies and trading partners. The Chips Act is at
once both a geoeconomic and a geostrategic initiative. It is a response to
substantive state actions abroad that have made the US reliant on semi-
conductor fabrication by a few major suppliers headquartered in Asia. It
focuses on China’s industrial policies and on the inherent national secu-
rity risks for the US. But industrial policies in Taiwan have also played

===== PDF_PAGE 93 =====
91 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
a significant role in the emergence of TSMC (Taiwan Semiconductor
Manufacturing Company) as the major global supplier of advanced sem-
iconductors for both defence and non-defence purposes (Breznitz, 2011).
Competitive advantage in the semiconductor industry has been shaped
by industrial policies around the world, and the Chips Act signals that the
US will join the competition, using industrial policy levers to make the US
a desirable location for the industry.
The goal of ‘chips’ is to ensure continuation of national, or at least
allied, industrial and security leadership in this critical ‘dual-use’ tech-
nology sector. In semiconductors, as in other key technologies including
quantum computing, AI and clean energy, the goal of US industrial policy
is to maintain as large a technological lead as possible, while impeding
technological advances in China, Russia and other countries that pose
national security risks. Export controls and restrictions on inflows and
outflows of investment to keep advanced technologies out of the hands of
geopolitical rivals are complementary tools to achieve this goal.
The green bills in the US, in contrast, are designed to foster the pro-
duction of green technologies and products in the US to speed and scale
the transition to a low-carbon economy, a move from one energy and
economic equilibrium to another. This requires a global, not just national
transition, one that forces open the questions of who gains from the tran-
sition and who bears the costs domestically and internationally.
The success of both the chips and green industrial policies depends
on cooperation with US allies. Cooperation, however, is complicated by
the fact that US policies will affect the gain/cost calculus of allies and
their own industrial policy goals. Moreover, the alliances required for
chips and green goals are different. The pursuit of the different alliances
required for the chips and green goals raises the question of how the
choices of one state (or in the case of the EU, an association of states)
influence the gain/cost calculus of others. Achieving the goals of the
Chips Act requires cooperation between friends and allies. The climate
goals of the ‘green’ bills require cooperation around the world.

===== PDF_PAGE 94 =====
92 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Taken together the American initiatives raise broader questions23. In
this chapter, we set aside the normative question of the role of the ‘state’
in domestic economic policy: whether it should extend beyond making
the rules to shaping markets to actual intervention to overt support for
particular firms and sectors. Industrial policies involve picking winners:
with chips, the semiconductor industry, and with the green bills, the
energy and climate mitigation and adaptation sectors. For the United
States, overt industrial policies would seem to be a shift in the terms of
debate and discussion. The US has certainly had extensive policies of
sector-focused intervention, arguably very successful, for example, in
the health sector and, of course, in defence-related technologies and
sectors. Government policies to foster R&D and technological break-
throughs, and to provide demand, have been critical in the development
of the commercial aircraft industry, the biotechnology industry and the
internet. The rapid development of COVID-19 vaccines is the most recent
dramatic example of industrial policy intervention and success in the US.
Generating domestic political support for overt intervention tilts
policy choices towards favouring of national firms over foreign firms, or
at least towards production on national soil. That distinction matters. It is
reasonable for nations to use their own resources to encourage research,
production and employment at home to benefit directly their own com-
munities, and this inevitably raises issues with trading partners, and has
done so even when embedded in defence policy. These activities, how-
ever, can be done by both domestic and foreign firms; industrial policies
need not disadvantage foreign firms relative to domestic firms. The goal
need not be to create national champions or to prefer national firms, but
to promote economic activities in preferred sectors at home.
The success of the green and chips policies will require allies. For
allies to adopt complementary policies, their governments will likewise
23 We wrote about many of these same issues in 1983. It was a radically different polit-
ical and economic time, but many of the issues continue to be relevant. See Tyson
and Zysman (1983).

===== PDF_PAGE 95 =====
93 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
need to create advantages and benefits for their local communities. This
raises another issue. Overt national favouritism forces the issue of how
to reconcile in international commerce and rule-making the diverse,
competing, national objectives and varied national policy strategies to
promote national firms or local production.
International economic negotiations always involve balancing bene-
fits, but those negotiations are likely to be more difficult, and more public,
when favouritism of national players or locations is direct, as in industrial
policy24. The initial disagreement between the US and France over the
Chips Act and Inflation Reduction Act is a clear signal of the frictions
likely to arise among allies and trading partners25. The old international
political economic order anchored by the United States was ‘rule bound’ .
Although the rules themselves were built from debates about who would
capture advantage, the new fragmentation and disorder are centred on
national competitive advantage and self-sufficiency through onshoring,
nearshoring and friend shoring. And the new economic nationalism is
reflected in growing impediments to trade and global capital flows.
Negotiations about the several national industrial policies are likely
to be even more difficult because enduring commercial and national
advantage will be created in both green industries and in semicon-
ductors. These considerations are not far from policymakers’ minds.
That comparative advantage can be created is evident in the Taiwanese
success with TSMC and advanced foundries, and in China’s success in
solar panels. Another more mundane example is how Danish policies
supporting early deployment of digital hearing aids helped Danish firms
24 Certainly differences in national policies, even policies without direct trade or
development intent, can spill over into international trade conflicts. The case of the
European steel cartel is a perfect example; see European Commission press release
of 4 April 2011, ‘ Antitrust: Commission fines prestressing steel producers € 269 mil-
lion for two-decades long price-fixing and market-sharing cartel’ , https://ec.europa.
eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_11_403.
25 Dave Lawler, ‘Biden’s “Made in America” push alienates allies’ , Axios, 1 December 2022,
https://www.axios.com/2022/12/02/biden-inflation-reduction-electric-cars-macron.

===== PDF_PAGE 96 =====
94 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
in global markets. Familiar mantras like ‘we’re all in this together’ justify
compromises to achieve the needed alliances, yet national interests in
national champions and local production are real and will cause ten-
sions. The new twin US industrial policies, green and chips, are likely to
exacerbate such tensions.
Now as the US pursues broad security and climate goals, albeit goals
shared by different sets of economic and political allies, it also overtly
seeks competitive advantage and industrial leadership in chips and green
technologies. There was a time when the US would rail against the ‘state
actions’ of France, Japan and other market economies to create compet-
itive advantage for their firms. Now the US is turning to the lessons from
China’s successful industrial policies to justify its own actions. There is a
clear shift in US policies from trade policies to stem imports from China
and other developing economies, based on their labour-cost advantages
and state policies of industrial promotion, to industrial policies to bolster
innovation, investment, production and employment in the US. Is the new
US industrial policy irreconcilable with existing trade and foreign direct
investment rules that the US has helped write and enforce? The compe-
tition among nations for both green industries and semiconductors will
make establishing a new rule-bound order much more difficult. Will it
make it impossible? Does the green/chips duality of US industrial policy
show that the existing order is dead and gone? If so, what takes its place?
This new iteration of American industrial policy forces us to consider
two seemingly competing logics. First, the green transition requires
the needed technologies to be produced as fast and at as large a scale
as possible. Second, fear of great-power conflict or other supply chain
disruptions requires friend shoring, nearshoring or onshoring of produc-
tion of critical technologies (semiconductors being the most complex
and systemically important), including climate technologies. Impeding
technological development by geopolitical rivals is a key goal, certainly
of the US semiconductor policies and arguably of green policies as well.
But autarky is both impossible and undesirable and working with allies
is essential. Complicating matters is that China is a rival in the chip world

===== PDF_PAGE 97 =====
95 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
and must be in some sense an ally in pursuing global climate objectives.
Before delving more deeply into the two cases, let us consider industrial
policy itself.
2 Situating industrial policy
Industrial policy justifications are traditionally associated with national
competitiveness, jobs and technological advancement. Those goals
are to be achieved by nurturing a particular sector/industry in a place,
country, region or sphere. Importantly, it is not just about nurturing a
sector/industry and, often, specific firms, but about nurturing them in a
specific place, a particular nation26. State action is intended to alter the
market results of firms and sectors, to achieve outcomes that are unlikely
otherwise in the market. The objective is changing, or maintaining the
economy’s production profile, for example, by moving from agricul-
ture to industry, or in the case of China moving from labour-intensive
sectors to technology-driven sectors. Sometimes industrial policy is a
story of broad transformations and sometimes it is a story that focuses
on particular problems or sectors27. Industrial policy instruments are as
diverse as the actual policy goals. Many policy instruments are available
to achieve these goals: subsidies, tax incentives, R&D support, trade and
foreign direct investment restrictions that discriminate in favour of local
production, whether by domestic or foreign firms, and against foreign
competitors. The goals and purposes, not the tools in particular, define
industrial policy.
We should situate industrial policy in an historical context. Industrial
26 Of course, nurturing particular firms makes the policy open to corruption, that is
for those with access to government, and the capability to influence its decisions, to
direct the benefits of the policy to themselves. Arguably all economic policy, from
tax and savings through regulation, has the same ability to benefit some firms and
sectors differentially. However, industrial policy, which rewards as a goal particular
sectors and firms, makes the link to political influence direct.
27 In a sense it is a shift from one equilibrium to another, and the incentives in an
initial equilibrium may not induce the better outcome. Hence the question then
becomes how to get from a less-attractive equilibrium to a better one.

===== PDF_PAGE 98 =====
96 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
policy has long been associated with a drive toward national power,
whether in seventeenth century France with Colbert, nineteenth cen-
tury Germany with List, or indeed – less well known – sixteenth century
Britain when the need for wood for ships began a policy push to shift
from wood to coal (Gerschenkron, 1962). More recently, French strat-
egies after the Second World War to move from a predominantly agri-
cultural to a modern industrial economy were about structuring market
incentives to favour the modernisation of firms and activities (Zysman,
1983). The Japanese modernisation in the nineteenth century and its
restructuring after the Second World War similarly were rooted in the
objective of establishing, and re-establishing in Japan’s case, a global
economic position. After the Second World War, the United States was
the dominant economy, and the dominant Western political force. It led
the construction of a neo-liberal system of global trade/finance rules,
which it is now regularly violating, and it reconciled both its geopolitical,
strategic objectives and its domestic economic and political goals with
these rules. Consistent with these rules, the US responded to import
pressures in a wide variety of sectors from shoes to televisions, and
from a wide variety of trading partners, through trade protections, often
in the form of anti-dumping measures and voluntary export restraint
agreements. These measures allowed the US to espouse free trade while
restricting market access in sharply impacted sectors28. But, importantly,
direct market intervention to support domestic firms was limited and
even trade-adjustment assistance, announced firmly, was limited and
used ineffectively. Companies, workers and communities were left to
bear the costs of lost production and lost markets from low-cost imports
and export competition. The local costs were concentrated and devas-
tating, gradually undermining political support for free trade and stirring
the rise of populist ‘nationalist’ movements on both the left and the right
(Autor et al, 2016).
28 Arguably hypocritical, these restraints were triggered at a much high level of im-
ports than would have been tolerated in other polities.

===== PDF_PAGE 99 =====
97 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
The track record of industrial policy is mixed. Certainly, the cases of
Germany, France, Japan and now China contain successful stories of
economic transformations steered by the state. They make clear that
policies of purposeful development and creating competitive and com-
parative advantage can succeed. At the sectoral level there are European
successes such as Airbus, to set alongside the questionable Concorde
project. The failure of Minitel, or the French Machine Bull efforts, need
to be set alongside France’s success in high speed railways. In the case of
the US, the defence-driven creation of the internet and the emergence
of the biotechnology industry are two outstanding success stories. But
most of the other specific industrial policies to protect employment in
sectors or firms from import competition have been expensive failures
(Hufbauer and Jung, 2021). What might be expected, then, from green
industrial policy with its goal of fundamental economic transformation
aimed at containing global warming? Can the chips industrial policy
succeed in its geostrategic move to maintain for the US, or the US and
its allies, leadership in a critical dual-use technology as a foundation for
success in the rest of their chip-dependent digital sectors? What will be
the consequences of these industrial policies for international trade and
investment? Are the twin goals in inherent conflict: green requires every-
one; chips is intended to contain China, Russia and other strategic rivals?
3 A green transformation
Green industrial policy in the United States is aimed at generating and
accelerating an economic transformation, a transition from a car-
bon-based energy system to a green/alternative energy system. In a
simple real sense, this involves electrifying everything and decarbonising
electricity. History is replete with other energy system transitions, from
wood to coal to steam to oil to electricity. Each has involved both markets
and governments, prices and policies. The current transition, however, is
particularly urgent: there isn’t time to rely on markets to drive the tran-
sition from fossil fuels to renewables and more efficient uses of energy
resources to achieve the net-zero commitments made by the US and the

===== PDF_PAGE 100 =====
98 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
majority of UN countries. Green policy in the US and abroad is driven by
the assumption that markets alone will not get to the goal of decarbonisa-
tion at sufficient speed and scale to realise these commitments and avoid
climate disaster.
The US has defined its green goal in the IRA as a 40 percent reduction
in carbon emissions compared to 2005 levels by 2030. The strategy is to
use a variety of specific policies to achieve this goal: generous incen-
tives on both the supply side, for firms, state and local governments, for
R&D and for talent development, and on the demand side for consum-
ers. Certainly, some of the subsidies for green tech, development and
deployment can be viewed as offsetting ongoing policy support for the
fossil-fuel energy system. Tit-for-tat green subsidies are likely around the
world. The EU is already considering a European version of the IRA to
allow its member states to counter the competitive challenges posed by
US policies, and many other nations are making investments to speed
the transition to green energy. Many of the poorest countries facing the
greatest threats from climate change, however, do not have the financing
to make such investments29.
Securing a stable global climate – combating climate change – is a
shared goal to provide a global public good of a sustainable climate30.
Coordinated policies of nations around the world are required to achieve
this goal. That said, ‘green policy’ in each country, as is evident in the IRA
in the US, also pursues nationally specific objectives of local production
and jobs. US policy is aimed overtly at assuring that green technologies,
products, production and employment are developed in the United
29 Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment press
release of 8 November 2022, ‘COP27 report calls for international investments of $1
trillion annually by 2030 in climate action in developing countries’ , https://www.
lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/news/cop27-report-calls-for-international-invest-
ments-of-1-trillion-annually-by-2030-in-climate-action-in-developing-countries/.
30 There are significant historical parallels in which massive state involvement and
investment was part of transformations altering the underlying infrastructure of
the economy, including the interstate highway system driven in part by defence
justifications, the railroad system and the electricity grid.

===== PDF_PAGE 101 =====
99 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
States, whether by US or foreign firms. US policy is also driven by making
certain that China does not dominate green technologies and products.
But US green industrial policies to make the US the competitive location
for green technologies and products can conflict with the objectives and
goals of US allies, whose own energy transformations are essential, and
who likewise want to pursue national advantage in green sectors and
technologies.
A purely national or autarkic success, even if possible in industrial
terms, will not address the global climate challenge: success requires all
nations to participate. There will however be rivalries over who wins and
loses in the process of building the new energy systems. Consequently, a
significant challenge for green industrial policies will be building coali-
tions both at home and abroad to share the economic adjustment costs
and benefits of the transition. Global coalitions will require the engage-
ment of China, India and Russia, posing very different coalitions that
reconcile ambitions amongst like-minded allies.
A core challenge will be building domestic coalitions for the energy
transformation that also permit, if not facilitate, global alliances31.
Certainly policy must support and reward the emerging green tech-
nologies. But there are losers as well as winners. Who will pay the costs
of transition? Will the losers be compensated? The fossil-fuel sector
will continue to fight to maintain its position, arguing in some settings
that the climate challenge is exaggerated or unreal. The French gilets
jaunes movement is about resistance against higher prices that reflect
the carbon costs of those who use fossil-fuel products. Since time is of
the essence, delay is a profound challenge. The losers will not easily be
displaced. Can they be bought off at a price and within a timeframe that
allows nations to honour their commitments to net zero? The neces-
sity of building domestic coalitions for green industrial policies means
that each nation will seek to shape such policies to reward their local
31 On domestic coalitions, see Meckling et al (2015). On international coalitions, see
Meckling (2021).

===== PDF_PAGE 102 =====
100 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
constituencies. Indeed, building domestic coalitions for the green tran-
sition seems likely to generate conflicts among nations about industries
and competitiveness, conflicts that make building global coalitions on a
shared public good more difficult. The challenge of harmonising national
competitiveness and economic goals in green sectors with global climate
goals should not be underestimated.
At stake in the transition is who will control the industries of the
future. In theory, the development of green technologies and prod-
ucts in one country can benefit all countries, speeding and scaling the
global energy transition. In practice, however, the rise of one nation’s
green industries can undermine the same industries in another nation.
Consider China and solar panels. Chinese producers, supported by
generous state industrial policies, drove down costs, making solar energy
much less expensive. But the subsidised rise of China’s solar panel
industry also damaged actual and potential producers in the US and
elsewhere. That is not just a market issue of lost domestic producers and
production, but the loss of potential allies in domestic green industries in
a domestic coalition to offset the political weight of domestic fossil-fuel
producers.
There are many distinct yet crucial sectors in the energy transition.
Supplying electrical energy involves wind and solar equipment, batteries
and critical minerals required for those systems. Adapting energy use
to electricity involves, as examples, transportation goods, from cars
and trucks today to perhaps aircraft tomorrow, and heating systems
for offices and homes. Diverse and complex, widely dispersed, global
supply networks in the materials and components are involved. One
consequence is that a policy drive toward predominance in one sector
– say electric-vehicle design and assembly – risks retaliation in others.
There are choke points throughout whether, as examples, those are
the materials that go into products, the components of full systems, or
mastery of battery manufacturing32. Targeting domestic firms alone or
32 Choke points in a supply network occur when one firm or one country has an effec-

===== PDF_PAGE 103 =====
101 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
local production exclusively assures international conflicts, higher costs
and slower transition. Green policy must find political solutions and
coalitions at two levels: domestic and international33.
In the effort to find solutions that will ensure domestic support and
avoid damaging trade conflicts that undermine the collective good of
a green transition, existing products and technologies must be distin-
guished from the development of new next-generation technologies.
Existing technologies are about who produces for today’s markets.
Existing products and technology – electrical generation, batteries, wind,
solar power and the like – as well as the conversion of products to electri-
cal operation, entail direct market competition. Next generation break-
through technologies, in contrast, might be a basis for joint pre-commer-
cial development.
Reconciling the several national green policies is essential to
accelerate the transition. There are no panaceas. As a starting point,
creating and maintaining a green roadmap that identifies potential choke
points, and seeking cooperative solutions to them or identifying lines of
potential collaborative pre-competitive research, might be useful first
steps. But those who control current or future choke points are not likely
to give them up willingly, and as technological breakthroughs come
closer to market implementation, collaboration will not necessarily be
comfortable. Since carbon-related border taxes are on the table, certainly
seeking a tax deal, global or between friends, should be considered.
Another option worth considering is the development of a sectoral trade
agreement that covers trade in green products and services. Some would
consider the IT sectoral trade agreement that began in 1996 and today
has 82 participants and covers 97 percent of global trade in IT products
to be an example of a successful sectoral trade agreement that has
fostered trade and reduced barriers. Another option worth consideration
tive monopoly or dominates the market, creating leverage. Examples can be found
in materials, components and final products, such as solar systems.
33 The classic statement of this is in Putnam (1988).

===== PDF_PAGE 104 =====
102 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
is joint pre-competitive research and funding by the US and its allies on
green breakthrough technologies, such as nuclear fusion and carbon
sequestration.
4 Chips with everything
The chips story poses very different problems to the green story. The
Chips Act is focused both on maintaining US and allied leadership and
on impeding China’s advances in one sector – micro-electronic com-
ponents. Semiconductors are essential dual-use technologies, inputs
throughout much of the economy and critical to security concerns.
Advanced countries have national economic and security interests in
nurturing a resilient, secure supply of both mature and cutting-edge
chips to meet growing non-defence and defence demand. Remaining
at the frontier of technological change in chips requires semiconductor
production: technological change and production go hand in hand. A
nation needs a strong production base to remain at the technological
frontier of chips: “you can’t control what you can’t produce” (Cohen and
Zysman, 1987).
But, technological and market autarky will not be possible in this
sector. In the words of Morris Chang, founder of TSMC: “If you want to
re-establish a complete semiconductor supply chain in the US, you will not
find it as a possible task”34. Consequently, market and policy alliances
will be needed. In foundries, where leading-edge chips are produced,
Taiwan’s TSMC is dominant with Korea’s Samsung and perhaps the US’s
Intel as enduring scale players. Production equipment, apart from the
materials that go into production, is widely dispersed across Europe, the
US and Asia with the Dutch company ASML dominating the essential
domain of advanced lithography. ASML has announced that it will limit
exports of its most advanced equipment to China, consistent with the
goals of US policy to slow the growth of China’s semiconductor industry.
34 Cheng Ting-Fang and Lauly Li, ‘The resilience myth: fatal flaws in the push to
secure chip supply chains’ , Financial Times, 4 August 2022, https://www.ft.com/
content/f76534bf-b501-4cbf-9a46-80be9feb670c.

===== PDF_PAGE 105 =====
103 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Japan has also announced that it will limit exports of such equipment to
China. In design, the US has very strong positions with companies like
Qualcomm. Europe’s ARM, still owned by Japanese holding company
SoftBank, is a major player.
We have previously defined the economic and geostrategic goals of
US industrial policy in the semiconductor industry in the following way:
“For the sake of both national and economic security, the United
States needs a multifaceted strategy for providing a competitive,
resilient, secure, and sustainable (CRSS) supply of semiconductors.
Such a strategy must address all parts of the industry, from design,
fabrication, assembly, and packaging to materials and manufactur-
ing equipment.
 “Each of these elements of the supply chain is critical.
Competitive market conditions must prevail throughout the indus-
try, because excessive market power in any one segment can jeop-
ardize supply. The system must also be resilient to shocks like fires,
droughts, earthquakes, and geopolitical tensions and upheavals.
And it must be secure in two senses: the US must maintain reliable
access to cutting-edge chips and the means of producing them, and
chip supplies need to be protected from threats like counterfeiting,
theft, cyberattacks, and espionage. Finally, the supply must be sus-
tainable, accounting for the significant environmental and energy
costs of chip production.
 “CRSS does not mean national autonomy in the semiconduc-
tor industry. That goal would be neither feasible nor economically
rational, given the complex global supply system and the dispersion
of industry knowledge, talent, and production. What CRSS does
mean is that the US should cooperate closely with the European
Union, Japan, Singapore, Israel, and others who form core parts of
its secure supply base” (Tyson and Zysman, 2021).

===== PDF_PAGE 106 =====
104 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
The American calculus is driven principally by the national security
concerns of maintaining substantial leadership over China – indeed,
of rapidly moving the US and allies forward while slowing the Chinese.
Not all countries share the US view of China, or at least they calculate
their national interests differently. Many US allies and other nations
are as concerned about the dominance of US tech companies as they
are about the China challenge. Our concern is that competing national
industrial policies, however well motivated, can quickly lead to coun-
terproductive and wasteful tit-for-tat bidding wars of the sort we have
seen before, both among US states and among European countries.
The recent downturn in semiconductor demand will make this more
acute. Governments will both be called on to support sagging com-
panies while political pressure from the chip customer base will ease.
The cyclical character of the industry makes sustained support both
tricky and important. In contrast, collaborative policy could include
pre-competitive public-private R&D partnerships to share equipment
and other costs among participants. Perhaps a similar ‘commons’
approach could be extended to chip production as well. Further along
the collaboration development chain, there may be possibilities in
defining together the needs of sectors such as the automotive sector
for semiconductor chips that differ from those that have been driven
by the needs of the leading US tech companies. Finally, there is a need
for allied coordination of export controls and controls over foreign
direct investment in semiconductors and other strategic sectors and
technologies.
5 Conflict or collaboration?
With ‘industrial policy’ resurgent, several questions arise. First, are
the goals and policies of green and chips industrial policy in inherent
conflict with each other? Green has the objective of a universal energy
transformation. That requires a broad alliance, including China, even
with competitive conflicts in green production and employment. Chips
requires a more restricted alliance of allies and friends that confront

===== PDF_PAGE 107 =====
105 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
China, in which the underlying purposes of the allies are not all the same.
China’s ambition to establish leadership, indeed dominance, in crucial
digital technologies is both a security and an economic challenge. For
the United States, the security challenge is primary. The choices are not
straightforward for other countries, which are trying to ensure in the
name of ‘sovereignty’ their capacities for sustained autonomous technol-
ogy development, to keep pace with US technology firms, while main-
taining access to the Chinese market for their exports. An overarching
question is whether the US-driven policy of containing China in the sem-
iconductor industry will undermine China’s willingness to participate in
global solutions and trading rules in green technologies and products. If
China is identified as an enemy in the semiconductor industry, will it be
an ally in green industries?
Second, a more general problem is how to manage the conflicts gen-
erated by competing national industrial policies, and more specifically by
the policies adopted by the United States. The existing trade and foreign
direct investment rules do not provide comfort. The dispute settlement
mechanism of the World Trade Organisation is moribund, killed off by
the United States. The American ability to use access to its domestic
market as leverage in international negotiations has dwindled in its effec-
tiveness. The US sometimes applies its trade restrictions on an extrater-
ritorial basis, applying them to both US and foreign firms doing business
with China in violation of global trading rules. Does the US move to overt
industrial policy require new trading rules and the revitalisation of the
WTO dispute settlement mechanism to enforce these rules35? Without
these changes, the open trading order is likely to be undermined by
wasteful beggar-thy-neighbour industrial policies that encourage onshor-
ing, nearshoring and friend shoring and that further fragment the global
35 A cynic might remark that in the era of the Washington Consensus and a neo-liberal
order, we were in fact both protectionist and promoting our own interests when speak-
ing of global trade. Our cynic would accuse us of saying ‘do as we say, not as we do’ . The
response of others was often that we hid strategies pursuing our particular advantage
in deals covered with the ideology of free trade.

===== PDF_PAGE 108 =====
10 6 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
economy. Such fragmentation will drive up costs, restrict the develop-
ment options of emerging economies and slow global growth. Such frag-
mentation will also thwart the global cooperation necessary to speed and
scale the transition to a sustainable green future. The climate challenge
is a global one that requires coordinated global action supported by new
global trade and investment rules and a new international order.
References
Autor, D., D. Dorn and G. Hanson (2016)
‘The China Shock: Learning from Labor
Market Adjustments to Large Changes
in Trade’ , NBER Working Paper 21906,
National Bureau of Economic Research,
available at https://www.nber.org/
papers/w21906
Breznitz, D. (2011) Innovation and the
State, Yale University Press
Cohen, S.S. and J. Zysman (1987)
Manufacturing Matters: The Myth of the
Post-Industrial Economy, New York: Basic
Books
Gerschenkron, A. (1962) Economic
Backwardness in Historical Perspective,
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press
Hufbauer, G. and E. Jung (2021) ‘Scoring
50 years of US industrial policy, 1970,
2020’ , PIIE Briefings 21-5, Peterson
Institute for International Economics,
available at https://www.piie.com/
publications/piie-briefings/scoring-50-
years-us-industrial-policy-1970-2020
Meckling, J., N. Kelsey, E. Biber and J.
Zysman (2015) ‘Winning Coalitions
for Climate Policy’ , Science 349(6253):
1170-71
Meckling, J. (2021) ‘Making Industrial
Policy Work for Decarbonization’ , mimeo,
available at https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.3802719
Putnam, R.D. (1988) ‘Diplomacy and
Domestic Politics: The Logic of Two-Level
Games’ , International Organization 42(3):
427-460
Tyson, L. and J. Zysman (1983) American
Industry In International Competition:
Government Policies and Corporate
Strategies, Cornell University Press
Tyson, L. and J. Zysman (2021) ‘ America’s
Vital Chip Mission’ , Project Syndicate,
27 July, available at https://www.
project-syndicate.org/commentary/
us-semiconductor-strategy-by-laura-
tyson-and-john-zysman-2021-07
Zysman, J. (1983) Governments, Markets,
and Growth, Cornell University Press

===== PDF_PAGE 109 =====
6 Green industrial policy: the
 necessary evil to avoid a
 climate catastrophe
Alessio Terzi
1 Introduction36
Industrial policy is a term that is often interpreted differently depending
on the audience. The fact that it cuts through a variety of economic policy
tools, ranging from innovation programmes and tax policy, to trade and
foreign direct investment (FDI), makes the matter even more complex.
It lends itself to easy misinterpretation. At its core, it refers to “any type of
selective intervention or government policy that attempts to alter the struc-
ture of production toward sectors that are expected to offer better prospects
for economic growth than would occur in the absence of such intervention”
(Pack and Saggi, 2006). This might include sectors/technologies in which
leadership might have geopolitical, security and military implications.
The concept builds on two fundamental elements: (i) production in some
sectors is more desirable than in others (Hausmann et al, 2007), and
because of this, (ii) governments should make an active effort to nudge
the production structure in that direction.
It is important to note that, irrespective of simplistic characterisations
(eg capitalism vs socialism) or standard economic modelling of markets
under perfect conditions, practically all countries, including the United
36 The views expressed here are the author’s and do not necessarily represent those of
the institutions to which he is affiliated.

===== PDF_PAGE 110 =====
108 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
States, the UK, France, China, Japan, Taiwan and South Korea, engage in
various forms of industrial policy, and always have (Rodrik, 2009; Terzi et
al, 2022).
Nonetheless, it is true that over the past few decades there has been
a generalised reduced use of industrial policy, which has moved to the
margins of mainstream economics. As this principle became embedded
in policymakers’ minds, it was framed under the narrative that govern-
ments cannot pick winners in a market economy, and rather they are
at high risk of being captured by interest groups (Rodrik, 2014a). And of
course, narratives eventually shape policies (Shiller, 2019).
Moreover, industrial policy was seen as harmful to the pursuit of a
more globalised world economy, which to some extent became a leading
objective in and of itself (Rodrik, 2011). In the service of a rules-based
global trade order, richer nations of the West sided against a prepon-
derant role of governments in altering production in a certain direction,
rather allowing comparative advantages to manifest themselves freely.
If that meant the relocation of manufacturing to China and away from
the US and Europe, this was to be welcomed in the face of the associated
gains from trade and specialisation (Figure 1).
Figure 1: Manufacturing, share of world total (%)
Source: World Bank.
0.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
China
European Union
United States

===== PDF_PAGE 111 =====
109 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
The idea that industrial policy was unhelpful was to some extent
codified in the so-called ‘Washington Consensus’ , or else the idea that
a small government (together with open current and capital accounts)
was instrumental in achieving rapid development. As such, the resist-
ance to industrial policy was exported to the Global South, in particu-
lar during macroeconomic adjustment programmes (Boccaletti, 2021).
Over the last few years, however, what has facetiously been called
“the policy that shall not be named” has returned to the main stage
of economic policy (Cherik and Hasanov, 2019). There are several
reasons for this. First, and most prominently, China has been making
extensive use of industrial policy, experiencing meteoric growth in the
process. Moreover, the fact that the country’s access to the World Trade
Organisation in 2001 did not prod it to abandon such practices effec-
tively invalidated the argument for others to favour the safeguarding of
a level playing field at global level. Second, COVID-19 required a large
degree of government intervention in the economy, including for the
stockpiling and provision of personal protective equipment and the
fast development and production of vaccines. And, of course, in the
moment at which global supply chains came to a grinding halt because
of COVID-19-induced restrictions, there was a sudden realisation of
the central role that microchips play in today’s economy, from cars to
military applications. Lack of access to them could be weaponised,
because artificial intelligence and the digital economy will play a cru-
cial role in defining military supremacy in the twenty-first century.
Finally, the returning appeal of industrial policy is due to climate
change, defined as the greatest market failure the world has ever seen
(Stern, 2006), and thus questioning the narrative that market forces
should be left largely unfettered. In this chapter, we focus narrowly on
the latter aspect, namely what comes under the name of ‘green indus-
trial policy’ , aimed at accelerating decarbonisation.

===== PDF_PAGE 112 =====
110 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
2 Green industrial policy and its intended consequences
If global warming is an externality problem, no matter how big, then
the standard textbook solution to it should be to price emissions, in
a way reinserting them into the market economy. Carbon pricing
must be a crucial element in any credible pathway towards net zero
(Tagliapietra, 2020). However, even the High-Level Commission on
Carbon Prices, put together to identify the optimal price of carbon to
achieve fast decarbonisation, eventually concluded that carbon pric-
ing alone will not be sufficient to address climate change (Stern and
Stiglitz, 2017). This is because there are other market imperfections
that work against speedy decarbonisation (Stern and Stiglitz, 2017).
An example of this could be technological path dependency, mean-
ing that innovation tends to build on pre-existing knowledge, which
generates a bias towards fossil fuels (Aghion et al, 2019). Another
example could be risk aversion combined with lack of perfect infor-
mation about the technology that will prevail in a green economy,
leaving firms in a wait-and-see mode (Rodrik, 2014a). Due to the same
problem, firms are particularly wary of investing in green technologies
that are far from marketable, such as decarbonised steel and cement
production, carbon capture and storage, and carbon-free aviation
(Gates, 2021). Finally, for political-economy reasons, it could very well
be that the optimal level of carbon pricing cannot be achieved, in part
because of the large redistributive implications it would have37. When
that is the case, a more active role of government can be envisioned,
including by means of industrial policy, which has been shown to
complement carbon pricing, increasing the speed of the transition
(Acemoglu et al, 2012).
There is another reason related to climate change that, in my view,
drives the current push for industrial policy: effectively reaching net
zero will require a complete restructuring of production, consumption,
37 John Van Reenen, ‘The Case for Green Industrial Policy’ , ProMarket, 14 February
2023, https://www.promarket.org/2023/02/14/the-case-for-green-industrial-policy/.

===== PDF_PAGE 113 =====
111 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
transport, housing, agriculture and more because we live in a fos-
sil-fuel civilisation. In other words, the green transition has historical
resemblances to an industrial revolution (Terzi, 2022a). When that is
the case, comparative advantages will be reshuffled across companies
and countries, based on the (general purpose) technologies that will
become the bedrock of the future green economy. It should thus come
as no surprise that governments will use all policy tools available to try
and develop an edge in the key technologies of the future, and secure
the long-term prosperity of their country, as they did in the early
phases of past industrial revolutions (Beckert, 2015; Rodrik, 2011).
This competitive argument in favour of industrial policy would not
apply in a first-best world in which decarbonisation was planned in
an optimal way at the global level, and where positive and negative
spillovers between countries could be internalised. However, the
urgent need to tackle catastrophic climate change will not lead to the
end of geopolitics. Decarbonisation policies must rather be designed
in a way that is incentive-compatible with a world in which policies
will primarily be designed at the national level38, and where nation
states will continue to scramble for economic and military primacy. In
this context, green industrial policy in the service of national interest
should be seen as suboptimal but necessary.
Terzi et al (2022) discussed the design characteristics an effective
industrial policy should have in order to minimise the risks that it will
not deliver its intended effects at home. The remainder of this chapter
will instead focus on the unintended effects if it does indeed succeed,
particularly on other countries.
38 The European Union is perhaps a notable exception in this respect, having substan-
tial policy competence with respect to climate and environment issues.

===== PDF_PAGE 114 =====
112 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
3 Unintended consequences
First, it is important to realise that even mainstream experts are gener-
ally in favour of R&D subsidies or tax credits. However, the use of such
active industrial policy at a multi-billion-dollar scale will effectively
plant the seed for the defensive side of industrial policy, meaning trade
and investment restrictions, which is the type normally considered
negative or protectionist (Poitiers et al, 2023). This is almost inevitable,
particularly in a post rules-based world trade order (Terzi, 2022b): if
billions worth of taxpayers’ money is being used, the political-econ-
omy forces pushing for restricting it to domestic firms and jobs will
be strong. The US for instance is openly celebrating how the Inflation
Reduction Act (IRA) is “prioritising American jobs”39.
Effectively, this means that a more active use of (green) industrial
policy at home is bound to spark an international subsidy race. To
some, this is a good result because it will fast-track decarbonisation
and the development/deployment of new green technologies40. The
reality is however that only countries with deep pockets and wide
access to financial markets will be able to engage in it, as already well
noted by Kleimann (2023). These are likely to be high-income coun-
tries, but it is not limited to those and encompasses also a small set
of large and rapidly emerging economies, including China and India.
At a rough estimation, it will encompass most G20 economies, with
the notable exception perhaps of Argentina and South Africa. The
others will suffer its consequences or do the only thing they can with
39 Aime Williams and Derek Brower, ‘US Makes ‘No Apologies’ for prioritising Amer-
ican jobs, Clean Energy Tsar tells EU’ , Financial Times, 24 February 2023, https://
www.ft.com/content/cb0a8ddf-6b32-49d8-8870-d1384580e9c9.
40 Arvind Subramanian, ‘Global Cooperation Is Not Necessary to Fight Climate
Change’ , Project Syndicate, 10 November 2022, https://www.project-syndicate.org/
commentary/multilateral-cooperation-climate-change-unnecessary-inflation-re-
duction-act-by-arvind-subramanian-2022-11, and Gernot Wagner, ‘The Clean-En-
ergy Race Is On’ , Project Syndicate, 15 August 2022, https://www.project-syndicate.
org/commentary/inflation-reduction-act-global-clean-energy-race-by-gernot-wag-
ner-2022-08.

===== PDF_PAGE 115 =====
113 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
no immediate costs for the public coffers, ie increase trade barriers to
try and protect domestic production along the lines of ‘infant industry
protection’ . These are likely to be less-developed economies and some
emerging markets, which are far from the technological frontier and
will hardly benefit from having to develop innovation at home rather
than exploit technology transfers associated with imports, especially of
capital (Aiyar et al, 2023).
3.1 Investment and production
In terms of investment, there is likely to be a wave of re-shoring as a
result of the ramp up of active and defensive industrial policy, accom-
panied by national security concerns in an increasingly fractured geo-
political world. Up to now, much of the focus in the media has been
on whether the IRA would draw European firms and their production
plants to the US41. As Europe will set up its own response, in equilib-
rium, what will be lured will mostly be investment that could have
otherwise taken place in third countries, especially emerging markets.
The active use of subsidies to attract production and FDI, combined
with trade and investment barriers, means that production will relo-
cate closer to demand. Note that OECD countries currently command
60 percent of world demand (Figure 2). This number goes down to
roughly 45 percent for G7 countries only, and 62 percent if China is
added to the G7, ultimately reflecting the great degree of income ine-
quality between a small group of larger, richer economies and the rest
(Milanovic, 2019).
41 Sam Fleming, Alice Hancock and Javier Espinoza, ‘Can the EU Keep up with the US
on Green Subsidies?’ Financial Times, 31 January 2023, https://www.ft.com/con-
tent/85b55126-e1e6-4b2c-8bb2-753d3cafcbe5.

===== PDF_PAGE 116 =====
114 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Figure 2: Gross national expenditure, share of world (%)
Source: World Bank. Note: Gross national expenditure (formerly known as domestic
absorption) is the sum of household final consumption expenditure, general govern-
ment final consumption expenditure, and gross capital formation. Underlying data are
in constant 2015 prices, expressed in US dollars.
As these reflections will apply to a variety of sectors, including elec-
tric vehicles, solar panels, green hydrogen, wind energy, heat pumps
and possibly also raw materials that are critical for the green transition,
they will ultimately imply less trade42. Most of this trade is of the stand-
ard manufacturing type, requiring limited advanced education and
therefore suitable to propel growth in less-developed economies that
want to move away from agrarian societies (Rodrik, 2014b).
3.2 Development and global income convergence
Effectively, industrial policies and in particular those with local
content provisions, will reduce global trade, which is fundamental
for rapid development. To understand why, it is worth going back
to the so-called Growth Report (World Bank, 2008). In 2008, a group
of 19 policymakers, mostly from developing economies, headed by
two Nobel economics laureates, put together a report analysing the
42 Martin Wolf, ‘The New Interventionism Could Pose a Threat to Global Trade Re-
ceive Free Protectionism Updates’ , Financial Times, 14 February 2023, https://www.
ft.com/content/3bc33cc4-1ee9-42ce-bcc2-2ba2a483e8ce.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
United States EU China G7 OECD m em bers

===== PDF_PAGE 117 =====
115 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
experiences of 13 countries that had managed to sustain high GDP
growth since the 1950s. Drawing on the input of over 300 academics,
on top of the personal hands-on experiences of the policymakers,
the report sifted out the common traits of successful cases. Of the 13
episodes of ‘miracle’ development, which came with sharp reductions
in extreme poverty, from China to post-war Japan, and including South
Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, Brazil and Taiwan, literally all relied on a
fast expansion of exports. This is for two reasons. First, low trade barri-
ers give access to markets where demand is large or rapidly expanding,
whereas demand at home in a poor country is limited by definition.
Second, exports loosen the current-account constraint, allowing coun-
tries to obtain hard currency, import foreign advanced machinery and
move up the value chain.
The implication is that an aggressive use of green industrial policy
in countries that can afford it will come to the detriment of the global
income-convergence process. This was already running out of steam
(Rodrik, 2016), so effectively industrial policy will compound this
problem.
To sum up, even if inspired by the genuine desire to tackle a global
challenge like climate change, strong use of green industrial policy
will ultimately contribute to deglobalisation. Combined with the fact
that production and investment will locate closer to where demand
is found, widening inequalities between countries can be expected
or, at the very least, a halt to the so-called “great income convergence”
(Baldwin, 2016).
3.3 Prices and innovation
A variety of factors already distort prices at global level, but the use
of policy tools to distort prices even more and twist production in a
certain direction could easily imply that citizens at home will pay more
for a set of products than they would have otherwise. This is something
that has already been seen when trade tension and barriers increased
during the Trump Administration (Cerutti et al, 2019). Ultimately,

===== PDF_PAGE 118 =====
116 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
this is the other side of the coin to the so-called ‘gains from trade’ that
classical economists Adam Smith and David Ricardo were already
describing three centuries ago. We could define them as losses from
protectionism.
At the same time, however, inflationary losses from protectionism
will be counteracted by the speed at which innovation proceeds in
green sectors, notably walking down cost curves at a fast clip. This
leads us to the aspect that deserves the closest attention: the degree
to which active (and especially defensive) industrial policy leads to a
slowdown in the rate of innovation at the technological frontier. This
is particularly crucial because catastrophic climate change can be
avoided only if the speed of the development and deployment of green
technology and innovation ramps up enormously (Terzi, 2022b).
This concern might be overstated, however. Taking a long-term
perspective, it is not trade that has generated the acceleration in
innovation associated with industrial revolutions (Mokyr, 2016). And
therefore, unsurprisingly, for economies at the technological frontier,
gains from trade are comparatively small relative to overall cumula-
tive rates of growth43. In fact, it could very well be that investment in
and urgency of innovation picks up as a result of great-power rivalry –
accelerations of innovation have happened typically at times of geopo-
litical confrontation (Moretti et al, 2019). To an extent, the US Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), which is now cele-
brated as the mother of many crucial inventions, including the inter-
net, GPS, touch screens and voice recognition, is the product of US
industrial policy in response to the Soviet Union launch of the Sputnik
43 Looking at the US for instance, it is estimated that the 12 bilateral free trade agree-
ments (FTAs), plus two regional FTAs (the North American Free Trade Agreement
and the Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade Agree-
ment), resulted in the US economy being one half of a percent bigger than what
it would have been without the agreements in place (Russ, 2021). To put this into
perspective, since the NAFTA came into effect in 1994, US real GDP has grown by 89
percent.

===== PDF_PAGE 119 =====
117 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
(Mazzucato, 2013). The Apollo Project, often given as a commendable
example of public-sector-driven innovation, generating waves of sec-
ondary innovation for decades, was only possible because of the space
race with the Soviet Union during the Cold War (Mazzucato, 2021).
However, what should instead not be overlooked is that competi-
tion plays a crucial role in fostering innovation, and as such should be
safeguarded even in the face of increasing trade barriers (Aghion et al,
2023). This, incidentally, is why competition policy should not be loos-
ened in the name of industrial competitiveness and creating national
champions (Terzi et al, 2022). And state aid should be deployed only
with great care.
4 Policy implications
It should be evident that the use of industrial policy will come with
some significant downsides, especially for less-developed countries.
What is particularly ironic is that for a long time a more forceful use of
industrial policy in the rich world has been a trope of left-wing think-
ers, which would prioritise to an equal extent the rapid development
of the Global South. Now that industrial policy is starting to be used
forcefully, it will come to the detriment of the latter.
This consideration is not meant to discourage the use of industrial
policy. Overall, the pursuit of a green transition powered by national
interest is suboptimal, but is the only path likely to obtain it at a fast
enough speed. To a certain extent, this comes to the benefit of the
Global South in that many poorer nations are likely to be impacted
most and earliest by extreme weather events associated with unfet-
tered global warming (Carleton et al, 2020). However, this benefit is
indirect, and will therefore likely go missed in global negotiations,
which are instead set to become more tense in the face of more evident
direct costs for poorer nations (Kleimann, 2023; Terzi, 2022c).
Policymakers must be aware of these negative effects so that the
renewed interest in industrial policy does not lead to an excessive
enthusiasm with this policy tool, which, as the title of this chapter

===== PDF_PAGE 120 =====
118 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
suggests, should at best be considered a necessary evil to avoid cata-
strophic climate change.
In particular, in the face of what will represent a scaling down of
international cooperation, policymakers should avoid as much as
possible measures that risk harming innovation. International scien-
tific cooperation and migration policies, for example, are conducive to
the attraction of talent and must be ringfenced as much as possible, so
they do not fall prey to broader protectionist reflexes (Neufeld, 2022).
On the international front, countries should be mindful of the
repercussions of their national industrial policies. International neg-
ative spillovers are to a degree inevitable, but in principle allies and
like-minded countries should be spared them as much as possible.
This is particularly so in an increasingly fractured geopolitical sce-
nario, if foreign policy alliances are to remain solid. Even just from a
political-economy perspective, one cannot expect to impose economic
damage on a trade partner on one hand, and expect deep political
or security cooperation on the other. Moreover, the national security
argument for industrial policy does not really hold relative to trusted
partner countries, while the general principle of gains from trade and
comparative advantages do.
Instead, in order to prevent allied countries from being forced to
engage in a wasteful subsidy war or to raise trade barriers, blunting
the positive effect of national industrial policies at home, international
economic agreements should be sought. This idea may not be new, but
rather responds to the logic of growing regionalisation, which many,
including US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen44 and European Central
Bank President Christine Lagarde (Lagarde, 2022), see as the natural
response to safeguard what can be saved as the world moves away
from the multilateral trade order (Evenett, 2022). It is in this spirit that
the EU and the US should, for example, seek an agreement on sourcing
44 Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen on Way Forward for the Global
Economy, 13 April 2022, https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1425.

===== PDF_PAGE 121 =====
119 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
green minerals, which could potentially extend to the G7 as a whole,
and then extend to partnerships with Chile, Australia and other like-
minded nations.
Building on this idea, and in an effort to expand alliances, nations
pursuing aggressive industrial policies at home should reinforce their
international climate finance and climate-linked aid to less-developed
economies, in particular to fast-track the rollout of green technologies
in the Global South, in line with the bilateral agreements with South
Africa, Indonesia and Vietnam as part of the international Just Energy
Transition Partnerships.
In such as scenario, it is possible to imagine that firms that have
developed a technological edge in green sectors will be on the benefit-
ting end of these large decarbonisation investment projects, extending
even further the benefits of industrial policy for home-based com-
panies. However, they will also provide local (green) jobs and some
much-needed technological transfer to the Global South in a win-win
fashion (Tagliapietra and Veugelers, 2021). Benefits to lower-income
countries will also come from the fact that these green technologies
will be available at a cheaper and more developed stage, also thanks to
industrial-policy efforts in richer economies.
All in all, a more aggressive use of industrial policy at home should
warrant more active engagement outside national borders to engage
partner countries, establish broad economic alliances and mitigate the
international economic and political fallouts from industrial policy,
and to prevent a green transition pursued in the name of national
interest from ending up isolating a country at global level, straining
much-needed strategic alliances, and creating lost decades of develop-
ment for the world’s poorest.

===== PDF_PAGE 122 =====
120 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
References
Acemoglu, D., P . Aghion, L. Bursztyn and
D. Hémous (2012) ‘The Environment and
Directed Technical Change’ , American
Economic Review 102(1): 131–66
Aghion, P ., R. Bénabou, R. Martin and A.
Roulet (2023) ‘Environmental Preferences
and Technological Choices: Is Market
Competition Clean or Dirty?’ AER: Insights
5(1): 1–20
Aghion, P ., C. Hepburn, A. Teytelboym and
D. Zenghelis (2019) ‘Path dependence,
innovation and the economics of climate
change’ , in R. Fouquet (ed) Handbook on
green growth, Edward Elgar
Aiyar, S., J. Chen, C.H. Ebeke, R. Garcia-
Saltos, T . Gudmundsson, A. Ilyina ...
J.P . Trevino (2023) ‘Geo-Economic
Fragmentation and the Future of
Multilateralism’ , Staff Discussion Notes No.
2023/001, International Monetary Fund
Baldwin, R. (2016) The Great Convergence,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
University Press
Beckert, S. (2015) Empire of Cotton: A
Global History, New York: Vintage
Boccaletti, G. (2021) Water: A Biography,
New York: Pantheon
Carleton, T .A., A. Jina, M. T . Delgado, M.
Greenstone, T . Houser, S.M. Hsiang ... A.
Tianbo Zhang (2020) ‘Valuing the Global
Mortality Consequences of Climate
Change Accounting for Adaptation Costs
and Benefits’ , NBER Working Paper 27599,
National Bureau of Economic Research
Cerutti, E., G. Gopinath and A.
Mohommad (2019) ‘The Impact
of US-China Trade Tensions’ ,
IMF Blog, 23 May, International
Monetary Fund, available at
https://blogs.imf.org/2019/05/23/
the-impact-of-us-china-trade-tensions/
Cherif, R. and F . Hasanov (2019) ‘The
Return of the Policy That Shall Not Be
Named: Principles of Industrial Policy’ ,
IMF Working Papers 19(74), International
Monetary Fund
Evenett, S.J. (2022) ‘What Endgame
for the Deglobalisation Narrative?’
Intereconomics 57(6): 345–51
Gates, B. (2021) How to Avoid a Climate
Disaster: The Solutions We Have and
the Breakthroughs We Need, New York:
Random House
Hausmann, R., J. Hwang and D. Rodrik
(2007) ‘What You Export Matters’ , Journal
of Economic Growth 12(1): 1–25, available
at http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
s10887-006-9009-4
Kleimann, D. (2023) ‘Climate versus
trade? Reconciling international subsidy
rules with industrial decarbonisation’ ,
Policy Contribution 03/2023, Bruegel
Lagarde, C. (2022) ‘ A new global map:
European resilience in a changing
world’ , speech at the Peterson Institute
for International Economics, 22 April,
available at https://www.ecb.europa.
eu/press/key/date/2022/html/ecb.
sp220422~c43af3db20.en.html

===== PDF_PAGE 123 =====
121 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Mazzucato, M. (2013) The Entrepreneurial
State: Debunking Public vs. Private Sector
Myths, London: Anthem Press
Mazzucato, M. (2021) Mission Economy: A
Moonshot Guide to Changing Capitalism,
London: Allen Lane
Milanovic, B. (2019) Capitalism, Alone:
The Future of the System That Rules
the World, First edition, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Belknap Press
Mokyr, J. (2016) A Culture of Growth:
The Origins of the Modern Economy,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press
Moretti, E., C. Steinwender and J. Van
Reenen (2019) ‘The Intellectual Spoils
of War? Defense R&D, Productivity
and International Spillovers’ , NBER
Working Paper 26483, National Bureau of
Economic Research
Neufeld, J. (2022) ‘Immigration
Powers American Progress’ , Institute
for Progress, 8 February, available
at https://progress.institute/
immigration-powers-american-progress/
Pack, H. and K. Saggi (2006) ‘Is There
a Case for Industrial Policy? A Critical
Survey’ , World Bank Research Observer
21(2): 267–97
Poitiers, N., A. Sapir, S. Tagliapietra, R.
Veugelers and J. Zettelmeyer (2023) ‘The
EU Net Zero Industry Act and the risk of
reviving past failures’ , First Glance, 9 March,
Bruegel, available at https://www.bruegel.
org/first-glance/eu-net-zero-industry-act-
and-risk-reviving-past-failures
Rodrik, D. (2009) One Economics, Many
Recipes: Globalization, Institutions,
and Economic Growth, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton Univerity Press
Rodrik, D. (2011) The Globalization
Paradox: Democracy and the Future of the
World Economy, New York: W.W. Norton
Rodrik, D. (2014a) ‘Green Industrial
Policy’ , Oxford Review of Economic Policy
30(3): 469–91
Rodrik, D. (2014b) ‘The Perils of
Premature Deindustrialization’ , Project
Syndicate, 11 October, available at https://
www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/
dani-rodrikdeveloping-economies--
missing-manufacturing
Rodrik, D. (2016) ‘Premature
Deindustrialization’ , Journal of Economic
Growth 21: 1–33
Russ, K. (2021) ‘Yes, US Trade Agreements
Led to Economic Gains, Especially in
Services, New Report Says’ , Trade and
Investment Policy Watch, Peterson
Institute for International Economics,
available at https://www.piie.com/blogs/
trade-and-investment-policy-watch/
yes-us-trade-agreements-led-economic-
gains-especially
Shiller, R.J. (2019) Narrative Economics:
How Stories Go Viral and Drive Major
Economic Events, First edition, Princeton,
NJ: Princeton Univerity Press
Stern, N. and J.E. Stiglitz (2017) Report of
the High-Level Commission on Carbon
Prices, Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition

===== PDF_PAGE 124 =====
122 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Stern, N. and J.E. Stiglitz (2021) ‘The
Social Cost of Carbon, Risk, Distribution,
Market Failures: An Alternative Approach’ ,
NBER Working Paper 28472, National
Bureau of Economic Research
Stern, N. (2006) The Economics of Climate
Change: The Stern Review, Cambridge
University Press
Tagliapietra, S. (2020) Global Energy
Fundamentals: Economics, Politics, and
Technology, Cambridge University Press
Tagliapietra, S. and R. Veugelers (2021)
‘Fostering the Industrial Component of
the European Green Deal: Key Principles
and Policy Options’ , Intereconomics 56(6):
305–10
Terzi, A. (2022a) ‘ A Green Industrial
Revolution Is Coming’ , VoxEU,
28 June, available at https://
cepr.org/voxeu/columns/
green-industrial-revolution-coming-0
Terzi, A. (2022b) Growth for Good:
Reshaping Capitalism to Save Humanity
from Climate Catastrophe, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press
Terzi, A. (2022c) ‘The Green Revolution
Will Not Be Led by International
Treaties, but by Persistent Voters’ ,
LSE Business Review, 15 March,
available at https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/
businessreview/2022/03/15/the-
green-revolution-will-not-be-led-by-
international-treaties-but-by-persistent-
voters/
Terzi, A., A. Singh and M. Sherwood
(2022) ‘Industrial Policy for the 21st
Century: Lessons from the Past’ ,
Discussion Paper 157, European
Economy, Publications Office of the
European Union, available at https://
data.europa.eu/doi/10.2765/538421
World Bank (2008) Commission on growth
and development The Growth Report:
Strategies for Sustained Growth and
Inclusive Development, Washington DC

===== PDF_PAGE 125 =====
7 Industrial strategies for the
 green transition
Chiara Criscuolo, Antoine Dechezleprêtre and Guy Lalanne
1 Introduction45
Governments have been using industrial policy, to varying degrees and
in different forms, since the industrial revolution, but until recently these
policies had a bad reputation. Among various criticisms, they were seen
as instruments that allowed governments to pick winners or support
losers, and that were plagued by so-called government failures, eg
asymmetry of information, meaning governments do not have sufficient
information to select the right projects, technologies or sectors, and are
prone to policy capture by rent-seeking players.
Since the 2008 great financial crisis, and even more so since the
COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent geopolitical crises, industrial pol-
icies have however made a full comeback. The urgency of global societal
challenges, and in particular the need to reach climate neutrality by 2050,
have heightened the need for government intervention.
There is now wider recognition of the role of industrial policies, as, in
a world of imperfect markets, imperfect government intervention might
still be welfare-enhancing.
• For example, the inefficient sectoral allocation revealed by the great
financial crisis justified intervention to favour reallocation.
• In a period of multifaceted structural change, there is a major need
45 The opinions expressed in this chapter are those of the authors and do not neces-
sarily reflect the official views of the OECD.

===== PDF_PAGE 126 =====
124 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
for public impetus and guidance, combined with large-scale private
investment. This is particularly the case for the investment needed to
transition to climate-neutral economies, which the IEA has estimated
at $4.2 billion per year by 2030 (IEA, 2021).
• Similarly, the development of new general purpose technologies
(eg artificial intelligence) and green technologies with potentially
large spillovers requires new rules, new governance frameworks and
high-level domestic and international coordination and coopera-
tion. Some of these new (digital) technologies are also characterised
by network externalities, which might provide governments with a
justification to support the development of these technologies early
on, in order to secure global leadership positions. The COVID-19
pandemic and the geopolitical crisis have highlighted how short-run
and potential long-term disruptions in global value chains might call
for industrial policy interventions – as a complement to trade and
competition measures – to ensure the goals of economic resilience
and strategic autonomy.
• Finally, industrial policy is being called on in support of other chal-
lenges linked to the slowdown of productivity growth (OECD, 2015),
coupled with the increase in productivity dispersion and wage ine-
quality (Andrews et al, 2016; Berlingieri et al, 2017; OECD, 2021b). In
particular, Rodrik and Sabel (2019) have highlighted the potential role
of industrial policies in reducing geographical and wage inequalities
by providing ‘good jobs’ and supporting the provision of skills to make
productivity more inclusive. The importance of focusing on good jobs,
opportunities and skill provision – initially triggered by the impacts
of globalisation – is becoming ever more relevant, given the potential
costs associated with the digital and green transitions.
The world is thus witnessing the development of a new wave of indus-
trial strategies that combine horizontal and targeted instruments, and
demand- and supply-side measures. The objectives of these strategies
go beyond productivity growth and innovation to include sustainability,

===== PDF_PAGE 127 =====
125 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
resilience and strategic autonomy. Beyond traditional sectoral or place-
based orientations, these new industrial strategies focus increasingly on
specific technologies or missions. Examples include the US Chips and
Science Act and the Inflation Reduction Act, the EU’s proposed Net Zero
Industry Act and China’s 13th Five- Year Plan for Economic and Social
Development (2016-2020).
Building on the conceptual framework developed in Criscuolo et al
(2022a), several of its applications to country- or sector-specific con-
texts (Anderson et al, 2021; Cammeraat et al, 2022; Dechezleprêtre et
al, 2023), and work on the role of innovation and industrial policies to
accelerate the development and diffusion of low-carbon technologies
(Cervantes et al, 2023), this chapter summarises the main lessons learned
for the design of effective industrial strategies, with a focus on policies to
reach climate neutrality. In fact, the discussion today is no longer about
whether industrial policies should exist, but how they should be best
designed and implemented.
This chapter emphasises that effective policy design is crucial and
should leverage complementarities across different policy instruments
within industrial strategies, which Criscuolo et al (2022a) defined as a
consistent and articulated group of policy instruments aimed at achiev-
ing policy objectives. To encompass a broad set of instruments and
ensure that many complementarities are taken into consideration, they
delineate industrial policy as including “all interventions intended to
improve structurally the performance of the domestic business sector.”
This definition covers both manufacturing and non-manufacturing, and
includes horizontal and targeted policies.
These new industrial strategies, if well designed, can help achieve
diverse objectives and contribute to addressing societal challenges.
Indeed, industrial strategies, through a combination of several policy
instruments, including carbon pricing, can support the urgently needed
innovations and the adoption of new technologies and business models
to achieve climate neutrality, while helping firms and workers adapt
to the green and digital transitions, including by focusing on the skills

===== PDF_PAGE 128 =====
126 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
needed to thrive in the new environment. For this, governments might
need to be bold and invest in sizeable programmes.
This will not come without significant challenges, not least because of
the multiple goals new industrial strategies are asked to achieve, from cli-
mate neutrality to strategic autonomy. As the Tinbergen rule (Tinbergen,
1956) highlights, this will require at least as many independent policy
instruments as there are policy targets, but also coordination of policies
managed by different agencies within countries and, especially when
dealing with societal challenges such as climate change, coordination
and cooperation across countries.
The rest of the chapter is organised as follows: the next section focuses
on the need for green industrial strategies. Section 3 describes the role of
innovation and technology diffusion incentives. Section 4 highlights the
importance of framework conditions for green industrial strategies, while
section 5 focuses on the role of competition. The last section concludes.
2 Green industrial strategies are needed
2.1 Industrial decarbonisation faces a number of market and government failures
Countries representing more than 90 percent of the world economy have
adopted or announced targets on climate neutrality by mid-century.
Reaching this objective requires rapid deployment of zero-carbon energy
sources and production processes across all economic sectors, while
reducing emissions unrelated to energy consumption, for example from
the agriculture sector.
Some of the carbon-free technologies necessary to reach net-zero
emissions already exist, but their cost needs to be reduced so they
become fully competitive with carbon-based alternatives and can be
deployed rapidly and at scale (IPCC, 2022). Other technologies, such as
green hydrogen, are still in their infancy and need to be further devel-
oped. According to the IEA, half of the global reductions in energy-re-
lated CO2 emissions up to 2050 will have to come from technologies
that are currently at the demonstration or prototype phase (IEA, 2021).

===== PDF_PAGE 129 =====
127 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
In heavy industry and long-distance transport, the share of emissions
reductions from technologies that are still under development today is
even higher. For example, the decarbonisation of manufacturing requires
not only the adoption of technologies that are close to market, such as a
massive increase in renewable electricity generation to enable the elec-
trification of low temperature heat processes, but also the deployment
of many technologies that are still far from maturity, notably bio-based
products and green hydrogen (Anderson et al, 2021).
Despite the urgent need for low-carbon innovation, the current
pace of innovation is not in line with the challenge of carbon neutrality.
Over the past decade, climate-related frontier innovation, measured as
the share of patent filings in climate-related technologies relative to all
technology areas, has slowed (Figure 1). Following a period of strong
growth between 2004 and 2011, innovation efforts in climate-related
technologies declined around 2012, despite the signing of the 2015 Paris
Agreement. Moreover, the decrease in low-carbon patenting affects
nearly all relevant technologies except for energy storage (batteries), and
can be observed across almost all major innovating countries, except
Denmark.
Figure 1: Global low-carbon patenting efforts have declined
Source: OECD, STI Micro-data Lab: Intellectual Property Database, http://oe.cd/ip-
stats, November 2022. Note: Data refers to families of patent applications filed under
the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), by earliest filing date.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
%

===== PDF_PAGE 130 =====
128 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Numerous barriers and market failures discourage low-carbon
innovation.
A first obvious major market failure is related to the existence of large
environmental externalities from greenhouse gas emissions. Because
carbon remains largely unpriced at the global level (OECD, 2022b), the
lack of economic incentives implies low financial returns for low-carbon
innovations, limiting the market for these technologies and reducing
incentives to develop them in the first place. There is ample empirical
evidence that carbon pricing, by encouraging the diffusion of low-car-
bon technologies, affects innovation activity further up the technology
supply chain, favouring R&D in clean technologies and discouraging it in
conventional (polluting) technologies (Dechezleprêtre and Kruse, 2022;
Calel and Dechezleprêtre, 2016).
Second, green innovations are characterised by the existence of
significant knowledge spillovers, which have been shown to be 60
percent greater for low-carbon than for high-carbon technologies
(Dechezleprêtre et al, 2014). For green innovation, learning-by-doing
at the sector- or technology-level is also important. This occurs when
the costs to manufacturers or users fall as cumulative output increases
(Rubin et al, 2015), and accrues not only to the first movers but also, per-
haps to a lesser extent, to other firms in the same sector or using the same
technology. For example, production costs in renewable energy typically
fall by around 15 percent each time the cumulative installed capacity
doubles, with higher learning rates in earlier stages of deployment. The
presence of learning-by-doing provides a strong justification for deploy-
ment subsidies. In the renewable electricity domain, these subsidies (in
the form of feed-in tariffs and auctions) have been instrumental in induc-
ing the massive cost reductions observed in the last couple of decades
(Nemet, 2019).
Third, imperfections in the capital market, such as reluctance to take
on risk and lack of information on the potential value of new innovations,
also limit the amount of private capital available for low-carbon R&D.
Small firms developing clean innovations face particularly high financial

===== PDF_PAGE 131 =====
129 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
constraints, as shown by Howell (2017). Additional factors include sys-
temic barriers to change and innovation, barriers to competition, lack of
co-operation within an innovation system, prevailing norms and habits,
and technology lock-in and path dependence (Aghion, 2019).
However, government failures, including a preference for incumbents,
lack of policy predictability and stability, and regulatory barriers, may
also act as barriers to low-carbon innovation. In particular, climate policy
uncertainty is associated with significant decreases in investment, par-
ticularly in pollution-intensive sectors that are most exposed to climate
policies (Berestycki et al, 2022).
2.2 These barriers call for the use of coherent industrial strategies
This complex set of market failures and policy objectives calls for a
carefully designed strategy relying on a consistent and articulated
group of policy instruments, corresponding to the definition of
mission-oriented industrial strategies (Larrue, 2021; Criscuolo et al,
2022a).
Mission-oriented innovation policy can be defined as a “co-or-
dinated package of research and innovation policy and regulatory
measures tailored specifically to address well-defined objectives related
to a societal challenge, in a defined timeframe. These measures possibly
span different stages of the innovation cycle from research to demon-
stration and market deployment, mix supply-push and demand-pull
instruments, and cut across various policy fields, sectors and disciplines”
(Larrue, 2021). Even though this definition is designed for innovation
policies, it is straightforward to extend it to industrial strategies more
generally. For instance, mission-oriented industrial strategies are
motivated primarily by the societal benefits they can provide and the
need to coordinate multiple stakeholders around complex challenges,
such as the green transition.
Mission-oriented strategies are becoming increasingly popular in
order to address societal challenges, including the green transition and
more generally the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals

===== PDF_PAGE 132 =====
130 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
(OECD, 2021a). By improving sustainability, mission-oriented strate-
gies can also be understood as contributing to the long-run resilience
of industry.
Mission-oriented strategies differ from other types of strategies in
that they are “transformation-oriented” (Weber and Rohracher, 2012), ie
they address the direction of innovation rather than its level, and require
coordination across policy domains and across stakeholders (including
consumers, governments and research institutions).
Green industrial strategies must therefore feature a variety of
industrial policy instruments. Alongside investment incentives, policy
instruments on the demand side and governance categories are also
required. Criscuolo et al (2022a) defined a taxonomy of industrial-policy
instruments (Figure 2), which identifies the channels through which
policy instruments operate and highlights potential complementarities
between them. In addition to keeping with the traditional distinction
between horizontal and targeted policies, the taxonomy distinguishes
between demand-side instruments and two types of supply-side
instrument: those that primarily improve firm performance (such as tax
credits, grants, loans or loan guarantees and public support for training
within firms) and those that affect industry dynamics (framework
instruments including the tax system, capital and labour market policies,
competition and trade policies). Green industrial strategies require all
these categories of instruments.
This framework can shed light on the design of industrial strate-
gies for the green transition, for example by helping to understand
the complementarities between innovation and technology adoption
support on one hand and demand-side instruments on the other. The
latter can contribute to transformative industrial change by affecting the
demand for products through their price, availability or public demand,
and have become increasingly common, particularly in transformative
mission-oriented strategies. The underlying rationale is the creation
of demand to support scaling-up, and in turn lowering costs through
learning-by-doing. In the context of targeted industrial strategies,

===== PDF_PAGE 133 =====
131 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
demand-side policies are particularly interesting as they may be less
distortive than targeted supply-side policies.
Figure 2: T axonomy of industrial policy instruments
Source: Criscuolo et al (2022a). Note: Examples based on the main channel through
which policy instruments work.
This framework highlights the need for coherent policy packages
adopted as part of industrial strategies. For example, although innova-
tion policies have a major role to play in carbon-neutrality strategies,
they are insufficient on their own. While innovation policy can help
facilitate the creation of new environmentally friendly technologies, it
provides little incentive to adopt these technologies, unless R&D activ-
ities manage to make clean technologies competitive with high-carbon
alternatives on economic grounds. Until then, incentives for adop-
tion need to be provided by demand-side policies, which can make
low-carbon options more attractive economically. However, demand-
side policy cannot supplant the need for innovation policy, given the
SUPPLY
DEMAND
GOVERNANCE
Instruments coordinating stakeholders
WITHIN
BETWEEN
Framework instruments
•
Well-functioning capital
markets
•
Labour mobility
•
Tax system
•
Entrepreneurship policies
•
IP and technical
standardisation policies
Complementary policy areas
•
Competition
•
Trade and investment
Investment incentives
•
Tax expenditures, grants,
subsidies
•
Financial instruments (public
VCs, loans, guarantees)
Access to inputs
•
Skills policy (education,
training)
•
Public R&D and transfer of
publicly provided knowledge
•
Infrastructure, energy…
Regulation
•
Product standards
•
Pigouvian taxes and subsidies
Public procurement
Awareness
-
raising campaigns
and behavioural nudges
Industry boards
Public-private fora
International co-operation
Instruments aﬀecting the demand
of products/services
Framework instruments aﬀecting
industry dynamics
Instruments aﬀecting ﬁrm
performance

===== PDF_PAGE 134 =====
132 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
presence of barriers and market failures at the R&D and demonstration
stages.
These instruments are thus not substitutes but can instead be mutu-
ally reinforcing. Carbon pricing, in particular, is also not sufficient on its
own. Carbon prices ensure there will be a demand for new low-carbon
technologies. However, they are unlikely to help for technologies that are
far from market and require long development timelines. As any tech-
nology-neutral instrument, carbon pricing tends to favour technologies
that are closest to market and with the shortest payback time. It needs
to be complemented by technology-specific support, which, by lower-
ing the cost of future green technologies, can build the case for stronger
carbon pricing in the future. The Dutch climate policy package is a good
example of an approach that combines a strong commitment to raising
carbon prices – through a carbon levy on industrial emissions – with
ambitious technology support provided by the Sustainable Energy
Transition Incentive Scheme (see section 3.1; Anderson et al, 2021).
The digital transformation could be a key enabler for reaching
climate goals, thanks to technologies including smart meters, sensors,
artificial intelligence (AI), the internet of things (IoT) and blockchain,
along with digitally-induced changes in business models and consump-
tion. In the energy sector, demand-side management can help balance
the renewables-based electricity system. Digital solutions are equally
important on the supply side, for example by accelerating low-carbon
innovation with simulations and deep learning. Already, around 20 per-
cent of patents protecting climate change mitigation technologies have
a digital component (Amoroso et al, 2021). However, digital technolo-
gies consume large amounts of energy, implying higher direct energy
demand and related carbon emissions, which warrant further efficiency
improvements. This suggests that the digital and green transformations
need to be tackled jointly through coherent industrial strategies.
Preliminary estimates from the Quantifying Industrial Strategies
(QuIS) project, based on evidence from nine countries (Figure 3;
Criscuolo et al, 2022b; Criscuolo et al, 2023) show that green industrial

===== PDF_PAGE 135 =====
133 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
policies, while not negligible, comprise on average 15 percent of indus-
trial policy expenditures (or an average of 0.24 percent of GDP). In addi-
tion, green industrial policies are on the rise, as their weight increased
by about 10 percent from 2019 to 2021, and is expected to grow even
more in the near future. Post-pandemic recovery plans, which are still
being ramped up, include in many countries a much higher share of
green expenditures (O’Callaghan et al, 2021; OECD, 2022; Aulie et al,
2023). Similarly, digital industrial policies represent an even lower share
of industrial policy expenditures (3 percent on average). Countries’
priorities are in fact still dominated by a sectoral approach (Figure 3):
policy instruments for specific industries still represent close to 30
percent of expenditures on average, mainly targeting manufacturing,
energy and transportation. Country profiles are nevertheless diverse,
with, for instance, green expenditures as high as 34 percent in some
countries and almost non-existent in others, and digital going from as
low as 0 percent to 8 percent.

===== PDF_PAGE 136 =====
134 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Figure 3: Industrial policy priorities in nine selected OECD countries*, industrial
policy expenditures by eligibility criteria in 2021, % of total industrial policy
subsidies and tax expenditures
Source: Criscuolo et al (2023). Note: * QuIS covers Canada, Denmark, France, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden and the United Kingdom. Structural policies (ie ex-
cluding COVID-19 emergency support). Categories are not mutually exclusive, as policies
can be tagged in several categories. Additionally, some policies do not fulfil any of these
eligibility criteria. Hence, the numbers in this figure do not add up to 100 percent.
3 Innovation and technology diffusion incentives are the founda-
tion for green industrial strategies
Bringing about the necessary cost reductions to make carbon-free
technologies competitive with their high-carbon alternatives should
be the primary objective of climate-neutral strategies. This would
also help accelerate the diffusion of available technologies, which is
critical to reach medium-term carbon emissions reductions. For these
reasons, innovation and industrial policies – with a focus on both the
development and deployment of low-carbon technologies – should
underpin strategies to reach carbon neutrality. Given the wide range of
50%
Sectoral
R&D
Green
Jobs/skills
Minimum/MaximumAverage
Technology
Digital
SMEs
and young ﬁrms
40%
30%
20%
10%

===== PDF_PAGE 137 =====
135 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
barriers discouraging low-carbon innovation, the theoretical justifica-
tions for policy intervention are sound and well established.
Innovation and industrial policies can also complement carbon
prices, which are often difficult politically to implement. In fact,
technology support policies are more popular among voters and
citizens than other climate change policies (including carbon pricing,
bans or regulations), making them an attractive option from a public
acceptability point of view (Dechezleprêtre et al, 2022). In addition,
by reducing clean technology adoption costs and boosting the growth
of new carbon-efficient firms and sectors, such policies can facilitate
the adoption of more ambitious emissions reduction targets, includ-
ing among emerging economies, where the bulk of future emissions
growth is projected to take place.
3.1 Evidence suggests that specific R&D support instruments are required
Public expenditures on research, development and demonstration
of low-carbon technologies are a key element of the toolkit available
to governments to achieve climate neutrality. However, low-carbon
public R&D spending has remained broadly flat as a percentage of
GDP over the last 30 years (Cervantes et al, 2023).
In addition to public R&D spending on low-carbon technologies,
governments can support financially the innovation activities of firms
through direct and targeted instruments (eg research grants) or via
horizontal and untargeted instruments (R&D tax credits). Horizontal
R&D support has indisputable advantages, including its low admin-
istrative cost and technological neutrality, but by construction, it
cannot be directed and likely benefits mostly technologies that have
the greatest short-run returns. As such, tax credits may not be the
best policy tool to promote new technologies that are far from the
market and require long development timelines. Climate neutrality
will require innovation in breakthrough technologies, which cannot
be incentivised through horizontal support. Support for an emerg-
ing technology justifies a stronger focus on targeted instruments for

===== PDF_PAGE 138 =====
136 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
R&D, complementing horizontal instruments. Therefore, support for
low-carbon R&D undertaken by business should primarily be direct,
rather than horizontal. Technology neutrality – even between various
low-carbon technologies – tends to favour technologies with the short-
est payback time and is therefore not neutral in practice.
For example, the main technology support instrument in the
Netherlands is the Sustainable Energy Transition Incentive Scheme
(SDE++), which subsidises the additional costs associated with adopt-
ing a low-carbon technology. The instrument is allocated to applicants
in increasing order of subsidy requirement per tonne of CO2 reduc-
tion. While this allocation design is economically efficient and ensures
least-cost decarbonisation in the short run, it favours technologies that
are close to the market at the expense of more radical alternatives that
are still at an earlier stage of development, such as green hydrogen
(Anderson et al, 2021).
An analysis of countries’ hydrogen strategies provides a worrying
example (Cammeraat et al, 2022). The ambitious hydrogen production
targets at the 2030 horizon included in national hydrogen strategies
mostly rely more on financial support for the deployment of new large
electrolysers than on direct support for innovation. Between 2008 and
2019, several countries increased public R&D spending on hydrogen,
but others cut public spending on R&D by more than half. The focus
of public support at the deployment stage is evident in firms’ filings
of intellectual property rights: while patenting activity on hydrogen
production technologies is growing at a very slow pace, the number
of hydrogen trademarks has taken off, suggesting that companies are
focusing on commercialisation rather than on innovation, and antici-
pate a growing hydrogen market pulled by government subsidies. This
calls for greater targeted support for R&D in green hydrogen.
3.2 Financial instruments also have a role to play
Recent evidence on venture capital (VC) funding for green start-ups
shows that, conditional on receiving VC, these firms are less likely to

===== PDF_PAGE 139 =====
137 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
secure seed funding compared to non-green start-ups, suggesting that
in the early phases of product or service development they might be
perceived as riskier than their non-green counterparts (Bioret et al,
2023). Holding patents also increases the likelihood of being awarded
a grant or of receiving VC more for green firms than for non-green
firms, suggesting that grant providers and investors potentially wait
for green technologies to be de-risked through patent applications
before supporting the companies that hold them. The relationship
between cumulative grants or cumulative VC received and subsequent
innovation is substantially lower for green firms relative to non-green,
which might suggest higher development costs for green products and
services. Taken together, this evidence demonstrates the importance of
reducing barriers to external funding to help high-risk companies raise
funds. Low-interest or subsidised loans for young firms and greater
mobilisation of government venture capital toward the green transi-
tion can help.
4 Framework conditions and demand-side support are also key
components of green industrial strategies
Framework policies and demand-side policies complement innova-
tion and technology diffusion policies and are important in enabling
frontier firms (in terms of productivity, but also in terms of green-
ness) to invest and grow. These instruments not only play on strategic
decisions within these firms but also directly affect the allocation of
resources and their reallocation between firms, which is one of the
main drivers of structural change.
This section illustrates the role of framework conditions using three
examples: first, with the role of science and skills in enabling the green
transition of the industry, then the role of regulations and standards
in allowing the diffusion of green technologies, and finally how the
carbon price is key to promote green investment and technology adop-
tion. The next section focuses on the contribution of competition and
business dynamics to structural change.

===== PDF_PAGE 140 =====
138 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
4.1 Education, skills and science policies
Education, skills and science policies are necessary to ensure that
industry can rely on the right set of skills and that new research into
low-carbon technologies is not performed at the expense of the devel-
opment of other productivity-enhancing innovations.
Re-skilling and up-skilling displaced workers with green skills
through active labour market policies and adult training is essential to
address social concerns and contribute to reducing skill shortages in
the future low-carbon industries. Cross-sector training programmes
can ease labour market transitions from surplus to shortage sectors.
Timely and transparent information on sectoral labour markets can
help workers anticipate future labour needs and policymakers to
monitor and accompany the changes. With a view to the longer run,
education programmes need to incorporate new material and compe-
tences, so the next cohort of workers can cope with the impact of the
low-carbon transition in the workplace.
Universities and research institutes play a key role in developing
emerging green technologies. For instance, patents in automotive
emerging technologies (particularly hydrogen, and to a lesser extent
autonomous vehicles and electric vehicles) are more likely to cite uni-
versity patents and the academic literature than patents in traditional
combustion engine technologies (Figure 4). This result is confirmed
when looking at the share of patents filed in collaboration between
firms and academic institutions.

===== PDF_PAGE 141 =====
139 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Figure 4: Emerging technologies are strongly linked with universities and
scientific research, automotive technology patent citations, 2000-2019
Source: Dechezleprêtre et al (2023), based on STI Micro-data Lab: Intellectual Property
Database, http://oe.cd/ipstats, June 2022. Note: A collaboration is defined as a patent
family with at least two applicants, one being a firm and another a non-firm entity (eg
universities, governments, hospitals). Patents filed by academic institutions only include
patents for which the type of applicant (individual, company, government entity) is iden-
tified. A patent is labelled as citing an academic patent if at least one application in the
patent family cited a patent filed by an academic institution. A patent family is labelled as
citing the academic (non-patent) literature if at least one patent in the patent family cited
a serial/journal/periodical citation, a chemical abstract citation, or a biological abstract
citation. When labelling a patent family as citing the non-patent literature, the sample
is restricted to those patent families that have at least one patent application at the EPO,
USPTO or WIPO (PCT applications). This restriction is necessary as non-patent literature
citations are only available for patents filed in one of these three offices.
4.2 Regulatory standards
Setting regulatory standards is another important complementary
policy, which can help reduce uncertainty and facilitate coordination.
Standardisation can strongly promote the diffusion of technologies
with network externalities, such as carbon capture and storage (CCS;
Anderson et al, 2021) or green hydrogen (Cammeraat et al, 2022).
For instance, defining liabilities would allow investors in CCS to
more accurately price and potentially insure this risk. The industry, the
0 %
5 %
1 0 %
1 5 %
2 0 %
2 5 %
3 0 %
3 5 %
H yd r o g e n p at e nt s A ut o no m o us p at e nt s E V p at e nt s A ut o m o t i v e
t e c hno l o g y p a t e nt s
C o m b us t i o n p at e n t s
C i t at i o ns of p at e nt s ﬁl e d b y ac a d e m i c i ns t i t ut i o ns
C i t at i o ns of n o n- p at e nt l i t e r at ur e
C o l l a b o r at i o ns b e t w e e n ﬁr m s and ac ad e m i c i ns t i t ut i o ns

===== PDF_PAGE 142 =====
140 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
financial sector and the different levels of government have to work
together to explore potential risk-sharing solutions should such liabili-
ties create a barrier to market development.
For hydrogen, standards are needed on the purity of hydrogen for
passenger vehicles, on the gas composition for cross-border sales, on
safety measures (such as materials used for hydrogen tanks) and on
how to measure lifecycle environmental impacts from hydrogen pro-
duction (IEA, 2019), and for blending hydrogen into the gas grid. As it
is impossible to assess from hydrogen itself how it has been produced,
accounting standards for the origin of hydrogen are needed to create a
market for blue (out of natural gas with CCS) or green (out of renewa-
ble electricity through electrolysis) hydrogen.
Hydrogen can be produced on-site, but also in a centralised
manner before being stored and transported via tanks or pipes, in
a pure form or blended with natural gas. This wide variation in the
modes of producing, storing and transporting hydrogen suggests that
regulatory standards can facilitate the creation of a dynamic hydrogen
market.
Harmonisation of standards and regulations related to the use of
recycled products is necessary to promote the circular economy and,
ultimately, address Scope 3 emissions (ie linked to the supply chain).
This is of particular importance in the steel industry, where relabelling
by-products of steel production at the European level (eg slag and
fly ash) from ‘waste’ to ‘product’ with all due care to avoid pollution
hazard, would reduce the administrative burden associated with pur-
chasing scrap for companies while increasing import opportunities.
Standardisation faces a trade-off: advancing fast on a national
basis or slower at the international level. For example, China has at
time of writing adopted 93 standards for hydrogen infrastructure and
applications. Even EU countries do not yet rely on EU standards. For
example, Italy has adopted a national regulation on hydrogen fuel-
ling stations. Most countries recognise that standards are important
and should ideally be set at the international level, and international

===== PDF_PAGE 143 =====
141 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
cooperation related to hydrogen is thus mostly about harmonising codes
and standards.
4.3 Carbon pricing
Carbon pricing is a cornerstone of the policy toolbox for industrial
decarbonisation. It is essential to have clear trajectories of gradually
increasing carbon prices over the next decades to establish a level
playing field and make the business case for a low-carbon transition.
In this respect, the design of the Dutch carbon levy (Anderson et al,
2021) is particularly interesting, with an increasing price path and a
levy base that phases in gradually over time. The levy adds a floating
contribution on top of the EU ETS allowance price to yield a fixed price
on Dutch emissions covered by the system. This price floor provides
more certainty about future prices and protects investors against vol-
atility of EU ETS allowance prices. Such a design can provide forward
guidance to investors without immediately imposing new taxes on
businesses in the context of high uncertainty about short- and medi-
um-term demand and liquidity. Since expectations of future prices,
rather than current prices, determine innovation, long-term regulatory
consistency is crucial for new technology development. Commitments
to raise carbon prices in the future and clear carbon-price trajectories
can already induce innovation even if current carbon prices are low.
Carbon contracts-for-difference (CCfD), experimented on in Germany,
can decrease uncertainty thanks to forward contracts on the price of
abated greenhouse gases (Neuhoff et al, 2022).
Nevertheless, all carbon pricing instruments in the Netherlands
(carbon levy, European carbon market, energy tax and energy sur-
charge) include competitiveness provisions which grant extensive
preferential treatment to energy-intensive users, for instance in the
chemicals, refineries and basic metals sectors. These can take various
forms, including tax exemptions, regressive tax rates and free emis-
sions allowances. This naturally erodes the carbon pricing signal,
reduces the cost-effectiveness of the policy instrument and generates

===== PDF_PAGE 144 =====
142 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
equity concerns as small firms typically face much higher energy and
carbon prices than large incumbents (Anderson et al, 2021).
In this respect, strong financial support for low-carbon technol-
ogy adoption should be seen as an alternative, not a complement, to
the provision of generous exemptions to energy-intensive industry,
and should allow governments to gradually remove such preferential
treatment, which stands in the way of long-term decarbonisation.
The convergence of climate policy ambitions at EU level and beyond
– notably among large emitters from the developed and developing
world alike – as well as the progress made towards the introduction of
a carbon border adjustment mechanism, are other justifications for
removing these exemptions.
5 Competition and business dynamism are key for structural change
Competition policy is closely linked to industrial strategies, favour-
ing an efficient allocation of production factors between firms, and
thereby contributing to aggregate productivity and structural change.
At the same time, industrial policy also has an impact on competition.
• First, industrial policy, by promoting technology adoption, innova-
tion and entrepreneurship, can foster competition by supporting
business dynamism.
• Second, targeted industrial policies, by giving an explicit advantage
to some firms over others, might compromise competitive neutral-
ity principles, while horizontal industrial policies are less likely to
have a detrimental effect on competition (see OECD, 2009).
In general, targeted industrial policies should be competitively neu-
tral. In case competitive neutrality is not feasible to achieve the desired
objective, interventions should be narrow, temporary and monitored
closely (OECD, 2020). Inclusiveness and technology-neutrality are
essential to ensure that in practice industrial policies do not discrim-
inate unduly between firms. This issue is even more meaningful for

===== PDF_PAGE 145 =====
143 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
instruments that are by essence discriminatory, such as incentives
provided on a competitive basis (grants, loan or equity financing).
However, even if they might be at risk of hurting competition,
targeted industrial policies that are designed to fix market failures or to
address externalities do not necessarily affect competition negatively.
By increasing the returns for a given project, they may even enable
more firms to enter into that market (Aghion et al, 2015a).
Both theory and evidence suggest the existence of significant
complementarities between industrial and competition policies.
Competition promotes the most efficient firms and provides incentives
for innovation, while industrial policy increases the ability to innovate
and protects the rights of innovators, thus guaranteeing the returns to
innovation and investment. For example, Acemoglu et al (2018) high-
lighted the fact that R&D support might not be effective in the absence
of efficient exit policies. Interestingly, Aghion et al (2015b) showed
that there is a complementarity between competition and intellectual
property rights (patents) in fostering innovation. Indeed, with stronger
patent rights, the incentives to escape competition are higher.
Besides innovation, competition is also a major driver of technology
adoption and of organisational and managerial improvements, since
competitive pressures boost returns to adoption (Andrews et al, 2016).
Finally, most of the arguments developed in this section also apply
to international trade, which can contribute to increasing competition
on domestic markets and expanding the size of the market for domes-
tic firms. For instance, comparative advantage is an important lever to
decrease the cost of green hydrogen, which should be produced where
renewable energy is more abundant and cheaper (Cammeraat et al,
2022). Importantly, reconciling green investment support and trade
rules is necessary (Kleimann, 2023).
5.1 The example of the automotive sector
Ongoing trends in the automotive sector, such as the major investment
required for the shift to connected, automated, shared and electric

===== PDF_PAGE 146 =====
144 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
(CASE) vehicles, the network externalities linked to the increasing role
of data or the potential increase in market segmentation could reduce
competition in the medium run. High upfront investment needs, net-
work externalities and high economies of scale required in this sector
might indeed lead to a higher level of concentration in this industry.
This could be reinforced by the evolution towards increasingly seg-
mented markets.
Dechezleprêtre et al (2023) showed that the automotive sector
experienced very significant growth in mergers and acquisitions
(M&As) before the COVID-19 crisis. Given the likelihood of a new
wave of M&As after the crisis, the level of competition and contestabil-
ity in the ecosystem may decrease in the near future, thereby threaten-
ing innovation and the benefits for consumers.
Nevertheless, M&As and concentration are also an effective way
to acquire new knowledge, to integrate new technologies, know-how
and talents in the products, and to benefit from economies of scale or
scope. M&A is often cited as a strategy to acquire external knowledge
(Cassiman et al, 2005; Phillips and Zhdanov, 2012). If this is indeed the
case, the patent portfolio of target firms should reflect the technologies
of interest for acquiring firms. As transactions within the automotive
sector can have other motives, such as industrial synergies or entry in a
new market, target firms outside the automotive sector are more likely
to be bought for their technologies.
Compared to firms that are not the target of a merger or an acqui-
sition, target firms outside the automotive sector have a much higher
proportion of patents in autonomous vehicle technologies (Figure
5). However, they have significantly lower shares of patents related
to combustion engines. Target firms in the automotive sector tend
to have higher shares of patents in combustion and electric engine
technologies.

===== PDF_PAGE 147 =====
145 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Figure 5: Automotive sector, patent portfolio of selected firms, by technology,
2016-2019
 Source: Dechezleprêtre et al (2023), based on Zephyr data. Note: This figure covers the
deals in the following categories: ‘genuine acquisition’ , ‘further acquisition’ , ‘minority
stakes’ and ‘joint venture’ . Non-target firms correspond to firms having filed patents in
at least one of the four selected technologies.
In this context, it is important to find new ways to support collabo-
ration between firms, while preserving competition and a level playing
field (eg industrial alliances in the EU). This calls for:
• Ensuring that competition authorities have adequate tools to moni-
tor and enforce merger control. As acquisitions of young firms often
remain below applicable thresholds, analyses (Crémer et al, 2019;
Shapiro, 2019; Digital Competition Expert Panel, 2019; Kamepalli et
al, 2020; Argentesi et al, 2020; Motta and Peitz, 2021) have sug-
gested reassessing them in order to review potentially problematic
mergers. Although this literature mainly focuses on acquisitions
by large digital platforms, its conclusions may also apply to the
automotive ecosystem, which is becoming more digital and prone
to network effects.
• Ensuring that young and fast-growing firms can choose between
several exit strategies. Being bought by a larger firm should re-
main a possibility, but young ventures should also be able to opt
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
A u t o n o m o u s Co m b u st i o n El e c t ri c H y d ro g e n
Non-target
Target - non automotive
Target - automotive

===== PDF_PAGE 148 =====
146 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
for initial public offerings (IPO) or private equity funding. The
development of financial markets is therefore key to allow for the
growth of promising firms and to limit market concentration in the
medium run. This seems to be particularly relevant for the Europe-
an automotive ecosystem, which is often a target of cross-border
transactions (Dechezleprêtre et al, 2023). Publicly provided finan-
cial instruments can also support young and fast-growing firms,
especially in downturns when capital markets are more risk averse.
• Finally, competition can also be fostered by limiting market seg-
mentation. This can notably be achieved by international coop-
eration on regulatory and technical standards, for instance on
autonomous vehicles (eg homologation; see Fernandez Llorca and
Gomez, 2021) and emissions. Technical standardisation must nev-
ertheless balance the risk of premature standardisation against the
need to provide clarity to investors and facilitate investments (see
Cammeraat et al, 2022, on hydrogen). In addition, clear data gov-
ernance rules are needed to facilitate the deployment of connected
and autonomous vehicles.
6 Conclusion
Industrial policy has made a comeback and is seen as a way to achieve
an increasing number of goals. Industrial strategies are indeed neces-
sary to deal with urgent societal challenges, such as climate change.
As many of the technologies required to reach carbon neutrality are
still in the labs and innovation in green technologies seems to have
reached a plateau, there is a strong and urgent need to stimulate these
innovations and, more generally, to transform economies towards
net-zero emissions, leaving no one behind. Green industrial strategies,
which still represent a small share of industrial policy, even if they are
growing, are therefore required to speed up the green transition.
Green industrial strategies rely on important pillars, such as incen-
tives for innovation and technology diffusion or carbon pricing, but

===== PDF_PAGE 149 =====
147 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
deserve a more encompassing approach that takes into consideration
other aspects of industrial policy. In particular, this chapter stresses
the importance of education, skills and science policies, regulatory
standards and competition and business dynamism, which are shown
to be highly complementary to green technology support and carbon
pricing. In order to succeed, these policies need to be coherent and
provide clear trajectories and long-term consistency.
Industrial and competition policies have often been considered as
antagonistic, but major complementarities exist between industrial
and competition policies. For green industrial strategies to succeed,
they need to go hand in hand with competition policies to continue to
foster business dynamism, business entry and the efficient allocation of
resources.
The chapter also indicates fruitful avenues for future research. First,
the chapter summarises the results of novel efforts aimed at quantify-
ing industrial strategies. This is the first step of a long journey, the final
goal of which is to evaluate industrial strategies. Second, the chapter
focuses on industrial strategies for the green transition, but, as high-
lighted in the chapter, achieving climate neutrality and succeeding in
the green transition requires relying on a sustainable digital transition
and the buy-in of voters. For this reason, an important area of work
could be on how industrial strategies can best support an inclusive
twin transition.
References
Acemoglu, D., U. Akcigit, H. Alp, N.
Bloom and W. Kerr (2018) ‘Innovation,
Reallocation, and Growth’ , American
Economic Review 108(11): 3450-3491,
available at https://doi.org/10.1257/
aer.20130470
Aghion, P ., C. Hepburn, A. Teytelboym
and D. Zenghelis (2019) ‘Path
dependence, innovation and the
economics of climate change’ , in R.
Fouquet (ed) Handbook on green growth,
Edward Elgar, available at https://doi.
org/10.4337/9781788110686.00011

===== PDF_PAGE 150 =====
148 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Aghion, P ., J. Cai, M. Dewatripont, L.
Du, A. Harrison and P . Legros (2015a)
‘Industrial Policy and Competition’ ,
American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 7(4): 1–32, available at
https://doi.org/10.1257/mac.20120103
Aghion, P ., P . Howitt and S. Prantl (2015b)
‘Patent rights, product market reforms, and
innovation’ , Journal of Economic Growth
20(3): 223-262, available at https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10887-015-9114-3
Amoroso, S., L. Aristodemou, C.
Criscuolo, A. Dechezleprêtre, H. Dernis,
N. Grassano ... A. Tübke (2021) World
Corporate Top R&D investors: Paving
the way for climate neutrality, European
Commission Joint Research Centre and
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, available at https://doi.
org/10.2760/49552
Anderson, B., E. Cammeraat, A.
Dechezleprêtre, L. Dressler, N. Gonne,
G. Lalanne ... K. Theodoropoulos (2021)
‘Policies for a climate-neutral industry:
Lessons from the Netherlands’ , OECD
Science, Technology and Industry Policy
Papers No. 108, Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, available
at https://doi.org/10.1787/a3a1f953-en
Andrews, D., C. Criscuolo and P . Gal
(2016) ‘The Best versus the Rest:
The Global Productivity Slowdown,
Divergence across Firms and the Role of
Public Policy’ , OECD Productivity Working
Papers No. 5, Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, available
at https://doi.org/10.1787/24139424
Argentesi, E., P . Buccirossi, E. Calvano,
T . Duso, A. Marrazzo and S. Nava (2020)
‘Merger Policy in Digital Markets:
An Ex-Post Assessment’ , Journal of
Competition Law & Economics 17(1):
95-140, available at https://doi.
org/10.1093/joclec/nhaa020
Aulie, F ., A. Dechezleprêtre, F . Galindo-
Rueda, C. Kögel, I. Pitavy and A. Vitkova
(2023), “Did COVID-19 accelerate the
green transition?: An international
assessment of fiscal spending measures to
support low-carbon technologies” , OECD
Science, Technology and Industry Policy
Papers, No. 151, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/5b486c18-en.
Berestycki, C., S. Carattini, A.
Dechezleprêtre and T . Kruse (2022)
‘Measuring and assessing the effects
of climate policy uncertainty’ , OECD
Economics Department Working Papers
No. 1724, Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, available
at https://doi.org/10.1787/34483d83-en
Berlingieri, G., P . Blanchenay and C.
Criscuolo (2017) ‘The great divergence(s)’ ,
OECD Science, Technology and Industry
Policy Papers No. 39, Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and
Development, available at https://doi.
org/10.1787/953f3853-en
Bioret, L., A. Dechezleprêtre and P . Kelly
(2023) The New Green Economy: Venture
Capital, Innovation and Business Success
in Cleantech Startups, Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and
Development, forthcoming

===== PDF_PAGE 151 =====
149 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Calel, R. and A. Dechezleprêtre (2016)
‘Environmental Policy and Directed
Technological Change: Evidence from
the European Carbon Market’ , Review of
Economics and Statistics 98(1): 173-191,
available at https://doi.org/10.1162/
rest_a_00470
Cammeraat, E., A. Dechezleprêtre and
G. Lalanne (2022) ‘Innovation and
industrial policies for green hydrogen’ ,
OECD Science, Technology and Industry
Policy Papers No. 125, Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and
Development, available at https://doi.
org/10.1787/f0bb5d8c-en
Cassiman, B., M.G. Colombo, P . Garrone
and R. Veugelers (2005) ‘The impact of
M&A on the R&D process’ , Research Policy
34(2): 195-220, available at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.respol.2005.01.002
Cervantes, M., C. Criscuolo, A.
Dechezleprêtre and D. Pilat (2023)
‘Driving low-carbon innovations for
climate neutrality’ , OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers
No. 143, Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, available
at https://doi.org/10.1787/8e6ae16b-en
Crémer, J., Y.-A. De Montjoye and H.
Schweitzer (2019) Competition policy for
the digital era, European Commission,
Directorate-General for Competition,
available at https://ec.europa.eu/
competition/publications/reports/
kd0419345enn.pdf
Criscuolo, C., L. Díaz, G. Lalanne, L.
Guillouet, C.-É. van de Put, C. Weder and
H. Zazon Deutsch (2023) ‘Quantifying
industrial strategies across nine OECD
countries’ , OECD Science, Technology
and Industry Policy Papers No. 150,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, available at https://
doi.org/10.1787/5f2dcc8e-en
Criscuolo, C., N. Gonne, K. Kitazawa
and G. Lalanne (2022a) ‘ An industrial
policy framework for OECD countries:
Old debates, new perspectives’ , OECD
Science, Technology and Industry
Policy Papers No. 127, Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and
Development, available at https://dx.doi.
org/10.1787/0002217c-en
Criscuolo, C., G. Lalanne and L. Díaz
(2022b) ‘Quantifying industrial strategies
(QuIS): Measuring industrial policy
expenditures’ , OECD Science, Technology
and Industry Working Papers No. 2022/05,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, available at https://
doi.org/10.1787/ae351abf-en
Dechezleprêtre, A., L. Díaz, M. Fadic
and G. Lalanne (2023) ‘How the green
and digital transitions are reshaping the
automotive ecosystem’ , OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers
No. 144, Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, available
at https://doi.org/10.1787/f1874cab-en

===== PDF_PAGE 152 =====
150 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Dechezleprêtre, A., A. Fabre, T . Kruse,
B. Planterose, A. Sanchez Chico and
S. Stantcheva (2022) ‘Fighting climate
change: International attitudes toward
climate policies’ , OECD Economics
Department Working Papers No. 1714,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, available at https://
doi.org/10.1787/3406f29a-en
Dechezleprêtre, A. and T . Kruse (2022)
‘The effect of climate policy on innovation
and economic performance along
the supply chain: A firm- and sector-
level analysis’ , OECD Environment
Working Papers No. 189, Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and
Development, available at https://doi.
org/10.1787/3569283a-en
Dechezleprêtre, A., R. Martin and M.
Mohnen (2014) ‘Knowledge spillovers
from clean and dirty technologies’ , CEP
Discussion Papers CEPDP1300, Centre for
Economic Performance, London School of
Economics and Political Science, available
at http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/60501/
Digital Competition Expert Panel (2019)
Unlocking digital competition, HM
Treasury, available at https://assets.
publishing.service.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_
data/file/785547/unlocking_digital_
competition_furman_review_web.pdf
Fernandez Llorca, D. and E. Gomez
(2021) Trustworthy Autonomous
Vehicles, JRC Science for Policy Report,
European Commission Joint Research
Centre, available at https://doi.
org/10.2760/120385
Howell, S. (2017) ‘Financing Innovation:
Evidence from R&D Grants’ , American
Economic Review 107(4): 1136-1164,
available at https://doi.org/10.1257/
aer.20150808
IEA (2021) Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap
for the Global Energy Sector, International
Energy Agency, available at https://
dx.doi.org/10.1787/c8328405-en
IEA (2019) The Future of Hydrogen: Seizing
today’s opportunities, International
Energy Agency, available at https://www.
iea.org/reports/the-future-of-hydrogen
IPCC (2022) Climate Change 2022:
Mitigation of Climate Change.
Contribution of Working Group III
to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, Cambridge University Press
Kamepalli, S., R. Rajan and L. Zingales
(2020) ‘Kill Zone’ , NBER Working Paper
27146, National Bureau of Economic
Research, available at https://doi.
org/10.3386/w27146
Kleimann, D. (2023) ‘Climate versus trade?
Reconciling international subsidy rules
with industrial decarbonisation’ , Policy
Contribution 03/2023, Bruegel, available
at https://www.bruegel.org/sites/default/
files/2023-02/PB%2003%202023.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 153 =====
151 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Larrue, P . (2021) ‘The design and
implementation of mission-oriented
innovation policies: A new systemic
policy approach to address societal
challenges’ , OECD Science, Technology
and Industry Policy Papers No. 100,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, available at https://
dx.doi.org/10.1787/3f6c76a4-en
Motta, M. and M. Peitz (2021) ‘Big tech
mergers’ , Information Economics and
Policy 54: 100868, available at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.infoecopol.2020.100868
Nemet, G. (2019) How Solar Energy
Became Cheap: A Model for Low-Carbon
Innovation, Routledge, available at
https://doi.org/ISBN 9780367136598
Neuhoff, K., N. May and J. Richstein (2022)
‘Financing renewables in the age of falling
technology costs’ , Resource and Energy
Economics 70: 101330, available at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.reseneeco.2022.101330.
O’Callaghan, B., N. Yau, E. Murdock, D.
Tritsch, A. Janz, A. Blackwood ... L. Heeney
(2021) Global Recovery Observatory,
Oxford University Economic Recovery
Project, available at https://recovery.
smithschool.ox.ac.uk/tracking/
OECD (2022a) Assessing environmental
impact of measures in the OECD Green
Recovery Database, OECD Policy
Responses to Coronavirus (COVID-19),
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, available at https://doi.
org/10.1787/3f7e2670-en
OECD (2022b) Pricing Greenhouse Gas
Emissions: Turning Climate Targets
into Climate Action, OECD Series on
Carbon Pricing and Energy Taxation,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, available at https://doi.
org/10.1787/e9778969-en
OECD (2021a) Industrial Policy for the
Sustainable Development Goals: Increasing
the Private Sector’s Contribution,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, available at https://
dx.doi.org/10.1787/2cad899f-en
OECD (2021b) The Role of Firms in Wage
Inequality: Policy Lessons from a Large
Scale Cross-Country Study, Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and
Development, available at https://doi.
org/10.1787/7d9b2208-en
OECD (2020) COVID-19: Competition
policy actions for governments and
competition authorities, Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and
Development, available at https://
www.oecd.org/daf/competition/
COVID-19-competition-policy-actions-
for-governments-and-competition-
authorities.pdf
OECD (2015) The Future of Productivity,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, available at https://
doi.org/10.1787/9789264248533-en

===== PDF_PAGE 154 =====
152 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
OECD (2009) Competition Policy,
Industrial Policy and National
Champions, Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
available at http://www.oecd.org/daf/
competition/44548025.pdf
Phillips, G. and A. Zhdanov (2012) ‘R&D
and the Incentives from Merger and
Acquisition Activity’ , Review of Financial
Studies 26(1): 34-78, available at https://
doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhs109
Rodrik, D. and C. Sabel (2019)
‘Building a Good Jobs Economy’ ,
Harvard Kennedy School Faculty
Research Working Paper RWP20-
001, available at https://scholarship.
law.columbia.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=3612&context=faculty_
scholarship
Rubin, E., I.M.L. Azevedo, P . Jaramillo and
S. Yeh (2015) ‘ A review of learning rates
for electricity supply technologies’ , Energy
Policy 86: 198-218, available at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2015.06.011
Shapiro, C. (2019) ‘Protecting
Competition in the American Economy:
Merger Control, Tech Titans, Labor
Markets’ , Journal of Economic Perspectives
33(3): 69-93, available at https://doi.
org/10.1257/jep.33.3.69
Tinbergen, J. (1956) Economic Policy:
Principles and Design, North-Holland,
available at http://hdl.handle.
net/1765/16740
Weber, K. and H. Rohracher (2012)
‘Legitimizing research, technology and
innovation policies for transformative
change’ , Research Policy 41(6): 1037-1047,
available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
respol.2011.10.015

===== PDF_PAGE 155 =====
8 A more globally minded
 European green industrial
 policy
Ricardo Hausmann and Ketan Ahuja
“I want Europe to be the first climate neutral continent in the world by
2050, ” proclaimed Ursula von der Leyen, President of the European
Commission, in the context of discussions about the European Green
Deal in December 2019. The goal at the time sounded bold and inspir-
ing. To back it up, the European Commission announced ambitious
targets for 2030: a 55 percent emissions reduction from 1990 levels,
which corresponds to a 40 percent reduction from 2019 levels. To
achieve this, Europe is adopting a set of directives and policies, includ-
ing an expansion of its carbon trading mechanism to include air and
shipping transport, and the adoption of the Carbon Border Adjustment
Mechanism (CBAM). In addition, in the context of the recovery from
COVID-19, it is putting on the table €750 billion (€360 billion in loans
and €390 billion in grants) in NextGenerationEU funds to support
decarbonisation and digitalisation processes.
If the plans are successful and all goals are achieved, the EU will have
reduced global emissions by 2050 by a paltry 9 percent. Obviously, this is
too little to do much to change the course of global warming.
Moreover, decarbonisation is only one half of Europe’s green indus-
trial policy equation. The other half, to “make sure that the future of
industry is made in Europe, ” featured prominently in Ursula von der
Leyen’s State of the Union speech in 2022 (Von der Leyen, 2022). In
Europe’s post-COVID-19 economy, wracked by supply-chain disrup-
tion, strategic competition over critical minerals, and an uncomfortable

===== PDF_PAGE 156 =====
154 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
dependence on Russian oil and gas and Chinese solar panels, it is easy
to see where von der Leyen is coming from. Europe’s policy prescrip-
tions though – to mine its own minerals and make its own green hydro-
gen and solar panels – are harder to understand.
Both of Europe’s goals suffer from the wrong framing, because
they neglect the global dimensions of global warming and the future
of industry. On decarbonisation, Europe’s goal must obviously be to
reduce global emissions. Reducing Europe’s emissions to zero does very
little, unless Europe can bring the other 91 percent of emissions along
with it. On the future of industry, Europe’s goal should be first to maxim-
ise the global value of the clean economy, and then to claim as much as
it can.
To be fair, many of the current European policies and policy pro-
posals are sensitive to the international dimension. Europe’s CBAM
attempts to create a level playing field that applies the same price to
carbon emissions embodied in industrial production, whether they
take place domestically or abroad46. Similarly, the proposed Critical
Raw Materials Club appears to aim in part at developing critical min-
eral supply chains and deposits around the world, and the Green
Deal Industrial Plan affirms a commitment to open trade in principle
(European Commission, 2023).
But ‘Europe First’ policy goals – decarbonising the European conti-
nent and making what Europe needs domestically – mean that Europe
might not consider valuable approaches and instruments because of
a lack of a framework to justify them. Here, we reframe the goals of
Europe to include these global dimensions, and draw out some of the
implications.
46 See European Commssion press release of 14 July 2021, ‘Carbon Border Adjustment
Mechanism: Questions and Answers’ , https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorn-
er/detail/en/qanda_21_3661.

===== PDF_PAGE 157 =====
155 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
The silent prologue to ‘Europe First’ goals
‘Europe First’ goals (to be the first net-zero continent and to make the
future of industry in Europe) suppose a set of unspoken assumptions
on how the whole will respond to its parts. We should bring these
assumptions into the light to see how realistic they are.
Europe aims to be the first net-zero continent. One implicit
assumption is that by promoting the technological innovations needed
to reduce emissions, it will bring the costs of clean technologies down
for everyone and hence accelerate global decarbonisation. Maybe,
but maybe not. Europe trying to decarbonise faster than the rest of the
world could increase the relative price of scarce resources including
lithium, copper and cobalt, and hence slow everyone else’s decarbon-
isation efforts. It might also cause Europe to try to do things in Europe
that can be more efficiently done elsewhere, such as capturing solar
and wind energy, and hence become uncompetitive and decline eco-
nomically, with uncertain effects on global emissions. Europe could
also end up protecting its domestic market in ways that may reduce
the incentives others have to decarbonise in order to meet Europe’s
emission standards.
By making the future of industry in Europe, Europe hopes to supply
the world with what it needs to make its own energy transition, and
thereby profit from the rest of the world as it attempts to decarbonise.
But it is equally likely that Europe’s industrial policy could be zero sum:
by attempting to localise supply chains domestically, Europe could
disrupt efficient allocation of capital, undermine economies of scale and
needlessly transfer wealth to shareholders of companies by engaging in
subsidy races with other industrial nations.
For a guide on how to make industrial policy zero sum, Europe just
needs to look across the Atlantic. In late 2017, Amazon announced it
would create a second headquarters somewhere on the North American
continent. Over 200 municipal economic development agencies across
the US lined up to lavish tax breaks, subsidies and funding on one of the
world’s largest companies in the hopes of attracting its 50,000 workers.

===== PDF_PAGE 158 =====
156 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
More than a year later, Amazon selected Washington DC and New York
(its presumptive frontrunners from the start), having extracted offers of
over a billion dollars in state funds for its shareholders. Getting drawn
too far into a subsidy race with Europe’s strategic competitors to localise
clean industries could have the same effect.
All of this is to say that the general equilibrium effects of a ‘Europe
First’ industrial policy are opaque. Green industrial policy in Europe
takes place under conditions of fundamental uncertainty: not only are
there obvious uncertainties over which technologies are likely to win in
the search for a cleaner future, but there are also many degrees of free-
dom on how the world might respond to Europe First efforts, making it
hard to know whether they will really benefit Europe. Better to start with
the right goals: to reduce global emissions, and to maximise the global
clean economy (while claiming as much of it as Europe can).
What is industrial policy?
Part of Europe’s challenge is that it is not always clear what industrial
policy means. Economists have long questioned whether industrial
policy should exist at all. As the traditional argument goes, govern-
ments should not pick winners: they should let the market allocate
resources across industries to reflect consumer preferences and
technological possibilities. Governments rarely have superior informa-
tion to justify interfering in the market, and even when they do, they
shouldn’t make matters worse by adding government failures (such as
rent seeking) onto market failures.
But before there can be market regulation, there must be a market.
A cardinal function of government is to co-create markets alongside
changing technology and social relations. Industrial policy is about
creating the ingredients needed for an industry to thrive in the first
place: the focus is on the rich web of (often vertical-specific) public
goods that modern industries need. Cars require roads, traffic lights,
rules and cops. Air travel requires airports, air traffic controllers, safety
regulations, overflight rights and visas. Electricity systems require

===== PDF_PAGE 159 =====
157 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
standardised voltage and frequency. In other words, every technology
presumes a set of public goods that are relatively specific and that
need to be provided for an industry to thrive. This may involve creating
product standards for market players to adhere to, inspecting product
safety and quality so customers have the confidence to buy, adapting
infrastructure to product needs, training the workers industries will
require, and coordinating research ecosystems, companies and inves-
tors around particular technology or industry roadmaps. Governments
need to engage deeply with industry to supply the public goods
needed for industries to take off.
Industrial policy can also involve internalising learning external-
ities, solving coordination problems and de-risking private invest-
ment. Without intervention, market outcomes in these cases may be
inefficient because the incentives faced by certain activities are weak
relative to the benefits that society may obtain from them. This is the
general case in favour of subsidies. R&D subsidies may compensate
for learning externalities. Advance market commitments may solve
coordination problems. Grants de-risk investment. But over-empha-
sising subsidies may shift the focus away from the public goods that
industries need in order to thrive.
Industrial policy’s cardinal rule is never to stray too far from an
industry’s inherent economics, or a region’s underlying compara-
tive advantage, while helping to accumulate the capabilities needed
to evolve that comparative advantage in purposeful directions. Put
differently, industrial policy can do many things, from promoting good
jobs, to reviving the Rust Belt, to bringing production home, so long as
it does not try to step beyond what is economically possible given the
state of technology, or a region’s production costs relative to those of
its competitors. States that do so at scale risk grave public waste and
self-defeating policies.
China knows this only too well. Chinese industrial policy is cur-
rently the envy of the western world, which admires, loathes, fears and
attempts to emulate it all at the same time. But three generations ago, in

===== PDF_PAGE 160 =====
158 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
an attempt to wean itself off imported steel and develop its hinterlands,
China planned a ‘Great Leap Forward’ consisting of small-scale back-
yard steel furnaces that waged misguided war against the technology
and economics of large-scale modern steel production. This is not, of
course, to compare Europe’s highly considered green industrial policy
with China’s tragic decision. But efforts by many developed countries
with high labour costs to recreate relatively small-scale domestic solar
manufacturing industries may not, ultimately, be any more successful.
A framework for green growth
A rigorous framework for green growth in Europe starts with the obser-
vation that Europe can best pursue its dual economic and environ-
mental goals not by focusing only on decarbonising its own economy,
but on helping the world decarbonise. This involves helping the world
produce the goods and services it needs to decarbonise, wherever they
can most efficiently be produced.
A seismic shift in comparative advantage will take place as local
energy resources start to matter in the production of energy-inten-
sive industrial commodities again. Throughout the history of human
civilisation, industry has been located close to sources of energy. This
changed in the twentieth century, as cheap-to-transport fossil fuels
made it possible for energy-intensive industrial production to take
place pretty much anywhere.
But decarbonisation implies a move from cheap-to-transport fossil
fuels to green sources of energy – sun, wind, hydro and geothermal –
that are unevenly distributed and very hard to move. A megawatt of
solar energy costs a small fraction of what it takes to transform it into
green hydrogen or ammonia and ship it to Europe. Better use it where
it hits. The local availability of renewable energy will increasingly drive
an economy’s comparative advantage. Places rich in hard-to-trans-
port renewable power have a generational opportunity to produce the
energy-intensive building blocks of the world’s economy, including
fertilisers, steel, aluminum, chemicals and fuels.

===== PDF_PAGE 161 =====
159 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Europe’s green industrial policy should recognise and work with
this economic reality, rather than attempt to fight it. Europe is a large
net importer of energy: it lacks the renewable resources to engage in
zero-carbon energy-intensive industrial production. Producing basic
industrial commodities such as green hydrogen, steel or ammonia
with German sunshine and wind will be less efficient than doing it
with German knowhow and Namibian sun and wind.
None of this means that Germany needs to deindustrialise the
Mittelstand. Fortunately for Europe, energy costs matter less for more
complex forms of production that are further downstream from many
of the energy-intensive inputs. Energy costs make up a greater propor-
tion of the cost of raw aluminum than they do of the aluminum-en-
cased laptops on which we are writing this chapter. And increasing the
size of the global green economy will increase overall demand for the
green products and services in which Europe does have a comparative
advantage, such as carbon accounting services, engineering, procure-
ment, construction and complex electrical equipment.
Europe is already seeing these dynamics play out in the way that
surging natural gas prices have rendered sectors of European heavy
industry uncompetitive, from ammonia to steel to basic chemical pro-
duction. Natural gas is substantially more transportable than hydrogen
or renewable electricity, but much less so than oil. As a consequence,
the spot price of natural gas in the European market (TTF) is, at the
time of writing, some 20 times the price at Henry Hub, coming down
from much higher multiples. Definitely, the law of one price does not
apply to natural gas and it will apply much less to green hydrogen.
Trying to keep energy-intensive nodes of the value chain in Europe is
unlikely to succeed. Instead, these nodes should relocate to places that
are potentially more efficient in capturing green energy. Part of the
mechanism through which Europe will achieve net zero is by relocat-
ing – outside of Europe – production steps that can be more effectively
decarbonised elsewhere. European green industrial policy shouldn’t
try to fight this reality: it should instead plan an orderly transition

===== PDF_PAGE 162 =====
160 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
into the green industries of the future in which it is likely to retain or
enhance its comparative advantage.
This dynamic applies in the same way for manufacturing of
clean-energy technologies. Industry dynamics and Europe’s economic
structure give Europe an advantage in producing some clean-energy
technologies, but make it less well equipped to produce other technol-
ogies. Manufacturing of wind turbines and lithium batteries appears to
be easier to localise in high-wage industrial economies.
Other technologies such as solar panels exhibit extraordinary econ-
omies of scale and labour forms a relatively high share of total produc-
tion costs, meaning that it will always be most efficient to produce the
world’s solar panels in only a few places with low labour costs. The US
Department of Energy’s Solar Office has accordingly concluded that:
“to reestablish domestic solar manufacturing in the U.S., compa-
nies that produce and sell solar components will require finan-
cial support to offset the 30 – 40% higher cost of domestic solar
production… These tax credits should be enacted for at least a
decade… Renewal for some time thereafter… could be required to
maintain US competitiveness” (US Department of Energy, 2022).
Europe, it seems, should not follow the US’s lead and create large
subsidies for domestic production of solar panels. Doing so would
fight comparative advantage, rather than work with it.
Coordinate international value chains to maximise shared value
A globally-minded European green industrial policy would therefore
put production where it makes sense to put it, and only engage in
strategic competition over the parts of the value chain in which Europe
realistically has a comparative advantage.
How should Europe determine in which parts of the value chain
it could have a comparative advantage? Bottom-up technoeconomic
cost modelling is one approach widely used in firms and industrial

===== PDF_PAGE 163 =====
161 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
strategy offices. Another approach (that is less familiar to industrial
strategy offices) is to apply economic complexity analysis to emerging
clean supply chains (Hausmann et al, 2014). This enables researchers
to predict which industries might thrive in certain places based on
whether the industries are similar to existing activities that already
succeed in that place.
Where parts of clean value chains should be located abroad,
European industrial policy should coordinate with partner countries
to help build out these value chains. Europe’s ultimate aim, after all,
is to help the world decarbonise, not to bring its own emissions to
zero the fastest. To do so, it must create the infrastructure to scale the
building blocks of the clean economy wherever it makes sense to scale
them, whether these building blocks are critical minerals, green steel
or manufacturing supply chains.
Of course, this doesn’t mean that Europe should bankroll the green
transition for everyone else. European industrial policy should aim to
maximise the size of the clean economy, and take a fair share of it for
Europe. Crucially, Europe’s return depends on the total size of the pie,
not just on its share of the pie. Attempting to take too much of a green
value chain can be counterproductive. To understand this point, just
look at Bolivia’s lithium industry. Bolivia has the world’s largest lithium
reserves by some margin, but it produces no lithium: Bolivia’s mining
rules attempt to reserve such a high share of the industry profits for
Bolivians that they scare away foreign investors that have the capital
and knowhow to develop Bolivia’s lithium industry. Europe’s attempt
to make all possible things at home might replicate a similar ineffi-
ciency, but on the manufacturing front.
In addition, it may prevent others from decarbonising. The global
discussions in the context of the Paris Agreement and subsequent
Conference of the Parties meetings have focused on what will be done
to help finance the energy transition in developing countries, in order
to reduce their carbon footprints. These talks include, inter alia, setting
up the Global Environment Facility and the Clean Energy Finance

===== PDF_PAGE 164 =====
162 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Facility. But many developing countries are already severely over-in-
debted, both fiscally and externally, and adding more debt to their
books, even under soft terms, will crowd out other investment priori-
ties. Ultimately, foreign financing only postpones payment. In the end,
imports are paid with exports and if developing countries are not going
to have a role as exporters in the new green economy, they will not
be able to pay for the imports their economies will require. Helping
these countries leverage their advantages so they can become efficient
nodes in global green value chains is crucial to make sure that supply
is elastic to the growing global demand for decarbonisation. However,
all of the discussion of green development finance has been focused
on funding the decarbonisation of developing countries themselves,
not on helping them become important suppliers of the world’s decar-
bonisation needs.
Helping Europe’s partners to develop will also maximise Europe’s
economic returns, as it gives Europe’s trading partners the resources
they need to buy Europe’s green technologies. Merely providing credit
through development finance is not enough: it postpones the issue
until the bill has to be paid. Europe’s trading partners need revenues,
not debt: they can get these revenues if Europe helps localise appro-
priate parts of green production there.
Just as vested interests and industry’s political economy affects
Europe, it also affects Europe’s trading partners. In many developing
economies, such as South Africa and India, powerful political interests
sit behind the coal-based electricity system, and these forces resist the
transition to green energy and decarbonised production. A globally
minded industrial policy would develop economic constituencies and
political economic forces behind green industries in Europe’s trading
partners (to counterbalance fossil-fuel interests that resist change).
Seeding industries in these places around critical minerals, solar and
wind, green hydrogen, green steel and other green technologies with
European industrial policy would serve Europe’s goal of helping the
world decarbonise.

===== PDF_PAGE 165 =====
163 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
How should Europe earn a return from its industrial policy invest-
ments abroad? The answer to this lies in the recognition that every
business has three constituents: workers, shareholders and customers.
European workers can benefit if these industrial policy investments
abroad lead to demand for products and services produced in Europe,
for example through the design of projects, the sale of machinery and
the provision of technical assistance. European shareholders can benefit
when they earn a return on foreign direct investments through debt or
equity. And European customers can benefit when they secure the low-
est-cost sources of supply.
Flexibly and agnostically seeking to benefit the different constituents
of the European economy – workers, customers and shareholders – can
help inform how European industrial policy should address its thorniest
industries. These are industries for which domestic production is uneco-
nomical, where Europe is reliant on strategic adversaries for supply and
where industry dynamics lead to extreme concentration. These include
industries such as solar and also the energy-intensive segments of many
value chains.
Recognising that industrial policy can promote these three differ-
ent constituent groups can expand the parameter space for European
industrial policy, and thereby enable it to create better strategies. Europe
seems to be stuck: it shouldn’t localise production domestically when
doing so is uneconomic. At the same time, European energy security
demands that it can’t rely on China for its supply of solar panels, or try
to protect its industry from more efficient producers of hard-to-move
green energy. The solution is for Europe to channel its purchasing power
into developing a supply chain outside of China in regions with lower
labour or energy costs, and ideally with European participation in the
technology and shareholding of the new supply chain. European indus-
trial policy would thereby benefit European customers and sharehold-
ers, while recognising that European workers are better employed in
tasks other than low-skilled labour or energy-intensive manufacturing.

===== PDF_PAGE 166 =====
164 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Conclusion
Europe is in the process of aligning its considerable ingenuity, resources
and ambition behind a green industrial policy that pursues the wrong
goals: to become the first continent to decarbonise, and to build the
future of industry in Europe. The right goals for European green indus-
trial policy – to help the world decarbonise, and to maximise the value of
the clean economy, while claiming Europe’s share in it – are not far off.
But the differences are significant, not just nit-picking: a green industrial
policy framework that is more globally minded will be more adaptive,
nuanced and accommodating of the real tradeoffs that Europe must
confront.
Many proposals under the European green industrial policy umbrella
are sensitive to these global dimensions. But in its actual implementa-
tion, European green industrial policy may end up splitting the differ-
ence. Its Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism, for example, is seen
both as a protectionist measure to defend European heavy industry,
and an attempt to make global markets fairly price in carbon. Europe’s
REPowerEU plan aims to produce half of the EU’s hydrogen domesti-
cally and import half of it from abroad, which seems like a compromise
struck by policymakers keen to localise at least some production47.
Promising all things to all people with industrial policy may be smart
politics, but it is not smart economic strategy. Superior strategy involves
confronting real inconvenient tradeoffs, choosing between dearly held
goals, and letting go of good opportunities to pursue great ones. Baking
the binding restrictions of green industrial policy in a global setting into
European goals will make European green industrial policy stronger,
not weaker, and more likely to benefit Europe’s economy and the planet
overall.
47 See European Commission press release of 13 February 2023, ‘Commission sets
out rules for renewable hydrogen’ , https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/
detail/en/IP_23_594.

===== PDF_PAGE 167 =====
165 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
References
European Commission (2023) ‘ A Green
Deal Industrial Plan for the Net-Zero Age’ ,
COM(2023) 62 final, available at https://
eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52023DC0062
Hausmann, R., C.A. Hidalgo, S. Bustos,
M. Coscia, A. Simoes and M.A. Yildirim
(2014) The Atlas of Economic Complexity:
Mapping Paths to Prosperity, The
MIT Press, available at https://doi.
org/10.7551/mitpress/9647.001.0001
US Department of Energy (2022) Solar
Photovoltaics Supply Chain Deep Dive
Assessment, US Department of Energy
Response to Executive Order 14017,
‘ America’s Supply Chains’ , available at
https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/
files/2022-02/Solar%20Energy%20
Supply%20Chain%20Report%20-%20
Final.pdf
Von der Leyen, U. (2022) ‘2022 State of
the Union Address by President von
der Leyen’ , speech to the European
Parliament, 14 September, available
at https://ec.europa.eu/commission/
presscorner/detail/en/speech_22_5493

===== PDF_PAGE 168 =====
9 Europe’s green
 industrial policy
Simone T agliapietra, Cecilia Trasi and Reinhilde Veugelers
1 Introduction
The transition of economies from brown to green represents the major
socio-economic transformation of our time, often referred to as an
industrial revolution against a deadline. Never in history has tech-
nological development been so crucial to tackle a global common
good. The goal is clear: to facilitate a comprehensive decarbonisation
process to avoid the most dramatic impacts of global warming, while
simultaneously tackling the socio-economic issues that this transfor-
mation will unavoidably create.
With the European Green Deal, Europe has pledged to become
the first climate-neutral continent by 2050. To get there, the European
Union has committed to cut its greenhouse gas emissions by 55
percent by 2030 compared to 1990 and has also started to adopt the
necessary legislation – the so-called ‘Fit for 55’ package – to turn this
objective into reality (Tagliapietra and Veugelers, 2021).
But a strategy only based on climate targets and instruments would
fall short if firms and citizens fail to adjust or reject the adjustment. The
need to meet climate and environmental targets, while ensuring their
economic and social sustainability, requires a transformation that gen-
erates enough benefits to compensate the losers. This puts industrial
policy under the spotlight in the context of the European Green Deal’s
promise to be the EU’s new growth engine.
Europe’s focus on green industrial policy has gained momentum,
notably since the adoption by the United States in August 2022 of the

===== PDF_PAGE 169 =====
167 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Inflation Reduction Act (IRA). The IRA prompted fears of relocation of
European clean-tech industries to the US, attracted by a combination
of subsidies and protectionist local-content requirements. Regardless
of how reasonable these fears are, this new geoeconomic context poses
two challenges for Europe.
First, Europe is already lagging Asia and the US in the global race
for digital technologies. It cannot afford to give up its position in the
global race for clean technologies and miss out on the industrial
growth opportunities from the green transition.
Second, for overall competitiveness and growth, the European
economy is heavily reliant on carbon-intensive industries, such as the
automotive industry. These sectors will undergo significant restructur-
ing in the coming years, because of the transition to clean technologies
– to electric vehicles, for example. A green industrial policy is therefore
needed to ensure the success of the green transition and to help main-
tain and strengthen the EU’s socio-economic model. This is why the
EU has packaged the European Green Deal as its ‘growth strategy’ and
why it has reacted nervously to the IRA by proposing its own Net Zero
Industry Act (European Commission, 2023a).
In this chapter, we: i) outline a set of principles for an effective
green industrial policy in Europe; ii) provide an overview of Europe’s
ongoing green industrial policy measures; iii) set out recommenda-
tions to deliver a more effective green industrial policy in Europe.
2 Principles for an effective green industrial policy in Europe
Green industrial policy is unique. Instead of solely focusing on the
competitiveness of industries and companies, as is typical of tradi-
tional industrial policy, green industrial policy tackles the broader
societal challenges arising from global warming. This sets it apart from
climate-change policy, which usually has more narrow objectives
aimed at reducing carbon emissions.
Similar to standard industrial policy, the selection of tools and pro-
jects for green industrial policy should be based on where the private

===== PDF_PAGE 170 =====
168 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
and public returns from clean markets diverge the most. A green indus-
trial policy should be developed in coordination with the instruments
used for climate policy, and with industrial policy instruments more
generally. For example, carbon pricing is an important instrument in
the green industrial policy toolbox, which also includes subsidies, taxes,
targets, regulations, and standards.
Green technologies, often still emerging, are complex and uncertain.
Future uncertainty about climate and technology scenarios underlines
the importance of learning and information sharing, and thus exper-
imentation, risk taking, self-discovery on the market and industry-re-
search-policy collaborations to share risks, costs and information.
Clean technologies are also characterised by inflated costs or benefits
for those other than the producers (Martin and Verhoeven, 2022), if only
because of the variety of climate policies worldwide. This calls for a more
directed approach to supporting investments in clean technologies. In
addition, a clean-tech investment push is necessary to counter the lock-
ing-in of fossil fuel-based technologies and their path-dependencies.
The difficulty in profiting from green technologies, and in develop-
ing new low-carbon technologies, lies in the hidden support provided
to fossil-fuel products in different forms, from the absence of a carbon
price to explicit subsidies. These mechanisms can skew the market in
terms of production, technology adoption and innovation (Aghion et al,
2016; Aghion et al, 2019). The case for subsidising green technologies, in
this sense, is broader and stronger than the general case. Environment-
directed innovation policy. Needs to select ‘clean’ to address the greater
knowledge spillovers and lock-in problems. This still leaves the ques-
tions of whether and how to choose between ‘clean’ technologies, and
which winners to pick (eg focusing on individual clean technologies
such as batteries or hydrogen). When choosing between clean technol-
ogies, the principle of divergence between expected social and private
returns, and the greatest scope for reducing clean market failures,
should guide the decision-making process. Choosing between clean
technologies should also take into account the impact of any choice on

===== PDF_PAGE 171 =====
169 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
other non-selected clean technologies. This calls for a good mix between
vertical and horizontal instruments and putting time limits on support,
and emphasises the importance of ensuring fair competition (Aghion et
al, 2011).
The climate crisis requires urgent mitigation efforts and green indus-
trial policy is no exception. More than other areas of industrial policy,
the lack of risk-taking in clean-tech sectors can be particularly prob-
lematic overall. A green innovation policy portfolio with risks entails
acceptance that there will be failures. This makes experimentation a key
principle of green industrial policy, alongside close monitoring of the
effectiveness of experiments and adaptability.
Finally, by addressing broader societal concerns, green industrial
policy requires the involvement of a variety of stakeholders covering a
larger set of private-sector areas. Public-private partnerships ought to
be central in green innovation policy, much more than in climate policy
and standard industrial policy. The extent of the transformation brought
about by climate change means there is more need for the involvement
of, and support from, civil society than in other areas of industrial policy.
3 Designing green industrial policy
Most of the challenges for green industrial policy deal with practical
implementation rather than with theoretical justifications. This section
lists a set of principles for green industrial policy design that draws
especially on the insights of “new industrial policy” (Rodrik, 2014; see
also Tagliapietra and Veugelers, 2021).
When introducing his new industrial policy perspective, Rodrik
(2014) said industrial policy should be about institutionalised collab-
oration and dialogue between governments, the private sector and
civil society, spanning multiple sectors, technologies and value chains
(Figure 1), rather than about “who gets how much”.

===== PDF_PAGE 172 =====
170 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Figure 1: The new industrial policy approach as a process of institutionalised
collaboration and dialogue
Source: Bruegel based on Rodrik (2014).
To implement a new green industrial policy approach, it is impor-
tant for governments to work with the private sector and civil society
to identify constraints and opportunities, leveraging their knowledge
and capacities to generate solutions, while addressing issues such as
rent-seeking and political capture. This in turn requires accountability
and a balanced set of incentives and penalties, with coherent, meas-
urable and well-communicated targets to enable effective monitoring
and evaluation.
Co-financing should be used to support projects that accelerate
and consolidate existing scientific and industrial capacity, and new
projects at the frontier of technologies and markets along the entire
value chain, from research, development and diffusion, to manufac-
turing, distribution and sales.
Information problems and the elevated level of uncertainty can be
dealt with by viewing green industrial policy as a continuous learning
process through policy experimentation. To encourage risk-taking,
Policy
expertimentation,
accountability,
dynamic PPPs ...
Government
Civil societyPrivate sector

===== PDF_PAGE 173 =====
171 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
policy should include milestones and should be adapted depending
on lessons learned from regular monitoring and evaluation.
Finally, coordination between the many different stakeholders,
policy governance areas, instruments and projects will require strong
operational governance for successful green innovation policy.
4 An overview of Europe’s current green industrial policy
The EU sets the framework for green industrial policies throughout the
bloc through competition policy, trade policy, EU single market rules,
climate policy, research and innovation policy, EU public investment
and regional development policy. It has in place a wide range of policy
tools, including public funding for green research, development and
deployment of green technologies, green public procurement and
clean energy standards (Table 1). This section summarises the finan-
cial tools available at EU level to support clean-tech innovation and
deployment.

===== PDF_PAGE 174 =====
172 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
T able 1: Europe’s main green industrial policy tools
Innovation Deployment Framework conditions
EU level • Horizon Europe European
Research Council
• European Innovation
Council
• European Institute
of Innovation and
Technology
• European Alliances
• IPCEIs
• EU Innovation Fund
• European Investment Bank
• EU Cohesion Funds
• NextGenerationEU
• Single market rules
• Trade and investment policy
• Competition policy
• Environmental standards
• Climate policy
• Energy policy
• Development policy
National level Regional level • State aid
• Investment programmes
• Incentive programmes
• Public procurement rules
• Clean energy standards
• Energy policy
• Environmental standards
• Environmental taxation
Regional level Regional level • ‘Smart’ specialisation
strategies
• Regional investment budgets
• Implementation of EU
Cohesion policies
Regional regulations
 Source: Bruegel.

===== PDF_PAGE 175 =====
173 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
4.1 Innovation
Horizon Europe is the EU’s main funding programme for research and
innovation48. Its budget is €95.5 billion for 2021 to 2027, of which €5.4
billion comes from NextGenerationEU49. Among other things, it seeks to
tackle climate change and boost the competitiveness and growth of the
EU. Horizon Europe also has a strong focus on green technologies. The
programme defines a new partnership instrument, the Horizon Europe
Missions, to catalyse cross-sectoral investments to find solutions to press-
ing challenges for society. In September 2020, Mission Boards proposed
five Missions, of which four have a climate change/environment angle:
A Climate Resilient Europe; Mission Starfish 2030: Restore our Ocean
and Waters; 100 Climate-Neutral Cities by 2030 – by and for the citizens;
Caring for Soil is Caring for Life.
The European Research Council (ERC)50 was created in 2007 to fund
frontier research through grants. Since its creation, it has funded more
than 12,500 projects with an emphasis on early-stage researchers. The
overall ERC budget from 2021 to 2027 is more than €16 billion. While ERC
projects are selected for funding without thematic priorities, the research
undertaken by many ERC grantees generates knowledge in support of
the European Green Deal51.
The European Innovation Council (EIC)52 was created in 2017 to help
companies grow and expand beyond European borders. It has a budget
of €10.1 billion for 2021 to 2027. Money is provided to beneficiaries as
grants and/or as equity investment. The EIC is split into two branches:
the EIC Accelerator and the EIC Pathfinder. Although also a programme
funding bottom-up proposals without thematic priorities, the EIC is
48 See: https://research-and-innovation.ec.europa.eu/funding/funding-opportunities/
funding-programmes-and-open-calls/horizon-europe_en.
49 See: https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/recovery-plan-europe_en.
50 See: https://erc.europa.eu/about-erc/erc-glance.
51 See https://erc.europa.eu/projects-statistics/frontier-research-european-green-deal.
52 See: https://eic.ec.europa.eu/about-european-innovation-council_en.

===== PDF_PAGE 176 =====
174 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
strong in the areas of clean energy, clean mobility and smart buildings53.
The European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT)54 was cre-
ated in 2008. Its 2021 to 2027 budget is €2.9 billion from Horizon Europe.
The EIT supports the development of pan-European partnerships
between companies, research labs and universities, known as EIT
Innovation Communities (Knowledge and Innovation Communities –
KICs), which aim to find answers to global challenges. The EIT provides
grants with a varying funding rate according to the life cycle of the KICs.
Five out of the eight Communities at time of writing are strongly rele-
vant to green industrial policy: EIT Climate-KIC: Innovation for climate
action, EIT InnoEnergy, EIT Manufacturing, EIT Raw Materials and EIT
Urban Mobility.
4.2 Deployment
The EU Innovation Fund (IF) was established under the EU emissions
trading system (ETS) for the period 2021-2030 with at least 450 million
carbon allowances. Assuming a carbon price of €75 per tonne, the Fund
will provide around €38 billion of support over the period. Projects
supported by the fund are expected to be implemented in collaboration
with industry partners, research institutions and other stakeholders. As
of March 2023, 52 projects had been signed, for a total contribution by
the Fund of €2.94 billion: 58 percent of projects target energy-intensive
industries, 21 percent renewable energy, 17 percent energy storage and 4
percent carbon capture and storage.
Industrial Alliances are a tool to promote public-private partner-
ships with an increasingly leading role in regulating and directing funds
towards the strategic priorities identified by the European Commission.
The aim is to maximise the job, growth and investment potential of new
green technologies, and to prevent a technological dependence on
53 See https://eic.ec.europa.eu/news/green-deal-challenge-eic-supports-solu-
tions-2021-12-15_en.
54 See https://eit.europa.eu/.

===== PDF_PAGE 177 =====
175 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
EU competitors. In practice, these Alliances are a network of indus-
trial and innovation players (including SMEs), regional authorities,
national authorities, the European Commission and the European
Investment Bank. Out of the nine Industrial Alliances, at least three
cover clean technology industries (Box 1).
Box 1: EU Industrial Alliances in the clean-tech supply chain
Launched in 2017, the European Battery Alliance (EBA) initiative is intended
to support frontier innovation along the batteries value chain, from mining
and processing of raw materials, production of advanced chemical materials,
design of battery cells and modules and their integration into smart systems,
to the recycling and repurposing of used batteries. This includes providing
adequate training at EU and country level, re-skilling and upskilling, making
Europe attractive for world-class experts in the field, and supporting the sus-
tainability of EU battery cell manufacturing industry with the lowest environ-
mental footprint possible.
Launched in 2020, European Clean Hydrogen Alliance aims to foster the
deployment of hydrogen technologies up to 2030, bringing together renew-
able and low-carbon hydrogen production, demand in industry, mobility and
other sectors, and hydrogen transmission and distribution. The main target
is to reach a level of six gigawatts (GW) of clean hydrogen by 2024, and then
40 GW (EU) and 40 GW (non-EU) clean hydrogen by 2030. The Alliance covers
about 750 projects in six main thematic areas of intervention, from renewable
and low-carbon hydrogen production to industrial applications and energy.
Also launched in 2020, the European Raw Materials Alliance (ERMA)
focuses on securing access to resources deemed strategic for the devel-
opment of a green industrial value chain and on mobilising investment and
innovation in this area. Its creation is in line with the recommendations of
the Action Plan on Critical Raw Materials on reducing Europe’s dependency
on third countries, diversifying supply from both primary and secondary
sources and improving resource efficiency and circularity, while promoting
responsible sourcing worldwide.

===== PDF_PAGE 178 =====
176 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Important Projects of Common European Interest (IPCEI) were
introduced in 2014 in the context of a wider modernisation of state aid
rules to facilitate the disbursement of aid targeted at identified market
failures and objectives of common EU interest and considered the
least distortive (so-called ‘good aid’). To qualify for support under the
IPCEI framework, a project must: i) contribute to strategic EU objec-
tives; ii) involve several EU countries; iii) involve private financing by
the beneficiaries, iv) generate positive spill-over effects across the EU,
and v) be highly ambitious in terms of research and innovation. IPCEIs
thus seek to bring together knowledge, expertise, financial resources
and partners throughout the EU by supporting cross-border projects.
As of March 2023, the European Commission has approved state aid
in the context of five IPCEIs to support the development of a European
clean-tech industry (Table 2).

===== PDF_PAGE 179 =====
177 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
T able 2: IPCEIs in the EU
Industry Launch Description and objectives Countries Public
invest.
Private
invest.
Micro-
electronics 12/2018
(i) Energy efficient chips; (ii) Power
semiconductors; (iii) Smart sensors; (iv)
Advanced optical equipment; (v) Compound
materials.
DE (€820 million), IT (€524 million), FR (€355
million), UK (€48 million)
€1.75
billion
€6
billion
Batteries
12/2019
IPCEI Battery I - (i) Raw and advanced
materials; (ii) Cells and modules; (iii) Battery
systems; (iv) Repurposing, recycling, and
refining.
DE (€1250 m), FR (€960 m), IT (€570 million),
PL (€240 million), BE (€80 million), SE (€50
million), FI (€30 million)
€3.2
billion
€5
billion
01/2021 IPCEI Battery II - The project complements the
first IPCEI in the battery value chain. AT , BE, DE, EL, ES, FI, FR, HR, IT , PL, SK, SE €3.2
billion
€5
billion
Clean
Hydrogen
07/2022
IPCEI Hy2Tech - (i) the generation of hydrogen;
(ii) fuel cells; (iii) storage, transportation,
and distribution of hydrogen; (iv) end-users’
applications, especially mobility sector.
AT , BE, CZ, DE, DK, EE, ES, FI, FR, EL, IT , NL,
PL, PT , SK
€5.4
billion
€8.8
billion
09/2022
IPCEI Hy2Use - complements a “Hy2Tech".
The target is to build new electrolysis capacity
of approx. 3.5 GW equivalent to 340,000 tons of
renewable and low-carbon hydrogen per year.
AT , BE, DK, FI, FR, EL, ES, IT , NL, PL, PT , SK, SE €5.2
billion
€7
billion
09/2022
IPCEI Hy2Use - complements a “Hy2Tech".
The target is to build new electrolysis capacity
of approx. 3.5 GW equivalent to 340,000 tons of
renewable and low-carbon hydrogen per year.
AT , BE, DK, FI, FR, EL, ES, IT , NL, PL, PT , SK, SE €5.2
billion
€7
billion
Source: Bruegel.

===== PDF_PAGE 180 =====
178 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
The European Investment Bank (EIB) has positioned itself as the EU’s
“climate bank” since 2019. It adopted a new energy lending policy and
sustainability strategy based on three pillars: i) end of lending for fos-
sil-fuel projects from the end of 2021; ii) focus future financing on clean
energy innovation, energy efficiency and renewables; iii) unlock €1 tril-
lion of climate and environmentally sustainable investment in the decade
to 2030. In 2022, the EIB allocated around €17.5 billion to the transport
and industrial sectors. We estimate that €3.3 billion of this package was
targeted at clean technology projects. In addition, the EIB provided €10.4
billion to projects in the energy sector, out of which €4.4 billion went to
renewable energy-related projects. The EIB is also responsible for the
implementation of around 75 percent of the EU guarantees allocated to
the InvestEU programme. This is a tool with an EU budget guarantee of
€26.1 billion to promote private investments in priority areas, distributed
between four policy windows, including sustainable infrastructure (€9.9
billion) and research, innovation and digitisation (€6.6 billion).
Finally, it is worth mentioning that most state aid in the EU is paid
out by EU countries. This state aid requires approval by the European
Commission. In 2020, state aid approved for objectives related to envi-
ronmental protection, renewable energy and energy savings amounted
to €61.41 billion, with indications of levelling off compared to previous
years (European Commission, 2022a).The Commission issued guidelines
on state aid for climate, environmental protection and energy (CEEAG)
in January 2022, to implement the European Green Deal objective of
revising state aid rules to support a cost-effective and just transition to
climate neutrality (European Commission, 2022b).
EU countries also have access under the NextGenerationEU Recovery
and Resilience Facility (RRF) to loans and grants to support green invest-
ments, including for decarbonisation of industry and the strengthening
of clean-tech supply chains.
Nevertheless, despite all these elements of green innovation policy
at EU level, there remains a long way to go to achieve a green industrial
policy, as outlined in section 2. Notably, strong governance that can

===== PDF_PAGE 181 =====
179 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
ensure the consistency of green industrial policy is missing. Instead, the
EU green industrial policy strategy seems more like a scattered collection
of energy, climate, innovation and social policy initiatives, rather than a
coherent industrial policy framework.
5 Recommendations for a more effective green industrial policy in
Europe
The need to tackle climate change calls for a green industrial revolution.
A new policy-driven approach should be based on strong governance,
on formalised collaboration with the private sector and civil society, and
on development of solutions that combine public and private knowledge
and capacities. To design green industrial policy, a new industrial policy
perspective is helpful. This should have much broader multi-dimen-
sional objectives and should view policymaking as a process of partner-
ship between the public sector, the private sector and society, rather than
a top-down approach of allocating funds to a few winners.
The traditional EU strategy is not sufficient to turn the green transition
into an industrial opportunity. The EU faces challenges in coordinating
and achieving the necessary economies of scale because of the fragmen-
tation of tools and funding sources, and because of nationalistic indus-
trial policies. While some elements already reflect the new industrial
policy approach, such as provision of support for industrial ecosystems
encompassing all players operating in a value chain, much stronger
measures are required to develop an effective EU green industrial policy.
5.1 Governing public-private collaboration and dialogue
Given the inherent complexities of both green industrial policy and the
EU as policymaking machinery, strong governance is a prerequisite for
effective EU green industrial policy. Only a leadership that is competent,
independent and accountable to clear goals and milestones, and that
encourages risk-taking, can coordinate the progress of different gov-
ernment groups, which are each responsible for distinct parts of green
industrial policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 182 =====
180 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
5.2 Revamping EU-level subsidies for green innovation
While the EU should not copy the US IRA production subsidies, there
may be a case for more EU subsidies for green R&D, innovation and
early-stage deployment of next-generation green technologies, in
which EU companies could build globally competitive positions. There
may also be a case for building or maintaining within the EU minimum
levels of capacity in certain areas critical for the green transition, to
make the EU more resilient to natural or political shocks.
The EU should design such subsidies without harming the single
market’s level playing field. This justifies an EU-level approach, par-
ticularly for early-stage, high-risk projects, which are more vulnerable
to market and eco-system failures. There should be more reliance on
synergies, integration of knowledge spillovers, and cost and risk shar-
ing, rather than on national subsidies. Current schemes are bureau-
cratically heavy and end up mostly supporting a few large incumbent
firms that can propose and manage such projects, which typically
take place in the EU countries that have sufficiently deep pockets to
support them. While large firms can play anchor roles in such projects,
it is important to ensure that smaller players and radically new clean
eco-systems can find their place (Poitiers and Weil, 2022). Otherwise,
the IPCEI format may fail to pick ‘winning’ clean eco-systems or par-
ticularly disruptive new green technology solutions, proposed by new
young firms.
EU funding should also be deployed to improve EU strategic resil-
ience. This involves support for new technological solutions for critical
components that, without support, might make EU clean-tech produc-
tion vulnerable to supply chain disruption. The EU should, for exam-
ple, fund mission-oriented programmes to develop substitutes for
certain critical raw materials. For these new early-stage projects, the
EU approach should rely on an instrument other than IPCEIs. Novel
support models that provide grants in a relatively non-bureaucratic

===== PDF_PAGE 183 =====
181 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
way are crucial to unleash high risk/high return ideas55. Funding such
grants could be the main purpose of the EU Sovereignty Fund pro-
posed by the European Commission56.
New joint borrowing may not be needed to fund such EU initiatives.
As suggested by the European Commission (2023b), one option could be
to re-shuffle EU budget money. Another option could be to make use of
the additional grants that will be devoted to the new REPowerEU facil-
ity under the RRF , and to blend some of this money with EIB loans and
guarantees57.
Public funding can be more efficient when leveraging private invest-
ments in clean-tech public-private partnerships, with the size of the
multiplier depending on the framework conditions that shape the private
incentives for clean-tech investment. A green EU subsidy policy should
thus be accompanied by monitoring of the barriers private firms face
when investing in clean tech. These barriers can include lack of access to
finance, excessive regulatory burdens, lack of access to public (procure-
ment) and private markets, and lack of access to critical skills and com-
ponents. Unless these barriers are addressed, additional public funding
may not be as efficient. A further complementary policy instrument is
carbon pricing. The EU ETS remains the critical cornerstone of any net-
zero industry strategy.
5.3 Leveraging the single market as the most valuable tool
The single market is the EU’s most valuable tool for EU green indus-
trial policy. Single market rules can accelerate the roll-out of clean
55 See Tagliapietra and Veugelers (2021) on how to design such green subsidy pro-
grammes at EU level.
56 See European Commission press release of 15 September, 2022: https://ec.europa.
eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/statement_22_5543.
57 This will be financed through the frontloaded sale of emissions trading system
allowances (40 percent) and the resources of the Innovation Fund (60 percent).
The distribution of these extra resources will take into account cohesion policy, EU
countries’ dependence on fossil fuels and the increase in investment prices. See
Regulation (EU) 2023/435.

===== PDF_PAGE 184 =====
182 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
technologies by avoiding regulatory costs associated with fragmentation,
uncertainty, and bureaucracy. These include regulations that place time
limits for decisions at each stage of permitting procedures, a measure
that can accelerate developments in areas vital to decarbonisation, thus
enlarging clean-tech markets more quickly. For example, in December
2022, EU countries agreed a temporary emergency regulation to fast-
track permits for renewable energy infrastructure and grids (Council
Regulation (EU) 2022/2577).
Similarly, tighter European standards can foster global competitive-
ness by demonstrating marketability and attracting investment into firms
that comply with standards. One example, agreed by the EU in December
2022, is the introduction of stronger environmental sustainability
requirements for all batteries sold in the EU58. Another option could be
to develop regulatory sandboxes – frameworks for experimentation – to
push for quicker development of clean technologies and fast-tracking of
the necessary certifications required for placing them on the market59.
Coordinated use of procurement can provide a larger, more integrated
lead market for clean technologies. An efficient EU electricity market
design could help to lower energy costs structurally, also for clean-tech
manufacturers, with the related competitiveness benefits. Greater use of
green public procurement would be particularly important in sectors in
which public purchasers make up a large share of the market, including
transport and construction (Rodríguez Quintero et al, 2019). By introduc-
ing sustainability requirements for clean technologies (for instance, by
rewarding in tenders the use of electric cars that are produced to certain
sustainability criteria, or based on certain innovation or environmental
58 See European Parliament press release of 9 December 2022: https://www.europarl.
europa.eu/news/en/press-room/20221205IPR60614/batteries-deal-on-new-eu-
rules-for-design-production-and-waste-treatment.
59 Such schemes already exist in EU countries, notably in Germany (see https://
www.bmwk.de/Redaktion/EN/Dossier/regulatory-sandboxes.html). EU countries
endorsed regulatory sandboxes in November 2020; see Council conclusions of 16
November 2020: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/46822/st13026-en20.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 185 =====
183 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
features), the EU could prioritise the deployment of clean technologies
produced to European standards, without having any form of local con-
tent requirement60.
5.4 Skills
The speed of manufacturing and roll-out of clean technologies is corre-
lated closely with the simultaneous development of a qualified workforce
to implement clean projects. Ensuring enough skilled workers is of prime
importance for Europe, to avoid shortages and to ensure a prominent
level of productivity for its clean-tech industry. This also is a crucial item
when it comes to the just transition, as part of the workforce currently
employed in carbon-intensive sectors can be re-skilled and re-employed
in green-energy projects (IEA, 2022).
Recognising these factors, the EU has a European Skills Agenda
(European Commission, 2020) intended to help individuals and busi-
nesses develop more and better skills in these sectors. It has earmarked
sizeable funds to support worker training: the €61.5 billion European
Social Fund Plus (ESF+), and the Just Transition Fund (JTF) and the RFF .
The European Commission (2023a) has stressed that the EU and its
members can do more. For instance, as Europe seeks to develop pan-Eu-
ropean clean-tech supply chains, it would be efficient to have inte-
grated continuous monitoring at EU level of the supply of and demand
for green skills and jobs. The EU single market for clean skills could be
promoted by developing a Europe-wide strategy for clean-tech higher
qualifications, and by easing intra-EU mobility of talent, linked also to
Erasmus+ funding. Sector-level efforts should also be made through links
60 Environmental criteria in public procurement should be handled carefully, as they
might expose officials to lobbying and electioneering (for instance, to protect local
producers against competition; Blanchard et al, 2022). But this risk could be miti-
gated by using precise and easy-to-verify award criteria (eg CO2 emissions of cars or
carbon intensity of electricity) rather than imprecise and hard-to-verify criteria (eg
environmental criteria related to the suppliers). This requires a clear categorisation
of green criteria and adequate investment in the training of public authorities that
must apply them (Sapir et al, 2022).

===== PDF_PAGE 186 =====
184 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
to European industrial alliances. The establishment in February 2023
of a large-scale skills partnership for onshore renewable energy61 was a
welcome first step.
6 Conclusions
In early 2023, the European Commission published a Green Deal
Industrial Plan (European Commission, 2023a), intended to leverage
the single market and improve the competitiveness of Europe’s net-
zero industry. Its main plank was a proposal for a Net Zero Industry Act
(NZIA) that serves three main purposes.
First, it identifies the net-zero technologies deemed of strategic impor-
tance, including renewable energy technologies, batteries, electrolysers
and carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies. Second, it defines a
target for manufacturing capacity of at least 40 percent of the EU’s annual
deployment needs of these technologies by 2030. Third, it would estab-
lish a governance system resting on Net-Zero Strategic Projects (NZSPs)
identified by EU countries, and a regulatory framework to facilitate their
rapid implementation, including fast-track permitting and administra-
tive procedures, evaluation of public procurement procedures against a
‘sustainability and resilience’ criteria, and a streamlined process for EU
countries to grant aid to accelerate the green transition.
Yet, the design of the governance framework falls short. The NZIA
would still rely on the dispersed assemblage of policy tools and initi-
atives, instead of delivering a systematic green industrial policy. Even
more troubling is the how the proposed NZIA prioritises net-zero tech-
nology sovereignty and the pursuit of strategic autonomy over efficiency
and the imperative of global decarbonisation. The US IRA is a wake-up
call for the EU that a more coherent framework and public support is
required for the manufacturing and deployment of clean technologies.
However, rather than following the paths taken by others, the EU must
61 Under the Pact for Skills. See industriALL press release of 10 February 2023: https://
news.industriall-europe.eu/Article/860.

===== PDF_PAGE 187 =====
185 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
leverage its strengths to meet the challenge of the green industrial transi-
tion, particularly by boosting the single market.
Policies should aim to improve the attractiveness of the single market
as a location for green investment, with horizontal measures to enhance
market functioning and specific measures in support of clean technolo-
gies. Examples of these measures include better regulation, better green
procurement rules and EU-level financing to promote new or early-stage
clean tech, in which EU firms can achieve sustainable competitive posi-
tions. Finally, a stronger governance model is needed to ensure better
coordination and longer-term commitment.
References
Aghion, P ., J. Boulanger and E. Cohen
(2011) ‘Rethinking industrial policy’ ,
Policy Brief 2011/04, Bruegel, available at
https://www.bruegel.org/policy-brief/
rethinking-industrial-policy
Aghion, P ., A. Dechezleprêtre, D. Hemous,
R. Martin and J. van Reenen (2016) ‘Carbon
taxes, path dependency, and directed
technical change: Evidence from the auto
industry’ , Journal of Political Economy
124(3): 1-51
Aghion, P ., C. Hepburn, A. Teytelboym and
D. Zenghelis (2019) ‘Path dependence,
innovation and the economics of climate
change’ , in R. Fouquet (ed) Handbook on
green growth, Edward Elgar
Blanchard, O., C. Gollier and J. Tirole
(2022) ‘The Portfolio of Economic Policies
Needed to Fight Climate Change’ , PIIE
Working Paper 22-18, Peterson Institute
for International Economics, available
at https://www.piie.com/sites/default/
files/2022-11/wp22-18.pdf
European Commission (2020)
‘European Skills Agenda for sustainable
competitiveness, social fairness and
resilience’ , COM(2020)274
European Commission (2021) ‘Strategic
dependencies and capacities’ , Commission
Staff Working Document, SWD(2021 352
final
European Commission (2022a) State Aid
Scoreboard 2021, available at https://
competition-policy.ec.europa.eu/system/
files/2023-04/state_aid_scoreboard_
note_2021.pdf
European Commission (2022b)
‘Guidelines on State aid for climate,
environmental protection and energy
2022’ , 2022/C 80/01, available at https://
eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
HTML/?uri=CELEX:52022XC0218(03)
European Commission (2023a) ‘ A Green
Deal Industrial Plan for the Net-Zero Age’ ,
COM(2023) 62 final

===== PDF_PAGE 188 =====
186 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
European Commission. (2023b) ‘Proposal
for a regulation of the European Parliament
and of the Council on establishing a
framework of measures for strengthening
Europe’s net-zero technology products
manufacturing ecosystem (Net Zero
Industry Act)’ , COM(2023) 161
IEA (2021) The Role of Critical Minerals in
Clean Energy Transitions, International
Energy Agency, available at https://
www.iea.org/reports/the-role-of-critical-
minerals-in-clean-energy-transitions
IEA (2022) Skills development and
inclusivity for clean energy transition,
International Energy Agency, available
at https://www.iea.org/reports/skills-
development-and-inclusivity-for-clean-
energy-transitions
IEA (2023) Energy Technology Perspectives
2023, International Energy Agency,
available at https://www.iea.org/reports/
energy-technology-perspectives-2023
Rodríguez Quintero, R. C. Vidal-Abarca
Garrido, H. Moons, M. Gama Caldas, O.
Wolf, I. Skinner, A. van Grinsven, M. ‘t Hoen
and H. van Essen (2019) Revision of the
EU Green Public Procurement Criteria for
Transport, JRC Science for Policy Report,
European Commission Joint Research
Centre
Kleimann, D., N. Poitiers, A. Sapir, S.
Tagliapietra, N. Véron, R. Veugelers and J.
Zettelmeyer (2023) ‘How Europe should
answer the US Inflation Reduction Act’ ,
Policy Contribution 04/2023, Bruegel
Martin, R. And D. Verhoeven (2022)
‘Knowledge spillovers from clean and
emerging technologies in the UK’ , CEP
Discussion Paper CEPDP1834, Centre for
Economic Performance, London School of
Economics and Political Science
Mazzucato, M. (2013) The Entrepreneurial
State. Debunking Public vs. Private Sector
Myths, London: Anthem Press
Poitiers, N. And P . Weil (2022) ‘Opaque and
ill-defined: the problems with Europe’s
IPCEI subsidy framework’ , Bruegel Blog, 26
January, available at https://www.bruegel.
org/blog-post/opaque-and-illdefined-
problems-europes-ipcei-subsidy-
framework
Rodrik, D. (2014) ‘Green industrial policy’ ,
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 30(3):
469-491
Sapir, A., T . Schraepen and S. Tagliapietra
(2022) ‘Green Public Procurement: A
Neglected Tool in the European Green Deal
Toolbox?’ Intereconomics 57(3): 175-178,
available at https://link.springer.com/
content/pdf/10.1007/s10272-022-1044-7.
pdf
Tagliapietra, S. And R. Veugelers (2021)
‘Fostering the Industrial Component of
the European Green Deal: Key Principles
and Policy Options’ , Intereconomics
56(6): 305-310, available at https://www.
intereconomics.eu/contents/year/2021/
number/6/article/fostering-the-industrial-
component-ofthe-european-green-deal-
key-principles-and-policy-options.html

===== PDF_PAGE 189 =====
10 Smart green industrial policy
Ben McWilliams and Georg Zachmann
1 Industrial policy is back
Industrial policy is back in vogue. Governments worldwide are turning
to it as a way to promote economic growth as their economies transi-
tion to climate neutrality. With the Inflation Reduction Act, the United
States has sent a clear signal that it intends to pursue climate targets
through a strong industrial policy. The European Union focuses more
strongly on the use of carbon pricing, but is also responding with its
own Net Zero Industry Act, which seeks to protect and expand the
EU’s clean technology industrial output. Governments are assuming
a critical role through industrial policy in smoothly managing the
transition from a fossil-fuel to a low carbon energy system. Bordoff and
O’Sullivan (2022) predicted a wave of “government intervention in the
energy sector on a scale not seen in recent memory”.
But a European green industrial policy will not work only by
throwing more euros at the problem. If the state is to assume a more
dominant role in achieving decarbonisation and accelerating green
technology innovation and deployment, green policymaking must be
rethought. In this chapter we focus on the development of ‘smart green
industrial policy’ focussed on the regional aspect.
1.1 Towards ‘smart’ green industrial policy
This chapter discusses the targeting of green industrial policy at the
regional level. We argue that such targeting is essential for a govern-
ment to maximise returns.
The logic of our argument is as follows:

===== PDF_PAGE 190 =====
188 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
1. Governments wish to use industrial policy for the development of
priority low-carbon technologies (a policy decision that has already
been made).
2. Regions have unique technological, knowledge and institutional
capacities, and these are a crucial indicator of the ability of a region
to absorb new specific knowledge and innovate (widely document-
ed in literature).
3. It is possible to identify this comparative advantage at regional level
(documented in literature).
4. Desirable green technological capacities can be mapped against
existing comparative advantages by geography, allowing a pol-
icymaker to make positive, well-informed decisions about the
likelihood of regions being successful in developing a new green
technology.
5. By using the above, ‘smart’ green industrial policy should focus on
removing bottlenecks to allow regions to grow their comparative
advantage in the direction of new green technologies.
In section 2, we discuss a definition of green industrial policy
suitable for today’s political climate. In section 3, we provide a brief
overview of the fact that governments are today actively in the process
of selecting priority green technologies. In section 4, we provide the-
oretical and empirical evidence that regions have unique capabilities
and potential development pathways. In section 5, we discuss metrics
widely used in the literature for measuring these regional specialisa-
tion and comparative advantages. Existing energy factor inputs have
driven regional industrial specialisation, but the advent of zero-carbon
energy technologies will reshape the map, as we discuss in section 6.
Public policy should utilise the information discussed in sections 3 to
6 to better target regional industrial policy at alleviating broad growth
constraints that prevent development into nearby green technologies –
which is the focus of section 7.

===== PDF_PAGE 191 =====
189 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
2 Contemporary green industrial policy
2.1 Defining industrial policy
The main objective of industrial policy is to increase the welfare of the
population sustainably. This can be pursued by ensuring that a country
can generate high value added. That is, a country should try to export
many goods with a substantial mark-up on top of the initial production
cost. This only works if a country is very efficient at producing desirable
goods that competing exporters are unable/unwilling to offer more
cheaply to global markets. The country is then said to have some form of
market power. At the same time the welfare of the population depends
on the cost of imports. If essential import goods are monopolised by
certain exporters, the importing country’s terms of trade will deteriorate.
Hence, industrial policy is both about generating own market power
(eg supporting a highly efficient offshore wind industry) and breaking
foreign market power (eg setting up Airbus to rival Boeing).
2.2 Defining green industrial policy
A future-proof industrial policy almost inevitably needs to have strong
‘green’ elements. Investments in production processes that lock in
substantial carbon emissions are likely to become sunk, and the clusters
around those investments, including the human skills, will lose value.
Supporting this cannot be good industrial policy. By contrast, invest-
ments in low-carbon alternatives may be the first steps towards devel-
opment of sustainable comparative advantages in relatively new fields –
developing new skills that will see high demand in the future and pulling
entire new value chains.
This implies a race between countries to host the growing sectors of
the future. Using the revealed comparative advantage measure (RCA)62,
62 Revealed comparative advantage is a computed index used in economics to determine
the relative competitiveness of a country in a given class of goods or services. It is meas-
ured as the share of a class of goods or services in a country’s total exports. This share is
divided by the proportion of global exports of that class of goods or services.

===== PDF_PAGE 192 =====
190 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Figure 1 indicates that current strength in exporting certain low-carbon
products is strongly correlated to past strength. That means that devel-
oping competitive production and export advantages in new low-car-
bon products will provide a lasting advantage.
Figure 1: Correlation of the 2020 standardised RCA with the same technology’s
past standardised RCA
Source: Bruegel based on UN COMTRADE database. Notes: the chart shows the
correlation of RCA by country for each sector over time. Each data point shows the
correlation of RCA across countries for a given sector and given year compared to the
RCA by country in 2020 (the most recent data). All countries for which data is available
were included; the exact number of countries for each correlation depends on each
year/sector export data availability.
2.3 Goals for contemporary green industrial policy
2.3.1 Reducing greenhouse gas emissions
Traditional academic rationale for government support for the devel-
opment of green technologies comes from positive societal spillovers
that do not directly accrue into profit for investors or entrepreneurs.
The first reason for this is a form of late-mover advantage: while pio-
neer companies take on the risk of failure, some of the valuable side
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010
Solar
W ind
Batteries
Electric furnaces

===== PDF_PAGE 193 =====
191 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
effects, including proving commercial potential, spill over to competi-
tors. Second, falling costs of low-carbon technologies enable society to
embark on lower-cost pathways to decarbonisation – think, for exam-
ple, of government support in the early 2000s for solar PV and wind
deployment in Europe and the United States. Third, there remains
considerable uncertainty around carbon pricing and the extent of gov-
ernment commitment to climate targets (the Trump administration
pulled out of the Paris Climate Accord, for example). Investors do not
face a certain environment in which they can make green investments.
The final reason is that in many cases, export markets for low-carbon
products do not contain any serious climate policy, and hence pure
market forces would make EU green-tech producers underinvest in
low-carbon solutions (McWilliams and Zachmann, 2021).
2.3.2 As a growth strategy
In 2014, Rodrik proposed that the definition of green industrial
policy be limited to only this first goal: developing innovative tech-
nologies that have the potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
However, in the current political reality, green industrial policy
is also being seen explicitly as a vehicle for growth: the European
Green Deal, has been labelled “our new growth strategy” by
European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen, for example.
Domestic content requirements in the US Inflation Reduction Act
highlight the US administration’s focus on green industrial policy as
a vehicle to create domestic jobs. President Biden commented that
tax credits will “create thousands of good-paying jobs” 63.
2.3.3 To escape import dependencies
Finally, governments are also using green industrial policy as a politi-
cal lever to position their own countries more strategically in a future
63 See https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/08/04/
remarks-by-president-biden-in-roundtable-with-business-and-labor-leaders-on-
the-inflation-reduction-act/.

===== PDF_PAGE 194 =====
192 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
global energy order. The inevitability of the energy transition sees
governments evaluating the potential strategic dependences that may
emerge in future. Europe’s experience of rapid energy decoupling from
Russia in 2022, and the associated challenges, have strengthened the
resolve that energy systems should not be overly dependent on exter-
nal suppliers.
Consequently, a third aim for green industrial policy is identified
as contesting or breaking foreign market power. Rhetoric around the
US Inflation Reduction Act has clearly focused on competition with
China, which is perceived to have excessive power over supply chains
that will be critical in a decarbonised system, such as the production of
solar cells and lithium-ion batteries. The EU Net Zero Industry Act lays
out the context: “net-zero technologies are at the centre of strong geo-
strategic interests” , and the “global technology race” . The word ‘strategic’
occurs one and half times more often than ‘climate’ in the document,
and three times more than the word ‘carbon’ .
3 Identifying green sectors for intervention
Beginning in the early 2000s, governments provided substantial sup-
port for the deployment of solar photovoltaic and onshore and offshore
wind generation. Since then, there has been a clear government focus
on supporting specific green technologies. The European Commission
in July 2020 proposed a Hydrogen Strategy (European Commission,
2020), which was strengthened in 2022 to set fixed targets for 2030 for
the domestic production and import of low-carbon hydrogen. The
European Union operates an Innovation Fund that supports certain
technologies deemed eligible for support. A Battery Alliance was
launched in 2017, aiming to make Europe a global leader in sustainable
battery production and use. The draft Net Zero Industry Act now lays
out a range of technologies in which the EU aims to achieve 40 percent
production capacity relative to deployment by 2030.
Bringing down the cost of low-carbon technologies and thereby
enabling large-scale decarbonisation in the EU and beyond is the

===== PDF_PAGE 195 =====
193 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
most tangible benefit. But mastering the technology, creating new
production clusters and gaining a competitive edge in sectors that will
become very large global markets certainly contribute to the boldness
of interventions. Electric vehicles are expected to dominate the market
for new passenger vehicles in less than a decade; renewable power
generation investments are already larger than fossil-fuelled invest-
ments. For heating installations, energy-intensive industries and heavy
road, maritime and air transport, low-carbon alternatives will also
have to surpass the often technologically quite different incumbent
fossil technologies in the next decade.
This is a real new deal as some incumbent strength (eg in inter-
nal combustion engines) will quickly depreciate, making space for
entrepreneurial newcomers. As demand for these technologies might
initially outpace supply, substantial margins might be available.
Though comparative advantages in green technologies are not as
entrenched as those in many conventional technologies, the potential
to develop certain sectors is not distributed evenly between regions.
Desirable areas for development of green technologies can be mapped
against existing regional comparative advantages. A region’s existing
specialisations can be a predictor of future potential specialisation
(Bergamini and Zachmann, 2020).
A better understanding can thus be developed about the suitabil-
ity of particular regions to develop capacities in any given direction.
Such a strategy can build on academic demonstration, such as that by
Bergamini and Zachmann (2020). Hausmann et al (2021) presented
an empirical framework that allows policymakers to estimate potential
comparative advantage, including for industries not currently present
in a region.

===== PDF_PAGE 196 =====
194 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
BOX 1: Energy-intensive industries typically have low value-added
European energy prices have increased drastically since 2021. This has
put the spotlight on the relatively high share of energy-intensive sectors in
some European regions. This leads to the very uncomfortable policy question
of whether energy-intensive production should be defended, (in)directly
subsidising its energy use? For the most energy-intensive products this is
hard to justify if viewed only in terms of value added and jobs. A few European
sub-sectors require a lot of natural gas as a feedstock and/or energy to pro-
duce a product that has little value added as it is a globally traded commodity.
Mertens and Müller (2022) found that if Germany were to import products
with high gas intensity and import substitutability, industry could reduce gas
demand by 26 percent, while losing only 3 percent of final sales, and less in
value added. Hence, strong strategic reasons are needed to justify enabling
these sectors to use scarce energy (and thus drive up the energy price for all
other European industries) for these processes.
4 Regions are unique and this drives development
4.1 Conceptual consideration
Economic activity is distributed unevenly across geography. Different
regions have different industrial and institutional structures, different
educational, human and physical capital bases, and different access
to production factor inputs, such as primary energy. The result is that
agglomerations form, with similar firms co-locating in the same area,
enabling knowledge spillovers. Areas evolve to become specialised in
certain economic activities and develop location-specific advantages,
including in transportation and energy infrastructure, access to par-
ticularly skilled labour, knowledge spillovers and economies of scale.
Geographic regions develop comparative advantages in particular sec-
tors, which grow over time. These specialisations are best understood
at the regional, not national level. Consider Belgium, a small country,

===== PDF_PAGE 197 =====
195 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
but with diverging specialisations between its chemical industry in
Antwerp and automotive industry in Ghent and Brussels.
4.2 Uniqueness influences a region’s ability to absorb new knowledge
A firm’s ability to comprehend and absorb new knowledge is condi-
tional on its own knowledge base (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990). For a
given regional domain of knowledge and technical capacity, growth
paths are then biased toward economic activities related to the region’s
existing skill base. This is a result of regions being better able to absorb
new knowledge when it is more closely related to an existing domain.
Tacit – as opposed to codified – knowledge is particularly important as
it cannot be copied easily and is geographically restricted (Balland et
al, 2018). Where external knowledge is unrelated, the existing indus-
trial base will struggle to learn from it and develop economically.
Political attempts to impose knowledge or technological capacity that
is deemed strategically important, but unrelated to a given region,
has been described as attempting to build “cathedrals in the desert”
(Balland et al, 2018). Todtling and Trippl’s (2005) summary of litera-
ture showed that knowledge spillovers are often spatially bounded,
while knowledge spills over effectively only when complementarities
exist among sectors (Boschma and Iammarino, 2009).
4.3 Empirical evidence from the literature
Boschma and Gianelle (2014) summarised the empirical literature,
concluding that the ability to develop new growth paths is not equal
in all regions, while trade profiles tend to remain constant because of
increasing returns to scale and non-transferable tacit knowledge that
is accumulated over time. Bergamini and Zachmann (2020) com-
plemented this with regional patent data from the OECD to identify
technological clusters at NUTS-2 level in the EU. In a second step, the
authors used network proximity between existing technological base
and 14 innovative green technologies to estimate the potential advan-
tage regions may have in each tech.

===== PDF_PAGE 198 =====
196 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Hidalgo et al (2007) showed that countries expand their mixes of
exports around products in which they have already established a
comparative advantage. Neffke (2011) found that Swedish regions
diversify into industries that are related to their current portfolio of
industries, and that industries which leave the region are typically
located at the periphery of the existing technology portfolio.
On green technology specifically, Montresor and Quatraro (2020)
performed patent-based empirical analysis for 240 NUTS regions, to
show that relatedness to pre-existing knowledge makes a new green-
tech specialisation more probable. An important contribution is the
clarification that non-green tech specialisation is still important,
and perhaps even more so, for developing green tech capabilities. To
develop capacities for building hydrogen pipelines, it is helpful to have
existing skills building natural-gas pipelines.
Boschma and Iammarino (2009) related the import and export
structure of Italian provinces, to show that regions benefit particularly
from extra regional knowledge when that knowledge originates from
sectors that are related, but not too similar, to those present in the
region. If cognitive proximity is too close, nothing is learned.
Box 2: Problems with picking winners
The key problem of industrial policy is the risk of ‘picking winners’: governments
trying to decide in favour of which sectors/technologies/companies they are tilting
the playing field. It is already intrinsically difficult to beat the market (where equity
and finance providers should have a strong incentive to bet on the right horse). But
governments not only typically lack the resources to make good choices, they are
also politically more accountable to incumbent interests than to those unborn sectors
and jobs. Moreover (hidden) distributional motives to favour specific regions/stake-
holder groups over others can even inefficiently bias ‘horizontal industrial policies’.
Following intervention, there is a risk of evaluating support given to incumbents
overly positively, as the high indirect cost of withholding resources (skilled people,
energy, finance) from new sectors is not properly accounted for.

===== PDF_PAGE 199 =====
197 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
5 Identifying regional comparative advantage
Regions typically do not become active in all industrial sectors at
once. They specialise in several sectors in which they are particularly
successful. Thereby, sectoral success in a region is driven by a complex
combination of local knowledge, specific human capital, infrastruc-
ture, geography, input factor cost/availability, economic, industrial
and institutional organisation. Some of these factors are relatively
rigid, some are endogenous to past development and some can be
shaped by policy. The combination of these factors can be said to
determine a region’s comparative advantage64. Every region, by defini-
tion, has a comparative advantage. It is a challenge to identify in which
sectors this not directly observable advantage lies.
Bottom-up approaches mapping out specific regional factor
endowments (eg based on regional labour surveys, energy cost and
infrastructure statistics, etc) are possible. But as so many drivers
determine a comparative advantage in a specific sector, and some
factors are rather difficult to measure directly (and in an internation-
ally comparable way), reliable bottom-up approaches are extremely
challenging.
An alternative and/or complement is indirect approaches based on
current outputs, rather than available inputs. Here, identifying com-
parative advantages can be approached empirically, in two steps:
1. Identifying the economic activities, and innovation efforts, current-
ly present in a region;
2. Using known technological and knowledge linkages to project
potential future specialisation.
64 The ability of a firm, region or country to produce a particular good or service at a
lower opportunity cost than competitors. Opportunity cost is key to comparative
rather than absolute advantage, and the idea that every economic actor in a system
has comparative advantage at producing something.

===== PDF_PAGE 200 =====
198 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
5.1 Identifying current regional specialisation
Where market data is available, a typical step for translating this into
comparative advantage is assessing export and import structure. The
logic is that trade brings a region into direct competition with neighbour-
ing and competitors further afield. Therefore, if a region is particularly
successful at exporting a particular good, it is likely to be competitive in
that sector. Export data has often been used to map national compara-
tive advantage (eg by calculating the Balassa (1965) revealed compar-
ative advantage index), for example by Hidalgo (2007), Boschma and
Iammarino (2009), Zachmann (2016) and Hausmann (2021). However,
trade data is typically not available at regional level65 and so alternative
indicators should be used to explore current regional specialisation.
Identifying current economic activities present in a region is relatively
straightforward. For Europe, regional economic data is widely available
for industrial output, employment, production and value added, but
much of the data has only a (very) limited sectoral/product resolution. To
have not only regional, but also sectoral and temporal granularity, more
indirect sources might be needed.
Regional specialisation can be explored using labour-market data.
For example, text mining of job vacancy descriptions and using arti-
ficial intelligence methods to develop up-to-date classifications can
offer granular insights into regional specialisation trends (even slightly
forward-looking).
Patent data is another source of information. A patent offers legal
protection for new and innovative products or processes. Such data
therefore can provide a very granular indication of technological and
scientific data on a sectoral basis (see for example, Bergamini and
Zachmann, 2020; Montresor and Quatraro, 2020). Data is publicly
available for very specific locations and narrowly defined technological
65 Customs data might be in principle available at the zip-code level – but we have not
seen them made accessible to research.

===== PDF_PAGE 201 =====
199 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
domains. Making them comparable internationally is not easy66, but
using relative frequency of technologies in specific regions gives an indi-
cation of a region’s specialisation.
5.2 Exploiting linkages between sectors
Consistent with Hidalgo and Hausmann (2009), we can view the product
space as a representation of the underlying economic factors that influ-
ence competitiveness. If a region specialises in producing semi-con-
ductors, condensers and photovoltaic cells, this indicates the presence
of economic factors that are conducive for such activities. There are rel-
atively strong (and typically intuitive) linkages between specialisations.
Turning this around, a region that specialises in a certain sector indi-
cates that certain economic conditions are present, which also increase
the likelihood of successfully specialising in related economic activities.
For export data, establishing the links between specialisations can be
done relatively directly by exploiting the coincidence of revealed com-
parative advantages, eg through correlation or some regression analysis.
Boschma and Gianelle (2014) proposed that relatedness between indus-
tries can be measured in different ways, including: industry classifica-
tion codes, co-occurrence of products, input-output linkages and the
intensity of labour reallocations between industries. As patent data clas-
sifications are much more granular and patents typically have more
than one classification, Zachmann (2016) used the relative frequency
with which two industry codes appear for the same patent to establish
linkages between specialisations.
Building on the above, one approach to identify regional poten-
tial is to use predictive algorithms trained with historical data. That
is, current specialisation on a regional level is regressed on past
66 Patents are still not a perfect indicator of innovative activity. They measure only
specific steps in the innovation process, and only apply in case entrepreneurs do
apply for legal protection. Their quality can vary significantly, with some sectors,
such as photovoltaic cells, being characterised by wider patent categories than
others (Zachmann, 2016).

===== PDF_PAGE 202 =====
200 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
specialisation in the corresponding product space. The obtained coef-
ficients allow extrapolation for any region of which technologies are
more or less likely to emerge, based on past specialisation trends.
Box 3: From official statistics to big data
Pre-defined industrial and geographical classifications will not necessarily
map well to a dynamic reality. For example, the ‘Modifiable Areal Unit Problem’
refers to the fact that clustering does not always take place at the geographic
scale of available data (eg NUTS-2), and working at inappropriate scales can
distort results. Second, industrial classifications are backward-looking and
may constrain understanding of emergent sectors, including low-carbon tech
applications, which may sit across multiple industries. Stich et al (2023) cited
the fact that the NACE classification is over a decade old.
Recent, innovative attempts in the literature have been made to utilise big
data and web scraping techniques for better identification of regional clusters.
Stich et al (2023) scraped a dataset of archived webpages, which they inter-
rogated using natural language processing techniques, to build a bottom-up
classification of economic activities, alongside physical trading addresses
that businesses report on their websites. They argued that their novel meth-
odology can overcome traditional limitations, and successfully applied the
methodology to the postcode region of Shoreditch, London. Papagiannidis et
al (2017) applied a big-data mining methodology to identify regional clusters,
applied to the northeast of England.
Making approaches based on very granular big data productive for indus-
trial policy-making should allow for better targeting.

===== PDF_PAGE 203 =====
201 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
5.3 Interacting with industry
Finally, for all the quantitative and innovative analysis, having people
on the ground engaging with local stakeholders will remain fundamen-
tal for regional policymakers to understand community specialisations
and needs. In seminal work, Rodrik (2014) argued that the state should
build on knowledge that resides in the private sector, in a pragmatic way.
This requires significant communication between public and private
sectors, with the state embedded but not ‘in bed’ with private interests
(Tagliapietra and Veugelers, 2020). The challenge is for forums to be
established in which policymakers can learn from entrepreneurs, but not
fall prey to lobbying attempts and vested interests when designing policy.
6 The new energy map: evolving factors of production
Regions have unique comparative advantages, and empirical methods
can reliably identify these. Maps of least resistance can be designed
which plot the likely ability of any region to diversify into a desirable
green technology.
One specific extension must be added to include the evolution of
energy as a relative input cost. Europe’s existing heavy industrial base
has developed on the back of location-specific access to cheap fossil
fuel-based energy. Bridge et al (2013) found that Europe’s geographical
pattern of industrialisation “closely coincided with the geological distri-
bution of coal beneath the ground”.

===== PDF_PAGE 204 =====
202 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Figure 2: Historically, ferrous metal facilities were built close to coal deposits
Source: Bruegel and Alves Dias et al (2018).
The energy transition implies that access to cheap fossil-fuel
energy will no longer be a relevant factor for locational decisions.
Instead, access to cheap, low-carbon energy will become important.
McWilliams and Zachmann (2021) used the following framework to
evaluate the extent to which the low-carbon evolution will change
economic geographies, comprising three elements:
1. Location-specific differences in the cost of capturing clean energy;
2. The technological ability to cheaply transport this energy;
3. Existing ‘sticky’ agglomeration effects where investments, and poli-
cy support are drawn to existing capital and human investments.
Consequently, maps of least resistance must be adapted to include
information about anticipated access to cheap, green energy, and
the impact this will have on future competitiveness. The necessity
of energy transformation can be considered an exogenous shock to
a region’s initial endowment. All else being equal, it will impact the
Ferrous metal plants
Coal mines

===== PDF_PAGE 205 =====
203 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
comparative advantage and subsequent innovative capacity of a
region.
Geography and endowments of renewable capacities (wind, sun,
flowing water) are important, but government policy will also be
heavily influential. Local regulations concerning land availability are
fundamentally important for factor (1): costs of capturing clean energy.
Policymakers play a central role in infrastructure development of elec-
tricity grids, and potentially hydrogen grids, which determine factor
(2): the ability to cheaply transport energy to a given region. Policy may
also choose to artificially reduce energy input costs through prefer-
ential industry tariffs or by flattening electricity costs across a country
irrespective of location.
Existing and proven approaches can and should be used by policy-
makers to produce detailed comparative advantage maps. Onto this,
desirable innovations can be contrasted against existing comparative
advantage, as along with information on low-carbon energy input
costs. Ideally, the industrial classification for calculating this compar-
ative advantage should adapt over time as new low-carbon industrial
processes develop that will not necessarily fit neatly into existing clas-
sifications. The use of more than one classification based on different
techniques can provide a more holistic picture. The first steps toward
such an approach have been undertaken by European governments
under the Research and Innovation Strategies for Smart Specialisation
(RIS3), as part of EU Cohesion Policy (Gianelle et al, 2020a), including
initial priority visualisation67.
Such information could be used as a tool for regional bottom-up
approaches to identify relevant sectors to approach, and for national
top-down approaches through which the most suitable regions are
identified for supporting priority technologies.
67 See https://s3platform.jrc.ec.europa.eu/digital-innovation-hubs-tool.

===== PDF_PAGE 206 =====
204 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
7 ‘Smart’ green industrial policy
7.1 One size-fits-all is not suitable
The primary consequence of regional uniqueness is that a one-size-
fits-all industrial policy is not appropriate and should rather be
tailored to regional needs. This follows from the fact that the leveraging
of structural economic factors that are typically considered to drive
growth will have different impacts in different areas. What matters for
regional economic growth is the interaction of structural factors, not
simply their aggregate volume (Zachmann, 2012).
7.2 Truly horizontal industrial policy is impossible
A regional economy cannot reach ‘critical mass’ in every domain, but
must specialise. A local government cannot achieve all the specific
capacities and infrastructure needed for all economic activity, so
must specialise (Foray, 2017). Moreover, truly horizontal industrial
policy is impossible. Each unique economic activity requires a set of
specific inputs for success, many of which are influenced by public
intervention. Public intervention, by definition, therefore, will not be
neutral, but will have different impacts on different industrial bases
(Hausmann and Rodrik, 2006). With information on regional compara-
tive advantage, industrial policy can be tailored to put in place specific
support that will best grow local knowledge.
7.3 Geographically targeted ‘green bets’
Governments do not, and cannot, ‘pick winners’ . Instead, green
industrial policy is built on the principle of making informed ‘green
bets’ , which at the individual level may or may not turn out profitable.
What is desirable is that the aggregation of these green bets creates a
portfolio which generates positive societal return. The public nature
of industrial policy means intervention is centred on areas that lack
private investment due to the largely socially externalised returns
involved (see section 1).

===== PDF_PAGE 207 =====
205 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
To this understanding, smart green industrial policy adds the
notion that policymakers target ‘green bets’ geographically. After the
smart gambler picks a horse, he walks the length of the track to find
the bookmaker offering the best odds on his choice. In similar fash-
ion, when making green bets, governments should scour the range of
geographically specific comparative advantages, to find the best odds
of success. Alternatively, regional governments operating within a
given comparative advantage should optimise public intervention to
leverage domestic capacities.
7.4 Removing specific bottlenecks
Based on an evaluation of a regions comparative advantage, poli-
cymakers should look to remove and address bottlenecks that are
slowing evolution into nearby green technologies. This does not entail
simply providing subsidies to incumbent firms, which should only be a
last-resort policy measure.
Instead, the goal for industrial policy is to facilitate organic growth
toward green, innovative sectors. With defined technologies in mind,
policies attempt to use industrial policy measures to smoothe the
transition of industries and knowledge into said areas. This should be
focused on bottlenecks that have public-good characteristics, which
individual companies cannot solve, such as the provision of infrastruc-
ture. Regulatory measures, public spending on R&D, specific curricula
at universities and colleges, public-private partnerships, support for
commercialisation of research ideas, specific training of local work-
forces and encouragement of knowledge exchange between similar
regions, can all be tailored to fit this design.
It is a challenge to identify bottlenecks that hold up development
of individual technologies in certain regions. It is another challenge to
implement smart policies to alleviate these bottlenecks. Smart special-
isation has been a target for EU Cohesion Policy since 2014. In their
review, Gianelle et al (2020a) concluded that regions put significant
effort into defining priority areas for development, but then did not

===== PDF_PAGE 208 =====
206 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
use this information to orient policy implementation. That is quite
possibly because regional authorities lack the capacity, and know-how
to do so. Bergamini and Zachmann (2020) provided a first step in this
regard by empirically associating a variety of economic indicators with
regional specialisation. Determining causality is an area for future
policy-relevant academic research.
One temptation will be to subsidise an individual factor input
cost. For example, policy could design industrial tariffs for electric-
ity prices that provide lower prices for industries in a certain region.
Governments might also consider subsidising the imports of new
green fuels, such as hydrogen toward existing hubs. This approach only
creates artificial specialisations in a region, dependent on government
support, and are therefore not desirable. They will likely be driven for
political reasons and are hence at risk of rent seeking. In cases where
policymakers want to use such a tool, they should be explicitly limited
in time.
7.5 Policy learning
The decision to embark on a revolutionary industrial policy pro-
gramme of green technology development, that will reach into the
billions of euros, must be accompanied by a rethink of, and improve-
ments to, policy functioning. Significantly increased resources must
also be made available to the public sector for more efficient distribu-
tion of the increased funds.
Government analytical capabilities should be developed for
mapping out both regional comparative advantage, and maps of least
resistance. Gianelle et al (2020b) argued that this will require the estab-
lishment of stable and accountable policy teams at the regional level,
which are not vulnerable to political cycles, but accountable for the
implementation of smart green industrial policy design.
The innovative and experimental nature of smart green industrial
policy means active learning is important. Failures can be celebrated,
but the public sector must learn from them. Built-in ex-ante and

===== PDF_PAGE 209 =====
207 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
ex-post evaluation of policy is key. Each intervention should be accom-
panied by clear guidelines that will be used to evaluate its success at
predefined time periods.
8 Conclusion
Industrial policy is set to play a critical role in the decarbonisation
efforts of the next decade, providing billions of euros in public support.
The challenge of stimulating innovative green technological develop-
ment, whilst boosting domestic growth and reducing strategic import
dependences, is significant. It is imperative that the public sector
develops better competences for more efficient distribution of limited
funds.
In this chapter, we have focused on one element: the idea that
industrial policy should be focused on alleviating constraints, thus
allowing regional comparative advantages to flourish and grow into
nearby desirable green technologies. A wide literature base has shown
that regions have unique potential growth pathways, and emerging
analysis is demonstrating proven techniques for identifying these spe-
cialisations at decomposed granularities.
An area for future research remains the type of policy intervention
that can best alleviate bottlenecks at regional level. We warn against
firm-specific support, or artificially lowering the prices of certain
energy inputs. Instead, support should focus on removing bottlenecks
which have some public good nature, such as infrastructure provision.
The targeting of this support to regional specificities will ensure that
public support is efficient and provides the best chance for countries
to successfully develop competences in the green technologies of the
future.

===== PDF_PAGE 210 =====
208 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
References
Alves Dias, P ., K. Kanellopoulos, H.
Medarac, Z. Kapetaki E. Miranda-
Barbosa, R. Shortall ... E. Tzimas (2018)
‘EU coal regions: opportunities and
challenges ahead’ , JRC Science for Policy
Report, Joint Research Centre, European
Commission, available at http://dx.doi.
org/10.2760/064809
Balland, P-A., R. Boschma, J. Crespo and
D. Rigby (2018) ‘Smart specialisation
policy in the European Union:
relatedness, knowledge complexity, and
regional diversification’ , Regional Studies,
53(9): 1252-1268, available at https://doi.
org/10.1080/00343404.2018.1437900
Balassa, B. (1965) ‘Trade Liberalisation
and “Revealed” Comparative
Advantage’ , The Manchester School
33(2): 99-123, available at https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1467-9957.1965.tb00050.x
Bergamini, E. and G. Zachmann (2020)
‘Understanding the European Union’s
regional potential in low-carbon
technologies’ , Working Paper 07/2020,
Bruegel
Bordoff, J. and M. O’Sullivan (2022) ‘The
New Energy Order’ , Foreign Affairs, 7 June,
available at: https://www.foreignaffairs.
com/articles/energy/2022-06-07/
markets-new-energy-order
Boschma, R. and C. Gianelle (2014)
‘Regional Branching and Smart
Specialisation Policy’ , S3 Policy Brief Series
No. 06/2014, European Commission Joint
Research Centre
Boschma, R. and S. Iammarino (2009)
‘Related Variety, Trade Linkages, and
Regional Growth in Italy’ , Economic
Geography 85(3): 289-311
Bridge, G., S. Bouzarovski, M. Bradshaw
and N. Eyre (2013) ‘Geographies of energy
transition: Space, place and the low-
carbon economy’ , Energy Policy 53: 331-
340, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enpol.2012.10.066
Cohen, W.M. and D.A. Levinthal (1990)
‘ Absorptive capacity: New perspective on
learning and innovation’ , Administrative
Science Quarterly 35: 128–52
European Commission (2020) ‘ A
hydrogen strategy for a climate-neutral
Europe’ , COM(2020) 301 final
Foray, D. (2017) ‘The Economic
Fundamentals of Smart Specialisation
Strategies’ , in S. Radosevic, A. Curaj, R.
Gheorghiu, L. Andreescu and I. Wade
(eds) Advances in the Theory and Practice
of Smart Specialisation, Academic Press,
available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-804137-6.00002-4
Gianelle, C., F . Guzzo and K. Mieszkowski
(2020a)‘Smart Specialisation: what
gets lost in translation from concept to
practice?’ Regional Studies 54(10): 1377-
1388, available at https://doi.org/10.1080/
00343404.2019.1607970

===== PDF_PAGE 211 =====
209 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Gianelle, C., D. Kyriakou, P . McCann and
K. Morgan (2020b) ‘Smart Specialisation
on the move: reflections on six years of
implementation and prospects for the
future’ , Regional Studies 54(10): 1323-
1327, available at https://doi.org/10.1080/
00343404.2020.1817364
Hausmann, R. and D. Rodrik (2006)
‘Doomed to choose: Industrial policy as
predicament’ , Center for International
Development Blue Sky Conference Paper,
September
Hausmann, R., D. Stock and M. Yildirim
(2021) ‘Implied Comparative Advantage’ ,
Research Policy 51(8), available at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2020.104143
Hidalgo, C., B. Klinger, A-L. Barabási and
R. Hausmann (2007) ‘The Product Space
Conditions the Development of Nations’ ,
Science 317(5847): 482-487, available at
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/
science.1144581
Huberty, M. and G. Zachmann, (2011)
‘Green exports and the global product
space: Prospects for EU industrial policy’ ,
Working Paper 2011/07, Bruegel
McWilliams, B. and G. Zachmann (2021)
‘Commercialisation contracts: European
support for low-carbon technology
deployment’ , Policy Contribution 15/2021,
Bruegel
Mertens, M. and S. Müller (2022)
‘Wirtschaftliche Folgen Des
Gaspreisanstiegs Für Die Deutsche
Industrie’ , IWH Policy Notes 2/2022,
Leibniz-Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung
Halle, available at https://www.iwh-halle.
de/fileadmin/user_upload/publications/
iwh_policy_notes/iwh-pn_2022-02_de_
Gaspreisanstieg_Industrie.pdf
Montresor, S. and F . Quatraro (2020)
‘Green technologies and Smart
Specialisation Strategies: a European
patent-based analysis of the intertwining
of technological relatedness and key
enabling technologies’ , Regional Studies
54(10): 1354-1365, available at https://
www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/0
0343404.2019.1648784
Neffke, F ., M. Henning and R. Boschma
(2011) ‘How Do Regions Diversify over
Time? Industry Relatedness and the
Development of New Growth Paths in
Regions’ , Economic Geography 87(3):
237-265
Papagiannidis S., E. See-To, D.G.
Assimakopoulos and Y. Yang (2018)
‘Identifying industrial clusters with a
novel big-data methodology: Are SIC
codes (not) fit for purpose in the Internet
age?’ Computers & Operations Research,
98: 355–366, available at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cor.2017.06.010
Rodrik, D. (2014) ‘Green Industrial
Policy’ , Oxford Review of Economic Policy
30(3): 469-491, available at https://doi.
org/10.1093/oxrep/gru025

===== PDF_PAGE 212 =====
210 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Stich, C., E. Tranos and A. Nathan (2023)
‘Modeling clusters from the ground up: A
web data approach’ , Urban Analytics and
City Science 50(1): 244-267
Tagliapietra, S. and R. Veugelers (2020)
A Green Industrial Policy for Europe,
Blueprint Series 31, Bruegel, available
at https://www.bruegel.org/book/
green-industrial-policy-europe
Tödtling, F . and M. Trippl (2005) ‘One size
fits all? Towards a differentiated regional
innovation policy approach’ , Research
Policy 34(2005): 1203-1219
Zachmann, G. (2012) ‘Smart Choices for
Growth’ , Policy Contribution 2012/21,
Bruegel available at https://www.
bruegel.org/sites/default/files/wp_
attachments/1211_pc_gz_smart_choices_
for_growth.pdf
Zachmann, G. (2016) ‘ An approach
to identify the sources of low-carbon
growth for Europe’ , Policy Contribution
16/2016, Bruegel, available at https://
www.bruegel.org/policy-brief/approach-
identify-sources-low-carbon-growth-
europe

===== PDF_PAGE 213 =====
11 Industrial policy for electric
 vehicle supply chains and
 the US-EU fight over the
 Inflation Reduction Act
Chad P . Bown
1 Introduction68
In August 2022, President Joe Biden signed the United States Inflation
Reduction Act (IRA) into law. The European Union celebrated the
fact that the United States finally had an aggressive climate policy,
applauding the administration’s commitment to reduce emissions
from 2005 levels by 50–52 percent by 203069. But it found fault with a
number of the IRA ’s details.
One of the EU’s most important complaints was the law’s dis-
criminatory ‘Buy American’ (local content) incentives. The IRA ’s new
tax credit for electric vehicles (EVs), for example, seemed initially to
deem eligible only cars assembled in North America. If so, this rule
would shut out a Volkswagen imported from Germany but not one
68 The author thanks Olivier Blanchard, Kim Clausing, Kristin Dziczek, Robert Law-
rence, Marcus Noland, and Brad Setser for helpful comments and discussions, and
Madona Devasahayam, Barbara Karni, and Melina Kolb for editorial assistance.
Yilin Wang and Julieta Contreras provided outstanding research assistance. Nia
Kitchin, Melina Kolb, and Oliver Ward assisted with graphics.
69 Model estimates from Bistline et al (2023) suggested that the IRA could help the
United States reduce emissions from 2005 levels by 32-42 percent by 2030, a 6-11
percentage point improvement relative to the business as usual (non-IRA) projec-
tions.

===== PDF_PAGE 214 =====
212 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
manufactured in Tennessee. Over the next few months, the US Treasury
Department wrote implementing regulations that tweaked key IRA pro-
visions on EVs in ways that accommodated some of the EU’s concerns.
Doing so through implementing regulation, however, rather than reform
of the statute, comes with its own consequences. And some of the
trading partners’ more fundamental concerns with the IRA could not be
fixed through implementing regulations.
This chapter showcases the political-economic complexity of US
and EU attempts to cooperate over clean-energy transition policy to
address a global externality. EVs are but one example of the challenge
facing partners with integrated supply chains, similar levels of economic
development and shared worries over climate and other environmental
problems, rising inequality, workers, social issues and democracy itself.
The EV conflict laid bare the different ways in which the United States
and the European Union prioritise economic efficiency, World Trade
Organisation (WTO) rules, the approach to non-market economies and
national security vulnerabilities that arise from depending on an author-
itarian regime such as China for import sourcing of critical inputs.
The details matter for how the IRA and its implementing regulations
affect incentives for international trade in EVs and their key inputs. This
chapter explores those details, including the potentially transformative
decision that leased vehicles could qualify for consumer tax credits
under a separate and independent track of the IRA that did not have
those discriminatory local content incentives. It also examines numer-
ous other policies – including the considerable differences in US and EU
import tariffs on EVs toward each other and toward third countries, such
as China – that are also likely to affect EV trade patterns in ways that
offset some effects of the IRA. In the pre-IRA policy landscape, for exam-
ple, EU imports of EVs were increasingly dominated by sourcing from
China, which had largely displaced US exports. Furthermore, the United
States continued to import large numbers of EVs from Europe even after
implementing the IRA. Whether this trend continues, of course, remains
an open question.

===== PDF_PAGE 215 =====
213 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Most importantly, this chapter explains what the United States did in
passing the IRA, as well as its implementing regulations, and why it did it.
Along the way it attempts to identify inefficiencies, tradeoffs, inconsisten-
cies and potential unintended consequences of the US policy approach,
especially as manifest in the implementing regulations announced in the
eight months following the IRA ’s passage in August 2022.
The analytical framing is driven largely by economics. Because the
analysis operates in a setting motivated by both enormous environ-
mental externalities (climate) and growing externalities associated
with national security concerns, it is limited to identifying channels
and clarifying trade-offs. Without an explicit model or data, such
an approach is admittedly modest. The goal is to provide a detailed
explanation of the policy to provide a building block for more formal
modelling that can generate informed normative recommendations
for enhanced policy cooperation in light of continually shifting real-
world political-economic constraints.
2 The US policy objectives for its electric vehicle tax credits
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions, including carbon dioxide, is critical
to meeting the Paris Agreement objectives of limiting the rise in global
temperatures. This massive environmental externality provides a clear
motivation for the US federal government to intervene with policy.
In the climate crisis, the economically efficient, first-best policy is a
Pigouvian tax equal to the social cost of carbon. The current US federal
estimate of that cost is $51 per tonne of carbon dioxide emissions,
though recent estimates indicate that an updated measure would be
in the range of $185–$200 per tonne (Rennert et al, 2022; EPA, 2022).
The US federal government has never introduced a carbon price or an
economically equivalent cap and trade scheme70. It has largely turned
70 At the sub-federal level, states like California have introduced carbon pricing
programmes (Clausing and Wolfram, forthcoming). OECD (2022) estimated that
32 percent of greenhouse gas emissions in the United States in 2021 were subject to
some “positive net effect carbon rate” policy instrument.

===== PDF_PAGE 216 =====
214 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
instead to regulations mandating certain clean-energy standards.
Given the constrained policy environment in which it operated, the
Biden Administration also focused on second-best policies, including
subsidies, in the IRA, which was signed into law on 16 August 2022
(Table 1). In general, subsidies for the take-up of clean energy are a
second-best solution because they encourage excessive consumption
of energy overall71.
71 In the absence of a market failure for clean energy, a subsidy will lead to excess
equilibrium production and consumption of clean energy relative to the social op-
timum, even if the subsidy internalises the negative externality in the dirty energy
market (by reducing demand for dirty energy, assuming clean and dirty energy are
substitutes in consumption). One potential market failure for clean energy could
result from learning-by-doing (increasing returns to scale). Bistline et al (2023)
found that the learning-by-doing externality would need to be sizable for a subsidy
to be equivalent to the first-best carbon tax.

===== PDF_PAGE 217 =====
215 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
T able 1: Key events affecting US policy on electric vehicles
Date Event
15 November
2021
President Biden signs into law the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act (House: 228–206; Senate 69–30). The bipartisan legislation includes
funding of up to $7.5 billion for EV charging stations.
19 November
2021
The US House of Representatives passes the Build Back Better Act (220–
213), which includes tax credits for EVs. The bill never passes the Senate.
27 July 2022
Senator Joe Manchin and Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer announce
an agreement to allow a vote on the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) of 2022. It
subsequently passes both the Senate (51–50) and House (220–207).
16 August
2022
President Biden signs the IRA into law. The North American assembly
requirement in IRA Section 30D goes into effect immediately.
7 September
2022
The Congressional Budget Office releases revised estimates of the budgetary
effects of IRA over 2022-31.
1 December
2022
In response to European complaints, during the state visit of French
President Emmanuel Macron, Biden says his administration will make
‘tweaks’ to the IRA.
19 December
2022
The Treasury Department delays proposed regulation on critical minerals
and battery components requirements for Section 30D tax credits in the
IRA until March 2023.
29 December
2022
Treasury (Internal Revenue Service) clarifies that the IRA ’s commercial
clean vehicle tax credits (Section 45W) are available to consumers who lease
vehicles. Treasury also releases a Section 30D White Paper anticipating the
direction of proposed guidance on critical mineral and battery component
value calculations.
3 February
2023
Treasury reclassifies certain vehicles, making more models eligible for the
Section 30D consumer tax credit.
10 March
2023
President Biden and European Commission President Ursula van der
Leyen launch negotiations on a targeted critical minerals agreement
that would enable relevant critical minerals extracted or processed in the
European Union to count toward requirements for clean vehicles in the
IRA ’s Section 30D.
28 March
2023
The United States and Japan sign a Critical Minerals Agreement that
qualifies Japan as a ‘free trade agreement’ partner for the IRA ’s Section 30D
critical minerals content requirements.
31 March
2023
Treasury proposes a rule for content requirements in the IRA ’s Section 30D,
including general criteria for ‘free trade agreement’ partners that will go
into effect 18 April.
12 April 2023
The Environmental Protection Agency proposes new regulations for
vehicle emissions to ensure that two-thirds of new passenger cars will be
all-electric by 2032.
18 April 2023 The content requirements of IRA Section 30D announced on 31 March
2023, go into effect.

===== PDF_PAGE 218 =====
216 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
2.1 The environmental policy objectives of US tax credits on electric vehicles
Transportation accounted for 38 percent of US carbon emissions in
2021, the largest single contributor to emissions (CBO, 2022a). Of this
figure, 83 percent came from personal vehicles (58 percent) and com-
mercial trucks and buses (25 percent); air transport made up another 10
percent. If the United States is to reach its overall goal, carbon dioxide
emissions from transportation will have to fall.
Historically, US consumers have been relatively slow to switch from
cars with internal combustion engines (ICEs) to EVs. In 2021, for exam-
ple, only 5 percent of new vehicles sold in the United States were EVs, a
much smaller share than in China (16 percent) or the EU (18 percent)
(Figure 1).
Figure 1: The US lags the EU and China on electric vehicle sales
Source: International Energy Agency. Notes: Electric vehicles include battery electric
vehicles and plug-in hybrids. Figures are based on number of vehicles, not their value.
Several factors explain why the share is small in the United States
One is EV cost, relative to comparably performing ICE vehicles, espe-
cially since the gasoline used to power ICE vehicles has been inexpen-
sive relative to many other countries. Another is consumer tastes. Many
Americans prefer large vehicles that can drive long distances, which
initial EVs could not easily do, especially given the lack of charging
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
US
China
EU27

===== PDF_PAGE 219 =====
217 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
infrastructure in the geographically expansive United States72. This con-
straint on consumer EV take-up is often referred to as ‘range anxiety’ .
At the federal level, the United States provided consumer tax
credits for EVs of up to $7,500 dating back to the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009. They were phased out once a
manufacturer’s US sales reached 200,000 units. By the summer of 2022,
Nissan and Ford were getting close to reaching the cap, and Tesla,
General Motors (GM) and Toyota had exceeded it and were no longer
receiving subsidies73.
To incentivise buyers to switch from ICE vehicles to EVs, the IRA
modified existing federal consumer tax credits. It removed the 200,000
unit cap, making the tax credits available again to Tesla, GM and
Toyota. The uncapped credits would be available for 10 years.
In an attempt to encourage automakers to build out a fleet of EV
models for the mass market, the IRA initially limited the tax credit to
lower-priced EVs and to individuals or households with lower earn-
ings. These provisions were added out of concern that most of the
limited EV take-up – and subsidies paid out by US policy under earlier
tax credits – had gone to higher-income consumers who purchased
expensive models, such as early Teslas. To the extent that these
purchases would have been made without the tax credits, they were
both costly to taxpayers and had insufficient impact on achieving US
climate policy objectives74.
2.2 Additional policy objectives of the tax credits
The IRA includes more than just consumer tax credits, as it also
attempts to achieve other objectives. Understanding these requires
72 The bipartisan Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act that was signed into law in
November 2021 provided $7.5 billion of funding to address part of this challenge.
73 Jon Linkov, ‘Toyota Becomes 3rd Automaker to Reach Electric Vehicle Tax Credit
Limit’ , Consumer Reports, 7 July 2002, https://www.consumerreports.org/hy-
brids-evs/toyota-reaches-electric-vehicle-tax-credit-limit-a9709089660/.
74 For a review of the literature, see Sheldon (2022).

===== PDF_PAGE 220 =====
218 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
getting to grips with what the US government perceived as the initial,
pre-IRA economic and policy equilibrium, as well as the domestic
political-economic forces that would make the green energy transition
policy sustainable and not subject to a political reversal of the sort that
took place in 2017, when President Donald Trump pulled the United
States out of the Paris Agreement.
The United States has a large, legacy ICE automobile industry.
As ICE vehicles and EVs involve some different corporate players, as
well as different inputs in their supply chains, a transition from one
to the other puts hundreds of thousands of jobs at risk (Klier and
Rubenstein, 2022; Hanson, 2023). Many of these at-risk jobs are in
politically important swing states, such as Michigan and Ohio, where
they affect communities that have suffered disproportionately large
economic losses since 2001 – a period that coincides with the “China
shock” (Autor et al, 2021). Whatever the source of the shock, the failure
of workers and communities to adjust continues to play an outsized
role in policy discussions – unsurprisingly, given the effectiveness
with which Donald Trump weaponised it during the 2016 presidential
campaign and while in office.
The US perception of the pre-IRA equilibrium was that it was
dominated by China, which subsidised EVs. Beijing had prioritised the
sector as part of its highly controversial ‘Made in China 2025’ industrial
policy programme announced in 2015. China’s supply-side policies
for batteries were also alleged to discriminate in favour of indigenous
firms75. Finally, its import tariffs were high, providing firms that pro-
duced locally protection from foreign competition (in game-theoretic
terms, if the rivalry were modelled as a prisoner’s dilemma, China was
75 See Trefor Moss, ‘China’s Road to Electric-Car Domination Is Driven in Part by
Batteries’ , Wall Street Journal, 21 October 2017, https://www.wsj.com/articles/chi-
nas-road-to-electric-car-domination-is-driven-in-part-by-batteries-1508587203; and
Trefor Moss, ‘Power Play: How China-Owned Volvo Avoids Beijing’s Battery Rules’ ,
Wall Street Journal, 17 May 2018, https://www.wsj.com/articles/power-play-how-
china-owned-volvo-avoids-beijings-battery-rules-1526551937.

===== PDF_PAGE 221 =====
219 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
already playing noncooperatively; if it were a Stackelberg game, China
already had a first-mover advantage).
As a result, by 2022 China’s EV exports to the world were booming,
especially in volume terms (Figure 2, panel b), as Chinese exports tended
to be in lower-priced models. US exports of EVs lagged considerably.
Figure 2: US electric vehicle exports are also trailing China and the EU
Source: US International Trade Commission Dataweb, Eurostat, China Customs. Notes:
Figures show battery and fuel cell electric vehicles only. Trade values for the EU are
converted to US dollars from euros using end-of-month $/€ spot exchange rates from
FRED (DEXUSEU). For the EU, the CN codes are 87038010 and 87038090 in 2017–23 and
87039010 in 2016. For the US, the Schedule B code is 8703800000. For China, the HS code
is 87038000. The code for both the US and China was created in 2017 and did not exist for
electric vehicles prior to 2017.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Jan-18
M ar-18
M ay-18
Jul-18
Sep-18
Nov-18
Jan-19
M ar-19
M ay-19
Jul-19
Sep-19
Nov-19
Jan-20
M ar-20
M ay-20
Jul-20
Sep-20
Nov-20
Jan-21
M ar-21
M ay-21
Jul-21
Sep-21
Nov-21
Jan-22
M ar-22
M ay-22
Jul-22
Sep-22
Nov-22
Jan-23
US
China
EU27
0
5
10
15
20
25
Jan-18
M ar-18
M ay-18
Jul-18
Sep-18
Nov-18
Jan-19
M ar-19
M ay-19
Jul-19
Sep-19
Nov-19
Jan-20
M ar-20
M ay-20
Jul-20
Sep-20
Nov-20
Jan-21
M ar-21
M ay-21
Jul-21
Sep-21
Nov-21
Jan-22
M ar-22
M ay-22
Jul-22
Sep-22
Nov-22
Jan-23
US
China
EU27

===== PDF_PAGE 222 =====
220 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
In theory, the United States could have confronted China over con-
cerns about its non-market economy and system of subsidies, nego-
tiating rules to jointly limit such subsidies to cooperative and globally
efficient levels76. It could have worked jointly with other major exporters,
including the European Union and Japan, to address China together.
However, the contemporary political reality of US-China tensions had
taken that cooperative equilibrium off the table. From the US govern-
ment’s perspective, failure to intervene in the EV market risked another,
automobile industry-specific ‘China shock’ , with potentially devastating
domestic political consequences.
Another important policy objective of the IRA is to improve the
resilience of the EV battery supply chain by developing input sourcing for
batteries outside of China, which dominates the supply chain for battery
components, as well as lithium, cobalt, graphite, nickel and other critical
materials (Leruth et al, 2022). Multiple concerns lay behind this goal. One
is economic competitiveness. China has long used a variety of export-re-
strictions on inputs – including some critical minerals – to take advantage
of its supply-side market power, thereby supporting its downstream,
using industries relative to their foreign competitors (OECD, 2023).
A second is national security. As Biden Administration National
Security Advisor Jake Sullivan would state in a major speech in April
202377, “More than 80 percent of critical minerals are processed by one
country, China. Clean-energy supply chains are at risk of being
76 The United States did confront China unilaterally over a number of Chinese policy
issues related to trade; the Trump Administration’s trade war tariffs ultimately cov-
ered two-third of US imports from China. However, the approach was an ineffective
way to address the subsidies issue (Bown, 2018). It was thus unsurprising that the
‘Phase One’ agreement that President Trump signed with China in January 2021
contained nothing that would address China’s subsidies (Bown, 2021).
77 White House, ‘Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan on Renewing
American Economic Leadership at the Brookings Institution’ , 27 April 2023, https://
www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2023/04/27/remarks-by-na-
tional-security-advisor-jake-sullivan-on-renewing-american-economic-leader-
ship-at-the-brookings-institution/.

===== PDF_PAGE 223 =====
221 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
weaponised in the same way as oil in the 1970s, or natural gas in Europe
in 2022. So through the investments in the Inflation Reduction Act and
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, we’re taking action. ” With US-China geo-
political tensions worsening, the United States was unwilling to expose
itself to the same sort of long-run energy dependencies that resulted in
the OPEC-led supply shocks of the 1970s, which triggered backups at
gas pumps, rationing and ultimately inflation, recession and political
upheaval at home. Russia’s weaponisation of energy supplies to the
detriment of the European Union provided even more ammunition to
policymakers worried that in a military conflict, China would do some-
thing similar in the future to restrict the supply of EVs or the ability to
manufacture them domestically.
The final policy objective – and the one creating the biggest negative
reaction from Europe – was to ease the US labour market transition from
ICE vehicles to EVs. The IRA seeks to do so in several ways. First, con-
sumption subsidies appeared initially limited to EVs assembled in North
America. This feature of the law transformed the consumption subsidy
into a subsidy to production, as it is paid only as long as the EV is both
manufactured and sold domestically78. Second, the law includes a sepa-
rate production tax credit for batteries and their inputs (as well as other
sources of clean energy), which also affects the competitiveness of the EV
supply chain in the United States.
Advocates for the local assembly provisions argued that the green
transition would be sustainable in a democracy like the United States
only if a political constituency of workers and domestic firms were cre-
ated to support it. Consumer interests would never mobilise politically
78 The main competitiveness spillover was that the subsidy might impede the ability
of foreign exporters to sell to the US market; that subsidy did not affect the direct
cost of producing an EV for export. The IRA also does not ‘pick winners’ in terms of
subsidising production. Because the subsidy flows through to producers through a
consumer tax credit, consumers are still the ones choosing which EV models they
want to purchase. This mechanism is different from the subsidies available in the
2022 CHIPS and Science Act, for example, which charges the Commerce Department
with disbursing subsidies across semiconductor manufacturing investment projects.

===== PDF_PAGE 224 =====
222 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
in large enough numbers to support the lower prices that might arise
through import competition.
A related argument is that political support for the United States
remaining open at all remains tenuous (the national psyche remains
scarred by the ‘China shock’ , which President Trump so masterfully
exploited politically). Policies like the IRA – even if discriminatory and
inefficient – are needed to maintain a broader policy of trade openness
elsewhere across the economy.
Numerous concerns with the IRA ’s objectives have emerged. An over-
arching worry is that using a single policy instrument to target multiple
objectives reduces the chance that any one objective will be met.
One set of concerns is domestic. The IRA is a poorly targeted
labour-market and community-adjustment policy. Although the geog-
raphy of the North American EV supply chain may end up driven by the
same forces as the ICE supply chain that emerged by the late twentieth
century (Klier and Rubenstein, 2023), the plants and jobs are unlikely
to end up in exactly the same communities as the ICE plants and where
jobs are being wound down. Although there may be a political constit-
uency of workers in the EV supply chain years from now to support a
cleaner automobile sector, workers and communities that lose out as
ICE supply chain plants are no longer needed may be nearly as unhappy
about their jobs being replaced by EV jobs two or three states away as EV
jobs overseas79.
A second important domestic concern with the IRA is its fiscal impli-
cations. Targeting the climate externality with subsidies requires raising
taxes elsewhere, which will generate additional inefficiencies (a carbon
tax does not).
79 Other parts of the IRA unrelated to EVs do include place-based policies designed to
facilitate new investment in the exact locations where economic activity driven by
dirty energy would decline. The IRA also includes Low-Income Communities Bo-
nus Credits for clean energy projects rooted in underserved communities, and the
Davis-Bacon Act provides additional tax benefits if wages are high enough (under)
and the work involves registered apprentices.

===== PDF_PAGE 225 =====
223 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Even without those inefficiencies, the IRA is expensive for taxpayers,
especially if take-up far exceeds initial estimates by the Congressional
Budget Office (CBO, 2022b; Bistline et al, 2023; Goldman Sachs, 2023). If
taxpayers end up unwilling to support the IRA fiscally over the long term,
Congress could terminate the programme early, reducing the chance
of achieving its most important objective of reducing carbon dioxide
emissions.
An additional concern (discussed below) is whether the IRA approach
will incentivise creation of an EV supply chain for the world outside of
China. Two other worries involve how trading partners might respond to
the international spillovers created by the US policy approach.
First, to the extent that the IRA displaces the legitimate market access
expectations of trading partners exporting to the United States, there
may be retaliation, which would impose other costs on the US economy.
If the IRA leads to excessive US exports, trading partners may respond
directly with tariffs (countervailing duties) to limit those exports. Rather
than a cooperative equilibrium, in which governments agree to restrain
their subsidies ex ante to socially efficient levels (and combine them
with carbon taxes), the noncooperative equilibrium may end up with the
same level of economic activity on EVs and carbon dioxide reductions
but with excessive subsidies (which requires tax-raising elsewhere) and
retaliation (which increases other costs).
Second, US subsidies may lead other countries to change their climate
policies, especially out of concern over reduced industrial competi-
tiveness. If the trading partner’s initial emission reduction targets were
insufficiently ambitious, this change could be positive for the environ-
ment. However, if it forces a trading partner (like the EU) to deviate from
a potentially more efficient policy (such as carbon pricing), then it could
be harmful, potentially offsetting some of the global externality (climate)
benefits of the US policy.
Finally, the IRA did not include all of the important objectives of the
Biden Administration’s initial version of the legislation (the Build Back
Better Act), which passed the House of Representatives in November

===== PDF_PAGE 226 =====
224 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
2021 but failed to pass the Senate80. One was a tax credit of $4,500
for vehicles assembled at unionised plants in the United States. The
European Union lobbied heavily against this provision, in part because
it would have discriminated against the US manufacturing facilities of
European-headquartered car companies, many of which are located in
right-to-work states where workforces are not unionised81. Canada com-
plained vociferously as well, including in a letter sent by Deputy Prime
Minister Chrystia Freeland and Trade Minister Mary Ng to a host of US
senators that included explicit tariff threats if they passed the legislation82.
The IRA stripped out the unionisation criterion and changed the require-
ment for US assembly to a requirement for North American assembly,
making Canadian and Mexican plants eligible (Mexico also has plants for
several European-headquartered automakers).
3 The effects of the IRA on electric vehicle supply chains
Multiple provisions of the IRA affect EVs. They include consumer tax
credits for new clean consumer (Section 30D) and commercial (Section
45W) vehicles, and producer tax credits for other parts of the EV supply
chain (Section 45X), which have received much less public attention83.
80 House Committee on Rules, H.R. 5376: Build Back Better Act, 3 November
2021, https://rules.house.gov/sites/republicans.rules118.house.gov/files/BILLS-
117HR5376RH-RCP117-18.pdf.
81 See Margaret Spiegelman, ‘Mexico, EU, Japan, Others Voice Concern about Pro-
posed US EV Tax Credit’ , Inside, US Trade, 1 November 2021, https://insidetrade.
com/daily-news/mexico-eu-japan-others-voice-concern-about-proposed-us-ev-
tax-credit; Joe Miller, ‘German carmakers condemn Biden’s electric-vehicle subsidy
plans’ , Financial Times, 11 December 2021, https://www.ft.com/content/8b432548-
9a7d-4669-b479-27fa6eb70bd9.
82 See David Ljunggren, ‘ Angry Canada Threatens to Impose Tariffs on US Goods over EV
Tax Credit Plan’ , Reuters, 10 December 2021, https://www.reuters.com/world/ameri-
cas/canada-threatens-impose-tariffs-us-goods-over-ev-tax-credit-plan-2021-12-10/.
83 Section 25 also includes a provision for previously owned clean vehicles.

===== PDF_PAGE 227 =====
225 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
3.1 Consumer tax credits for consumer vehicles
Consumer vehicles are defined as vehicles that weigh less than 14,000
pounds (6,350 kilogrammes). They include cars, pickup trucks and
sport utility vehicles (SUVs). Even relatively heavy vehicles with batter-
ies fall under the threshold with room to spare. Examples include the
Audi RS e-tron (5,200 pounds/2,358kg) for cars, the Ford F-450 Crew
Cab (8,600 pounds/3,900kg) for pickups and the GMC Hummer EV
(9,000 pounds/4,082kg) for SUVs84.
The consumer tax credit is restricted to vehicles for which final
assembly takes place in North America. This requirement went into
effect immediately on implementation of the law (16 August 2022).
The sudden change left consumers who had placed orders but had not
legally contracted for vehicle delivery in the lurch.
The consumer tax credit is up to $7,500, with eligibility determined
by the inputs going into the batteries of the EV . Half of the tax credit eli-
gibility ($3,750) is available for vehicles that include a battery recycled
in North America or a battery that meets a critical minerals sourcing
requirement. Critical minerals, defined in section 45X(c)(6), include
lithium, cobalt and nickel (Tracy, 2022). Certain minimum thresholds
have to be sourced from (extracted or processed in) the United States
or a country with which the United States has a free trade agreement
– a definitional issue that would turn out not to be innocuous. The
minimal critical mineral threshold was 40 percent in 2023 – on a date
(18 April) determined once Treasury issued guidance (31 March) –
increasing by 10 percentage points a year up to 80 percent in 2027-32.
The other half of the tax credit eligibility is for vehicles meeting a
battery components requirement. The components sourcing require-
ments are much more restrictive than for critical minerals: the thresh-
old amount of material has to be manufactured or assembled in North
America (this difference meant that other Treasury decisions – such as
84 See Matthew Guy, ‘Weight, Weight: 5 of the Heaviest New Vehicles on Sale Today’ ,
Driving, 19 June 2022, https://driving.ca/car-culture/lists/weight-weight-5-of-the-
heaviest-new-vehicles-on-sale-today.

===== PDF_PAGE 228 =====
226 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
where to draw the line in the battery supply chain between what was
a critical mineral and what was a component – could matter substan-
tially). The minimal battery components threshold was 50 percent in
2023 (once Treasury issued guidance), increasing by 10 percentage
points a year until reaching 100 percent in 2029-32.
Also excluded under the law is sourcing from a “foreign entity of con-
cern, ” a designation that covers China, Iran, North Korea and Russia85.
Beginning in 2024, a vehicle may not contain any battery components
manufactured or assembled by a foreign entity of concern. Beginning in
2025, a vehicle’s battery may not contain any critical minerals sourced
from a foreign entity of concern.
Section 30D includes at least two other criteria that affect eligibility
for a tax credit. The first is the limit on adjusted gross income (AGI),
which cannot exceed $300,000 for married couples and $150,000 for
individuals. The second is a price cap. Beginning in 2023, tax credit eligi-
bility requires that the manufacturer’s suggested retail price (MSRP) be
less than $80,000 for SUVs, vans and pickup trucks, and less than $55,000
for vehicles under 14,000 pounds (on 3 February 2023, Treasury made
more vehicles eligible for the consumer tax credit by shifting ‘crossover’
SUVs into the SUV category and out of the smaller vehicle category;
GM’s Cadillac Lyriq, Tesla’s five-seat Model Y, Volkswagen’s ID.4 and
Ford’s Mustang Mach-E and Escape Plug-in Hybrid were suddenly eligi-
ble thanks to the increase in the price cap to $80,000 from $55,00086).
Treasury and the Department of Energy needed to provide guid-
ance in a number of areas. One was to define with which countries the
United States has a ‘free trade agreement’ , as the term was not formally
85 Section 40207(a)(5) of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (42 USC. 18741(a)
(5)) defines a “foreign entity of concern” as own owned by, controlled by, or subject
to the jurisdiction or direction of a government of a foreign country that is a covered
country (as defined in section 2533c(d) of title 10, United States Code).
86 US Treasury press release of 3 February 2023, ‘Treasury Updates Vehicle Classifica-
tion Standard for Clean Vehicle Tax Credits Under Inflation Reduction Act’ , https://
home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1245.

===== PDF_PAGE 229 =====
227 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
defined under US law. The United States has Congressionally ratified
trade agreements with 20 countries, including major auto industry
participants such as South Korea, Canada and Mexico. Its trade agree-
ments with other countries (such as Japan) are more limited, including
zero tariffs for only a limited set of products. The United States and
the European Union do not have any sort of trade agreement beyond
being members of the WTO. The Department of Energy was expected
to determine whether part of a battery input was ‘from’ a foreign entity
of concern – for example whether it would include subsidiaries or
joint ventures in the United States or free trade agreement partners
if the parent was headquartered in China or another foreign entity of
concern87.
These new criteria in Section 30D raised at least two questions.
First, in the immediate term – before companies have a chance to
adjust their supply chains – would they significantly limit the availabil-
ity of car models eligible for the tax credit, even for vehicles assembled
in North America? (As described below, the answer was yes). Second,
over the long term, would these criteria be enough to shape economic
activity and incentivise the shifting of supply chains?
3.2 Consumer tax credits for commercial vehicles
The IRA created a separate track for clean commercial vehicles.
Section 45W provides a tax credit for businesses buying new EVs or
fuel cell EVs (FCEVs), which could include a fuel cell stack powered
by hydrogen rather than a battery. For businesses purchasing small
commercial vehicles (weighing less than 14,000 pounds), eligibil-
ity requires battery capacity of at least 7 kilowatt-hours (kWh). For
87 For example, Jiyeong Go, ‘Chinese Companies Expanding Footprint in Global
Lithium Mines’ , FDI Intelligence, 29 August 2022, https://www.fdiintelligence.
com/content/feature/chinese-companies-expanding-footprint-in-global-lithi-
um-mines-81261; Scott Murdoch and Jaskiran Singh, ‘China’s Tianqi-Led Venture
Bids for Australian Lithium Firm Essential’ , Reuters, 8 January 2023, https://www.
reuters.com/markets/deals/igo-tianqi-lithium-jv-looks-beef-up-assets-with-essen-
tial-metals-bid-2023-01-08/.

===== PDF_PAGE 230 =====
228 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
vehicles weighing more than 14,000 pounds (such as buses and deliv-
ery trucks), eligibility requires battery capacity of at least 15 kWh.
In the commercial track, the maximum tax credits cannot exceed
$7,500 for vehicles under 14,000 pounds and $40,000 for vehicles
above 14,000 pounds. The actual tax credit amount is equal to which-
ever of the following is lowest: 15 percent of the vehicle purchase price
for plug-in hybrid EVs, 30 percent of the vehicle purchase price for
EVs and FCEVs, or the incremental cost of the vehicle compared with
an equivalent ICE vehicle. Businesses cannot combine this tax credit
with the clean vehicle tax credit for consumers; they can use one or the
other.
Table 2 summarises crucial differences between Sections 30D and
45W. Equally important are all of the criteria not found in Section 45W,
as made clear below. None of the eligibility requirements in Section
30D described above (limits related to North American assembly, crit-
ical minerals or battery components sourcing, MSRP or income levels)
are included in Section 45W.

===== PDF_PAGE 231 =====
229 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
T able 2: Key requirements for qualifying for a tax credit under Sections 30D and
45W of the IRA
Requirement Section
30D
Section
45W
Gross vehicle must weigh less than 14,000 pounds X Xa
Vehicle must be used for business X
Vehicle must be assembled in North America X
Manufacturer’s suggested retail price cannot exceed
$80,000 for SUVs, vans, and pickup trucks and
$55,000 for smaller vehicles
X
Annual adjusted gross income cannot exceed
$300,000 for couples or $150,000 for individuals X
Credit of $3,750 is granted if critical minerals
criterion is satisfied X
Credit of $3,750 is granted of battery components
criterion is satisfied X
Vehicle must eventually include no critical mineral or
battery components from ‘foreign entity of concern’ X
Note: a Vehicles with gross vehicle weight of more than 14,000 pounds are eligible for
tax credits of up to $40,000 under Section 45W.
3.3 Production tax credits
Section 45X of the IRA provides for a tax credit for the production of
battery cells, battery modules and battery components88. These provi-
sions are additional and available only for production taking place in
the United States. The tax credits are based on the capacity (in kilowatt
hours) of the battery module or battery cell.
88 Orrick, ‘Section 45X of the Inflation Reduction Act: New Tax Credits Available
to Battery Manufacturers’ , 17 November 2022, https://www.orrick.com/en/In-
sights/2022/11/Section-45X-of-the-Inflation-Reduction-Act-New-Tax-Credits-Availa-
ble-to-Battery-Manufacturers.

===== PDF_PAGE 232 =====
230 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
These tax credits could result in another $4,500 in tax credits per
vehicle. For EVs eligible for the tax credit under Sections 30D or 45W, the
additional $4,500 from Section 45X means that a single EV could poten-
tially qualify for $12,000 in total subsidies (whether the consumer, the
EV company, the battery company or the company making critical min-
erals or components will enjoy these subsidies needs to be determined
empirically, but the combined benefit to consumers and firms in these
markets clearly comes at the expense of the government and taxpayer).
At the upper end of take-up, the cost to the US government for the
production tax credit could total six times more than the Congressional
Budget Office (CBO, 2022b) estimate89.
While these tax credits may induce additional battery manufacturing
investments into the United States, some of the subsidies may be trans-
fers that do not have a marginal effect on investment facility decisions.
EV companies had announced considerable new investment projects
before July 2022 – when passage of the IRA seemed unlikely – and thus
may subsequently receive subsidies for investments they had already
committed to. As of January 2022, for example, plans were already afoot
to build 13 large-scale EV battery plants in the United States90.
4 The European response to the Inflation Reduction Act
The IRA was signed into law in August 2022. The European Union’s
political reaction was relatively slow to materialise. In contrast, in early
September 2022, the trade minister from South Korea was already in
Washington demanding action on behalf of Korean auto companies.
He objected vociferously to the unexpected cutting off from con-
sumer tax credits of Hyundai’s popular Ioniq models, which were being
89 Christine McDaniel, ‘The Cost of Battery Production Tax Credits Provided in the
IRA’ , Forbes, 1 February 2023, https://www.forbes.com/sites/christinemcdan-
iel/2023/02/01/the-cost-of-battery-production-tax-credits-provided-in-the-ira/.
90 Dasl Yoon, ‘EV Battery Maker’s Sales Pitch to the West: We’re Not Chinese’ , Wall
Street Journal, 26 January 2022, https://www.wsj.com/articles/ev-battery-makers-
sales-pitch-to-the-west-were-not-chinese-11643198401.

===== PDF_PAGE 233 =====
231 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
assembled in South Korea until their US plant was operational in 202591.
Once Europe fully understood the details of the IRA though, its
public reaction was fierce. Bernd Lange, the head of the European
Parliament’s Trade Committee, called for a WTO dispute, which
Thierry Breton, the European Commissioner for Internal Market,
indicated could lead to retaliation92. There were threats of a subsidy
war. In a state visit to Washington in early December, French President
Emmanuel Macron said the IRA risked “fragmenting the West.”
The ferocity of the criticism from Europe stunned Washington. To
the extent that the United States had been motivated by nondomestic
factors, it was the threat of China that it used to mobilise its legislation.
It had not realised just how damaging its policy was to the political
and economic interests of some of its key allies. The European polit-
ical response was also remarkable, given the United States’ massive
political, economic and military support to Europe and its coordina-
tion with European and NATO allies following Russia’s February 2022
invasion of Ukraine and its subsequent conduct of a brutal war93.
The Biden Administration responded in various ways. The White
House agreed to a high-level task force with the European Commission
President’s office94. It also placed the IRA on the formal agenda of the
91 See Bown (2022) and Christian Davies and Song Jung-a, ‘South Korea complains of
growing friction with US over high-tech trade’ , Financial Times, 18 September 2022,
https://www.ft.com/content/9074c4ce-61f6-45c1-823f-84efe2af4d3e.
92 See Riham Alkousaa, ‘Lawmaker Says EU Should Complain to WTO over US Inflation
Reduction Act’ , Reuters, 3 December 2022, https://www.reuters.com/business/law-
maker-says-eu-should-complain-wto-over-us-inflation-reduction-act-2022-12-04/.
93 Europe’s aggressive response risked alienating Washington, given the shift in the
political climate in the United States in the wake of the November 2022 election,
in which Republicans won control over the House of Representatives, potentially
jeopardising continued military support for Ukraine and Europe.
94 White House, ‘Statement by NSC Spokesperson Adrienne Watson on Launch of
the United States–EU Task Force on the Inflation Reduction Act’ , 25 October 2022,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/10/25/state-
ment-by-nsc-spokesperson-adrienne-watson-on-launch-of-the-us-eu-task-force-
on-the-inflation-reduction-act/.

===== PDF_PAGE 234 =====
232 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
semi-annual US-EU Trade and Technology Council (TTC) meetings held
in early December 2022 in Maryland. Biden’s US Trade Representative
Katherine Tai also suggested that Europe consider subsidies of its own95.
Finally, during the state visit of French President Macron in
December, President Biden indicated there would be flexibility96. The
administration ultimately showed considerable and unexpected flexibil-
ity when the Treasury Department, the US government agency in charge
of implementing key discretionary elements of the IRA, issued regula-
tions on 29 December 2022 and 31 March 2023 (as discussed below).
Domestic political constraints meant that the administration could
do relatively little to ease the pain of the IRA on its allies. The IRA was
not a bipartisan piece of legislation. After the November 2022 mid-
term elections, when with Republicans took control of the House of
Representatives, prospects for legislative reform became even less
likely than they were before the election.
4.1 Europe’s perspective
The IRA provoked a tremendous reaction in Europe for a number of
reasons. For EVs, the problems were obvious. Under the new law, as of
16 August 2022, an EV manufactured in Europe would no longer be eligi-
ble for the consumer tax credit offered on EVs manufactured in North
America. The difference created incentives for multinational companies
to locate their production facilities in North America instead.
95 Andy Bounds and Aime Williams, ‘Top US trade official urges EU to join forces on
subsidies amid Green Deal tensions’ , Financial Times, 2 November 2022, https://
www.ft.com/content/0e52d609-5cfe-453c-9baf-b33b66e941e9.
96 “For example, there’s a provision in it that says that there is the exception for anyone
who has a free trade agreement with us. Well, that was added by a member of the
United States Congress who acknowledges that he just meant allies; he didn’t mean,
literally, free trade agreement. So, there’s a lot we can work out.” White House,
‘Remarks by President Biden and President Macron of France in Joint Press Confer-
ence’ , 1 December 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-re-
marks/2022/12/01/remarks-by-president-biden-and-president-macron-of-france-
in-joint-press-conference/.

===== PDF_PAGE 235 =====
233 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
There was also much more. The EU was caught off guard when the
details of the new legislation were abruptly revealed in late July 2022.
It had hoped that its efforts to work with the Biden Administration and
establish the TTC in 2021 would prevent these sorts of policies from
emerging with little notice. Failing to include Congress in the TTC
proved to have been a mistake, as industrial policy often takes the form
of legislation (given Treasury’s rule-writing function under the IRA and
the fact that industrial policy is being implemented through the US tax
code, it would also be helpful if the Treasury Department, not only the
US Trade Representative, the Commerce Department, and the State
Department, were part of the TTC).
In terms of the EU’s own policies, the IRA was problematic for
reasons that went well beyond the EV sector. The European Green Deal
and Fit for 55 involved first-best carbon taxes, phasing out free allow-
ances, a carbon border adjustment mechanism and other potentially
WTO–consistent policies as part of its clean energy transition (the IRA
suddenly made apparent the fact that the United States was not inter-
ested in solutions consistent with traditional WTO rules). For Europe,
an extremely important policy question was how much of its own
original clean energy transition plan would remain feasible. Would the
EU remain politically able to implement a sizable carbon tax, phase
out free allowances and impose other policies that make dirty energy
consumption in the bloc more expensive for industry?
The IRA ’s tax credits for batteries and other sources of clean energy
make consumption of US energy cheaper, jeopardising the EU’s indus-
trial competitiveness. This fear was the major concern facing the EU that
even the fixes to the EV tax credits (discussed below) would not be able
to address.
Not only did the IRA put economic pressure on the European
Union to move away from the first-best policy (taxing carbon at its high
social cost), the new pressure to subsidise posed separate threats to
the internal structure of the EU itself. The Treaty on the Functioning of
the European Union (TFEU) has rules prohibiting member states from

===== PDF_PAGE 236 =====
234 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
providing subsidies to companies; these rules are part of the fabric
that maintains harmony within the union (Kleimann et al, 2023). The
IRA may thus create a wedge between EU countries that can subsi-
dise and those that lack fiscal resources and cannot. If EU countries
now feel political-economic pressure to subsidise, their response to
the IRA may be to not only discriminate against the United States and
other countries; they may also end up discriminating against each
other.
The timing of the IRA was also problematic, given the macroeco-
nomic environment in Europe in 2022. Russia’s war on Ukraine, its
weaponisation of gas supplies flowing through the Nord Stream 1
pipeline and the European policy decision to wean itself off Russian
energy, created political problems across the continent by straining
European economies, creating high inflation and recessionary risk.
Heavy industries in Europe – many concentrated in Germany – were
already being forced to rethink their business models, given the
loss of access to relatively inexpensive Russian natural gas. Adding
early fuel to the fire was a September 2022 Wall Street Journal report
that Tesla was putting on hold its plans to produce battery cells in
Germany, potentially shifting more EV production to the United
States to take advantage of the IRA ’s battery manufacturing tax cred-
its97. Firms across the continent opportunistically threatened to leave
for the United States unless Europe provided them with subsidies
of its own. The problem was clearly not just the IRA though. Major
German energy-intensive firms like chemical company BASF subse-
quently announced plans to relocate production not to the United
States but to China 98.
97 Rebecca Elliott and Mike Colias, ‘Tesla Shifts Battery Strategy as It Seeks US Tax
Credits’ , Wall Street Journal, 14 September 2022, https://www.wsj.com/articles/tes-
la-shifts-battery-strategy-as-it-seeks-u-s-tax-credits-11663178393.
98 Patricia Nilsson, ‘BASF outlines further cost-cutting and 2,600 job losses as it down-
sizes in Germany’ , Financial Times, 24 February 2023, https://www.ft.com/content/
b0b2b2c2-ee63-4989-afab-6882feab4b73.

===== PDF_PAGE 237 =====
235 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
The EU was also concerned about the implications of the US
policy actions for the WTO (the nondiscriminatory, rules-based trad-
ing system also formed the legal backbone of the European Union).
Following four years of the Trump Administration’s policies eroding
rules-based trade, the hope had been that the Biden Administration
might not only be different but that it might be a partner in rebooting
efforts at multilateralism.
The IRA was perhaps the final nail in the coffin. By aggressively
choosing subsidies – and a particularly discriminatory form of them
– the United States clearly indicated that it had caved. At least for the
moment, it was foregoing any rules-based effort to address what had
been, at least rhetorically, joint EU-US concern over China’s own
large and discriminatory subsidies and industrial policy that was
itself a major driver of the IRA 99.
The EU was also powerless to respond to the United States in a
rules-based way. WTO dispute settlement was still dysfunctional.
The United States continued to block appointments to the WTO’s
Appellate Body, disabling the EU’s preferred (judicial) approach to
send trade frictions off to be litigated 100.
4.2 Europe’s own policies affecting electric vehicles
There has been some discussion in the EU about whether to
respond to the IRA by deploying leftover funds from the €800 billion
Recovery and Resilience Facility put in place following the COVID-19
99 Under the Trump Administration, the European Union, Japan and the United States
formed a trilateral group to potentially consider new subsidies rules to address
such concerns (Bown and Hillman, 2019).
100 WTO Director-General Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala discouraged litigation anyway,
indicating in a Bloomberg interview that “it’s far better for them to speak to the
United States and try to resolve this and see if there’s any way to take account of their
concerns than to come to the dispute-settlement system of the WTO” . Bryce Baschuk,
‘WTO Chief Urges Talks to Resolve Green Subsidy Dispute’ , Bloomberg, 23 January
2023, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2023-01-19/supply-chain-lat-
est-wto-urges-talks-to-resolve-subsidies-debate.

===== PDF_PAGE 238 =====
236 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
pandemic. As of April 2023, no new subsidy policy decision had been
announced, however 101.
Most EU countries provide consumer tax credits for EVs, which
average €6,000 (roughly $6,400) per vehicle (Kleimann et al, 2023;
ACEA, 2022). The main difference is that the EU credits are nondis-
criminatory (they do not include local content requirements or other
limiting criteria found in Section 30D of the IRA). A US-assembled
vehicle is eligible for EU member state tax credits just like a European
assembled vehicle (this was the structure of the US tax credits in place
after the ARRA in 2009 until passage of the IRA in August 2022).
Table 3 summarises important differences in tariffs on EVs by
the United States, the EU and China. Several of these differences are
noteworthy.
101 See, for example, Jan Strupczewski, ‘Seven EU Countries Oppose New EU Funding
as Response to US Subsidy Plan—Letter’ , Reuters, 27 January 2023, https://www.
reuters.com/markets/europe/seven-eu-countries-oppose-new-eu-funding-re-
sponse-us-subsidy-plan-letter-2023-01-27/.

===== PDF_PAGE 239 =====
237 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
T able 3: T ariffs on electric vehicles imposed by the US, EU and China in 2023
Economy
Applied
MFN tariff
(%)
Exceptions
United
States 2.5
• Mexico: 0 percent (under the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement [USMCA])
• Canada: 0 percent (under the USMCA)
• South Korea: 0 percent (under the US–Korea Free Trade Agreement [KORUS])
• China: 27.5 percent (applied MFN tariff + trade war tariff ) imposed since July 2018
European
Union 10
• South Korea: 0 percent (under the EU–Republic of Korea Free Trade Agreement)
• Japan: 3.8 percent (under the EU–Japan Economic Partnership Agreement)
• Canada: 0 percent (under the EU–Canada Comprehensive Economic and Trade
Agreement)
• Canada: 0 percent (under the EU–Canada Comprehensive Economic and Trade
Agreement)
China 15
• Applied MFN was 25 percent until July 2018, when it was lowered to 15 percent
• United States: 40 percent tariff (applied MFN + retaliatory tariff ) between July 2018
and January 2019 during the trade war, then reduced to 15 percent
• South Korea: 13.5 percent (under Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement)
• Japan: 15 percent (under Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership)
Sources: US International Trade Commission, European Commission (CIRCABC), State Council of the People’s Republic of China (Chi-
na’s tariff schedule, 2023), and trade war tariff announcements from China’s Ministry of Finance and the United States Trade Representa-
tive. Notes: The HS code for battery EVs is 870380. MFN = Most favoured nation.

===== PDF_PAGE 240 =====
238 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
First, there is an important distinction in the argument that follows
below relative to the earlier, Trump Administration argument for recip-
rocal tariffs in levels between the United States and its trading partners
(Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross famously argued that the United
States and EU should have the same tariffs on ICE vehicles)102. Indeed,
today’s different US and EU tariff rates for ICE vehicles are the result of
decades of reciprocal negotiating rounds under the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), in which the EU received lower tariffs on
its ICE vehicle exports in exchange for the United States receiving lower
tariffs on some other US export products. However, EVs are relatively new
products for both sides; there have been no historical negotiations by the
two economies over their tariff levels. This makes directly comparing US
and EU EV tariff rates more relevant103.
The European Union MFN import tariff for traditional consumer
EVs (10 percent) is much higher than the US tariff (2.5 percent). One
longstanding fundamental insight from economics is the equivalence
of an import tariff and the combined effect of a consumption tax and
a production subsidy. The EU’s 10 percent import tariff on EVs is thus
economically equivalent to EU member states offsetting some of their EV
consumption subsidies with a 10 percent consumption tax, while simul-
taneously granting a 10 percent production subsidy for locally assembled
EVs (the equivalent for the United States would be a 2.5 percent con-
sumption tax and a 2.5 percent production subsidy). The US-EU differen-
tial is therefore equivalent to a 7.5 percent EU production subsidy. For a
$50,000 vehicle, this would equate to a $3,750 production subsidy.
Second, US exports of EVs face further discrimination in the EU
102 Wilbur Ross, ‘Most Favored Nation Rule Hurts Importers, Limits US Trade’ , Wall
Street Journal, 25 May 2017, https://www.wsj.com/articles/most-favored-nation-
rule-hurts-importers-limits-u-s-trade-1495733394.
103 For pickup trucks, the United States imposes a 25 percent import tariff; the EU
import tariff is only 10 or 22 percent (depending on the cylinder capacity of the
engine), and China’s is 15 percent. Depending on the type of engine and the gross
vehicle weight, pickup trucks could fall under several possible tariff lines in Har-
monised System (HS) category 8704.

===== PDF_PAGE 241 =====
239 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
market because of the EU’s free trade agreements (FTAs) with Korea
and Japan – two other major EV manufacturers – as well as Mexico and
Canada. The EU’s FTAs with South Korea, Mexico and Canada already
have a 0 percent duty on EVs in effect; the phase-in period for Japan’s
FTA means that the tariff will fall from its current level of 3.8 percent
to 0 in 2026. The implication is that EU imports from these countries
enjoy (or will enjoy) a 10 percentage point tariff preference into the
EU market relative to the United States. Under the United States’ FTAs,
the tariff preference offered to South Korea, Mexico and Canada (2.5
percentage points) and Japan (none) is much smaller (or nonexistent).
The United States and the EU could negotiate a trade agreement to
reciprocally lower those bilateral tariffs to zero, but such a move is not
currently on the policy agenda.
Third, the EU and US treat China, the other major exporter of EVs to
the world, quite differently. In the EU market, imports from China face
the same tariff as imports from the United States. In the United States,
because of the trade war tariffs in effect since July 2018, EU exporters
benefit from a 25 percentage point tariff preference into the US market
relative to EVs manufactured in China.
These tariffs are likely to affect trade flows (Figure 3)104. The value
of EU imports of EVs from China, for example, is nearly three times as
high as EV imports from South Korea and 16 times as high as imports
from the United States. Offshored production by Tesla, Volkswagen
and MG – major US and European brands – dominates Chinese EV
exports to the European Union105. Imports of EVs from Japan remain
small; major exporters like Toyota have been relatively slow to move
104 In Figure 3, almost 90 percent of EU EV imports from rest of world were sourced
from Mexico in 2022.
105 See Selina Cheng, ‘Tesla Rival BYD Leads Push to Sell Chinese EV Brands Around
the World’ , Wall Street Journal, 3 March 2023, https://www.wsj.com/articles/tes-
la-rival-byd-leads-push-to-sell-chinese-ev-brands-around-the-world-4e0b6d06;
Peter Sigal, ‘Europe Forecast to Import 800,000 Chinese-Built Cars by 2025’ ,
Automotive News Europe, 7 November 2022, https://europe.autonews.com/auto-
makers/chinese-electric-car-exports-europe-soar.

===== PDF_PAGE 242 =====
240 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
to battery EVs, in part because they developed and stuck with plug-in
hybrids106.
Figure 3: The EU used to import electric vehicles from the United States but now
mostly imports from China and South Korea
Source: Eurostat. Notes: The CN codes are 87038010 and 87038090 in 2017–23,
87039010 in 2016. Trade values are converted to US dollars from euros using end-of-
month usd/euro spot exchange rates from FRED (DEXUSEU).
EU imports of EVs from the United States fell dramatically beginning
in mid-2021. The decline was driven partly by Tesla shifting its exports to
the EU away from its US facilities to its plant in China.
In late 2018, Tesla announced it would accelerate construction of its
gigafactory in China in response to the trade war, after China’s retaliatory
tariffs made it too costly to export cars from the United States to China.
US EV exports to China disappeared (Figure 4)107. After losing both
106 Eri Sugiura and Peter Campbell, ‘Toyota was a hybrid pioneer with the Prius
but struggles to leap to electric’ , Financial Times, 18 October 2022, https://www.
ft.com/content/23707b53-0737-4271-bce2-65471005f34c.
107 “Our vehicle sales in China have been negatively impacted in the past by certain
tariffs on automobiles manufactured in the United States, such as our vehicles, and
our costs for producing our vehicles in the United States have also been affected by
import duties on certain components sourced from China” (Tesla, 2020).
0
2
4
6
8
J a n - 1 7
A p r - 1 7
J ul - 1 7
O c t- 1 7
J a n - 1 8
A p r - 1 8
J ul - 1 8
O c t- 1 8
J a n - 1 9
A p r - 1 9
J ul - 1 9
O c t- 1 9
J a n - 2 0
A p r - 2 0
J ul - 2 0
O c t- 2 0
J a n - 2 1
A p r - 2 1
J ul - 2 1
O c t- 2 1
J a n - 2 2
A p r - 2 2
J ul - 2 2
O c t- 2 2
J a n - 2 3
U n i te d S ta te s
S o uth K o r e a
C h i n a
U n i te d K i n g d o m
J a p a n
R e s t o f w o r l d

===== PDF_PAGE 243 =====
241 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
the Chinese and European markets, the only sizable recent US export
growth for EVs has been to Canada108.
Fourth, sales to the United States and Norway have dominated EU
exports of EVs (Figure 5). EU exports to the United Kingdom resumed
after a brief decline in the aftermath of Brexit. EU exports of EVs to China
are modest.
Figure 4: Trade war tariffs wiped out US electric vehicle exports to China; exports
to the EU have also suffered, but exports to Canada have grown
Source: US International Trade Commission Dataweb. Notes: The Schedule B code
for electric vehicles is 8703800000. The code was created in 2017 and did not exist for
electric vehicles prior to 2017.
108 Beginning in 2022, some lower US exports in the short run would also be partially
attributed to an increase is US domestic demand for EVs driven by US policy – eg
the consumer tax credits in the IRA as well as charging stations funded by the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act.
0
1
2
3
4
5
J a n - 1 8
M a r - 1 8
M a y- 1 8
J ul - 1 8
S e p - 1 8
N o v - 1 8
J a n - 1 9
M a r - 1 9
M a y- 1 9
J ul - 1 9
S e p - 1 9
N o v - 1 9
J a n - 2 0
M a r - 2 0
M a y- 2 0
J ul - 2 0
S e p - 2 0
N o v - 2 0
J a n - 2 1
M a r - 2 1
M a y- 2 1
J ul - 2 1
S e p - 2 1
N o v - 2 1
J a n - 2 2
M a r - 2 2
M a y- 2 2
J ul - 2 2
S e p - 2 2
N o v - 2 2
J a n - 2 3
C a n a d a
C h i n a
E U 2 7
J a p a n M e x i c o
S o uth K o r e a
R e s t o f w o r l d

===== PDF_PAGE 244 =====
242 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Figure 5: Major EU electric vehicle export destinations include the US, UK, and Norway
Source: Eurostat. Notes: The CN codes are 87038010 and 87038090 in 2017-2023,
87039010 in 2016. Trade values are converted to US dollars from euros using end-of-
month usd/euro spot exchange rates from FRED (DEXUSEU).
5 The US policy response to European pleas and other
announcements
On 29 December 2022, the Biden Administration quietly announced what
may turn out to have been an economic bombshell. The Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) in the Treasury Department issued guidance indicating that
consumers that leased EVs weighing less than 14,000 pounds – normally
falling under the Section 30D tax credits – could qualify under the Section
45W tax credits whether or not the leased vehicle was assembled in North
America (IRS 2022). Leased vehicles assembled in Europe, South Korea,
Japan or anywhere else were suddenly eligible for the tax credit.
Put differently, almost none of the constraints found in Section 30D
– including the price and income caps – apply when US consumers
lease vehicles to access the tax credit under Section 45W. Expensive
European-assembled models from Porsche, BMW and Mercedes – and
the high-income consumers who can afford them – suddenly became
eligible for US tax credits. For European luxury brands, the benefit of
the 29 December decision was thus potentially even greater than if the
0
2
4
6
J a n - 1 7
A p r - 1 7
J ul - 1 7
O c t- 1 7
J a n - 1 8
A p r - 1 8
J ul - 1 8
O c t- 1 8
J a n - 1 9
A p r - 1 9
J ul - 1 9
O c t- 1 9
J a n - 2 0
A p r - 2 0
J ul - 2 0
O c t- 2 0
J a n - 2 1
A p r - 2 1
J ul - 2 1
O c t- 2 1
J a n - 2 2
A p r - 2 2
J ul - 2 2
O c t- 2 2
J a n - 2 3
U n i te d S ta te s
S w i tz e r l a n d
C h i n a
U n i te d K i n g d o m
N o r w a y
R e s t o f w o r l d

===== PDF_PAGE 245 =====
243 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
United States had eliminated the North American assembly require-
ment in Section 30D by Congress amending the law.
The Section 45W leasing option will also dull the battery supply
chain sourcing incentives, which are also found only in Section 30D. If
consumers choose to take up the tax credit primarily via leasing under
Section 45W, automakers will not face financial pressure to use battery
components sourced from the United States, use recycled batteries or
source critical minerals from the United States or free trade agreement
partners. Section 45W thus reduces the incentive to create a separate
redundant EV battery input supply chain outside of China.
In a second set of announcements in early 2023, the Biden
Administration made additional decisions affecting implementation
of the consumer tax credits. On 31 March, Treasury released its pro-
posed rule regarding which countries would be considered ‘free trade
agreement’ partners to satisfy the critical minerals sourcing criterion
in Section 30D. It highlighted countries with which the United States
“has reliable and trusted economic relationships. ” In addition to the 20
countries with which the United States had a Congressionally ratified
FTA109, the criterion for a critical minerals agreement would be one in
which each side
“(A) reduces or eliminates trade barriers on a preferential basis,
(B) commits the parties to refrain from imposing new trade barri-
ers, (C) establishes high-standard disciplines in key areas affecting
trade (such as core labor and environmental protections), and/
or (D) reduces or eliminates restrictions on exports or commits the
parties to refrain from imposing such restrictions on exports” (88
Federal Register 23370, 17 April 2023).
109 The 20 countries are Australia, Bahrain, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Israel, Jordan, Korea,
Mexico, Morocco, Nicaragua, Oman, Panama, Peru and Singapore.

===== PDF_PAGE 246 =====
244 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
The Biden Administration had foreshadowed these details on 28
March, when it announced and released the text of a critical minerals
trade agreement with Japan110. On 10 March, European Commission
President Ursula von der Leyen and President Biden announced that the
EU and US would negotiate a similar agreement specifically “to count
toward requirements for clean vehicles in the Section 30D clean vehicle tax
credit of the Inflation Reduction Act”111. Countries including the United
Kingdom, Indonesia and the Philippines immediately indicated they, too,
would like to negotiate such an arrangement with the United States112.
The purpose of such an agreement is obvious. If a country gets such
a deal, it becomes a more attractive location for critical mineral supply
chain investments, because of access to the $3,750 tax credit under
Section 30D. What remains unclear is whether such an agreement would
be simply a memorandum of understanding or if it would force a trading
partner to adopt new laws or regulations. For the United States, these
laws or regulations are currently being negotiated as executive agree-
ments (Claussen, 2023), which do not require Congressional ratification.
Negotiating them as such also means that a future administration could
revoke them. This situation creates uncertainty for firms as they make
decisions about where to locate substantial investments.
Some lawmakers were not pleased with the Biden Administration
110 See https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/2023-03/US Japan Critical Minerals Agree-
ment 2023 03 28.pdf.
111 White House, ‘Joint Statement by President Biden and President von der Leyen’ ,
10 March 2023, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releas-
es/2023/03/10/joint-statement-by-president-biden-and-president-von-der-leyen-2/.
112 See Graham Lanktree, ‘Rishi Sunak Presses Joe Biden for a Trade Deal — Just
Not the One the UK Wants Most’ , Politico, 11 April 2023, https://www.politico.eu/
article/rishi-sunak-presses-joe-biden-for-trade-deal-uk-us-raw-materials-ira-sup-
ply-chains-china/; Stefanno Sulaiman, ‘Indonesia to Propose Limited Free Trade
Deal with US on Critical Minerals’ , Reuters, 10 April 2023, https://www.reuters.
com/world/asia-pacific/indonesia-propose-limited-free-trade-deal-with-us-criti-
cal-minerals-2023-04-10/; and Brett Fortnam, ‘The Philippines calls for FTA, criti-
cal minerals deal with the U.S. ’ , Inside US Trade, 25 April 2023, https://insidetrade.
com/daily-news/philippines-calls-fta-critical-minerals-deal-us.

===== PDF_PAGE 247 =====
245 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
implementing regulations of 29 December and 31 March, and its nego-
tiations of such critical minerals agreements. In March, a bipartisan
group called out the administration for not consulting with Congress,
arguing that it was interfering with Congressional authority under the
Constitution113.
For its part, Congress also admitted to errors when drafting the
original IRA text on the EV tax credits in haste in July 2022. Senator
Manchin, who had negotiated the last-minute IRA details with Senate
Majority Leader Schumer stated, “I gotta be honest with you. I should
have paused and said ‘OK, I’m going to make sure our NATO allies
are involved in this’”114. In January 2023, Manchin also admitted that
“I did not realise the European Union is not a free trade agreement
[economy]”115. Such statements suggest that he may have welcomed
Treasury’s efforts at writing the implementing regulations that would
make the EV tax credits more accessible to NATO allies and the EU.
Writing in the Wall Street Journal on 29 March 2023, however, Manchin
made clear his displeasure with the way in which Treasury was imple-
menting the tax credit regulations to include partners like Japan and
the European Union, by asking President Biden “to instruct his admin-
istration to implement the Inflation Reduction Act as written and stop
redefining its credits and other subsidies”116.
113 Margaret Spiegelman, ‘Ways & Means Trade Chair: Guidance on EV Tax Credits
“Unconstitutional” ’ , Inside US Trade, 31 arch 2023, https://insidetrade.com/dai-
ly-news/ways-means-trade-chair-guidance-ev-tax-credits-unconstitutional.
114 Andrew Duehren, ‘EU and Japan Strike Deal on Minerals Used in Batteries for
Electric Cars’ , Wall Street Journal, 28 March 2023, https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-
s-and-japan-strike-deal-on-minerals-used-in-batteries-for-electric-cars-bbf8b8ee.
115 Ari Natter, ‘Manchin Says He Didn’t Know US, EU Lacked Free Trade Agree-
ment’ , Bloomberg, 19 January 2023, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/arti-
cles/2023-01-19/manchin-says-he-didn-t-know-us-eu-lacked-free-trade-agreement.
116 Joe Manchin, ‘Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act Betrayal. Instead of Implementing
the Law as Intended, His Administration Subverts It for Ideological Ends’ , Wall Street
Journal, 29 March 2023, https://www.wsj.com/articles/biden-inflation-reduction-
act-betrayal-joe-manchin-debt-ceiling-budget-fossil-fuels-green-energy-dc37738e.

===== PDF_PAGE 248 =====
246 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
The full impact of these critical minerals agreements and the
Treasury announcement of 31 March 2023 remains unknown. At one
extreme, they could turn out to be meaningless. For example, if all
consumers and automakers switch to transacting via lease instead of
purchases, there would be no additional tax credit benefit from sourc-
ing critical minerals from such a partner country. Or, if the executive
agreement nature of the critical minerals deals does not create enough
certainty about future access to the US tax credits, firms may not invest.
At the other extreme, if consumers seek the tax credit under Section 30D
instead, the ability to source inputs from such countries might create
additional incentives to develop alternative supply chains outside of
China.
Finally, on 12 April 2023, the Biden Administration proposed another
policy to increase the take-up of EVs117. The Environmental Protection
Agency announced new regulations that require two-thirds of new
passenger cars to be all-electric by 2032. If implemented, the regulations
would tend to increase consumption of all EVs, domestic or imported,
relative to ICE vehicles.
6 Eligibility for US tax credits, US imports of electric vehicles, and
leasing
It is too soon to look for the impact of these emerging regulations on
the EV supply chain, but it is worth examining the US import market to
provide context (Figure 6). The concern expressed by South Korean and
European officials over the North American assembly provisions in the
IRA is understandable. In the lead-up to the sudden announcement of
its details (in July 2022), US imports of EVs from both the EU and South
Korea had been growing. In the 12 months ending in July 2022, US
imports were $3.3 billion from the EU and $1.8 billion from South Korea.
Cutting off those exports would obviously hurt both economies.
117 See EPA press release of 12 April 2023, https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/bid-
en-harris-administration-proposes-strongest-ever-pollution-standards-cars-and.

===== PDF_PAGE 249 =====
247 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Figure 6: US imports of electric vehicles from the EU and South Korea have
continued growing despite the IRA
Source: US International Trade Commission Dataweb. Notes: The Harmonised Tariff
Schedule code is 8703800000. The code was created in 2017 and did not exist prior to
2017.
There is no discernible impact of the IRA on the US electric vehicle
import data at time of writing. The North American assembly provi-
sion went into effect on 16 August 2022 and has remained in place for
purchased vehicles since. Adoption of the August provision was not
followed by a reduction in US imports of EVs from either the EU or
South Korea in the fourth quarter of 2022. The lack of decline suggests
that US demand for EVs in this period was high, as US consumers
continued to purchase imported EVs even though the Section 30D
consumer tax credits discriminated against most foreign-assem-
bled vehicles. It was only on 29 December that Treasury announced
that leased vehicles were eligible for the consumer tax credit, even if
assembled outside of North America. Thus, any positive impact from
that announcement would only be expected to arise in the 2023 data.
However, at least three other interesting trends are apparent in
the US import data. First, US imports of EVs from Mexico are increas-
ing, thanks in part to sales of the Mustang Mach-E assembled at
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
J a n - 1 8
M a r - 1 8
M a y- 1 8
J ul - 1 8
S e p - 1 8
N o v - 1 8
J a n - 1 9
M a r - 1 9
M a y- 1 9
J ul - 1 9
S e p - 1 9
N o v - 1 9
J a n - 2 0
M a r - 2 0
M a y- 2 0
J ul - 2 0
S e p - 2 0
N o v - 2 0
J a n - 2 1
M a r - 2 1
M a y- 2 1
J ul - 2 1
S e p - 2 1
N o v - 2 1
J a n - 2 2
M a r - 2 2
M a y- 2 2
J ul - 2 2
S e p - 2 2
N o v - 2 2
J a n - 2 3
C a n a d a C h i n a
E U 2 7
J a p a n
M e x i c o
S o uth K o r e a
R e s t o f w o r l d

===== PDF_PAGE 250 =====
248 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
the Ford Cuautitlan Stamping and Assembly Plant (while US imports
from Mexico were unaffected by the IRA ’s North American assembly
requirement that went into effect in August 2022, they may be affected
by the input sourcing requirements that went into effect in April 2023
discussed below). Second, like the EU, the US is importing relatively few
battery EVs from Japan. Third, and unlike the EU, the US is not importing
many EVs from China. These sales are probably limited by the 25 percent
US trade war tariffs imposed in July 2018 on imports of cars from China,
which remain in effect.
Stronger recent American take-up of all EVs, including imports, may
reflect several additional factors. First, improvements to the EV charging
infrastructure – including the roll-out of fast-charging stations – may
have reduced ‘range anxiety’ concerns. Second, so few models may have
been assembled in North America that consumers found it difficult not
to buy imports. If more vehicle models are assembled in North America,
that constraint would be relaxed over time.
Indeed, when the sourcing regulations announced on 31 March went
into effect on 18 April, only 20 models from four automakers – Ford, GM,
Tesla and Volkswagen – remained eligible for the full $7,500 tax credit
under Section 30D. Another six models (one from Tesla, two from Rivian
and three from Ford, including the Mustang Mach-E) were eligible for
$3,750 of the credit. Apparently nine models from four automakers –
Hyundai (Genesis), Nissan, Tesla and Volkswagen – were not able to
adjust their input sourcing requirements in time to remain eligible for
the tax credits on 18 April. For these and other non-eligible models, it
remains to be seen whether automakers shift their input sources (and
regain access under Section 30D), lease to consumers instead (and gain
access under Section 45W), sell without the tax credit or discontinue the
models entirely.
US imports of EVs may remain high, especially if consumers choose
to lease instead of buy. In the short run, this may also be impacted by the
fact that so few models satisfying the tax credits were available to buy.
Early indications suggest US leasing of electric vehicles increased

===== PDF_PAGE 251 =====
249 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
considerably in the immediate aftermath of the Treasury announce-
ment of 29 December 2022 (Figure 7). EV leasing rates increased from
only 9.7 percent of new EVs entering the market in December 2022
to 34.3 percent by March 2023. The steady increase from January to
March is consistent with dealers and consumers learning about and
responding to the tax credit differential available under the leasing
option. While the leasing rate of all US vehicles increased between
December 2022 and March 2023, the uptick was much larger for EVs
(in 2022, ICE vehicles still made up more than 90 percent of all new
vehicles in the US market – see again Figure 1).
Figure 7: US electric vehicle leases have increased since the eligibility for IRA
tax credits was expanded
Source: Edmunds. Notes: On 29 December 2022, Treasury announced that EVs leased
to consumers would be eligible for tax credits under Section 45W of the Inflation
Reduction Act.
More generally, Figure 7 also illustrates how US lease rates, includ-
ing for EVs, fell dramatically during the COVID-19 pandemic and
remained extraordinarily low as of December 2022. Between 2010-19,
on average, 25 percent of all new passenger cars put onto the market
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Jan-20
M ar-20
M ay-20
Jul-20
Sep-20
N ov-20
Jan-21
M ar-21
M ay-21
Jul-21
Sep-21
N ov-21
Jan-22
M ar-22
M ay-22
Jul-22
Sep-22
N ov-22
Jan-23
M ar-23
All vehicles
Electric vehicles

===== PDF_PAGE 252 =====
250 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
each year were leased, with slightly lower rates for light trucks118.
Pandemic lockdowns and mobility restrictions resulted in a crash of
US car production in early 2020. When mobility restrictions were lifted,
there was a shortage of new cars – further exacerbated by supply chain
disruptions, including semiconductor shortages – increasing demand
for used cars, causing used-car prices to spike. As a result, many leased
vehicles had higher market values at the end of their lease period than
the option price set when the lease was first signed. That price differ-
ential led many consumers to purchase their previously leased cars
outright, forgoing the need for another lease. This is one reason why
leasing rates fell and have only recently begun to recover119.
7 Conclusion
Section 30D of the IRA restricts eligibility for consumer tax credits on
the purchase of EVs. For a consumer to receive the full subsidy, the
vehicle must not only be assembled in North America, but the source
of key inputs for its batteries must be sourced outside of China and
from a restrictive set of locations. Furthermore, access requires that
consumers satisfy legislatively mandated income caps and specific
models meet price caps. On the other hand, the 29 December 2022
Treasury announcement meant that Section 45W of the IRA does not
restrict eligibility for tax credits provided consumers lease the EV .
Thus, those Section 30D restrictions may be significantly dulled if
consumers start leasing EVs and accessing tax credits under Section
45W instead. If consumers do not lease EVs, then the IRA ’s Section 30D
constraints will bind and affect incentives in a number of ways. First,
fewer models will be available and limited to those assembled in North
America. Second, the binding nature of the EV supply chain con-
straints also found in Section 30D may further limit eligibility – eg only
118 Bureau of Transportation Statistics, 2023, https://www.bts.gov/content/new-and-
used-passenger-car-sales-and-leases-thousands-vehicles.
119 Sean Tucker, ‘Car Leases are Declining – Here’s Why’ , Kelley Blue Book, 1 Novem-
ber 2022, https://www.kbb.com/car-news/car-leases-are-declining-heres-why/.

===== PDF_PAGE 253 =====
251 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
a few models were eligible for the full tax credit as of April 2023, when
the input sourcing regulations first went into effect. More models may
become eligible over time if automakers choose to assemble in North
America and if their supply chains for inputs adjust. However, that out-
come may also be influenced by the restrictiveness of other Treasury
and Department of Energy Section 30D decisions that are still under
consideration, as well as whether countries negotiate critical minerals
agreements with the US Trade Representative.
However, even if consumers opt to buy instead of lease EVs, so that
the battery input sourcing criterion binds, several questions remain.
To address concerns over dependency on imports from an authori-
tarian regime with a history of restricting exports, how will the United
States coordinate with trading partners to establish an additional EV
battery input supply chain outside of China? In June 2022, the United
States, the EU, Japan, South Korea, the United Kingdom and Australia
established the Minerals Security Partnership120. How it will be used
remains unclear. Where will the mining and the environmentally chal-
lenging refining take place? Incentivising industry to invest in an addi-
tional supply chain outside of China is resource intensive and requires
policy coordination, including through potentially discriminatory
policies. Those policies include subsidies (to favoured producers),
tariffs (on Chinese production), or establishment of environmental,
social and governance standards that China would be deemed unable
to meet. Even adding Japan, the EU or the UK as ‘free trade agreement’
partners to provide them eligibility under Section 30D is unlikely to
be sufficient on its own, as these economies currently mine or process
few critical minerals.
From the EU’s perspective, although the EV subsidies made the
headlines, they were only one small part of its concerns with the IRA.
And even they were only partially fixed. Whether EU EV exporters are
120 See US State Department press release of 14 June 2022, https://www.state.gov/
minerals-security-partnership/.

===== PDF_PAGE 254 =====
252 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
affected will ultimately depend, in part, on whether consumers switch
to leasing.
Another issue that could not be resolved is the IRA ’s producer tax
credits for batteries and their inputs arising under Section 45X.
Furthermore, none of the tweaks arising from Treasury regulations
tackled the larger and more fundamental European worry about the
IRA: the divergence between the US and EU approaches to reducing
carbon emissions and tackling climate change. Even ignoring the local
content requirements and other discriminatory elements associated
with all of the other tax credits for production of hydrogen, solar, wind
and other forms of clean energy121, Europe’s primary concern is that the
US approach is to subsidise energy while the EU has been planning to
tax carbon. This policy divergence may make certain energy-intensive
industries artificially competitive in the United States relative to their
European counterparts. How great this impact will be is an empirical
question.
To keep tabs on the issue, French and German economy ministers
Bruno Le Maire and Robert Habeck requested additional US trans-
parency122. Although transparency is obviously welcome, at least two
challenges remain. First, take-up of the subsidies is difficult to project,
because it depends on consumer responsiveness, producer respon-
siveness and many other factors. It will also be difficult to measure and
report on publicly because much of the subsidisation arrives through
credits and the tax code as opposed to direct government expenditures.
121 Many of the production tax credits in Section 45X may also distort trade by reduc-
ing purchases of imported inputs. As they are for domestic energy products that
may be nontraded, the resulting outputs may not be trade distorting. However,
the impact of reducing US energy prices (relative to the EU climate policy ap-
proach, which increases energy prices) will affect the relative competitiveness of
other US and EU energy-intensive industries.
122 Christian Kraemer and David Lawder, ‘France, Germany Protest US Green Sub-
sidies on Washington Trip’ , Reuters, 8 February 2023, https://www.reuters.com/
markets/europe/inflation-reduction-act-should-cover-most-possible-eu-com-
panies-frances-le-maire-2023-02-07/.

===== PDF_PAGE 255 =====
253 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Second, understanding the potential impacts of these other parts of the
IRA on competitiveness will require more complex assessments than
simply counting up the total amount of subsidies disbursed.
From the US perspective, the IRA also remains imperfect. As already
described, the implementing regulations may impact economic out-
comes in ways that diverge from the law’s initial intentions.
Even putting that aside, additional domestic policy is needed to assist
workers and communities adversely affected by the transition from
ICE vehicles to EVs. Displaced workers need help reaching opportuni-
ties, both within the automobile and clean energy sectors and in other
important and growing areas of the US economy (Hanson, 2023).
The IRA also raises longer-run fiscal concerns. Because its tax credits
are uncapped, if consumer and producer take-up of incentives exceeds
expectations, the federal government may need additional sources of tax
revenue. One potential solution – included in the Build Back Better Act,
which passed the House in 2021 but failed to pass the Senate, but was
not included in the IRA – was a global minimum corporate tax that is
consistent with that of the OECD (Clausing, 2022, 2023; the EU adopted
a directive implementing the minimum tax at the end of 2022, Directive
(EU) 2022/2523).
The US and EU may have resolved the most pressing bilateral fric-
tions associated with their EV industries. But the European concerns
associated with the IRA overall have not been fixed, and the considera-
ble political-economic challenges associated with coordinating the US
and EU green transitions are far from over.

===== PDF_PAGE 256 =====
254 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
References
ACEA (2022) Overview—Electric Vehicles:
Tax Benefits & Purchase Incentives in the
European Union, European Automobile
Manufacturers’ Association, 21
September, available at https://www.acea.
auto/fact/overview-electric-vehicles-
tax-benefits-purchase-incentives-in-the-
european-union-2022/
Autor, D., D. Dorn and G. Hanson (2021)
‘On the Persistence of the China Shock’ ,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
Fall: 381–447, available at https://
www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/
on-the-persistence-of-the-china-shock/
Bistline, J., N.R. Mehrotra and C. Wolfram
(2023) ‘Economic Implications of the
Climate Provisions in the Inflation
Reduction Act’ , Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity Conference Draft,
March
Bown, C.P . (2018) ‘Why the United States
Needs Allies in a Trade War Against
China’ , Harvard Business Review, 11
December, available at https://piie.com/
commentary/op-eds/why-us-needs-
allies-trade-war-against-china
Bown, C.P . (2021) ‘The US–China Trade
War and Phase One Agreement’ , Journal of
Policy Modeling 43(4) 805–43
Bown, C.P . (2022) ‘Will New US Tax
Credits Remake EV Supply Chains?’ Trade
Talks, episode 167, 3 October, available
at https://tradetalkspodcast.com/
podcast/167-will-new-us-tax-credits-
remake-electric-vehicle-supply-chains/
Bown, C.P . and J.A. Hillman (2019)
‘WTO’ing a Resolution to the China
Subsidy Problem’ , Journal of International
Economic Law 22(4): 557–78
Clausing, K. (2022) ‘The Global Minimum
Tax Lives on. America Has Abandoned
It for Now but Will Likely Come around’ ,
Foreign Affairs, 17 August, available
at https://www.foreignaffairs.com/
united-states/global-minimum-tax-lives
Clausing, K. (2023) ‘The international tax
agreement of 2021: Why it’s needed, what
it does, and what comes next?’ Peterson
Institute for International Economics
Policy Briefs 23-4, available at https://
www.piie.com/publications/policy-
briefs/international-tax-agreement-2021-
why-its-needed-what-it-does-and-what
Clausing, K. and C. Wolfram
(Forthcoming) ‘ Asymmetric Climate
Policies and International Trade’ , Journal
of Economic Perspectives
Claussen, K. (2023) ‘What Is a Free Trade
Agreement, Anyway?’ International
Economic Law and Policy Blog, 3 January,
https://ielp.worldtradelaw.net/2023/01/
what-is-a-free-trade-agreement-anyway.
html
CBO (2022a) Emissions of Carbon
Dioxide in the Transportation Sector,
Congressional Budget Office, available at
https://www.cbo.gov/system/files/2022-
12/58566-co2-emissions-transportation.
pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 257 =====
255 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
CBO (2022b) ‘Summary Estimated
Budgetary Effects of Public Law 117- 169,
to Provide for Reconciliation Pursuant to
Title II of S. Con. Res. 14’ , Congressional
Budget Office and Joint Committee on
Taxation, available at https://www.cbo.
gov/publication/58455
EPA (2022) EPA External Review Draft of
Report on the Social Cost of Greenhouse
Gases: Estimates Incorporating
Recent Scientific Advances, PA-HQ-
OAR-2021-0317, Environmental
Protection Agency, available at
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/
documents/2022-11/epa_scghg_report_
draft_0.pdf
Goldman Sachs (2023) Carbonomics: The
Third American Energy Revolution
Hanson, G.H. (2023) ‘Local Labor
Market Impacts of the Energy Transition:
Prospects and Policies’ , NBER Working
Paper 30871, National Bureau of
Economic Research, available at https://
www.nber.org/papers/w30871
IEA (2022) Electric Vehicles, International
Energy Agency, available at https://www.
iea.org/reports/electric-vehicles
IRS (2022) ‘Frequently Asked Questions
Related to New, Previously-Owned and
Qualified Commercial Clean Vehicle
Credits’ , RS Fact Sheet FS-2022-42,
Internal Revenue Service, US Department
of Treasury, available at https://www.irs.
gov/pub/taxpros/fs-2022-42.pdf
Klier, T .H. and J.M. Rubenstein (2022)
‘North America’s Rapidly Growing EV
Market: Implications for the Geography
of Automotive Production’ , Chicago Fed
Economic Perspectives 5, available at
https://doi.org/10.21033/ep-2022-5
Kleimann, D., N. Poitiers, A. Sapir, S.
Tagliapietra, N. Véron, R. Veugelers and J.
Zettelmeyer (2023) ‘How Europe should
answer the US Inflation Reduction Act’ ,
Policy Contribution 04/2023, Bruegel,
available at https://www.bruegel.org/
policy-brief/how-europe-should-answer-
us-inflation-reduction-act
Leruth, L., A. Mazarei, P . Régibeau and
L. Renneboog (2022) ‘Green Energy
Depends On Critical Minerals. Who
Controls the Supply Chains?’ PIIE
Working Paper 22-12, Peterson Institute
for International Economics, available
at https://www.piie.com/publications/
working-papers/green-energy-depends-
critical-minerals-who-controls-supply-
chains
Noland, M. (2023) ‘Electric Vehicle
Uptake: Hawaii as a Natural Experiment’ ,
PIIE Realtime Economics, 4 April,
Peterson Institute for International
Economics, available at https://www.
piie.com/blogs/realtime-economics/
electric-vehicle-uptake-hawaii-natural-
experiment
OECD (2022) Pricing Greenhouse Gas
Emissions: Key Findings for the United
States, Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, available
at https://www.oecd.org/tax/tax-policy/
carbon-pricing-united-states.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 258 =====
256 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
OECD (2023) ‘Raw Materials Critical
for the Green Transition. Production,
International Trade and Export’ , OECD
Trade Policy Paper 269, Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and
Development, available at https://www.
oecd.org/publications/raw-materials-
critical-for-the-green-transition-
c6bb598b-en.htm
Rapson, D.S. and E. Muehlegger (2022)
‘The Economics of Electric Vehicles’ ,
NBER Working Paper 29093 (revised),
National Bureau of Economic Research
Rennert, K., F . Errickson, B.C. Prest,
L. Rennels, R.G. Newell, W. Pizer ...
D. Anthoff (2022) ‘Comprehensive
Evidence Implies a Higher Social Cost
of CO2’ , Nature 610: 687–92, available
at https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41586-022-05224-9
Sheldon, T .L. (2022) ‘Evaluating Electric
Vehicle Policy Effectiveness and Equity’ ,
Annual Review of Resource Economics 14:
66988
Tesla (2020) ‘Form 10-K. Annual
Report Pursuant to Section 13 or
15(D) of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934’ , 29 January, available at
https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/
data/1318605/000156459020004475/tsla-
10k_20191231.htm
Tracy, B.S. (2022) Critical Minerals in
Electric Vehicle Batteries, CRS Report
R47227, Congressional Research Service,
available at https://crsreports.congress.
gov/product/pdf/R/R47227
US Treasury Department (2022)
‘ Anticipated Direction of Forthcoming
Proposed Guidance on Critical
Mineral and Battery Component Value
Calculations for the New Clean Vehicle
Credit’ , 30D White Paper, 29 December,
available at https://home.treasury.gov/
system/files/136/30DWhite-Paper.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 259 =====
1 2 A new pharma industrial
 policy for Europe? Lessons
 from COVID-19
Mathias Dewatripont
1 Introduction123
This chapter draws out lessons for industrial policy in the European
Union from the COVID-19 vaccine experience. It reviews the process
of development of safe and efficient vaccines and the issue of vaccine
procurement.
The emergence of new efficient vaccines in record time has been
a great success of public and private international cooperation.
However, credit should go to the United States’s ‘Operation Warp
Speed’ , from which Europe should learn important lessons.
This chapter also discusses how to improve the tradeoff between
innovation and affordability, a challenge which is growing with the
emergence of new, costly therapies thanks to the progress of science.
In particular, opportunities should be taken in relation to the new role
of the European Commission as representative of the 27 EU countries
in price negotiations with pharmaceutical companies.
2 Vaccine development, authorisation and production124
The COVID-19 crisis and the question of vaccine development have
been instructive in terms of what needs to improve in the EU. The
123 The paper is based on Dewatripont (2022). I thank Sofia Amaral-Garcia, Philippe
Aghion, Alain Fischer and Michel Goldman, with whom I collaborated on some of
the work discussed here.
124 This section is partly based on Aghion et al (2020).

===== PDF_PAGE 260 =====
258 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
crisis revealed the weaknesses of the US social system compared to
Europe, and the mismanagement of the pandemic by the Trump
Administration. Nonetheless, together with Congress, the Trump
Administration pursued a determined and aggressive strategy to: (i)
ensure US leadership in vaccine R&D, and (ii) secure supplies of future
vaccines for US citizens.
Although the European Commission took the lead in negotiating
advance purchase agreements with vaccine manufacturers on behalf
of the 27 EU countries, and decided to provide loans to European
biotechs engaged in vaccine development through the European
Investment Bank, it fell short in terms of matching the US effort to
incentivise vaccine innovation. This was because of a lower level of
financial investment and insufficient coordination of research and
innovation funding schemes (reflecting the more decentralised nature
of R&D and health policies in Europe).
2.1 General considerations
Considering the race for a successful ‘global product’ , a natural ques-
tion concerns the optimal degree of competition and coordination.
For COVID-19 vaccines, we observed an interesting mix of the two:
although political authorities in China initially denied the upcoming
disaster, Chinese scientists have been very open about their research
results. In fact, the first vaccines to be authorised could be developed
rapidly because Chinese scientists had published the genetic sequence
of the virus as soon as it was deciphered, allowing universities and
private firms, large and small, to compete aggressively to be the first
in the race for a vaccine, with the help of private, and especially state,
funding sources.
From the perspective of world welfare, the cooperation/open
science part is obviously good. As for the competition on vaccine
development, things are more subtle: on the one hand, more financial
effort overall is good since it saves lives and accelerates exit from costly
lockdowns. On the other hand, is there a risk of money being ‘wasted’

===== PDF_PAGE 261 =====
259 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
in funding more than 100 vaccine projects, including advance building
of production facilities? As discussed by Bolton and Farrell (1990), in
“times of war” , speed is essential, and more coordination is preferable
to “fine-tuning for the most efficient option, ” if such an optimal solution
comes significantly later. We can, however, safely conclude that speed
has not been hampered, given the rush we observed. If anything, the
risk to be worried about concerned ‘cutting corners’ in excessively
fast approval of vaccines that might not be safe or effective enough.
But that risk appears to have been dealt with successfully, since more
than 13 billion vaccine doses had been administered worldwide by
February 2023, with few adverse side-effects. Authorisation bodies
(Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the US, European Medicines
Agency (EMA) in the EU, etc) thus showed they were able to combine
speed and safety.
2.2 The US versus the EU
As is well-known, the US is a clear leader in biotech innovation (see
evidence summarised in Aghion et al, 2020). Moreover, it set up an
articulated US-centric COVID-19 strategy – Operation Warp Speed
(OWS) – which took advantage of the complementarity between devel-
oping vaccines and securing advanced supplies. It thereby brought
together the two phases of negotiations with private entities, while
relying on the combined expertise and financial weight of existing fed-
eral instruments, in particular the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
and the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority
(BARDA). This gave the US a first-mover advantage.
Congress allocated almost $10 billion to OWS, of which more than
$6.5 billion was allocated to BARDA and $3 billion for NIH research.
By September 2020, BARDA had distributed more than $11 billion
to more than 40 companies to fund the development of COVID-19
vaccines, diagnostic, therapeutics, rapidly deployable capabilities and
others (see Aghion et al, 2020).
The EU, instead, pursued a less-coherent strategy overall, and with

===== PDF_PAGE 262 =====
260 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
fewer financial resources invested directly in candidate vaccines. And
while it looked more ‘benevolent’ than the US in terms of vaccine devel-
opment, pushing for worldwide cooperation, through the Coronavirus
Global Response, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations
(CEPI) and the ‘ ACT-Accelerator’ (see details in Aghion et al, 2020), it
has been ‘EU-centric’ when trying to secure vaccine supplies for its
member states and citizens. This strategy did not exploit sufficiently the
complementarity involved in the process, which adds to the problematic
complexity of funding sources (European budget, European Investment
Bank (EIB), member states, etc).
By September 2020, there were more than 130 candidate vaccines
in preclinical evaluation and 30 candidate vaccines in clinical evalu-
ation. Among these 30 candidates, 13 received support from BARDA,
CEPI and/or the EU/EIB (see Aghion et al, 2020). Among these, three
received support from both BARDA and CEPI (University of Oxford,
Moderna and Novavax), one received support from both CEPI and
the EIB (CureVac), and one received support from BARDA and EIB
(BioNTech). In all these cases, BARDA consistently provided higher
funding amounts.
It is moreover striking that BARDA spent $8.69 billion out of its $10.8
billion on the five vaccines that were approved, as of December 2021, by
the FDA and/or EMA (BioNTech-Pfizer, Moderna, AstraZeneca, Johnson
and Johnson and Novavax). And obviously the funding did not go only
to US companies, since AstraZeneca and BioNTech (which is the com-
pany that received BARDA funding, not Pfizer) are European. In fact the
remaining $2.07 billion went to Sanofi, a French company, whose vac-
cine developed together with GSK received EMA approval in late 2022.
It is also interesting that a very significant chunk of the funding
went to biotech companies Moderna and Novavax, and BioNTech. This
confirms the importance of smaller firms in health innovation. That
said, the success of the BioNTech-Pfizer alliance also shows the value
of a close association with a big pharma company for scaling up the
downward development and the production phases, even if Moderna’s

===== PDF_PAGE 263 =====
261 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
performance was quite impressive. And it is striking that, of the ‘big
four’ pre-COVID-19 vaccine players – MSD, GSK, Sanofi and Pfizer –
only the last emerged as a ‘winner’ of this race, and only thanks to its
alliance with BioNTech.
Coming back to OWS, as stressed in 2020 by Moncef Slaoui125, who
was appointed OWS Chief Scientific Officer, there was a conscious
decision to concentrate funding on three different technologies and
two projects per technology (or ‘dual sourcing’): BioNTech/Pfizer
(Germany/US) and Moderna (US) for the mRNA technology, Johnson
and Johnson (US) and Oxford/AstraZeneca (UK/Sweden) for the viral
vector technology, and Novavax (US) and Sanofi/GSK (France/UK) for
the protein subunit technology.
It is hard not to consider OWS as an overwhelming success of
‘industrial policy’ , bringing together, as stressed by Slaoui: (i) signif-
icant public money, (ii) competences from the whole ‘ecosystem’:
universities, BARDA, NIH, FDA, biotech companies, big pharma, and
even the US Army, and (iii) a small unified decision-making structure
to speed things up, at arm’s length from politics. Of course, there was
quite some luck: the most successful technology, mRNA, was read-
ily available, thanks to years of research efforts (which, as argued by
Veugelers (2021) had not benefited before COVID-19 from the support
it deserved). And the vaccines turned out to be even more successful
than what could have been expected. But still, this episode was a great
success, which other jurisdictions should definitely try to learn from.
2.3 For an integrated EU treatment and vaccine development strategy
Europe (especially when adding the United Kingdom and Switzerland
to the EU) is strong in health, with its universities, biotech companies,
big pharma companies and public money, which is ample although
125 See Jean-François Munster, ‘Moncef Slaoui au «Soir»: «Avec les vaccins, on va
pouvoir contrôler cette pandémie»’ , Le Soir, 26 December 2020, https://www.
lesoir.be/345671/article/2020-12-26/moncef-slaoui-au-soir-avec-les-vaccins-va-
pouvoir-controler-cette-pandemie.

===== PDF_PAGE 264 =====
262 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
scattered (the EU being rightly seen as a regulatory giant but a budgetary
dwarf ). It is coordination that is suboptimal.
Therefore a renewed EU support strategy for the development and
commercialisation of innovative technologies is desirable. This could be
extended to other areas, for example, defence-related technologies, on
the model of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
in the US, which, strikingly, has been instrumental also in a number of
non-defence innovations. This should not be a renewed industrial policy
amounting to ‘picking one winner’ . As in the case of COVID-19 vaccines,
the BARDA-DARPA model mixes top-down and bottom-up approaches,
in which government funds finance competing teams that work on
making new technologies operational126. Once selected by the govern-
ment, team leaders have full autonomy in deciding how to organise the
research process and who to involve in that process. The various teams
will typically compete not only within Europe, but also on a more global
scale, with the US but also China. So, this is about competition-friendly
industrial policy, as advocated by Aghion et al (2015).
Interestingly, by the end of 2020, the European Union had launched
HERA, the Health Emergency Response and Preparedness Authority,
with explicit reference to BARDA and the US innovation ecosystem. Let
us see to what extent it can help in boosting European innovation in
healthcare.
Let us end this section with three remarks. First, since speed is often
crucial, flexibility has been key to the success of BARDA. This pleads for
relaxing typical EU political constraints about juste retour, seven-year
budgets and (near) unanimity voting rules. Second, BARDA has taken
a global view, so funding should not be exclusively restricted to EU
entities; in particular, despite Brexit, joining forces with the UK makes
particular sense, given its academic and industrial expertise in the area
(the same is true for defence). Third, the US success was not limited
to BARDA. Pooling more resources at the EU level to create an EU
126 See Veugelers (2021) for a discussion of the various dimensions of this ecosystem.

===== PDF_PAGE 265 =====
263 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
equivalent of the NIH is worth considering. And the US has been able to
use the leverage of the Defense Production Act to request private firm
cooperation with OWS (not to mention the help of the US Army). The
lessons of this US success are thus wide-ranging.
3 Securing supplies and setting up delivery systems
COVID-19 vaccines provided an opportunity for the European
Commission to centralise discussions with vaccine producers in order to
obtain sufficient vaccine supplies at an appropriate price.
The Commission was criticised in the first months of 2021 for insisting
too much on low prices in their contractual negotiations with vaccine
producers, and not enough on speed of delivery, in a world where the
opportunity cost of delaying the recovery was huge. This criticism is not
unfair, and countries including Israel, the UK and the US did get ahead of
the EU in vaccination in the first half of 2021. This was particularly true in
the first quarter of 2021. In this respect, while the UK and the US bene-
fited from their close links with, respectively, AstraZeneca and Pfizer and
Moderna to accelerate purchases, Israel showed that one does not have
to be involved in R&D or production to be the first in terms of purchases:
paying a high price is enough (Israel also allowed Pfizer/BioNTech to
analyse in detail the impact of vaccination on the Israeli population,
thereby contributing to global knowledge). Indeed, Israel seems to have
paid between $47 and (more than) $100 – respectively around €38 and
€81 at the time – for two doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine127, much
more than the €24 the EU paid for the same vaccine (the EU also paid less
than €4 for two doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine and €36 for two doses of
the Moderna vaccine in the original contracts signed by the Commission
(these numbers are contractually meant to be secret but were disclosed
in a tweet by the Belgian secretary of state for budget).
After the first quarter of 2021, EU vaccination took off and many
127 Stuart Winer, ‘Israel has spent $788m on vaccines, could double sum — Health
Ministry’ , Times of Israel, 16 March 2021, https://www.timesofisrael.com/israel-
has-spent-788m-on-vaccines-could-double-that-in-future-health-ministry/.

===== PDF_PAGE 266 =====
264 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
western EU countries overtook the US, the UK and Israel in vaccina-
tion rates. And the Commission intervention favoured equal treat-
ment between member states, while earlier a group of four countries
(France, Italy, Germany and the Netherlands) had decided to join
forces and bargain only for themselves. Thanks to the Commission,
everyone agreed ultimately to go for centralised EU-wide bargaining.
As discussed by Dewatripont (2022), vaccination rates went up with
little variance across most EU countries in the first months of 2021.
Until May 2021, only Bulgaria was significantly slower than the other
EU countries. During the course of May and June, some other eastern
EU countries, including Romania, Slovakia, Poland and Czechia, also
started to lag the rest of the pack. Other EU countries stayed close
together until June, when divergence started to grow. But by this time,
vaccine hesitancy had become the key constraint, not vaccine avail-
ability or logistical challenges. Joint European purchases therefore
ensured equity between EU member states, a success which explains
why HERA was subsequently tasked to buy monkeypox vaccines for
most EU countries.
4 Insufficient public leverage on the innovation/affordability
tradeoff of new drugs
The COVID-19 vaccine experience also offers lessons on this innova-
tion/affordability tradeoff.
4.1 Excessive prices?
While the European Commission was criticised in the first half of 2021
for insisting excessively on low COVID-19 vaccine prices (instead of
speed of delivery), containing prices of booster shots and improved
COVID-19 vaccines could be a concern in the future. In this respect,
the words of Frank D’ Amelio, the Chief Financial Officer of Pfizer were
not very reassuring: “In short, D’ Amelio explained that Pfizer expects
its COVID vaccine margins to improve. Under one pandemic supply
deal, Pfizer is charging the US $19.50 per dose, D’ Amelio said, which is

===== PDF_PAGE 267 =====
265 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
‘not a normal price like we typically get for a vaccine—$150, $175 per
dose. So, pandemic pricing’ ”128.
This should remind authorities of the need to avoid rents above
competitive rates of returns for vaccines and treatments. The question
of high prices has become an even bigger issue at a time when acceler-
ating scientific progress opens up new opportunities, for example with
gene therapies (and mRNA could provide another boost to this trend),
which is both very promising and challenging. For example, Fischer et
al (2019, 2022) reported several cases of treatments approved by the
FDA and/or EMA since 2018 costing between $373,000 and $2,100,000
per patient, for diseases affecting 1000 to more than 10,000 patients in
Europe and the US. Since this increasing trend is going to persist, it is
important to find ways to keep public health budgets under control,
while ensuring that useful innovation can flourish.
In its official strategy documents, the European Commission (2021)
has recognised this challenge, and has therefore stressed the need
to ensure access to affordable medicines for patients, and to address
unmet medical needs, in the areas of antimicrobial resistance and rare
diseases in particular. In this respect, the Commission has stressed
four strands of policy: (i) enhancing competition; (ii) working with
national authorities to exchange information on sustainable health
systems, pricing, cost-effectiveness, payment, procurement policies
and affordability; (iii) enhancing transparency through guidelines on
how to calculate the R&D costs of medicines; and (iv) using the annual
European Semester cycle of economic policy coordination to assess
national health systems and issue country-specific recommendations
to ensure their accessibility, efficiency and sustainability.
While these are useful avenues, more could be done. Of course,
while Pfizer, BioNTech and Moderna have been making good money,
128 Eric Sagonowsky, ‘Pfizer eyes higher prices for COVID-19 vaccine after the
pandemic wanes: exec, analyst’ , Fierce Pharma, 23 February 2021, https://www.
fiercepharma.com/pharma/pfizer-eyes-higher-covid-19-vaccine-prices-after-pan-
demic-exec-analyst.

===== PDF_PAGE 268 =====
266 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
typical discussions about innovation in pharma in general pit critics of
high prices and returns against industry advocates who stress the cost
and risk of innovation. Obviously, economists would naturally assume
that inducing private R&D to take place, especially in the ex-ante less
‘attractive’ areas of ‘neglected’ diseases (rare diseases, several infec-
tious diseases, complex diseases like Alzheimer’s, where industry is
seen to be not active enough), requires the researcher/innovator to
anticipate the (discounted) net benefit (B – C) of innovation to exceed
(B – C)*, the net benefit of other potential uses of the innovator’s
resources. Policy can act in particular on the gross benefit B (which is
the result of price negotiations with funders after authorisation) and
also on the cost C129.
On the other hand, there is no reason, for either (B – C) or (B – C)*, to
be above competitive returns. However, evidence indicates that, while
biotech firms earn on average a (B – C) that is higher than (risk-adjusted)
market-consistent rates of return (having in fact a higher risk more than
compensating their ex-post high return), big pharmaceutical companies
have for decades earned annual risk-adjusted rates of return that are 3
percent in excess of the market (see Thakor, 2015).
This is partly linked to the lobbying power of big pharma compa-
nies, especially in the US, where prices have been high since George
W. Bush convinced Congress to prevent Medicare from negotiating
drug prices (see Danzon, 2018). This adds to the problem of generally
weak competition today, which has led big firms to earn high returns,
129 Note that neglected diseases have a number of specificities as far as this inequality
is concerned: (i) B will typically be low when the potential market is small, either
in terms of number of cases (eg rare diseases), or of low ‘ability to pay’ (diseas-
es affecting poor countries); (ii) on the other hand, since low patient numbers
reduce the threat to public budgets, higher prices per patient can at times be
obtained, which raises B; (iii) as for C, it can be higher when the disease is com-
plex (eg Alzheimer’s); (iv) on the other hand, some neglected diseases can benefit
from a fair amount of public funding, which lowers C, and finally (v) authorisation
on the basis of lower sample sizes for randomised controlled trials, typical for rare
diseases, lowers C again.

===== PDF_PAGE 269 =====
267 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
even leading to adverse macroeconomic consequences (see, for exam-
ple, the discussion in Aghion et al, 2021). In this respect, one should
reiterate that industrial policy should be competition-friendly, as
stressed by Aghion et al (2015) and as successfully managed by OWS.
Moreover, not only is the equilibrium (B – C) 3 percent per year
too high, but evidence points to an authorisation bias against ‘truly
creative’ innovation through an excessive reward of ‘marginal’ innova-
tion’ . Fojo et al (2014) looked at US evidence on cancer therapies and
stressed the unintended consequences of expensive marginal thera-
pies that earn higher risk-adjusted returns than more innovative ones,
and are unsurprisingly pursued by for-profit pharma companies. This
indicates a flaw in the authorisation/pricing process for new thera-
pies, since by making marginal innovation more lucrative, one raises
the opportunity cost (B – C)* of engaging in truly innovative research.
Industrial policy should try and address this problem.
4.2 Improving the innovation/affordability tradeoff
Unsurprisingly, the COVID-19 vaccine experience has generated
debates about the distribution of the rewards of innovation between
private companies and the public sector.
4.2.1 Improving bargaining positions
In fact, the emergence of the European Commission as a negotiator on
behalf of the 27 EU countries echoes efforts by groups of EU countries
to join forces in price negotiations with drug companies. Belgium,
the Netherlands, Austria, Ireland and Luxembourg were the first such
group130. Other initiatives are the Valletta group of southern European
countries, the Nordic pharmaceuticals forum and the Visegrad group131.
130 See https://beneluxa.org/.
131 Francesca Bruce, ‘Europe’s Biggest Multi-Country Access Alliance Picks Up The
Pace’ , Pink Sheet, 28 July 2021, https://pink.pharmaintelligence.informa.com/
PS144710/Europes-Biggest-Multi-Country-Access-Alliance-Picks-Up-The-Pace.

===== PDF_PAGE 270 =====
268 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
The goal of such initiatives is to put these countries in a better position to
require more transparency about R&D, manufacturing and distribution
costs of the drug.
Truly meaningful impact would however require further coordina-
tion. The COVID-19 vaccine episode should provide an opportunity to
go more generally towards EU-wide coordination of negotiations with
pharma companies, to limit their ability to put states in competition.
Kyle (2007) showed in particular that new drugs are introduced earlier
in jurisdictions that pay higher prices, which is in line with the priority
given to Israel by Pfizer. One should therefore not draw the wrong les-
sons from the European COVID-19 negotiation: it should constitute a
precedent worth building on in order to improve the bargaining power
of European member states with pharma companies.
Rare diseases would be a natural area for EU-wide intervention.
One objective reason for high prices is of course the limited market
size of each country. A pan-EU purchase would offer the prospect of
higher sales, thereby making lower prices more sustainable for indus-
try. One could even envisage advance market commitments, like with
vaccines (Levin et al, 2021), which should ideally be coupled with a
percentage of profits to be refunded by the company in case these turn
out to be higher than expected.
EU-wide coordination of the organisation of statistically significant
clinical trials, which does represent a key challenge for rare diseases,
would also make sense. And the same is true for the necessary coordi-
nation of national research and development funding beyond EU R&D
funding, along the lines of NIH funding, in order to maximise syner-
gies, especially for rare diseases.
Finally, COVID-19 vaccines are an extreme example of the asym-
metric timing of the financial costs and benefits of health innovation.
Early stages of the process are heavily subsidized – in this case not
only R&D but even production – but price negotiations, and espe-
cially renegotiations, happen later on and risk insufficiently rewarding
earlier subsidies through subsequent price discounts in the case of

===== PDF_PAGE 271 =====
269 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
successful innovation. Public authorities should make their early sup-
port conditional on profit-sharing schemes in order to benefit from the
upside of innovation.
4.2.2 Governance
Current healthcare innovation typically works as follows: its later
stages are implemented by the private sector, often big pharmaceutical
companies, which buy biotech firms, which are themselves built on
publicly-funded research (universities, the NIH and BARDA in the US,
etc). While this sequence is natural, achieving a fair distribution of the
rewards of innovation is difficult in a system of large for-profit providers
of new vaccines and therapies. The profit motive is a powerful driver
with high rent-extraction costs, and economics has documented how
information asymmetries and residual rights of control do allow pro-
ducers to earn rents. One idea to limit these rents could be the introduc-
tion of common-good advocates on the boards of pharma companies.
Another could be to transform (part of ) them into ‘benefit corporations’ ,
as advocated by Fischer et al (2019), so that shareholder value would
stop being their overriding objective (an objective resulting from their
legal charter and, since the 1980s, aggressively put into practice).
Change could be enacted by leveraging companies’ corporate social
responsibility. Concretely, payers could for example incentivise com-
panies involved in expensive therapies to create ad-hoc subsidiaries
for these activities and organise them according to the benefit corpo-
ration concept (Cummings, 2012) in order to subsequently obtain a B
Corporation certification132. The benefit corporation declaration gives
legal protection to companies to pursue social and environmental
performance alongside value for shareholders. The boards of benefit
corporations are required in their decision-making to consider other
stakeholders in addition to shareholders. The application for B corpo-
rate certification further enhances accountability to social good, as the
132 See https://bcorporation.net/.

===== PDF_PAGE 272 =====
270 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
certification is done by an external third-party based on the company’s
verified performance on the B impact assessment, making the benefit
corporation a certified B corporation.
By acquiring the status of certified B corporation, companies should
be able to leverage the social impact of their pricing in their perfor-
mance indicators, thus affording them the opportunity to bring their
pricing down to a market-consistent level, in order to enhance their
social performance.
Pushback is to be expected. But corporations themselves are increas-
ingly recognising the need to generate long-term value for all stakehold-
ers, instead of solely shareholders, and to shift their priorities from profit
maximisation to optimising value creation, as demonstrated by the
Business Roundtable 2019 Statement on the Purpose of a Corporation
(Business Roundtable, 2019), to which several pharmaceutical com-
panies are signatories. The next step would be for payers to consider
making reimbursement of some therapies conditional on their commer-
cialisation by certified B corporations. The greater objective should be
a pricing policy that results from a credible alignment of the interests of
industry, patients and payers.
5 Conclusion
This pandemic has been unique in its magnitude and should lead to a
rethink of a number of features of the institutional system. In particular,
the US OWS success should call for a strengthening of the EU biotech
innovation system, not only through a BARDA-like HERA, but also
through a better-coordinated EU health research budget similar to the
NIH. More EU coordination on purchases is also desirable given the
experience the European Commission has acquired in its contractual
negotiations with vaccine producers. The objective should be to improve
the terms of the innovation/affordability tradeoff. Given the magnitude
of public funds poured into health innovation systems, society at large
could obtain a larger share of successful innovation returns, without
driving private players away from the market.

===== PDF_PAGE 273 =====
271 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
References
Aghion, P ., S. Amaral-Garcia, M.
Dewatripont and M. Goldman (2020)
‘How to strengthen European industries’
leadership in vaccine research and
innovation’ , VoxEU, 1 September, available
at https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/
how-strengthen-european-industries-
leadership-vaccine-research-and-
innovation
Aghion, P ., C. Antonin and S. Bunel
(2021) The Power of Creative Destruction:
Economic Upheaval and the Wealth
of Nations, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press
Aghion, P ., J. Cai, M. Dewatripont, L. Du, A.
Harrison and P . Legros (2015) ‘Industrial
Policy and Competition’ , American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7: 1-32
Bolton, P . and J. Farrell (1990)
‘Decentralization, Duplication and Delay’ ,
Journal of Political Economy 98: 803-826
Business Roundtable (2019) ‘Statement
on the Purpose of a Corporation’ , available
at https://system.businessroundtable.
org/app/uploads/sites/5/2023/02/
WSJ_BRT_POC_Ad.pdf
Cummings, B. (2012) ‘Benefit
Corporations: How to Enforce a Mandate
to Promote the Public Interest’ , Columbia
Law Review 112: 578–627
Danzon, P . (2018) ‘Differential Pricing of
Pharmaceuticals: Theory, Evidence and
Emerging Issues’ , Pharmacoeconomics 36:
1395-1
Dewatripont, M. (2022) ‘Which policies
for vaccine innovation and delivery
in Europe?’ International Journal of
Industrial Organization 84, 102858,
available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijindorg.2022.102858.
European Commission (2021)
‘Making Medicines More Affordable’ ,
available at https://health.
ec.europa.eu/medicinal-products/
pharmaceutical-strategy-europe/
making-medicines-more-affordable_en
Fischer, A., M. Dewatripont and M.
Goldman (2019) ‘Benefit Corporation:
A Path to Affordable Gene Therapies?’
Nature Medicine 25: 1813-1814
Fischer, A., M. Dewatripont and M.
Goldman (2022) ‘Improving the
innovation/access tradeoff for rare
diseases in the European Union after
Covid-19’ , VoxEU, 29 September, available
at https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/
improving-innovationaccess-trade-rare-
diseases-eu-after-covid-19
Fojo, T ., S. Mailankody and A. Lo (2014)
‘Unintended Consequences of Expensive
Cancer Therapeutics—The Pursuit of
Marginal Indications and a Me-Too
Mentality That Stifles Innovation and
Creativity’ , Journal of the American
Medical Association Otolaryngology –
Head Neck Surgery 140: 1225-1236
Kyle, M. (2007) ‘Pharmaceutical Price
Controls and Entry Strategies’ , Review of
Economics and Statistics 89: 88–99

===== PDF_PAGE 274 =====
272 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Levin, J., M. Kremer and C. Snyder
(2020) “Designing Advance Market
Commitments for New Vaccines” ,
Working Paper 28168, National Bureau of
Economic Research
Thakor, R., N. Anaya, Y. Zhang, C.
Vilanilam, K. Siah, C. Wong and A. Lo
(2015) ‘Just How Good an Investment is
the Biopharmaceutical Sector?’ Nature
Biotechnology 35 :1149–1157
Veugelers, R. (2021) ‘mRNA vaccines:
a lucky shot?’ , Working Paper 13/2021,
Bruegel

===== PDF_PAGE 275 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 276 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 277 =====
275 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
A policy for net zero, growth and resilience
Industrial policy has for a long time raised difficult questions for
policymakers to unpick. What justifications are there for government
intervention in market mechanisms, and how and to what extent should
governments intervene? What are the pros and cons of picking ‘winners’
for support? These questions have made a powerful return in the wake of
the COVID-19 pandemic and geopolitical uncertainty, and because of the
pressing need to move to net-zero emission economies. In addition, the
European Union is reviving its industrial policy in the context of support
given to companies in the United States under the US Inflation Reduction
Act. This volume, produced with financial support from the European
Climate Foundation, assesses what must be done to implement industrial
policy in a way that will achieve overarching goals while minimising
distortions.
Bruegel, Rue de la Charité 33, B-1210 Brussels
(+32) 2 227 4210
info@bruegel.org
www.bruegel.org
