
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Heather Grabbe
(heather.grabbe@bruegel.
org) is a Senior Fellow at
Bruegel
Luca Léry Moffat
(luca.moffat@bruegel.org) is
a Research Analyst at Bruegel
This policy brief has
been produced with the
financial support of Finnish
Innovation Fund Sitra
Executive summary
If the European Union is to achieve a sustainable net-zero economy, resources need to
be used much more efficiently. Extraction from nature and processing of materials are the
principal causes of biodiversity loss and are also major sources of pollution, water stress and
greenhouse gas emissions.
Resources are used inefficiently currently because market and government failures
create a nexus of disincentives and barriers to firms and individuals, hindering them in
making resource-efficient choices. The most prominent failure is the artificial cheapness of
raw materials because the environmental and human costs of extraction are not including in
their prices.
A powerful way to improve resource efficiency is to increase circularity, so that fewer
resources are used to meet the same level of human need. This can be done by extending the
duration of use and reuse of materials, and by reducing resource demand from the start by
designing products and systems for optimal efficiency.
A circular single market would allow faster de-risking from toxic dependencies and
economic coercion by authoritarian regimes. It would increase resilience in the context
of fragile supply chains while reducing instability from volatile commodity prices. Firm
competitiveness would also be enhanced, given that European companies operate on a
continent that is poor in energy and natural resources, and are thus very exposed to future
scarcity of resources when climate impacts will make water and land scarcer. If firms were to
optimise production and consumption systems for efficiency now, they would be ahead of
the curve.
To develop the circular economy further, the EU will need to spur investment.
Public policy that sets common standards and a predictable regulatory framework would ac-
celerate the development of markets for inputs such as recyclates and services such as repair,
both in the EU and in trade partners. The EU has established a legislative framework for the
circular economy but it needs scaling up in the forthcoming Circular Economy Act.
Recommended citation
Grabbe, H. and L. Moffat (2024) ‘A European circular single market for economic security and
competitiveness’, Policy Brief 20/2024, Bruegel
Policy Brief
Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024 A European circular single
market for economic security
and competitiveness
Heather Grabbe and Luca Léry Moffat

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
1 Why resource efficiency matters
For many years, tackling climate change and environmental degradation lingered in the
shadow of other policies as political leaders prioritised short-term economic issues. In terms
of the former, the European Union’s transition to a net-zero economy has been boosted by
the supply side measures taken to end dependence on Russian gas following Putin’s 2022
invasion of Ukraine. Carbon emissions are the focus of the international agenda on climate.
However, awareness remains low of the magnitude of human extraction from nature and
the risks building up from breaching planetary environmental boundaries. This has led to the
“tragedy of the horizon”1 of longer-term consequences ignored as short-term concerns prevail,
despite the threats to human life and well-being. In addition to the problem of time horizons for
environmental impacts, there is a global public good problem: the loss of biodiversity and other
environmental impacts create harm across countries but governments cannot agree on suffi-
ciently effective measures to address them.
This Policy Brief gives an overview of the environmental and economic cases for Europe to
improve resource efficiency, particularly by increasing circularity in the single market. Greater
resource efficiency would reduce pressure on nature, enabling biodiversity improvements and
lessening pollution and water stress, both in Europe and regions where Europe’s imports come
from. It would also improve the EU’s economic security and financial stability, as well as the
competitiveness of European firms in the medium term.
Resources include materials, land and water. Materials include everything extracted from
the earth and initial processing, and can be categorised into biomass, fossil fuels, metals and
non-metallic minerals. Materials can be transported to other regions, while the effects of land
and water use and pollution are local. However, all of these resources can be accounted for as
‘embedded’ environmental impacts (such as emissions, water and pollution) in the raw materials
and products that are transported and traded internationally.
The current economic system does not encourage resource efficiency on a large scale, even
though companies and consumers would see efficiency gains from circularity if multiple market
failures were removed. The most obvious market failure is that the impact on nature of the linear
economy is largely unpriced and often unmeasured because the environmental and human
costs of extraction and processing of materials, and of their end-of life disposal, fall mainly on
local residents and on taxpayers.
Environmental degradation is a problem for the economy as well as for nature. Many of the
ecosystem services delivered by nature – from pollination to fertile soil – cannot be substituted
by human technology. Others – such as fresh water – are extremely expensive and difficult to
provide at scale when ecosystems are disrupted.
In addition to the risks, the potential value of greater resource efficiency is also under-appre-
ciated. This value includes opportunities to increase economic security, financial stability and
competitiveness over the medium and longer terms.
The EU has an important role to play in promoting resource efficiency because of Europe’s
high levels of consumption and, on the positive side, its high quality of governance. The EU is a
global leader in applying circularity principles. However, like other economies, the single market
faces market failures of several kinds that prevent faster and more extensive moves to increase
the efficiency of material use throughout value chains, in both production and consumption.
Even when individual companies and consumers would benefit from efficiency gains from circu-
larity, realising these gains requires public policy to set common standards and to create markets
that can deliver inputs such as recyclates, and services such as repair.
We start with the scientific evidence on the environmental impact of global and European
extraction and processing. We then show how resource efficiency would improve the EU’s

1 This term is widely attributed to Mark Carney (Carney, 2015).
Many ecosystem
services delivered
by nature cannot be
substituted by human
technology

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
economic security and financial stability, as well as the competitiveness of European firms in the
medium term, particularly through increased circularity in the single market. We then provide
policy recommendations for achieving greater resource efficiency in the EU.
2 The environmental case for resource
efficiency
2.1 The impact of resource over-use on the planet
It is a harsh reality that the unsustainable extraction of resources from nature is already well
beyond several key planetary boundaries2. Biomass cultivation for food, forestry and textile
production, mineral and fossil resource extraction, and processing of these primary materi-
als are the principal drivers of the triple planetary crises of climate change, biodiversity loss
and pollution (Figure 1). In 2022, these activities, including the fossil-fuel use that underpins
them, were responsible for 64 percent of greenhouse gas emissions, 40 percent of air pollution
health impacts, 98 percent of land biodiversity loss and nearly 100 percent of biodiversity loss
from freshwater eutrophication3.
Figure 1: Global environmental impacts of cultivation/extraction, processing and
use of biomass, metals, non-metallic minerals and fossil resources, 2022
Source: Bruegel adapted from UNEP (2024), Figure 3.2. Notes: The dotted lines correspond to the impacts attributed to the cultivation/ex -
traction and processing of materials, which are captured in four categories: biomass, metals, non-metallic minerals and fossil resources.
See Annex 1 for definitions and an explanation of how economic activities are categorised.
The extent to which resource-related environmental impacts have already severely trans-
gressed planetary boundaries (Figure 2) means there is a high risk of disruption of the natural
systems that underpin the Holocene, the stable and favourable conditions in which human
civilisations have developed over the last 11,700 years (Richardson et al, 2023). Despite often
being treated as separate issues, the non-linear interactions between environmental impacts
2 The planetary boundary framework “identifies nine processes that are critical for maintaining the stability and
resilience of the Earth system as a whole” , based on Earth system science (Richardson et al, 2023). It calculates the
extent to which these processes are perturbed by human activities.
3 The primary cause of eutrophication (accumulation of nutrients in water, leading to algal growth and other effects)
is overload of nitrogen and phosphorus from animal waste, human sewage and excess use of fertilisers.
Bi o m a s s Me ta l s No n - m e ta l l i c m i n e r a l s Fo s s i l r e s o ur c e s Re m a i n i n g e c o n o m y Ho us e h o l d s
0 %
1 0 %
2 0 %
3 0 %
4 0 %
5 0 %
6 0 %
7 0 %
8 0 %
9 0 %
1 0 0 %
G r e e n h o us e ga s
em i s s i o n s
Pa r ti c ul a te m a tte r
h e a l th i m p a c ts
B i o d i v e r s i ty l o s s
( l a n d )
B i o d i v e r s i ty l o s s
( f r e s h w a ter e utrophication)
Share of total

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
mean that greater risks are building up from the aggregate effects of degradation of ecosystems
(IPCC, 2022). This will have damaging and volatile impacts on economies, which are embedded
in nature and rely on the services it provides (Dasgupta, 2021).
It is therefore worrying that the climate impacts and biodiversity loss driven by extraction and
processing of materials are rising fast. Figure 3 shows that materials-related CO2 emissions have
increased by 52 percent since 1995, reaching 26 gigatonnes in 2022. This alone exceeded by a
factor of five the level of CO2 emissions that would enable the world to keep to the Paris target of
a global temperature rise of no more than 1.5°C – and the chasm has widened despite measures
to decarbonise economies. New annual species loss driven by land use change has consistently
exceeded targets, increasing biodiversity loss. Annual species loss resulting from land-use change
exceeded the international target by 35 times in 2022 (UNEP , 2024). Biomass cultivation and
processing have driven the vast majority of land-based annual species losses historically.
Figure 2: Current status of the nine planetary boundaries
Source: Richardson et al (2023). Reproduced from https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.adh2458. Note: N = nitrogen, P =
phosphorus.
The divergence of climate and biodiversity impacts from intergovernmental targets is driven
by growing extraction and processing. Material extraction grew for the last five decades at an
annual rate of 2.3 percent (UNEP , 2024), but material productivity4 has hardly improved, unlike
the other factors of production (Figure 4). Unlike emissions, these trends are only expected to
speed up. The UN International Resource Panel forecasts resource use to increase by up to 60
percent by 2060 relative to 2020 levels if no significant action is taken (UNEP , 2024).
4 Material productivity is the ratio of GDP to total material requirement (TMR). The European Environment Agency
defines TMR as the total mass of primary materials extracted from nature to support human activities.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
Figure 3: Global contribution of materials vs remaining economy and households to CO2 emissions and
land-related biodiversity loss, 1995 – 2022
Source: Bruegel adapted from UNEP (2024), Figure 3.5. Notes: See Annex 2 for definitions and explanations of the targets.
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
5 0
1 9 9 5
1 9 9 7
1 9 9 9
2 0 0 1
2 0 0 3
2 0 0 5
2 0 0 7
2 0 0 9
2 0 1 1
2 0 1 3
2 0 1 5
2 0 1 7
2 0 1 9
2 0 2 1
1 9 9 5
1 9 9 7
1 9 9 9
2 0 0 1
2 0 0 3
2 0 0 5
2 0 0 7
2 0 0 9
2 0 1 1
2 0 1 3
2 0 1 5
2 0 1 7
2 0 1 9
2 0 2 1
G t C O 2
Other C O 2 e m i s s i o n s ( h o us e h o l d s a n d
r e m a i n i n g e c o n o m y)
C O 2 e m i s s i o n s f r o m extraction and p r o c e s s i n g
( b i o m a s s , m e ta l s , n o n - m e ta l l i c m i n e r a l s a n d
f o s s i l r e s o ur c e s )
1 . 5 ° C ta r g e t
- 0 . 0 0 0 1
0 . 0 0 0 0
0 . 0 0 0 1
0 . 0 0 0 2
0 . 0 0 0 3
0 . 0 0 0 4
0 . 0 0 0 5
0 . 0 0 0 6
B i o d i v e r s i t y l o s s g l o b al p o t e nt i al l y
d i s ap p e ar e d f r ac t i o n o f s p e c i e s
Bi o m a s s Me ta l s
No n - m e ta l l i c m i n e r a l s Fo s s i l r e s o ur c e s
Re m a i n i n g e c o n o m y Ho us e h o l d s
Ta r g e t
Figure 4 shows limited improvement in material productivity since 1970, relative to improving
productivity of energy, greenhouse gases and labour. Globalisation has contributed to this lag
in the material productivity trend through the outsourcing of production to regions with lower
material efficiency (UNEP , 2024). The energy crises of the 1970s and 2020s led to drives for energy
efficiency, but there has been no systemic drive for similar increases in materials efficiency. This
is despite relatively high material input costs in sectors such as manufacturing, which can be
more than twice the labour and energy costs (VDI, 2016).
Figure 4: Global material extraction 1970 – 2024, and productivity of materials, greenhouse gases, energy and
labour, 1970 – 2024
Source: UNEP (2024), Figures 2.9 and 2.23.
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
1 2 0
1 9 7 0
1 9 7 2
1 9 7 4
1 9 7 6
1 9 7 8
1 9 8 0
1 9 8 2
1 9 8 4
1 9 8 6
1 9 8 8
1 9 9 0
1 9 9 2
1 9 9 4
1 9 9 6
1 9 9 8
2 0 0 0
2 0 0 2
2 0 0 4
2 0 0 6
2 0 0 8
2 0 1 0
2 0 1 2
2 0 1 4
2 0 1 6
2 0 1 8
2 0 2 0
2 0 2 2
2 0 2 4
0
0 . 5
1
1 . 5
2
2 . 5
3
3 . 5
4
1 9 7 0
1 9 7 3
1 9 7 6
1 9 7 9
1 9 8 2
1 9 8 5
1 9 8 8
1 9 9 1
1 9 9 4
1 9 9 7
2 0 0 0
2 0 0 3
2 0 0 6
2 0 0 9
2 0 1 2
2 0 1 5
2 0 1 8
2 0 2 1
2 0 2 4
1 9 7 0 = 1
M a te r i a l s
Greenhousegases
G t C O 2
No n - m e ta l l i c m i n e r a l s
Bi o m a s s
Me ta l ores
Fo s s i l r e s o ur c e s
Labour
Energy

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
Demand for some materials is rising as a result of the decarbonisation of energy, transpor-
tation and other systems. The transition to renewable energy and electric vehicles presents a
paradox: it is essential to reduce emissions and improve the outlook for climate change, but it
is driving more extraction of certain critical raw materials in the short term, with uncertain but
potentially profound environmental impacts (see, for example, Riofrancos et al, 2023; Watari
et al, 2021; Sonter et al, 2020). Once decarbonisation has been largely achieved, it will reduce
resource extraction because a functioning renewable energy system needs hardly any more
materials, whereas a fossil-fuel system requires ongoing extraction of highly polluting hydrocar-
bons (ETC, 2023). Furthermore, once there are enough electric vehicles and other clean tech-
nologies in circulation, with an efficient re-use and recycling system, the secondary markets for
materials will reduce demand for new extraction of critical raw materials (Karali and Shah, 2022).
2.2 The EU’s high consumption of resources
Europeans are responsible for a disproportionately large share of material extraction. The
European continent’s per-capita resource use is more than three times higher than that of
Africa, for example (UNEP , 2024). The EU comprises 6 percent of the world’s population, but
its consumption accounts for between 70 percent and 97 percent of the ‘safe operating space’
across multiple planetary boundaries available for the entire planet (Sala et al, 2019; Nega-
Watt et al, 2024).
In 2021, EU domestic extraction of raw material amounted to 5.6 gigatonnes5, the largest cat-
egories being non-metallic minerals (60.6 percent) and biomass (27.9 percent)6. Outside Europe,
new material extraction generated by the EU’s demand for imported goods was 3.1 gigatonnes in
20217. The largest categories were fossil energy materials/carriers (46.3 percent) and metal ores
(29.7 percent).
The EU’s material use – the weight of products consumed in the EU – comprised just under
5 gigatonnes in 2022. Approximately 35 percent this, or 1.76 gigatonnes, became waste. The
remaining 65 percent accumulated as stock, for example in buildings and machinery (EEA,
2024).
However, Figure 5 indicates a positive exception to the global trends of increasing resource
use, as shown in Figure 4, and that the EU’s circular economy policy might be having a tangible
impact on resource efficiency. Although the EU’s material consumption remains dispropor-
tionately high, it has improved in the last 15 years (Figure 5). In the 14 current EU countries that
were already members before 2004 (EU14)8, raw materials consumption9 grew after 1970, albeit
at a slower rate than GDP . Since 2007, however, there has been an absolute decoupling in those
countries of resource use from GDP growth, and a resulting boost in raw material productivity. In
2021, the material footprint of the EU was the same as in 1998, and 18 percent lower than in 2007,
despite a 9 percent increase in GDP over the same period. This absolute decoupling – as opposed
to a relative decoupling – is significant even though overall material volumes remain high.
5 Billion tonnes or trillion kilogrammes.
6 Bruegel calculations based on Eurostat.
7 Models to calculate the raw material equivalent of traded goods are still under development and have high degrees
of uncertainty (Eurostat, 2018), but these are the best available estimates for understanding the true global impact
of the EU’s material use.
8 We use the EU14 since data is available starting from 1970. However, we observe the same absolute decoupling in
recent years when using data for the whole EU.
9 The material footprint, or raw materials consumption comprises domestic extraction plus total imports in raw
material equivalent minus total exports in raw material equivalents. It therefore fully accounts for extraction in
other countries for EU consumption.
The European
continent’s per-capita
resource use is more
than three times that
of Africa

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
Figure 5: Raw material productivity, raw material consumption and GDP , EU14,
1970 – 2021 (1970 = 1)
Source: Bruegel based on Global Material Flows Database. Note: EU14 = Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and Sweden.
2.3 Defining the circular economy
The circular economy is an assembly of many different ideas and initiatives (Kovacic et al,
2020), but in essence it “revolves around maintaining high product and material value while
extending their lifespan within the economy and eliminating unnecessary material usage”
(Letta, 2024). More broadly, it is an alternative economic paradigm to the current mainly linear
economy (ie extract-use-throw away), comprising a system that meets human needs10 – includ-
ing food, mobility, shelter and health – in the most resource-efficient way possible (Potočnik and
Nohl, 2023).
In practice, the circular economy involves actions such as designing products or processes for
least resource use, optimisation of material use (through circular business models such as pro-
viding goods as a service; Systemiq, 2021), recycling and turning used resources into new prod-
ucts (Kovacic et al, 2020; Bocken et al, 2016; Geissdoerfer et al, 2018; Allwood, 2014). Frameworks
such as the ‘9 Rs’11 or ‘narrow-slow-close’ (ie use less material, use it for longer and then reuse it)
encapsulate the ethos of the circular economy.
The potential environmental benefits of a circular economy are great. For example, circular
approaches in seven important sectors – including steel, construction, plastics and vehicles
– could reduce annual EU industrial emissions by 34 percent by 2050 relative to 2018, with
reductions in greenhouse-gas emissions within the next one to five years (Agora Industry,
2022). Material efficiency through redesigned industrial processes and products, substitution of
materials and enhanced recycling are examples of the circular measures that can contribute to
emissions reduction.
Circular economy interventions could also help halt biodiversity loss in the EU and even
help it to recover to 2000 levels by 2035 (Forslund et al, 2022). Agriculture, forestry and other
land use change (such as the draining of wetlands) are the principal drivers of biodiversity loss
globally (UNEP , 2024). Circular measures that would support the recovery of biodiversity include
reducing input requirements for livestock farming, extending the lifetimes of buildings and other
products that use timber, land use techniques in forestry and agriculture such as regenerative
agriculture, and recycling of textiles (Forslund et al, 2022).
10 Referred to as “provisioning systems” in UNEP (2024), these include food, built environment, energy, public
mobility, household fuel use, private mobility, clothing, education, water, sewage and health.
11 9Rs = refuse, rethink, reduce, reuse, repair, refurbish, remanufacture, repurpose, recycle, recover.
0
0 . 5
1
1 . 5
2
2 . 5
3
1 9 7 0
1 9 7 2
1 9 7 4
1 9 7 6
1 9 7 8
1 9 8 0
1 9 8 2
1 9 8 4
1 9 8 6
1 9 8 8
1 9 9 0
1 9 9 2
1 9 9 4
1 9 9 6
1 9 9 8
2 0 0 0
2 0 0 2
2 0 0 4
2 0 0 6
2 0 0 8
2 0 1 0
2 0 1 2
2 0 1 4
2 0 1 6
2 0 1 8
2 0 2 0
G DP
R a w ma te r i a l co n s um p ti o n
R a w ma te r i a l pr o d uc ti v i ty

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
2.4 The EU’s progress towards circularity so far
The EU has fostered circularity for more than a decade through regulation. Two Circular
Economy Action Plans (CEAP) in 2015 and 2020 have broadened the scope of EU policy from
a focus on waste to a wider vision for circularity, introducing ecodesign and shifting towards
legally binding measures (Watkins and Meysner, 2022). Key measures include the Batter-
ies Regulation (Regulation (EU) 2023/1542), the Right to Repair initiative, the directive on
empowering consumers for the green transition (Directive (EU) 2024/825) and the Ecodesign
for Sustainable Products Regulation (ESPR, Regulation (EU) 2024/1781). A new European
Packaging and Packaging Waste Regulation, to update rules from the mid-1990s, is also
pending adoption, at time of writing. The 2020 CEAP also contained several ambitious targets
including on decoupling economic growth from resource use, doubling the circular material
use rate and halving the amount of non-recycled municipal waste by 2030 – although these
are non-binding.
The most recent legislation aims to increase resource efficiency across the whole life-cy-
cle of products. For example, the Batteries Regulation contains mandatory recycled content
requirements for lithium, which could spur the creation of new markets for an element that
is not widely recycled at present. The ESPR first working plan will ensure minimum ecode-
sign requirements in several high-impact intermediate and end-use products, including
iron products, chemicals, furniture and textiles. These requirements could include resource
efficiency, durability, level of recycled content and repairability12.
To succeed, these measures will require many implementing regulations in the coming
years to invigorate the so-far modest national application of circular principles.
Although all EU countries have national circular economy roadmaps or strategies, or are
currently developing one, most of these remain generic (EEA, 2024). The European Court
of Auditors found in 2023 that Commission action since 2015 has led to little progress in
influencing circular activities beyond these generic strategies, that waste management has
remained the focus of funding and that reaching 2030 targets looked unlikely given current
progress (ECA, 2023). However, hopeful signs of progress towards resource efficiency at
national level include targets for absolute decoupling of material use from growth set by three
EU countries (Austria, Finland and the Netherlands), and the start of a decline in raw material
use in the EU (Figure 5). The economic case for action by governments, municipalities and
firms needs to be understood better to motivate Europeans to act faster to decouple resource
use from growth.
3 The economic case for greater resource
efficiency
Greater resource efficiency would make a significant contribution to the EU’s major policy
goals, most notably economic security and strategic autonomy, competitiveness and finan-
cial-system stability. This section discusses how resource efficiency through circular economy
principles can support priorities at the top of the EU’s agenda.
3.1 Economic security and strategic autonomy
Raising resource efficiency would be the fastest way to de-risk the European economy. It
would reduce dependence on authoritarian regimes and fragile supply chains, and make the
EU less vulnerable to volatile commodity prices (Letta, 2024; WEF , 2024). Circular solutions
will become more important as energy infrastructure dependencies shift from imports of fos-
12 See Article 5, Regulation (EU) 2024/1781, for the full list of ecodesign requirements.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
sil fuels (commodities) to the import of critical raw materials (CRMs; to create capital assets
in renewable energy). This does not mean that the EU should aim to move to autarky and
become a self-sufficient economy or introduce protectionist policies. Rather, the elimination
of wasteful use of materials and energy has the potential to support the economic-security
objectives of reducing import dependencies for critical products and deepening the single
market and making it more flexible (Pisani-Ferry et al, 2024). A well-functioning circular
single market would increase the EU’s resilience against import shocks. Critical dependencies
can be reduced by bringing down demand for imported virgin materials, by substituting them
with local, re-used and recycled materials and by using fewer materials thanks to efficien-
cy-by-design or repair opportunities.
In energy, the recovery of biodegradable waste could contribute significantly to supply
diversification. Biogas and biomethane could meet 10 percent of natural gas demand by
203013, to which better food-waste collection and processing could contribute. Biogas pro-
duction emits little carbon and prevents organic material from going to landfill. Given that
organic waste accounts for up to 50 percent of municipal waste (ECN, 2022) and 10 percent of
all greenhouse gas emissions (WWF , 2021), that would reduce environmental damage while
contributing to energy security.
The next decades are likely to be characterised by supply bottlenecks as climate shocks
proliferate, economies race to decarbonise and trade rivalries disrupt flows. But even in the
very short term, resource efficiency can offer a buffer to protect the EU’s economic security.
For CRMs, supply deficits are already expected for 2024 (Stewart et al, 2023). In the medium
term, there are forecasts of potential supply gaps for copper and lithium of up to 10 percent
and 49 percent respectively in 2030 (ETC, 2023).
Commodity price volatility is another threat to economic security. Since 2020, the prices
of critical minerals used in batteries underwent both dramatic increases and large declines
(IEA, 2024). Certain battery-grade lithium compounds increased in price by 800 percent to
1000 percent in just over one year (Riofrancos et al, 2023). This volatility is likely to increase
because of climate impacts, with 25 percent of mining executives expecting climate risks to be
very significant in their operations in the next five years (KPMG, 2023).
To ensure that decarbonisation is not disrupted, the circular market for CRMs needs to
expand faster. Through end-of-life recovery, design for materials efficiency and extended
product lifetimes, more reliable markets for critical minerals can be developed that would
improve economic security. According to one estimate, secondary materials could meet up
to 91 percent of US demand for CRMs in low-carbon technologies by 2050 (Karali and Shah,
2022). Another example is Apple’s calculation that from one metric ton of iPhone compo-
nents, recyclers can recover the amount of gold and copper typically extracted from 2,000
metric tons of mined rock (Apple, 2024) – but users need incentives to return old devices and
those devices need to be designed for easy materials recovery. The EU’s Critical Raw Materials
Act (CRMA, Regulation (EU) 2024/1252) sets targets for recycling to meet 25 percent of EU
annual consumption of strategic raw materials by 2030.
The value embedded in disused electronic devices globally is around $57 billion14. The
EU has room to increase from its current 39 percent recycling rate for waste electrical and
electronic equipment (WEEE) (EEA, 2024). The contribution of recycled minerals to fresh
inputs that are crucial for electronics is also very low: cobalt (22 percent), nickel (16 percent),
neodymium (1 percent) and lithium (0 percent)15, even though significant supply gaps are
forecast for these transition materials (ETC, 2023). This is partly driven by low rates of recovery
13 See European Biogas Association news of 17 February 2022, ‘ A way out of the EU gas price crisis with biomethane’ ,
https://www.europeanbiogas.eu/a-way-out-of-the-eu-gas-price-crisis-with-biomethane/.
14 Kimberley Botwright and James Pennington, ‘Will your next phone be made from recycled materials? These 6 tech
giants are working on it’ , World Economic Forum, 24 September 2020, https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/09/
will-your-next-phone-be-made-from-recycled-materials-these-6-tech-giants-are-working-on-it/.
15 See Eurostat, ‘Contribution of recycled materials to raw materials demand - end-of-life recycling input rates (EOL-
RIR)’ , dataset code: cei_srm010. Data is for 2022.
Even in the very
short term, resource
efficiency can offer a
buffer to protect EU
economic security

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
due to poor product design for end of life and the lack of well-established infrastructure for
recovery of such minerals (Charles et al, 2020).
However, although end-of-life treatment is important, the high projected demand for CRMs
suggests that recycling alone cannot meet all the EU’s needs. One estimate suggests that globally,
recycling may only start to play a substantial role in reducing virgin material extraction after 2040,
once enough recyclable materials are in use (Peplow, 2023). To achieve economic security, end-
of-life treatment must be pursued in conjunction with other measures to reduce the volume of
CRMs needed further up the production chain.
Beyond CRMs, design of products so that they use less raw materials, and resource efficiency
through repair and durability have great potential to contribute to economic security. Many
household appliances are treated as obsolete far before their designed lifetimes are over, partly
driven by a culture of constant upgrading to the latest model (EEA, 2024). Design also has a role to
play in developing clean circular loops. This ensures that products are designed to minimise the
use of substances of concern and other pollutants, to facilitate end-of-life recovery.
Circularity would contribute to other aspects of security. By reducing biodiversity loss, it
would also diminish bio-risks to health, such as epidemics, and environmental disasters due
to extraction, such as landslips. It would also reduce the drivers of armed conflict, as shown in
the Environmental Justice Atlas16, which maps how the extraction of resources and resource
management drive conflict. These conflicts will proliferate with the increase in extraction for
decarbonisation, given that 32 percent to 40 percent of this extraction is expected to occur in
countries with weak to failing resource governance (Watari et al, 2021).
Resource efficiency would be a major contribution to security at an existential level – not only
economic security but nature’s support of life and every kind of human activity. Recent European
debates have been dominated by external threats – from Russia and China to COVID-19 – but the
environmental threats to security have not gone away and tipping-points are looming (Lenton et
al, 2019).
3.2 Competitiveness
A circular single market (the term used in Letta, 2024) could boost European competitiveness in
several ways. First, it would help eliminate inefficiencies in resource use in production and con-
sumption that prevail under the linear economy, because of market and government failures such
as cheap resources with prices that do not include environmental impacts, or lack of information
about resource-efficient production methods (section 4). By increasing efficiency in how goods
are produced and in how long they are used, the EU can achieve greater productivity that will
enhance its competitiveness over the long term. At firm level, greater resource efficiency means
lower input material costs. This allows firms to set lower prices and to invest in R&D or increase
wages, all of which enhance competitiveness (Flachenecker and Kornejew, 2019).
A second issue is opportunity cost. Europe will further lose competitiveness if it misses out on
the growth of new, green sectors – not only clean tech but also the major opportunities for Europe
to develop competitive products and services around the circular economy (EEA, 2024). Mate-
rial productivity improvements have been shown to generate spillover innovations, contributing
positively to firms’ successes (Rennings and Rammer, 2009). In a study of 52,000 firms in 12 EU
countries, Flachenecker and Kornejew (2019) found that firms that developed eco-innovations to
improve material productivity increased their market shares while reducing their CO2 footprints.
At macro level, a functioning circular economy needs well-functioning markets for secondary
raw materials characterised by consistent price signals and standardised product-quality specifi-
cations (EEA, 2024). The Circular Economy Act proposed in the political guidelines for the 2024-
2029 European Commission could foster world-leading waste and secondary materials markets,
attracting global investments and expertise (von der Leyen, 2024).
For example, the European remanufacturing market’s circular potential is projected to grow
from its current value of €31 billion to €100 billion by 2030, creating half a million new jobs (World
16 See ‘EJAtlas - Global Atlas of Environmental Justice’ , https://ejatlas.org/.
By reducing
biodiversity loss,
circularity would
diminish bio-risks
to health, such as
epidemics

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
Bank, 2022). In Finland, the circular potential for textile fibres could yield €1.2 billion in invest-
ments and generate 17,000 new jobs17. In the agricultural sector, initiatives such as the Dutch 2018
circular agricultural plan, which includes practices such as local production, reusing waste flows
and identifying symbiosis between the supply chains of arable, livestock and horticulture sectors,
are likely to be in high demand globally as competition for land and biomass increases (King et al,
2023; Muscat et al, 2020).
Third, the EU’s circularity standards are likely to spread as other countries aim to go circular as
well. Europe is poor in resources but rich in human capital, and world-class in making regulations
that create and lead markets (Bradford, 2020). Many governments around the world struggle with
the problems of increasing volumes of waste (Kaza et al, 2018) and are creating circular economy
plans18. As environmental regulation increases internationally, European companies – in the con-
text of the EU setting global norms for ecodesign, repairability, durability and recyclability through
its circular economy strategy – will be able to comply with this regulation more cost-effectively
than other firms (Gunningham et al, 2004). European firms might also have a comparative advan-
tage in developing the most energy- and resource-efficient products and services.
Fourth, European firms are more vulnerable to volatility in global markets for many materials
than are Chinese producers which have long-standing vertical integration of their supply chains
with extraction and processing. Through resource efficiency, European firms would reduce their
exposures to material price fluctuations and insure themselves against supply shocks (Flache-
necker and Kornejew, 2019). Furthermore, in the future, the cost of many raw materials may rise
because climate change will make both land and water scarcer (IPCC, 2022), raising the costs of
extraction and processing (which are often very water-intensive). This will be in addition to more
governments starting to price pollution and emissions. Although regulation to increase circularity
might increase costs in the short and medium terms, this is likely to be out-weighed by the longer-
term benefits if it gives European companies an incentive to invest in resource efficiency. An
analogy would be European standards on fuel efficiency (see Oki, 2021), which led to the creation
of cars that were more competitive when oil prices went up.
3.3 Financial stability
Resource inefficiency causes excessive extraction of materials that degrades the natural assets that
provide ecosystem services19. This poses systemic risks to the financial sector. The European Cen-
tral Bank is among the financial institutions now calculating the exposure of financial institutions
to ecosystem services. It has found that 75 percent of all corporate loan exposures in the euro area
have a strong dependency on at least one ecosystem service (Boldrini et al, 2023). The ECB is also
starting to measure the contribution of the financial sector to the degradation of natural assets,
having calculated that corporate loans in the euro area have driven biodiversity loss globally
equivalent to the loss of 582 million hectares of pristine natural areas (Ceglar et al, 2023).
The Dutch and French national banks have calculated exposure to biodiversity risks for their
own financial institutions of €510 billion and 42 percent of the value of securities portfolios held
respectively (van Toor et al., 2020; Svartzman et al., 2021). In the private sector, credit ratings agen-
cies and insurers are developing their own methodologies for risk assessment around the costs of
environmental degradation.
In addition to evaluating risk, valuation of natural assets is a powerful tool for fostering the
circular economy. It puts a price on the degrading of ecosystem services, which reduces systemic
risk to the financial sector and encourages value creation through means other than cultivation
17 Ali Harlin, ‘The Finnish textile industry will be the most responsible and functional in the world in 2035 –
investment opportunities of more than billion euros’ , VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, 27 August
2021, https://www.vttresearch.com/en/news-and-ideas/finnish-textile-industry-will-be-most-responsible-and-
functional-world-2035.
18 In 2022, over 70 countries were applying circular economy policies; see UNDP , ‘Circular Economy’ , Chemicals and
Waste Hub, undated, https://www.undp.org/chemicals-waste/our-work/circular-economy.
19 The benefits that nature provides to sustain human wellbeing, such as pollination, food production and water
purification.
The EU’s circularity
standards are likely
to spread as other
countries aim to go
circular as well

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
and extraction. Nature can be a high-value investment; the European Commission estimates that
every euro invested in EU nature restoration adds €4 to €38 in benefits (European Commission,
2022). This attention to environmental and climate risks in the financial system is an important
step forward in recognising and analysing previously uncalculated risks. However, central banks,
financial regulators and credit agencies cannot introduce the policies and laws that would reduce
these risks. Only governments and international institutions can lead the system change to a
circular economy.
4 How to improve the circular single market:
policy recommendations
We have described how resource efficiency can contribute to environmental and strategic
goals and assessed the EU’s progress towards a circular economy. However, current progress
can be characterised as an incremental approach to resource efficiency within the context
of a linear economy, rather than a deep transformation through which circular behaviour
becomes the norm (European Commission, 2019). To reap the environmental and economic
benefits, this transition needs to go much faster.
The linear economy exists because producers, consumers and waste managers have opti-
mised systems and behaviour to match the prevailing linear incentive structure (European
Commission, 2019). An extensive literature documents the market and governance failures
and barriers to a fully-fledged circular economy, creating a nexus of disincentives to making
resource-efficient choices. Some of these barriers prevent companies and consumers from
taking what would otherwise be financially positive resource efficiency actions (Table 1, part a).
Others are systemic economic barriers (Table 1, part b).
T able 1: Barriers to resource efficiency
(a) Barriers that inhibit pursuit of financially positive resource efficiency actions
Information constraints Consumers may not make rational economic and resource-efficient choices if they have incom-
plete information on efficiency, for example of energy-consuming appliances.
Financial barriers Uncertain payoffs, competing conventional investment opportunities and inadequate credit mar-
kets may inhibit resource-efficient investment even if it would be financially positive.
Path dependency Pre-existing habits, relationships, knowledge and therefore technical and managerial capacity
may inhibit the identification of opportunities to increase resource efficiency.
Fiscal mismanagement Subsidies or tax incentives for polluting inputs (for example fossil fuels), enforcement gaps or
incoherent policy (for example landfill taxes) may create disincentives.
(b) Other barriers
Absent or incomplete
pricing of externalities
The negative impacts of emissions, biodiversity loss and resource depletion may carry no price
or a low price, making virgin materials artificially cheap, so private actors do not have a strong
financial interest to use resources efficiently.
Split incentives
Individual actors may lack an incentive to use resources efficiently, even if it is in the social inter-
est to do so, if they are not exposed to the costs of waste disposal.
Infrastructure deficits Actors may not have infrastructure to re-use resources to their maximum potential.
Market structures Lack of competition, protected industries and trade protectionism discourage innovation, in-
cluding in resource efficiency.
Source: Bruegel based on Ekins et al (2019) and Rentschler et al (2018).

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
Policy is essential to address these barriers and establish effective incentive structures
to optimise resource efficiency. The next EU Circular Economy Act needs to ensure effective
implementation of the current legislative tools at the right level of government. Some incen-
tives might be more powerful if implemented in a more decentralised way (eg local or munici-
pal level), such as incorporating circularity criteria into public procurement rules.
Our policy recommendations highlight measures that would yield the highest returns if
implemented at EU level, presented from most to least ambitious20.
Price materials according to their environmental cost
In many parts of the world, there is currently little or no financial price put on the negative
environmental effects of material extraction and processing. That makes virgin raw materials
often cheaper than secondary materials, reducing investments in circular infrastructure and
hindering circular business models. Environmental taxation is crucial to create a level play-
ing-field for secondary materials and prevent arbitrage. To achieve this, more work should
be done to identify the costs of climate, biodiversity and pollution externalities. Research
into resource taxes and their feasibility should be encouraged, since there are few real-world
examples and little literature on this (UNEP , 2024).
Producers must internalise the costs of disposal in purchase prices
The burden of landfill and incineration taxes and ‘pay-as-you-throw’ systems usually falls
directly or indirectly on the consumer and taxpayer. If more responsibility for materials
throughout their lifecycles falls on producers, they might redesign products radically for easy
recycling or remanufacturing, or develop different business models such as product-as-a-ser-
vice. Extended Producer Responsibility21 (EPR) should be strengthened and extended to other
sectors with high impact, such as construction, where EPR schemes are not common.
Assess tax incentives throughout the economy
Environmental taxes are a major economic instrument to promote circularity, but are often
countered by tax incentives in other sectors of the economy. Progress is needed to tackle the
negative incentives created by fossil-fuel subsidies, which total €55 billion to €58 billion per
year in the EU, and to shift more of the current high tax burden on labour, which in 2019 con-
stituted 52 percent of EU tax revenues, onto pollution and resources, which constituted only
0.19 percent of tax revenues (World Bank, 2022).
Design whole systems for efficiency, not only individual products
In addition to designing individual products and services for efficiency, systems should be
designed to meet human needs in the most resource-efficient ways. For example, Riofran-
cos et al (2023) found that continuation of the current US transport system with like-for-like
replacement of current vehicles with electric vehicles, up to 2050, would create demand
for three times more lithium than is currently available on the global market. However, this
demand could be vastly reduced if the US were to encourage smaller car batteries, lighter
vehicles and expansion of public transport.
Implement and harmonise regulatory measures
Effective implementation of sustainable product standards, requirements for recycled content
and end-of-waste criteria are crucial for developing stable circular markets. They will foster
steady streams of circular materials, while providing price signals and reliable, standardised
information that will generate business confidence and economies of scale.
Implementation also has to be coherent in order to counter perverse incentive structures.
20 Mario Draghi’s report crystallises ways of achieving some of these recommendations in the short and medium
term (see Draghi, 2024).
21 Legislation which makes producers responsible for their products throughout the whole life-cycle.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
For example, the EU’s Waste Shipment Regulation (Regulation (EU) 2024/1157) makes it dif-
ficult for waste to cross borders in the EU, resulting in about 90 percent of waste being treated
in the country where it was generated (EEA, 2021). However, recycling facilities need greater
economies of scale to generate enough recovery of many materials to be profitable.
Incentivise investment
For the circular single market to achieve its potential in terms of boosting EU competitiveness,
the 2024-2029 European Commission needs to build out the institutional and policy
infrastructure to address the demand side, while framing it intelligently under the headings
of the main strategic goals. This strategy will need to include materials efficiency, not only
energy. Such an incentive structure would support the substantial investments that are
necessary. Currently, projections of the economic benefits of the circular economy do
not bring an equivalent scale of investment. For example, in plastics recycling alone, the
European Investment Bank has estimated an investment gap of €6.7 billion to €8.6 billion to
achieve EU targets (EIB, 2023). Policy needs to incentivise both public and private investment
in the circular economy, which will be essential to the transformation from an inherently
inefficient linear economic model (Letta, 2024).
Correct information asymmetries in the private sector
Firms are reluctant to share commercially sensitive information that might increase welfare
but could reduce their competitiveness. The EU could provide missing institutions, such as
a neutral inter-firm mediator, to enable confidential or anonymised information exchanges
to take place, allowing firms to identify resource synergies with firms in other sectors. One
example is facilitated industrial symbiosis, which was successful in the United Kingdom in
overcoming data and trust problems to allow firms to trade used materials to mutual benefit22.
Such practices can lead to huge resource and financial savings, as demonstrated in the EU by
the Kalundbourg eco-industrial park in Denmark23. For critical and valuable materials, firms
will need communication and data-sharing along the value chain to avoid pollutants and
preserve the recycling potential of materials.
Circular economy review
Although the Commission regularly monitors, reports and reviews the impact of circular
economy legislation, the incremental approach to resource efficiency makes it unlikely the
EU’s 2030 targets on resource use will be met. This is exacerbated by a legislative framework
that is dispersed across different parts of the European Commission. The Commission should
launch a comprehensive review which assesses the whole European strategy on resources,
similar to the 2001 ‘Strategy for a future chemicals policy’ (European Commission, 2001)
which led to the REACH chemicals regulation of 2006 (registration, evaluation, authorisa-
tion and restriction of chemicals, Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006). The 2001 review increased
momentum around a complex issue, resulting in a paradigm-shifting approach to chemicals
legislation in the EU (Engström, 2020). A review of resource use could be a powerful catalyst
for bolder action that, like the chemicals review, could transform the EU’s relationship with
resources.
Leverage financing at EU level to enhance circularity
Lenders lack understanding of circular investments and of evaluating the benefits of circular
models compared to linear models, the risks of which are also underestimated. An enhanced
22 See UK Parliament, ‘Written evidence submitted by International Synergies Ltd’ , 1 September 2015, https://
committees.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/57938/pdf/.
23 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark, ‘Half a Century of Industrial Symbiosis’ , Insight, 24 October 2022, https://
investindk.com/insights/half-a-century-of-industrial-symbiosis-denmark-offers-a-platform-for-success-in-
biosolutions.
Firms are reluctant to
share commercially
sensitive information
that might increase
welfare but could
reduce their
competitiveness

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
15
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
circular economy taxonomy would allow for investment and other financial tools, such as
green bonds, to support circular businesses (EEA, 2024).
Make the business case for circularity
Support from European businesses may be greater than among politicians at present. For
example, the German Chamber of Commerce showed that companies in most sectors see
circularity as an opportunity rather than a risk (DIHK, 2024; Figure 6).
Figure 6: Corporate attitudes to the circular economy, Germany, 2024
Source: DIHK (2024). Note: The figure shows responses to the question: Is the development towards a circular economy more of an
opportunity or a risk for your company’s current business model?
Improve metrics
All of the policy recommendations we have listed require improved and standardised metrics
– both estimates of the value of a circular economy in macro variables, such as growth and
employment, and the measurement of risk, reward and externalities for calibrating and im-
plementing the right incentives to spur the transition to a circular economy (Box 1).
Box 1: Circularity metrics
Although research demonstrates that greater resource efficiency can lead to higher eco-
nomic growth, employment and improvements in other macroeconomic variables, there
remains considerable variation in the size of these estimates and their underpinning
assumptions. Modelling of circular-economy practices is at an early stage and needs devel-
opment and standardisation to create robust metrics for use in policy.
One priority to make the case for a circular economy is job creation estimates. The ILO es-
timates that the circular economy could create a net total of 7 million to 8 million jobs globally
by 2030 (ILO, 2019). In the EU, one estimate forecasts a net increase of 700,000 jobs by 2030 if
circular economy policies are pursued (Cambridge Econometrics, ICF and Trinomics, 2018).
In the EU, current metrics mostly provide a macro-view of the circular economy, provid-
ing information on outcome variables such as waste collection and consumption of materials
(World Bank, 2022). According to the World Bank, greater granularity on materials throughout
value chains is needed, as is tracking of impacts of circular policies. Such data would be much
more useful for application by business and policymakers.
A further area for development of metrics is avoided costs and disasters. The costs of en-
vironmental policies are widely discussed and calculated in terms of trade and competitive-
ness, but the costs of pollution and waste are not subject to the same denominators and are
0 % 1 0 % 2 0 % 3 0 % 4 0 % 5 0 % 6 0 % 7 0 % 8 0 % 9 0 % 1 0 0 %
R e ta i l
C o n s tr uc ti o n
M a n uf a c tur i n g
O th e r
S e r v i c e s
W a s te m a n a g e m e n t
M o r e o f a n o p p o r tun i ty M o r e o f a r i s k U n s ur e

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
often not included in cost-benefit calculations. There is still no widespread understanding of
either the near-term or longer horizon risks posed by losing the services that nature provides
for free, such as pollination and carbon sequestration. Few metrics are available for valuing
those services in monetary terms. Only rarely do calculations of the effect of lessening the
pressure on nature appear in economic thinking, for example by using concepts such as suf-
ficiency or sobriété, which would reduce the rate of extraction from nature thanks to demand
reduction and/or greater resource efficiency.
These accounting challenges have long caused environmental objectives to lose out in the
competition for investment, even relative to other aspects of the green transition. For exam-
ple, risk assessments suggest that biodiversity collapse is a nearer-term threat than sea-level
rise, but the potential costs, such as the economic impact of key pollinators becoming extinct,
are little discussed in policy debates. The efficiency and value of circular solutions can only be
properly understood once such metrics are standardised and implemented.
5 Resource efficiency and the EU’s global
green role
A more circular economy in Europe will have an impact on major EU trade partners, requiring
attention to achieve a just transition. More EU circularity would to some extent correct the
historical imbalance of European resource consumption relative to the rest of the world, but
the EU will need to support trade partners that rely on European markets during the transi-
tion to circularity.
The predominant linear take-make-waste economic model causes over-extraction from
nature in Europe and even more in other regions of the world that still have greater biodiversity
(UNEP , 2024). If the EU reduced its imports of goods with high levels of embedded fresh water
and pollution (not only emissions), that would reduce stresses on nature and societies on other
continents. A drop in raw material imports would lessen the conflict drivers in resource-rich
regions. For example, UNEP (2009) estimated that at least 40 percent of all intrastate conflicts
have a link to the exploitation of natural resources.
Most estimates of Europe’s environmental footprint do not take account of the environ-
mental impact in other regions of the huge amounts of goods that the EU imports. The demand
side of the green transition now needs attention, but progress will be harder politically than on
the supply side. To ensure that environmental outcomes are met, the EU will need to integrate
circularity more systematically into its external policies. This must also take into account energy
security and independence, resilience in the face of climate-related disasters, and the value of
ecosystem services. It should start with the EU’s southern neighbourhood and enlargement
countries.
The impact on other regions of Europe moving to a circular economy will be significant and
have adjustment costs that need to be factored into EU external policies (see Grabbe et al, 2022;
Repp et al, 2021). Countries with large numbers of people employed in industries producing
goods for European markets will need help to develop other economic opportunities. An exam-
ple is the garment industry in Bangladesh, which employs for 4 million people, with 56 percent of
output destined for European markets (Berg et al, 2021; Razzaque and Rahman, 2019). The shift
to a circular economy in textiles may result in up to 756,000 job losses in low- to upper middle-in-
come countries, while EU employment would grow by up to 91,000 (Repp et al, 2021).
Exportable European expertise on circular solutions would also benefit development
by reducing the cost of, and the environmental damage caused by, waste in developing
countries. Urban waste management is expensive, often the single highest budget item for local

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
17
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
administrations in low-income countries, where it comprises nearly 20 percent of municipal
budgets, on average, and where the total quantity of waste generated is expected to increase
more than three times by 2050 (Kaza et al, 2018). In addition to the budget savings, recovery of
value from waste would bring greater efficiency and new resources to low-income countries.
6 Conclusion
Despite the enormous risks building up from over-extraction from nature – in terms of climate
change, biodiversity and human health – the physical reality that Europeans will face in the
longer term is quickly forgotten in EU and national debates about priorities and resources for
the next one to five years. Moreover, the voices of those who benefit from the current eco-
nomic system are loud – industries, farmers, coalminers – whereas the people and companies
who will benefit from a green economy in the future cannot speak up because they are often
unaware of these future benefits (or they are not yet born).
Circularity principles are an effective way to reduce inefficient resource use and its impact on
climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution. But a circular single market would also contrib-
ute to the EU’s strategic priorities in the short and medium terms.
The legislative framework set up at EU level has so far achieved modest results, and the
opportunity to optimise it is substantial. For resource efficiency to become the norm would
require policies that foster pricing of materials to account for their environmental costs, the filling
of information gaps, implementation of the EU’s regulatory framework and spurring of invest-
ment in resource-efficient business practices.
Circularity would support EU competitiveness by helping leading European companies in
this field to deploy their expertise and services. Metrics to make this case are still lacking, and the
impact of resource use on the EU’s global role still needs to be integrated into its external policies.
The case for a structural change that favours circular economy principles needs to focus on
how it links to the EU’s major policy objectives, because that is where the power, money and
political attention will be. Any environmental policy that is treated as a ‘nice to have’ will be
quickly elbowed aside by other, more immediate priorities. To put the circular economy at the
core of EU policies aiming at economic security, competitiveness and financial stability is a way
to overcome the tragedy of the horizon.
References
Agora Industry (2022) Mobilising the circular economy for energy intensive materials, available at https://
www.agora-industry.org/publications/mobilising-the-circular-economy-for-energy-intensive-
materials-study
Allwood, J. M. (2014) ‘Squaring the Circular Economy’ , in E. Worrell and M.A. Reuter (eds) Handbook of
Recycling, Elsevier, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-396459-5.00030-1
Apple (2024) 2024 Environmental Progress Report, available at https://www.apple.com/environment/
pdf/Apple_Environmental_Progress_Report_2024.pdf
Berg, A., H. Chhaparia, S. Hedrich and K.-H. Magnus (2021) ‘What’s next for Bangladesh’s garment
industry, after a decade of growth?’ McKinsey & Company, 25 March, available at https://www.
mckinsey.com/industries/retail/our-insights/whats-next-for-bangladeshs-garment-industry-after-a-
decade-of-growth

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
Bocken, N.M.P ., I. De Pauw, C. Bakker and B. Van Der Grinten (2016) ‘Product design and business model
strategies for a circular economy’ , Journal of Industrial and Production Engineering, 33(5): 308–20,
available at https://doi.org/10.1080/21681015.2016.1172124
Boldrini, S., A. Ceglar, C. Lelli, L. Parisi and I. Heemskerk (2023) ‘Living in a World of Disappearing Nature:
Physical Risk and the Implications for Financial Stability’ , ECB Occasional Paper 2023/333, European
Central Bank, available at https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4630721
Bradford, A. (2020) The Brussels Effect: How the European Union Rules the World, Oxford University Press,
available at https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190088583.001.0001
Cambridge Econometrics, ICF and Trinomics (2018) Impacts of Circular Economy Policies on the
Labour Market, report for the European Commission, available at https://trinomics.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2018/07/Impacts-of-circular-economy-on-policies-on-the-labour-market.pdf
Carney, M. (2015) ‘Breaking the tragedy of the horizon - climate change and financial stability - speech
by Mark Carney’, Speech given at Lloyd’s of London, 29 September, available at https://www.
bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2015/breaking-the-tragedy-of-the-horizon-climate-change-and-
financial-stability
Ceglar, A., S. Boldrini, C. Lelli, L. Parisi and I. Heemskerk (2023) ‘The Impact of the Euro Area Economy and
Banks on Biodiversity’ , ECB Occasional Paper 2023/335, European Central Bank, available at https://doi.
org/10.2139/ssrn.4651049
Charles, R.G., P . Douglas, M. Dowling, G. Liversage and M.L. Davies (2020) ‘Towards Increased Recovery
of Critical Raw Materials from WEEE– evaluation of CRMs at a component level and pre-processing
methods for interface optimisation with recovery processes’ , Resources, Conservation and Recycling
161:104923, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.104923
Dasgupta, P . (2021) The Economics of Biodiversity: The Dasgupta Review, London: HM Treasury, available
at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/final-report-the-economics-of-biodiversity-the-
dasgupta-review
DIHK (2024) Kreislaufwirtschaft als Chance? Deutsche Industrie- und Handelskammer, available at https://
www.dihk.de/resource/blob/117788/4847632a7db7d7cdf922f1dc55e6ac8a/dihk-circular-economy-
report-2024-v3-data.pdf
Draghi, M. (2024) ‘The future of European competitiveness’ , available at https://commission.europa.eu/
topics/strengthening-european-competitiveness/eu-competitiveness-looking-ahead_en
ECA (2023) ‘Circular Economy: Slow transition by member states despite EU action’ , Special Report 17/2023,
European Court of Auditors, available at https://www.eca.europa.eu/en/publications?ref=SR-2023-17
ECN (2022) Compost and Digestate for a Circular Economy, European Compost Network, available at
https://www.compostnetwork.info/policy/biowaste-in-europe/
EEA (2021) ‘Linking cross-border shipments of waste in the EU with the circular economy’ , Briefing,
European Environment Agency, available at https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/linking-cross-
border-shipments-of
EEA (2024) Accelerating the Circular Economy in Europe: State and Outlook 2024, EEA Report 13/2023,
European Environment Agency, available at https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/accelerating-the-
circular-economy
EIB (2023) Cutting plastics pollution: Financial measures for a more circular value chain, European
Investment Bank, available at https://www.eib.org/en/publications/20220248-cutting-plastics-
pollution
Ekins, P ., T . Domenech, P . Drummond, R. Bleischwitz, N. Hughes and L. Lotti (2019) The Circular Economy:
What, Why, How and Where, background document for an OECD/European Commission workshop
on ‘Managing the transition to a circular economy in regions and cities’ , 5 July, available at https://
discovery.ucl.ac.uk/id/eprint/10093965/1/Ekins-2019-Circular-Economy-What-Why-How-Where.pdf
ETC (2023) Material and Resource Requirements for the Energy Transition, Energy Transitions Commission,
available at https://www.energy-transitions.org/publications/material-and-resource-energy-transition/
Engström, M. (2020) ‘Sverige, EU-medlemskapet och kontrollen av farliga kemikalier’ , Sieps 2020:9,
Svenska institutet för europapolitiska studier, available at https://www.sieps.se/globalassets/
publikationer/2020/sieps-2020_9-web.pdf
European Commission (2001) ‘Strategy for a future Chemicals Policy’ , COM(2001) 88 final, available at
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2001:0088:FIN:en:PDF

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
19
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
European Commission (2019) Accelerating the Transition to the Circular Economy: Improving Access to
Finance for Circular Economy Projects, Publications Office of the European Union, available at https://
data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/983129
European Commission (2022) ‘Impact Assessment Accompanying the Proposal for a
Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on Nature Restoration’ ,
COM/2022/304 Final, available at https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52022SC0167&amp%3Bqid=1686750707844
Eurostat (2018) Economy-Wide Material Flow Accounts Handbook: 2018 Edition, available at https://data.
europa.eu/doi/10.2785/158567
Flachenecker, F . and M. Kornejew (2019) ‘The Causal Impact of Material Productivity on Microeconomic
Competitiveness and Environmental Performance in the European Union’ . Environmental Economics
and Policy Studies 21(1): 87–122, available at https://doi.org/10.1007/s10018-018-0223-z
Forslund, T ., A. Gorst, C. Briggs, D. Azevedo and R. Smale (2022) Tackling Root Causes: Halting
Biodiversity Loss through the Circular Economy, Sitra studies 205, available at https://www.sitra.fi/
app/uploads/2022/05/sitra-tackling-root-causes.pdf
Geissdoerfer, M., S.N. Morioka, M.M. De Carvalho and S. Evans (2018) ‘Business models and supply
chains for the circular economy’ , Journal of Cleaner Production 190: 712–21, available at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.04.159
Grabbe, H., J. Potočnik and S. Dixson-Declève (2022) International System Change Compass: The Global
Implications of Achieving the European Green Deal, Open Society, Systemiq, The Club of Rome,
available at https://www.clubofrome.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/International-System-
Change-Compass-main-report-compressed.pdf
Gunningham, N., R.A. Kagan and D. Thornton (2004) ‘Social License and Environmental Protection: Why
Businesses Go Beyond Compliance’ , Law and Social Enquiry 29(2): 307–41, available at https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1747-4469.2004.tb00338.x
IEA (2024) Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024, International Energy Agency, available at https://www.
iea.org/reports/global-critical-minerals-outlook-2024
ILO (2019) Skills for a Greener Future: Key Findings, International Labour Organisation, available at
https://www.ilo.org/publications/skills-greener-future-key-findings
IPCC (2022) Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability, Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, available at https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/
Karali, N. and N. Shah (2022) ‘Bolstering supplies of critical raw materials for low-carbon technologies
through circular economy strategies’ , Energy Research & Social Science 88: 102534, available at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2022.102534
Kaza, S., L.C. Yao, P . Bhada-Tata and F . Van Woerden (2018) What a Waste 2.0: A Global Snapshot of Solid
Waste Management to 2050, World Bank, available at https://doi.org/10.1596/978-1-4648-1329-0
King, R., T . Benton, A. Froggatt, H. Harwatt, D. Quiggin and L. Wellesley (2023) The Emerging
Global Crisis of Land Use, The Royal Institute of International Affairs, available at: https://doi.
org/10.55317/9781784135430
Kovacic, Z., R. Strand and T . Völker (2020) The Circular Economy in Europe: Critical
Perspectives on Policies and Imaginaries, Routledge, available at https://www.econstor.eu/
bitstream/10419/213905/1/978-0-429-06102-8.pdf
KPMG (2023) 2023 Global Mining and Metals Outlook, available at https://assets.kpmg.com/content/
dam/kpmg/xx/pdf/2023/06/2023-global-mining-and-metals-outlook-WEB.pdf
Lenton, T .M., J. Rockström, O. Gaffney, S. Rahmstorf, K. Richardson, W. Steffen and H.J. Schellnhuber
(2019) ‘Climate tipping points — too risky to bet against’ , Nature 575(7784): 592–95, available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-019-03595-0
Letta, E. (2024) Much more than a market: Empowering the Single Market to deliver a sustainable future
and prosperity for all EU Citizens, available at https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/ny3j24sm/
much-more-than-a-market-report-by-enrico-letta.pdf
Muscat, A., E.M. De Olde, I.J.M. De Boer, and R. Ripoll-Bosch (2020) ‘The Battle for Biomass: A Systematic
Review of Food-Feed-Fuel Competition’ , Global Food Security 25: 100330, available at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gfs.2019.100330

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
NegaWatt, CAN Europe, ECOS, European Environmental Bureau, European Youth Forum, Friends of
the Earth Europe, Zero Waste Europe and Seas at Risk (2024) Sustainable Resource Management in
the EU, available at https://eeb.org/library/white-paper-on-sustainable-resource-management-in-
the-eu/
Oki, T . (2021) ‘European fuel economy policy for new passenger cars: a historical comparative analysis of
discourses and change factors’ , International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics
21(2): 165–81, available at https://doi.org/10.1007/s10784-020-09510-7
Peplow, M. (2023) ‘Lithium-ion battery recycling goes large’ , Chemical & Engineering News 101(38), available
at https://cen.acs.org/environment/recycling/Lithium-ion-battery-recycling-goes/101/i38
Pisani-Ferry, J., B. Weder di Mauro and J. Zettelmeyer (2024) How to de-risk: European economic security
in a world of interdependence, Paris Report 2, CEPR and Bruegel, available at https://cepr.org/
publications/books-and-reports/paris-report-2-europes-economic-security
Potocnik, J. and R. Nohl (2023) ‘ Accelerated Circular Economy and Reduced Resource Use’ , Reflection Paper,
Mistra, available at https://mistra.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/Mistra_RP_Accelerated_Circular_
Economy_korr02.pdf
Razzaque, M.A. and J. Rahman (2019) ‘Bangladesh’s Apparel Exports to the EU: Adapting to
Competitiveness Challenges Following Graduation from Least Developed Country Status’ , International
Trade Working Paper 2019/02, Commonwealth Secretariat, available at https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/333092701_Bangladesh’s_Apparel_Exports_to_the_EU_Adapting_to_Competitiveness_
Challenges_Following_Graduation_from_Least_Developed_Country_Status
Rennings, K. and C. Rammer (2009) ‘Increasing Energy and Resource Efficiency Through Innovation - An
Explorative Analysis Using Innovation Survey Data’ , Discussion No. 09-056, ZEW - Centre for European
Economic Research, available at https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1495761
Rentschler, J., R. Bleischwitz and F . Flachenecker (2018) ‘On Imperfect Competition and Market Distortions:
The Causes of Corporate under-Investment in Energy and Material Efficiency’ , International Economics
and Economic Policy 15(1): 159–83, available at https://doi.org/10.1007/s10368-016-0370-2
Repp, L., M. Hekkert and J. Kirchherr (2021) ‘Circular economy-induced global employment shifts in
apparel value chains: Job reduction in apparel production activities, job growth in reuse and recycling
activities’ , Resources, Conservation and Recycling 171: 105621, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
resconrec.2021.105621
Richardson, K., W. Steffen, W. Lucht, J. Bendtsen, S.E. Cornell, J.F . Donges … J. Rockström (2023) ‘Earth
beyond six of nine planetary boundaries’ , Science Advances 9(37), available at https://doi.org/10.1126/
sciadv.adh2458
Riofrancos, T ., A. Kendall, K.K. Dayemo, M. Haugen, K. McDonald, B. Hassan and M. Slattery (2023)
Achieving Zero Emissions with More Mobility and Less Mining, UC Davis, available at https://www.
climateandcommunity.org/more-mobility-less-mining
Sala, S., L. Benini, A. Beylot, V . Castellani, A. Cerutti, S. Corrado … E. Crenna (2019) Consumption and
Consumer Footprint: Methodology and Results: Indicators and Assessment of the Environmental Impact
of European Consumption, Publications Office of the European Union, available at https://data.europa.
eu/doi/10.2760/98570
Sonter, L.J., M.C. Dade, J.E.M. Watson and R.K. Valenta (2020) ‘Renewable energy production will
exacerbate mining threats to biodiversity’ , Nature Communications 11(1), available at https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-020-17928-5
Stewart, D., G. Crossan, A. Bucaille and C. Simons (2023) ‘ A raw deal: Will materials shortages, supply chain
challenges threaten tech’s future?’ , Deloitte, available at https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/
industry/technology/technology-media-and-telecom-predictions/2024/e-waste-recycling-could-help-
raw-material-shortage-for-tech-industry.html
Svartzman, R., E. Espagne, J. Gauthey, P . Hadji-Lazaro, M. Salin, T . Allen, J. Berger, J. Calas, A. Godin and A.
Vallier (2021) ‘ A “Silent Spring” for the Financial System? Exploring Biodiversity-Related Financial Risks
in France’ , Working Paper 826, Banque de France, available at https://publications.banque-france.fr/en/
silent-spring-financial-system-exploring-biodiversity-related-financial-risks-france
Systemiq (2021) Everything as a service Xaas: How businesses can thrive in the age of climate change and
digitalization, available at https://www.systemiq.earth/xaas/

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
21
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
UNEP (2009) From Conflict to Peacebuilding: The Role of Natural Resources and the Environment,
United Nations Environment Programme, available at https://www.iisd.org/publications/conflict-
peacebuilding-role-natural-resources-and-environment
UNEP (2024) Global Resources Outlook 2024, United Nations Environment Programme, available at https://
www.unep.org/resources/Global-Resource-Outlook-2024
van Toor, J., D. Piljic, G. Schellekens, M. van Oorschot and M. Kok (2020) Indebted to Nature Exploring
Biodiversity Risks for the Dutch Financial Sector, De Nederlandsche Bank, available at https://www.
dnb.nl/media/4c3fqawd/indebted-to-nature.pdf
VDI (2016) ‘Competitive Advantage: Resource Efficiency’ , VDI Zentrum Ressourceneffizienz GmbH,
available at https://www.ressource-deutschland.de/fileadmin/user_upload/1_Themen/h_
Publikationen/VDI-ZRE-competitive-advantage-resource-efficiency.pdf
von der Leyen, U. (2024) Europe’s Choice: Political Guidelines for the next European Commission 2024
- 2029’ , available at https://commission.europa.eu/document/download/e6cd4328-673c-4e7a-8683-
f63ffb2cf648_en?filename=Political%20Guidelines%202024-2029_EN.pdf
Watari, T ., K. Nansai, K. Nakajima and D. Giurco (2021) ‘Sustainable energy transitions require
enhanced resource governance’ , Journal of Cleaner Production 312: 127698, available at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.127698
Watkins, E. and A. Meysner (2022) European Circular Economy policy landscape overview, Institute
for European Environmental Policy, available at https://ieep.eu/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/
European-Circular-Economy-policy-landscape-overview.pdf
WEF (2024) The Global Risks Report 2024, World Economic Forum, available at https://www3.weforum.
org/docs/WEF_The_Global_Risks_Report_2024.pdf
World Bank (2022) Squaring the Circle: Policies from Europe’s Circular Economy Transition, available at
https://www.worldbank.org/en/region/eca/publication/squaring-circle-europe-circular-economy-
transition
WWF (2021) Driven to Waste: Global Food Loss on Farms, available at https://wwf.panda.org/discover/
our_focus/food_practice/food_loss_and_waste/driven_to_waste_global_food_loss_on_farms/
Annex 1
Global environmental impacts of cultivation/extraction, processing and use of resources:
definitions (Figure 1)
Climate impacts include the impact of all greenhouse gases, with units are converted to CO2
equivalents taking into account their relative climate impacts.
Land-related biodiversity loss includes that from land occupation and land-use change only,
measured in ‘potentially disappeared fraction of species’ (PDF). Biodiversity loss from drivers
including climate change, terrestrial acidification and water stress are not included here, nor is
marine biodiversity loss.
Particulate matter (PM) health impacts are impacts from primary emissions of PM and sec-
ondary formation from precursor gases SOx, NOx and ammonia. Health impacts are measured
in disability adjusted life years, ie the number of life years lost or lived with a health impairment.
Understanding the categorisation of greenhouse gas emissions from materials extraction
and processing
Greenhouse gas impacts in Figures 1 and 3 are categorised by economic activity and purpose
rather than the more usual categorisation by sector (eg industry) or energy carrier (eg coal).
If the purpose is the cultivation, processing or extraction of material, then all greenhouse-gas
impacts resulting from that activity (eg from energy use) are categorised into one of biomass,
metals, non-metallic minerals and fossil resources. If counted not for these purposes, the
impacts are categorised under ‘remaining economy or households’ .

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22
Policy Brief | Issue n˚20/24 | September 2024
An economic activity’s purpose is determined by where it sits in the value chain: cultiva-
tion, processing and extraction are all the activities up to the point where a usable material
is delivered (eg natural gas, steel or animal products). These products are then distributed
or become inputs into other processes. Figure A1 gives several examples of how economic
activities are categorised.
Figure A1: categorisation of economic activities to extraction and processing vs
remaining economy and households
Source: Bruegel based on Annex 2 to UNEP (2024).
Therefore, the calculation that 64 percent of climate impacts is attributable to materials
processing and extraction does not suggest that fossil energy carriers are unimportant. On the
contrary, they account for around 75 percent of emissions, but for our purposes greenhouse
gas emissions from oil and gas are distributed throughout the six categories (see UNEP , 2024,
Annex 2 for a complete mapping of economic sectors).
Annex 2
Materials-related CO2 emissions shown in Figure 3 correspond to emissions from the man-
ufacturing and processing of materials (biomass, metals, non-metallic minerals and fossil
resources).
For each year, the CO2 equivalent target corresponds to the total carbon budget to limit
global warming by 20100 to 1.5 degrees Celsius with a 50 percent probability, divided by the
number of years until 2100. For example, in 2022 the carbon budget was 410 gigatonnes (from
IPCC, 2021) divided by 78, the number of years until 2100. This is why the curve declines: the
CO2 budget reduces every year because of overshoot of annual targets.
The PDF biodiversity target in Figure 3 corresponds to a limit of 0.001 percent additional
global species extinction per year. Both the target and the contribution of materials pertain
to land-based biodiversity loss from land-use change. Biodiversity loss from climate change,
terrestrial acidification and water stress are not included in Figure 3.
MetalsBiomass Non-metallic minerals Fossil resources
Extraction and processing Remaining economy Households
