
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
This paper contains web-based interactive figures that cannot be reproduced here. All
figures are available at https://www.bruegel.org/analysis/inclusive-digital-economy-
round-project-research 
Bruegel’s Future of Work and Inclusive Growth (FWIG) project took on the challenge of
investigating how today’s job market can transform to meet the needs of the future
economy. The combined rise of automation, remote employment, globalisation and a
diversifying workforce will necessitate a generational shift in how we interact with, and
collaborate around, new technology.
Over the course of this project, we have oriented our many projects around four
themes: new ways of working; technology in the workforce; reskilling and mobility; and
inclusive digital economy. This last grouping looks at the inequalities that accompany
economic transformation, some longstanding and some tied to the same innovation
that brings promise. Sexism, poor working conditions and other forms of
discrimination have long kept economies from operating at full potential, as well as
perpetuating inequities at odds with European societal values. It is therefore imperative
that any study of new ways of working look at how technology-driven shifts affect
women, minorities and unemployed young people. If the digital transformation can
reduce the amount of bias in the economy, we will all be better off. If it perpetuates it,
however, much is at stake.
Inclusive digital economy:a round-up of projectresearch
The rise of automation, remote employment and a
diversifying workforce will necessitate a shift in how
we interact with new technology
Rebecca Christie
ANALYSIS 10/2024 / 08 April 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Inclusive digital economy: a round-up of project research 2
One of the takeaways from this project is that policymakers should spend more time
considering the quality, not just the quantity, of available jobs. Bruegel’s Laura Nurski
and Mia Hoffman found that recurring economic crises have repeatedly shifted
attention away from whether jobs that citizens can have are actually jobs worth having.
How is the labour market changing?
To get a sense of how the labour market is changing, Bruegel researchers assembled a
Labour market outlook dashboard published in March 2024. The dataset covers labour
trends since 2006 in all 27 European Union member countries and the bloc as a whole.
In addition to giving an overview of unemployment rates and demographic
breakdowns, the dashboard brings less-visible workforce trends to the surface. 
This will help policymakers get a better sense of why something is happening, not just
what – for example, when considering unemployment rates, the dashboard makes it
easier to compare trends on why workers are out of work. Is it because they cannot
find a job or have caregiving responsibilities? Or is it because they are discouraged or
facing health care issues that keep them inactive even when they would prefer to be
otherwise? The dashboard was created by affiliate fellow Duygu Güner, one of the
leaders of the FWIG project, along with research assistants Giulia Gotti and Nina Ruer. 
Job quality is the focus of a working paper by non-resident fellow Laura Nurski, also
part of the FWIG project leadership, and former research analyst Mia Hoffman. In
‘Beating burnout: identifying bad jobs and improving job quality’, published in May
2022, they assemble a suite of evidence showing that poor working conditions are
costing employers money and keeping the economy from growing at its full potential.
On average 11% of the EU workforce feels burnt-out, ranging from 4.3% in Finland to
20.6% in Slovenia. National statistics show that stress-related absenteeism has been
rising, which hurts firms and places extra burden on government social supports. Even
though it shows up at the individual level, burnout is an occupational phenomenon.
High workloads and low autonomy are the most common predictors, leading to a
syndrome of chronic workplace stress that becomes impossible to manage. In such a
state of exhaustion, workers become disengaged, doubtful and cynical about the value
of what they are doing.
Bruegel analysis 10/2024 / 08 April 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Inclusive digital economy: a round-up of project research 3
Burnout has been notably acute across occupations within the healthcare and
education sectors, exacerbated by new technologies that give employers more ways
to control workers and keep track of their every move. In an accompanying podcast
with Bruegel’s Giuseppe Porcaro, ‘Job quality is about more than working conditions’,
Nurski and Hoffman note that surveillance itself creates stress and weakens the trust
between employees and employers. This, combined with the way automation changes
job roles, can have a big impact on how workers feel about their jobs and how they
perform in those roles. 
Changing jobs in Europe is still difficult and relatively low volume, which makes it harder
to rely on the market to improve job quality without policy action. Furthermore, while
researchers are studying job content trends and social relations in the workforce,
policy has been centred around labour contracts and physical working conditions.
Hoffman and Nurski note that physical conditions account for only about 4% of how
people feel about their jobs, whereas role substance and social factors play much
bigger roles.   
There are costs to making bad jobs better: higher wages are an obvious expense, but
there are other measures to help reduce bullying and improve safety that also require
investments. That said, giving workers more autonomy could end up saving money,
because more motivated and happier people are more productive at their jobs. Going
Bruegel analysis 10/2024 / 08 April 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Inclusive digital economy: a round-up of project research 4
forward, policymakers should take a more systematic look at burnout trends, make job
quality a priority, and evaluate the effects of subsidies, training programmes and other
interventions. With better data, it will be easier to see which sectors and regions have
better outcomes and to share best practices across the EU. 
Younger workers will face these questions most keenly in coming years, not just
because they have more years ahead of them in the labour force but because they are
having a harder time getting started on their career path. Even before the pandemic,
youth unemployment in the European Union was three times higher than among the
over-55s, the age cohort at the other end of their working lives. EU countries had been
trying to address the disparity, but the COVID-19 shutdowns threatened to undo any
progress, according to work by Bruegel Senior fellow Guntram Wolff and former
research analyst Monika de Ridder.
In ‘The scarring effect of COVID-19: youth unemployment in Europe’, published
November 2020, they found that youth unemployment rose during the second quarter
of 2020, while unemployment for the older cohort was unchanged compared to a year
earlier. Older workers had more professional experience and were able to hang onto
their jobs, while younger workers faced substantial obstacles – the substantial
increase in the proportion of under-25s not even seeking work, even though they are
available to work, includes discouraged jobseekers and persons prevented from
looking for work due to personal or family circumstances. Wolff and De Ridder called
on the European Commission and national policymakers to urgently focus on
supporting young people through hiring and training initiatives, not just
macroeconomic policy.  
Gender matters
Outsized pandemic’s effects were not limited to younger workers compared to older
counterparts. The worldwide challenge also disproportionately hurt working women,
compared to past recessions that took aim at jobs more commonly held by men. This
difference in crisis effects requires appropriate steps in response, according to a paper
by , former Bruegel Visiting fellow Estrella Gomez-Herrera of the University of Balearic
Islands, Alexia Prskawetz of the Vienna Institute of Technology, the University of
Vienna’s Sabine Theresia Köszegi and Caroline Berghammer.  
In ‘Gender equality and reboundability in the labour market: lessons from COVID-19’,
published December 2023, the authors noted that women are overrepresented in
Bruegel analysis 10/2024 / 08 April 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Inclusive digital economy: a round-up of project research 5
sectors that were hit severely by lockdowns, including hospitality, delivery of personal
services and healthcare. Families had to organise home working, schooling, childcare
and housework in parallel, also affecting women, given that traditional gender norms
expect women to be the primary caregivers. Gender norms impact job segregation in
labour markets and strongly affect the division of unpaid work.
Recognising gender equality as a determinant of societal resilience can provide
policymakers with essential insights to guide them on the right path and the paper
recommends further work in this area. Authorities need to do a better job designing
measures that target structural gender equality, such as promoting equal sharing of
care obligations, providing high-quality childcare institutions, and offering work-time
flexibility. More resilient societies are better able to weather and rebound from shock
and less stereotyped workforces are also more likely to reach their full potential. 
Other gender-related factors are also holding the economy back. Bruegel consultant
Tom Schraepen found that members of the gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender
communities are less likely to disclose their identities and orientations in less equitable
societies. Even when they do disclose, there still is not enough data to draw clear
conclusions on working conditions in the knowledge economy. His analysis ‘Do
LGBTQIA+ people face EU labour market discrimination?’, published in September
2022, looks at trends in working conditions and related populations to assess what
is happening and how policy can make it better.
At first glance, people in same-sex partnerships seem to have more managerial
responsibilities, with higher levels of education and are in more skilled occupations.
However, a closer look shows signs of discrimination: for example, research shows gay
men are more likely to be in lower-level management positions than their heterosexual
peers. 
To try to get a sense of how these groups manage their careers, Schraepen used
the EU Labour Force Survey constructing a group of people in same-sex partnerships
and comparing them to people in heterosexual partnerships. This data showed that
people in same-sex partnerships seem more likely to be unemployed than individuals
in heterosexual partnerships, around 5.9% versus 4.6%. The overall finding becomes
more pronounced when educational levels are taken into account: for workers with less
education, the gap between people in same-sex partnerships and those in
heterosexual arrangements widens. Furthermore, those in same-sex relationships
Bruegel analysis 10/2024 / 08 April 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Inclusive digital economy: a round-up of project research 6
were more likely to have left their last job for reasons not of their own choosing like
being fired, having been made redundant or not having a contract extended. 
In planning a strong future workforce, it will be important to make sure workers are not
ruled out of certain jobs because of demographic factors. LGBTQIA+ community
members are more likely to face disproportionate unemployment in countries that
have fewer rights and protections. Automated hiring procedures and other new forms
of workplace management need to avoid entrenching the worst parts of the current
system.
Looking forward, gender matters must not be left out of efforts to understand how
artificial intelligence is affecting the workforce. Left unchecked, digital inequality can
spiral. In ‘How do gender stereotypes and gendered work segregation, and
digitalisation and automation, result in a vicious cycle of digital gender inequality?’,
published in August 2022, Gomez-Herrera and Köszegi emphasise that broad study of
labour markets will not be enough. 
Existing gender barriers hold women back at multiple levels, from the percentage of
women pursuing science and engineering studies to their progress through a
workforce that is too often systematically unwelcoming. Disparities in women's
representation, remuneration and promotion make it extremely difficult to retain female
Bruegel analysis 10/2024 / 08 April 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Inclusive digital economy: a round-up of project research 7
talent in technology-related fields. A disproportionate number of women leave during
their transition from higher education and career cycles. 
This is bad for reasons that go beyond losing talented workers. Homogenous all-male
developer teams are more likely to design AI systems and their applications in ways
that perpetuate stereotypes and don’t meet user needs. Given that computing and AI
jobs represent a significant proportion of EU employment, and the demand for these
specialists is only expected to grow, this is cause for substantial concern. According to
European Commission data, only 34% of STEM graduates and 17% of information and
computer technology (ICT) graduates are female. Only 2.4% of female tertiary
graduates earn ICT degrees versus 9.2% of male tertiary graduates. 
Given the current talent shortage and the need to offer new skills to workers whose
jobs are phased out by technology-related market shifts, policymakers need to turn
their attention now to making AI and related careers more accessible to more people.
The paper finds that a lack of data scientists and other experts is a main bottleneck
holding up widespread adoption of AI technologies, and that this lack of AI skills could
undermine Europe’s industrial prospects.
The AI revolution
Bruegel’s Porcaro looked into the link between AI and societal change with Nurski and
Köszegi in an October 2021 podcast, ‘Is tech redefining the workplace for
Bruegel analysis 10/2024 / 08 April 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Inclusive digital economy: a round-up of project research 8
women?’ They explored the relationship between artificial intelligence and job
transformation and whether the impact differs by gender. The scholars note that work
is often segregated along gender lines and even societies where women are high
educational achievers don’t take those gains into and throughout the workforce. It is
important to ask whether increased use of technology will lower or exacerbate current
discrepancies, and what actions can policy make to tip the scales in a more positive
direction. 
One issue is that studies generally tend to measure only the potential of automation,
but do not consider other economic or practical factors that affect how and where new
technology is adopted. As some jobs become more fully automated and disappear,
others spring up to take their place. These trends combine with existing societal
patterns that better paid, tech-intensive jobs tend to be more male dominated than
lower-paid jobs that demand more physical and person-to-person duties. For example,
in health care, the number of men increases as more tech is involved in providing care,
and it will be important to keep tabs on whether this is happening across professions. If
jobs become more presitigious and higher paid as they become more technology
intensive and if women are pushed away from these jobs, it will make current
imbalances worse and limit the available talent pool. 
Robots add a physical dimension to these questions of technology and societal
balance. Oxford Internet Institute’s Ekaterina Hertog and Bruegel Non-resident fellow
Fabian Stephany joined Porcaro in the November 2023 podcast episode ‘Can/Should
robots look after the young and the old?’, exploring the potential, ethics and the
willingness of people to automatise unpaid domestic work. These cross-cutting
questions affect not only employment trends but gender considerations, migration
trends, service availability and work-life balance. 
Privacy and opportunity cost are two of the big factors when assessing what can and
cannot be automated. New technology is making these considerations more complex.
For example, in the past, a washing machine might have increased privacy because it
eliminated the need for a human assistant to enter a home, but the rise of Internet-
connected setups means that the hired human might actually protect data better than
a data collecting vacuum that sucks up not just dust but all kinds of personal
information.
Stephany and Hertog discussed differences between the UK and Japan and among
men and women in each society, on what can be automated. British men and Japanese
Bruegel analysis 10/2024 / 08 April 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Inclusive digital economy: a round-up of project research 9
women were more optimistic about technology than their counterparts, while
Japanese men tended to worry about the cost of adopting new systems. Generally
speaking, survey respondents were more likely to predict growing use of robots for
cleaning, cooking and dishwashing than raising children or taking care of older family
members. 
If these robots turn out to work well as caregivers but come at significant cost, how
should policy regulate who has access? Which households merit subsidies, and how
else should authorities step in to make sure certain populations aren’t exploited in the
process. That said, more automation could have radical implications for productivity
because of all the time and resources that go into unpaid labour and other things that
are important yet economically not measured. 
Bruegel contributors Cristiano Codagnone and Maria Savona, who hold multiple
academic affiliations in Spain, the UK and Italy, found that digital automation already
has had broad effects on working conditions, not just on job loss and job creation. In
‘The hidden inequalities of digitalisation in the post-pandemic context’, published in
January 2023, they delve into the more hidden impacts of technology adoption on
employment, particularly on the invisible conditions of some jobs. These effects could
represent a substantial social cost, particularly in the aftermath of the financial crisis
and the COVID-19 pandemic, given the rise of non-standard work, remote work and
more stressful job conditions in many fields. Mental health plays a big role in how
workers approach their jobs and welfare considerations go beyond administrative
differences in which jobs are classified as full time employment versus independent,
part-time or otherwise outside traditional models. 
Authorities could do more to provide social protections against job loss, sickness and
other life circumstances, independently of employment status. The authors
recommend that workers with non-standard employment, whose numbers are
increasing, should have more access to social protection, such as through portable
benefits attached to the worker rather than the job, or the establishment of
‘underemployment insurance’ to smooth out fluctuating incomes in the gig economy.
Although more evidence is needed to investigate trade-offs, it seems clear that
occupational safety and health risks are rising in part because of digitalisation. To
make the digital future work for everyone, policymakers and communities must tackle
the digital divide and address labour market inequalities.
Bruegel analysis 10/2024 / 08 April 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
© Bruegel 2026. All rights reserved. Short sections, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted in the original language without explicit
permission provided that the source is acknowledged. Opinions expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) alone.
Bruegel
Rue de la Charité 33,
B-1210 Brussels
(+32) 2 227 4210
info@bruegel.org
Bruegel.org
