
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Bertin Martens (bertin.
martens@bruegel.org) is a
Senior Fellow at Bruegel
Executive summary
The rapidly evolving market for artificial-intelligence services is apparently thriving and
very competitive, with a growing number of AI start-ups and ever larger and more capable AI
models. Investors are pouring large amounts of money into start-ups and into a few big tech
firms that have the large financial resources and computing capacity that constitute key in-
puts to the production and running of AI-driven services. However, exponentially growing AI
model training costs create a market entry barrier for AI start-ups, forcing them to cooperate
with big tech firms to get access to computing infrastructure and end users. At the same time,
their AI models compete with those of the big tech firms. Competition authorities investigate
these co-opetition agreements, looking for market-distorting clauses. Beyond computing
costs, other competition choke points in the AI supply chain include access to dedicated AI
processor chips and training data. Strict enforcement of copyright on data may further tighten
an already scarce supply of affordable training data.
Policymakers have few, if any, effective tools to deal with these potential competition
bottlenecks in AI industries. Co-opetition agreements are necessary to enable AI start-ups to
access hyperscale and costly computing infrastructure. At the same time, the agreements give
big tech privileged access to the latest AI models. Competition authorities can try to minimise
market-distorting provisions in these agreements but there are technical and economic limits
to the extent of fragmentation in the AI value chain that can be meaningfully imposed on big
tech firms. Licensing fees for copyright-protected data further tighten the already scarce sup-
ply of affordable data. It is hard to implement a fair market-clearing mechanism for dedicated
AI processors.
If model training costs continue to grow exponentially, as appears to be the case for the
foreseeable future, the entire competition policy setting for AI industries may need a revision,
with collaboration, including between big tech firms, dominating competition to keep the
pace of AI innovation going.

Recommended citation
Martens, B. (2024) ‘Why artificial intelligence is creating fundamental challenges for
competition policy’, Policy Brief 16/2024, Bruegel
Policy Brief
Issue n˚16/24 | July 2024 Why artificial intelligence
is creating fundamental
challenges for
competition policy
Bertin Martens

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
Policy Brief | Issue n˚16/24 | July 2024
1 Artificial intelligence competition concerns
The artificial intelligence industry is booming, powering stock market valuations1. From 2022
to 2023, investment in generative AI in the United States by big tech companies and private
venture capital in AI start-ups increased from less than €1 billion to over €20 billion (Madiega
and Ilnicki, 2024). In the EU, it increased from almost zero to nearly €4 billion over the same
period.
However, a series of high-profile collaboration agreements between AI start-ups and
big-tech firms, combined with emerging bottlenecks in AI input markets, have drawn the
attention of competition authorities. There is suspicion that big tech companies are jostling
to strengthen their market positions in the AI industry and that they use these agreements to
stifle competition and increase the dependency of, and restrict the room for manoeuvre for,
start-ups. Investigations into these agreements have been started in France, Portugal, Hun-
gary, the United Kingdom and the US2. The US Department of Justice in June 2024 announced
“urgent” scrutiny of big tech’s control of AI3, in particular choke points in the supply chain,
including access to computing power, data and dedicated AI processors. Moreover, acquisi-
tions of entire teams of AI engineers from other firms, such as Microsoft’s hiring of Inflection
AI staff in early 20244, are perceived as a way to circumvent merger regulation.
Such competition checks are considered urgent because competition authorities do not
want to be caught short a second time by big-tech firms, as happened over the past decade
when a few online platforms grew very fast and managed to carve out dominant market
positions. Classic slow-grinding competition policy procedures were unable to catch up with
them. A major justification for the EU Digital Markets Act (DMA, Regulation (EU) 2022/1925)
– the main EU competition policy tool for very large digital platforms – was precisely to create
a fast ex-ante instrument so that policymakers would no longer have to wait for a competition
problem to occur before they could intervene.
The French Autorité de la Concurrence (2024) issued an opinion in June 2024 on compe-
tition bottlenecks in the AI value chain. The UK Competition and Markets Authority (2024)
noted that the growing presence of a few big-tech firms that underpin AI by providing com-
puting resources, expertise and monetisation channels, might shape AI-related markets to the
detriment of fair, open and effective competition. The European Commission as the European
Union’s competition authority is reviewing collaboration agreements and called at the start of
2024 for contributions on competition in generative AI5. AI systems are already integrated in ser-
vices operated by the hard-to-avoid ‘gatekeeper’ platforms that are monitored under the DMA.
This Policy Brief examines competition-reducing market-entry barriers in each segment
in the AI value chain, from upstream markets for model training inputs, intermediate markets
that match AI model developers with deployers of AI-driven services and downstream
markets that match deployers and end users. To structure the debate, it proposes a
collaboration and competition or “co-opetition” rationale (Brandenburger and Nalebuff,
1996) for collaboration agreements between AI start-ups and big-tech firms. It examines
1 Lewis Krauskopf, ‘Echoes of dotcom bubble haunt AI-driven US stock market’ , Reuters, 2 July 2024, https://www.
reuters.com/markets/echoes-dotcom-bubble-haunt-ai-driven-us-stock-market-2024-07-02/.
2 Matt O’Brian, ‘FTC opens investigation into Big Tech’s partnerships with leading AI startups’ , Los Angeles Times,
25 January 2024, https://www.latimes.com/business/story/2024-01-25/ftc-opens-investigation-into-big-techs-
partnerships-with-leading-ai-startups.
3 Stephen Morris, Javier Espinoza and Stefania Palma, ‘US antitrust enforcer says ‘urgent’ scrutiny needed over
Big Tech’s control of AI’ , Financial Times, 6 June 2024, https://www.ft.com/content/97b45759-36e0-4f5b-9c6a-
ae0580f9a29b.
4 Paul Kunert, ‘Microsoft hiring Inflection team triggers interest from EU’s antitrust chief’ , The Register, 5 April 2024,
https://www.theregister.com/2024/04/05/ai_talent_wars_craziest_ever_seen/.
5 See European Commission press release of 9 January 2024, ‘Commission launches calls for contributions on
competition in virtual worlds and generative AI’ , https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_24_85.
High-profile
collaboration
agreements between
AI start-ups and big-
tech firms, combined
with emerging
bottlenecks in AI
input markets, have
drawn the attention
of competition
authorities

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
Policy Brief | Issue n˚16/24 | July 2024
possible policy responses to these bottlenecks and shows how, in some parts of the value
chain, there are no clear-cut solutions because competition authorities are caught between
conflicting policy objectives. In particular, exponentially growing AI model training costs
constitute an increasingly high market entry barrier that cannot be addressed by imposing
constraints on the role of big tech firms or increasing public sector AI investments.
2 Market entry barriers and competition
along the AI model value chain
2.1 Competition between AI models
At first sight, the overall market for AI models, which respond to prompts by producing origi-
nal outputs – for example images or text – based on analysis of vast datasets6, looks very com-
petitive. The supply of AI models and the number of firms developing them is increasing fast.
The AI Index Report (Maslej et al, 2024) lists more than five hundred “notable” AI models7,
including hundreds of very large foundation models (FMs), or models able to perform a range
of tasks that are trained on very broad sets of data and can be added to in order to create new
applications (Figure 1).
Figure 1: Foundation models by access type
 Source: Maslej et al (2024).
Large language models, such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT8, are a subset of FMs. They can handle
text, images and audio, for example providing images and audio output based on descrip-
6 Examples include OpenAI’s ChatGPT , Microsoft’s Co-Pilot and Google’s Gemini.
7 Epoch, a widely respected AI research organisation, uses the term “notable machine learning models” to designate
noteworthy models handpicked as being particularly influential within the AI/machine learning ecosystem. In
contrast, foundation models are exceptionally large AI models trained on massive datasets, capable of performing
a multitude of downstream tasks. Examples of foundation models include GPT-4, Claude 3 and Gemini. While
many foundation models may qualify as notable models, not all notable models are foundation models. See Epoch
AI, ‘Notable AI Models’ , 19 June 2024, https://epochai.org/data/notable-ai-models.
8 For more explanation about ChatGPT , see for example Amanda Hechler, ‘What is ChatGPT’ , TechTarget, June 2024,
https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/definition/ChatGPT.
10
28 288
12 23
9
27
24
32
72
98
149
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
No access Lim ited Open

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
Policy Brief | Issue n˚16/24 | July 2024
tive text input. Hundreds of thousands of specialised AI model applications run like apps
in an app store on top of FMs. By the end of April 2024, the OpenAI GPT applications store
contained 159,000 specialised GPT applications created on top of the baseline ChatGPT AI
model9, which provides the equivalent of an ‘operating system’ for these AI apps, similar to
the way Google Android is the operating system for apps running on an Android smartphone.
However, a first important qualification to this overall view of the market for AI models is
that models should be distinguished according to their availability to users. About two thirds
of all FMs are fully open source, available publicly for free commercial and non-commercial
use. Open models reduce AI market entry barriers and increase competition between users,
giving them a wide range of models to choose from. Depending on the degree of openness,
model users can create their own versions of the model (Solaiman, 2023). Once they are
released, developers lose control of their open models, which may have consequences for
safety and responsible use. Anyone can modify the models for harmful purposes, such as
producing fake news, disturbing videos or racist speech.
However, the performance of open models is somewhat below that of closed models
(Maslej et al, 2024, p 146). The best FM models are not released for open use10. That reduces
the competitiveness of firms that deploy freely available open models, compared to firms that
have access to closed but better performing models – if the underlying AI model is less good,
the apps built on top of it will also be less good. This finding contradicts the often-heard claim
– copied from the open software movement – that open models accelerate AI-driven innova-
tion because many parties can use them.
2.2 Fixed computing costs as a barrier to market entry
A crude measure of the capability of AI models is the number of tokens they can handle.
Tokens are created by slicing training data into fragments – for example parts of words or sen-
tences – enabling analysis at a very granular level. Since the launch of the first Google Trans-
former model (Vashwani et al, 2017), AI models have grown exponentially, from millions to
trillions of tokens in the latest models (Figure 2). The processing of more tokens require more
computing capacity and training data, and so computing capacity requirements and the asso-
ciated costs have increased accordingly11 (Maslej et al, 2024, p 49-51).
The red line in Figure 2 shows that models are still on a linear growth path on the logarith-
mic scale of computing needs and costs. There are no signs yet of diminishing returns to scale,
not even across this wide range of orders of magnitude of increase in inputs. Since models
are pre-trained, prior to use, training is a fixed cost, independent of the intensity of use of the
model. High fixed training costs are the main AI market entry barrier. This favours large firms
with the financial capacity to cover these costs.
It explains why AI start-ups seek collaboration agreements with big-tech firms.
9 Daniel Baek, ‘GPT Store Statistics & Facts: Contains 159.000 of the 3 million created GPTs’ , SEO.AI, 24 April 2024,
https://seo.ai/blog/gpt-store-statistics-facts.
10 Meta’s Llama model is an exception, according to Maslej et al (2024).
11 Computing requirements have increased from a few thousand to a hundred billion petaflops – a unit of measure
for the calculating the speed of a computer equal to one quadrillion floating-point operations per second. Floating
point operations per second is a measure of computer performance.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
Policy Brief | Issue n˚16/24 | July 2024
Figure 2: Estimate training costs and computing requirements for selected AI models
Source: Maslej et al (2024). Note: * see footnote 11.
Model training requires expensive dedicated AI processors. Nvidia is currently the market
leader but competition is picking up, from established chip producers like AMD and Intel, and
from big-tech firms building their own AI processors. Other input market segments in the chips
supply chain are dominated by a small number of firms. For example Netherlands-based ASML
is a market leader in lithography machines for chip production.
To train and run the largest FMs, hundreds of thousands of dedicated AI processors need
to be assembled in cloud server farms. Only the largest big-tech players – essentially Google,
Amazon, Microsoft and Meta, and Apple and Nvidia, collectively known as the GAMMANs –
have the required cloud infrastructure and computing capacity to cater to the training needs
of the largest AI models. Meta is reportedly developing a state-of-the art AI computing system,
which with 350,000 Nvidia H100 processors12, each costing around $30,000, is estimated to
cost more than $10 billion. Extrapolating the red line in Figure 2 by a few years, it is easy to see
that the trillion-dollar AI processing farm would soon be reached. This market entry barrier is
completely out of reach of public funding; only the very largest firms can aspire to this, and even
they may have to collaborate in future.
Several authors suggest that an oligopolistic market for AI FMs is inevitable because the tight
control that GAMMANs have over essential assets confines smaller players to subordinate roles.
Azoulay et al (2024) argued that sharing resources is the only way to avoid market concentra-
tion, unless a “rogue” GAMMAN were to use openness as a competition strategy. Korinek and
Vipra (2024) also expected the market for FMs to be quite oligopolistic because of significant
economies of scale and scope in deployment.
High training cost market entry barriers explain why AI start-ups seek to negotiate collabora-
tion agreements with the GAMMANs, trading access to computing infrastructure for GAMMAN
access to their latest models (Figure 3). Alternatively, AI start-ups can drop away from the red
technology frontier line and side-track to smaller AI models that can be fined-tuned and per-
form well on specific tasks, or they can move into the booming market for ‘grounding’ of large
models to create applications with proprietary data (grounding refers to connecting AI model
output to verifiable sources of information and specific proprietary data sources13).
12 Katie Paul , Stephen Nellis and Max A. Cherney, ‘Exclusive: Meta to deploy in-house custom chips this year to
power AI drive – memo’ , Reuters, 1 February 2024, https://www.reuters.com/technology/meta-deploy-in-house-
custom-chips-this-year-power-ai-drive-memo-2024-02-01/.
13 Grounding thus links model responses to user queries more closely to trusted data and reduces the chances
of model hallucination, or invention of content. See for example Google Cloud documentation on grounding,
available at https://cloud.google.com/vertex-ai/generative-ai/docs/grounding/overview.
Gemini Ult ra
GPT - 4
P aLM ( 540B)
LaMDA
Meg at r on- T uring NL G 530B
GPT - 3 1 7 5B ( davinci)
R oBERT a Lar ge
BERT -Lar ge
T ransf ormer
10 K 100 K 1M 10M 100M 1B 10B 100B
1K
10K
100K
1M
10M
100M
Llama 2 70B
Computing requirements (petaﬂops*, log scale)
T raining c ost (in dollars, log scale )

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
Policy Brief | Issue n˚16/24 | July 2024
Figure 3: Collaboration agreements between big tech and smaller AI start-ups
Source: CMA (2024).
2.3 Access to model training data
FMs and LLMs are pre-trained on very large text datasets taken from books, documents, Wiki-
pedia and webpages. FMs are essentially statistical models that predict sequences of tokens.
They need many occurrences of sequences of tokens in order to make robust predictions.
That, in turn, requires large volumes of data. Likewise, FMs that produce images and audio
require large volume inputs of audio-visual material.
AI developers have already reached the limits of available high-quality human-edited
text data to train their models (Maslej et al, 2024, p 52). The supply of lower-quality text from
social media, or voice-to-text conversion is less constrained and could be sufficient until the
early 2030s on current model size trends. However, low-quality input reduces the quality of
model outputs. Using synthetic training data may cause model ‘collapse’ , meaning a dramatic
drop in model output quality. This will become an important issue as more digital media
content is generated synthetically by AI models. It would trigger a negative synthetic data
feedback loop in AI model training. Picture and audio data are sufficiently ubiquitous to keep
audio-visual model training going for another two decades.
Many if not most of the text, audio and picture AI training datasets are subject to copy-
right. Authors can in principle charge license fees for use of their works. That would trigger an
additional cost-induced shrinkage in the supply of training data (Gans, 2024). It would also
increase the cost of training of models and reduce competition between model developers.
The EU AI Act (finalised in May 2024) requires model developers to respect EU copyright law
as set out in the Copyright Directive (Directive (EU) 2019/790), in particular Article 4, which
grants an exception to copyright for commercial research but allows the copyright holder to
opt-out of this exception. The AI Act requires AI model developers to be transparent about the
data they use, including with regard to this opt-out. Many copyright holders and their collect-
ing societies have become aware of uses of their creative content for AI training purposes and
are introducing explicit opt-outs14.
In the US, the fair-use and transformative-use exceptions to copyright may apply to AI
training data. But this is still subject to legal uncertainty, with several court cases pending.
AI investors run the risk of punitive statutory damages if courts decide against the fair-use
exception. To avoid this, the largest AI firms have signed data-licensing deals with large media
companies. For example, OpenAI signed with the New York Times, the Bertelsmann media
group and the Reddit news platform. These deals give access to high-quality human-edited
text for model training and to recent information that can be ‘grounded’ into models with-
out having to go through costly re-training. But even the largest AI firms are unlikely to sign
licensing deals with all copyright holders. Strict enforcement of copyright law will increase
the price of access to training data. That is likely to reduce the volume of copyright-protected
14 See for example Brad Spitz ‘ AI data mining: French music collecting society Sacem opts out’ , Kluwer Copyright
Blog, 25 January 2024, https://copyrightblog.kluweriplaw.com/2024/01/25/ai-data-mining-french-music-
collecting-society-sacem-opts-out-with-what-consequences/.
Computing resources
Amazon Google Microsoft
FM development
Amazon
Titan series
Google
Gemini series
Gemma
PaLM series
Meta
Llama series
Apple
MM1
Ferret
Microsoft
Turing series
Phi series
FM partnerships/agreements
Amazon
Anthropic
Mistral AI
Cohere
Google
Anthropic
Mistral AI
Cohere
Microsoft
OpenAI
Mistral AI
Data
Google Meta Microsoft

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
Policy Brief | Issue n˚16/24 | July 2024
training data that model developers will access, thus weakening model performance. Smaller
AI developers and start-ups may not have the financial resources to pay for copyright licenses
and may be pushed out of the market altogether. Smaller models with less data and tokens
can still be trained, but will not be at the frontier of AI model performance.
Global differences in copyright regimes may distort the geographic level playing field for
AI developers. They may choose to move model training to countries with more favourable
copyright regimes. The EU AI Act requires that all models deployed in the EU respect EU
copyright law. This ‘Brussels effect’ may force AI firms based outside the EU to comply with
EU copyright law, even though copyright law is essentially territorial. Alternatively, a reversal
of the Brussels effect might keep the best models out of the EU market, at the expense of EU
consumer welfare and businesses productivity15.
2.4 Access to intermediate model deployers and end users
AI model developers need business channels to generate revenue to cover the costs of
training and running their models. Some start-ups try to build their own business models
from scratch. For example, OpenAI reached more than 100 million users within a year of the
launch of ChatGPT . It has created a GPT app store which downstream model deployers have
populated with hundreds of thousands of specialised ChatGPT applications. Application
developers have access to the open ChatGPT model but pay an app-store entry fee. OpenAI
also charges subscription fees for users of the professional version of ChatGPT . The app store
generates network effects that make ChatGPT even more attractive: more users attract more
application developers, and vice versa. Responsibility for compliance with AI Act standards
shifts from model developers to deployers.
However, starting a business model from scratch is hard for less-successful AI start-ups
with weaker or no network effects. An easier route to revenue is to collaborate with the
GAMMANs and embed AI models into their well-established business models. For example,
Microsoft is embedding its own and third-party AI models into all its productivity software
and the Bing search engine. It charges premium prices for access to some of its AI-driven
services. Google is doing the same for its search engine and other services. Meta has substan-
tially increased its advertising revenue with the help of AI systems16.
This results in “co-opetition” agreements (Brandenburger and Nalebuff, 1996) between
GAMMANs and AI start-ups. Start-ups collaborate with GAMMANs to embed their AI models
into existing GAMMAN user-facing services at the downstream end of the value chain, in
return for reverse collaboration at the upstream end of the value chain, where GAMMANs
grant start-ups access to computing infrastructure and possibly training data. In the middle of
the value chain however, collaboration is replaced by competition: start-up AI models com-
pete with the GAMMAN’s own AI models. And the parties must bargain over how to divide
the value chain they create together. GAMMANs may be vertically integrated along the entire
AI value chain while start-ups cover mostly the input and intermediate parts of the value
chain.
15 For more details on the AI and copyright debate, see Martens (2024).
16 Jo Arazi, ‘Meta’s Q1 Ad Revenue Soars 27% Amid AI-Driven Growth’ , West Island Community Blog, 12 July 2024,
available at https://www.westislandblog.com/metas-q1-ad-revenue-soars-27-amid-ai-driven-growth/.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
Policy Brief | Issue n˚16/24 | July 2024
Figure 4: The collaboration-competition model between AI start-ups and GAMMANs
Source: Bruegel.
3 Policy responses to bottlenecks in the AI
value chain
This section examines competition policy concerns that may arise in this competitive symbiosis
between GAMMANs and start-ups, and possible tools to deal with these concerns.
3.1 Bottlenecks in upstream AI model inputs markets
Hardware inputs
GAMMANs have their own hyperscale hardware facilities. Hardware is a rival good; it can only
be used by one party at the time. It is difficult to find a market-clearing mechanism that ensures
open and fair access for all contenders to available AI processor chips and cloud computing
capacity. First-come-first-served is not a viable strategy because the first could buy the entire
production capacity and re-sell it later. Price auctions are also hard to conceive. Quota would be
difficult to allocate on a fair basis: how much to whom? The essential facilities doctrine (Graef,
2019) under Article 102 TFEU is not applicable because there is no single unique source of hard-
ware inputs17.
This makes it difficult to issue a practical policy recommendation. An optimist might assume
that hardware bottlenecks are just temporary transition problems as new AI processors from
competing manufacturers, and additional cloud computing capacity from new market entrants,
enter the market. There is no guarantee however that this bottleneck will disappear soon. The UK
CMA is prudent and advocates “vigilance” in this segment of the AI value chain. The French com-
petition authority (Autorité de la Concurrence, 2024) suggests public sector investment in EU
supercomputing capacity – in other words, government subsidies. Given the exponential growth
in AI computing requirements (Figure 2), it is unlikely that the public sector has the financial
capacity to offer a viable alternative. Also, providing public computing capacity does not solve the
fair-allocation problem. On the contrary, political preferences might affect allocation decisions.
17 An essential facility is an asset or infrastructure to which a third party needs access in order to offer its own
product or service on a market. A facility is essential if no reasonable alternatives are available and duplication of
the facility is not feasible because of legal, economic or technical obstacles.
Model inputs
Model
development
Model
deployment
Model inputs
Model
development
Model
deployment
AI start
-
ups
GAMMANs
Access to compute and
data
Access to users
End users
Competition

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
Policy Brief | Issue n˚16/24 | July 2024
Model training data
With exponentially growing AI model size, and no diminishing returns in sight yet, maximum
access to data is a necessary condition to maximise model performance. The good news is
that, unlike hardware inputs, training data is non-rival and can be used by many at the same
time. The bad news is that many sources of high-quality training data are subject to copyright
and licensing fees. Strict copyright enforcement will increase the cost and shrink the supply of
data. Model quality will decline, especially for smaller start-ups that cannot afford copyright
licensing fees, and in smaller language zones where the supply of data is intrinsically limit-
ed. This reduces competition and innovation (Azoulay et al, 2024; Korinek and Vipra, 2024).
It may also distort the geographical level playing field if copyright regimes differ between
countries.
Competition authorities are aware of these potential negative effects. France’s Autorité de
la Concurrence (2024) recognises that provisions in the EU AI Act might disproportionately
affect start-ups. It recommends collective licensing to reduce copyright licensing transac-
tion costs, and price differentiation according to the value of the data. It is not clear how that
would work in practice. In our view, competition and innovation would be best served with
the elimination of the opt-out clause for AI training data from Article 4 in the EU Copyright
Directive. If US courts would confirm the application of fair use and transformative use for AI
model training data, that would have a similar impact. It would not affect traditional revenue
channels for copyright holders, while they would benefit from productivity increases through
better AI models.
3.2 Bottlenecks in downstream markets for model deployers and users
Co-opetition agreements between start-ups and GAMMANs point to potential competition
bottlenecks in downstream AI markets on two levels: the market for models between AI
start-up model developers and GAMMAN deployers, and the AI services market between
GAMMAN deployers and end users. If start-ups directly deploy their models to end users,
or via their own application stores, there is no competitive bottleneck because the market
for start-ups is very competitive. Except for Nvidia, all GAMMANs have been designated as
gatekeepers in their core platform services (CPS) for business users and end users under the
EU DMA18. Most of these CPS already run on embedded AI models. The DMA is in principle
technology-agnostic: relevant DMA obligations for these CPS apply, irrespective of the tech-
nology used to deliver the service.
Some obligations in the DMA ’s Article 6 are relevant for co-opetition relationships
between independent AI model developers that deploy their services through established
GAMMAN business models and intermediation platforms. For example, Microsoft Windows,
Apple iOS and Google Android were designated as CPS operating systems. They already
include third-party AI model-driven services applications. Under the DMA obligations, these
CPS should allow the installation of third-party software and the un-installation of gatekeeper
software (Articles 6(3) and 6(4)), enable access to and interoperability of the same hardware
and software features (Article 6(7)), permit effective portability of end-user and business-user
data (Articles 6(9) and 6(10)) and not give preferential treatment to their own and third-party
services (Article 6(5)).
Would this imply that these three CPS should allow the (un)installation of other AI models
than those they selected, ensure that these models are inoperable with their AI-driven ser-
vices, allow data portability between their CPS and third-party model providers and give no
preferential treatment to their own AI models, compared to any of these third-party models?
For example, Google, Microsoft and Apple already bundle and tie several AI models with their
AI-driven services. Should end users have a say in the choice of models? Uncertainty about
the application of DMA obligations may explain why Apple decided to withhold some AI
18 See https://digital-markets-act.ec.europa.eu/gatekeepers_en.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
Policy Brief | Issue n˚16/24 | July 2024
applications from the EU market19. Google Search has been designated as a CPS. DMA Article
6(11) mandates sharing of search engine ranking, query, click and view data. Would that
apply to queries and outputs of AI-driven services embedded in the search engine?
Some start-ups grow so fast that they may become DMA gatekeepers in their own right.
For example, OpenAI ChatGPT is coming close to fulfilling the quantitative DMA threshold
criteria to become a gatekeeper, and the ChatGPT app store is close to being a core platform
service: over 100 million users, estimated capital value over $80 billion and hundreds of
thousands of business users that develop specialised ChatGPT applications. If designated,
would DMA app store obligations apply and would they be relevant to an AI model app store,
as compared to a smartphone app store for which the obligations were designed? ChatGPT
could be considered as the ‘operating system’ on which specialised AI model applications
run. As long as access to the app store remains open, not subject to discrimination or prefer-
ential treatment of OpenAI’s own apps, that should satisfy the DMA objective of contestable
markets.
The Autorité de la Concurrence (2024) recommended that competition policymakers
should pay particular attention to this developer-deployer market segment for AI models-as-
a-service (MaaS). The UK CMA (2024) recommended that co-opetition agreements should
not contain vertical restraints, exclusive deals or tying or bundling, either in upstream or
downstream markets in the AI value chain. For these recommendations to work in prac-
tice, the technical layers of this intermediate developer-deployer market side, as well as the
deployer-end user market side, should be unbundled. This is technologically complex and
economically difficult. DMA authorities are currently trying to cope with the challenges of
the designated CPS and are nowhere near to contemplating further unbundling of these
CPS. Competition authorities can explore vertical restraints and exclusive deals but have no
practical means to deal with them yet. That leaves a lot of regulatory uncertainty and investor
hesitations hanging over the EU market for AI model services.
4 Conclusions
Exponentially growing model training costs, with no end in sight, are the biggest AI model
market entry barrier, at least at the technology frontier. For firms with smaller models below
the technology frontier, competition is likely to be intense, suggesting a more limited role
for competition policy. AI start-ups that want to stay at the technology frontier need to sign
co-opetition agreements with GAMMANs to overcome the training cost barrier. Competition
authorities are looking at these deals with suspicion. They fear that co-opetition agreements
may become Trojan horses for GAMMANs to exercise leverage over, and reduce competition
from, AI start-ups. But several investigations by competition authorities have so far not pro-
duced any smoking guns.
These investigations have to some extent diverted attention away from the main market
entry barrier – model training costs – and directed it to potential competition problems in
different market segments in the AI supply chain, while suggesting ways to keep these seg-
ments open and contestable. The UK CMA (2024) offers guidance on rules of behaviour that
it expects the GAMMANs to follow in their business dealings with AI start-ups. This includes
open access to hardware and data, making a variety of business models available to AI
businesses and consumers, partnerships that do not reduce the ability of others to compete,
no self-preferencing of AI services and models, and no tying or bundling. The Autorité de la
19 Stephen Warwick, ‘EU says Apple withholding Apple Intelligence from the EU market is anti-competitive in frankly
hilarious turn of events’ , iMore, 28 June 2024, https://www.imore.com/apple/eu-says-apple-withholding-apple-
intelligence-from-the-eu-market-is-anti-competitive-in-frankly-hilarious-turn-of-events.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
Policy Brief | Issue n˚16/24 | July 2024
Concurrence (2024) proposed similar principles in its opinion.
These principles are also in line with the obligations that the EU DMA imposes on a set
of designated gatekeeper platforms that largely overlaps with the GAMMANs. However, they
may be hard to implement in practice as they may require a considerable degree of techni-
cally complex and economically costly unbundling and untying of AI-driven services and the
underlying AI models that power these services. This may do more harm than good to con-
sumers and business users. Co-opetition agreements are necessary to enable AI start-ups to
access computing infrastructure. They come with privileged access for big tech to the latest AI
models. Licensing fees for copyright-protected data further tighten the already scarce supply
of affordable data.
Model training infrastructure and AI processor chips are rival physical inputs that can
only be used by one party at the time. It is hard to see how a fair quota or price-based
market-clearing access mechanism could be put in place. Training datasets are non-rival
inputs that can be used by many parties at the same time. Public data pooling could be a
fair access mechanism (Azoulay et al, 2024; Korinek and Vipra, 2024) but would run counter
to the private interests of copyright holders.
If model training costs continue to grow exponentially, as appears to be the case for the
foreseeable future, the competition policy setting for AI industries may need a revision, with
collaboration dominating competition to keep the pace of AI innovation going. It may even-
tually require collaboration between the GAMMANs. Computing infrastructure and data may
become an essential facility, with agreed rules to govern shared access.
It may also be that the current generation of FMs and LLMs is superseded in the next years
by new types with different cost structures and characteristics. Rapid advances, for example
in adversarial networks in which several AI models compete and generate feedback between
themselves, or in expanding memory capacity and query context data, so that AI models can
learn from user feedback and instructions, may still change the AI landscape.
The EU does not have home-based GAMMANs with sufficient computing capacity,
financial resources and business models for FM training and use. Private equity and venture
capital might contribute financial resources but physical infrastructure and business outlets
remain a bottleneck. Intervention through public finance and infrastructure is not an option
given the order of magnitude of financing required. Keeping access to AI inputs and outputs
markets open, as far as technically possible and economically meaningful, may be the best
option for EU policymakers if they want European AI start-ups to remain competitive in an
industry dominated by very large US-based GAMMANs.
This also applies to the strict EU copyright regime, which will inflate model training costs
and shrink the supply of data, at the expense of EU AI start-ups. The EU AI Act imposes poten-
tially high compliance costs that may push up the market entry barrier for model developers
and deployers, particularly for start-ups. The EU AI Office, established under the AI Act, still
needs to draft many implementation modalities for the AI Act. It should try to do so in a way
that keeps markets open and does not impose disproportionate compliance costs on smaller
AI developers. But the AI Act does not give the AI Office sufficient leeway to address the
underlying competition bottlenecks in the AI supply chain.
If model training
costs continue to
grow exponentially,
the competition
policy setting for AI
industries may need
revision

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
Policy Brief | Issue n˚16/24 | July 2024
References
Autorité de la Concurrence (2024) ‘ Avis sur le fonctionnement concurrentiel du secteur de l’intelligence
artificielle générative’ , Avis 24-A-05, available at https://www.autoritedelaconcurrence.fr/sites/
default/files/2024-06/Diapo_IA_conf_presse_VF_BC.pdf
Azoulay, P ., J. Krieger and A. Nagaraj (2024) ‘Old Moats for New Models: Openness, Control, and
Competition in Generative AI’ , Working Paper 32474, National Bureau of Economic Research,
available at https://www.nber.org/papers/w32474
Brandenburger, A. and B. Nalebuff (1996) Co-opetition: A Revolution Mindset that Combines Competition
and Cooperation, Crown Publishers, UK
CMA (2023) Proposed principles to guide competitive AI markets and protect consumers, UK Competition
and Markets Authority, available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ai-foundation-
models-initial-report
CMA (2024) ‘CMA AI strategic update’ , UK Competition and Markets Authority, 29 April, available at
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/cma-ai-strategic-update/cma-ai-strategic-update
Gans, J. (2024) ‘Market power in Artificial Intelligence’ , Working Paper 32270, National Bureau of
Economic Research, available at https://www.nber.org/papers/w32270
Graef, I. (2019) ‘Rethinking the Essential Facilities Doctrine for the EU Digital Economy’ , TILEC Discussion
Paper DP2019-028, available at https://research.tilburguniversity.edu/en/publications/rethinking-
the-essential-facilities-doctrine-for-the-eu-digital-e
Korinek, A. and J. Vipra (2024) ‘Concentrating Intelligence: Scaling Laws and Market Structure in
Generative AI’ , mimeo, available at https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/3vmu5q8js8bcgvujbc9bg/
Economic-Policy-Draft-R2-Concentrating-Intelligence.pdf
Madiega T . and R. Ilnicki (2024) ‘ AI investment: EU and global indicators’ , At a Glance Digital Issues in
Focus, European Parliamentary Research Service, available at https://www.europarl.europa.eu/
RegData/etudes/ATAG/2024/760392/EPRS_ATA(2024)760392_EN.pdf
Martens, B. (2024) ‘Economic arguments in favour of reducing copyright protections on Generative AI
model inputs and outputs’ , Working Paper 09/2024, Bruegel, available at https://www.bruegel.org/
working-paper/economic-arguments-favour-reducing-copyright-protection-generative-ai-inputs-
and
Maslej, N., L. Fattorini, R. Perrault, V . Parli, A. Reuel, E. Brynjolfsson … J. Clark (2024) The AI Index 2024
Annual Report, AI Index Steering Committee, Institute for Human-Centered AI, Stanford University,
available at https://aiindex.stanford.edu/report/
Schaeffer, R., B. Miranda and S. Koyejo (2023) ‘ Are Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models a
Mirage?’ 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023), available at
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/adc98a266f45005c403b8311ca7e8bd7-
Paper-Conference.pdf
Solaiman, I. (2023) ‘The Gradient of Generative AI Release: Methods and Considerations’ , mimeo,
available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04844
Vaswani, A., N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A.N. Gomez, L. Kaiser and I. Polosukhin (2017)
‘ Attention Is All You Need’ , mimeo, available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762
Zhao, X., S. Ouyang, Z. Yu, M. Wu and L. Li (2022) ‘Pretrained language models can be fully zero-shot
learners’ , mimeo, available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06950
