
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
BLUEPRINT SERIES 31
A GREEN INDUSTRIAL
POLICY FOR EUROPE
Simone Tagliapietra and Reinhilde Veugelers

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
A GREEN INDUSTRIAL
POLICY FOR EUROPE
Simone Tagliapietra and Reinhilde Veugelers

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT SERIES
A green industrial policy for Europe
Simone Tagliapietra and Reinhilde Veugelers
Editor: Stephen Gardner
Layout and cover design: Hèctor Badenes
© Bruegel 2020 All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted in the original language without explicit
permission provided that the source is acknowledged. Opinions expressed in
this publications are those of the author alone.
Bruegel
33, rue de la Charité, Box 4
1210 Brussels, Belgium
www.bruegel.org
ISBN: 978-9-078910-50-3

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to André Sapir, Guntram Wolff and Maria
Demertzis for their extensive comments on preliminary drafts. They
would like to thank Enrico Bergamini for his excellent contribution
in drafting the literature review underpinning chapters 1, 2 and 3 and
the case studies in chapter 6. Tom Schraepen and Ben McWilliams
provided excellent research assistance.
This Blueprint has been produced with the financial support of the
European Climate Foundation.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Contents
About the authors .....................................................................................3
Foreword ....................................................................................................5
Executive summary ...................................................................................6
1 Defining green industrial policy .......................................................12
2 The history of industrial policy in Europe .......................................17
3 Classic arguments for industrial policy ............................................23
4 New industrial policy .........................................................................27
5 A new green industrial policy ............................................................37
5.1 A bold green industrial policy: urgency, risk-taking,
experimentation..................................................................................37
5.2 A balanced mix of green industrial policy instruments ..............40
5.3 A global green industrial policy: avoiding the tragedy of the
commons .............................................................................................41
5.4 Addressing green industrial policy government failures .............42
5.5 Summary: lessons for green industrial policy ..............................44
6 Green industrial policy in practice .....................................................47
6.1 Germany ........................................................................................47
6.2 Netherlands ...................................................................................51
6.3 Denmark .......................................................................................53

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
2 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
6.4 United States .................................................................................55
6.5 Lessons learned .............................................................................56
7 Green industrial policy in the EU ......................................................58
7.1 The status of green industrial policy in the EU ............................58
7.2 The European Commission’s ‘New industrial strategy for Europe’
and its green aspect .............................................................................61
7.3 The EU’s main green industrial policy tools ................................63
8 Conclusions and policy recommendations .....................................79
8.1 Strong governance ........................................................................79
8.2 Tackling geographical fragmentation ..........................................81
8.3 Managing long-term expectations with a solid EU
decarbonisation trajectory .................................................................82
8.4 Development of sound public-private partnerships ...................83
8.5 Stimulating EU green investment ................................................85
8.6 Stimulating EU green science and innovation ............................86
8.7 A global approach.........................................................................87
8.8 Communicate transparently ........................................................88
References ...............................................................................................89

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
About the authors
Simone Tagliapietra is a Research Fellow at Bruegel and an adjunct
professor at the Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore and at the Johns
Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies. His
research focuses on European Union climate and energy policy, the
political economy of EU decarbonisation, green industrial policy, just
transition and global climate governance. He is the author of Global
energy fundamentals (Cambridge University Press, 2020) and L ’energia
del mondo (Il Mulino, 2020).
Reinhilde Veugelers is a Senior Fellow at Bruegel and a professor
at KULeuven (Belgium). She is also a Centre for Economic Policy
Research Fellow, a non-resident Senior Fellow at the Peterson Institute
for International Economics and a member of the Royal Flemish
Academy of Belgium for Sciences and of the Academia Europeana.
She was previously an advisor in the European Commission’s Bureau
of European Policy Analysis and a member of the European Research
Council Scientific Council. Her research concentrates on industrial
organisation, international economics and strategy, and innovation
and science. She is a member of the Board of Reviewing Editors of the
journal Science.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Foreword
The European Green Deal, the flagship initiative of the European
Commission under Ursula von der Leyen, aims at making Europe
climate-neutral by 2050. The European Council has decided on the
goal of reducing the European Union’s emissions by 55 percent relative
to their 1990 level by 2030. These are ambitious goals and putting them
into practice will be extremely challenging from political, distribu-
tional and technological perspectives. We are only at the beginning of
a major endeavour. Europe cannot afford to fail.
To succeed, decarbonisation has to accelerate in all industries
and sectors across Europe. The European Green Deal must foster
major shifts from fossil fuels to renewables. For example, the internal
combustion engine in vehicles will need to be replaced by electricity or
hydrogen. Industrial processes will need to reduce their dependence
on coal and oil. Green energy production capacities must be
increased.
Shifting the economy from brown to green represents one of the
biggest socio-economic transformations ever seen in history. Not
by coincidence, this challenge is often referred to as an industrial
revolution against a deadline. Without significant technological
advancements, the industrial revolution will become too expensive
to be socially acceptable. And relying only on price signals may mean
that technological change happens to late. Green industrial policy
therefore needs to be a cornerstone of the European Green Deal.
But what is green industrial policy? What makes it different from
general industrial policy? What are the market failures it should
address? What are the main principles it should respond to and its

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
5 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
main policy instruments? How can the mistakes of previous industrial
policies be avoided? Will states be ready to accept risks when trying
to foster breakthrough technologies? What governance mechanisms
should be established to ensure countries end support when projects
are failing?
In the EU context, an important factor is the interplay between
green industrial policy and the single market. Industrial policy
is national and is closely monitored by the EU’s state aid and
competition policy watchdog. But green industrial policy may be more
acceptable given the public-policy need to accelerate innovation to
achieve climate targets. But as this happens, the risk of fragmentation
of Europe’s single market will increase. A major theme of Europe’s
green industrial policy is therefore how it can ensure a level playing
field.
So far, the EU has failed to provide the coherent green industrial
policy framework that is required to turn the European Green Deal
into an industrial opportunity for Europe. I sincerely hope this
Blueprint will spark a fresh discussion on the principles and policy
tools that should underpin Europe’s green industrial policy. I would
like to thank the authors for their work and the European Climate
Foundation for their financial support for this work.
Guntram Wolff, Director of Bruegel
Brussels, December 2020

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Executive summary
The European Green Deal aims to make Europe the first climate-
neutral continent by 2050. This is not going to be an easy journey.
To be successful, the European Green Deal will have to foster major
shifts in the European industrial structure, including transitions from
fossil fuels to renewable energy and from combustion engine cars
to electric cars. Shifting economies from brown to green would be a
major, historic socio-economic transformation. Not by coincidence,
this challenge is often referred to as an industrial revolution against a
deadline. In this context of broad, paradigmatic, change for European
industry, a ‘green industrial policy’ will be fundamental to Europe’s
climate change ambitions.
In March 2020, the European Commission published a New
Industrial Strategy for Europe (COM (2020) 102 final). Despite its focus
on the twin green and digital transitions, the strategy failed to provide
the coherent European Union green industrial policy framework that is
required to turn the green transition into an industrial opportunity for
Europe. In her September 2020 State of the Union speech, Commission
President Ursula von der Leyen pledged to update the industrial strat-
egy in the first half of 2021. This Blueprint aims to contribute to this
debate, by setting out a set of principles and guidelines for the devel-
opment of a strong EU green industrial policy.
These principle and guidelines have been developed on the basis
of an in-depth analysis of the existing literature on industrial policy
design and selected case studies. There are limits to what the market
and the state can each deliver. For a successful green industrial policy,
mechanisms will be needed to make them work together efficiently.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
7 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
The design of public-private partnerships will make or break green
industrial policy efforts. The major transformative change demanded
by climate change will also require the involvement of civil society
more than in other areas of industrial policy. Green technologies, often
still emerging, are complex and uncertain. Future uncertainty about
climate and technology scenarios underlines the importance of indus-
try-research collaboration.
This Blueprint is structured as follows:
• Chapter 1 introduces the concept of green industrial policy, distin-
guishing it from general industrial policy, and from climate policy.
• Chapter 2 then discusses the practice of industrial policy in Europe,
from the protectionism of the early twentieth century to the current
industrial policy revival because of both the climate crisis and
COVID-19.
• Chapter 3 sets out the theory of industrial policy and the academic
debate between state interventionists and free-marketers. Particu-
lar attention is devoted to the notions of market and government
failures as a framework for discussing industrial policy.
• Chapter 4 describes the most recent developments in the academic
debate on industrial policy, seeking to reconcile the two traditional
schools of thought. It introduces a new perspective for industrial
policy that takes a broader approach and focuses not only on policy
tools, but also on the policy process, most notably the involvement
and coordination of, and the sharing of information between, the
government, private sector and civil society.
• Chapter 5 discusses the characteristics of green industrial policy, in
the context of the urgency of the climate crisis, the broad spectrum
of green transition challenges and the nature of the specific market
and government failures that characterise green technologies.
• Switching from theory to practice, chapter 6 discusses green indus-
trial policy in Germany, the Netherlands, Denmark and the United
States. From these case studies, we extrapolate a set of lessons,

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
8 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
including the importance of effective collaboration between all
parts of society, the importance of policy stability and long-term
predictability, and the development of balanced sets of instruments
that mix demand pull and technology push.
• Chapter 7 gives an overview of Europe’s green industrial policy
landscape. It focuses in particular on the wide variety of tools avail-
able at EU level, from competition policy to innovation policy, and
from development policy to climate policy.
Based on this analysis, our main recommendations for the develop-
ment of an EU green industrial policy are:
Green industrial policy cannot be only national: EU-wide
coordination is required
Europe is characterised by a multitude of green industrial policy initi-
atives, undertaken at regional, national and EU levels. These initiatives
are generally not coordinated, and may even conflict. This is a major
issue, because significantly different green industrial policies in differ-
ent EU countries fragment the EU single market and could disrupt the
level playing field. A fragmented EU single market for green technolo-
gies prevents innovative European cleantech companies from scaling
up in the way that their United States and Chinese competitors do on
their domestic markets. It is thus vital to develop a solid regulatory
framework accompanied by competition policy enforcement, ensuring
access to a truly single, competitive EU market with common environ-
mental standards. In other words, the EU single market is a key asset
for the development of an EU green industrial policy. Furthermore,
European countries and companies would benefit greatly from joint
coordinated actions in certain green technologies, so that they can
internalise externalities and exploit synergies and economies of scale.
Such coordinated actions should learn from past failures, such as
Germany’s unsuccessful attempts at developing a solar panel industry
despite generous solar energy subsidies.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
9 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
Strong governance will be essential
To develop a successful green industrial policy, the EU must work
closely with the private sector. Public-private partnerships are not only
about co-financing of initiatives, but are also about ensuring access to
skills, knowledge and information. But close public-private interaction
involves risks, such as rent-seeking and political capture. To address
risks, a clear set of targets and milestones and well-structured proce-
dures of accountability and transparency are needed.
European Alliances should be further expanded
European Alliances – already established since 2017 for batteries and
since 2020 for clean hydrogen – foster public-private collaboration and
should be expanded, making them deeper and broader. First, these
Alliances should focus on addressing mega-problems covering the
whole value chain, and not only manufacturing. This is relevant where
most of the economic growth and job-creation potential in a value
chain lies in installation and maintenance, rather than in the manufac-
turing – as is the case for solar energy or residential energy efficiency,
for example. Second, these Alliances should involve emerging and
innovative industrial and other stakeholders alongside established
industrial players. Third, state aid rules should be revisited to check
whether they are suitable for broadening and deepening of Important
Projects of Common European Interest, which are at the core of these
Alliances.
The EU should be braver in fostering green disruptive innovation
Green industrial policy needs breakthrough innovation. This requires
significant risk-taking by public institutions, and an acceptance that
there will be failures. New support models that provide numerous
but still-sizeable grants via relatively non-bureaucratic channels are
crucial to stimulate frontier ideas. Policy should not lead to money
being put only on safe bets that offer average returns. In this sense, the
innovation component of EU green industrial policy should be viewed

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
10 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
as a portfolio, in which certain initiatives will inevitably fail. A portfolio
with no failures entails no risks, and a portfolio with no risks is unlikely
to provide breakthrough innovation. More new policy initiatives
designed and monitored as experiments should be tried.
EU investment is important for financing green industrial policy
initiatives
EU green investment will play an important role in realising the green
transition, including by mobilising funds from national budgets and
the private sector. The decision to devote 30 percent of the EU 2021-
2027 budget and 37 percent of Next Generation EU funding to climate
action is good news. However, the European Commission should
develop a solid methodology for monitoring climate spending to avoid
risks of greenwashing. The European Investment Bank (EIB) should be
allowed to truly become Europe’s climate bank, notably via a capital
increase that will increase its firepower. The EIB should also further
develop its role as financier of the green transition, including by play-
ing the important role of connecting, as an intermediary, the relevant
public and private stakeholders and supporting their interactions.
Finally, the EU should seize the current opportunity to become
a global standard-setter for green bonds, given that it is the biggest
player on this rapidly growing market.
EU green industrial policy should go beyond Europe’s borders
Europe produces less than 10 percent of global greenhouse gas
emissions. To really make a difference in terms of climate protection,
the European Green Deal has to go beyond Europe’s borders. It is of
paramount importance for Europe to fill the current global leadership
vacuum in climate terms, and to initiate and build global partnerships
with other countries. In its relations with developing countries, we
recommend that the EU should focus its external development policy
more on supporting green projects financially and with capacity-build-
ing activities. Such an approach would provide a triple benefit. First,

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
11 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
it would help meet the EU’s climate finance obligations and thus help
to achieve the conditional emission-reduction commitments made
by most developing countries under the Paris Agreement. Second, it
would help EU industry to enter into new, rapidly growing markets.
And third, it would help economic development in the EU’s partner
countries, providing an invaluable foreign policy dividend for the EU.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
1 Defining green industrial policy
In December 2019, the then-newly appointed President of the
European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, published amid great
fanfare a proposal for a European Green Deal, which has the funda-
mental aim of making Europe the first climate-neutral continent by
2050. In September 2020, it was followed up with a proposal to achieve
net-zero emissions, centred on the acceleration of the European Union
decarbonisation process over the next ten years, with a steeper EU
emissions reduction target for 2030 of at least 55 percent relative to
1990 (compared to a 40% reduction target currently). The plan also
addresses the economic and industrial transformation this necessarily
implies, and aims to make the overall process socially inclusive.
It will not be an easy ride. A successful European Green Deal will
have to foster major shifts in the European economic structure, includ-
ing transitions from fossil fuels to renewable energy and from diesel to
electric cars. This will be a broad, paradigmatic, change to our econ-
omies and a historic major socio-economic transformation. For good
reason, this challenge is often referred to as an industrial revolution
against a deadline.
As in any major transformation, there will be winners and losers,
particularly in the short-run. With the European Green Deal, the EU
recognises that climate and energy policies alone are not sufficient
to pursue climate neutrality. For instance, a strategy only based on
raising the price of carbon would not deliver on the goals if people
will fiercely reject it – as seen in France with the gilets jaunes move-
ment. Only a much broader policy – also encompassing economic,
industrial, fiscal, labour, innovation and social policy aspects – can

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
13 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
meet such a vast challenge, creating more winners than losers. The
European Green Deal seeks to facilitate this challenging broader
process by providing a clear sense of direction to investors and citizens
and by putting in place mechanisms to ensure that the most vulnera-
ble segments of society are supported and not left behind.
It is often said that the European Green Deal must turn decarbon-
isation into an opportunity to revitalise the European economy, and
thus to ensure long-term economic growth and jobs. That is, while
heading towards climate neutrality by 2050, the European economy
has to remain highly competitive at global level, in the context of
increasing competition from other major economies. This puts green
industrial policy in the spotlight, in the context of a debate about it that
has gathered fresh momentum in recent years (see Lane, 2019; Rodrik,
2014; Rodrik and Sabel, 2019; Aiginger and Rodrik, 2020; and Cherif
and Hasanov, 2019, among many others).
A first challenge when entering into this debate is to define what
green industrial policy is about. It is already a challenge to define
industrial policy. Any government policy will have some impact on
the economic structure of a country. To narrow down the focus of the
analysis, it is useful to start by discussing the objectives of industrial
policy 1.
In the established literature, a common factor in all definitions of
industrial policy is that it targets a set of economic activities to achieve
long-term benefits for society. New tendencies in the industrial policy
literature, which we label ‘new industrial policy’ (NIP), stress that
industrial policy should have aims beyond short-term competitiveness
and economic growth. It should have a broader multi-dimensional
1 This is also how, for instance, Ambroziak (2017) approached the issue, in a liter-
ature review covering more than 110 publications. The falling share of manufac-
turing and the digitalisation of the economy, among other factors, are changing
the nature of industry itself. Ambroziak (2017) concluded that the definition of
industrial policy is subject to the same transformation the definition of ‘industry’
itself faces.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
14 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
objective, which can be captured in the notion of long-term social
welfare. This is the case, for instance, in Rodrik and Sabel (2019), who
set out to rethink and investigate “a set of interventions” which should
have as their goal a “good jobs economy”.
Delineation of a ‘green’ version of industrial policy becomes nec-
essary once decarbonisation is set as a societal goal, as Europe has
done with the European Green Deal. While the goal of climate policy
is decarbonisation and the goal of (new) industrial policy is social
welfare, green industrial policy must reconcile the goals of decarbonis-
ing the economy (like climate policy) and social welfare (like industrial
policy) (Figure 1). We can thus define green industrial policy as an
industrial policy in which climate change mitigation becomes a bind-
ing constraint in achieving the social welfare goal.
Figure 1: Green industrial policy
Source: Bruegel.
This combination of objectives immediately identifies the challenge
of green industrial policy, which is to meet both goals simultaneously.
This becomes particularly challenging when they conflict, when trade-
offs have to be decided on, and when costs must be attached when one
of the goals is not being met.
Climate policy
Green industrial policy
Decarbonisation Social welfare
Industrial policy

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
15 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
Furthermore, green industrial policy will operate alongside climate
policy and industrial policy more generally and therefore raises the
issue of coordination of the various policies, particularly when they are
overseen by different institutions or departments. Climate policy and
industrial policy each have their own instruments. Is coordination of
the already existing climate change and industrial policy instruments
sufficient to establish a green industrial policy? Does green industrial
policy need its own policy instruments? If so, how should they be coor-
dinated with existing instruments?
Green industrial policy, like any policy, is a public intervention
aimed at correcting problems. Industrial policy addresses problems
including financial market imperfections that lead to constraints on
access to finance, research externalities2 that cause constraints on
access to knowledge, labour market imperfections that limit access
to skills and network externalities that hinder partnerships3. These
constraints may lead to markets failing to grow, while preventing new
markets from emerging and developing.
In addition to tackling market failures, which is the core of classic
industrial policy, green industrial policy must also address market
failures associated with climate change. The main market failure in
climate terms is that greenhouse gas emissions are a side-effect of
economically valuable activities, but those responsible for the emis-
sions do not pay the costs. The adverse effects of greenhouse gases are
therefore ‘external’ to the market, which means there is usually only an
2 Research and development (R&D) activities are widely considered to have positive
effects beyond those enjoyed by the funders of R&D (normally, the companies that
pay for the research). This is because R&D adds to the general body of knowledge,
contributing to other discoveries and developments. However, the returns to a firm
selling products based on its own R&D typically do not include the returns to others
who benefited indirectly.
3 Network externalities are the phenomenon by which the value or utility a user
derives from a good or service depends on the number of users of compatible prod-
ucts. Network externalities are typically positive, resulting in a given user deriving
more value from a product as other users join the same network.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
16 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
ethical – rather than an economic – incentive for businesses and con-
sumers to reduce their emissions. Consequently, the market fails by
over-producing greenhouse gases. Economists have long argued that
the first-best policy to correct this market failure is to apply a cost to
greenhouse gas emissions in order to encourage reductions. Without a
high enough carbon price, policymakers must fall back on second-best
policy interventions, including regulation. Being generalised and
technology-neutral, carbon pricing represents a superior policy tool,
also because it avoids the risk that more targeted policies might bring
of selecting wrongly (eg subsidising certain industries that ultimately
go bankrupt).
The combination of classic market failure externalities and the
greenhouse-gas externality represents a significant challenge for green
industrial policy. It implies that green industrial policy requires the
deployment of specific instruments that go beyond typical general
industrial policy measures. These instruments do not need to be new
instruments, but should at least be tailored to fit into a green industrial
policy. A green industrial policy mix should in any case be developed
in coordination with the policy instruments used for climate policy
and industrial policy. Carbon pricing, for example, is an important
part of the green industrial policy mix because if the price of carbon
remains too low to drive low-carbon technology innovation in industry
and other sectors of the economy, green industrial policy will have to
fall-back on second-best options.
This Blueprint set out green industrial policy design guidelines,
based on an in-depth review of the academic literature and a critical
assessment of past policy experiences
.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
2 The history of industrial
policy in Europe
The industrial policy debate has historically been a debate on the role
of the state in the economy: why, how and to what degree should gov-
ernments intervene in steering markets? Should governments support
‘winners’?
Before 1914, the main aim of industrial policy in Europe was to
protect economies via tariffs (Foreman-Peck, 2006). Government
intervention focused on the provision of infrastructure, favouring spe-
cific manufacturing businesses in which the state had an ownership
and investment interest. Sectors targeted for intervention were largely
natural monopolies, including railways and utilities. Tariffs on indus-
trial and agricultural products were the main tools of industrial policy,
with significant variation between, and competition among, countries.
Less-developed countries had typically higher tariffs than advanced
countries, which had more open economies. Another instrument was
the protection of intellectual property, aimed at incentivising innova-
tion. Countries that wanted to catch up technologically exploited the
absence of intellectual property protection.
Between 1914 and 1950, European states intervened increasingly in
economies devastated by war. The state played a major role in steering
resources, not only under the dictatorships in Europe, but also in more
traditionally liberal countries including France and Belgium. The 1929
crisis led to several industrial crises, which required state intervention.
This was also legitimised in national debates by the successful expe-
rience of economic planning in the Soviet Union in terms of avoiding

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
18 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
the deep economic downturn (Foreman-Peck, 2006). The role of the
state in the economy thus emerged from war considerably strength-
ened in Europe. A prime example from this era was the creation of the
Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale (IRI), an Italian public holding
company established in 1933 by the fascist regime to rescue banks and
private companies from bankruptcy during the Great Depression.
After the Second World War, the process of European reconstruc-
tion began, with a focus on strategic industries including coal, steel,
electricity and railways. The period between the 1950s and the 1980s is
referred to as the heyday of industrial policy, during which there was
an increasing preoccupation to match United States levels of competi-
tiveness (Owen, 2012). Industrial policy was extremely interventionist,
as European governments ventured into picking winners through sec-
toral policies, also defined as vertical industrial policies. These policies
were aimed at sectors thought to be strategic and promising for the
future, including steel, chemicals, mechanics, communications and
technology, aviation and nuclear power. Europe saw a wave of nation-
alisation and strong intervention via state-owned enterprises and
other state-powered initiatives. It was in this period that the National
Enterprise Board (1975) was set up in the United Kingdom to acquire a
substantial level of equity in major manufacturing companies. France
created the CNRS (Centre national de la recherche scientifique) and
engaged in ‘Grands Projets’. West Germany followed a less-interven-
tionist approach to catch up with the other economies on both sides
of the Atlantic. These initiatives were mostly national. In this era,
European institutions were still in their early development.
At the European level, the European Coal and Steel Community
(ECSC) was set up in 1952 with the goal of reducing overcapacity
in coal production, while improving the overall production system.
This first industrial policy was considered a success in terms of both
outcome (modernisation and reduction of production capacities of
companies) and coordination between member states. The ECSC
provided an interventionist framework within which companies had

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
19 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
to modernise. The European Economic Community (EEC), established
after the ECSC, progressively reduced tariffs in European markets. The
first technology policy initiative at European Community level was
PREST (Politique de recherche scientifique et de technologie), which
sought to facilitate common European research projects. This initia-
tive was underpinned by fears of European technology lagging behind
American technology. In 1971, the European Cooperation in Science
and Technology (COST) framework for intra-European research
collaboration was established. In this phase, the development of a
European industrial policy was hindered by the “reluctance of govern-
ments, especially in the larger countries, to subordinate their national
interests to those of Europe as a whole” (Owen, 2012). A notable mile-
stone in this era was the Colonna memorandum, which raised con-
cerns about foreign direct investment from the United States going into
high-technology industries in Europe. As a follow-up to the Colonna
memorandum, and in reaction to a steel industry crisis, the European
Commission adopted in 1977 the Davignon Plan, which aimed to
stabilise the steel market by controlling prices and capacity, and also
raised the prospect of “European-wide solutions in the so-called ‘sunset’
industries and […] keeping national control over ‘sunrise’ industries”
(Owen, 2012, p21), such as computers. It was in this context that the
Airbus consortium was established, as a European industrial alliance
for the production of aircraft.
The 1980s saw a new phase of liberalisation, championed by
Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan. During the so-called
Washington Consensus, government intervention was deemed as
detrimental for economic growth, inaugurating an era of market-ori-
ented policies, during which a laissez-faire approach was taken to
industrial policy, or, at most, industrial policy was limited to setting
the right framework within which economic processes can take place
(horizontal industrial policy). During this phase in Europe, the state
became less interventionist. Countries liberalised markets, trying to
avoid the failures of past industrial policy (typically vertical industrial

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
20 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
policy and winner-picking). At European level, the inefficiency of
uncoordinated national industrial policies became clear and led to the
development of two important instruments at EU level: the inter-
nal market and competition policy, including state aid. The Single
European Act (1986) also created the legal basis for affirmative action
by the state in the area of research and development. During this time,
different initiatives were undertaken at European Communities level
to promote research and innovation cooperation. An example was
ESPRIT (European Strategic Programme for Research and Information
Technology), a five-year collaborative research programme with a goal
of “bringing together companies, universities and research institutes
across Europe” with a specific focus on information technology (Owen,
2012). ESPRIT was an attempt to respond to the government-led initi-
atives to bring together market and public participants undertaken by
the Japanese Ministry for International Trade and Industry. These initi-
atives were effective in helping Japan quickly catch up with the United
States as a technological and economic leader, particularly in the field
of semiconductors. ESPRIT was the precursor of the Commission’s
Framework Programmes for R&D (starting in 1984), through which
science, technology and innovation policy and collaborative research
initiatives have been put in place, including Horizon 2020 (2014 to
2020) and the next version, Horizon Europe.
During the 1990s and early 2000s, liberalisation programmes con-
tinued in Europe. At EU level, a consensus was gradually built around
a more holistic, integrated, horizontal approach to industrial policy,
with EU industrial policy confined to a role of ensuring the right frame-
work conditions, through the use of internal market and competition
instruments and by stimulating R&D and innovation. This resulted in
the Lisbon Strategy, a programme “to transform the EU into the most
competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world
capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
21 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
greater social cohesion”4. The strategy’s aim was to implement a com-
prehensive set of structural reforms based on boosting innovation and
investment in R&D, a more integrated and competitive internal market
and a more flexible labour market.
The Great Recession in 2008 and its aftermath revived interest in
industrial policy in Europe, as continuing economic crisis put man-
ufacturing production and industrial jobs under pressure. In this
environment, the European Commission published an updated plan
for reindustrialising Europe, focusing on the need for a comprehensive
vision for boosting the competitiveness of European companies. This
was to involve all the levers available at EU level, including the single
market, trade policy, policy towards small and medium enterprises,
competition policy, environment policy and research policy.
Since then, a consensus has grown around a normalisation of
industrial policy, acknowledging the need for government interven-
tion, shifting the debate away from whether governments should
do industrial policy at all to how they can do it well. The increasing
pressure to decarbonise Europe and the world to address the global
warming challenge has supported this resurgent stronger role of the
state in Europe. The COVID-19 crisis has further reinforced the role of
the state, which has had to intervene to combat the pandemic.
Figure 2: Timeline of European industrial policy
Source: Bruegel.
4 See https://www.consilium.europa.eu/ueDocs/cms_Data/docs/pressData/en/
ec/00100-r1.en0.htm.
Pre-1914
Tariﬀs and
protection of
intellectual
property
Growing state
intervention
Winner-picking
through vertical
industrial policy
Market-oriented
policies
Lisbon Agenda
and further
liberalisation
Renewed state
interventionism,
also due to the
climate crisis and
(more recently)
COVID-19
1914-1950 1950-1980 1980s 1990-2000s Recent years

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
22 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
The climate crisis together with COVID-19 have made clear that for
resilient growth after the pandemic, not only will state intervention
be needed, a different way of doing things will also be needed. Bowles
and Carlin (2020) argued that: “No combination of government fiat and
market incentives, however cleverly designed, will produce solutions
to problems like the pandemic, ” stressing the role of civil society in the
gap between the state and the market. A very similar argument can be
made for the climate crisis.
Future industrial policy also faces other challenges. Haskel and
Westlake (2018) showed that the economy is becoming more “intangi-
ble”, meaning that businesses are increasingly investing in intangible
assets, such as computerised information, knowledge, organisational
processes, marketing, R&D, design and strong supply chains. They
argued that this shift has major consequences for industrial policy,
as intangible assets differ considerably from tangibles in four ways:
they are more likely to be highly scalable, their costs are more likely
to be sunk, they are more likely to have spillovers and they are more
likely have synergies with each other. These characteristics create
new market failures and shift the importance of others. Industrial
policy should address these developments, most importantly because
governments need to act to accommodate the necessary changes,
including by providing public knowledge infrastructure and clarifying
intellectual property regulation.
This makes it clear how challenging green industrial policy is. To be
successful in the long term, it needs to reconcile policy and tools deal-
ing with classic market-failure externalities and the greenhouse-gas
externality, while taking into account a changing economy.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
3 Classic arguments for
industrial policy
At the core of the debate about industrial policy between state inter-
ventionists and free-marketers who oppose any form of market
interference is the notion of market failures as justification for state
intervention. Several market failures can provide a justification for
correction via industrial policy: knowledge spill-overs, dynamic scale
economies, coordination failures and informational externalities.
The early approach to industrial policy through trade protection
was based on the infant-industry argument, an example of dynamic
scale economies. Production costs may initially be higher for newly
established domestic companies than for well-established foreign
competitors, which have accumulated more experience. Over time,
however, domestic producers can reduce costs as they learn by doing
and/or achieve greater critical scale over time (dynamic scale econo-
mies). They may even overtake their foreign rivals if they can exploit
some comparative advantage. Yet, if future returns outweigh initial
losses, and it is only a matter of bridging, capital markets could finance
the necessary investment needed by domestic companies (Baldwin,
1969). For the infant-industries argument for industrial policy to be
justified, failings in the capital market are therefore also needed. Such
capital market imperfections are likely to be present particularly in
highly uncertain environments, and when firms and funders do not
have equal access to information.
As intangible assets become more important, the infant-indus-
try argument for industrial policy intervention becomes even more

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
24 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
powerful. Compared to entrants, incumbent firms may be better able
to exploit the synergies between new and existing intangible assets,
giving them a major advantage over entrants, especially for more
incremental innovative investments. The emerging role of big data in
firms’ business models illustrates this. Incumbents are able to expand
their databases, run algorithms, draw conclusions and improve their
services and operations, which in turn gives them access to more data.
In comparison, an entrant with access to only a limited set of data
cannot benefit from this positive feedback loop. In addition, an intan-
gible economy makes life harder for infant firms, as they face tighter
financial constraints. Intangible asset investments are most prone to
capital market imperfections. They are not always visible on balance
sheets and require investors to spend increasing amounts of time
researching the firm (Haskel and Westlake, 2018). The infant-industry
argument is therefore especially relevant in an intangible asset world,
especially for newly emerging technologies and markets.
The perhaps most often used argument for industrial policy relates
to R&D and technology policy and has to do with market failures
arising from knowledge spill-overs: markets do not provide sufficient
incentives for private investment in research because of the non-ap-
propriable, public-good, intangible character of knowledge and its
risky nature. New knowledge arising from R&D is non-rivalrous and
only partially non-excludable: others may learn and use the knowl-
edge, without necessarily paying for it. It is these spillovers that lead to
social rates of return above private rates of return, and private invest-
ment levels below socially-desired levels. Divergence between social
and private rates of return provides a reason for government inter-
vention to increase private R&D investment to the higher socially-op-
timal level. It justifies in particular support for private R&D projects
where the divergence between social and private returns is high. In
an intangible economy that relies heavily on R&D investments by
firms, governments therefore face difficult trade-offs. Industrial policy
should encourage firms to invest in R&D by guaranteeing that they

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
25 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
can enjoy the returns on their investments (for example through very
strong intellectual property rights (IPR) systems), but the state should
also encourage knowledge spillovers so firms can build on each other’s
innovations (which would weaken the case for strong IPR systems). A
way to reconcile both objectives is for governments to engage in R&D
themselves (for example, by funding universities). Another way to
do so, as suggested by Haskel and Westlake (2018), is to develop IPR
systems that are very clear and enforced, but not overly protective.
In addition, public research is needed to meet specific public inter-
est needs, providing common public goods which the market would
not supply on its own, including defence, public health and a clean
environment.
The coordination failure argument for industrial policy is based
on the idea that many projects require simultaneous investment in
different parts of the value chain. If different agents (eg downstream
and upstream firms) make these investments, each individual invest-
ment might not be optimal for the overall value chain. This happens
particularly for complex, early-stage projects with large externalities
and significant information asymmetries. A critical question over the
coordination failure argument for industrial policy is whether the gov-
ernment is able to solve this problem better than the market. Vertical
integration or long-term contracts between intermediate and final-
goods producers can help resolve coordination problems, although
there are clearly limits to the extent to which firms can adjust to solve
coordination problems, exemplified by the classic hold-up problem .
Perhaps the clearest case of market failure arises when information
is lacking and/or different parties have different levels of access to it.
Differences between investors and financiers in terms of access to
information is a classic case that gives rise to capital market imperfec-
tions and impedes access to finance for lucrative investment projects.
But parties in supply chains may also have different levels of access
to information. Issues may also arise when there is incomplete infor-
mation for everyone, such as for new projects in situations of high

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
26 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
uncertainty. For new activities, entrepreneurs may simply not know
what is profitable and what is not. In the presence of informational
externalities, a free-rider problem arises between initial and subse-
quent investors. Early investors cannot recover their sunk costs when
the outcome is unfavourable. But if it is unfavourable, this informa-
tion on the profitability of the project spills over to others. If there is
free entry ex post, no entrepreneur may be willing to make the initial
investment and a socially beneficial market will not be established.
Coordination problems are likely to further exacerbate the market-fail-
ure problem5.
Industrial policy needs to address these market failures. In addi-
tion, industrial policy might help solve other contemporary economic
issues associated with the growing intangible nature of economies,
such as the increase in inequality, the productivity trap and secular
stagnation (Haskel and Westlake, 2018). The growing importance of
intangibles thus provides a new argument for industrial policy and
increased state intervention.
5 This refers to a situation in which two parties may be able to work most efficiently
by cooperating but refrain from doing so because each is concerned it might give
the other party increased bargaining power and thus reduce its own profits.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
4 New industrial policy
Critiques of the traditional, vertical-style industrial policies that
prevailed during the 1960s and 1970s can be grouped into two larger
clusters of arguments: on the capacity of bureaucrats and adminis-
trators to allocate public resources correctly to the market (by picking
winners and subsidising them), and on the probability of rent seeking
and ‘capture’ .
In terms of the first of these, the review of arguments for indus-
trial policy in chapter 3 shows the enormous difficulties involved in
implementing industrial policies. Policymakers would have to master
an extraordinary range and depth of information and knowledge
to implement policies successfully. Policymakers would have to be
knowledgeable about firms and industries that generate knowledge
spillovers, the relative amount of learning by individual firms from
others and from their own experiences, the precise path of such learn-
ing over time and the magnitude of cost disadvantages at each stage
in the learning process, and the extent to which early entrants gener-
ate benefits for future entrants. The breadth of knowledge and skills
needed to implement an optimal policy would exceed that possessed
by almost any institution, including the best consulting firms.
In addition, distortions could arise from lobbying efforts through
which vested interests try to capture rents arising from public finances.
Where accountability and transparency are lacking, pervasive lobbying
efforts and corruption have resulted in inefficient and socially subop-
timal allocation of rents. Altenburg et al (2015) give the examples of

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
28 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
the German Renewable Energies Act6 and of the EU emissions trading
system7 in this regard.
If the role of industrial policy is the creation of ‘artificial’ rents, the
risks of capture, corruption and distortion are extremely tangible.
This is a well-known issue, especially for countries with low institu-
tional quality. Chang (2019) noted that the risk of political capture can
also be the indirect product of different lobbying efforts, which can
hinder the implementation of industrial policies. He cited the cases of
Brazil, South Africa and other developing countries, where competing
interests and lobbying groups (for example, the financial lobby pitted
against the manufacturing lobby) have contributed to premature
deindustrialisation. Because of greater pressure from the financial
lobby, high interest rates in countries such as Brazil and South Africa
undermined the competitiveness of the manufacturing sector. High
(real) interest rates discourage investment in general, but impacts
6 The Renewable Energies Act established the principle of providing feed-in tariffs
(over a 20-year period) for renewable sources of electricity generation (see the case
study in section 6). The costs originating from guaranteed prices above market rates
are translated into an electricity price surcharge borne by all electricity consumers,
domestic and commercial. The result is thus a deliberate policy-induced rise in
electricity costs. However, the law also foresees exemptions for particular types of
companies. This is exactly where political capture kicks in. Such exemptions were
initially confined to high energy-intensity manufacturers (electricity cost of at least
14 percent of production value) that were subject to international competition,
such as steel and chemical companies. However, exemptions have proliferated
and cover a broad range of diverse industries not foreseen under the provisions of
the law. As a result, the sum total of exemptions grew from 7 percent of Germany’s
electricity consumption in 2004, to 20 percent in 2014. Initially well-defined and
justified exemptions thus became the object of aggressive lobbying, leading to a
level of political capture that erodes the credibility of the incentive. In late 2013,
the European Commission opened an investigation into the compatibility of the
exemptions with EU state aid rules, and the German government reformed the
eligibility rules.
7 The emissions trading system has fallen prey to a mix of vested interests that advo-
cate the free allocation of permits (‘grandfathering’), exemptions and loopholes,
and the excessive issuance of permits, resulting in windfall profits for polluting
industries.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
29 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
are particularly negative for investment in the manufacturing sector,
where the requirement for borrowing is greater because of higher cap-
ital needs than in other sectors. These negative impacts of high interest
rates on the manufacturing sector have clearly unfolded in Brazil and
South Africa in the last two decades, with real interest rates frequently
around 10-12 percent. As a consequence, few firms are able to borrow
to invest (Andreoni and Chang, 2020).
Rent-seeking is likely to become increasingly challenging as firms
rely more on intangible assets. Defending the ownership of, and
appropriating the value from, intangible assets is much more complex
than for tangible assets. Copyrights and patents are, in general, more
subject to challenge than the ownership of, for instance, a production
plant. All this may encourage firms to spend money on lobbying to
protect their claims on intangible assets. Furthermore, the gains from
such lobbying are typically greater for larger, incumbent firms because
of the scalability of intangible assets. The resulting captured regula-
tions may then discourage smaller firms from investing in intangible
assets in the first place.
Even if optimal first-best policies were not possible because of the
information and capture constraint, policy could still be efficient and
effective. The effectiveness of industrial policy ultimately has to be
evaluated on the basis of its realised outcomes compared to no inter-
vention. In terms of realised outcomes, the history of industrial policy
in Europe provides many examples of failures, such as the loss to the
United States of the race to develop computers in 1960s and 1970s
(when France implemented the Plan Calcul8), the loss to Japan of the
8 The Plan Calcul was a 1960s programme to promote a national or European
computer industry, in response to concerns about French dependence on the US
computer industry. Under it, an agency, a manufacturing company and a research
institute were created, but it did not succeed in developing a French computer
industry, and as of 1971, US firm IBM had a more than 50 percent market share in
almost every European country. Under President Giscard d’Estaing, the Plan Calcul
was progressively dismissed between 1975 and 1978, and ultimately deemed a
failure.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
30 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
race to develop semiconductors in the 1980s and 1990s, and the failure
of Concorde, the British-French project to develop the first supersonic
passenger aircraft9. Various failed programmes built the case for a
laissez-faire approach to industrial policy. At a more systematic level,
larger-scale evaluation studies most often have looked at the impact of
trade protection, R&D subsidies and tax credits, and general subsidies.
Also in these studies one can find cases – such as subsidies for specific
industries or public procurement programmes – which have distorted
the market, resulted in the picking of the wrong firms and have bur-
dened the taxpayer with disappointing returns10. The big problem with
evaluation studies is to identify the causal impact of industrial policy
on outcomes, as proper counterfactuals to compare with are often
lacking, and one has to take into account that policy interventions are
not random but are implemented for a reason. More recent studies try
to deal better with causal identification show that industrial policy can
be effective in stimulating activities, but much depends, unsurpris-
ingly, on the policies used and the institutional context.
Lacking robust evidence in support of industrial policy, and fully
aware of the informational and rent-seeking issues that constrain the
implementation of industrial policy, the literature has moved on with
new insights to try to improve the design of industrial policy. A new
wave of academic debate has arisen around new forms of industrial
policy. This new industrial policy perspective, which started with the
work of Rodrik (2014), is an attempt to move beyond the ideological
division between state-driven intervention and purely market-based
solutions. It argues for a smart combination of both. New industrial
policy acknowledges both theoretical reasons for intervention, rooted
9 Concorde entered service in 1976 and operated for 27 years. During its develop-
ment, the programme experienced huge overruns, delays and costs spikes. This
impacted the commercial viability of the initiative, which was ultimately terminat-
ed in 2003.
10 For a review, see Noland & Pack (2003); Dechezleprêtre et al (2020), Rodrik (2004),
Aiginger and Rodrik (2019); Aghion et al (2014).

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
31 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
in market failures, and the implementation difficulties (government
failures). It addresses the information capacity of bureaucrats and
political-capture arguments. What needs to be solved by industrial
policy from this point of view (and what markets do when they func-
tion properly) is how to mobilise resources.
The new industrial policy perspective moves the debate away from
the view of industrial policy as a set of tools to allocate resources,
towards understanding it as a process. Rodrik (2014) argued for new
industrial policy to be a “process of institutionalised collaboration and
dialogue rather than a top-down approach” in which the government
picks sectors or firms and transfers money to them. The private sector
has to be one of the three fundamental stakeholders in this collabo-
ration, in which the other two elements are the government and civil
society.
Industrial policy should be designed in a way that makes it easier
for the state to build policies based on the knowledge that resides in
the private sector, while being legitimate from the point of view of civil
society. The state’s role should be to identify constraints and oppor-
tunities, in order to develop solutions that bring together private and
public capacities and information, with aligned public and private
motives, in a very pragmatic way. A modern framework should address
the issues of rent-seeking and political capture, and all the inefficien-
cies and risks that lie at the intersection between the public and the
private sectors, by effectively combining incentives and regulatory
constraints, and building in accountability and transparency.
Rodrik (2014) posits three pillars for this theoretical framework: i)
embeddedness; ii) discipline; iii) accountability11.
The concept of embeddedness (or embedded autonomy) dates
back to the work of Evans (1995). It starts from the notion that differ-
ent stakeholders have specific characteristics, and that governments
11 This framework is also used in Altenburg and Rodrik (2017); Ambroziak (2017);
Altenburg et al (2017); Andreoni and Chang (2019); Fernández-Arias et al (2020).

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
32 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
do not know in advance where market failures will occur. Therefore,
government agencies have to be embedded with the private sector
and have access to their information in order to leverage it to design
policies. Embeddedness thus requires a high degree of collaboration
between the public and private sectors, which would work closely to
discover solutions. The design of public-private partnerships can take
different forms. Deliberation councils, investment advisory councils,
round tables, public-private venture funds and development banks are
all examples through which governments can implement the embed-
dedness principle.
In the Rodrik interpretation, new industrial policies by definition
assume that trust and competences can be developed over time.
Embeddedness relies on a continuous, fair and open dialogue between
the different stakeholders, something that could be defined as policy-
learning. But while embedded, government agencies should not be
‘in bed’ with the private sector. The implementation of embeddedness
must take into account informational asymmetries between different
partners and how asymmetries change over time.
To avoid the risk of moving too slow or staying inactive in the face
of the high uncertainties and high risks of failure, experimentation is
crucial. Policies designed as learning experiments can help to reduce
risks, provided that they are closely monitored and adjusted when new
information arises. Monitoring will be required to deal with failures
and mistakes. The instruments and tools used by industrial policy
might initially not be the correct ones or might not work as planned.
Testing and learning can offset these problems if built into the design
of the policy. Governments should not start with the presumption that
solutions are known, and industrial policy built on experimentation
would ensure that the focus is no longer on ‘picking winners’ , but much
more on ‘letting losers go’ (Hallegatte et al, 2013). Openness to failure
should be a characteristic of the design of industrial policy, which
should incorporate uncertainty in its process. As Rodrik (2014) put it,
“failure is part and parcel of a successful industrial policy effort”. A new

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
33 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
industrial policy approach would therefore be a portfolio approach,
with some initiatives within the initial portfolio failing along the way. A
portfolio with no failures entails no risks.
While embeddedness and collaboration could represent a way
to solve the information problem, they clearly entail the risk of
capture and of provision of distorted information. To deal with the
political-capture risk, industrial policy should include monitoring and
transparency mechanisms, as well as mechanisms to align private and
public incentives. To activate private agents and prevent ‘cheating’ ,
proper incentives and accountability need to be in place.
Transparency on incentives and accountability mechanisms should
be facilitated by roadmaps and clear government communication
(Kemp and Never, 2017). A process of open policy dialogue should
ensure a high degree of accountability. Accountability will be critical to
the success or failure of industrial policy exercises.
Civil society will play an important role in new industrial policy
(Bowles and Carlin, 2020). In the bottom-up policymaking which the
embedded model involves, civil society including NGOs, trade unions,
activist groups and citizen lobbying initiatives, must be as engaged as
much as the private and public sectors in policy design.
The emphasis, within this new framework, on pragmatism, collabo-
ration, embeddedness and accountability are inspired by experiences
in Asia. Altenburg et al (2015) cited the examples of the industrial
transformations in some Asian countries between the 1970s and the
1990s, highlighting a number of successful features in private-pub-
lic alliances: the meritocracy of bureaucracies, the organisational
capacity of the private sector, upward accountability of policymakers,
competitive pressure, monitoring of sectoral performance, consumer
protection and press freedom. Pragmatism overruled an ideological
discussion in Singapore, when policymakers embraced very effectively
and decisively plans for a free-trade economy, although 90 percent of
the land in Singapore is state-owned (Chang, 2019). Japan and Korea
are other examples of good incentive systems for all participants

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
34 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
(companies, policymakers, administrators). Embedded autonomy
worked well in safeguarding processes against lobbying. The success
of those programmes relied on clear systems of incentives, in which
performance indicators were clearly stated, as well as transparency
requirements and serious evaluations conducted ex post for the firms
targeted by the industrial policy programmes.
Competition as a feature for taming the government failure risk is
reminiscent of Aghion et al (2011), who recommended competition
and state-aid policy to foster the level-playing field within sectors. Any
intervention should target those sectors with the greatest degree of
within-sector competitiveness. A focus on competitiveness should be
engrained in the public-private partnership mechanisms. Aghion et al
(2015) found empirical evidence, for China, that industrial policy that
subsidises firms can enhance productivity growth if the targeted firms
within sectors are sufficiently competitive and innovative. The con-
clusions of Aghion et al (2011) were broadly endorsed by Altomonte
and Veugelers (2019), who recommended a combination of horizontal
measures ensuring competition and an innovation-friendly environ-
ment, with vertical measures that are careful about the choice of tar-
geted firms and sectors, representing a portfolio approach to industrial
policy, which should be coupled with competition-enhancing policies.
The discussions on principles for industrial policy design mostly
focus on how to improve activities that already exist. Designing
industrial policy for activities that do not yet exist is a very different
challenge. Mazzucato (2011) made this point most vividly in what she
defined as the ‘entrepreneurial state’ . The notion of the entrepreneur-
ial state implies that not only should the state step into the economy,
promote existing industries and solve their market failures, but also
that government agencies should act as market creators. She further-
more proposed a broader “mission-oriented” approach to industrial
policy (Mazzucato, 2018). The missions should be goals on which
society agrees, taking into account its diverse range of stakeholders.
The policies that direct economic and technical change should do so

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
35 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
with the objective of reaching the goals. Broad acceptance of the mis-
sions would be rooted in citizen engagement, via multi-stakeholder
consultations.
This system also implies setting concrete but ambitious milestones
during the process. The United Nations’ Sustainable Development
Goals would be examples of missions, according to Mazzucato (2018).
Meeting them requires a new toolkit that goes beyond fixing failures
in existing markets. Strategic public investment in many different
sectors should open up new industrial opportunities, to be developed
further by the private sector. Mazzucato and Penna (2016) proposed
a revived role for development banks as channels for entrepreneurial
states. The public sector should help shape the industry by providing
basic research innovations as bases for follow-up private investments.
Examples are transistors and the internet. Gruber (2017) gave as an
example IMEC (Interuniversity Microelectronics Centre), set up in
Leuven, Belgium in 1982 by the Flemish government working with
Flemish universities to strengthen the microelectronics industry in
Flanders. IMEC is currently one of the most advanced research centres
for nano-electronics, working in areas including sustainable energy.
Fernandez-Arias et al (2020) studied smart development banks12
in more detail as facilitators of new activities within a new indus-
trial policy perspective. Well-designed development banks can help
governments discover where problems and failures lie. They should
engage in the search for nascent economic activities that face obstacles
from market or government failures. This requires intelligence gather-
ing and dissemination of lessons learned rather than simply providing
12 Development banks are ‘smart’ when they “identify market failures through their
loan-screening and lending activities to guide their operations and provide critical
inputs for the design of productive development policies. This intelligence role of
development banks is similar to the role that modern theories of financial interme-
diation assign to banks as institutions with a comparative advantage in producing
and processing information. However, while private banks focus on information on
private returns, development banks would potentially produce and organise infor-
mation about social returns” (Fernandez-Arias et al, 2020).

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
36 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
credit. Development banks should transmit information on market
and government failures to the relevant agencies. Fernandez-Arias et
al (2020), in a survey of development banks, concluded that current
practice is very far from what they propose. Nevertheless, they believe
that development banks can be reoriented to exploit the complemen-
tarities between their lending and intelligence gathering.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
5 A new green industrial policy
The new perspective on industrial policy elevates the industrial policy
discussion out of the realm of strict economic goals such as compet-
itiveness, productivity and GDP growth, to include broader societal
goals. Societal goals involve climate stability, health, poverty preven-
tion, the creation of quality jobs and reduced inequality. With climate
as a societal goal to be included explicitly in the objectives of industrial
policy, an industrial policy that is green follows naturally. How can
policymakers design green industrial policies? What makes green
industrial policy different from industrial policy and from climate
policy? Here, we delve further into how the principles of industrial
policy, and particularly of the new industrial policy perspective, can be
applied in the design of green industrial policy.
5.1 A bold green industrial policy: urgency, risk-taking,
experimentation
Dealing with climate crisis means tough targets. The decarbonisation
challenge is both broad (it will have to be all-encompassing across
the economy – this is where it differs from climate policy) and deep (it
must achieve real carbon abatement, which is where it is different from
industrial policy).
A feature of the climate crisis that is obvious but worth remarking is
the absolute need for an urgent effort to mitigate it. The consequences
in case of non-action would be devastating. As the Stern Review (2006)
stated, “The costs of stabilising the climate are significant but man-
ageable; delay would be dangerous and much more costly”. Fostering
the greening of the economy is not only a strategic industrial move to

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
38 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
achieve competitiveness, but a necessity to guarantee the continuation
of society. For green industrial policy, more than for other areas of
industrial policy, the lack of action and risk-taking can be particularly
problematic in the long run, as scenarios of doing too little too late are
extremely concerning. A green industrial policy portfolio with risks
entails accepting failures. This puts the experimentation principle at
the core of green industrial policy, going beyond the principle of only
intervening if there is a clear case for intervention.
5.1.1 Public-private partnerships and civil society involvement
The huge transformative change of decarbonisation will require
the involvement of the private sector and civil society more than
in other areas of industrial policy. It will also require private-sector
involvement. Public-private partnerships will be central to green
industrial policy, much more than for climate policy, and will cover
more private-sector activities than industrial policy.
5.1.2 Addressing green market failures: environmental externalities
The theoretical case for intervention is even more robust in the context
of green industrial policies. In addition to classical market failures,
environmental externalities must be dealt with because a clean envi-
ronment represents a public good. Being characterised by broader
market failures, green markets require more targeted support than
non-green markets.
5.1.3 Green technology externalities
While the previously highlighted market failures argument applies
to general industrial policies, some market failures are particularly
relevant for green industries. Markets tend to underinvest in research
and innovation, not only because of an aversion to risk and uncer-
tainty, but also because of the spillover effects. Green technologies
are often still early stage or emerging, with higher levels of risk and
uncertainty. In addition, green technologies seem to be more complex

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
39 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
than non-green technologies. Green technologies are a combination of
a larger and more diverse set of technologies, compared to non-green
technologies. Studies based on firm-level data (Ghisetti et al, 2015)
and patent data (Barbieri et al, 2020) have found that green technol-
ogies are more complex than non-green technologies. In addition,
Barbieri et al (2020) found that these technologies tend to have greater
spillovers and cause effects in a wider variety of other domains. The
greater risks and uncertainty, and the greater externalities from clean
technologies, make the case for green industrial policy, calling for an
approach that is more directed at supporting investment in clean tech-
nologies. The selection of tools and projects for green industrial policy
should also be directed to those areas with the greatest clean market
failures, where private and public returns diverge most.
5.1.4 Avoiding lock-ins and path dependencies
Beyond the spillover arguments, a push to invest in clean technologies
is necessary to counter the locking-in of fossil fuel-based technologies
and their path dependence (meaning the tendency for decisions to
be made in the context of previous decisions, therefore perpetuating
existing approaches). The difficulty in profiting from green technol-
ogies and in developing new low-carbon technologies is related to
support for fossil fuel products given in different forms, from the
absence of a sufficient carbon price to explicit fossil-fuel subsidies.
This makes the private returns from non-green capital much higher
than the returns it generates in terms of aggregate social welfare. As an
indication of the magnitude of this issue, Coady et al (2019) estimated
Europe’s post-tax fossil-fuel subsidies at $261 billion in 2015. This hap-
pens because environmental externalities are not incorporated into
the price of fossil fuels. In turn, lower-than-optimal fossil fuel prices
make investment in green products relatively less profitable, reducing
private incentives to invest green. These mechanisms can skew the
market, not only in terms of production and technology adoption,
but also in terms of innovation. Given the path-dependent nature of

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
40 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
innovation and its increased complexity and uncertainty in the green
context, this market failure is particularly concerning, given the danger
of locking-in industries or countries to unsustainable development
paths based on ‘dirty’ technologies (Aghion et al, 2011, 2016). The
case for subsidising green technologies, in this sense, is broader and
stronger than the general case for alleviating R&D-related market
failures. This is particularly relevant when considering that the cost of
combating the climate crisis will increase substantially the more action
is delayed. Locking-in unsustainable pathways will increase the cost of
mitigating the climate crisis.
5.2 A balanced mix of green industrial policy instruments
Environment-directed industrial policy technology (innovation)
cannot be neutral. It needs to make an ex-ante distinction between
‘clean’ and ‘dirty’ technologies and to choose ‘clean’ in order to
address the greater knowledge externalities and lock-in risks. This
still leaves the issue of how to choose between clean technologies.
Even within green industrial policy, decisions must still be taken both
vertically (eg choosing to focus on certain clean technologies, such
as batteries or hydrogen) and horizontally (eg choosing which instru-
ments to use, such as carbon prices, regulations, research subsidies,
etc). Choices of clean technologies should be guided by the principle
of divergence between expected social and private returns and the
greatest scope for reducing clean market failures, while addressing
sufficiently the governance failure challenges and avoiding risk-aver-
sion. Choosing clean technologies should also take into account the
spillovers of any choice for other non-selected clean technologies. This
implies a good mix between vertical and horizontal instruments, sup-
port that is limited in time and the importance of ensuring fair compe-
tition (Aghion et al, 2011).
Kemp and Never (2017), on the basis of an examination of several
green industrial policies in Europe, called for a mix of various policy
instruments, with a balance (in timing and strength) of demand-pull

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
41 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
instruments (such as public procurement) and technology-push
instruments (such as tariffs or subsidies), to make policy as effective as
possible. This points to a role for policy coordination and coherence in
the green industrial policy mix.
5.3 A global green industrial policy: avoiding the tragedy of the
commons
Climate change is a global commons problem. As stated by Edenhofer
et al (2013), “the atmosphere is a global common-pool resource in its
function as a sink for greenhouse gases, and it is openly accessible and
appropriated by everyone free of charge in most regions of the world”.
The geographical origin of greenhouse gas emissions into the atmos-
phere has no effect on their impacts. Any jurisdiction taking action to
limit emissions thus incurs the costs of its actions, while the benefits
are distributed globally. Therefore, as noted by Aldy and Stavins (2011),
“for virtually any jurisdiction, the climate benefits it reaps from its
actions will be less than the costs it incurs, despite the fact that the global
benefits may be greater – possibly much greater – than the global costs. ”
In economic theory terms, this problem is framed in terms of the
famous tragedy of the commons (Hardin, 1968). The consequences
of the tragedy of the commons are that all economic agents have an
incentive to exploit a common good beyond the socially-optimal level,
and they end up overexploiting it. There is also a free-riding issue that
leads to underinvestment in solutions to this problem. Rodrik (2014)
discussed the political economy and governance challenges emerging
from this. He pointed out that, whereas environmental externalities
on a micro-scale call for market correction, the bigger picture at the
aggregate level can be understood in terms of coordination issues.
Containing the global temperatures increase and reducing carbon
emissions are, per se, global commons from which all countries can
benefit. If this is not done, all countries can suffer the negative impact.
In this sense, green industrial policy, like climate change policy, will
have to be much more multilateral than traditional industrial policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
42 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
Lütkenhorst et al (2014) pointed out the necessity, in this sense, of
joint initiatives such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC). Rodrik (2014) pointed out another political economy
aspect of green industrial policy: the competitive motives of nation
states. He argued that this can have both a positive and negative
impact. It can be a zero-sum game, in which every resource invested to
achieve a domestic advantage is at global cost, but these competitive
motives can also spark a race for innovation that solves the market
failures linked to price distortion (by lowering prices) and underin-
vestment in R&D. Global cooperation in R&D, particularly during
pre-commercial phases, can bring about cost advantages, risk sharing
and greater efficiencies from combining complementary knowledge
and exploiting synergies. All this implies that multilateral coordina-
tion on green industrial policy should seek to achieve a good balance
between cooperation and competition to reach global targets.
5.4 Addressing green industrial policy government failures
Most of the arguments against industrial policy deal with the practical
implementation of industrial policy rather than its theoretical justifica-
tions. Criticisms about effective implementation remain valid for green
industrial policy. How can green industrial policy avoid government
failures while directing structural change in order to meet its goals?
The information problem is the first challenge. As a green indus-
trial policy requires a more directed approach to clean technolo-
gies, it relies on the government having the information capacity to
correctly allocate resources to the best sectors and players. The case
of Solyndra, a US solar panel producer, illustrates well the extent of
the information-capacity challenge faced by green industrial policy.
Solyndra received production subsidies via US industrial policy pro-
grammes. While most of the solar-panel market was silicon-based,
Solyndra relied on a different type of solar-panel material. Its com-
petitive advantage was mostly due to the high price of silicon. The
Barack Obama Administration pushed Solyndra as its green industrial

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
43 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
policy champion. But when the price of silicon unexpectedly fell, and
Solyndra could no longer compete with Chinese firms (it went bank-
rupt in 2011), the Obama Administration’s intervention was criticised.
Another governance challenge is high uncertainty and the need for
a long time horizon for green policymaking, conflicting with politi-
cians’ needs to find short-term successes. The difference in time hori-
zons between policy planning and political cycles makes achieving
coherent and sustained green industrial policy efforts extremely chal-
lenging. Green industrial policies thus need to be protected as much
as possible from this problem of uncertainty and time inconsistency.
A long-term vision of paths and objectives combined with milestones
is important. Lütkenhorst et al (2014) highlighted the need for a social
agreement on long-term roadmaps in order to prevent policies from
becoming subject to political capture and the economy from being
locked-in to unsustainable pathways. Measures could include invest-
ment guarantees and provision of long-term capital loans. Lütkenhorst
et al (2014) also underlined the need to ensure flexibility under these
different forward-looking settings. One example is feed-in tariffs that
are guaranteed for 15 to 20 years: long-term prices are guaranteed,
but the auctioning mechanism works in batches, in order to adapt to
technology cost changes.
Viewing the climate change challenge as a societal transition to a
new sustainable growth path, further increases the need for the broad
involvement of stakeholders, including citizens. A broader set of stake-
holders may exacerbate the rent-seeking challenge, but will also offset
one another’s rent-seeking incentives. To get citizens on board, Kemp
and Never (2017) stressed the importance of communicating well the
policies and their design. Altenburg et al (2017) quoted different exam-
ples of energy policy reforms undermined by a combination of “strong
opposition from interest groups” and lack of broad societal consensus,
especially in cases of strongly disruptive energy policies, such as the
scrapping of fossil-fuel subsidies.
Kemp and Never (2017) also underlined the concept of “embedded

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
44 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
autonomy” from the new industrial policy literature. When looking at
Germany’s national platform for electric mobility, for instance, they
found the continuous involvement of different stakeholders (automo-
bile producers, city planners, technology companies and environmen-
tal groups) was a key success factor. This transition also had a broad
political support: it was backed by the Chancellor, and co-led by min-
istries. Kemp and Never (2017) concluded that broad political backing
and the taking of responsibility gave more stability to the industrial
policy programme. “Embedded autonomy” should also be associated
with transparency, accountability and independence, in order to avoid
political capture.
5.5 Summary: lessons for green industrial policy
Green industrial policy should have much bigger and broader objec-
tives than typical industrial policy. Green industrial policy should
address the meta-problems associated with the transformative change
climate change brings, rather than seeking to boost the competitive-
ness of targeted sectors and firms. Its broadness is also different from
climate change policy, which is more narrowly defined in terms of
climate change targets. Longer-term broad objectives involving the
whole of society should focus on building win-win coalitions, com-
pared to the short-term competitiveness objectives of selected sec-
tors and firms. This broader public interest is the foundation for the
legitimacy of the policy. Objectives should be clearly identified and
transparently, broadly and repeatedly communicated. Goals should be
translated into clear, measurable targets and milestones, which are the
basis of monitoring and evaluation.
Green industrial policy should activate and coordinate a broad set
of stakeholders. From the private sector, various sectors and tech-
nologies and different parts of the value chain should be engaged in
public-private partnerships. Future uncertainty about climate and
technological scenarios underlines the importance of self-discovery
on the market and industry-research-policy collaboration via forums,

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
45 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
public-private partnerships or other means. However, this mechanism
will have to be designed robustly to resist lobbying efforts and attempts
at political capture.
A balanced set of incentives and constraints will be needed to
promote sharing risks, information and resources (blended finance),
while weeding out rent-seeking. Green industrial policy also requires
citizen support and involvement.
The implementation of green industrial policy should be seen as a
continuous learning process to deal with information problems and
high uncertainties and risks. At the same time, the sense of urgency
justifies policy action despite the high risks. In particular, green
industrial policy should help to shape the landscape for new indus-
trial eco-systems and markets, in which stakeholders still need to be
connected for the first time. Intermediate instruments, such as smart
development banks, and milestones may allow the risks of new, risky
projects to be minimised. Green industrial policy should be open to
policy experimentation. Experiments should have clear monitoring
and evaluation plans, so that unsuccessful experiments are stopped or
restructured in time.
It is clear that green industrial policy should deploy a broad
mix of policy instruments, balancing horizontal and vertical policy
instruments. Green industrial policy should set a clear direction
towards ‘clean’ and away from ‘dirty’ . Selection within clean tech-
nologies should be based on proposed solutions for meeting the
set targets. Bottom-up proposals should be chosen through com-
petition. Co-financing should cover a balanced set of projects that
accelerate and consolidate existing scientific and industrial capaci-
ties. Instruments should cover the whole value chain from research,
development and diffusion, to manufacturing, distribution and sales
(technology push, market pull).
These lessons make clear how critical the governance challenge
will be for successful implementation of green industrial policy. Strong
operational governance is needed to address coordination between

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
46 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
the many different types of stakeholders, policy governance areas,
instruments and projects, and to coordinate across different geograph-
ical layers. This requires competent, empowered governance bodies,
which should be sufficiently politically independent or detached from
political pressures, yet accountable for their achievements, with a set
of clear, realistic milestones.
Both the market and the state are limited in what they can deliver.
Successful green industrial policy will rest on mechanisms that
make them work together efficiently. The design of public-private
partnerships and strong policy governance are the basic foundations.
These lessons make it clear how critical the governance challenge
will be for successful implementation of green industrial policy. Strong
operational governance is needed to coordinate between the many
different types of stakeholders, policy governance areas, instruments
and projects, and to coordinate different geographical layers. This
requires competent, empowered governance bodies, which should
be politically independent or detached from political pressures,
yet accountable for their achievements, with a set of clear, realistic
milestones.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
6 Green industrial policy in
practice
We examine and assess the strengths and weaknesses of green indus-
trial policy implemented in Germany, the Netherlands, Denmark and
the United States.
6.1 Germany
Germany is often considered the textbook example of green indus-
trial policymaking, because of its energy transition programme,
Energiewende, which started in 2010 and is ongoing. A central part of
this has been the introduction of a system of feed-in tariffs (FIT) to
promote renewable energy.
Feed-in tariffs are one of the most common instruments of climate
change policy. They guarantee to renewable electricity producers a
fixed price above the market price. Typically, they are used to foster
the deployment of solar and wind generation, and they involve long-
term price fixing. This long-term price fixing reduces commercial
uncertainty, increasing the incentives for deployment of renewables.
However, successful deployment of these technologies does not neces-
sarily imply success in their manufacturing, which might face techno-
logical risks and uncertainties.
There is clear evidence on the fact that during its initial phase
(2010-2014), the outcome of the Energiewende policy programme
was very different for the domestic solar panel manufacturing indus-
try compared to the wind turbine industry. Lütkenhorst et al (2014)
compared four different indicators of the impact: competitiveness,

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
48 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
innovation, job creation and climate-change mitigation. On compet-
itiveness, Germany’s strong position in wind turbine manufacturing
rather than solar panel manufacturing clearly shows up in export data
(Figure 3). In terms of innovation, Germany ranked third in terms of
the absolute number of green patents from 1990 to 2010, behind the
United States and Japan. Figure 3 shows that there was little difference
in the number of solar and wind patents and trends. Yet, between 1990
and 2010, Germany accounted for 21 percent of global wind technol-
ogy patents, while for solar photovoltaic technology it only represented
12 percent. In terms of jobs, in 2012, solar and wind energy created 54
percent and 23 percent respectively of a total of 380,000 jobs attributed
to renewable energies.
Figure 3: German net exports (€ millions) and numbers of wind/solar patents
Source: Bruegel based on Patstat and Comtrade databases.
The solar panel industry’s weaker overall performance is mainly
due to strong Chinese competition and the lack of an accommodat-
ing industrial policy. Feed-in tariffs provided an important boost in
demand for solar panels in Germany. The government guaranteed
- 1 0 0 0
- 8 0 0
- 6 0 0
- 4 0 0
- 2 0 0
0
2 0 0
4 0 0
- 1 0 0 0 0
- 8 0 0 0
- 6 0 0 0
- 4 0 0 0
- 2 0 0 0
0
2 0 0 0
4 0 0 0
2 0 0 0
2 0 0 1
2 0 0 2
2 0 0 3
2 0 0 4
2 0 0 5
2 0 0 6
2 0 0 7
2 0 0 8
2 0 0 9
2 0 1 0
2 0 1 1
2 0 1 2
2 0 1 3
2 0 1 4
2 0 1 5
2 0 1 6
2 0 1 7
2 0 1 8
2 0 1 9
Patents€ millions
S o l a r
W i n d pa t e n t s (right scale)
S o l a r pa t e n t s (right scale)
W i n d te c h n o l o g y

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
49 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
these tariffs for 20 years, so risk and uncertainty were considerably
reduced, creating a stable investment environment and readiness on
the part of capital markets to finance renewable energy projects at rel-
atively low interest rates. But no direct support was given to the panel
manufacturing industry. Insufficient attention was therefore paid to
making the industry innovative, developing the latest cost-efficient
technologies and competing at the technological frontier with Chinese
manufacturers. Chinese manufacturers, who enjoyed a general man-
ufacturing cost advantage compared to Germany, and could access
huge credit lines with very low interest rates, were the major benefi-
ciaries from the market that the German feed-in tariffs created. The
Paris Tech Review (2012) noted “expansion was put above upgrading”.
The Paris Tech Review editors argued that if creating a national com-
petitive industry is the objective, it is vital to also support R&D in the
local manufacturing sector.
Wind turbines are different. The wind turbine industry is more
established industry than solar panels in Germany, which (like other
European countries) has managed to develop a solid wind sector, in
particular because of German technological know-how in the field
of mechanical engineering, and because of weaker competition from
Chinese and other international players. Moreover, Germany’s turbine
manufacturers, specialised component suppliers, wind park operators
and research institutions (more than 300 partners in total) are clus-
tered in the same region, supported by local governments. This has
facilitated the knowledge spillovers and coordination mechanisms
required for highly knowledge intensive industries.
The German solar energy case makes it clear that the deployment
of climate change policy instruments (in this case feed in tariffs) is
not necessarily sufficient from a green industrial policy perspective.
So, should solar energy be considered a green industrial policy failure
in Germany? The policy implications are not so straightforward.
Although Germany failed to create a competitive solar panel manu-
facturing industry, it should be considered where the real social value

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
50 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
added lays in this industry. End users of solar panels benefitted from
the feed-in tariffs, as did suppliers and workers, as the industry is char-
acterised by a high density of installation and maintenance jobs. To
the extent that FIT made this part of the solar panels value chain more
attractive, an overall positive social welfare outcome was realised, even
without explicit strong domestic solar panel manufacturers or support
for explicit policy intervention in favour of manufacturing.
Surprisingly, the rapid deployment of renewables in Germany did
not lead to lower total greenhouse gas emissions but rather to stag-
nation. Electricity prices fell considerably as a result of oversupply,
resulting from unexpectedly high generation from renewable sources.
Low input prices and the low carbon price in the EU emissions trading
system exacerbated the situation. Therefore, at times, only the cheap-
est energy sources remained competitive: hard coal and, in particular,
lignite in the case of Germany (Lütkenhorst et al, 2014).
The buildings energy efficiency part of Germany’s energy transition
programme, meanwhile, was based on three pillars: regulation, fiscal
incentives and a high level of transparency to stakeholders and mar-
kets (Kemp and Never, 2017). The policy was gradually introduced by
raising buildings energy efficiency standards, to overcome the various
imperfections in the real estate and construction markets. Market fail-
ures included unequal access to information, split incentives between
tenants and owners in terms of energy efficiency and mispricing of
future energy costs at the time of construction (Kemp and Never,
2017). As we have discussed, these situations call for collaboration and
policy learning, in which targets are progressively adapted. In terms
of public-private partnerships, buildings energy-efficiency agencies
were set-up in Germany to check and expand the policy framework
and promote experimental measures. Agencies were also responsible
for the evaluation and monitoring of ongoing programmes. Weiß et al
(2014) performed an economic assessment, concluding that the policy
managed to reduce buildings’ energy consumption and also “impacted
the regional value chain by €14 billion and generated about 287,000

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
51 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
full time jobs”. El-Shagi et al (2014) concluded that regulation had a
strong indirect impact on innovation. Key success factors are identified
in the process of continuous revision of regulation and incentives, in
the combination of different types of measures, in the collaboration
between different participants and in the promotion of complemen-
tary measures, such as the use of renewable energy in buildings.
The Energiewende case makes it clear that climate change policy
instruments, such as feed-in tariffs, although important for supporting
renewable energy, may not be sufficient from the perspective of green
industrial policy, which requires more focus on innovation, job crea-
tion and competitiveness, particularly for infant renewable energy sec-
tors. Looking at the broader picture of the energy system in Germany,
Lütkenhorst et al (2014) made three recommendations. First, Germany
has a fragmented multi-level institutional framework, that despite its
reputation, needs to be pooled together politically to efficiently tackle
the problem. Second, green policies must interact with other poli-
cies, including those at the European level, avoiding duplication, and
working towards common goals, however politically difficult this may
be. Third, it is necessary to be pragmatic in alliances for this transfor-
mation with very different stakeholders. Schwarz (2020) argued that, in
the German context, citizen involvement should be taken into consid-
eration and framed properly, given that citizens are often the unrecog-
nised stakeholders during these policy processes. Civil society needs
to be fully recognised as a stakeholder in green industrial policy and
is neither less nor more important than the private and public sectors.
Acceptance of industrial policy and transitions is a key element that in
the future will likely interact with different macro-trends.
6.2 Netherlands
The Netherlands provides another interesting case study for Europe.
Kemp (2010) labelled the spirit of the programmes that started in 2002,
as a “guided evolution”, by means of experimentation and a portfo-
lio approach, with an emphasis on knowledgeable players. Kemp

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
52 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
and Never (2017) defined the Dutch approach as a systemic green
industrial policy, building on the transition management literature.
The Dutch approach in phasing-in green technologies considered
the entire energy system. In order to achieve the goals, the economic
affairs ministry and the environment ministry were brought closer
together to jointly manage the framework programme. The framework
involved the establishment of several different transition platforms,
the drafting of action plans and different scenarios. As Kemp (2010)
outlined, the process was designed so that “individuals from the
private and the public sector, academia, and civil society come together
to develop a common ambition for particular areas, develop path-
ways, and identify useful transition experiments”. These experiments
involved R&D programmes for technology support and the creation
of networks of expertise. Kemp and Never (2017) showed in practice
an example of what Rodrik (2014) defined as self-discovery or embed-
dedness: the set-up, in 2004, of a “front-runners desk” designed to “help
innovative companies with problems encountered and to help policy to
become more innovation friendly”. Private-sector knowledge informed
policy about problems such as credit constraints. It is interesting to
note that in order to foster the energy transition in the country, the
Dutch regulator also devised a ‘regulatory sandbox’13. Aimed at pro-
moting decentralised, sustainable electricity generation, this initiative
allowed homeowners’ associations and energy cooperatives to pro-
pose projects that were prohibited by current regulation. In particular,
local experimenters could organise peer-to-peer supply and determine
their own tariffs for energy transport in order to localise, democratise
and decentralise energy provision.
Despite the good characteristics of the policy design, the evalu-
ation of all these initiatives in terms of efficiency and effectiveness
remains difficult. Kemp (2010) identified the electric mobility sector as
13 A framework set up by a regulator to allows start-ups and other innovators to con-
duct live experiments in a controlled environment under a regulator’s supervision.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
53 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
a success in terms of transition management, while the effects on the
energy sector were less clear. Kemp and Never (2017) also pointed to
policy inconsistency, as the energy market went through a programme
of liberalisation. This lack of consistency in policy targets watered
down the effectiveness of the transition management programmes.
6.3 Denmark
Denmark is interesting for its specific experience in the wind turbine
industry. Denmark has been a pioneer in wind energy production at
global level (Figure 4).
Figure 4: Danish net exports (€ millions) and patents, wind energy
Source: Bruegel based on Patstat and Comtrade databases.
The elements of Denmark’s green industrial policies have to be
understood in the context of specific ownership structures, based on
cooperatives. Cooperatives became more and more important from
the 1970s, as Danish wind companies moved from family-owned
structures to a world-leading industry. This development “was driven
from the bottom-up, with enthusiasts influencing the political process
in such a way that government got engaged in providing the enabling
0
5 0
1 0 0
1 5 0
2 0 0
2 5 0
3 0 0
3 5 0
400
450
0
5 0 0
1 0 0 0
1 5 0 0
2 0 0 0
2 5 0 0
3 0 0 0
3 5 0 0
4 0 0 0
4 5 0 0
2 0 0 0
2 0 0 1
2 0 0 2
2 0 0 3
2 0 0 4
2 0 0 5
2 0 0 6
2 0 0 7
2 0 0 8
2 0 0 9
2 0 1 0
2 0 1 1
2 0 1 2
2 0 1 3
2 0 1 4
2 0 1 5
2 0 1 6
2 0 1 7
2 0 1 8
2 0 1 9
Patents€ millions
Wind technology patents
(right scale)
Wind technology exports

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
54 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
conditions to boost the development of the sector, through economic
incentives and favourable ownership restrictions” (Mendonça and
Lacey, 2009).
Mendonça and Lacey (2009) linked this structure to the idea of
“innovative democracies”, which is defined by Hvelplund (2005) as
“the active collaboration of a number of actors, including politicians,
new small private firms, the energy companies and the grassroots energy
movement”. Clearly, this model presents some of the features of the
theoretical framework for green industrial policy (section 5). This
approach is characterised by a combined bottom-up and top-down
approach that includes the private and public sectors, civil society,
activists and NGOs. This spread of involved parties has helped coun-
terbalance lobbying efforts by fossil-fuel companies.
Two sets of government policies further contributed to wind indus-
try developments in Denmark. The Danish government implemented
several programmes of feed-in tariffs, which stayed relatively stable
from the 1980s to the beginning of the 2000s. In addition, R&D and
investment subsidies had a positive impact on the production and
deployment of wind turbines, as shown by Klaassen et al (2005). This
highlights the importance of a balanced mix of policy instruments,
particularly the interplay between demand-pull and technology-push
green industrial policy tools. More recent work by Cook and Lin Lawell
(2020) has confirmed empirically the success of feed-in tariff schemes,
as well as another Danish government programme: the replacement
certificate programme, which provided incentives for the replacement
of old turbines.
In institutional and political economy terms, an important part of
the success of the Danish model has been its persistency (Mendonça
and Lacey, 2009). We can think of the Danish model as a clear way
to address the market failures linked to uncertain time horizons.
Continuous involvement of NGOs, academics and citizens in the
policy process, in the innovative democracy model (as also referred to
by Schwarz, 2020), ensures that the risk of doing too little is mitigated

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
55 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
by the involvement of stakeholders who keep the pressure to act
constant.
6.4 United States
Green industrial policy in the United States was strengthened after
the 2008 economic crisis with the 2009 American Reinvestment and
Recovery Act, and subsequently with the Climate Action Plan (2013)
(Rodrik, 2014). The main instruments deployed were loan guarantees
and tax incentives. Rodrik (2014) discussed the case study of solar-
panel producer Solyndra (see section 5.8), as an illustration of failing
industrial policy. Rodrik (2014) stressed that necessarily some of the
companies targeted by industrial policy will fail along the way, while
only a few will be hits – Tesla is one example. Rodrik (2014) proposed
to look at industrial policy as a portfolio of investments. From an
analysis of the US National Research Council (NRC) which evaluated,
based on a portfolio approach, programmes carried out by the US
Department of Energy (DOE) (including R&D projects), Rodrik (2014)
concluded that at the portfolio level, the net benefits surpassed the
net losses. He also stressed the need to understand and avoid political
capture. The NRC highlighted how much of value added in industrial
policy efforts came from relatively modest projects.
The DOE and the Advanced Research Projects Agency – Energy
(ARPA-E) are the US public agencies most widely analysed in the
framework of industrial policy studies. They are considered, together
with the US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA),
as good examples of state industrial policy efforts resulting in break-
through scientific advancements (including microprocessors, space
missions and the internet). But what characterises the approach of
these agencies? Evaluations (which are empirically difficult) of these
types of agencies and programmes show that their success has more
to do with the design of the institution and policies, the quality of the
people involved and operating market conditions, rather than their
budgets.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
56 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
Goldstein and Narayanamurti (2018) estimated the effectiveness
of public funding of DOE and ARPA-E in stimulating the production
of research and patents. While DOE categorises funding into basic or
applied research, ARPA-E has a more flexible approach, which better
fits energy research. In addition, ARPA-E seems to address purpose-
fully uncertainty, as the selection of projects favourably takes into
account their disruptive – and thus uncertain – nature (Rodrik and
Sabel, 2019). ARPA-E has a form of governance that puts its own design
under review, with gradual and incremental changes based on contin-
uous monitoring. The evidence suggests that the impact of ARPA-E, in
which science advancement, in parallel to technology advancement,
is stimulated more, has been broader than the impact of the DOE in
general. Goldstein and Narayanamurti (2018) concluded that “in order
for DOE to fulfil its energy mission, it must fund research in a way that
allows science and technology to coexist with minimal friction between
them”. Rodrik (2019) added that the ARPA-E approach is successful in
eliminating gaps in technical knowledge. These spaces are exactly the
overlaps between science and technology discussed by Goldstein and
Narayanamurti (2018).
6.5 Lessons learned
A first lesson from these four green industrial policy cases is the impor-
tance of effective collaboration between all parts of society. Two areas
that stand out are citizens and private industry. Citizens ultimately
must accept policies, while private industry contributes significant
knowledge and expertise. Policy should be able to involve both indus-
try and society as new industrial policy advocates. Best practices in
this respect have been seen in both the Netherlands and Denmark. In
the Netherlands, transition pathways have long been negotiated by
all stakeholder groups, enabling constructive collaboration (this has
been done with the 2019 Dutch National Climate Agreement of the
Netherlands, the Klimaatakkoord). In Denmark, cooperative owner-
ship structures and bottom-up political activism have been crucial to

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
57 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
the successful wind industry. Public-private partnerships have enjoyed
similar success in Germany.
Another lesson is the importance of policy stability, commitment
and predictability over a longer term horizon. The development
of the Danish wind industry was supported strongly by stable and
sensible policies. Conversely, literature has noted that policy incon-
sistency in the Netherlands, arising from energy market liberalisation
programmes, reduced the effectiveness of transition-management
programmes. Yet, in view of high levels of uncertainty, long-term
commitment needs to go hand in hand with flexibility. Though built
on a stable platform, policies are gradually adapted and strengthened
over time. Effective stakeholder engagement allows this to be done in
an informed manner. The German experience of progressively adapted
targets for energy efficiency in buildings is a good example.
Measures should mix demand-pull and technology-push, general,
horizontal instruments, and specific, targeted instruments. On select-
ing targets, the US experience with Solyndra shows that public admin-
istrations should refrain from placing any one industry or organisa-
tion on a pedestal, and should instead reinforce the message that a
successful industrial policy is characterised by risk taking involving
winners but also losers. Political communication must reinforce this
message.
A final observation from the German experience of feed-in-tariffs
is the importance of clearly defining and understanding the relative
importance of ‘green’ and ‘industrial policy’ . The German FIT arguably
catalysed the global market for solar panel, yet German players have
a relatively low share of the market. From a purely industrial policy
perspective, the conclusion might be that this was a failure. But from a
green perspective, the policy was successful. Even from an industrial
policy perspective it was a success, at least when taking a broader view,
including the benefits of value added and jobs created in the servicing
of solar panels. The Danish wind deployment programme was success-
ful from both the sectoral and broader perspectives.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
7 Green industrial policy in the
European Union
7 .1 The status of green industrial policy in the EU
Table 1 on the next page provides an overview of the status of green
industrial policy in Europe. It illustrates how Europe remains far from
having a fully-fledged green industrial policy. Instead, there is a multi-
tude of green industrial policy initiatives, covering various policy com-
petences and different geographical layers (regional, national and EU).
These initiatives are generally not coordinated, and may even conflict.
This is a major issue, because significantly different green industrial
policies in different countries fragment the EU single market and could
undermine the level playing field. Strong EU action and coordination
is justified.

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
59 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
T able 1: Europe’s green industrial policy landscape
Innovation and
technology
Investments and
deployment Framework conditions
EU level
Framework
programmes
(Horizon
Europe);European
Innovation Council;
Missions; EU
Innovation Fund
(section 7.3.4)
EU budget and
Next Generation
EU; European
Investment Bank
(section 7.3.5);
Single market rules
(eg green public
procurement)
(section 7.3.7)
Coordination of
national green
industrial policies (eg
European Semester;
RIS3; IPCEIs)
(sections 7.3.1 and
7.3.3);Competition
policy; Environmental
standards; Climate
policy (eg carbon price,
renewable and energy
efficiency targets, clean
standards; section
7.3.6); Development
policy (7.3.8);
Monetary policy
National
level
Public R&D spending;
Intellectual property
protection law (at EU
level)
Government
investment
programmes,
incentives,
subsidies, public
procurement, clean
energy standards
Consistency of
macroeconomic
policies with industrial
strategy; Climate
targets; Environmental
standards;
Environmental taxation
Regional
level
Implementation
of public-private
partnership in place-
based setups (eg
university-industry
collaborations)
Smart
specialisation
strategies; Regional
Investment
budgets;
Implementation
of EU Cohesion
policies
Regulations (such
as buildings energy
efficiency)
Source: Bruegel.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
60 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
EU regions promote their own ‘smart specialisation’14 initiatives
in order to exploit their existing competitive advantages or to estab-
lish a competitive advantage in certain green technology sectors (eg
solar panels, batteries, wind turbines – or related components). The
EU regional policy framework incentivises regions to design and
implement research and innovation strategies for smart specialisation
through the so-called RIS3 programme15. Bergamini and Zachmann
(2020) showed that low-carbon products tend to be concentrated in
certain European regions, such as Rhône-Alpes in France, Dresden
and Stuttgart in Germany, and Lombardy in Italy. The question is
whether an alignment of these regional policies with national and EU
policy is possible, to exploit cross-regional synergies.
EU countries and regions often use different policy tools to push
their green industrial policies, ranging from public funding to sub-
sidies for the deployment of green technologies, from green public
procurement to clean energy standards.
At EU level, there are also several policies that can be used for
green industrial policy, including competition policy, climate policy,
research and innovation policy, EU public investments, EU single
market rules and development policy. The following sections review
in more detail the EU’s industrial policy approach and the main green
industrial policy tools deployed at EU level.
14 ‘Smart specialisation’ is an innovation policy concept that aims to boost regional
innovation, contributing to growth and prosperity by helping and enabling regions
to focus on their strengths. The concept is based on partnerships between business-
es, public entities and knowledge institutions.
15 The RIS3 (Regional Integrated Smart Specialisation Strategies) programme is an
EU Cohesion Policy tool that supports the creation of knowledge-based jobs and
growth in leading research and innovation hubs, and in less-developed and rural
regions.

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
61 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
7 .2 The European Commission’s ‘New industrial strategy for
Europe’ and its green aspect
In February 2019, France and Germany sparked a lively debate by
publishing ‘ A Franco-German manifesto for a European industrial
policy fit for the 21st century’ (BMWi, 2019). The manifesto was based
on a simple idea: at a time of increasing global competition, Europe
must pool its strengths to remain a global manufacturing and indus-
trial power. To do so, the manifesto called for a new approach to EU
industrial policy, notably based on a revision of EU competition rules
(including a revision of merger guidelines and relaxation of state-
aid rules), the implementation of protective measures to safeguard
European technologies and companies, and funding for disruptive
innovation.
In March 2020 – as COVID-19 started to bite in Europe – the
European Commission then published a plan for a ‘New industrial
strategy for Europe’ (European Commission, 2020a)16, a strategy
primarily aimed at “managing the green and digital transitions and
avoiding external dependencies in a new geopolitical context”, to use
the words of EU Internal Market Commissioner Thierry Breton. The
main underpinnings of the strategy were: i) the need to face emerging
global competitors and promote Europe’s ‘strategic autonomy’; ii) the
need to cope with a period of global economic uncertainty; and iii) the
need to face the twin ecological and digital transitions.
The strategy encompasses a number of areas, from intellectual
property to public procurement, but focuses mainly on competition
policy. In line with the Franco-German manifesto, the EU strategy calls
for EU competition rules to be reviewed, including a revisiting of state-
aid rules and a revision of EU instruments on foreign subsidies.
Being more general, the EU new industrial strategy is not a green
industrial strategy, but it does contain an explicit green aspect. The
16 It should be noted that the European Commission publishes industrial policy strat-
egies regularly. See European Commission (2010, 2012, 2014, 2017).

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
62 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
strategy actually never uses the expression ‘green industrial policy’ but
a set of green goals is specified: i) securing the supply of clean energy
and raw materials; ii) stepping up investment in green research, inno-
vation, deployment and up-to-date infrastructure; and iii) creating
lead markets in clean technologies through regulatory policies, public
procurement and competition policy.
The strategy outlines a set of green policy action areas: i) support
for zero-carbon steelmaking; ii) launch of a chemicals strategy for
sustainability; iii) launch of an energy efficiency ‘renovation wave’;
iv) creation of an EU Just Transition Fund; v) launch of a clean hydro-
gen strategy; and vi) development of a carbon border adjustment
mechanism.
The need for public-private partnerships and for coordination
between EU countries and regions is also explicitly recognised: “EU
institutions, Member States, regions, industry and all other relevant
players should work together to create lead markets in clean technolo-
gies and ensure our industry is a global frontrunner”. The strategy also
recognises the need for the EU to leverage the impact, size and integra-
tion of its single market.
All in all, the strategy appears more as a collection of more-or-less
novel energy, climate, innovation and social policy initiatives, rather
than as a truly coherent green industrial policy framework. On this
basis, the measures outlined in the strategy seem unlikely to create
the necessary framework to really turn the green transition into an
industrial opportunity for Europe. Some general elements that reflect
the ‘new industrial policy’ approach (such as the idea of pushing
industrial ecosystems encompassing all players operating in a value
chain; see the discussion of European Alliances in section 7.3.2) are
in the direction of green industrial policy, but much stronger action
is required to develop a workable, effective EU green industrial policy
(chapter 8).

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
63 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
7 .3 The EU’s main green industrial policy tools
7.3.1 Coordination of national green industrial policies: the European Semester
and smart specialisation programmes
There is a real need for better coordination of EU countries’ respective
national green industrial policies, in order to prevent distortions of
the EU single market and to enable synergies and economies of scale.
Strong EU coordination in the field is thus of paramount importance,
particularly if Europe wants to establish itself at the frontier of green
technology and green technology value added creation.
To coordinate the various green industrial policy initiatives under-
way at national and regional levels, the EU can leverage the national
reform programmes developed within the European Semester and
the regional RIS3 smart specialisation programme. In other words, the
broad EU green industrial policy framework should become embed-
ded in the member-state national reform programmes and regions’
smart specialisation programmes. Regular evaluation of these pro-
grammes should be done by the Commission, with evaluation helping
in the coordination of national industrial policy initiatives. This is
even more important today, as the European Semester becomes more
relevant than before given its central role in the governance of the EU
post-COVID-19 recovery plan, Next Generation EU.
7.3.2 European Alliances
Another EU instrument for green industrial policy is European
public-private partnerships or joint projects or alliances: European
Alliances, as done for batteries in 2017 (Box 1) and for clean hydrogen
in 2020 (Box 2).
Inspired by the Airbus consortium, these European Alliances are
aimed at creating European integrated, cross-border value chains in
technologies that are considered central for the future of the energy
transition. The goal is twofold: to seize the job, growth and investment
potential of new green technologies, and to prevent technological

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
64 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
dependence on the EU’s competitors.
In practice, these alliances are networks of the main industrial and
innovation players (including SMEs), regional authorities, national
authorities, the European Commission and the European Investment
Bank. Importantly, projects developed in this context can receive state
aid from EU countries (see section 7.3.3 on the Important Projects
of Common European Interest) and are therefore channels through
which the EU level can support national or regional green industrial
policy.
Box 1: The European Battery Alliance
Launched in 2017, the European Battery Alliance supports the development
of highly innovative and sustainable technologies for lithium-ion batteries
with longer lifetimes and shorter charging times, and that are safer and
more environmentally friendly than those currently available. The Alliance
promotes research and development across the batteries value chain, from
mining and processing of raw materials, production of advanced chemical
materials, design of battery cells and modules and their integration into
smart systems, and recycling and repurposing of used batteries (European
Commission, 2020b). More specifically, the Alliance focuses on:
1. Securing access to raw materials for batteries from resource-rich countries
outside the EU, facilitating access to European sources of raw materials, and
improving access to secondary raw materials obtained through recycling;
2. Supporting scaled-up European battery cell manufacturing and a full com-
petitive value chain in Europe. The Alliance brings key industry players and
national authorities together and works in partnership with EU countries and
the European Investment Bank to support large-scale, integrated (cross-bor-
der) manufacturing projects;
3. Strengthening industrial leadership through accelerated research and
innovation support to advanced (eg lithium-ion) and frontier (eg solid state)
technologies;

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
65 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
4. Developing and strengthening a highly skilled workforce along the whole val-
ue chain. This includes providing adequate training, re-skilling and upskilling,
and making Europe attractive for world-class experts in the field;
5. Supporting the sustainability of EU battery cell manufacturing industry with
the lowest environmental footprint possible. This entails setting require-
ments for safe and sustainable battery production in Europe;
6. Ensuring consistency with the broader EU regulatory and enabling frame-
work (including the clean energy strategy and mobility packages, and trade
policy).
In December 2019, the European Commission approved under EU state
aid rules an Important Project of Common European Interest jointly notified
by Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Poland and Sweden that will
support activities in the framework of the European Battery Alliance. This
public funding support amounts to approximately €3.2 billion, which is
expected to unlock an additional €5 billion in private investment. The com -
pletion of the projects supported by this public funding is planned for 2031
(European Commission, 2019a).
Box 2: The European Clean Hydrogen Alliance
Launched in 2020 as part of the ‘New industrial strategy for Europe’, the
European Clean Hydrogen Alliance aims to support the deployment of hydro -
gen technologies by 2030, bringing together renewable and low-carbon
hydrogen production, demand in industry, mobility and other sectors, and
hydrogen transmission and distribution. With this initiative, the EU seeks to
become a global leader in this nascent domain.
The Alliance aims to expand from 500 companies in 2020 to 1000 com -
panies in 2024. Its main target is a level of 6 gigawatt (GW) of clean hydro -
gen by 2024, and then 40 GW (EU) and 40 GW (non-EU) clean hydrogen by
2030 (European Commission, 2020c). This process is ongoing, and relevant
Important Project of Common European Interest have yet to be approved at
time of writing.

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
66 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
7.3.3 Important Projects of Common European Interest
Competition policy possibly represents the most potent green indus-
trial policy tool the EU has at its disposal, as it regulates interventions
in the market by EU countries. Unsurprisingly, competition policy was
at the centre of the pan-European discussions in 2019 around the need
for a new green and digital industrial policy for Europe.
A revisiting of EU competition rules should indeed be an important
part of developing an EU green industrial policy, as long as the appli-
cation of competition rules is not just aimed at a ‘negative coordina-
tion’ , in which all countries are permitted to intervene in the market as
they prefer. Instead there should be a ‘positive coordination’ , in which
countries can jointly act in certain green technologies, internalising
externalities and exploiting synergies.
An example of ‘positive coordination’ is the Important Projects
of Common European Interest (IPCEI), a tool introduced in 2014
(European Commission, 2014) in the context of a wider modernisation
of state-aid rules (European Commission, 2012). In essence, countries
can provide state aid to particular projects (ICPEI) if they meet the fol-
lowing conditions: i) contribute to strategic EU objectives; ii) involve
several EU countries; iii) involve private financing by the beneficiaries,
iv) generate positive spillover effects across the EU; and v) are highly
ambitious in terms of research and innovation. Both the European
Batteries Alliance and the European Clean Hydrogen Alliance (Boxes 1
and 2) are IPCEI, but more are in the pipeline.
7.3.4 Innovation policy
In general terms, Europe’s R&D spending in relation to GDP remains
lower than that of other major economies. In 2017, Europe’s private
and public sectors combined spent 2.06 percent of GDP on R&D,
compared to 2.07 percent in China, 2.8 percent in the US, 3.2 percent
in Japan and 4.5 percent in South Korea (Eurostat, 2020). Europe will
thus not meet the target it set itself in 2010 to spend 3 percent of GDP
on R&D by 2020. The EU business enterprise sector in particular needs

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
67 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
to invest more. Its share of total R&D expenditure is much lower in
Europe (64 percent) than in the US (72 percent), or China, Japan and
South Korea (almost 80 percent) (Eurostat, 2019).
Europe invests less in climate-related R&D than the United States
and China (Figure 5). In particular, Europe is not well-positioned
in the fast-growing technologies, ranging from electronics to digital
sectors, which will increasingly underpin clean energy, clean mobility
and smart buildings. To truly develop a green industrial policy, the EU
must push the business enterprise sector to scale-up its R&D invest-
ment in these sectors.
Figure 5: Investment In climate-related R&D, 2011-2018 (€ billions)
Source: Bruegel based on Bloomberg New Energy Finance.
Most of the public budget for clean technologies is at the level of
member states and regions. Nevertheless, the EU level can comple-
ment and leverage national and regional public investments as well as
private investments. The EU has at its disposal various tools to do so:
i) its research and innovation framework, called Horizon Europe for
the period 2021-2027, particularly with its Missions and the European
Innovation Council components; ii) the EU Innovation Fund, devel-
oped in the framework of the EU emissions trading system (ETS); iii)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
United States
China
EU

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
68 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
the European Institute of Innovation and Technology.
Of Horizon Europe’s budget of close to €100 billion, 35 percent
has been allocated to actions aimed at tackling climate change. More
generally there is a commitment to use the overall programme to help
achieving the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals and
to boost EU competitiveness and growth (European Commission,
2019b). Missions and the European Innovation Council are two novel
elements in Horizon Europe.
Three out of the five Missions relate to climate change (Box 3 on
the next page). These can be considered green industrial policy tools,
while also responding to the need to create institutionalised processes
of collaboration between institutions, civil society and the private
sector.
The European Innovation Council (EIC) was created in 2017 as a
pilot initiative within Horizon 2020 to fund the most talented radical
innovators and help their companies scale up and expand beyond
European borders. It was given a budget of around €3 billion for the
period 2018-2020, and will be fully implemented from 2021 under
Horizon Europe. The EIC could become an important green innova-
tion tool, with a strong mandate in the areas of clean energy, clean
mobility and smart buildings.
Box 3: Horizon Europe Missions
Inspired by the Apollo 11 mission to put a man on the moon, Horizon Europe
Missions aim to tackle some of the greatest global challenges, within certain
timeframes and budgets. The European Commission involves civil society in
the design, monitoring and assessment of the Missions. Five expert boards
were set up to define missions covering cancer, climate adaptation, healthy
oceans and seas, climate-neutral cities and soil health (for further informa -
tion, see https://ec.europa.eu/info/horizon-europe/missions-horizon-eu -
rope_en). In September 2020, the boards proposed the five more specifical -
ly-defined Missions:

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
69 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
1. Conquering Cancer: Mission Possible. Aimed at preventing more than 3 mil-
lion premature deaths by 2030.
2. A Climate Resilient Europe. Aimed at preparing Europe for climate disruptions
and accelerating the transformation to a climate resilient and just Europe by
2030.
3. Mission Starfish 2030: Restore our Ocean and Waters. Aimed at cleaning up
marine and fresh waters, restoring degraded ecosystems and habitats and
decarbonising the blue economy by 2030.
4. 100 Climate-Neutral Cities by 2030, by and for the citizens. Aimed at sup-
porting, promoting and showcasing 100 European cities in their systemic
transformations to climate neutrality by 2030, and turning these cities into
innovation hubs.
5. Caring for Soil is Caring for Life. Aimed at promoting good practices to make
at least 75 percent of all soils healthy for food, people, nature and climate by
2030.
Selected missions will start to be implemented in 2021 as part of Horizon
Europe.
The EIC is split into two branches: the EIC Accelerator and the EIC
Pathfinder. The Pathfinder supports breakthrough research projects
with grants of up to €4 million. The Accelerator supports SMEs that
have new ideas and the potential to scale up. This instrument has a
fund of up to €15 million in grants and equity. The EIC Accelerator
includes more than 5,500 firms17. Of these 922 (17 percent) are in
energy and 424 in transportation (8 percent). In 2020, the first call for
projects was opened by the Accelerator programme with a focus on
green objectives. The European Commission has identified 38 projects
17 This portfolio includes projects that received funding previously under the EU’s
SME Instrument. Approximately 71 percent of projects in the portfolio received a
€50,000 grant under the SME Instrument scheme.

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
70 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
through this call (European Commission, 2020d), which will receive
both a grant and equity investment. The Pathfinder branch at time of
writing covers 431 funded projects. Of these, 15 percent are in the areas
of energy and environment (Deep Tech Europe, 2020).
The EU Innovation Fund (IF), established under the EU ETS for the
period 2021-2030, will support the demonstration of low-carbon tech-
nologies and processes in energy-intensive industries, carbon capture
and utilisation and storage of carbon dioxide, innovative renewable
energy and energy storage technologies. The IF has been endowed
with at least 450 million carbon allowances, with a value at carbon
price levels at time of writing of about €11 billion. One approach to
further scale-up the IF would be to rapidly reduce the number of
allowances allocated for free under the ETS, and to use the resulting
revenues for the IF .
The European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT) is an
independent body created by the EU in 2008 to strengthen Europe’s
ability to innovate. The EIT is an integral part of the EU’s Framework
Programme for Research and Innovation. The Institute seeks to
promote innovation across Europe by helping business, education
and research organisations collaborate and work on pressing global
challenges. In particular, the EIT supports the development of pan-Eu-
ropean partnerships among companies, research labs and universities
– so-called EIT Innovation Communities (Knowledge and Innovation
Communities, KICs). Each KIC is dedicated to finding solutions to a
specific global challenge. Of the eight KICs at time of writing, at least
five are strongly relevant in the context of green industrial policy:
EIT Climate-KIC: Innovation for climate action; EIT InnoEnergy; EIT
Manufacturing; EIT Raw Materials; and EIT Urban Mobility. The addi-
tional KICs are: EIT Digital; EIT Food; and EIT Health.
7.3.5 Investment
Investment is a key part of a green industrial policy. The EU has
at its disposal two main green investment vehicles: its budget

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
71 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
(the Multiannual Financial Framework, MFF) and the European
Investment Bank (EIB).
The MFF covers spending areas from agriculture to cohesion,
from research and innovation to environment, from single market to
security and defence. EU leaders agreed in July 2020 to equip the EU
with a budget of €1074.3 billion for the period 2021-2027. They also
agreed on a post-COVID-19 recovery fund, known as Next Generation
EU (NGEU), amounting to €750 billion for the period 2021-202418. EU
leaders agreed an overall target for 30 percent of the total amount of
expenditure from the MFF and NGEU to be climate-related spending.
Furthermore, the European Commission also requires each national
post-COVID-19 recovery and resilience plan to dedicate a minimum
of 37 percent to climate expenditure. Consequently, in different forms
and with different timing, between 2021 and 2027 around €550 billion
in ‘fresh’ EU resources will be made available for the green transition.
This represents roughly a quarter of the estimated €300 billion per year
required to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 50 to 55 percent by
2030 compared to 1990. Given this order of magnitude, it is clear that
only the private sector is in a position to deliver the necessary invest-
ment for the green transition. However, if properly invested, the EU
funds have a major role to play, also by leveraging additional invest-
ment from governments and the private sector. This is particularly true
for the so-called ‘enabling investments’ , such as investing in smart elec-
tricity grids or electric-car charging infrastructure, which are neces-
sary to unlock private-sector investment in clean energy and mobility
18 The European Commission will be able to borrow up to €750 billion on the markets.
Capital raised on the financial markets will be repaid by 2058. The amounts avail-
able under NGEU will be mainly allocated to a Recovery and Resilience Facility of
€672.5 billion (of which €360 billion will be distributed as loans and €312.5 billion
as grants). Other resources will be top-ups of other MFF programmes, including
ReactEU (€47.5 billion), Horizon Europe (€5 billion), InvestEU (€5.6 billion), rural
development (€7.5 billion), the Just Transition Fund (€10 billion) and RescEU (€1.9
billion). Final sign-off of NGEU by EU leaders had not been completed at time of
writing.

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
72 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
solutions. It should be noted that the 30 percent climate spending
target should be handled carefully and could be overstated. Not all the
expenditures considered to qualify for this target will truly be green
investment, or even green spending, as a very diverse range of activi-
ties will be covered, ranging from agriculture subsidies to research and
innovation funding. This likely overstatement is also a result of the lack
of a clear methodology for accounting for climate-related expendi-
tures, a point reiterated by the European Court of Auditors (2020).
The development of a strong methodology and reporting system for
monitoring climate spending is thus necessary to ensure that climate
spending targets are translated into reality.
The EIB is the EU bank, and works, in cooperation with other EU
institutions, to promote the development of the EU and to support
EU policies within Europe and globally. In 2019, the EIB prioritised
climate action, with the aim of becoming Europe’s ‘climate bank’ . It
adopted a new energy lending policy and sustainability strategy based
on three pillars: i) end of financing for fossil fuel projects from the
end of 2021; ii) future financing focused on clean energy innovation,
energy efficiency and renewables; iii) €1 trillion of climate action and
environmentally-sustainable investment up to 2030 (EIB, 2019). It
should be noted that the volume of new lending disbursed by the EIB
has declined every year since 2015, and its total amount of outstand-
ing loans has fallen as well. The EIB has a margin of manoeuvre to act
more forcefully: its capital ratio has gone up in recent years and its
leverage has been dropping since 2012. Also, according to its statutes
(Article 16.5), it can lend as much as two and a half times its level of
subscribed capital (plus reserves and profits), which means its portfo-
lio of loans could reach around €600 billion, compared to about €450
billion today (Claeys et al, 2019).
Monetary policy also has an important role in unleashing the finan-
cial capital required for green investments. There are various potential
ways to do so, including focusing purchases of bonds on green bonds,
applying less-stringent risk-mitigation measures to green assets used

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
73 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
as collateral and imposing lower capital charges on green assets held
by banks. European Central Bank (ECB) president Christine Lagarde
has approved use of the ECB’s large asset purchase scheme to pursue
green objectives. She notably stated that the ECB “has to look at all
the business lines and the operations in which it is engaged in order
to tackle climate change, because at the end of the day, money talks”
(Financial Times, 2020). In an important speech in July 2020, ECB
board member Isabel Schnabel further developed this vision, identi-
fying three major avenues through which the ECB, and central banks
more generally, can contribute: i) through the ECB’s involvement in
defining rules and standards, and in promoting research for a better
understanding of the implications of climate change for financial mar-
kets and monetary policy; ii) by ensuring that the ECB is itself an envi-
ronmentally mindful and responsible investor, for instance when it
comes to its pension fund investments and other non-monetary policy
portfolios; iii) by taking climate considerations into account when
designing and implementing monetary policy operations. These issues
are at the centre of a vivid debate in monetary policy circles, with some
taking the view that central banks must keep market neutrality as their
benchmark in purchasing corporate bonds, and others taking the view
that central banks should respond to market failures and take into
account in their actions the risks that climate change poses to price
stability. The outcome of this debate and any eventual decision taken
in this field by the ECB will impact green investment significantly in
Europe and beyond.
Finally, the EU can become a standard-setter in the green bond
market. The global green, social and sustainability-related bond
market reached €270 billion in 2019, though the segment remains a
niche, representing about 5 percent of the total bond market. However,
it is rapidly expanding. Between 2018 and 2019, it grew by 50 percent,
and is expected to reach €338 billion in 2020. The EU is the biggest
player in the market with 45 percent of global issuance in 2019, and the
EU is where green bond issuance is increasing most, with a 74 percent

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
74 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
jump between 2018 and 2019. According to a 2019 survey (Climate
Bonds, 2019), 67 percent of respondents said there was a shortage of
supply of green bonds. Moreover, respondents specified that regula-
tion is the most effective way to scale-up the green bond market, with
the development of a clear taxonomy of what counts as green being a
key priority.
7.3.6 EU climate policy
All but one of the EU’s member countries have endorsed the objective
of EU-wide climate neutrality in 2050. This political commitment has
not yet been translated into an operational strategy.
EU climate policy is based on a framework that includes bloc-wide
targets and policy objectives for the period from 2021 to 2030. This
framework, which also represents the EU contribution to the Paris
Agreement, requires a 40 percent greenhouse gas emissions reduction
target by 2030 (compared to 1990 levels), as along with renewable
energy and energy efficiency targets.
However, the European Commission in September 2020 issued a
plan to tighten the emissions reduction target to at least 55 percent
by 2030 compared to 1990. The December 2020 European Council
approved this target. The EU will now have to revise its climate and
energy legislation to accommodate it.
One of the main EU policy tools is the emissions trading system
(ETS), which covers emissions from the power sector, industry and
intra-EU flights (overall amounting to about 40 percent of total EU
emissions). Non-ETS sectors including transport, buildings and
agriculture are dealt by the Effort Sharing Regulation (ESR, Regulation
(EU) 2018/842), which requires EU countries to pay fines if they fail to
reduce emissions by stated amounts.
Increasing the EU carbon price can be achieved by reducing the
number of allowances put on the market by member states. This
should result in increased revenues for EU countries because the
price effect should largely exceed the volume effect. An increase in the

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
75 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
carbon price from €25 /metric tonne currently to around €50 /tonne
could be engineered by more rapidly tightening the cap, or number of
allowances that can be issued to the market. Reform of the ETS is also
increasingly seen as a way of raising resources so the EU can repay the
€750 billion it will borrow for its coronavirus recovery fund (section
7.5). Reforming the ETS will involve major challenges including how
to cut the number of carbon allowances given out for free (a concern
for industry), how to deal with transport (inclusion in the ETS versus
national taxation) and how to use ETS revenues (EU own resources
versus national green investments and mitigation of the distributional
effects of climate policy).
If Europe puts in place a stringent climate policy while other parts
of the world do not, there is a risk that emissions-intensive companies
might leave the EU with its high emission prices, and relocate to places
with significantly lower or no emission prices. This is called leakage.
This issue is set to become more relevant as the EU pursues a stricter
climate policy, but it is hard to gauge exactly how significant an issue
carbon leakage is. It has not represented a substantial issue for EU
industry under the ETS (Claeys et al, 2019). Furthermore, the carbon
price is one element among many others in an industrial strategy.
Other considerations include energy prices, logistics, territorial legacy
and innovation ecosystems.
In the ETS, carbon leakage is dealt with by giving emission allow-
ances for free to companies in specific sectors. The allocation mech-
anism for free allowances is based on production benchmarks to
ensure that companies have an incentive to reduce emissions but not
to reduce production in the EU. But the granting of free allowances
has led to massive windfall profits for some companies (they received
allowances for free but included their nominal cost in the price of their
products). It is not desirable to continue with this method to deal with
carbon leakage.
The European Commission has said it will introduce an alterna-
tive system, a carbon border adjustment mechanism, with a proposal

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
76 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
promised in 2021. A carbon border mechanism would have two aims:
i) preventing carbon leakage by ensuring that all goods consumed
in the EU, whether imported or produced domestically, are treated
the same; ii) pushing other countries to also decarbonise. This would
be achieved by putting a tax or tariff on the emissions embedded in
imported products – or by requiring importers to buy ETS allowances
based on what they know the exporters from third countries have
emitted (Wolff, 2019). In addition, EU exporters might reclaim the cost
of the emissions embedded in their products to ensure that European
companies are not at a competitive disadvantage when selling abroad.
It should be noted that while introducing such a mechanism is
possible, it would be a significant challenge for a number of reasons,
including the technical design (for example, how to calculate the
carbon content of imported goods) and the geopolitical repercussions,
with some countries likely to perceive the measure as protectionist.
7.3.7 Single market rules: green public procurement
The new industrial strategy adopted by the European Commission in
March 2020 rightly points to the fact that “by providing a common reg-
ulatory space and scale, the single market is the driver of competitive-
ness and facilitates the integration of companies of all sizes in European
and global value chains” (European Commission, 2020a). The EU has
two main tools to create the conditions for innovative, green, European
companies to flourish in a receptive market.
The first, more general, tool is the completion of the EU single
market. It is vital to develop a solid regulatory framework, focused
on ensuring competition and access to a truly single market,
with common or mutually-recognised environmental standards.
Fragmentation in environmental standards, energy taxation and
support measures for clean technologies prevent innovative European
cleantech companies from scaling up in the way that their US and
Chinese competitors do on their domestic markets. Coordination of
national policies is key to avoid fragmentation of the EU single market:

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
77 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
“failing to coordinate would hamper the full exploitation of the size
of the EU market and the related economies of scale” (Altomonte and
Veugelers, 2019).
The second, more specific, tool is public procurement. In the EU,
this is estimated to amount to about 16 percent of GDP (European
Commission, 2018). Given its scale, public procurement represents a
unique tool to foster innovation. For example, with the revised Clean
Vehicles Directive ((EU) 2019/1161), the EU introduced national
targets for public procurement of electric and low-emission buses and
other vehicles. Such measures are important in boosting demand and
promoting further deployment of low- and zero-emission vehicles.
According to OpenTender data, in 2018 European countries procured
transport equipment (including passenger cars, vans, buses and
trains) for a total value of almost €19 billion. Assuming that most of
this public procurement is devoted to motor vehicles, it is interesting
to compare this figure with EU’s electric car market, estimated in the
same year at €13 billion19. This illustrates the order of magnitude of the
role EU public procurement could play in creating a lead market for
clean vehicles. Requiring clean mobility solutions in public procure-
ment tenders can also support the transformation of the European
automotive industry and could be a case of EU green industrial policy
working.
Similar provisions could be introduced in the construction sector,
which stands out as a sector in which European governments are
important buyers, with about €100 billion in purchases per year. Such
measures would contribute to the refurbishment and improvement of
the building stock in the EU, which plays a central role in decarbon-
isation strategies, as the building sector is one of the largest energy
19 Based on European Automobile Manufacturers’ Association data, we estimate that
the value of motor vehicles registered in the EU in 2019 was €430 billion. Consider-
ing that only 3 percent of total car registrations in 2019 related to electric cars, we
then estimate the value of the electric cars sold in the EU in 2019 to be in the order
of magnitude of €13 billion.

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
78 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
consumers in Europe, responsible for more than one third of the EU’s
emissions. Furthermore, such measures could represent a major
opportunity to create jobs and boost the construction sector, which is
largely dominated by local businesses, while strengthening Europe’s
industrial competitiveness.
These two complementary tools – common environmental stand-
ards and green public procurement – can foster the emergence of
the necessary ecosystem that will enable innovative green European
companies to grow in a receptive single market.
7.3.8 Development policy
The EU produces less than 10 percent of global greenhouse gas
emissions. This implies that to have an impact on global temperature
levels, the EU needs to push its green objectives beyond its borders –
also to achieve green industrial policy objectives. An important step
in this direction was the European Commission’s proposal in 2018
for a Neighbourhood, Development and International Cooperation
Instrument (NDICI, COM (2018) 460). Starting in 2021, NDICI will
bring together EU funding for its external policies in a single instru-
ment. A quarter of the NDICI budget would be earmarked for climate
action. With this tool the EU can increase its visibility and leverage
in developing countries, notably in the promotion of green projects.
Another important step would be to further consolidate and stream-
line EU development finance and climate activities outside Europe,
which are today divided between the European Commission, the EIB,
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and EU
countries.

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
8 Conclusions and policy
recommendations
As this Blueprint illustrates, green industrial policy is complex. For the
European Union, we recommend development of a green industrial
policy based on eight principles, as derived from the literature and
case studies:
1. Strong governance
2. Tackling geographical fragmentation
3. Managing long-term expectations with a solid EU decarbonisation
trajectory
4. Development of sound public-private partnerships
5. Stimulating EU green investment
6. Stimulating EU green science and innovation
7. A global approach
8. Transparent communication
8.1 Strong governance
Given the complexities of both green industrial policy and the EU
as policy-making machinery, strong governance is a prerequisite for
effective EU green industrial policy. It is crucial for efficient coor-
dination of different types of stakeholders and for management of
different policy governance areas, different instruments and different
projects. First, the various partners must be incentivised with a set of
balanced, clear, credible and time-consistent commitments. Second,
it is necessary to set clear and realistic intermediate goals throughout

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
the process to promote more risk taking. Third, flexible policy design
is required to cope with the uncertainties of new green technologies,
with clear intermediate targets and milestones that can be monitored
in order to strengthen policy measures over time. Fourth, it is key to
ensure accountability, with incentives and penalties where needed.
Implementing all this requires strong governance, which should
be based on three principles: competence, ownership and political
independence. This could be provided through a governance body
that is politically independent but still fully accountable. This will
not be straightforward to operationalise within the EU institutional
environment.
A green industrial policy governance body should be accommo-
dated within the structure of the European Commission. It should ulti-
mately be answerable to the College of Commissioners, chaired by the
Commission president. In particular, the Executive Vice President for
the European Green Deal (currently Frans Timmermans, who is also
responsible for the climate action portfolio) and the Internal Market
Commissioner (which includes industrial policy; the current com-
missioner is Thierry Breton) should be closely connected to this GIP
body. Other commissioners with policy tools that need to be activated
for green industrial policy also need to be closely connected. These
include the energy, transport, cohesion and reform, budget, trade,
innovation and competition policy portfolios. Of these, the last two are
perhaps the most potent instruments at EU level to leverage EU green
industrial policy into private investment and national and regional
public investment.
Ensuring the coordination and cooperation of multiple government
players, each responsible for aspects of policy needed for green indus-
trial policy, and ensuring that they will work together, requires a ‘czar’
or designated leader or figurehead. This person should be selected
externally, based on their skills, appointed by, and responsible to,
the Commission president, and given political independence and
broad powers to coordinate and run dedicated green industrial policy

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====
81 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
instruments, such as Green Missions and IPCEIs. This czar would be
able to select a dedicated EU green industrial policy unit and advisory
board, with external experts from industry, academia and civil society.
The czar leader should be given clear and realistic targets, and mile-
stones, for which (s)he can be held accountable, and which also allow
for risk-taking and failures.
The advantages of this approach include the ability to find new
creative solutions, go outside formal channels, and an ability to involve
multiple different players in big-issue decision-making. These advan-
tages would suit very well the governance challenge presented by EU
green industrial policy.
8.2 T ackling geographical fragmentation
European green industrial policies remain highly fragmented, with
a vast number of initiatives being undertaken at EU, national and
regional levels with little to no coordination. Significantly different
green industrial policies in different countries could undermine the
level playing field in Europe – and thereby fragment the EU single
market. Thus strong EU coordination is needed. Strong coordina-
tion at EU level also is of paramount importance to benefit from
synergies from various local policy initiatives. Fragmentation exists
in local industrial policy initiatives to support green technologies,
and in local climate-change policy initiatives related to, for example,
environmental standards or energy taxation. A fragmented EU single
market for clean technologies and markets holds back innovative
European cleantech companies from scaling up in the way that their
US and Chinese competitors do on their domestic markets. It is vital to
develop a solid regulatory framework, ensuring access to a truly single,
competitive EU market with common environmental standards. The
current fragmentation ultimately hampers the full exploitation of the
size of the EU market and the related economies of scale.
The EU level can tackle geographical fragmentation of green
industrial policy in three ways: through state aid control, the European

===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
82 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
Semester and the regional RIS3 smart specialisation programme.
The European Commission should regularly evaluate national and
regional green industrial policy initiatives, which will create the space
for coordination of the various ongoing policy initiatives. One way to
coordinate national and regional green industrial policies would be for
the EU to leverage the national reform programmes developed within
the European Semester and RIS3 regional specialisation programmes
(Altomonte and Veugelers, 2019). The broad EU green industrial
policy framework should become embedded in member state national
reform programmes and regional smart specialisation programmes.
The EU should replicate the successful experience of the governance of
state aid, under which member states retain responsibility for design-
ing measures, but it is ultimately up to the European Commission to
have the final say on whether these measures can proceed.
8.3 Managing long-term expectations with a solid EU
decarbonisation trajectory
Climate targets are an important green industrial policy tool, as they
give a clear direction to companies and investors in terms of the EU’s
decarbonisation trajectory. Setting strong climate targets for tomor-
row, if backed-up by legislation to effectively turn them into practice,
can have a major influence over the behaviour of the private sector
already today.
The EU’s pledge to reach climate neutrality by 2050 and its target of
reducing emissions by at least 55 percent by 2030 compared to 1990
send a clear signal to market players about the irreversibility of the
EU’s climate trajectory. But to be credible, these targets need to be
supported by detailed legislation. After the approval of the stricter 2030
climate target, the EU will have in 2021 to issue a wide range of new
climate and energy proposals for legislation that will align its tools with
the target. The emissions trading system (ETS), the effort sharing reg-
ulation (ESR) for non-ETS emissions and the energy taxation directive
will be reformed. Major challenges will include how to cut the number

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
83 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
of ETS allowances given out for free (a concern for industry), how to
deal with transport (inclusion in the ETS versus national taxation),
how to use ETS revenues (EU own resources versus national green
investments and mitigation of the distributional effects of climate
policy), and how to design a functional carbon border adjustment
mechanism. EU legislation on renewable energy and energy efficiency
will also need a substantial upgrade. EU 2030 targets for renewable
energy and energy efficiency at time of writing (respectively, a 32 per-
cent share of final energy consumption, and a 32.5 percent improve-
ment against a baseline) will only deliver greenhouse gas emissions
reductions of 45 percent by 2030. The EU must find ways for its coun-
tries to deliver on higher targets in the absence of nationally binding
commitments, and for private investment to be really mobilised (one
example is simplification of permitting procedures for renewables).
Other important areas of EU legislation, including transport and agri-
culture, will have to be revised to push the decarbonisation of these
sectors.
Delivery of this legislative framework will be critical for the devel-
opment of a strong EU green industrial policy. It should be noted that
the difference in time horizons between policy planning and political
cycles makes achieving coherent and sustained green industrial policy
efforts extremely challenging. In this sense, clear climate targets –
particularly if enshrined into law – also protect green industrial policy
from significant uncertainty.
8.4 Development of sound public-private partnerships
To develop a successful green industrial policy, the EU has to be
embedded with the private sector. Public-private partnerships are not
only about activating co-funding, but are also ways to access skills,
knowledge and information. This requires a high degree of interaction
between the public and private sectors, and collaboration should be
iterative since the solutions are not assumed as known, but only as
discoverable. The literature and case studies show that the design of

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
84 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
public-private partnerships can take different forms. Deliberation
councils, investment advisory councils, round tables, public-private
venture funds and smart development banks are all examples of ways
in which governments can make operational the principles described
above.
Our recommendations on EU green industrial policy governance
include a strong element of private embeddedness. In parallel, we
recommend expanding the use of the European Alliances format,
which has already been employed since 2017 for batteries and since
2020 for clean hydrogen. These Alliances are important public-private
collaborations at EU level and should become key tools for EU green
industrial policy. Important Projects of Common European Interest
(IPCEI) are a core element of European Alliances. A further broader
and deeper application of IPCEI should be considered, to make the
best of this tool.
The principles for a new green industrial policy should serve as
guidelines when selecting and governing new alliances. Alliances
should focus on addressing mega-problems covering the whole value
chains of all relevant clean markets, rather than solving more discrete
problems. The Hydrogen Alliance is already broader than the quite
narrow Battery Alliance. EU green industrial policy should also employ
a balanced mix of alliances involving already-connected value chains
that need to be scaled-up and very early-stage emerging value chains
with still-to-be-connected stakeholders, even if the latter are higher
risk choices that will result in higher failure rates.
To ensure a competitive environment in which innovation is stim-
ulated in the new clean markets created and supported by the EU’s
green industrial policy, and to avoid rent seeking, the EU should use its
competition policy toolbox, while ensuring that the competition policy
arm of the Commission has sufficient dedicated expertise on clean
technologies and markets.

===== PDF_PAGE 89 =====
85 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
8.5 Stimulating EU green investment
EU green investment will be important to realise the green transition,
including by mobilising funds from the national budgets of EU coun-
tries and from the private sector. The EU decision to devote 30 percent
of its budget for 2021-2027 to climate action is good news. But this goal
should be handled carefully. First, it will be important to ensure that
the remaining spending does not go against the green targets, requir-
ing a mainstream green monitoring of the EU budget and of Next
Generation EU funding. Second, with current EU accounting rules,
there is a risk the climate-related spending will be overstated. Not all
these expenditures can be considered green investment, or even green
spending, as they are very diverse, ranging from agricultural subsi-
dies to research and innovation funding. For all these reasons, the EU
should develop a solid methodology for monitoring climate spend-
ing, and to report on it annually (Claeys and Tagliapietra, 2020). This
will be important to ensure that the 30 percent target is realistically
reflected in spending choices – and thus contributes to the scaling-up
of the investment component of EU green industrial policy.
The EIB should be allowed to do more on climate action. The EIB
currently benefits from very favourable rates for borrowing from
capital markets and it would be a shame not to use this opportunity
to finance worthwhile projects that can contribute to the fight against
climate change. If EU countries are (unduly) worried about the EIB’s
rating, a capital increase should be carried out. The European Council
of July 2020 invited the EIB Board of Governors to review exactly this
issue. This represents an important opportunity to take a step towards
making the EIB into Europe’s true ‘climate bank’ . The EIB should also
be supported in further developing its role as intermediary to address
network and information imperfections, in order to become a true
‘smart climate development bank’ .
The European Central Bank can help unleash the finances required
for the green transition by using its operations – such as its large asset
purchase scheme – to pursue green objectives.

===== PDF_PAGE 90 =====
86 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
8.6 Stimulating EU green science and innovation
The EU needs to invest more in green innovation. It currently invests
less in climate-related R&D than the United States and China. To
truly develop a green industrial policy, the EU must leverage its
public resources and toolkit to scale-up national and regional public
resources that go into climate innovation, but especially private
investment in climate innovation. The decision to earmark 35 percent
of the Horizon Europe budget to climate innovation is welcome, but,
as in the case of green budget spending, it will be necessary to ensure
that the remaining 65 percent does not end up working against green
targets.
It should be emphasised that fostering green innovation is not only
about availability of public finance resources. It is also about allocating
public finance to the best areas and projects, meaning those with the
largest socio-economic and climate returns that could not have been
reached without public support. In this respect, particular emphasis
should be placed on high-risk, early stage technologies with poten-
tial for general-purpose breakthroughs. Green innovation requires a
significant dose of risk-taking by public institutions, and an acceptance
that there will be failures. New support models that provide numerous
and still sizeable grants in a relatively non-bureaucratic way are crucial
to unleash frontier ideas. Green industrial policymaking should avoid
deploying money only to safe bets with only average returns. In this
sense, a new green industrial policy should be a portfolio, with some
initiatives within the portfolio failing along the way. A portfolio with
no failures entails no risks. In the EU, this is the spirit of the European
Innovation Council (EIC, section 7.3.4), and also of the well-estab-
lished European Research Council (ERC). Although both programmes
are applicant-driven and directed at supporting frontier science and
ideas, without any targeted calls, many ERC and EIC bottom-up pro-
posals address climate change challenges and should thus be seen as
an integral part of green industrial policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 91 =====
87 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
Within Horizon Europe, new climate change missions should be
considered beyond the current three (box 3 in chapter 7). The Horizon
Europe missions should be a key component of EU green industrial
policy toolbox because of their direct relevance, and also because they
put into practise the new industrial policy vision of an institutionalised
process of collaboration between institutions, the private sector and
civil society. Each mission has a Mission Board of 15 high-level experts
and an Assembly that brings together a larger number of experts from
academia, industry, civil society, finance and end-users. This innova-
tive and interactive model of policy design should be further devel-
oped. But the missions should also have clearer targets, incentives
and milestones to promote more risk taking, to monitor and ensure
commitment and to avoid rent seeking.
8.7 A global approach
Europe produces less than 10 percent of global greenhouse gas
emissions. To really make a difference for the climate, the European
Green Deal must go beyond Europe’s borders. Europe should thus fill
the current vacuum in global leadership, and initiate and build global
partnerships with other countries.
In connection with developing countries, we recommend that
Europe should leverage its external development policy and make
it into a vehicle for global sustainability. In 2019, the Wieser Group
(Council of the European Union, 2019) proposed to create a European
Climate and Sustainable Development Bank to fix the current system
of European multilateral finance, which is characterised by overlaps,
gaps and inefficiencies. The Group outlined three options for creating
a European Climate and Sustainable Development Bank: i) building
on the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the
external financing activities of the EIB; ii) creating a new, well-cap-
italised, institution with mixed ownership (including the European
Commission, EIB, EBRD, EU countries and others); iii) creating it as an
EIB subsidiary.

===== PDF_PAGE 92 =====
88 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
A European Climate and Sustainable Development Bank could
indeed become an important tool for exporting the European Green
Deal, and thus a key tool of EU green industrial policy. Such an
approach would first help meet the EU’s climate finance obligations
and thus achieve the conditional emission-reduction commitments
proposed by most developing countries under the Paris Agreement.
Second, it would enable EU industry to enter new, rapidly growing
markets, a win for EU green industrial policy. Third, it would help
economic development in the EU’s partner countries, providing an
invaluable foreign policy dividend for the EU.
A second-best, and perhaps more realistic, solution would be to
establish a one-stop-shop through which all EU (and eventually also
national) funding for development is channelled or at least described
in a consistent manner. It would be a platform to make it easier for
third parties to access these European development funds, and to pro-
vide a clear overview about who is doing what in Europe in the field.
8.8 Communicate transparently
Green industrial policy, like any form of industrial policy, brings with
it the risk of political capture, and all the risks that generally lie at the
intersection of the public and the private sectors. Transparency is
critical throughout the whole process of green industrial policy devel-
opment, and should include roadmaps and clear government com-
munication. A process of open policy dialogue on the part of the EU
should ensure a high degree of accountability, which is critical to the
success or failure of green industrial policy. Getting citizens on board
through transparent communication will provide more involvement,
legitimacy stability to green industrial policy initiatives.

===== PDF_PAGE 93 =====
References
Aghion, P ., A. Dechezleprêtre, D. Hemous,
R. Martin and J. van Reenen (2016)
‘Carbon taxes, path dependency, and
directed technical change: Evidence from
the auto industry’ , Journal of Political
Economy, 124(1): 1-51
Aghion, P ., C. Hepburn, A. Teytelboym
and D. Zenghelis (2014) ‘Path
dependence, innovation and the
economics of climate change’ , Policy
Paper 11/2014, Centre for Climate
Change Economics and Policy,
available at https://www.lse.ac.uk/
granthaminstitute/publication/path-
dependence-innovation-and-the-
economics-of-climate-change/
Aghion, P ., J. Boulanger and E. Cohen
(2011) ‘Rethinking industrial policy’ ,
Policy Brief 2011/04, Bruegel, available
at https://www.bruegel.org/2011/06/
rethinking-industrial-policy/
Aghion, P ., J. Cai, M. Dewatripont, L.
Du, A. Harrison and P . Legros (2015)
‘Industrial policy and competition’ ,
American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 7(4): 1-32
Aiginger, K. and D. Rodrik (2020) ‘Rebirth
of Industrial Policy and an Agenda for the
Twenty-First Century’ , Journal of Industry,
Competition and Trade 20: 189-207
Aldy, J. and R. Stavins (2011) ‘The Promise
and Problems of Pricing Carbon: Theory
and Experience’ , National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper 17569
Altenburg T ., C. Assmann, D. Rodrik, E.
Padilla, S. Ambec, M. Esposito … and S.
Averous Monnery (2017) ‘Green industrial
policy: Concept, policies, country
experiences’ , Report, UN Environment
Programme, available at https://www.
unenvironment.org/resources/report/
green-industrial-policy-concept-policies-
country-experiences
Altenburg T ., O. Johnson and H. Schmitz
(2015) ‘Rent management – The Heart
of Green Industrial Policy’ , New Political
Economy 20(6): 812-831
Altenburg, T . and D. Rodrik (2017)
‘Green industrial policy: Accelerating
structural change towards wealthy green
economies’ , Green Industrial Policy
Altomonte, C. and R. Veugelers
(2019) ‘Memo to the Commissioner
responsible for Single Market and
Industry’ , in M. Demertzis and G. Wolff
(eds) Braver, greener, fairer: Memos to
the EU leadership 2019-2024, Bruegel,
available at https://bruegel.org/2019/09/
memos-2019/
Ambroziak, A.A (2017) The New Industrial
Policy of the European Union, Springer
Andreoni, A. and H.J. Chang (2019) ‘The
political economy of industrial policy:
Structural interdependencies, policy
alignment and conflict management’ ,
Structural Change and Economic
Dynamics 48: 136-150

===== PDF_PAGE 94 =====
90 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
Baldwin, R. (1969) ‘The Case against
Infant-Industry Tariff Protection’ , Journal
of Political Economy 77: 295-305
Barbieri, N., A. Marzucchi and U. Rizzo
(2020) ‘Knowledge sources and impacts
on subsequent inventions: Do green
technologies differ from non-green ones?’
Research Policy 49(2): 103901
Bergamini, E. and G. Zachmann (2020)
‘Understanding the European Union’s
regional potential in low-carbon
technologies, Working Paper 07/2020,
Bruegel
Bowles, S. and W. Carlin (2020) ‘Shrinking
capitalism’ , American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceedings 110: 372-377
BMWi (2019) ‘ A Franco-German
Manifesto for a European industrial
policy fit for the 21st Century‘ ,
Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und
Energie, available at https://www.bmwi.
de/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/F/franco-
german-manifesto-for-a-european-
industrial-policy.pdf
Chang, H.J. (2019) ‘Economics for
People’ , Institute for the New Economic
Thinking, available at https://www.
ineteconomics.org/perspectives/videos/
economics-for-people
Cherif, R. and F . Hasanov (2019) ‘The
Return of the Policy That Shall Not Be
Named: Principles of Industrial Policy’ ,
Working Paper 19/74, International
Monetary Fund
Claeys, G., S. Tagliapietra and G.
Zachmann (2019) ‘How to make the
European Green Deal work?’ Policy
Contribution 2019/13, Bruegel, available
at https://www.bruegel.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/11/PC-13_2019-151119.pdf
Claeys, G. and S. Tagliapietra (2020) ‘Is
the EU Council agreement aligned with
the Green Deal ambitions?’ Bruegel
Blog, 23 July, available at https://www.
bruegel.org/2020/07/is-the-eu-council-
agreement-aligned-with-the-green-deal-
ambitions/
Climate Bonds (2019) Green Bond
European Investor Survey 2019, available
at https://www.climatebonds.net/
resources/reports/green-bond-european-
investor-survey-2019
Coady D., I. Parry, N. Le and B. Shang
(2019) ‘Global Fossil Fuel Subsidies
Remain Large: An Update Based on
Country-Level Estimates’ , Working Paper
89, International Monetary Fund (IMF),
available at https://www.imf.org/en/
Publications/WP/Issues/2019/05/02/
Global-Fossil-Fuel-Subsidies-Remain-
Large-An-Update-Based-on-Country-
Level-Estimates-46509
Cook, J. and C. Y.C. Lin Lawell (2020)
‘Wind turbine shutdowns and upgrades
in Denmark: Timing decisions and the
impact of government policy’ , The Energy
Journal 41(3)

===== PDF_PAGE 95 =====
91 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
Council of the European Union (2019)
‘Europe in the world: The future of the
European financial architecture for
development’ , available at https://www.
consilium.europa.eu/media/40967/efad-
report_final.pdf
Deep Tech Europe (2020) European
Innovation Council Pilot: Impact Report
2020, Publications Office of the European
Union, Luxembourg, available at https://
ec.europa.eu/research/eic/pdf/ec_rtd_
eic-vision-roadmap-impact.pdf
Edenhofer O., K. Seyboth, F . Creutzig and
S. Schlömer (2013) ‘On the Sustainability
of Renewable Energy Sources’ , Annual
Review of Environment and Resources 38:
169-200
El-Shagi, M., C. Michelsen and S.
Rosenschon (2014) ‘Regulation,
innovation and technology diffusion:
Evidence from building energy efficiency
standards in Germany’ , DIW Berlin
German Institute for Economic Research
Discussion Paper No. 1371
European Commission (2012) ‘EU State
Aid Modernisation (SAM)’ , COM (2012)
209
European Commission (2014) ‘Criteria for
the analysis of the compatibility with the
internal market of State aid to promote
the execution of important projects of
common European interest’ , Official
journal of the European Union 2014/C
188/02
European Commission (2018) ‘ A Clean
Planet for all A European strategic
long-term vision for a prosperous,
modern, competitive and climate neutral
economy, COM (2018) 773 final
European Commission (2019a) ‘State aid:
Commission approves €3.2 billion public
support by seven Member States for a
pan-European research and innovation
project in all segments of the battery value
chain’ , available at https://ec.europa.
eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/
ip_19_6705
European Commission (2019b) ‘Horizon
Europe the next EU research and
innovation investment programme
(2021-2027)’ , available at https://
ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/
research_and_innovation/strategy_on_
research_and_innovation/presentations/
horizon_europe_en_investing_to_shape_
our_future.pdf
European Commission (2020a) ‘Making
Europe’s business future-ready: A
new Industrial Strategy for a global,
competitive, green and digital Europe’ ,
available at https://ec.europa.eu/
commission/presscorner/detail/en/
IP_20_416
European Commission (2020b)
‘European Battery alliance’ , available at
https://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/
policy/european-battery-alliance_fi
European Commission (2020c) ‘European
Clean Hydrogen Alliance’ , available at
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/
presscorner/detail/en/FS_20_1297

===== PDF_PAGE 96 =====
92 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
European Commission (2020d)
‘Enhanced European Innovation
Council (EIC) pilot: investment
opportunities’ , available at https://
ec.europa.eu/research/eic/index.
cfm?pg=investing#about
EIB (2019) ‘EU Bank launches ambitious
new climate strategy and Energy Lending
Policy’ , European Investment Bank,
available at https://www.eib.org/en/
press/all/2019-313-eu-bank-launches-
ambitious-new-climate-strategy-and-
energy-lending-policy
Evans, P . (1995) Embedded autonomy:
States and industrial transformation,
Princeton University Press, Princeton
Fernández-Arias E., R. Hausmann, and
U. Panizza (2020) ‘Smart Development
Banks’ , Journal of Industry Competition
and Trade 20(2): 395-420
Financial Times (2020) ‘Lagarde
puts green policy top of agenda in
ECB bond buying’ , July 8, available
at https://www.ft.com/content/
f776ea60-2b84-4b72-9765-2c084bff6e32
Foreman-Peck, J. (2006) ‘Industrial policy
in Europe in the 20th century’ , EIB papers
11(1): 36-62
Ghisetti, C., A. Marzucchi and S.
Montresor (2015) ‘The Open Eco-
innovation Mode. An Empirical
Investigation of Eleven European
Countries’ Research Policy 44(5):
1080-1093
Goldstein, A.P . and V . Narayanamurti
(2018) ‘Simultaneous Pursuit of Discovery
and Invention in the US Department of
Energy’ , Research Policy 47(8): 1505–1512
Gruber, H. (2017) ‘Innovation, skills and
investment: a digital industrial policy for
Europe’ , Economia e Politica Industriale
44: 327–343
Hallegatte, S., M. Fay and A. Vogt-Schilb
(2013) ‘Green Industrial Policies: When
and How’ , Policy Research Working
Paper 6677, The World Bank, available at
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
handle/10986/16892
Hardin, G. (1968) ‘The Tragedy of the
Commons’ , Science 162(3859): 1243-1248
Haskel, J. and S. Westlake (2018)
Capitalism without capital, Princeton
University Press, Princeton
Hvelplund, F . (2005) Handbook of
renewable energies in the European
Union, Peter Lang, Frankfurt
Kemp, R. (2010) ‘The Dutch energy
transition approach’ , International
Economics and Economic Policy 7:
291-316
Kemp, R. and B. Never (2017) ‘Green
transition, industrial policy, and
economic development’ , Oxford Review of
Economic Policy 33(1): 66-84
Klaassen, G., A. Miketa, K. Larsen and T .
Sundqvist (2005) ‘The impact of R&D on
innovation for wind energy in Denmark,
Germany and the United Kingdom’ ,
Ecological Economics 54(2-3): 227-240

===== PDF_PAGE 97 =====
93 | A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
Lane, N. (2019) ‘Manufacturing
revolutions: Industrial policy and
industrialization in South Korea’ ,
Working paper, Institute for International
Economic Studies
Lütkenhorst, W., T . Altenburg, A. Pegels
and G. Vidican (2014) ‘Green industrial
policy: Managing transformation under
uncertainty’ , Discussion Paper 28,
Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik
Mazzucato, M. (2011) ‘The
entrepreneurial state’ , Soundings 49:
131-142
Mazzucato, M. (2018) Mission-oriented
research & innovation in the European
Union, Publications Office of the
European Union, Luxembourg, available
at https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-
detail/-/publication/5b2811d1-
16be-11e8-9253-01aa75ed71a1/
language-en
Mazzucato, M. and C.C. Penna (2016)
‘Beyond market failures: The market
creating and shaping roles of state
investment banks’ , Journal of Economic
Policy Reform 19(4): 305-326
Mendonça, M. and S. Lacey (2009)
‘Stability, participation and transparency
in renewable energy policy: Lessons from
Denmark and the United States’ , Policy
and Society 27(4): 379-398
Noland, M. and H. Pack (2003) Industrial
Policy in an Era of Globalization:
Lessons from Asia, Peterson Institute for
International Economics, Washington DC
Owen, G. (2012) ‘Industrial policy in
Europe since the Second World War:
what has been learnt?’ Occasional Paper
1/2012, European Centre for International
Political Economy (ECIPE), available at
https://ecipe.org/publications/industrial-
policy-europe-second-world-war-what-
has-been-learnt/
Paris Tech Review (2012) ‘The German
solar energy crisis: Looking for the right
incentive scheme’ , available at http://
www.paristechreview.com/2012/04/13/
german-solar-crisis/
Rodrik, D. (2004) ‘Industrial policy for
the twenty-first century’ , Discussion
Paper 4767, Centre for Economic Policy
Research, available at https://cepr.org/
active/publications/discussion_papers/
dp.php?dpno=4767
Rodrik, D. (2014) ‘Green industrial policy’ ,
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 30(3):
469-491
Rodrik, D. and C. Sabel (2019)
‘Building a good jobs economy’ ,
Working Paper, Harvard University,
available at https://drodrik.
scholar.harvard.edu/publications/
building-good-jobs-economy
Schwarz, L. (2020) ‘Empowered but
powerless? Reassessing the citizens’
power dynamics of the German energy
transition’ , Energy Research and Social
Science 63: 101405
Stern, N. (2006) The Economics of Climate
Change: The Stern Review, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge

===== PDF_PAGE 98 =====
94 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 31
Wolff, G. (2019) ‘Demystifying carbon
border adjustment for Europe’s green
deal’ , Bruegel Blog, 31 October, available
at https://www.bruegel.org/2019/10/
demystifying-carbon-border-adjustment-
for-europes-green-deal/

===== PDF_PAGE 99 =====
Bruegel, Rue de la Charité 33, B-1210 Brussels
(+32) 2 227 4210
info@bruegel.org
www.bruegel.org
A GREEN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FOR EUROPE
The European Green Deal aims to make Europe the first climate-neutral
continent by 2050. This is not going to be an easy journey. To be
successful, the European Green Deal will have to foster major shifts in
the European industrial structure, including transitions from fossil fuels
to renewable energy and from combustion engine cars to electric cars.
Shifting economies from brown to green would be a major, historic
socio-economic transformation.
In this context of broad, paradigmatic, change for European industry,
a ‘green industrial policy’ will be fundamental to Europe’s climate change
ambitions. But what is green industrial policy? What market failures must
it address? Unlike traditional industrial policy, green industrial policy
must be directed to twin goals of climate protection and social welfare.
Green industrial policy initiatives in the European Union so far, however,
have been piecemeal and fragmented. This Blueprint examines how past
mistakes can be avoided and how the EU can develop a coherent green
industrial policy that will serve the goals of the European Green Deal.
This Blueprint has been produced with the financial support of the
European Climate Foundation.
