
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
WORKING PAPER | ISSUE 08/2025 | 22 MAY 2025
WHICH COMP ANIES ARE
AHEAD I N FRONTIER
I
NNOVATION ON CRITI CAL
TECHN
OLOGIES? COMPARING
CHINA, THE EURO PEAN UNION
AND THE UN ITED STATES
ALICIA GARCÍA-HERRERO, MICHAL KRYSTYANCZUK AND ROBIN SCHINDOWSKI
Competition in critical technologies is attracting increasing attention not only because
of the fo
undational nature of these technologies for other types of innovation, but also
b
ecause of their role in the United States national security strategy. In this paper, we look
into which entities in China, the European Union and the US innovate at the technology
fr
ontier in the three most important critical technologies – artificial intelligence, quantum
com
puting and semiconductors – based on identification of the most radical novel patents
in these technologies and their subsectors. Working with these pathbreaking patents, we
lo
ok into the origin of the companies that file the largest numbers of them. US innovators
domin
ate the innovation frontier for quantum computing and, to a lesser extent, AI,
with Chinese innovators doing better in semiconductors. European innovators lag in
all, b
ut perform relatively better in quantum computing, in which they rank similarly
t
o Chinese innovators. Furthermore, the innovation ecosystem is quite different across
g
eographies. In the US, tech companies top the rankings of critical novelties and are highly
concentrated: as many as three companies are in the top rankings of all of the three critical
t
echnologies. Frontier innovators in the field in which the EU competes most equally
– quantum – are mostly research centres and not companies. China lies somewhat in
b
etween in all three domains.
JEL: O30, O33, F52
Key words: critical technologies, patents, innovation, AI, quantum computer,
s
emiconductors
Alicia García-Herrero (alicia.garcia-herrero@bruegel.org) is a Senior Fellow at Bruegel.
Michal Krystyanczuk (michal.rystyanczuk@bruegel. org) is a Data Scientist at Bruegel.
Robin Schindowski is a Research Fellow at MERICS.
R
ecommended citation:
García-Herrero, A., M. Krystyanczuk and R. Schindowski (2025) ‘Which companies are
ahead in frontier innovation on critical technologies? Comparing China, the European
Union and the United States’
, Working Paper 08/2025, Bruegel
WORKING PAPER|ISSUE 03|2020

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
1
1 Introduction
Quantum computing, semiconductors and artificial intelligence are at the centre of the United States-China
technology rivalry. They are foundational technologies with large spillover effects and potential gains in
productivity, and are therefore essential to the technological autonomy of any major economy. Some have even
argued that economic singularity – the point at which machine intelligence is capable of innovating
autonomously and beyond human capabilities – will result from progress in these technologies (Nordhaus,
2021). AI is at the core of this. It promises to improve human judgement by providing predictive insights from
historical data through simulating human intelligence (Agrawal et al, 2018). Furthermore, through techniques of
computer vision and game simulation, AI has the potential to grant a significant advantage on the battlefield to
those powers that can harness it (Scharre, 2024).
The advancement of AI, however, depends crucially on computing power, for which the deployment and further
development of cutting-edge semiconductors are necessary. The semiconductor industry is characterised by a
highly globalised supply chain and by high concentration with respect to the production of advanced logic chips
needed for AI development. It is therefore particularly subject to geopolitical risk.
Finally, quantum computing is the most embryonic of the three technologies, but the economic implications are
potentially huge. Once matured, quantum computing could render traditional semiconductor chips redundant,
ending the age of silicon. Hence, it may enable breakthroughs in AI, biotechnology, agricultural technology,
material sciences and cybersecurity that would be impossible for traditional supercomputers (Kaku, 2023).
Because of the importance of these three technologies for future competitiveness, China, the European Union
and the US – the world’s largest economic blocs – are promoting their advancement with growing resources for
research and development (R&D) and industrial-policy strategies. The US adopted the CHIPS and Science Act in
20221 to further develop a US-based semiconductor ecosystem while attracting foreign investment. In addition,
the US federal government has attempted to curtail the transfer to China of high-end semiconductors – and the
components to produce them. China has prioritised for much longer the development of these technologies in
its national industrial plans. In particular, it set up the National Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund in
2014, with a total of $98.38 billion in raised funds as of today. China has also implemented dedicated industrial
policy initiatives such as the National Guideline for the Development and Promotion of the Integrated Circuit
Industry (2014)
2 and the New Generation Artificial Intelligence Plan (2017)3. Finally, less is known about how
China supports quantum computing, although it appears as a priority in central five-year plans. The EU,
meanwhile, has adopted the European Chips Act (Regulation (EU) 2023/1781) and has started to invest heavily
in AI and quantum-computing R&D through its Horizon Europe research funding programme4. Further initiatives
exist at the national level in the EU.
In this paper, we study who is engaging in frontier innovation in AI, semiconductors and quantum computing in
China, the US and the EU. To do this, we exploit a dataset of ‘radically novel’ patents in the three technologies
created by García-Herrero et al (2025). The authors use a large language model (LLM) to gauge the degree of
1 The text of the law is available at https://www.congress.gov/117/plaws/publ167/PLAW-117publ167.pdf.
2 See (in Chinese) https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2014-06/24/content_2707281.htm.
3 See (in Chinese) https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2017-07/20/content_5211996.htm.
4 Dan Cooper, Lisa Peets, Marty Hansen, Sam Jungyun Choi and Marianna Drake, ‘European Commission Announces New
Package of AI Measures’, Inside Global Tech, 14 February 2024, Covington,
https://www.insideglobaltech.com/2024/02/14/european -commission-announces-new-package-of-ai-measures/.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
2
novelty of patents and then categorise these novelties into subfields within the three above-mentioned
technologies (eg memory technology in semiconductors). This paper is an extension of García-Herrero et al
(2025). We shed light specifically on: 1) the entities that file the highest number of radical novelties in each
technology, and 2) the subfields in which these entities innovate. This more granular analysis allows us to
better understand where China, the EU and the US stand in this tech race, as well as relevant differences in their
approaches to innovation, whether in terms of the subfields in which research efforts are focused, or the types
of entity that conduct the top-level research with visible outcomes, namely radically novel patents in these
three fields.
2 What radical novelty in patented technology reveals and what it does not
García-Herrero et al (2025) applied an LLM to the universe of patents filed at the main patent registries (the US,
the EU and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), ie the USPTO, EPO and PCT) between 2019 and
20235. Specifically, we define a patent as a ‘radical novelty’ in a particular field if the related innovation,
identified from the patent abstract through the LLM, has never appeared before in a patent grant since 1979,
and the innovation appears at least five times in subsequent patents. The subfields reviewed for each critical
technology in the next few sections are also identified by classifying all available patents through an LLM. While
García-Herrero et al (2025) focused on the general subfield evolution within each region and related cross-
regional patterns, in this paper, we focus on the entities that file the highest numbers of radical novelties for
each region and for each technology.
First, however, we want to offer a few words of caution on the indicator we use. A radical novelty as we have
defined it is meant to reveal which entities are patenting technologies that are likely to alter the trajectory of the
technology frontier in the future. This has two implications.
First, we look only at patented technology. While patents have been used extensively to quantify the innovative
performance of an economy, we acknowledge that, just like every innovation metric, it comes with limitations.
Some firms might not disclose their technology in a patent to guard secrecy. A prominent example is Coca Cola,
which never filed a patent for its recipe. Some Chinese firms might not disclose their technological progress in
order to avoid being sanctioned by the US government.
Second, while we provide statistics on entity-level shares of radical novelties in total patent counts, we want to
emphasise that our concept of radical novelty omits incremental innovations that would nevertheless be crucial
in the advancement of the industry and a given firm’s commercial success. For example, the sum of sustained
small-scale improvements in the efficiency of a photolithography machine might have significant commercial
implications but may rely on technologically mature methods. Hence, related patents would not count as
radically novel in our analysis. Indeed, we find that Chinese chip manufacturer SMIC files a lot of patents, but
only a relatively small fraction of these patents appears to be radically novel. Photolithography machine
producer ASML does not even appear among the top ten entities with the most radical novelties. What we are
extracting with our concept of radical novelties are the patents that are likely to open up a new technology
5 Because of inflated patent filing in China as a result of subsidy program mes, we have omitted Chinese domestically filed
patents. We do not believe this to be an issue as the three technologies of concern are subject to fierce international
competition, and hence, innovators are likely to file with patent offices which offer international validity. For a further
discussion, see García-Herrero et al (2025).

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
3
trajectory. These may become commercially valuable in the near or far future and may open up new potential for
significant subsequent innovation.
3 Some stylised facts on general patenting trends in critical technologies
Patent filings in AI, quantum computing, and semiconductors help understand the innovation landscape in
these critical technologies in China, the EU and the US.
From 2019 to 2023, Chinese AI patents grew remarkably, rising from over 29,000 in 2019 to almost 63,000 in
2023, well above the US number (Figure 1). However, as will become clear later, the seemingly high gap
between China and the US in the number of AI patents disappears and actually runs in the US’s favour in many AI
subfields when the novelty of each patent is taken into account. Entities in the EU tend to file the fewest patents,
and our analysis of radical novelties presented later will not change this underwhelming finding.
Figure 1: Published patents in artificial intelligence
Source: WIPO.
The US dominates in terms of numbers of semiconductor-related patents, with more than 210,000 annually
(Figure 2). This apparent dominance in patent numbers becomes less evident relative to China when we control
for the novelty of the patents. The EU ranks last in the number of chip patents, and the results are quite similar in
the analysis to follow when controlling for the novelty of patents.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
4
Figure 2: Published patents in semiconductors
Source: WIPO.
As for quantum computing, the significantly higher number of patents overall indicates that the US dominates,
with China and the EU trailing and with a recent growing gap between China and the EU (Figure 3). Our analysis
controlling for the novelty of patents offers a more favourable view of the relative weights of China and the EU,
although the US still dominates novel patents in quantum.
Figure 3: Published patents in quantum computing
Source: WIPO.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
5
4 How is the patenting landscape evolving in these critical technologies and which companies are most
innovative?
To answer this question, we proceed as follows: for each technology and each region, we extract the ten entities
(firms, universities or research institutes) with the most radically novel patents published from 2019 to 2023.
Throughout the text, we refer to them as ‘frontier innovators’. We then use the subfield classification developed
in García-Herrero et al (2025) to further decompose the radically novel patents of each entity into technology-
specific subfields. In what follows, we present the results of this analysis for each of the three technologies.
4.1 Artificial intelligence
Figure 4 shows the ten entities for each region that file the highest number of radically novel patents in AI. A few
large technology incumbents from China and the US dominate the raw patent count, represented by the bars.
However, the picture looks slightly different when considering the share of patents that count as radical novelty.
For most entities this share is between 0.2 percent and 4 percent, with few less actively patenting firms with
shares of above 4 percent. French robotics firm Stanley Robotics has the lowest total number patents published
between 2019 and 2023 – 63 – but six of these patents were ‘radical novelties’. At the other end of the
spectrum, Baidu ranks highest among the patent holders with 11,879 total patents, but only 0.33 percent of its
patents contain a radically novel innovation. In what follows, we examine China, the US and EU separately,
beginning with China.
Figure 4: Patent count and share of radical novelties by entity (AI)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
Figure 5 shows the most prominent Chinese patentees of radical novelties in AI and their shares of these
patents among frontier innovators over time. Some well-known large Chinese technology corporations are

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
6
among them, including Huawei, insurance firm Ping An, drone manufacturer Autel Robotics, WeChat parent firm
Tencent, AI firm Baidu, TikTok parent firm ByteDance and smartphone and IoT device manufacturer Oppo. The
most important frontier innovators are Huawei and Ping An. Ping An reached its highest share in 2021 with 29.94
percent of radical novelties, and Huawei did so in 2023 with 34.09 percent. Tencent also increased its share
from 7.96 percent in 2019 to 18.18 percent in 2023.
Alongside these, three major Chinese robotics firms are among the frontier innovators. Autel Robotics is one of
China’s major drone manufacturers, and its products are used for public security, agriculture and industrial
purposes. It accounted for 25 percent of frontier innovators’ radical novelties in 2019, but its share dropped to
6.38 percent by 2023. In July 2024, it was placed on the US Entity List
6, restricting the firm’s access to US
goods, software, and technology. UBTECH Robotics, a manufacturer of service robots, has gained ground in the
patenting of radical novelties, appearing for the first time in the data in 2020 and reaching a share of 14.1
percent in 2022. Finally, the operator of cloud services for robotics applications, CloudMinds Robotics, was a
major innovator in 2019, accounting for 23.89 percent of the novelties among the top ten firms, but mostly
disappeared from the data after 2020.
Figure 5: Radical novelties in AI by entity (China, 2019 – 2023)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
A more detailed picture emerges when looking at the subfields in which the frontier innovators are active. With
the exception of Autel Robotics, almost all of the top ten AI innovators from China have made significant
contributions in either ‘computer vision’ or ‘image processing’. Chief among these is ByteDance with 75 percent
of its radical novelties in the two fields combined, followed by electronics display producer BOE Technology
(64.51 percent), gaming and social media giant Tencent (63.93 percent) and Oppo (62.22 percent).
6 See https://www.bis.gov/entity-list.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
7

In addition to firms that focus on the processing of visual data, robotics firms are drivers of AI innovation in
China, although each of the three robotics firms in our subset specialises in somewhat different subfields.
UBTECH Robotics’ radically novel patents are focused on both ‘computer vision’ (32.14 percent) and ‘robotics’
(60.71 percent). Autel Robotics is the only firm in our data innovating significantly in ‘aerial vehicle technology’
(46.67 percent of its radical novelties). CloudMinds Robotics, as an operator of robotics-related IT infrastructure,
is more diversified, appearing also in ‘telecommunications’ (24.32 percent), ‘computer vision’ (18.92 percent),
‘machine learning’ (8.11 percent), ‘data storage’ (5.41 percent) and ‘data analytics’ (5.41 percent).
Among the more diversified firms are Huawei and Ping An, which are also the most dominant frontier innovators
in this area. Huawei appears to be strong both in the processing of visual and textual data, with shares of 23.53
percent in ‘computer vision’, 15.44 percent in ‘image processing’, 21.32 percent in ‘machine learning’, 10.24
percent in ‘natural language processing’ (NLP) and smaller but still significant shares in ‘data analytics’ (7.35
percent) and ‘telecommunications’ (4.41 percent). Ping An, with heavy investment in healthcare and
telemedicine solutions, financial services and fraud detection, has a strong presence in ‘natural language
processing’ (25.74 percent), ‘data analytics’ (11.88 percent) and ‘machine learning’ (11.88 percent). Finally,
Baidu – as China’s largest search engine provider and a major innovator in autonomous driving – has filed a
number of novel patents, split into the processing of visual data (33.34 percent in ‘computer vision’ and ‘image
processing’) and the processing of textual and audio data (30.77 percent in ‘natural language processing’).
Figure 6: Chinese frontier innovators and their related subfields (AI)

Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
For the United States, Figure 7 shows the general trend in AI innovation. As can be seen from the line graph with
the scale on the right-hand axis, despite the COVID-19 pandemic, and contrary to the trend in China, patenting of
radical novelties in AI has strongly accelerated in the US. The number of radical novelties among all innovators in
the field (not only those in our subset of frontier innovators) almost doubled from 298 in 2019 to 571 in 2023.
Another striking feature is that the US frontier innovators are exclusively large incumbent technology firms,
most notably Google, which accounted for a share of 23.86 percent in 2023, Microsoft (18.75 percent) and IBM

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
8

(11.93 percent). Qualcomm significantly increased its share from 3.15 percent in 2019 to 20.45 percent in
2023. Chip firms Nvidia and Intel also accounted for strong shares in AI-related frontier innovation in 2023,
reaching 6.82 percent and 7.95 percent, respectively. Except for Qualcomm and IBM, the shares of innovation of
US AI innovators have remained fairly stable.
Figure 7: Radical novelties in AI by entity (US, 2019 – 2023)

Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
The categorisation of this innovation into subfields is also telling (Figure 8). First, all frontier innovators hold
significant shares of ‘machine learning’, with Micron holding the largest share, with precisely 50 percent of its
radical novelties. Except for Amazon and IBM, companies’ shares of ‘computer vision’ are also substantial, and
applications across the frontier innovators are broad. For example, Qualcomm, Nvidia and Micron, for which
38.46 percent, 29.56 percent and 27.78 percent respectively of their radical novelties are in this field, are
known to apply computer-vision techniques to autonomous driving, while Google (18.92 percent), IBM (9.89
percent), Intel (30.56 percent) and Nvidia equally use computer vision to enhance their firms’ services for the
processing of medical images.
‘Natural language processing’ (NLP) is likewise a strong field, especially for Amazon, which has a share of 58.34
percent of its radical novelties in related innovation, and to a lesser extent Oracle (31.25 percent) and IBM
(31.87 percent). This is not surprising, as methods of NLP are offered as a business service by all of these firms.
For instance, Amazon Web Services offers NLP techniques to businesses to analyse social-media content and
customer feedback. Amazon also relies on NLP for its core business. In its e-commerce segment, NLP
contributes to predicting customer types from search queries and optimising product recommendations
(Amazon, 2023). IBM and Oracle specialise in the application of NLP for business communications, such as
entity recognition, automatic updating of customer information and facilitated search queries for business
databases. Amazon and IBM are also innovative in ‘data analytics’ more generally.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
9

Finally, Nvidia and Adobe are the only firms with a non-trivial share (9.09 percent and 6.67 percent of their
radical novelties, respectively) in ‘generative AI’. Nvidia’s provision of its generative AI platform as a service for
the development of OpenAI’s ChatGPT is in alignment with this. Given current market trends in the US, we expect
this field to grow in importance when it comes to radical innovation.
Figure 8: US frontier innovators and their related subfields (AI)

Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
In the EU, as can be seen from the line graph in Figure 9, the absolute number of radical novelties by EU
patentees remains modest compared to the US and China. However, it still grew from 70 in 2019 to 90 in 2023.
Major frontier innovators are the two prominent telecommunication firms Ericsson and Nokia, with the former
having overtaken the latter in recent years. Siemens has also maintained a substantial share among the top
innovators, even though decreasing from 30.77 percent of the total to 20.83 percent in 2023. Since 2021, the
French robotics firm Stanley Robotics has appeared, with around 8 percent of the European radical novelties in
this field since then. The French aerospace and defence corporation Safran is also an important frontier
innovator, with 15.38 percent of total EU radical novelties in 2020, but with a large reduction in 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
10
Figure 9: Radical novelties in AI by entity (EU, 2019 – 2023)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
A distinguishing feature of European innovation in AI is its relatively small concentration in advanced
manufacturing and robotics, except for Stanley Robotics (Figure 10). This is particularly surprising given the
EU’s long-standing comparative advantage in high-end manufacturing. Some firms also specialise in ‘machine
learning’, notably Siemens (53.34 percent), Bosch (33.34 percent), Ericsson (33.34 percent), Nokia (33.34
percent) and Accenture (40 percent). Carl Zeiss and the French research organisation Commissariat à l’énergie
atomique et aux énergies alternatives (CEA) are innovating in ‘advanced medical technologies’, although the
absolute number – only five and four radical novelties, respectively – is small. Accenture and SAP, major
providers of business services, are also innovating in ‘natural language processing’, with shares of 30 percent
and 40 percent of radical novelties in this field, respectively.
A large fraction of European AI innovation is also driven by the EU’s two major telecommunication firms, Ericsson
and Nokia. Both firms have invested in AI-driven optimisation of network performance, energy efficiency and
reliability, which requires capabilities in ‘machine learning’ (in our data with 33.34 percent and 33.34 percent,
respectively) and ‘telecommunications’ (33.34 percent and 16.67 percent) more generally. Both firms also
innovate in ‘computer vision’ (11.11 percent and 27.28 percent). Finally, the French defence corporation Safran
also focuses on the processing of visual data, namely ‘computer vision’ and ‘image processing’. This is not
surprising given the firm’s capabilities in automated target recognition and ground and air surveillance.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
11
Figure 10: EU frontier innovators and their related subfields (AI)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
4.2 Semiconductors
We now move to our second critical technology, semiconductors. Figure 11 shows the raw patent counts in
relation to the shares of radical novelty of frontier innovators in the three regions under observation. One striking
feature is how many European firms are among the entities with the highest raw patent counts, represented by
the bars. These include Bavarian optoelectronics firm Osram, Siemens, Infineon and Franco-Italian chip firm
STMicroelectronics. Well-known semiconductor incumbents from the US also feature prominently in frontier
innovation, including IBM, Micron, Intel and Texas Instruments. Chip manufacturer SMIC leads patenting for
China, but only 0.29 percent of its patents are considered radically novel. Generally speaking, the share of
radical novelties in total patents is low for large incumbent firms and usually does not exceed 1 percent. Some
exceptions, however, are visible. Of the patents filed by Chinese consumer electronics giant TCL Technology,
18.58 percent fall under our definition of radical novelty. Changxin and Yangtze Memory Technology have
shares of 6.12 percent and 11.38 percent, respectively. We now take a deep dive into each region separately,
starting with China.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
12
Figure 11: Patent count and share of radical novelties by entity (semiconductors)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
Figure 12 shows the frontier innovators across the period of observation in China. As a general trend, the
importance of China’s previously most innovative firm, TCL Technology, has diminished, from a share of 74.83
percent in 2019 to a mere 18.13 percent in 2023. Since 2022, memory technology and chip fabrication have
become more important7, which is represented by Changxin Memory (CXMT) and Yangtze Memory (YMTC), two
of China’s fastest-growing semiconductor manufacturing firms. Both have benefitted from investment by
China’s Big Fund in the past. CXMT – founded in 2016 as a private firm – received $724.18 million from the Big
Fund in 2020 as part of a $2.38 billion deal with 13 co-investors (Pitchbook, 2024). Similarly, YMTC was founded
by state-owned Tsinghua Unigroup in 2016 with an initial investment from the Big Fund, although the exact
amount remains undisclosed. CXMT specialises in DRAM, while YMTC focuses on NAND Flash chips8. The visible
7 Memory technology has traditionally presented a critical starting point for countries that aim at building a competitive
semiconductor industry. Compared to logic-chip manufacturing, memory chips can be produced on mature 10 –20nm
nodes and do not require the high design complexity of logic chips or cutting -edge equipment for manufacturing. The
market is also highly commoditised and firms rely less on brand reputation. Hence, entry barriers into the industry are
generally lower. Once human capital in memory-chip manufacturing is accumulated, firms can then transition into the
fabrication of more advanced logic chips. Both Taiwan and South Korea have followed such a path. All in all, the large share
of radical novelties by Chinese firms in chip manufacturing a nd the fact that such innovation stems from companies that
have been supported by China’s semiconductor funds, sheds some light on the question of whether this industrial policy is
working. A cost-benefit analysis of these policies, given their massive cost, is clearly beyond this paper’s scope .
8 YMTC reached the technology frontier in 2019 when it announced the development of a 64 layers 3D -NAND. Its latest
breakthrough came in 2023, when a 232-layer 3D NAND chip was discovered in a consumer device. See Tech Insights,
‘China Does It Again, A NAND Memory Market First’, undated, https://www.techinsights.com/blog/china-does-it-again-nand-
memory-market-first.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
13
progress of CXMT and YMTC is a positive signal for the effectiveness of China’s support projects (Semiconductor
Big Funds). The data also reveals frontier innovators with lower shares of radical novelties, including Huawei,
Ningbo Semiconductor International, Enkris Semiconductor and InnoScience. SMIC, while filing a large number
of patents, almost disappeared from the ranks of the frontier innovators in 2023. Whether this is the result of US
export controls is an intriguing question, but beyond the scope of this paper.
Figure 12: Radical novelties in semiconductors by entity (China, 2019 - 2023)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
Looking at the subfield specialisation of these entities reveals further details (Figure 13). The two
optoelectronics giants BOE Optoelectronics and TCL Technology are mostly focused on ‘display technology’, with
lower shares in ‘semiconductor manufacturing’ (11.12 percent and 19.06 percent, respectively). Huawei,
despite accounting for a smaller share of China’s overall chip innovation, is highly diversified in its patented
novelty portfolio, focusing on ‘display technology’ (13.21 percent), ‘MEMS’ (11.32 percent), ‘memory
technology’ (16.99 percent), ‘power electronics’ (13.21 percent), ‘semiconductor manufacturing’ (16.99
percent) and ‘semiconductor design’ (5.66 percent). CXMT and YMTC, not surprisingly, focus on ‘memory
technology’ and ‘semiconductor manufacturing’, although CXMT has a higher share in the latter than the former.
SMIC, while accounting for a small share of radical novelties in general, has focused on ‘semiconductor
manufacturing’, with 62.5 percent of its total radical novelties in this field.
Among the frontier innovators are also a few specialised firms, such as Shenzhen-based AAC Acoustic, which
focuses on microphones and haptic feedback devices for consumer electronics and smart wearables, with
84.85 percent of its radically novel patents in ‘MEMS’. Finally, InnoScience and Enkris are among the few firms
dedicated exclusively to the production of specialised gallium nitride (GaN) chips. This is reflected in Enkris’s
concentration of novelties in ‘semiconductor manufacturing’ (43.48 percent) and even more for InnoScience.
GaN chips are a semiconductor class that can handle higher temperatures, voltages and frequencies than
silicon-based chips. They expand the possibility frontier of radar systems and satellite communication systems

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
14
for military purposes and also increase the efficiency of data centres and fast chargers (Shivakumar et al,
2024). InnoScience has been sued by German semiconductor firm Infineon9 and US-based Efficient Power
Conversion Corporation10 for IP infringement.
Figure 13: Chinese frontier innovators and their related subfields (semiconductors)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
We now move to the United States, the country in which semiconductors were first commercialised at large
scale. As can be seen from the line graph in Figure 14, the annual number of novelties in semiconductors hovers
around 240 to 260, with a sharp drop in 2023. This is lower than the average number of radical novelties by
Chinese entities, but we show in the next section that US firms specialise in subfields with higher value-added.
Among the frontier innovators in our sample are well-known global players in the semiconductor ecosystem,
including IBM, Intel, Applied Materials, Micron, Texas Instruments and Qualcomm. Intel has lost share of radical
novelties, dropping from 22.99 percent in 2019 to 9.09 percent in 2023. Over the same period, IBM and Applied
Materials gained ground, reaching shares of radical novelties of 19.70 percent and 27.27 percent respectively in
202311. Micron, Apple and Texas Instruments also have consistently strong presences, with shares of between
5 percent and 20 percent annually. Microsoft, Lumileds, onsemi and Qualcomm account for smaller shares of
radical novelties. Generally speaking, innovation stems from large incumbent firms.
9 Michael Shapiro, ‘Infineon Accuses Rival of Copying Gallium Nitride Technology (1)’, Bloomberg Law, 14 March 2024,
https://news.bloomberglaw.com/ip-law/infineon-accuses-rival-of-copying-gallium-nitride-technology.
10 Christopher Yasiejko, ‘California Firm Defends Key Chip Patents From Chinese Rivals (2)’, Bloomberg Law , 17 July 2024,
https://news.bloomberglaw.com/ip-law/california-firm-defends-key-chip-patents-from-chinese-rivals.
11 As patents are published at most 18 months after being filed , this drop might be COVID-19-induced.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
15

Figure 14: Radical novelties in semiconductors by entity (US, 2019 - 2023)

Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
In line with the fact that the US dominates the more R&D-heavy upstream segments of the global chip
ecosystem, many firms, including Qualcomm, IBM, Intel, Apple and Micron, have significant shares of radical
novelties in ‘semiconductor design’ (Figure 15). However, the striking feature of US frontier innovators is that
they generally tend to be diversified in their portfolios. In some cases, this reflects a high degree of vertical
integration, most notably for Micron and Intel. Both firms design and then manufacture parts of their
semiconductors in-house. In other cases, the diverse patent portfolios reflect the increased trend towards co-
development of the design and related downstream activities (such as manufacturing and packaging), in
particular for special-purpose or new, cutting-edge frontier chips12.
For instance, while it is not surprising that Apple has generated 34.16 percent of its radical novelties in ‘display
technology’, it covers almost the entire value chain from ‘semiconductor design’, ‘semiconductor manufacturing’
and ‘material sciences’ to ‘semiconductor packaging’. Similar patterns are noted with IBM and Qualcomm, which
also have significant shares in ‘semiconductor manufacturing’ (22.73 percent and 10 percent, respectively)
despite the fact that the two firms outsource the fabrication of their designs and other downstream activities to
firms including TSMC, GlobalFoundries and Samsung. IBM, for example, has been active in developing EUV
photoresist.
While diversification is apparent, a few specialised firms exist among the frontier innovators as well. While exact
numbers are not available, Applied Materials is a key supplier of semiconductor manufacturing equipment for
the fabs of global chip manufacturers such as Intel, Micron, TSMC and Samsung. In our data, Applied Materials
holds more than three quarters of its novelties in ‘semiconductor manufacturing’ (52.02 percent) and ‘materials
science’ (25.51 percent). Finally, Lumileds, which has slightly increased its overall share among the frontier

12 Boston Consulting Group, ‘Advanced Packaging Is Radically Reshaping the Chip Ecosystem’, 20 May 2024,
https://www.bcg.com/publications/2024/advanced-packaging-is-reshaping-the-chip-industry.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
16
innovators in recent years, is highly specialised in ‘optoelectronics’, the subfield which accounts for 82.35
percent of its radical novelties.
Figure 15: US frontier innovators and their related subfields (semiconductors)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
Finally, moving to the EU, Figure 16 shows the evolution of radical novelties for the EU’s frontier innovators.
While EU entities appear dominant in the raw patent count, the number of novelties is quite low, with only about
70 per year. When compared to the US company landscape, novelties patented by EU firms are more
concentrated around a few large players, notably Infineon, STMicroelectronics and Osram Opto Semiconductors.
In 2019, Osram accounted for 57.69 percent of all novelties, but dropped out of our subset in 2023.
STMicroelectronics is consistently present, with its share fluctuating between 6.25 percent and 35 percent. At
the same time, Infineon rose up the ranks from 11.54 percent in 2019 to 42.86 percent in 2023. All other
companies hold rather small shares. Similar to the situation in the US, the overall number of novelties in our data
dropped for the EU in 2023, to 68, down from 39, largely driven by Osram Optoelectronics. In 2022, the firm
published 17 novelties but disappeared from our sample in 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
17
Figure 16: Radical novelties in semiconductors by entity (EU, 2019 – 2023)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
With regards to the subfield specialisations of the frontier innovators, the EU is focused on ‘MEMS’ and
‘Optoelectronics’, in which several firms have a strong presence (Figure 17). Most of these firms derive
substantial parts of their revenues from the automotive industry. For instance, Osram Opto Semiconductors
made €1.1 billion (40.74 percent of its total revenue) from its automotive lighting segment in 2023, mostly from
LED and lasers for vehicle lighting and driver-assistance systems. Our data shows that 46.94 percent of its
radical novelties fall under ‘optoelectronics’. Another major innovator is Infineon, which is one of Germany’s
major automotive suppliers and is specialised in automotive semiconductors, which accounted for €8,242
million or 50.54 percent of its revenue in 2023. This is reflected in its portfolio of radically novel patents that
reach 40 percent in ‘sensor technology’ and ‘MEMS’. Bosch also specialises in the two fields, with 14.29 percent
of novelties in ‘sensor technology’ and 71.43 percent in ‘MEMS’. Not surprisingly, given its proximity to the
Mercedes and Porsche HQ in Stuttgart, Bosch is also focused on the automotive industry. In 2023, it derived
61.52 percent of its revenues from its ‘mobility solutions’ segment.
Finally, STMicroelectronics is another strong innovator operating in various fields, deriving $6.7 billion (34.7
percent) of its revenues from its automotive segment, alongside analogue chips and MEMS (24.4 percent) and
microcontrollers (39.9 percent). Based on our results, it is the only major EU chip firm with a highly diversified
innovation portfolio, holding a presence in ‘semiconductor design’ (19.05 percent), ‘MEMS’ (19.05 percent),
‘semiconductor packaging’ (9.52 percent) and ‘memory technology’ (9.52 percent).

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
18
Figure 17: EU frontier innovators and their related subfields (semiconductors)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
4.3 Quantum computing
The last of the three technologies covered by our analysis is quantum computing. As Figure 18 shows, the
patent count is dominated by Chinese and US technology giants. Not surprisingly, IBM, Google, Microsoft and
Intel are among the most active US patentees. On the Chinese side, Origin Quantum is taking the lead, with
smaller numbers claimed by TCL and Huawei. Two significant features of the data are striking. First, unlike in AI
and semiconductors, for frontier innovation in quantum computing, universities and dedicated research labs
play crucial roles, despite not filing as many patents as large technology incumbents. Second, while the latter
file large numbers of patents, the share of radical novelties in total patents is significantly higher for universities
and start-ups, many of which are European, such as IQM Finland and Equal1.Labs. In what follows, we examine
each region separately.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
19
Figure 18: Patent count and share of radical novelties by entity (quantum computing)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
The evolution of quantum computing innovation in China has been relatively slow, with a peak in the number of
radical novelties in 2021 (27) and a decline since then to barely 21 (Figure 19). The smaller number of
novelties is in line with the relatively scarcer research funds available for quantum compared to AI. However, the
recent pick-up in quantum research, given the need for faster, more efficient computer support for AI, should
have led to an increase in the number of novelties, which is not the case for China. According to the distribution
of radical technologies we find in our dataset, Chinese innovation in quantum computing is dominated by
several large players, most notably Huawei, Origin Quantum and, more recently, Tencent. Several of the smaller
innovators are universities and research institutions, including the state-owned CETC, the South China Normal
University and Shenzhen Polytechnic.
Two of the main innovators, QuantumCTek and Origin Quantum, are located in Hefei, which is often viewed as a
model city for local government-guided development. The city has developed into a cluster for firms across
various parts of the quantum computing supply chain
13. Origin Quantum has become the largest quantum
computing innovator, with a 78.51 percent share of radical novelties in 2023, up from zero in 2020. In January
13 The Economist, ‘An unlikely tech cluster exemplifies China’s economic vision’, 5 August 2023,
https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2023/08/05/an-unlikely-tech-cluster-exemplifies-chinas-economic-
vision.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
20
2024, Origin Quantum announced the introduction of Origin Wukong, a 72-qubit quantum computer14. The other
Hefei-based firm in our sample, QuantumCTek, was founded in 2009 and produces hardware and software for
quantum secure communication. In July 2022, it was selected as one of the 10,000 Little Giants, an extensive
government programme to foster the most innovative industry suppliers and equipment manufacturers (Brown
et al, 2023; García-Herrero and Schindowski, 2024). Finally, Alibaba appears among the frontier innovators,
although the firm officially scrapped its quantum computing segment in 202315, which means that it should
have exited the market by now.
Figure 19: Radical novelties in quantum computing by entity (China, 2019 – 2023)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
Figure 20 displays the subfields in which Chinese quantum computing firms are active. Huawei, as the largest
innovator, has a strongly diversified quantum innovation portfolio, including ‘quantum communication’,
‘quantum cryptography’, ‘quantum hardware’ and ‘quantum photonics’. Origin Quantum is focused on the
physical components of quantum computing, with ‘quantum hardware’ and ‘quantum systems and control’
accounting together for 88.23 percent of its radical novelties. QuantumCTek, the other Hefei-based firm, is
focused mainly on ‘quantum cryptography’ and ‘quantum communication’, with shares of 83.34 percent and
16.67 percent, respectively. Tencent is also focused on the physical aspects of quantum computing, namely
‘quantum hardware’ and ‘quantum systems and control’, while Shenzhen Polytechnic focuses on ‘quantum
14 Quantum Zeitgeist, ‘China Quantum Computer ‘Origin Quantum’: Superconducting Quantum Computer has 72 Qubits in
Boost for Chinese Technology’, 7 January 2024, https://quantumzeitgeist.substack.com/p/china- quantum-computer-
origin-wukong.
15 Matt Swayne, ‘Reports: China’s Alibaba Shuts Down Quantum Lab’, The Quantum Insider, 25 November 2023,
https://thequantuminsider.com/2023/11/25/reports-chinas-alibaba-shuts-down-quantum-lab/.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
21
cryptography’, ‘quantum cybersecurity’ and ‘quantum systems and control’, with shares of 28.57 percent, 42.86
percent and 28.57 percent, respectively.
Generally speaking, the data highlights China’s multifaceted quantum computing landscape. Chinese innovators
are active in many fields at the same time, instead of carving distinct niches. Hardware producers such as Origin
Quantum, Tencent, Shenzhen Polytechnic and Alibaba are complemented by firms specialising in ‘quantum
communication’, ‘quantum cryptography’ or a union of those, among which are CETC, Huawei, Hentong Quasky
Quantum and QuantumCTek. In recent years, however, as reflected by the dominance of Origin Quantum and
Tencent, China’s innovative dynamism in quantum computing has shifted to its physical aspects. These are
generally considered the most critical but challenging aspects of quantum computing innovation because of the
difficulties of maintaining the superposition of the quantum system (dubbed ‘coherence’), the key necessary
condition for operating a quantum computer (NAS, 2019).
Figure 20: Chinese frontier innovators and their related subfields (quantum computing)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
In terms of the evolution of quantum computing innovation in the US (Figure 21), among the top ten quantum
computing innovators are well-known technology firms such as Intel and IBM, which hold major shares of radical
novelties. IBM clearly stands out as the most innovative frontier firm and has consistently accounted for a share
between 30 percent and 50 percent. This is not surprising given that IBM reached a global milestone in the
evolution of quantum computing with the introduction of the Quantum System One in 2019, the first commercial
circuit-based quantum computer
16. Intel’s share decreased from 40 percent in 2019 to a still formidable 16
percent in 2023.
16 Rosalie Chan, ‘IBM unveils the world's first quantum computer that businesses can actually use to solve previously
impossible problems’, Business Insider, 13 January 2019, https://www.businessinsider.com/ibm-unveils-ibm-q-system-
one-the-first-commercial-quantum-computer-2019-1.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
22
A few newcomers are also noticeable. Among the innovators with growing shares is IonQ, founded in 2015 to
produce hardware for trapped-ion quantum computing. According to IonQ’s official communication, its core
technology is licensed from the University of Maryland, close to which IonQ is based, and which also appears
independently among the frontier innovators. The two founders have a decade-long history of fundamental
research in the field, highlighting the symbiotic relationship between universities and start-ups, for which the US
has traditionally been famous (Mowery and Sampat, 2005). IonQ became the first publicly traded pure-play
quantum computing firm in 202117.
Another entry into the quantum computing market is Zapata Computing, founded in 2017 by a team of Harvard
scientists, and focused on the intersection of quantum computing and generative AI. The examples of IBM and
Intel on the one hand, and Zapata Computing and IonQ on the other, reflect well the nature of the emerging
quantum computing industry in the US. Innovation plays on both the well-known strength of large US technology
incumbents and the nexus between university-based research and start-up creation.
Figure 21: Radical novelties in quantum computing by entity (US, 2019 – 2023)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
In terms of subfields, the top ten US innovators focus mainly on the physical components of quantum
computing, with all key firms having a significant share of their radical novelties in either ‘quantum hardware’ or
‘quantum systems and control’ (Figure 22). Since the overall advancement of quantum computing depends on
quantum hardware and control systems, the amount of frontier innovation in these areas reflects the US’s
leadership in quantum computing more generally.
17 Business Wire, ‘IonQ To Become The First Publicly Traded Pure-Play Quantum Computing Company’, 8 March 2021,
https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20210308005321/en/IonQ -To-Become-The-First-Publicly-Traded-Pure-Play-
Quantum-Computing-Company.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
23
Still, some of the entities also specialise in specific aspects or applications of quantum computing. The
University of Maryland holds a large share of radical novelties in ‘quantum photonics’ (22.22 percent) and
‘quantum networking’ (44.44 percent). Intel is innovating in ‘quantum semiconductor technology’, with a share
of 38.30 percent of its radical novelties. The firm has made advances in developing silicon-based quantum
computing processors, significant for the development of general-purpose quantum computers (Neyens et al,
2022). IonQ, Zapata Computing and, to a lesser extent, Microsoft are also innovative in ‘quantum chemistry’, the
application of quantum mechanics to chemical systems. IBM subsidiary Red Hat holds one third of its radical
novelties in ‘quantum communication’. And finally, Amazon innovates in ‘quantum cybersecurity’, which
accounts for a share of 20 percent of its novelties. Overall, the strong focus on quantum hardware and control
systems reflects the intensity of the race towards the wide adoptability of quantum computers in the US.
Figure 22: US frontier innovators and their related subfields (quantum computing)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
Moving to the EU, semiconductors are the critical technology in which Europe is closest to the US and China. As
Figure 23 shows, the EU is almost on par with China in the number of radical novelties filed in quantum
computing, reaching a total of 126 novelties during the period of observation compared to 130 from Chinese
firms. Interestingly, the key European players in such innovation are (mostly public) research institutions and
not companies like in the US, while China lies in between. In other words, a significant amount of the top
innovation in quantum computing in the EU occurs outside of the commercial space.
For instance, one of the quickly growing innovators is the Delft University of Technology in the Netherlands,
whose share of novelties among the top ten innovators in the EU rose from 15.79 percent in 2021 to 30.43
percent in 2023. Two Finnish firms are among the top innovators, including incumbent telecommunications firm
Ericsson and the entrant firm IQM Finland, the latter founded in 2018 and now dominating radical novelties in
European quantum innovation with shares of 30.77 percent and 30.43 percent in 2022 and 2023, respectively.
Other firms include French state-owned enterprise Bull (now Atos) and the government-funded research

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
24
organisation Commissariat à l’énergie atomique et aux énergies alternatives (CEA), which jointly developed the
supercomputer Tera 1000. Interestingly, some of the most relevant innovators, like Rhine-Westphalian
Technical University Aachen (RWTH Aachen), have moved from being the largest producers of radical novelties
in quantum to virtually disappearing.
Figure 23: Radical novelties in quantum computing by entity (EU, 2019 – 2023)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
Similarly to the US, the EU’s focus on innovation in quantum computing is strongly focused on ‘quantum
hardware’ and ‘quantum systems and control’ (Figure 24). For instance, RWTH Aachen holds two thirds of its
radical novelties in ‘quantum hardware’, and the rest with equal shares in ‘quantum semiconductor technology’
and ‘quantum photonics’. Bull, HQS Quantum Simulations and IQM Finland are nearly entirely focused on the two
subfields.
Next to innovators in quantum computing equipment, Ericsson and the Delft University of Technology hold fairly
diversified novelty portfolios. Ericsson is innovating in ‘quantum communication’ (with 20 percent of its
novelties filed there), ‘quantum machine learning’ (20 percent), ‘quantum networking’ (20 percent) and
‘quantum systems and control’ (40 percent). Although all these subfields are crucial for Ericsson’s core
business activities, the total amount of novel patents it has filed so far in quantum (5) remains small. Delft
University of Technology innovates equally in ‘quantum communication’, with one third of its radical novelties in
this subfield, and the rest falling into ‘quantum hardware’ (25 percent), ‘quantum networking’ (25 percent) and
‘quantum semiconductor technology’ (16.67 percent). Among the specialised firms, the French state-owned
research institute CEA and Irish start-up Equal1 Labs focus on ‘quantum semiconductor technology’, with shares
of 45.45 percent and 75 percent within their respective novelty portfolios. Compsecur innovates exclusively in
‘quantum cryptography’, with all of its five radical novelties in this subfield. The Polytechnic University of
Valencia filed all of its eight radical novelties in ‘quantum photonics’. What is remarkable about European

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
25
quantum computing is how geographically dispersed it is. The top-ten innovators are from eight different EU
countries.
Figure 24: EU frontier innovators and their related subfields (quantum computing)
Source: Bruegel based on WIPO.
5 Conclusions
Competition in critical technologies is attracting increasing attention not only because of their foundational
nature for other types of innovation but also because of their importance in the technological competition
between the US and China. To better understand which countries and companies are leading in these
technologies, we use the methodology developed by García Herrero et al (2025) to identify radical novelties (ie
novel patents) in AI, semiconductors and quantum computing. Their findings pointed to the US dominating AI, at
least in terms of radical novelties, followed by China and with the EU in a far distant third position. However,
China appears to have come up with more novel patents in the semiconductor sector than the US, although US
firms dominate the highest value-added sectors, such as design. As for quantum, the US clearly leads frontier
innovation, even more than for AI. China and the EU follow behind and, unlike for AI, the EU is on par with China in
terms of radical novelties.
In this paper, we look into the entities that are patenting the radical novelties and find that they are quite
different across geographies. In the US, technology companies dominate the three critical technologies and with
very high concentration in a few names. In fact, IBM, Intel and Microsoft rank in the top 10 in terms of the
numbers of novel patents in each of the three critical technologies. In China, only Huawei produces a similarly
large number of radical novelties for all three critical technologies (chips, quantum and AI). In Europe, the
French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission (CEA) and Ericsson are both in the category of triple
frontier innovator. Frontier innovators in the field in which the EU competes more equally, namely quantum, are
mostly research centres and not companies like in the US. China lies somewhat in between in all three domains,
although with fewer companies for quantum.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
26

Finally, looking at how companies have evolved in terms of patents in the subfields of AI, semiconductors and
quantum computing, China is found to have increased relentlessly, not only the number of critical novelties but
also their relevance when looking at performance across subfields. For example, in the subfield of quantum
computing, China has shifted from ‘quantum cryptography’ and ‘quantum cybersecurity’ to the more
technologically challenging fields of ‘quantum hardware’ and ‘quantum systems and control’. Similarly, in
semiconductors, China has moved away from innovating predominantly in ‘display technology’ to defining the
technology frontier in ‘memory technology’ and ‘semiconductor manufacturing’. An interesting finding is the
relatively more volatile presence of frontier innovators for China, with some key innovators disappearing from
the list while new ones suddenly appear at the top of the list. This could be related to Chinese companies having
been included in the US entity list, but more research is needed to test this hypothesis.
All in all, for AI, US tech companies remain dominant in terms of critical (patented) novelties for ‘machine
learning’, ‘natural language processing’, ‘cybersecurity’ and ‘generative AI’. China focuses mostly on the
processing of visual data and robotics, two fields that are technologically closely related and that have military
applications. The EU’s stronger field, namely quantum computing, is dominated by research centres (mostly
public) and is also very diverse and geographically dispersed, which might be a disadvantage in terms of
commercialisation. In semiconductors and AI, EU companies patent far fewer radical novelties than Chinese or
American companies. This is even the case in subfields in which the EU used to have a longstanding
comparative advantage, such as robotics.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
27

References
Agrawal, A., J.S. Gans and A. Goldfarb (2019) ‘Exploring the impact of artificial Intelligence: Prediction versus
judgment’, Information and Economic Policy 47: 1-6
Brown, A., F. Chimits and G. Sebastian (2023) Accelerator State: How China fosters ‘Little Giant’ companies,
Mercator Institute for China Studies
García-Herrero, A., R. Schindowski and M. Krystyanczuk (2025) ‘Radical novelties in critical technologies: How
do China, the EU, and the US fare?’ Working Paper, Bruegel
García-Herrero, A. and M. Krystyanczuk (2024) ‘How Does China Conduct Industrial Policy: Analyzing Words
Versus Deeds’, Journal of Industry, Competiton and Trade 24(10)
Kaku, M. (2023) Quantum Supremacy: How the Quantum Computer Revolution Will Change Everything,
Doubleday
Mowery, D.C. and B.H. Sampat (2005) ‘The Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 and University-Industry Technology Transfer: A
Model for Other OECD Governments?’ Journal of Technology Transfer 30(1-2): 115-127.
NAS (2019) Quantum Computing: Progress and Prospects, National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine, Washington, DC: The National Academies Press
Neyens, S., O.K. Zietz, T.F. Watson, F. Luthi, A. Nethwewala, H.C. George … J.S. Clarke (2024) ‘Probing single
electrons across 300-mm spin qubit wafers’, Nature 629: 80–85
Nordhaus, W.D. (2021) ‘Are We Approaching Economic Singularity? Information Technology and the Future of
Economic Growth’, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 13(1): 299-332
Scharre, P. (2024) Four Battlegrounds: Power in the Age of Artificial Intelligence, W.W. Norton & Company
Shivakumar, S., J. Yoon and T. Sirkar (2024) ‘Gallium Nitride: A Strategic Opportunity for the Semiconductor
Industry’, Commentary, 20 May, Center for Strategic and International Studies

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
28

Appendix
US top patentees company list
Abbreviation Full name Website
Adobe Adobe Inc. www.adobe.com
Amazon Amazon.com, Inc. www.amazon.com
Apple Apple Inc. www.apple.com
Applied Materials Applied Materials, Inc. www.appliedmaterials.com
Google Google LLC www.google.com
IBM International Business Machines Corporation www.ibm.com
Intel Intel Corporation www.intel.com
IonQ IonQ ionq.com
Lumileds Lumileds http://www.lumileds.com/
Micron Micron Technology, Inc. https://www.micron.com/
Microsoft Microsoft Corporation https://www.microsoft.com/
Nvidia Nvidia Corporation https://www.nvidia.com/
onsemi ON Semiconductor Corporation https://www.onsemi.com/
Oracle Oracle Corporation https://www.oracle.com/
Qualcomm Qualcomm Incorporated https://www.qualcomm.com/
Red Hat Red Hat, Inc. https://redhat.com/
Rigetti Rigetti Computing, Inc. http://rigetti.com/
Texas Instruments Texas Instruments Incorporated https://www.ti.com/
UOM University of Maryland, College Park https://umd.edu/
Zapata Computing Zapata Computing Holdings Inc. https://www.zapatacomputing.com/

China top patentees company list
Abbreviation Full name Website
AAC Acoustic AAC Technologies Holdings Inc. https://www.aactechnologies.com/
Autel Robotics Autel Robotics Co., Ltd. https://www.autelrobotics.com/
Baidu Baidu, Inc. https://www.baidu.com/
BOE Optoelectronics Beijing BOE Optoelectronics Technology Co., Ltd https://www.boe.com/en/
BOE Technology Group BOE Technology Group Co., Ltd. https://www.boe.com/en/
ByteDance ByteDance Ltd. https://www.bytedance.com/en/
CETC China Electronics Technology Group Corporation https://en.cetc.com.cn/
Changxin Memory ChangXin Memory Technologies https://www.cxmt.com/en/
CloudMinds Robotics CloudMinds Technologies Co. Ltd https://cloudminds.com/
Enkris Semiconductor Enkris Semiconductor Inc. https://en.enkris.com/
Hengtong Qask Hengtong Qasky Quantum Inf. Research Institute Co., Ltd. https://www.hengtonggroup.com/
Huawei Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. https://www.huawei.com/en/
InnoScience InnoScience Technology Holding Co., Ltd. https://www.innoscience.com/
Ningbo Semiconductor Ningbo Semiconductor International Corporation https://www.nsemii.com/#/index
Oppo OPPO Guangdong Mobile Telecommunications Corp., Ltd. https://www.oppo.com/en/
Origin Quantum Origin Quantum Computing Technology (Hefei) Co., Ltd. https://originqc.com.cn/
Ping An Ping An Insurance (Group) Company of China, Ltd. https://group.pingan.com/

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
29

QuantumCTek National shield quantum https://www.quantum-info.com/
Jingtai Technology Shenzhen Jingtai LCD Technology Co., Ltd https://www.xtalpi.com/
Shenzhen Polytechnic Shenzhen Polytechnic https://english.szpu.edu.cn/
SMIC Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corporation https://www.smics.com/en/
SCNU South China Normal University https://english.scnu.edu.cn/
TCL Technology TCL Technology Group Corp. https://www.tcltech.com/en
Tencent Tencent Holdings Ltd. https://www.tencent.com/en-us/
UBTECH Robotics UBTECH Robotics Inc. https://ubtrobot.com/
Yangtze Memory Yangtze Memory Technologies Co., Ltd. https://www.ymtc.com/

EU top patentees company list
Abbreviation Full name Country Website
Accenture Accenture plc Ireland https://www.accenture.com/
Aledia Aledia France https://www.aledia.com/en/
ASM IP Holding Advanced Semiconductor Materials Netherlands https://www.asm.com/
Bull Bull SAS France http://www.bull.com/
Carl Zeiss Carl Zeiss AG Germany https://www.zeiss.com/
CEA French Alternative Energies and Atomic
Energy Commission France https://www.cea.fr/
Compsecur CompSecur sp. Poland https://compsecur.pl/
DUT Delft University of Technology Netherlands https://www.tudelft.nl/en/
equal1.labs Equal1 Ireland https://www.equal1.com/
Ericsson Ericsson Limited Sweden https://www.ericsson.com/en
Infineon Infineon Technologies AG Germany https://www.infineon.com/
IQM Finland IQM Quantum Computers Finland https://www.meetiqm.com/
Nexperia Nexperia Netherlands https://www.nexperia.com/
Nokia Nokia Corporation[ Finland https://nokia.com/
Osram Opto Osram Opto Semiconductors GmbH Germany https://ams-osram.com/
Polytechnic University Valencia Polytechnic University Spain https://www.upv.es/index-en.html
Robert Bosch Robert Bosch GmbH Germany https://www.bosch.com/
RWTH Aachen RWTH Aachen University Germany https://www.rwth-aachen.de/
Safran Safran S.A. France https://safran-group.com/
SAP SAP SE Germany https://www.sap.com/
Siemens Siemens AG Germany https://www.siemens.com/
Stanley Robotics Stanley Robotics France https://www.stanley-robotics.com/
STMicroelectronics STMicroelectronics NV Switzerland https://www.st.com/

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
© Bruegel 2025. All rights reserved. Short sections, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted in the
original language without explicit permission provided that the source is acknowledged. Opinions expressed
in this publication are those of the author(s) alone.
Bruegel, Rue de la Charité 33, B-1210 Brussels
(+32) 2 227 4210
info@bruegel.org
www.bruegel.org
WORKING PAPER|ISSUE 03|2020
