
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Reinhilde Veugelers
(reinhilde.veugelers@
bruegel.org) is a Senior
Fellow at Bruegel and a
professor at KULeuven
Désirée Rückert* is an
economist at the European
Investment Bank
Christoph Weiss* is an
economist at the European
Investment Bank

* The views expressed in
this Policy Contribution are
those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the
position of the European
Investment Bank or its
shareholders.
Executive summary
Using new evidence on the digitalisation activities of firms in the European Union and the
United States, we document a trend towards digital polarisation based on firms’ use of the
latest digital technologies and their plans for future investment in digitalisation. A substantial
share of firms are not implementing any state-of-the-art digital technologies and do not
have plans to invest in digitalisation. However, there is also a substantial share of firms that
are already partially or even fully implementing state-of-the-art digital technologies in their
businesses and that plan to further increase their digitalisation investments.
Small Manufacturing firms and old small firms in services are significantly more
likely to be and remain non-active in terms of digitalisation. Our results do not provide
any evidence that EU firms are more likely than their US counterparts to be stuck on the
wrong side of the digitalisation divide. Taking into account firm size and firm age, there
are no significant differences between the EU and the US in terms of having more or fewer
persistently non-digital firms.
As persistently digitally-inactive firms are also less likely to be innovative, to add
employees or to command higher mark-ups, it is important for policymaking to remove
barriers that trap these firms in persistent digital inactivity. Lack of access to finance is a
major barrier for EU firms compared to their US counterparts, particularly for the EU’s
persistently non-digital firms, and especially for older, smaller companies in services.
Improving their access to finance might therefore go a long way towards addressing the
corporate digitalisation divide in the EU.
Policy Contribution
Issue n˚17 | December 2019 Bridging the divide:
new evidence about firms
and digitalisation
Reinhilde Veugelers, Désirée Rückert and Christoph Weiss

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚17 | December 2019
1 Introduction
Digital technologies have proliferated in the business sector, from the provision of digital
products and services online to robotised production processes, the internet of things, big
data and artificial intelligence, and applications, including use of digital systems to manage
back office tasks. Numerous optimistic statements have been made that the digitalisation of
the business sector will boost growth and productivity and trigger a fourth industrial revolu-
tion. However, there has been so far little hard evidence of a significant productivity boost.
More than 30 years after Robert Solow’s (1987) statement “you can see the computer age
everywhere but in productivity statistics”, macro-level productivity growth remains subdued.
Meanwhile, digitalisation is feared as a source of disruption, with the risk that only a few firms
will emerge as winners while many firms and workers lose out, leading to a more polarised
economic structure.
There is some evidence that this polarisation is happening and digital technologies are
leading to winner-takes-all markets. Andrews et al (2017) showed an increasing productivity
gap between firms at the global frontier and laggards. Frontier firms are typically larger, more
innovative and have higher rates of digital technology adoption1. There is also evidence of
rising market concentration (Autor et al, 2017; Philippon, 2019) and rising mark-ups by firms
(De Loecker and Eeckhout, 2017). In particular, Diez et al (2018) found that mark-ups have
risen among firms that already have the highest mark-ups within their industries, consistent
with winner-takes-all patterns. The trends of rising market concentration and mark-ups tend
be more pronounced in the sectors in which digital technologies, especially digital services,
are developed or widely adopted (Calligaris et al, 2018). Digital technologies often come with
features such as scale and synergies, which give an advantage to large firms and foster market
concentration (Haskel and Westlake, 2017).
The discussion on winner-take-all markets and rising mark-ups by firms that already have
the highest mark-ups is perhaps most associated with Big Tech firms, such as Alibaba, Alpha-
bet, Apple, Amazon, Facebook, Huawei and Microsoft. All these companies are from the US or
China. European firms are not present among the Big Tech giants and European Union firms
are not among the leading digital research and development investors (Veugelers, 2018; EIB,
2018).
The EU has fallen behind in the digital technologies and services race but might be able to
take up leading positions in new races. This will depend on the integration of digital technol-
ogies, including the internet of things (IoT) and artificial intelligence (AI), into manufacturing
and services (eg Bughin et al, 2019). For example, car manufacturing, a pivotal sector for the
EU economy, is now done in the context of a whole series of digital services (smart electricity
grids, personalised entertainment systems, smart mobility), which are all part of a network
centred on the physical platform represented by the car and based on IoT and AI.
If European firms are unable to integrate new digital technologies into their business
models, they will lose out, even in those sectors where they are currently still leading. There
is growing concern that EU firms in non-digital sectors lag behind in the adoption of digital
technologies, especially in the services sector (EIB, 2018). This correlates with subdued EU
productivity growth.
Although these are first-order concerns, there is little large-scale cross-sector and cross-
national firm-level evidence about digital technology use, which would allow the position
of EU firms on the digital technology divide compared with their US peers to be checked.
Using the results of a large-scale survey on the digitalisation activities of EU and US firms,
conducted in 2018 by the European Investment Bank, this Policy Contribution addresses
1 Andrews et al (2016) define global frontier firms as the top 5 percent of firms in terms of labour productivity levels,
within each two-digit sector, in each year, across all countries since the early 2000s. All other firms are defined as
laggards.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚17 | December 2019
this evidence gap. Based on data on the current use by firms of state-of-the-art digital
technologies in manufacturing and services, and on their future plans for investment in
digitalisation it maps the corporate digital investment divide and identifies which firms are
located on which side.
2 Digital investment and skills survey data
In 2018, the European Investment Bank interviewed 1,700 companies in the EU and the US
about their digital investments2. To categorise companies according to their stage of digitali-
sation, we used information from these interviews on:
1. How far companies have gone in adopting the most prominent state-of-the-art digital
technologies;
2. Companies’ investment plans for digital technologies.
The EIB data covers firms with at least five employees in the manufacturing and services
sectors. The sample was stratified by industry group (manufacturing and services sector), size
class and region (Table 1)3.
T able 1: Breakdown of firms surveyed for their digital investment plans
  Manufacturing Services
European Union 456 432
 West and North Europe 198 198
 South Europe 122 89
 Central and East Europe 146 145
United States 411 389
 Northeast 93 83
 Midwest 126 136
 South 106 82
 West 86 88
Size (no. employees)
 Micro (5-9) 143 172
 Small (10-49) 291 333
 Medium (50-249) 287 223
 Large (250+) 146 93
Source: EIB (for details see chapter 8 of EIB, 2018). Note: West and North Europe: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Ireland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Sweden and the United Kingdom. South Europe: Cyprus, Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain. Central
and East Europe: Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia. US
regions according to US Census Bureau geographical divisions.
2 For details, see chapter 8 of EIB (2018).
3 The sample size of the 2018 EIB survey is relatively small. The survey is representative at the level of the three
aggregate groups of countries in the EU and the four regions in the US (Table 1) but not at individual EU country
level. Similarly, it is representative for the manufacturing and services sectors, but does not provide more detailed
information on industry classification within those broad sectors. The full database underlying the results reported
in this Policy Contribution is not publically available. For details, see chapter 8 of EIB (2018).

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚17 | December 2019
2.1 Adoption of digital technologies
We first evaluated the current digitalisation status of companies (divided into manufacturing
and services companies) according to how far they have gone in adopting the state-of-the-art
digital technologies listed in Table 24.
T able 2: State-of-the-art digital technologies covered by the assessment
Manufacturing
3D printing, also known as additive manufacturing;
Automation via advanced robotics – a second generation of robots, which are more
autonomous, flexible and often more easily programmable;
Internet of things: electronic devices that communicate with each other without human
assistance;
Big data and analytics.
Services
Digitalisation and automation of internal routines, including back-office, purchasing and
logistics management, for example, software that automates routine tasks such as billing
and accounting;
Web-based applications for marketing and sales, for example, using a specific app
through which customers can order goods or services;
Provision of digital products and services over the internet, for example offering of
automated market intelligence or digital content streaming;
Big data and analytics.
Source: EIB (for details see chapter 8 of EIB, 2018).
We labelled as ‘fully digital’ companies that said their entire business is organised around at
least one of the four digital technologies listed in Table 2. If at least one of the technologies is
implemented in parts of a firm’s business, we labelled them as ‘partially digital’ . We labelled as
‘non-digital’ all companies that have not heard about any of these digital technologies or have
only heard about them but have not implemented any of them. Firms in the services sector
tend to be more digitalised and are more likely to be ‘fully digital’ , which could be related to
the different set of state-of-the-art digital technologies used in the survey to characterise the
level of digitalisation.
A first finding is that EU firms are not lagging behind their US counterparts. Figure 1 shows
no evidence that EU manufacturing firms are less digitally active compared to their US coun-
terparts. For the services sectors, the share of EU firms that are non-digital is larger than in the
US. However, the share of EU firms that have organised their entire business around digital
technologies is larger than in the US. But these differences disappear when comparing EU
and US firms within the same firm size and age category5.
4 The relevant question from the EIB survey was: ‘Q32. Can you tell me for each of the following technologies if you
have (i) not heard about them, (ii) have heard about them but not implemented, (iii) implemented them in parts
of your business, or (iv) whether your entire business is organised around them?’ For details see chapter 8 of EIB
(2018).
5 For a more detailed discussion, see Rückert et al (2019).

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚17 | December 2019
Figure 1: Share of firms that are digitally active (in %), 2018
Source: Bruegel based on EIB data.
2.2 Digital investment plans
In terms of companies’ digital investment plans for the next three years6, we classified compa-
nies as ‘increasing’ if they plan to increase their investments in digital technologies, or if they
have not yet made digital investments but plan to start doing so. We label all other firms as
‘stable/inactive/reduced’ .
Around 60 percent of companies plan to increase their digital technology investment
spending (Figure 2). Although EU firms score somewhat lower than their US counterparts,
both in manufacturing and services, there a re no major statistically significant differences
between companies in the EU and US when it comes to future investment in digital
technologies.
Figure 2: Share of firms that plan to increase investment in digital technologies in
the next three years (2018)
Source: Bruegel based on EIB data.
6 The relevant EIB survey question for firms that have already implemented one of the digital technologies read:
‘Over the next three years, do you expect your investment spend in digital technologies to (i) increase, (ii) stay
around the same, (iii) decrease, (iv) no investment planned in digital technologies?’ The similar question for
non-digital firms reads: ‘Looking ahead to the next three years, do you plan to invest in digital technologies?’
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
EU U S EU U S
M anufacturing Services
N on digital Partially digital Fully digital
50%
52%
54%
56%
58%
60%
62%
64%
EU US EU US
M anufacturing Services

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚17 | December 2019
3 Who is on which side of the digital divide?
Combining firms’ current state of digital investments with their plans for digital investments
allows us to characterise firms according to their positions on the digital divide. Figure 3
shows how digitally active firms are significantly more likely to have plans to expand their dig-
ital investments further. On the other side, firms that are currently not using state-of-the-art
digital technologies are less likely to have future digital investment plans. This is the case in
both the EU and the US, in the manufacturing and services sectors. This evidence of polarisa-
tion confirms the existence of a corporate digitalisation divide7.
Figure 3: Share of firms that plan to increase investment in digital technologies in
the next three years, by digitalisation intensity (2018)
Source: Bruegel based on EIB data.
The next question is which firms are on which side of the digitalisation divide? Figure 4
categorises firms according to their current level of digitalisation and their digital investment
outlook.
Firms that have not invested so far in state-of-the-art digital technologies and that are
not planning to do so in the coming years can be considered as falling behind. We categorise
them as ‘persistently non-digital’ . Companies that are currently non-digital but are planning
to start investing in the coming three years are categorised as ‘beginners’ .
Of the firms that are currently digitally active, those that are planning to increase their
digital investments in the coming three years are listed as ‘moving ahead’ . ‘Stable’ companies
are already digitalised but do not intend to increase their digital investment spending in the
coming three years. We further split up the moving-ahead firms depending on whether they
are currently fully or partially digitally active. ‘Frontrunners’ are those firms that are currently
already fully digitally active and that are also increasing their digital investments; the rest we
label as ‘catching-up’ .
7 For multivariate analysis results on the likelihood of firms having plans to expand their digital investments de-
pending on their state of current digitally activity, see Rückert et al (2019).
0%
1 0%
2 0%
3 0%
4 0%
5 0%
6 0%
7 0%
8 0%
E U U S E U U S
M a n u f a c t u r i n g S e r v i c e s
N o n d i g i t a l P a r t i a l l y d i g i t a l F u l l y d i g i t a l

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚17 | December 2019
Figure 4: Corporate digitalisation divide categories
Source: Bruegel based on EIB data.
Figure 5 sorts the surveyed companies in the EU and the US in manufacturing and ser-
vices into the digitalisation divide categories of Figure 4. For manufacturing firms, there are
no major differences in terms of digitalisation divide profiles between the EU and the US. In
services, however, the EU seems to have more firms left behind by digitalisation. At the same
time, the EU has somewhat more ‘frontrunners’ in services compared to the US. There is
therefore some evidence of a greater digitalisation divide among services companies in the
EU than the US, but these differences are not significant8.
Figure 5: Digitalisation divide in the EU and US, by sector (2018)
Source: Bruegel based on EIB data.
8 Multivariate analysis confirms that there are no statistically significant differences between EU and US firms in
terms of the likelihood that they are persistently non-active or moving ahead, when comparing within sectors and
controlling for firm size and age. The greater probability of EU firms being ‘frontrunners’ in services, compared to
US firms, is only marginally significant (see Rückert et al, 2019).
Persistently non-digital Stable
FrontrunnersCatching-upBeginners
Non-digital Partially digital Fully digital
Moving ahead
IncreasingStable/inactive/
reduced
Digital investment outlook
Digitalisation intensity
0 2 0 4 0 6 0 8 0 1 0 0
E U
U S
E U
U S
M a n u f a c t u r i n g S e r v i c e s
P e r s i s t e n t l y n o n - d i g i t a l B e g i n n e r S t a b l e Ca t c h i n g - u p F r o n t r u n n e r

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚17 | December 2019
Figure 6: Digitalisation divide, by sector and age-size categories (2018)
Source: Bruegel based on EIB data. Note: Young = less than 10 years old; small = fewer than 50 employees.
4 Performance and digital polarisation
Why is it important to identify on which side of the digitalisation divide firms are? Does it
matter for firm performance, or broader economic performance, whether firms are falling
behind or moving ahead? To address these questions, we looked at how firms with different
positions relative to the digitalisation divide perform in relation to employment growth, inno-
vation and mark-ups. This analysis is purely correlational and cannot be interpreted as causal.
4.1 Employment growth
The EIB in 2018 asked firms about their current number of employees and the number of em-
ployees three years ago (see section 2 for information about the EIB survey). Figure 7 shows
that firms with no plans to start or increase digital investments are also less likely to have
expanded employment in the past three years. Firms that are ‘persistently non-digital’ score
particularly poorly on adding jobs over the past three years, especially in the EU9. In contrast,
companies that plan to increase their digital investments, whether ‘beginners’ or ‘movers
ahead’ (ie ‘catching-up’ and ‘frontrunners’), are more likely to have increased employment.
Firms’ positioning on the digitalisation divide thus matters for employment growth: those
moving ahead are more likely to increase employment, while those left behind are less likely
to grow. Job destruction effects from digitalisation thus seem more likely to be found in firms
falling behind, rather than in firms that are forging ahead.
4.2 R&D and innovation
The EIB data also allows us to draw out innovation profiles. In line with Veugelers et al (2019),
we identified companies as ‘non innovation-active’ if they do not invest in R&D and do not
invest in order to develop or introduce new products, processes and services. These firms are
not engaged in incremental or radical innovation and are not adopting innovation developed
elsewhere. We would expect digital technologies to empower innovation and therefore firms
that are moving ahead with digitalisation to be also innovation-active. Figure 8 confirms that
those firms left behind on the wrong side of the digital divide are also more likely to be ‘non
9 The results are qualitatively similar when we split the sample by sector and conduct the analysis separately for
firms in manufacturing or services.
0 2 0 4 0 6 0 8 0 1 0 0
Y o u n g s m a l l
O l d s m a l l
Y o u n g l a r g e
O l d l a r g e
Y o u n g s m a l l
O l d s m a l l
Y o u n g l a r g e
O l d l a r g e
M a n u f a c t u r i n g S e r v i c e s
P e r s i s t e n t l y n o n - d i g i t a l B e g i n n e r S t a b l e Ca t c h i n g - u p F r o n t r u n n e r

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚17 | December 2019
innovation-active’ . Firms moving ahead are significantly more likely than companies in other
digitalisation categories to be leading innovators10.
Figure 7: Share of firms with positive employment growth in past three years (2018)
Source: Bruegel based on EIB data.
Figure 8: Share of ‘non innovation-active’ firms (2018)
Source: Bruegel based on EIB data. Note: Firms are considered non innovation-active if they do not invest in R&D and do not invest in order
to develop or introduce new products, processes and services (Veugelers et al, 2019).
4.3 Mark-ups
Digitalisation is often linked to increasing market concentration among a few big companies
with market power. We estimated mark-ups for the firms in our sample and correlated them
with the digitalisation profiles11. In line with the literature, we are interested in testing wheth-
er firms left behind on the wrong side of the digitalisation divide (ie ‘persistently non-digital’
firms) have lower mark-ups and whether firms that are moving ahead have higher mark-ups.
Figure 9 shows that persistently non-digital firms are also significantly less likely to be
the firms with the top mark-ups in their sectors. Beginners and, even more so, frontrunners
are likely to be in the top quintile of the distribution of mark-ups in their sector. This is most
evident for US firms.
10 For a more detailed discussion on multivariate analysis results on the link between the digital divide and
innovation, see Rückert et al (2019).
11 The estimation of mark-ups is based on the approach of De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017).
0%
1 0%
2 0%
3 0%
4 0%
5 0%
6 0%
7 0%
8 0%
E U U S
P e r s i s t e n t l y n o n -d i g i t a l B e g i n n e r S t a b l e Ca t c h i n g - u p F r o n t r u n n e r
0%
1 0%
2 0%
3 0%
4 0%
5 0%
6 0%
7 0%
E U U S
P e r s i s t e n t l y n o n -d i g i t a l B e g i n n e r S t a b l e Ca t c h i n g - u p F r o n t r u n n e r

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚17 | December 2019
Figure 9: Share of firms in the top quintile of the distribution of mark-ups (2018)
Source: Bruegel based on EIB data.
5 Barriers to, and incentives for, investment
in digitalisation
Finally, we looked at the different barriers and incentives firms perceive when contemplating
investment in digitalisation. We did this for each of the digitalisation divide categories. Iden-
tifying any barrier that specifically impedes firms that are left behind on the wrong side of the
digital divide is relevant for the identification of policy levers to help move these firms away
from of their ‘persistently non-digital’ status.
5.1 Perceived barriers to investment in digitalisation
Figure 10 shows that the ‘availability of staff with the right skills’ is the most important barrier
to investment activities: 44 percent of all firms report this as a major obstacle to investment.
This finding supports the central role of skill formation in any digital policy mix. ‘Uncertainty
about the future’ and ‘business regulations (eg licences, permits, bankruptcy) and taxation’
complete the top three major barriers. Perhaps surprisingly, ‘access to digital infrastructure’
is the barrier identified least frequently as a major obstacle. Policies to ensure access to digital
infrastructure seem to be therefore not (or no longer) necessarily as relevant as previously.
Figure 10: Share of firms that reported an obstacle to investment as ‘major’ (2018)
0%
1 0%
2 0%
3 0%
4 0%
5 0%
6 0%
D e m a n d S t a ﬀ w i t h
r i g h t s k i l l s
E n e r g y c o s t s D i g i t a l
i n f r a s t r u c t u r e
L a b o u r
r e g u l a t i o n s
B u s i n e s s
r e g u l a t i o n s
T r a n s p o r t
i n f r a s t r u c t u r e
E x t e r n a l
ﬁn a n c e
U n c e r t a i n t y
P e r s i s t e n t l y n o n -d i g i t a l B e g i n n e r S t a b l e Ca t c h i n g - u p F r o n t r u n n e r

Source: Bruegel based on EIB data.
0%
5%
1 0%
1 5%
2 0%
2 5%
3 0%
3 5%
4 0%
4 5%
5 0% P e r s i s t e n t l y n o n -d i g i t a l B e g i n n e r S t a b l e Ca t c h i n g - u p F r o n t r u n n e r
E U U S

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚17 | December 2019
 ‘Persistently non-digital’ firms do not report that the barriers to investment affect them
more severely than other firms. This evidence would suggest that the lack of digital invest-
ment is not so much a consequence of greater impediments, but of fewer incentives or less
ambition. Lack of availability of external finance is the only barrier that is more often rated by
persistently non-digital firms as a major impediment to investment: one out of four persis-
tently non-digital firms rates this as a major barrier compared to one out of six for all firms.
Figure 11 shows that the availability of external finance seems to be a more severe barrier
for EU firms than US firms. Unlike in the US, persistently non-digital firms in the EU are sig-
nificantly more likely than other EU firms to report access to finance as a major impediment.
This suggests that addressing the access to finance issue should be a primary focus for EU
policymakers to lift their persistently non-digital firms into digitalisation.
Figure 11: Share of firms that report the availability of external finance as a major
obstacle to investment (2018)
Source: Bruegel based on EIB data.
5.2 Increased competition because of digitalisation
The 2018 EIB survey also asked about firms’ expectations of future competitive pressure aris-
ing from digitalisation: whether they expect that digital technologies will lead to an increase
in the number of firms competing in their sector or not. As escaping competition might be a
major incentive for firms to engage in digital investment, we explored for which firms compe-
tition can work as incentive.
Figure 12: Shares of firms that expect digital technologies to lead to an increase in
the number of firms competing in their sector (2018)
Source: Bruegel based on EIB data.
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
EU U S
Persistently non-digital All ﬁrm s
0%
1 0%
2 0%
3 0%
4 0%
5 0%
6 0%
7 0%
E U U S
P e r s i s t e n t l y n o n -d i g i t a l B e g i n n e r S t a b l e
Ca t c h i n g - u p F r o n t r u n n e r

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚17 | December 2019
Overall, 40 percent of surveyed firms expected an increase in competition in their sector
as a result of digitalisation. In general, US firms are more likely than EU firms to expect an
increase in competitive pressure, reflecting a more competitive US single market (Figure 12).
Persistently non-digital firms seem to feel more shielded from competitive pressure, as they
are less likely to expect an increase in competition arising from digitalisation. This perceived
lack of competitive pressure contributes to a lack of incentives for persistently non-digital
firms to engage in digitalisation. Competitive pressure seems to motivate in particular firms in
the moving ahead category, especially in the US, to further advance in terms of digitalisation.
6 Conclusions and implications for policy
Our analysis confirms the trend towards a digitalisation divide between companies. A sub-
stantial share of firms does not implement any state-of-the-art digital technology and has no
plans to start investing in digitalisation. However, a substantial share of firms already partially
or even fully implements state-of-the-art digital technologies in their businesses, and has
plans to further increase their digitalisation investments.
In terms of the types of firms that are more likely to be persistently non-digital, firm size
and firm age matter. Small manufacturing firms and old small services firms are significantly
more likely to be persistently non-digital. Economies with more old SMEs are therefore more
vulnerable to corporate digital polarisation.
Taking into account sector and firm-size differences, our results do not provide any evi-
dence that EU firms are more likely to be stuck on the wrong side of the digitalisation divide
compared to their US counterparts. There are no significant differences between the EU and
the US in terms of having more or fewer persistently non-digital firms. Our results show that
it matters for firms’ performance if they are falling behind and for economies if they have too
many firms left behind on the wrong side of the digital divide. Persistently non-digital firms
are less likely to be innovative, less likely to create new jobs and less likely to command higher
mark-ups, while digitalisation frontrunners are more likely to be innovative and increase their
workforces, and can command significantly higher mark-ups. Lifting firms out of persistent
digital non-activity should therefore be high on the policy agenda.
The EIB survey carried out in 2018 also looked at the barriers firms perceive when con-
templating investment (see EIB, 2018, chapter 8, for details). Overall, our analysis shows
that policymaking in the EU should be concerned about the lack, and particularly about the
long-standing lack, of digital investment by some of its firms. SMEs in manufacturing and
old SMEs in services are likely to be in the danger zone of permanent digital inactivity and
deserve special policy attention. Addressing barriers to skills should be a priority for poli-
cymakers in order to support firms to digitalise further, irrespective of where they stand in
relation to the digital divide. Similarly, addressing the regulatory burden and the uncertain-
ties regulation can create should also be high on the digital policy agenda.
The higher sensitivity of US firms and frontrunners to competition when investing in
digitalisation is a reminder for EU policymakers of the importance of a well-functioning EU
integrated market. This underpins the call for an industrial policy at EU level which should
have the single market and competition policy as its core horizontal instruments, to ensure a
large, competitive market environment that will push firms to invest in digitalisation (as advo-
cated by Altomonte and Veugelers, 2019). Beyond completing the digital single market, the
single market for non-digital products should be completed, particularly non-digital services
(as diverse as retail, transport, hotels and banks). On skills, there is a role for the EU to make
it easier for firms to access digital skills across national borders. This requires, among other
things, more work on mutual recognition of diplomas and the introduction of a European
professional card to reduce intra-EU mobility costs. A recalibration of the European Social
Fund, providing greater support to specific national digital education initiatives and to the

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚17 | December 2019
training and retraining of workers, would also help to address this first-order impediment to
digital investment.
The evidence reported here finds access to finance to be a more severe obstacle to invest-
ment for EU firms compared to their US counterparts, particularly for the EU’s persistently
non-digital firms. Addressing problems of access to finance may therefore go a long way to
address the EU’s corporate digitalisation divide.
References
Altomonte, C. and R. Veugelers (2019) 'Memo to the Commissioner responsible for single market
and industrial policy', in M. Demertzis and G. Wolff (eds) Braver, greener, fairer: Memos to the EU
Leadership 2019-2014, Bruegel
Andrews, D., C. Criscuolo and P . Gal (2016) 'The best versus the rest: The global productivity slowdown,
divergence across firms and the role of public policy', OECD Productivity Working Paper No. 5,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Autor, D., D. Dorn, L. Katz, C. Patterson and J. Van Reenen (2017) 'The fall of the labor share and the rise
of superstar firms', NBER Working Paper No. 23396, National Bureau of Economic Research
Bughin, J., E. Windhagen, J. Mischke, P . Sjatel and B. Gürich (2019) 'Innovation in Europe: Changing the
game to regain a competitive edge', Discussion Paper, October, McKinsey Global Institute
Calligaris, S., C. Criscuolo and L. Marcolin (2018) 'Mark-ups in the digital era', OECD Science, Technology
and Industry Working Paper No. 2018/10, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
De Loecker, J. and J. Eeckhout (2017) 'The rise of market power and the macroeconomic implications',
NBER Working Paper No. 23687, National Bureau of Economic Research
Diez, F .J., D. Leigh and S. Tambunlertchai (2018) 'Global market power and its macroeconomic
implications', IMF Working Paper No. 18/137, International Monetary Fund
EIB (2018) Investment report 2018/2019: Retooling Europe’s economy, European Investment Bank,
available at https://www.eib.org/en/publications/investment-report-2018
Haskel, J. and Westlake, S. (2017) Capitalism without capital: The rise of the intangible economy, Princeton
University Press
Philippon, T . (2019) The great reversal: How America gave up on free markets, Cambridge, MA: The
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press
Solow, R. M. (1987) 'We’d better watch out', The New York Times, 12 July
Rückert, D., R. Veugelers and C. Weiss (2019) 'The growing digital divide in Europe and the United States',
mimeo
Veugelers, R. (2018) 'Are European firms falling behind in the global corporate research race?' Policy
Contribution 2018/06, Bruegel
Veugelers, R., A. Ferrando, S. Lekpek and C. Weiss (2019) 'Young SMEs as a motor of Europe’s innovation
machine', Intereconomics 54(6): 369-377
