
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Bertin Martens (bertin.
martens@bruegel.org) is a
Senior Fellow at Bruegel
Executive summary
European Union policymakers want to close the artificial intelligence innovation gap
with the United States, as a way to accelerate lagging productivity growth. The EU focus is
on expanding an existing supercomputer network with more AI hardware and computing
infrastructure, with taxpayer support. However, this computing infrastructure is not adapted
to AI modelling. The cost of catching up with leading big tech AI computing centres is already
prohibitive for EU budgets, and is set to become even more so.
The hardware focus overlooks missing EU markets for complementary services that are
required to set up a successful AI business: large-scale business outlets for frontier generative
AI models to generate sufficient revenues to cover huge fixed model training costs, hyperscale
cloud-computing infrastructure and private equity financing for AI start-ups. In the absence
of (or with insufficient) complementary services markets in the EU, start-ups are forced to
collaborate with US big tech firms. Injecting taxpayer subsidies to make up for these missing
markets may further distort EU markets. Regulatory compliance costs, including uncertainty
about the implementation arrangements for the EU Artificial Intelligence Act, add to market
problems.
The EU should address a wider range of market failures in its policy initiatives. It
should strive to increase productivity growth below the AI technology frontier, by facilitating
investment and applications of AI-driven services produced by derived and specialised
generative AI models, or AI-applications that build on top of existing generative AI models.
Building these below-frontier AI applications requires far less computing capacity and less
heavy investment costs. Promoting the uptake of AI application services across a wide range
of industries can substantially stimulate productivity growth.
That requires a razor-sharp focus on pro-innovation guidelines, standards and
implementation provisions for the EU AI Act, shortening the Act’s regulatory uncertainty
horizon as much as possible, and facilitating collaborations between EU AI startups and big
tech companies. Widening and deepening the EU private equity and venture capital market
would also be very helpful.

Recommended citation
Martens, B. (2024) ‘Catch-up with the US or prosper below the tech frontier? An EU artificial
intelligence strategy’ , Policy Brief 25/2024, Bruegel
Policy Brief
Issue n˚25/24 | October 2024 Catch-up with the US or prosper
below the tech frontier? An EU
artificial intelligence strategy
Bertin Martens

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
Policy Brief | Issue n˚25/24 | October 2024
1 Introduction
In the first half of 2024 alone, more than $35 billion was invested globally into artificial intel-
ligence startups1. The European Union attracted only 6 percent of that. The EU is doing better
in AI patents and in training AI researchers, but the outputs from this tend not to stay in the
EU, but rather to flow to the United States (Renda, 2024). Unsurprisingly, this situation has
triggered considerable debate in EU policy circles about what can be done at EU level so the
EU can catch up with the US and China on AI, in particular by developing its own AI models,
fostering more AI startups, accelerating the uptake of AI-based services in the EU economy.
In this context, the European Commission in January 2024 published a package of pro-
posals, decisions and plans to support AI startups2. This seeks to capitalise on the European
High-Performance Computing (EuroHPC) network of supercomputers – very large, high-per-
forming computers – used primarily for scientific research. The Commission proposed an
amendment to the network’s governance rules to facilitate collaboration with the private
sector – that amendment has since been adopted (Regulation (EU) 2024/1732). The plan is
that EuroHPC should be the core of a network of ‘ AI factories’ for the development by EU
startups of large-scale general purpose AI models and applications.
This approach recognises that these supercomputers need to be upgraded to AI capa-
bilities, to be financed equally by the EU and the computer-hosting EU countries3. But the
EuroHPC budget of €7 billion for 2021-2027 remains for now unchanged4.
The AI computing infrastructure budget could be increased very substantially if the
Commission and EU countries listen to former Italian prime minister and European Central
Bank governor Mario Draghi. His September 2024 report on the future of European com-
petitiveness, produced to steer EU policy in the next five years (Draghi, 2024), attributed the
EU’s weak productivity growth to insufficient investment and uptake of digital technologies,
including AI.
His proposed remedies include private and public investment in EU-developed general
and sectoral AI models, upgrading EuroHPC, creating an AI incubator similar to that of the
CERN nuclear and particle physics laboratory, creating EU-wide large data pools for AI model
training, facilitating consolidation among EU cloud providers to create hyperscale comput-
ing infrastructure and more financial resources for quantum computing. Draghi (2024) also
recognised that the EuroHPC computers cannot compete with US-based hyperscale AI firms
and proposed to allocate €100 billion for AI infrastructure.
All this suggests a consensus in EU policy circles that catching up on AI requires public
sector involvement and subsidies. There has been less analysis, however, of why the EU AI
value chain and business ecosystem have ended up falling behind the US and China in terms
of AI model development5 and uptake in services industries, and why this should justify
public sector involvement and subsidies. There is even less debate on how these problems
could be addressed through structural reforms that could incentivise more private investment
in EU AI industries.
This Policy Brief explores why EU AI investment has fallen behind the US and the types of
market failure that may have led to that situation. We ask how the EU should position itself
1 Joanna Glasner, ‘ AI Gobbled A Record Share Of Startup Funding This Year’ , Crunchbase News, 4 September 2024,
https://news.crunchbase.com/ai/record-share-startup-funding-2024-xai-anthropic/.
2 See European Commission press release of 24 January 2024, ‘Commission launches AI innovation package to
support Artificial Intelligence startups and SMEs’ , https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/
ip_24_383 and European Commission (2024).
3 The nine supercomputers are hosted in different countries; see https://eurohpc-ju.europa.eu/supercomputers/
our-supercomputers_en.
4 Other initiatives, complementary to EuroHPC and including a European ‘CERN for AI’ and other moonshot AI
initiatives, have been proposed. For an overview, see Renda (2024).
5 For more details on the global competitive landscape in AI modelling, see Martens (2024b).
The consensus in EU
policy circles is that
catching up on AI
requires public sector
involvement and
subsidies

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
Policy Brief | Issue n˚25/24 | October 2024
in the competition over AI and discuss two possible responses. Should the EU try to catch up
with the US, reach the AI technology frontier and develop its own AI capacities, independent
of US big tech firms? Or can the EU prosper below the AI technology frontier, in derived AI
products and services markets? We also look at the geopolitical context and the risks of EU
dependence on US big tech.
2 Building AI models on existing EU
supercomputers?
It is clear that the EU is running behind the US in digital technology investment and uptake in
general, and in AI specifically. It is less clear whether the response should be to invest taxpayer
money in physical infrastructures for AI, as advocated by the Commission policy initiatives and
Draghi (2024). It might be possible to resolve some market and regulatory failures in AI-related
markets with public money, but many other problems cannot be resolved this way. In this sec-
tion, we discuss the main considerations that should be factored in to the EU approach to AI.
2.1 Computing hardware issues
The EuroHPC network of nine supercomputers is not up to the task of delivering a state-of-
the-art AI computing infrastructure for commercial use. These computers were designed for
scientific research, not for training of general-purpose AI models or generative AI models like
ChatGPT6. Their hardware architecture is not suitable for that purpose. They have no more than
a few thousand Nvidia graphics processing units (GPUs) that play a central role in AI model
training. This is a tiny capacity compared to Meta’s most advanced AI computing centre, which
reportedly contains 600,000 Nvidia AI chips7.
Hobbhahn et al (2023) explained how AI hardware differs from classic computing architec-
tures that revolves around central processing units (CPUs). Handling the massive amounts of
data in GenAI model training requires GPUs. Nvidia became successful in AI hardware because
of its original specialisation in GPUs for gaming applications. Handling data traffic between
many thousands of GPUs requires extensive communication bandwidth between GPUs and
memory storage, though one way to reduce computational requirements can be to reduce
the number of digits behind the decimal point in calculations8. AI developers are increasingly
designing their own dedicated hardware, including for specific applications such as inference,
meaning the making of predictions based on newly supplied data after the model has been
trained.
2.2 AI infrastructure costs
Nvidia AI chips each cost more than $30,000. For Meta’s most advanced computing centre
with 600,000 of these chips, this amounts to $18 billion for the dedicated AI chips alone, ex-
cluding other hardware needs. In other words, the cost of chips for a single computing centre
is more than twice the current EuroHPC budget.
6 We define Generative AI models as machine learning and neural network models that apply the ‘transformer’
architecture (Vaswani et al, 2017).
7 Katie Paul, Stephen Nellis and Max A. Cherney, ‘Exclusive: Meta to deploy in-house custom chips this year to
power AI drive – memo’ , Reuters, 1 February 2024, https://www.reuters.com/technology/meta-deploy-in-house-
custom-chips-this-year-power-ai-drive-memo-2024-02-01/.
8 Venkataramani et al (2024) stated that: “Historically, high-performance computing has relied on high-precision 64-
and 32-bit floating-point arithmetic to deliver accuracy critical for scientific computing tasks. For deep learning (DL)
algorithms, however, the natural error-resilience due to the presence of statistical approximation and estimation
makes high-precision computation rather unnecessary”.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
Policy Brief | Issue n˚25/24 | October 2024
Moreover, technological progress in AI chips is so fast that the latest generation of AI chips
will be outdated and written off in less than a year (Hobbhahn et al, 2023). Spending $162
billion per year (ie nine EuroHPC supercomputers x $18 billion/year) is simply beyond the
financial resources of the EU. Even if the EuroHPC network were to be upgraded to train state-
of-the-art AI models, it would still have a hard time running these models on a daily basis
to respond to user queries because that requires additional investment in a different type of
inference accelerator chip, such as NVIDIA ’s Jetson processors, to reduce the cost of respond-
ing to user queries.
The costs of training state-of-the-art generative AI models (ie those that can produce new
images, video, audio or text based on prompts) are exploding, running into hundreds of mil-
lions of euros (Martens, 2024a). Cottier et al (2024) estimated that GenAI model training costs
are increasing exponentially by a factor 2.4 to 2.6 per year, or around 240 percent per year
from 2016 to 2023. Extrapolating the costs of the largest frontier models now to 2030 leads to
an estimated training cost for a single GenAI model of $60 billion.
New frontier GenAI models are coming out every week. Cottier et al (2024) also estimated
the cost of AI computing infrastructure at ten times the cost of model training. That infrastruc-
ture can be used to train several models but the hardware amortisation rate is estimated at
140 percent per year, or 100 percent depreciation in 8.5 months. By that time, a new genera-
tion of AI computing chips will have arrived with superior performance. Infrastructure costs
for GPT4 by the end of 2023 may have been as high as $800 million. Extrapolation could push
that figure up to $500 billion by 2030. This is beyond the financial reach of EU public and pri-
vate budgets. Even the largest US big tech firms will have a hard time financing this, and may
be forced to collaborate.
2.3 Integration of AI into business models
To succeed, AI startups require not only computing infrastructure but also an important
complementary asset: a business model to generate revenue that pays for these costs. Most
AI start-ups have close collaboration agreements with US big tech firms, to access hyperscale
computing capacity and because they can directly plug their AI models into big tech’s estab-
lished business models to generate revenue. Microsoft uses AI in its business software, Meta
uses it in advertising and Google in search, advertising and many other services.
AI startups can also try to launch their own business models from scratch to generate
sufficient revenue to finance AI model development. But this is very hard. Even successful
start-ups such as OpenAI have a hard time generating sufficient revenue, despite running a
successful business model9. An upgraded EuroHPC network may have the hardware capa-
bilities but offers no commercial outlet channels. EU startups would have to move their AI
models to incumbent big tech firms to generate revenue to finance the fixed training costs.
2.4 Missing markets for EU AI startups
In the absence of home-grown big tech platforms, EU AI startups have to turn to US compa-
nies with global business models that have sufficient market scale to amortise the huge fixed
costs of training generative AI models. In the absence of sufficient domestic private equity
and venture capital in the EU, US markets and big tech firms can provide financial resources
for EU startups. EU public funds might perhaps replace private equity but cannot replace
business outlets for AI models. Alternatively, EU AI startups could focus on specific AI model
applications, derived from big generative AI models. This avoids very high model training
costs and makes it easier to plug derived models into existing services markets, where there is
demand for these specific applications.
The absence of business model considerations in the Commission’s January 2024 ‘ AI
9 See for example Vishakha Saxena, ‘OpenAI’s ‘$8.5 Billion Bills’ Report Sparks Bankruptcy Speculation’ , Asia
Financial, 29 July 2024, https://www.asiafinancial.com/openais-8-5-billion-bills-spark-bankruptcy-speculation.
In the absence of
home-grown big tech
platforms, EU AI
startups have to turn
to US companies

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
Policy Brief | Issue n˚25/24 | October 2024
factories’ initiative, and in the AI recommendations in Draghi (2024), is problematic10. But the
exclusive hardware focus of these plans is not surprising. Eckert (2024) presented an insightful
historic overview of EU digital policies over the past 40 years. A recurrent pattern has been the
emphasis on telecoms infrastructure and hardware in general, and the almost total absence
of digital services markets and business model considerations. Draghi (2024, Part B, Figure 4)
showed how the value of telecoms services has become negligible compared to digital services
markets. Nevertheless, his recommendations focused on telecoms, cloud and AI hardware,
and do not mention digital or AI services markets. More than anything, four decades of path
dependency in EU digital policies may have contributed to an ever wider yawning gap between
EU and US digital performance – which still continues today.
Draghi (2024) pointed out that the EU should do more to create its own hyperscale cloud
computing infrastructure in support of generative AI model development, and reduce depend-
ence on the US big tech firms that currently dominate the cloud services market in the EU11.
There may be competition failures in EU cloud computing services, another important com-
plementary input for AI. A few big tech players can leverage their positions in cloud software-
and platforms-as-a-service, rather than just offering basic infrastructure-as-a-service12. This
increases entry barriers for smaller EU cloud service providers, leaving them unable to expand
their computing infrastructure, which would be suitable for AI model training (Ennis and Evans,
2024; Biglaiser et al, 2024). Throwing taxpayer money at this problem is unlikely to be a good
solution, however. Draghi (2024) recommended consolidation among smaller EU cloud players.
That does not solve the problem of lack of complementary software and platform services.
2.5 Derived AI model markets are very competitive
There is no indication of a market failure that would require public policy intervention, let alone
taxpayer subsidies, in derived and special applications of AI models. Draghi (2024) recom-
mended that EU AI funds could support European AI startups to develop specific industry or
company application models. That market is already very competitive (Martens, 2024b). While
more than a dozen new state-of-the-art GenAI models are released every month, more than a
dozen derived models are released per hour13. Just as app stores for mobile phones contain mil-
lions of special-purpose apps, there are now also millions of industry-, sector- or company-spe-
cific applications of the ChatGPT model in the OpenAI store.
For example, there are ChatGPT applications that help consumers with their shopping
questions or financial decisions. Developers of these applications make them widely available
to anyone who can use them. A derived model is created when a company uploads its own
proprietary data into ChatGPT for specific marketing, logistics or industrial process applications
within the company. Since they run on proprietary data, these models are of course not made
widely available.
2.6 Risk of regulatory failure
Policy intervention may create new market distortions in AI services markets. The amended
EuroHPC regulation (Regulation (EU) 2024/1732) now allows collaboration between public and
private computing and cloud services providers. Commercial firms can access publicly-owned
computers.
10 These initiatives could have learned from the poor performance of earlier initiatives, such as GAIA-X (https://
gaia-x.eu/), an EU-sponsored plan to create a European alternative to US-based hyper-scale cloud computing
infrastructure. Take-up to date has been rather weak. See Maximilian Hille, ‘Why GAIA-X hasn’t been successful
yet’ , Cloudflight, 21 May 2021, https://www.cloudflight.io/en/blog/why-gaia-x-hasnt-been-successful-yet/.
11 See for example Back4app, ‘Top Cloud Providers in Europe’ , undated, https://blog.back4app.com/top-cloud-
providers-in-europe/.
12 Lionel Sujay Vailshery, ‘Cloud computing market size in Europe from 2018 to 2029, by segment’ , Statista, 28 June
2024, https://www.statista.com/forecasts/1235161/europe-cloud-computing-market-size-by-segment.
13 LifeArchitect.ai, ‘LLMs released per month (2024)’ , undated, https://s10251.pcdn.co/pdf/2024-Alan-D-Thompson-
LLMs-released-per-month-Rev-3.pdf.
There is no indication
of a market failure
that would require
public intervention in
derived and special
applications of AI
models

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
Policy Brief | Issue n˚25/24 | October 2024
This raises the question of how scarce computing capacity will be allocated between users,
at what price and under what conditions. The amended EuroHPC regulation does not explain
this. Will authorities use auctions for commercial applications and sell capacity at market
prices? Or will there be a subsidy component in pricing, thereby opening the door to unfair
competition with private providers? How will capacity be allocated between paid commercial
and presumably unpaid non-commercial use, for instance for scientific projects, which the
EuroHPC network was involved in from the start? More importantly for AI start-ups, what
happens after the training of their AI model has been completed? Will they have guaranteed
access for inference, daily running of their models? Can they easily scale up capacity when
their startup rapidly expands? Computers may be provided by the public sector but they are
not non-rival non-excludable public goods. They are rival and easily excludable.
The European Commission and Draghi (2024) claim that these AI policy initiatives can
capitalise on EU regulation, including the EU AI Act (Regulation (EU) 2024/1689; see Box
1), the general data protection regulation (GDPR, Regulation (EU) 2016/679) and other data
regulations. The claim is that these EU regulations attract investment because they give users
confidence and regulatory certainty.
The available empirical evidence, however, does not support that view. There is considera-
ble evidence that the GDPR has reduced investment in consumer-oriented online services in
the EU (Demirer et al, 2024; Goldberg et al, 2023; Jia et al, 2023; Peukert et al, 2024). Consum-
ers may be better off without some of these privacy-infringing services, though that may not
be the case for all.
There is also evidence that EU regulation is limiting EU access to AI services. At the request
of the Irish Data Protection Commission, Meta held back the roll-out of its most advanced
AI models in the EU14. European data regulators have doubts that the legitimate interest
clause in the GDPR (Article 6(1)(f )) constitutes a sufficient legal basis for Meta to use publicly
posted messages on its Facebook and Instagram social media platforms as inputs for AI
model training. Other US AI developers, including Apple, Google and OpenAI, face similar
EU uncertainty about the use of personal data for model training15. The Irish Data Protection
Commission launched an enquiry into Google’s AI services16. Social media text has become
an important source of AI model training data when other sources are insufficient to meet
the training requirements of very large AI models, especially in relation to less-widely spoken
languages, for which the available volume of human text data is limited. Regulatory uncer-
tainty about this alternative source is holding back innovative AI services from entering the
European market.
Longpre et al (2024) showed that, following the release of ChatGPT in 2023, copyright
holders are making more active use of their right to exercise an opt-out for content from use
for AI model training, granted to them under the EU AI Act and the EU Copyright Directive
(Directive (EU) 2019/790). This has led to a 20 percent to 30 percent reduction in the availabil-
ity of AI training data.
Strict enforcement of data privacy consent rules could have a similar negative effect on the
availability of AI model training data. AI model training is already running into data shortages
(Martens, 2024b). This could especially affect small language communities in the EU that
already suffer from insufficient language training data. Moreover, the AI Act (Box 1) generates
14 Eliza Gkritsi, ‘Breaking: Meta halts AI rollout in Europe after ‘request’ from Irish data protection authorities’ ,
Euractiv, 14 June 2024, https://www.euractiv.com/section/data-protection/news/breaking-meta-halts-ai-rollout-in-
europe-after-request-from-irish-data-protection-authorities/.
15 See for example Vallari Sanzgiri, ‘OpenAI Not Releasing its Emotion-Inferring Voice Feature in the European
Union’ , MediaNama, 27 September 2024, https://www.medianama.com/2024/09/223-openai-voice-feature-not-
available-eu/, and James Morales, ‘Meta Hits Back at EU Crackdown: Requests Access To European Data for AI’ ,
CCN.com, 20 September 2024, https://www.ccn.com/news/technology/meta-eu-crackdown-zuckerberg-requests-
european-ai-data/.
16 Data Protection Commission press release of 12 September 2024, ‘Data Protection Commission launches inquiry
into Google AI model’ , https://techxplore.com/news/2024-09-ireland-eu-privacy-probe-google.html.
There is evidence
that EU regulation is
putting limits on EU
access to US-based AI
services

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
Policy Brief | Issue n˚25/24 | October 2024
not only high compliance costs for model developers and deployers, but also considerable
regulatory uncertainty regarding the specific implementation rules for copyright and privacy
protection. The finalisation of the AI Act in mid-2024 was only the start of a regulatory process
that will take several years to complete dozens of implementation guidelines and enforce-
ment standards, including on copyright and data privacy.
Box 1: The EU AI Act
The Artificial Intelligence Act (Regulation (EU) 2024/1689), finalised in mid-2024, is
intended to regulate AI in the EU by banning certain applications that impinge in citizens’
rights and creating a category of high-risk systems and uses, for which risk assessments and
measures to offset risks will be required. Decisions taken by high-risk systems should in
principle be explainable and appealable. The law also contains transparency requirements,
such as labelling obligations for AI-generated images, audio or video, and obliges compli-
ance with EU copyright rules. Parts of the law are being phased in, but it will apply in full
from August 2026.
The AI Act also created an AI Office, which was established in May 2024 17, as a moni-
toring, supervisory and enforcement body in relation to general purpose AI models and
systems. Among its responsibilities will be development of specific implementation rules,
including on AI and copyright and privacy protection 18.
The text of the AI Act is available at http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj.
3 Elements of an EU AI strategy
In summary, the EU’s current approach to AI is based on catching up on AI hardware and
infrastructure, while omitting the complementary business model components and not
addressing high regulatory uncertainty and compliance costs. Such an approach is unlikely to
solve the fundamental AI competitiveness problem because of the shortcomings set out in the
previous section. To address these shortcomings, the EU strategy should include the elements
we set out here. Overall, it would be a mistake for the EU to try to play the US at its own game
on AI – to reach the AI technology frontier and develop its own AI capacities. Instead, the EU
can thrive with smaller models to help firms implement AI-driven services. It does not need
to reach the AI technology frontier to accelerate AI-driven productivity growth.
3.1 Facilitate collaboration agreements
Complementary inputs and business ecosystems cannot be created by regulation or public
money. They need to grow organically. Competition authorities are taking a close look at
collaboration agreements between startups and big tech firms, sometimes rightly so because
they may contain exclusivity clauses that distort competition. At the same time, these collabo-
ration agreements and even mergers are necessary to provide the complementary inputs that
AI start-ups require. Short of exclusionary contractual clauses, such agreements and mergers
should be allowed to go through. Rather than cutting off startups from the complementary
17 See European Commission press release of 29 May 2024, ‘Commission establishes AI Office to strengthen EU
leadership in safe and trustworthy Artificial Intelligence’ , https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/
ip_24_2982.
18 See https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/ai-act-implementation-next-steps/.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
Policy Brief | Issue n˚25/24 | October 2024
inputs they need, EU regulators should focus on solving the missing market failure in private
equity markets (as advocated by Draghi, 2024).
3.2 Pro-innovation implementation of the AI Act
The AI Office within the European Commission is in charge of implementing the AI Act, in-
cluding by designing implementation guidelines and standards (see Box 1). The office should
have a razor-sharp focus on pro-innovation implementation and enforcement of the AI Act,
minimising compliance costs and navigating the potential pitfalls of strict enforcement. Strict
enforcement of existing EU copyright and privacy law is likely to create significant obstacles
for AI industries in the EU. The AI Office will have to define an appropriate trade-off between
private rights, including the protection of copyright and privacy, and the need to support the
development and use of AI services for the benefit of society as a whole.
3.3 Productivity growth below the AI technology frontier
Apart from trying overcoming these market and regulatory failures through regulatory reform,
rather than subsidies, what can the EU do set up a pro-active and pro-competitive AI strategy?
Would the EU be better off trying to reach the AI technology frontier, or can it prosper below
the frontier?
Because of delays in AI productivity uptake (Brynjolfsson et al, 2020), most productivity
growth will take place below the frontier of the latest generation of GenAI models. Much
of the roll-out of AI as a general-purpose technology across the economy will come from
derived, smaller and more specialised AI models that can be trained and run at far lower
computing costs19. AI applications that can retrieve data in real-time from various sources
to respond to user queries will become an important workhorse for industrial applications
(Lewis et al, 2024). The CEO of SAP , one of Europe’s leading AI applications companies, has
argued in favour of smaller AI models20. The focus should be on specialised models designed
for specific industrial tasks. This can be done with freely accessible open-source AI models or
models that are readily available on the market. It requires access to another type of special-
ised hardware for inference purposes, not so much for GenAI model training.
3.4 Overcoming complementary market failures
Teece (1980) argued that economies of scope, rather than economies of scale, can be an
important source of economic efficiency gains through the re-use of underutilised produc-
tion factors for other purposes and/or by other parties. However, re-use often fails because
markets for complementary inputs are missing or face many barriers, for example because
parties cannot agree on a contract to share complementary inputs. This is especially the case
in digital services such as AI, where the costs and benefits from combining complements are
hard to measure and price (Teece, 2020, 2024). Closer vertical integration is often easier.
Renda’s (2024) observation that European AI patent holders and skilled AI researchers
move to the US fits with this story of failing complementary inputs markets. They are looking
for complementary inputs that are missing in the EU. EU private equity and venture capital
markets for start-ups are underdeveloped. The EU is not home to big tech firms with hyper-
scale cloud computing infrastructure and business ecosystems that can readily absorb AI
services in existing large-scale business models.
Building AI model training infrastructure in the EU is not sufficient to solve that problem;
several other complementary inputs will still be missing. The EU could gradually build up
19 See Maarten Grootendorst, ‘ A visual guide to quantization’ , 22 July 2024, https://newsletter.maartengrootendorst.
com/p/a-visual-guide-to-quantization.
20 Stephen Morris, ‘SAP chief warns EU against over-regulating artificial intelligence’ , Financial Times, 1 October
2024, https://www.ft.com/content/9db8fe6d-3f8a-4886-a439-c23faf459c23. Even Chinese AI model developers are
now turning towards smaller and cheaper AI models. See Eleanor Olcott, ‘Chinese AI groups get creative to drive
down cost of models’ , Financial Times, 18 October 2024, https://www.ft.com/content/0a6da1bb-2bda-40f3-9645-
97877eb0947c.
Strict enforcement of
copyright and privacy
law is likely to create
significant obstacles
for AI industries in
the EU

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
Policy Brief | Issue n˚25/24 | October 2024
markets for complementary inputs by focusing on smaller, derived and specialised AI models
that do not require hyperscale infrastructure and business ecosystems and could still earn a
decent rate of return for patents and skilled researchers. Smaller venture capital funds and
private equity could gradually move into that market. Medium-sized EU cloud service provid-
ers could expand their infrastructures and services to accommodate smaller AI models and
inference operations.
3.5 Geopolitical dependency
In the current geopolitical security setting, can the EU and US be considered as a single and
trustworthy AI market, or are they two separate markets?
Admittedly, pursuing economic efficiency below the AI frontier would come at the risk of
leaving EU AI industrie to some extent dependent on GenAI frontier models developed and/
or hosted by US big tech firms. Dependence would only be limited to the extent that many
models are freely available in at least partially open-source formats. This raises the question
of whether the EU and US can be perceived as a single and trustworthy AI market, or as two
potentially separate markets? Here, we take an economic look at that geopolitical question.
Trying to reach the AI frontier is extremely costly (Martens, 2024a) and also requires global
market scale. A simple back-of-the-envelope calculation shows that combined GDP of the EU,
US and the advanced economies is required to amortize a €1 trillion annual investment in
state-of-the-art AI models, a figure that could easily be reached in the next years21. Collabora-
tion between the EU and US would enable a continuation of that thriving and highly compet-
itive AI industry. Fragmenting the market would put an economic break on that activity. It is
not in the interests of either the US or the EU to do this.
In case of fragmentation, the EU would want to build at least some independent AI
hyperscale infrastructure to train GenAI models. It will have to bear most of the cost of that
infrastructure as a subsidy because, with a reduced market size and in the absence of access
to global business ecosystems as AI services outlets, it will be difficult to earn a sufficient
rate of return on that fixed-cost investment. The subsidy would be the price for geopolitical
independence.
References
Biglaiser G., J. Crémer and A Mantovani (2024) ‘The Economics of the Cloud’ , Working Paper 1520,
Toulouse School of Economics
Brynjolfsson, E., D. Rock and C. Syverson (2020) ‘The productivity J-curve: how intangibles complement
general purpose technologies’ , Working Paper 25148, National Bureau of Economic Research
Cottier, B., R. Rahman, L. Fattorini, N. Maslej and D. Owen (2024) ‘The rising costs of training frontier AI
models’ , mimeo, available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.21015
Demirer M., D. Jiménez-Hernández, D. Li and S. Peng (2024) ‘Data, Privacy Laws and Firm Production:
Evidence from the GDPR’ , Working Paper 2024-02, Federal Reserve Board of Chicago
Draghi, M. (2024) The future of European competitiveness: Part A, a competitiveness strategy for Europe,
European Commission
21 Assume that digital firms represent 10 percent of GDP and jointly invest €1 trillion in AI models, and that this
triggers a 3 percent productivity increase in the remaining 90 percent of the economy, or a 2.7 percent increase in
total GDP . To reach break-even on a €1 trillion AI investment would require a GDP of €72 trillion at a 2.7 percent
return, assuming that 50 percent of all productivity gains accrue to the digital firms that invest in AI and the rest is
dissipated across society.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
Policy Brief | Issue n˚25/24 | October 2024
Eckert, D. (2024) 40 Years of European Digital Policies: Forgotten Lessons, Springer
Ennis, S. and B. Evans (2024) ‘Cloud Portability and Interoperability under the EU Data Act: Dynamism
versus Equivalence’ , mimeo
European Commission (2024) ‘Communication on boosting startups and innovation in trustworthy
artificial intelligence’ , COM/2024/28 final
Goldberg, S.G., G.A. Johnson and S.K. Shriver (2024) ‘Regulating privacy online: An economic evaluation
of the GDPR’ , American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 16(1): 325-358.
Jia, J., G. Zhe Jin and L. Wagman (2021) ‘The Short-Run Effects of the General Data Protection Regulation
on Technology Venture Investment’ , Marketing Science 40(4): 593-812
Hobbhahn, M., L. Heim and G. Aydos (2023) ‘Trends in Machine Learning Hardware’ , EpochAI, 9
November, available at https://epochai.org/blog/trends-in-machine-learning-hardware
Lewis, P ., E. Perez, A. Piktus, F . Petroni, V . Karpukhin, N. Goyal … D. Kiela (2024) ‘Retrieval-Augmented
Generation for Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks’ , mimeo, available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401
Longpre S., R. Mahari, A. Lee, C. Lund, H. Oderinwale, W. Brannon … S. Pentland (2024) ‘Consent
in Crisis: The Rapid Decline of the AI Data Commons’ , mimeo, available at https://arxiv.org/
abs/2407.14933
Martens, B. (2024a) ‘The tension between exploding AI investment costs and slow productivity growth’ ,
Working Paper 18/2024, Bruegel
Martens, B. (2024b) ‘Why artificial intelligence is creating fundamental challenges for competition policy’ ,
Policy Brief 16/2024, Bruegel
Peukert, C., S. Bechtold, M. Batikas and T . Kretschmer (2022) ‘Regulatory spillovers and data governance:
Evidence from the GDPR’ , Marketing Science 41(4): 746-768
Renda, A. (2024) ‘Towards a European large-scale initiative on AI: what are the options?’ CEPS In-depth
Analysis 2024-11, Centre for European Policy Studies
Teece D.J. (1980) ‘Economies of scope and the scope of the enterprise’ , Journal of Economic Behaviour
and Organization 1(3): 223-247
Teece, D.J. (2020) ‘Innovation, governance, and capabilities: implications for competition policy’ ,
Industrial and Corporate Change 29(5): 1075-1099
Teece D.J. (2024) ‘Strategic Management Perspectives on Competition Policy in the Digital Age’ ,
International Journal of the Japan Association for Management Systems 16(1): 63-67
Vaswani, A., N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. Gomez, L. Kaiser and I. Polosukhin (2017)
‘ Attention Is All You Need’ , mimeo, available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762
Venkataramani, S., X. Sun, N. Wang, C.- Y. Chen, J. Choi, M. Kang … K. Gopalakrishnan (2024) ‘Efficient AI
System Design With Cross-Layer Approximate Computing’ , Proceedings of the IEEE 108(12): 2232-2250
