
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Ben McWilliams (ben.
mcwilliams@bruegel.org)
is a Research Analyst at
Bruegel
Georg Zachmann (georg.
zachmann@bruegel.org) is a
Senior Fellow at Bruegel
The authors wish to thank
Natalia Fabra, Pedro Linares,
Jörn Richstein and Oliver
Sartor for helpful comments.
Executive summary
Many of the technologies that can help the European Union become a net-zero emissions
economy by 2050 have been shown to work but are not yet commercially competitive with
incumbent fossil-fuel technologies. There is not enough private investment to drive the de-
ployment of new low-carbon alternatives. This is primarily because carbon prices are neither
high enough nor stable. There are a number of benefits from the deployment of low-carbon
technologies that private firms do not factor in. These include the benefits of decreasing
industry-wide costs over time, and the global climate benefits from the development of
low-carbon technologies within the EU that can subsequently be exported. The result is an
investment level below the socially optimal value in the EU.
Commercialisation contracts could be implemented as a temporary measure to
remove the risk associated with uncertain carbon prices for ambitious low-carbon projects.
The aim of the contracts would be to increase private investment to the socially optimal level.
Contracts would be allocated through auctions in which fixed prices for abated emissions
over a fixed duration would be agreed on a project-by-project basis. On an annual basis,
public subsidies amounting to the difference between the agreed carbon price and the actual
EU carbon price would be provided to investors, depending on the total carbon emissions
abated. As long as EU carbon prices are low, investors would receive larger subsidies to
ensure their competitiveness.
Contracts would be auctioned at EU level. This would generate increased competition
compared to national auctions, leading to more efficient outcomes and preventing fragmen-
tation of the single market. From about €3 billion to €6 billion would be provided to the main
industrial emitting sectors annually, with the amount reducing as the EU carbon price rises
and low-carbon technologies become competitive without subsidy.
Recommended citation
McWilliams, B. and G. Zachmann (2021) 'Commercialisation contracts: European support for
low-carbon technology deployment', Policy Contribution 15/2021, Bruegel
Policy Contribution
Issue n˚15/21 | July 2021 Commercialisation contracts:
European support for
low-carbon technology
deployment

Ben McWilliams and Georg Zachmann

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚15/21 | July 2021
1 Introduction
To cut the cost of decarbonisation significantly, the best solution would be to provide in-
vestors with a predictable carbon price that corresponds to the envisaged decarbonisation
pathway. This would put a broad portfolio of low-carbon technologies on an equal footing in
competitive terms with high-carbon technologies presently in use. However, the European
Union’s carbon price has so far been very volatile and is likely to remain insufficient, by itself,
to drive all of the long-term investment in low-carbon technologies needed for net-zero to be
reached in an efficient way.
The problem of the insufficient carbon price arises for political economy reasons, with
policymakers reluctant to allow higher prices because of concerns about competitiveness or
social issues. Over the last 15 years, prices have fluctuated between zero and €50/tonne. These
levels have been sufficient to phase out production of electricity from coal in favour of pro-
duction from gas, but are neither high nor consistent enough for other necessary investments.
The subsequent underinvestment in deployment of new technologies means investors do not
learn from experience as quickly as they might, and the benefits for global decarbonisation
from EU decarbonisation are realised less quickly than they could be.
Policies to complement the EU carbon price are therefore necessary, because the alter-
native of waiting until carbon prices reach high enough levels will result in capital turnover
that is too slow for the EU to hit its climate targets. At both national and EU level, policymak-
ers recognise the need for supplementary policies1. We argue that a cost-effective approach
should be based on the principle of providing long-term certainty around a sufficiently high
carbon price on a project-by-project basis for low carbon investments. This should be done
through a transparent competition at the European level which would both enable lower-cost
decarbonisation and prevent nationally-focused plans from disrupting the EU single market.
In this Policy Contribution, we outline the case for ‘commercialisation contracts’ (a form of
carbon contracts for difference) to provide this transparent competition.
2 Commercialisation contracts
2.1 What are they?
We use the term ‘commercialisation contracts’ to refer to an instrument analogous to carbon
contracts for difference (CCfD), as detailed by Richstein (2017), among others2. In a CCfD, a
private buyer and a public seller agree a fixed carbon price for a fixed period. The agreed price
is compared to the actual carbon price. If the actual price is below the agreed price, the public
seller makes up the difference to the private buyer. If the actual price is above the agreed
price, the buyer refunds the difference to the seller. In contrast to CCfDs, in commercialisa-
tion contracts, private buyers would not be required to pay money back when carbon prices
are high.
Commercialisation contracts would remove the risk to ambitious low-carbon projects
that arises from uncertain carbon prices. Such contracts would support technologies that
are proven at the demonstration stage (ie they work technically), but have not yet been able
to compete in commercial markets because of the lack of financing or unfavourable market
1 For example, the Dutch SDE++ scheme (see Box 1) and the under-development German industry carbon contracts
for difference scheme. The Innovation Fund operates at the EU level.
2 See also Helm and Hepburn (2005), Sartor and Bataille (2019), Chiapinelli and Neuhoff (2020), Zachmann (2013)
and Gerres and Linares (2020).

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚15/21 | July 2021
conditions. The closer technologies move to commercialisation, the more financial risks
become the major obstacle (Vogl et al, 2021).
Commercialisation contract would be signed between governments (or public bodies)
and the private parties responsible for a low-carbon project. The contract would guarantee a
fixed carbon price (strike price) for a set number of years for the carbon emissions abated by
their project. Potential project funders would take part in an auction to determine a fair strike
price, which in a perfect world would just tip the low-carbon investment into profitability. The
necessary support per tonne of carbon emissions is calculated as the difference between the
average EU emissions trading system price and the strike price (Figure 1). Thus, when the ETS
price is higher, lower volumes of public support will be issued. When the ETS price exceeds
the strike price, no public support will be provided3. The carbon emissions abated by the pro-
ject are calculated by comparing the project’s emissions per volume of output to benchmark
emissions for the same output from average industry operations.
Figure 1: Illustrative commercialisation contract
Source: Bruegel.
We can consider the example of a low-carbon steel plant awarded a 20-year commer-
cialisation contract with a strike price of €70 per tonne of carbon dioxide. Investors in the
low-carbon steel plant receive a guaranteed carbon price for the emissions abated thanks
to their upfront capital investment. Each year, the steel plant records how many tonnes of
steel it produced (eg 1 million tonnes). The emissions associated with each tonne of steel are
compared to the benchmark average emissions for primary steel production in the EU. This
difference multiplied by total output is the plant’s annual abated carbon emissions that are
eligible for support. If each tonne of steel eliminates two tonnes of carbon dioxide, relative
to the industry’s benchmark carbon emissions, the avoided amount would be two million
tonnes of carbon dioxide. The annual subsidy is then calculated as the difference between the
average ETS price and €70, multiplied by two million tonnes of abated carbon. For example,
if the average ETS price over the period was €40, then the plant would receive an subsidy for
that year of 70 minus 40 = 30 x 2 million = €60 million.
In this way, carbon price risk is removed from the project. As long as the strike price is set
at an appropriate level, upfront private capital investment becomes attractive.
3 In contrast to CCfDs our proposal is more akin to a ‘put’ option, as the private counterpart would not pay back to
public funds when the ETS price exceeds strike price.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030
€/tonne CO2 2021
Support
No support
ETS price Strike pricePublic support

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚15/21 | July 2021
2.2 Why are commercialisation contracts needed?
Turning low-carbon technologies into viable propositions has a number of positive spillovers
for society that do not translate directly into profits for investors. Consequently, companies
invest less in the development of low-carbon technologies than is socially optimal. There are
four reasons for private underinvestment which justify intervention in the market.
The first reason is a form of late-mover advantage. While pioneer companies take on
the full risk of failure in the rollout of a low-carbon technology, some of the very valuable
side effects, such as proving its commercial potential, showing how to bring down the cost,
developing a new value chain and possibly developing an enabling system (such as electric
charging) spills over to competitors, which are able to pick the best elements of what was
shown to work and may then be able to provide a better product at lower cost than the
pioneer. Public support is necessary to encourage these first investments into large-scale
deployment of low carbon technologies.
The second reason is that falling costs arising from the early deployment of low-carbon
technologies has high societal value. The more an industry produces a product, the cheaper
it becomes, because of technological and economic innovation and scale effects (Figure 2).
If the cost decrease is steep enough, the excess cost over the incumbent technology at the
beginning of the learning curve will be dwarfed by the cost savings when the new technology
overtakes the incumbent technology. There are many examples of this for low-carbon tech-
nologies. Renewable technologies for producing electricity, for example, in principle required
a carbon price of over €400/tonne for their competitive operation in 2010. Following signif-
icant public support, they are now competitive in many cases without a carbon price at all.
Had policymakers waited only for carbon pricing to drive adoption of renewable electricity
technologies, they might be nowhere near commercial adoption today. The market failure is
that individual investors have a suboptimal incentive to contribute early on to the deployment
of low-carbon technologies, when they are not yet competitive with incumbent technologies.
For the EU to remain on track to achieve its net-zero 2050 goal, it is essential that investments
and progress along the learning curve for many low-carbon technologies begins today. For
this to happen, public support will be required.
Figure 2: Global learning curves for electric vehicles and renewable electricity
technologies
Source: Bruegel. Note: Lazard LCOE analysis is used to compare solar and wind prices to combined cycle gas plants. Solar deployment
data from Solar Power Europe. Wind deployment data from GWEC. Electric vehicle deployment data from the IEA. Data on the price of an
electric motor taken from Statista, compiled from Bloomberg NEF. A 50KWh electric motor is compared to the price of a 2L internal com -
bustion engine. Electricity data starts in 2009, electric vehicle data in 2010. The figure shows annual data.
10000 100000 1000000 10000000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
10.000 100.000 1.000.000
Global electric vehicle deployment
Global electricity capacity deployment
Solar PV
Wind
Electric vehicles
Marginal carbon abatement price
($/tonne CO2) for solar PV and wind
Marginal carbon abatement price
($/tonne CO2) for electric vehicles

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚15/21 | July 2021
The third reason is that industry does not believe that policymakers will let carbon prices
drive out high-carbon technologies. There remains considerable uncertainty around future
carbon pricing levels, because of political pressures for policymakers to renege on carbon
pricing schemes. Competitiveness and social concerns place a political constraint on the
acceptable carbon price, that is to say, policymakers might at some point intervene if they
become concerned that the carbon price has societal/political effects that are too damaging4.
Intervention is plausible within the EU as policymakers have many tools to influence the ETS
price paid by companies (maintaining free allowances, including foreign allowances, adjust-
ing the number of permits issued). Accordingly, current carbon prices do not fully reflect
the optimal future scarcity of allowances and markets do not provide long-term guidance
for investors (eg in the form of a liquid long-term futures market). The carbon market alone
thus does not provide the necessary hedging against the risk of too-low future carbon prices
required for low-carbon investments that depend on the carbon price for their competitive-
ness with incumbent technologies.
Finally, investment in low-carbon technologies in the EU might only make commercial
sense if the products of those technologies also find a sufficiently sizeable export market. As
many third countries do not have some form of climate policy that provides a premium to
low-carbon technologies, compared to high-carbon technologies, EU companies will only
invest in the rollout of low-carbon technologies if there is a large enough EU market to pay
for (or even overcompensate) the emission mitigation potential of a technology, which when
made competitive can be deployed globally. Beyond export benefits, the potential for abated
emissions outside of the EU through the rollout of new low-carbon technologies provides
a clear public benefit. The example of renewable electricity technologies shows that public
policy in the EU can have an enormously positive effect on global climate policy.
2.3 Why are commercialisation contracts an important addition for
deployment support?
Commercialisation contracts allow deployment support to be better targeted than it would be
by other low-carbon support policies alone (eg upfront capital subsidies, preferential markets,
public procurement, carbon standards)5.
Over the last five years, policies supporting renewable electricity generation deployment
have shifted toward contracts for difference designs in countries including the UK and France.
Renewable electricity contracts for difference work similarly to commercialisation contracts
but using an electricity rather than carbon strike price. The fact that countries have shifted
toward contracts-for-difference designs suggests that they are an attractive policy option.
Historically, pegging the cost of emerging technologies to that of incumbent technologies
was a way to speed-up switching. The European natural gas industry, for example, relied for
decades on oil-price indexation before maturing into its own liquid market. While different
in nature, the purpose of commercialisation contracts is also to provide certainty to investors
that their upfront capital investments (often into complex value chains) will generate secure
long-term returns.
Commercialisation contracts are attractive for five reasons. First, the level of the subsidy
adjusts with the carbon price. As carbon prices increase, the subsidy decreases. Given that
carbon prices can be expected to rise over time, this avoids the problem of significant ‘legacy’
4 See for example Pádraig Collins, ‘How not to introduce a carbon tax: The Australian experience’ , The Irish Times,
3 January 2019, available at https://www.irishtimes.com/news/environment/how-not-to-introduce-a-carbon-
tax-the-australian-experience-1.3746214. The French ‘gilets jaunes’ movement was also sparked by an unpopular
attempt to increase fuel taxes. See Benjamin Dodman, ‘ A year of insurgency: How Yellow Vests left “indelible
mark” on French politics’ , France24, 16 November 2019, available at: https://www.france24.com/en/20191116-a-
year-of-insurgency-how-yellow-vests-left-indelible-mark-on-french-politics.
5 In fact, commercialisation contracts can and most likely will be introduced as a complement to, and not as a
substitute for, other support policies. A well-balanced mix would enable different policies to address different
market barriers.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚15/21 | July 2021
(locked-in) costs, instead allowing for a smooth convergence towards the first-best solution:
a single carbon price for all sectors (Edenhofer et al, 2021). Consequently, the policy also
frontloads investment, which is useful given the need for stimulus spending in response to the
COVID-19 economic crisis, and in the context of low interest rates. At the same time, guaran-
tees of longer-term support are essential for mature markets to develop.
Second, by eliminating carbon-price risk, projects’ overall financing conditions are
improved. The increased certainty of pay-offs allows projects to increase the share of debt in
overall project financing relative to equity. As debt is cheaper, this reduces the cost of capital
and hence reduces the breakeven carbon price in a virtuous cycle (Richstein, 2017).
Third, the instrument facilitates competitive market outcomes because contracts can be
auctioned. An auctioning scheme could be designed at EU level to address the problem of
overwhelmingly national industrial climate policy fragmenting the EU single market.
Fourth, the policy can be viewed as an important commitment device. Lower carbon
prices would become a liability on public balance sheets, and there would therefore be clear
public desire for higher carbon prices. This would send strong market signals.
Finally, the policy is politically attractive because the volume of funding translates visibly
to reduced carbon emissions.
2.4 Where are they needed?
Commercialisation contracts are useful in situations in which large upfront capital costs
are required for investments for which the return depends on the price of carbon, because
payments for emission rights constitute a significant share of the variable cost of price-setting
competitors. This is typically the case for heavy industrial processes which require large pro-
duction sites. For this reason, most of the literature has focused on basic industrial materials
including steel, cement, aluminium and chemical feedstocks such as ammonia. Such con-
tracts have also been prominent in hydrogen strategies6.
In principle the concept of commercialisation contracts could be adapted to a wide range
of sectors. For example, households investing in a clean fuel-switching technology (such as
heat pumps or electric vehicles) could receive variable operations subsidies which would
ensure that the clean fuel (eg electricity or hydrogen) is always cheaper than the displaced
fossil fuel. This would depend heavily on the carbon price. However, in this Policy Contribu-
tion we focus on the use of commercialisation contracts for abatement of industrial emissions
covered by the ETS.
3 Designing commercialisation contracts
Commercialisation contracts, or similar schemes, are already part of the political debate, with
schemes under development. The Dutch SDE++ scheme is not strictly a commercialisation
contract, but shares many elements that illustrate how such a scheme could be designed
(Box 1). Germany is committed to running pilot programmes under its hydrogen strategy
(BMWI, 2020) and its environment ministry is developing a CCfD-programme for industrial
decarbonisation (BMU, 2021). The European Commission (2020) has also referred to the need
for commercialisation contracts in its hydrogen strategy. Moreover, in its updated industri-
al strategy, the European Commission signalled it was “considering proposing a European
approach to carbon contracts for difference” as part of the revised ETS Directive (European
Commission, 2021).
Commercialisation contracts can be designed in different ways. The design will have a
6 The German and EU hydrogen strategies explicitly mention carbon contracts for difference for the production of
low-carbon hydrogen.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚15/21 | July 2021
strong effect on the efficiency and effectiveness of the support, on which technologies receive
funding and on the distribution of costs and benefits. In the following section, we discuss
key design elements, with a focus on the trade-offs they imply. We address three broad areas:
political scope, allocation process and technological scope.
Box 1: The Dutch SDE++ scheme
The Netherlands operates the SDE++ scheme, which is similar in nature to commercialisa -
tion contracts. SDE++ is the follow-up scheme to SDE+ which operated from 2013. The SDE+
scheme was exclusively for the support of renewable electricity generation projects, while
since 2020, the SDE++ scheme has been open to a broader range of technologies which
contribute to reduced greenhouse-gas emissions, including low-carbon heat, renewable gas,
low-carbon hydrogen production and carbon capture and storage.
The scheme offers an operating subsidy equal to the difference between the cost of
low-carbon technologies and the market price of the products delivered. Projects compete in
auctions for SDE++ contracts. Each year, the operating subsidy that a project receives depends
on the long-term product price and volume of production. Technologies are ranked by an
emissions factor, which allows different technologies to compete fairly. The end result is that
the technologies which are able to reduce emissions at the lowest cost receive subsidies. The
scheme aims to mobilise operating support up to €3 billion annually.
Source: Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy (2020).
3.1 Political scope
3.1.1 Should contracts be organised at national or EU level?
The first consideration is whether commercialisation contracts will be issued or auctioned at
national or European level. European level would be preferable because this would increase
the competitive pressure on industry, leading to more efficient outcomes. Conversely, if
schemes were designed at the national level, they would pose a significant threat to the integ-
rity of the internal market, as EU countries might use such instruments to give their domestic
industries an unfair advantage.
The obvious obstacle to design at the European level is political. National governments
strongly guard industrial policy and there would be resistance to significant finances being
distributed via the European institutions to competing companies in other EU countries.
Moreover, countries are moving at different paces on low-carbon industrial reorganisation.
In some countries, discussions around commercialisation contracts are already maturing; in
others they are yet to seriously begin. A further consideration is that in countries that have
moved more slowly on decarbonisation, there might be a higher share of projects with low
carbon abatement costs, compared to countries that have moved faster. Projects from previ-
ously slower moving countries would be more competitive in an auction based on abatement
costs.
Compromises may be considered. Countries could join together to issue commerciali-
sation contracts7. Richer countries might be keen to begin in this way. Over time, countries
could apply to join the issuing group. Alternatively, if initially organised at the national level,
bilateral links could be envisaged to enable other countries to participate. For example, if
Germany moves first to set up a contracting scheme, an invitation to participate might be
7 A group of countries could cooperate in line with the ‘enhanced cooperation’ procedure. This allows a minimum
of nine member states to cooperate in an area without other members being involved. For example, this procedure
underpins the Schengen area.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚15/21 | July 2021
extended to Belgium. Over time, systems that began at the national level should evolve and
expand to the European level.
3.1.2 Who will pay for the subsidies?
The sources of revenue to fund commercialisation contracts will depend on geographical
organisation. At national level, support can come from national budgets. If operated at EU
level, funding could come from the EU budget. Alternatively, a fund could be created from the
auctioning of ETS emissions permits. While ETS revenues are frequently earmarked for every
new proposed investment, their use for a low-carbon deployment option would be appropri-
ate and within the spirit of the ETS.
The Innovation Fund has been established as one of the first EU funding instruments
for the demonstration of low-carbon technologies. The revenues for the Innovation Fund
come from the auctioning of 450 million ETS allowances between 2020 and 2030. During the
drafting of the policy, this was envisaged to amount to approximately €10 billion8, but given
current carbon prices the budget might be double that. The Innovation Fund proves that the
use of ETS revenues for funding low-carbon projects is politically possible. Use of commer-
cialisation contracts could be combined with the Innovation Fund. For example, projects
could progress from demonstration stage funding under the Innovation Fund to deploy-
ment-oriented support through contracts.
The volatility of the ETS price might cause a problem. When revenue is denominated in
ETS permits, price fluctuations mean annual revenue in terms of euros is not certain. At the
same time, the annual subsidies required for commercialisation contracts are also dependent
on the ETS price. This creates an unwelcome positive correlation between low revenues from
ETS auctions, and larger requirements to fund commercialisation contracts. However, cer-
tainty is required to ensure annual payments. To mitigate this risk, the European Investment
Bank could be tasked with smoothing revenues. This would involve borrowing so that years
with lower ETS prices would ultimately be paid for by higher future prices.
3.2 Allocation process
3.2.1 How should commercialisation contracts be awarded? Is auctioning the preferred
option?
Regardless of geographic scope, commercialisation contracts should be allocated via a com-
petitive process. This would involve bids from individual low-carbon projects. The core of a
project's bid should be the strike price, or the guaranteed carbon price the project asks for in
order to proceed with commercial operation. The central component of allocation should be
an auctioning system: the lower the strike price, the more attractive the bid. Auctions work
as a mechanism because of the information asymmetry between industry and policymakers.
Industry better understands the true costs of decarbonisation and their preferences would be
revealed through auctioning. However, certain caveats are required beyond only strike prices.
The purpose of commercialisation contracts is to stimulate low-carbon innovation in
order to meet the 2050 net-zero target. Accordingly, support should be given only to projects
that are compatible with this. This means not supporting incremental carbon emission reduc-
tions. For example, a power plant submitting a bid based on a new technology which allows
for more efficient combustion of coal should not be considered.
Funding of projects that facilitate replication and future cost decreases should also be pre-
ferred (ie projects with significantly steep learning curves)9. For the EU climate policymaker
concerned about global action, this replication clause should be extended to the global level.
8 Including €700 million left over from NER300 (the previous EU-wide low carbon support scheme). By the end of
2021, the Innovation Fund will have distributed €1.1 billion in support.
9 “Technical and market potential for widespread application or replication, or future cost reductions” is already a
selection criterion under the Innovation Fund, Article 11 (European Commission, 2019).

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚15/21 | July 2021
That is to say, projects should be preferred if they are based on technologies that can more
easily be replicated across the world. For example, the costs of small modular products tend
to decrease more rapidly than that of large non-modular units (Neij, 2008). Projects must also
be clearly ready for commercialisation, meaning they should at least demonstrate a certain
maturity regarding planning.
In a first application phase, projects could be assessed on these potentially more qualita-
tive points of eligibility and the strike price would not yet be considered. For projects that pass
this first assessment, a second application phase would see projects compete by promised
strike price. While projects would submit a requested strike price, the contracts would be
signed according to the clearing strike price, or the strike price agreed with the marginal
producer who receives support. An ex-ante maximum strike price can set limits to the volume
of public support committed.
3.2.2 How long should contracts last?
Contracts will need to cover sufficiently long periods to compensate upfront capital invest-
ment risk. This is likely to be in the range of 10-20 years depending on the technology. For
example, the German environment ministry plans to sign carbon contracts for difference
(‘Klimaschutzverträge’) with industry for 10 years, while many renewable support systems
run for 20 years. Given that the carbon price will likely rise to meet the strike price, support
would not necessarily be distributed each year.
3.2.3 How frequently should new commercialisation contracts be auctioned?
Frequent auctions, eg every year, would help alleviate information asymmetries as industry
preferences would be frequently revealed and updated. However, in sectors that require large
capital projects it may be too ambitious to run auctions every year, and a thinning of the
market might lead to volatile annual bids. Depending on other design choices, some form
of ‘tendering’ might also be necessary, with governments negotiating commercialisation
contracts bilaterally with individual providers of large capital investments. This would be less
likely if Europe-wide competition was encouraged.
3.3 Technological scope and differentiation
3.3.1 How to design an auctioning scheme to provide effective support across the range
of sectors and technologies required for net-zero
Allowing projects based on every technology covered by the ETS to compete in single auc-
tions would be unlikely to be effective. Technologies at different stages of maturity require
different strike prices, both across and within sectors. A single broad auctioning system would
therefore result in excessive public support being awarded to the cheapest technology for re-
ducing carbon emissions in a particular year. While this might appear attractive from a static
standpoint, it neglects the benefits of supporting a range of technologies that will be required
in the future.
Contracts for difference schemes for renewable electricity markets solve this problem by
holding auctions for different ‘technological pots’ . One auction is held for technologies with
anticipated low strike prices, and another for those with higher anticipated prices. A similar
format can be followed for commercialisation contracts. This leads to a trade-off between
efficiency and resilience. Less technological disaggregation (ie fewer pots) will lead to lots of
support for today’s more efficient technologies. More disaggregation (ie more pots) will sup-
port a broader range of technologies, likely creating more resilience but being less efficient
because policymakers have imperfect information.
The result will be a number of ‘auction pots’ , of which each is assigned a volume of public
support, which can be denominated in terms of the tonnes of abated carbon. A project’s bid
will then be considered against others within the same pot. These pots could correspond
directly to a sector, eg cement or ammonia, or could allow for the grouping of multiple sector

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚15/21 | July 2021
technologies. For example, similar sectors might be grouped and then further decomposed by
established technologies (lower strike prices), and less-established technologies.
Fabra and Montero (2020) suggested that these separate auction pots need not take the
form of separate auctions ex ante. Instead, a general auction can be designed that contains
minimum quotas for desired technologies. In this way, if technology-neutral competition is
efficient at providing a range of support, the system functions. If not, minimum quotas would
force some support to be provided across a range of technologies. At European level, mini-
mum quotas could also be built in for individual countries, so that each country receives at
least a minimum volume of support from the scheme (Figure 3).
Figure 3: Illustrative example of an EU commercialisation contract auction
Source: Bruegel.
4 Towards a European solution
The best approach for the implementation of commercialisation contracts would be a coor-
dinated system of EU project selection and funding. Bids should be submitted by low-carbon
projects from throughout the EU. Evaluation would be by an EU agency such as the European
Climate, Infrastructure and Environment Executive Agency10 using the two-step approach
detailed in the previous section.
Allocating contracts at European level would lead to considerably more competition and a
more efficient outcome. It would allow for significant technological disaggregation of support
while maintaining competition, because of the increased number of firms able to bid. It
would also prevent fragmentation of the EU single market.
4.1 Coordinating framework for project selection
The project selection framework would involve:
• Determining which technologies are eligible for commercialisation contracts. These
would be low-carbon projects that are in line with net-zero ambition, and can be feasibly
replicated across the EU (and ideally the world).
10 The agency already manages several EU-level climate programmes, including the Innovation Fund.
E X A M PL E
Country: Bulgaria/France/Spain
T e chno l o gy :
Ammonia/Cement/Steel
Strike Price:
Volume:
/F.sc/R.scCEMENT
€60
0 . 1 M t
/E.sc/S.sc
CEMENT
€63
0 . 3 M t
/F.sc/R.sc
CE M E N T
€65
0 . 2 M t
/F.sc/R.sc
ST EEL
€72
0 . 1 M t
/E.sc/S.sc
CE M E N T
€7 5
0 . 1 M t
/F.sc/R.sc
A M N
€8 5
0 . 1 M t
/B.sc/G.sc
CE M E N T
€8 7
0 . 1 M t
0. 7 M t
allo c at e d t h r o u gh
auct i o n wi t h pric e
s e ttle d at €72

0. 1 M t
allo c at e d
thro u gh te c h
qu o t a t o
ammo nia at
€85
0. 2 M t
allo c at e d t h r o u gh
minimu m co u ntr y
q u o t a t o Bu l ga ria at
€90
AUCTION RULES
Ph as e 2: Co mpe titio n by s t r i k e pr i c e
A uctio n vo l u me : 1 M t
Minimum country quota: 0.2 Mt
Minimum technology quota: 0.1 Mt
/B.sc/G.sc
ST EEL
€9 0
0 . 1 M t
/E.sc/S.sc
A M N
€8 6
0 . 1 M t
/B.sc/G.sc
A M N
€9 6
0 . 1 M t
N ot
s el ec t ed
N ot
s el ec t ed
N ot
s el ec t ed

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚15/21 | July 2021
• Grouping technologies into separate pots: this should be done on the basis of data from
the ETS (industry codes). Design would have to be dynamic so that it responds as infor-
mation about marginal abatement costs is progressively revealed.
• Decisions on the type of contract which will be offered to each pot. This would include
maximum strike price, maximum volume of support to be allocated to each pot. Some
elements such as length of contracts may be uniform across all pots.
In case political obstacles prevent Europe-wide contracts from being issued, a coordi-
nating framework would still be essential for the alternatives we have discussed (clubs of
countries, bilateral linkages). In this case, the coordinating framework will be necessary to
promote the convergence of national schemes over time. Within an overall framework, coun-
tries could be free to issue their own contracts, safe from state-aid restrictions. Coordinated
design of technology pots to ensure fair competition would be particularly important.
4.2 European funding
Beyond coordination, funds will also be required at the European level. Realistically, an EU
wide ‘commercialisation contract fund’ should look to distribute €3 billion to €6 billion per
year (or 0.0003 percent of EU27 GDP) when focused only on industrial emissions. This could
be conceived as an extension or reform of the Innovation Fund.
Commercialisation contracts should be a temporary form of industrial support. Once
deployment reaches a certain threshold, sufficient learning curves will be triggered, and
combined with rising carbon prices, new installations will then not need subsidies. For
the following calculations we take 20 percent as a rough estimate of the necessary market
penetration of a new technology to be supported. This is in line with estimates in previous
literature, such as Sartor and Bataille (2019). To calculate annual support levels, we assume
a constant carbon price of €45/tonne. Figure 4 compares the volume of annual EU support
that would be required to provide commercialisation contracts at €70, €100 and €150 /tonne
for low-carbon production processes to replace 20 percent of existing installations across all
industrial emissions11.
These numbers are very much an upper bound as not all industrial emissions would be
considered appropriate for support. Comparison with the ongoing legacy costs for just French
and German renewable electricity support, as well as the annual Common Agricultural Policy
payments at the EU level, show that this policy would be significantly cheaper.
Figure 4: Comparison of annual payments
Source: Bruegel.
11 Taking our threshold of 20 percent market penetration, our calculations assume that support is offered to all
industrial sectors. This involves a total of 800 megatonnes of greenhouse-gas emissions from industrial processes
and combustion for industry.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Commercialisation
contracts
CAP payments
France and Germany legacy
renewable costs
Annual payments (€ billions)
€150 €100 €70
Commercialisation contract strike price

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚15/21 | July 2021
A possibility would be co-financing at the national level. A scheme could be designed in
which competition occurs at the European level, but when a domestic project wins, the rele-
vant EU country agrees to provide a share (eg 40 percent) of the financing. This would allow
limited EU budgets to be stretched further.
4.3 Timeline for implementation
Based on the previous calculations, we outline an illustrative timeline for implementation of
commercialisation contracts by the EU over the next decade:
1. There is a substantial learning process for a new policy. A core difficulty for commerciali-
sation contracts would be the lack of information about the appropriate abatement costs
for different industries. A first auction can be split into two separate technology pots:
mature and less-mature technologies, with maximum strike prices of €70/tonne and
€100/tonne. The European Commission would have to decide which technologies can
compete in which pot.
2. In 2022, the first auction could issue contracts for 5 million tonnes of carbon to be abated
under each pot, ie annual support of €125 million and €275 million for the mature and
less-mature technology pots respectively12.
3. In subsequent years, auctions would allocate further support. As auction design reveals
industry preferences (marginal abatement costs), the European Commission could group
technologies into more appropriate pots.
An initial objective could be to allocate the equivalent of an additional €1 billion of annual
funding every year starting from 2024. This might take the form of auctions for €2 billion in
subsidies every other year if deemed more appropriate. By 2030, annual maximum opera-
tion subsidies would then be in the order of €6 billion per year (plus whatever was issued in
2022-2024). This would be a maximum based on today’s carbon price of about €45. The reality
is that by the time such contracts are finally issued, the ETS price is likely to have increased.
Annual operating subsidies are thus likely to be substantially lower.
References
BMWI (2020) The National Hydrogen Strategy, Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, Berlin,
available at https://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/EN/Publikationen/Energie/the-national-hydrogen-
strategy.pdf
BMU (2021) Eckpunkte für eine Förderrichtlinie Klimaschutzverträge zur Umsetzung des Pilotprogramms:
Carbon Contracts for Difference, Bundesministerium für Umwelt, Naturschutz und nukleare
Sicherheit, available at https://www.bmu.de/fileadmin/Daten_BMU/Download_PDF/Klimaschutz/
eckpunktepapier_klimaschutzvertraege_ccfd_bf.pdf
Chiappinelli, O. and K.Neuhoff (2020) ‘Time-consistent carbon pricing: The role of carbon contracts
for differences’ , DIW Discussion Papers No. 1859, Deutsches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung,
Berlin, available at https://www.diw.de/de/diw_01.c.758552.de/publikationen/
diskussionspapiere/2020_1859/time-consistent_carbon_pricing__the_role_of_carbon_contracts_for_
differences.html
Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy (2020) SDE++ 2020: Stimulation of Sustainable
Energy Production and Climate Transition, Netherlands Enterprise Agency, available at https://
english.rvo.nl/sites/default/files/2020/11/Brochure%20SDE%20plus%20plus%202020.pdf
12 Calculations based on assumption of a constant €45/tonne carbon price.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚15/21 | July 2021
Edenhofer, O., M. Kosch, M. Pahle and G. Zachmann (2021) ‘ A whole-economy carbon price for Europe
and how to get there’ , Policy Contribution 06/2021, Bruegel, available at https://www.bruegel.org/
wp-content/uploads/2021/03/PC-06-2021-090321.pdf
European Commission (2019) ‘Supplementing Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and
of the Council with regard to the operation of the Innovation Fund’ , Official Journal of the European
Union, available at https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32019R0856
European Commission (2020) 'A hydrogen strategy for a climate-neutral Europe', COM(2020) 301 final,
available at: https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/hydrogen_strategy.pdf
European Commission (2021) 'Updating the 2020 New Industrial Strategy: Building a stronger Single
Market for Europe’s recovery', COM(2021) 350 final, available at: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/
default/files/communication-industrial-strategy-update-2020_en.pdf
Fabra, N. and J.P . Montero (2020) ‘Technology-Neutral vs. Technology-Specific Procurement’ , CEPR
Discussion Papers 15554, Centre for Economic Policy Research, available at https://ideas.repec.org/p/
cpr/ceprdp/15554.html
Gerres, T . and P . Linares (2020) ‘Carbon Contracts for Differences: their role in European industrial
decarbonization’ , Policy Brief, September, Climate Strategies, available at https://climatestrategies.
org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Carbon-Contracts_CFMP-Policy-Brief-2020.pdf
Helm, D. and C. Hepburn (2005) ‘Carbon contracts and energy policy: An outline proposal’ , mimeo,
Oxford University
Neij, L. (2008) ‘Cost development of future technologies for power generation – A study
based on experience curves and complementary bottom-up assessments’ , Energy Policy
36: 2200-2211, available at https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/
S0301421508001237?via%3Dihub
Richstein, J. (2017) ‘Project-Based Carbon Contracts: A Way to Finance Low-Carbon Investments’ ,
Discussion Papers 1714, 18 S, Deutsches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung (DIW), Berlin, available at
https://www.diw.de/de/diw_01.c.575030.de/publikationen/diskussionspapiere/2017_1714/project-
based_carbon_contracts__a_way_to_finance_innovative_low-carbon_investments.html
Sartor, O. and C. Bataille (2019) ‘Decarbonising Basic Materials in Europe: How Carbon Contracts-
for-Difference could help bring breakthrough technologies to market’ , Study No. 6, Institute for
Sustainable Development and International Relations (IDDRI), available at https://www.iddri.org/
sites/default/files/PDF/Publications/Catalogue%20Iddri/Etude/201910-ST0619-CCfDs_0.pdf
Vogl, V ., M. Åhman and L.J. Nilsson (2021) ‘The making of green steel in the EU: a policy evaluation for the
early commercialization phase’ , Climate Policy, 21(1): 78-92
Zachmann, G. (2013) ‘You’d better bet on the ETS’ , Policy Brief 2013/02, Bruegel, available at https://www.
bruegel.org/wp-content/uploads/imported/publications/pb_2013_02_.pdf
