
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Francesco Nicoli (francesco
.nicoli@bruegel.org) is a
Visiting Fellow at Bruegel
and Professor of Political
Economy of Europe at
Politecnico di Torino
Roel Beetsma is Dean of
the Faculty of Economics
and Business and Professor
of Macroeconomics at the
University of Amsterdam
Executive summary
Joint procurement is an important tool that is currently under-exploited at European
Union level. It can greatly enhance the effectiveness of public spending in Europe, achieving
greater coherence between spending across different countries, exploiting monopsony power,
producing economies of scale, reducing downward competition between public authorities,
improving the single market and producing a degree of solidarity without resulting in
redistribution between EU countries. The EU has already implemented several
joint-procurement projects, including for COVID-19 vaccines, gas supplies and ammunition
for Ukraine.
These previous experiences can work both as a blueprint and as a pilot for larger-scale
actions. Joint procurement could be particularly relevant in sectors with substantial econ-
omies-of-scale and industry-government ties, such as defence. Despite some degree of
political opposition, experimental public opinion studies have shown consistently that joint
procurement in such areas can strongly improve public support for EU-level action.
Measures that could expand European joint procurement in a politically sustainable
way include the use of framework contracts, which allow for ad-hoc commitments tailored
to the needs of different EU countries; reporting by countries of their future large public
procurement plans as a part of the European Semester so that the European Commission
could propose coordinated actions if necessary; and the use of staggered contracting and
multiple-award strategies, which can ensure a level playing field among companies of similar
market power, promoting market-building and supporting the entry of new competitors.
The authors thank Guntram Wolff and Jeromin Zettelmeyer for extensive comments on an
earlier draft. We also thank for helpful comments the participants in a Bruegel seminar, in
particular Zsolt Darvas, Maria Demertzis, Heather Grabbe and Lucio Pench.

Recommended citation
Nicoli, F . and R. Beetsma (2024) ‘Joint public procurement as a tool for European Union
industrial policy’, Policy Brief 18/2024, Bruegel
Policy Brief
Issue n˚18/24 | July 2024 Joint public procurement
as a tool for European Union
industrial policy
Francesco Nicoli and Roel Beetsma

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
Policy Brief | Issue n˚18/24 | July 2024
1 Introduction
The European Commission under Ursula von der Leyen has spearheaded a controversial pivot
towards a more assertive, European Union-led industrial policy that combines public funding for
large-scale industrial projects, a relaxation of certain state aid rules and more assertive oversight
of Europe’s economic interactions with the rest of the world. By adopting such a coordinated
approach to industrial policy, the EU seeks to leverage its collective strength to foster innovation,
support sustainable development and enhance its competitiveness in key technological sectors –
an approach seen as especially relevant at a time of challenging global geo-economic shifts.
These actions require substantial public funding, which risks distorting the European single
market or could be ineffective in addressing the actual bottlenecks of the European economy1.
However, other instruments are available. One is the use of joint public procurement to purchase
at EU level certain strategic products that member states would otherwise have to purchase
domestically. Such joint procurement would increase the effectiveness of public spending and
help strengthen the single market. Ursula von der Leyen has restated its importance in her politi-
cal programme for the next Commission (Von der Leyen, 2024).
There have already been a number of instances of EU-coordinated joint procurement,
though in very different contexts: COVID-19 vaccines, gas contracts in the context of the energy
crisis caused by the full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine, and artillery ammunition to sustain
the Ukrainian army. Other initiatives have been proposed or are already underway. The Euro-
pean Defence Industry Reinforcement Through Common Procurement Act (Regulation (EU)
2023/2418) sets out rules to boost common procurement of weaponry. Estonian prime minister
and nominee as EU High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Kaja
Kallas has called for the issuance of €100 billion of Eurobonds for defence spending2.
We explore the economic rationale for and political feasibility of joint EU procurement as
an instrument of European industrial policy. EU industrial policy is expensive, while national
industrial policy undermines the single market. Since procurement is taking place anyway,
it may be collectively beneficial to focus it more on industrial-policy objectives. In itself, this
may justify joint procurement. However, as pointed out by Tagliapietra et al (2023) in relation
to the Net Zero Industry Act (NZIA, Regulation (EU) 2024/1735), deploying public procure-
ment is futile when foreign technology is substantially cheaper than domestic technology,
because national authorities are not obliged to purchase the latter. Efficiency gains from lift-
ing procurement to the EU level may make purchase of EU technology financially compelling
and create opportunities for joint procurement as a strategic industrial policy instrument.
In the most narrow sense, joint procurement is defined as the central and collective
procurement of goods and services that could have been otherwise procured and then used
by the individual parties involved – national governments and administrations in EU terms.
Given the complexity of the way the EU is organised, in particular the financial framework
at both the EU and national levels, multinational joint procurement can take very different
forms. We therefore adopt a somewhat wider definition of joint procurement. This includes
central activities involving the following:
• Pooling research and development expenditure around a product (without necessarily
resulting in joint purchases of this product, which might still be procured separately by the
participating countries);
1 For example, McWilliams et al (2024) viewed subsidies for EU solar manufacturing as unwarranted as they risk
increasing the costs of solar panels, slowing down their deployment and creating an industry becoming dependent
on subsidies. They propose alternative ways of reducing reliance on China as the near-monopolistic provider of
solar panels.
2 ERR News, ‘Kaja Kallas proposes €100 billion Eurobond issue to bolster defense sector’ , 19 February 2024, https://
news.err.ee/1609257408/kaja-kallas-proposes-100-billion-eurobond-issue-to-bolster-defense-sector.
Joint procurement
could increase the
effectiveness of public
spending and
help strengthen the
EU single market

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
Policy Brief | Issue n˚18/24 | July 2024
• Centrally negotiating framework contracts on behalf of member states, even though the
actual purchases are then left to member states at the price-points and contra clauses
resulting from the common negotiation;
• Joint procurement proper, whereby the central level – the EU through the European Com-
mission – directly purchases goods and services on behalf of the member states.
Section 2 discusses economic arguments in favour of joint public procurement. Section 3
presents three examples of joint procurement already under way. Section 4 makes use of a set
of original survey data from 2020 and 2022 to assess the level of public support (and, hence,
potential political feasibility) for joint procurement policies. A substantial part of the discus-
sion focuses on the defence industry, but we also demonstrate support for a role for joint
procurement in the areas of energy and medicines.
2 The economic added value of joint
European procurement
2.1 Advantages of joint procurement
From a conceptual and theoretical perspective, jointly procuring certain goods and services
at European level has a number of potential benefits, including economies of scale, monop-
sony power, avoidance of downward competition, single market enhancement and reinforced
solidarity.
2.1.1 Economies of scale
The academic consensus points towards significant effects of procurement pooling on price
(Karjalainen, 2011). Hence, by aggregating demand across the EU, larger purchases can be
made, resulting in efficiency gains on several fronts. First, unit costs can be lower, because
a large number of purchases can be replaced by a single procurement exercise. Karjalainen
(2011) demonstrated very clear cost advantages from procurement pooling, which can mani-
fest themselves even when a small number of agents pool their demands, providing empirical
evidence.
Second, when the needs of the various parts of the EU are uncertain and the procured
products can be stockpiled, the EU stockpile can be smaller than the sum of all member-state
stockpiles when each one procures for itself. This is because needs are generally not perfectly
correlated across countries. Through a common stockpile countries, effectively insure each
other against unexpected demand. This is relevant, for example, for vaccines and other
medicines.
Third, commitment to joint procurement at a large scale may support investment in costly
cutting-edge R&D. Domestic procurement guarantees alone might not make it worthwhile for
firms to make the relevant investment in R&D. Pooling public financing for R&D in this way
therefore allows a greater number of critical projects to be financed, widening the number of
potential beneficiaries. The rationale for joint action in R&D is so strong that the EU is in fact
already quite active on this front, for example in the area of defence3.
3 For example, see European Commission news of 19 December 2023, ‘European Defence Fund: start of 37 new
defence R&D projects’ , https://defence-industry-space.ec.europa.eu/european-defence-fund-start-37-new-defence-
rd-projects-2023-12-19_en.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
Policy Brief | Issue n˚18/24 | July 2024
2.1.2 Monopsony power
Scale matters not only for efficiency reasons, but also because it allows stronger negotiating
positions. By pooling demand, the EU can exploit its role as prime or even sole buyer, ap-
proaching a condition of monopsony (the opposite of a monopoly). Concentrated purchasing
power allows the EU to influence market conditions, dictating more favourable procurement
terms, including lower prices and better contract conditions. This can be particularly advan-
tageous in markets where suppliers possess significant market power or in sectors critical to
the EU’s strategic interests, such as technology and energy.
In general, however, monopsony power may lead to inefficient outcomes. The situation
tends to be inefficient to start with, because of monopoly power on the side of producers and/
or producers having close ties to their national authorities, resulting in a market that is already
distorted. Hence, the exertion of monopsony power helps to push prices towards those that
would prevail under perfect competition. In the longer run, however, producers may reduce
innovation or leave the market if they are squeezed too much, hence it is important for the
authorities to stimulate competition and look for ways to interact with producers so that they
find it in their interest to stay in the market and continue to innovate.
Whether monopsony power translates into lower prices is primarily an empirical question
for which cross-sectoral evidence is sparce. For instance, Atkinson and Kerkvliet (1989) found
evidence of monopsony power in coal markets. Muller et al (2002) conducted a double-auc-
tion lab experiment to demonstrate the empirical effects of both monopsony and monopoly
powers in emissions trading markets. Chown et al (2019) found substantial evidence in sup-
port of the claim that Canadian pharmaceutical prices for prescription drugs are less than half
the price of their United States equivalents due to monopsony power. Finally, Yeh et al (2022)
found strong evidence of employers’ monopsony power over workers in the US manufactur-
ing labour market. However, the extent to which these results apply generally across sectors is
not clear, especially in those sectors where the monopsony power is matched by a monopoly
or a cartel.
2.1.3 Prevention of a race to the bottom
Relatedly, joint procurement initiatives can significantly increase the capacity of public au-
thorities to deliver adequate levels of supply across Europe, especially in times of unexpected
crises when public demand for certain goods or services (say, vaccines or facemasks) increas-
es very sharply, but supply is sticky in the short run. Market dynamics, in this context, would
lead to downward competition – a race to the bottom – between public authorities, which
scramble to gain access to a suddenly scarce resource. Empirically, some evidence exists in
certain markets on the impact on pricing and conditions of purchases induced by such races
to the bottom. For instance, Di Maggio et al (2015) used a natural quasi-experiment to identify
the causal impact of de-regulation on races to the bottom in the mortgage market, finding
strong evidence that deregulation had worsened average mortgage conditions.
In the European context, such dynamics could have adverse political consequences,
especially when livelihoods are at stake. By pooling procurement, the EU can simultaneously
buy products at better prices and conditions than would be the case when many public
authorities are out-bidding each other, and allocate the product optimally across the entire
EU territory. This stops lower-income countries from being structurally cut off from supplies
of essential products.
2.1.4 Single market integrity
A single authority pooling the purchases of certain goods or services of different public
authorities across the EU can also be a unifying force for the single market for public
purchases. In some sectors – for instance energy or defence – individual countries have
very few industrial players and those they do have tend to have strong ties with national
bureaucracies and governments, regardless of whether or not they receive direct funding
from their authorities. These ‘national champions’ dominate their sectors, hindering the
By pooling demand,
the EU can exploit
its role as prime or
even sole buyer,
approaching
a condition of
monopsony

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
Policy Brief | Issue n˚18/24 | July 2024
emergence of any meaningful competition. Moreover, they are often so entwined with
policymakers and institutions that they can exert influence on regulatory or financial
measures to their advantage or to detriment of competitors.
With joint EU-level procurement, the EU can create meaningful competition between
large industrial players that dominate their respective markets but are locked-out from
meaningful access abroad. If appropriately designed, joint procurement helps to safeguard
the single market against fragmentation, promoting a more competitive environment within
the EU. To achieve this, however, the EU should design instruments that enable newcomers
– even small and medium enterprises – to compete directly, for instance by forming consortia.
Another approach would be to reserve dedicated competitions, at least initially, to smaller
entities, which may thereby develop into serious competitors for incumbent companies.
NASA ’s Small Business Innovation Research programme and the American Department of
Defence Small Business Strategy (2023), for example, aim to support the integration of smaller
businesses into the respective supply chains. Such approaches could be particularly help-
ful for the European market for defence products, which is highly fragmented according to
national boundaries.
In these contexts, monopsony is of little help, because the issue is not pricing per se, but
rather politically-induced market fragmentation. This can be reduced by pooling or creating
a certain number of centralised demands for defence equipment. Hence, the EU could pro-
gressively shape a common market for defence products, while helping the member states in
fulfilling their 2 percent of GDP defence spending NATO commitment.
One risk associated with this approach, of course, is that some national defence providers
might lose out on their status of national champions. However, this is unlikely to be the case,
since defence remains primarily a national prerogative. Nevertheless, the need for European
countries to increase their military spending to meet the Russian threat and fulfil their NATO
commitment opens a window of opportunity for enhanced competition. By creating limited,
but sufficiently sizeable, central procurement of additional equipment, the EU might create
a competitive subsidiary marketplace in which national champions could compete fairly
against each other without – at least initially – endangering their national positions.
Furthermore, since defence is typically an industry characterised by economies of scale in
production, there is a risk that a common marketplace would disadvantage smaller players.
To avoid such an outcome, the EU might learn from the US Department of Defense and the
European Space Agency, which have both started to procure orbital rocket launchers in a
staggered approach. This involves earmarking purchases for different classes of providers
depending on their size, hence enabling a level playing field between near equals. Similarly,
NASA has adopted, since 2008, a multiple-awards approach to provision of space launch
services, explicitly aiming not only at provisioning capabilities but also at creating a market-
place. Importantly, in these cases, procurement is seen as much as a market-building effort as
an effort in actually purchasing goods and services, and therefore this approach would fit well
with the single-market enhancing functions of joint EU procurement in defence.
2.1.5 Solidarity
Finally, solidarity might be a rationale for joint procurement. Thanks to economies of scale (in
purchases but also in development) and to monopsony power, even limited joint procurement
schemes can reduce prices to levels at which certain goods or services become available to the
less-affluent participants in the scheme, when this would otherwise not have been possible.
Solidarity thus emerges as a by-product of joint procurement initiatives. In fact, when it comes
to medicines, pharmaceutical companies sometimes refuse to supply especially smaller
countries that negotiate too fiercely for lower prices. Joint procurement implicitly prevents this
from happening.
Solidarity can also be built into the design of the procurement. For instance, joint stock-
piles of essential goods (for instance, medicines) could be established and made available not
simply on the basis of relative financial contributions, but on the basis of need. This explicitly
Even limited joint
procurement schemes
can reduce prices to
levels at which certain
goods or services
become available
to the less-affluent
participants

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
Policy Brief | Issue n˚18/24 | July 2024
solidaristic objective, although not strictly required for joint procurement to work, might pro-
vide a degree of political justification for joint procurement, as detailed below.
2.2 Limitations on joint procurement
First, joint procurement would not be deployable in all possible policy areas. It leaves limited
room for differences in preferences across countries and should focus on areas where there
is little variation in those preferences. This is straightforward when it comes to a vaccine, for
example, for the most relevant feature is its ability to protect against a virus. However, other
products might have multiple characteristics that appeal to different countries or groups. This
further implies an inherent tension – which in fact characterises all sorts of procurement or
purchasing – between prices and quality. This conflict can be particularly problematic in the
context of joining otherwise independent purchasing.
Second, monopsony power on the side of the Commission (acting for the EU) could
supress R&D efforts by producers if their profit margins are eroded too much. Some produc-
ers may stop producing in the EU or servicing the EU market, moving some of their activities
elsewhere, for example to the US. While maximising short-term aggregate welfare, excessive
monopsony power might therefore come at the expense of long-term growth.
It should be noted, however, that while monopsony leads to under-utilisation of factors
of production, this is the case only when compared with the theoretical outcomes of genuine
perfect competition. In the current context, monopsony would benefit the purchasers but
might push some of the producers out of the market. This outcome, however, needs to be
weighed against two considerations:
• First, many of the markets in which joint procurement has been introduced or could be
expanded are highly uncompetitive to start with and characterised by large conglomer-
ates; examples include the pharmaceutical, energy and defence sectors. These inefficien-
cies benefit corporations rather than the EU public.
• Second, the potential inefficiencies introduced by EU-wide joint procurement need to be
balanced against the natural reduction in market segmentation across national bound-
aries that joint procurement would induce in a number of important markets, thereby
reducing inefficiencies from a lack of competition in those markets.
One might also legitimately ask, assuming that joint procurement at EU level is beneficial,
why not set up joint procurement with other countries or blocs? However, since it is already
difficult to align EU countries on a joint procurement initiative, this would be even more
difficult when other blocs are involved, as it would require additional coordination, political
support from a broader set of countries and agreement on common legal foundations. The EU
already has some experience of coordinating procurement beyond its borders (for instance
in the case of certain pharmaceuticals) but this happens on a very contextual basis to face
specific challenges.
All in all, even though a proper balance needs to be found on a case-by-case basis
between the advantages laid out in section 2.1 and these considerations, the relative
under-utilisation of joint procurement at the European level suggests that there is scope for
harnessing untapped potential, while remaining attentive to its limitations.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
Policy Brief | Issue n˚18/24 | July 2024
3 Current joint procurement initiatives
Joint procurement has already been a core part of the EU response to three major crises: the
COVID-19 pandemic, the energy crisis and the full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine. Table 1
provides an overview of EU joint procurement actions undertaken in the last five years.
Even though joint R&D is not new for the EU, and joint procurement was envisaged as one
of the main goals of the European Defence Agency since its inception, the genuine added
value of EU-level procurement initiatives became apparent only after the EU put in place the
2020 EU Vaccines Strategy. This included centralised EU financing for vaccines development
with a series of industrial partners, an expedited regulatory and approval framework and the
introduction of the advance purchase agreements (AMAs) for vaccine doses, which allowed
member states to signal their interests in purchasing COVID-19 vaccine doses and allowed
the Commission to negotiate favourable quotas given the pooled demand (Beetsma et al,
2021).
T able 1: Joint procurement in response to crises, 2020-2024
Sector / type Research and
Development
Contract negotiations on
behalf of member states Direct purchases
Pharma
EU Vaccines
Development
Strategy (June 2020)
COVID-19 advance
purchase agreements
(June 2020)
Defence European Defence
Fund (2017; 2021)
Collaborative
ammunition procurement
(2023)
Collaborative
ammunition
procurement (up to
€1 billion) (2023)
Energy
EU Energy Platform
(2022); AggregateEU
& Joint Purchasing
Mechanism (2023)
Source: Bruegel.
The creation of a joint procurement initiative to respond to the 2022 energy crisis was
complicated by the inherently geopolitical nature of energy relations, by the general limited
available supply within the European Economic Area (with only Norway and the Netherlands
having sizeable gas reserves) and by the fact that public authorities are often not responsi-
ble for actual gas purchases, given the competitive and liberalised nature of the market. To
address this, the EU launched the European Energy Platform in 2022. This originally worked
as a transparency tool for gas pricing for utility providers, but was quickly extended into a tool
to pursue joint procurement4.
In particular, under the platform, the Commission launched the AggregateEU initiative,
which includes a Joint Purchasing Mechanism. The Joint Purchasing Mechanism (Council
Regulation 2022/2576) acts largely on a voluntary basis. National bodies and companies
that wish to combine demand and therefore obtain better prices can delegate the authority
to negotiate joint purchasing contracts to PRISMA European Capacity Platform GmbH – a
4 See European Commission press release of 25 April 2023, ‘EU Energy Platform: Commission launches first call for
companies to jointly buy gas’ , https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_2403; see also Boltz
et al (2022).

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
Policy Brief | Issue n˚18/24 | July 2024
dedicated private service provider appointed by the European Commission5. However, to
ensure minimum levels of stock refilling, the platform is mandatory for 15 percent of the
national storage capacity of natural gas, ensuring a minimum amount of joint procurement
and therefore achieving, on its own, a sizeable price effect (Nicoli et al, 2023a).
Finally, joint procurement is taking place in the context of stopping the Russian invasion
of Ukraine. As mentioned, joint development and purchasing of military goods has a long his-
tory in joint weapons programmes and associated framework contracts, both within Europe,
such as the Eurofighter programme, and transnationally, as in the case of the F35 fighter jet.
NATO has dedicated provisions to that end, and joint procurement constitutes one of the mis-
sions of the European Defence Agency (EDA) (Caranta, 2023), even though the impact and
scale of these activities remain limited. Furthermore, the EU has had since 2017 a dedicated
instrument to jointly finance defence R&D, the European Defence Fund with an €8 billion
endowment (about €1.1 billion/year over the 2021-2027 EU budget cycle). These various
activities, summarised in Figure 1 provide foundations on which a European defence industry
could be built, if political resistance can be overcome.
Figure 1: Joint procurement initiatives in EU defence
Source: Bruegel. Note: The EDA and the European Peace Facility have much broader mandates and more activities than procurement. The
figure reports only those activities involving procurement.
The full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine represented a watershed moment. Joint
procurement became a tool not just to secure a certain amount of industrial orders for the
development of new armaments, as was typically the case in the past, but also to procure
and deliver standard products such as 155mm artillery shells, which Ukraine desperately
needs. Once again, the Commission proposed a two-level process. The EDA is in charge of
negotiating framework contracts with industry partners on behalf of member states, which
can commit their own finances to purchase ammunition either for themselves (to replenish
stocks) or for Ukraine. Furthermore, the EU, through the European Peace Facility, reimburses
purchases of ammunition for Ukraine up to €1 billion6. All in all, such ‘pilot’ experiments have
delivered lower prices, exceeded expectations for vaccines procurement and seem to have
5 See European Commission Questions and Answers of 25 April 2023, ‘Joint gas purchasing: The AggregateEU
mechanism to increase energy security for Europe’ , https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/
qanda_23_2404.
6 Council of the EU press release of 5 May 2023, ‘EU joint procurement of ammunition and missiles for Ukraine:
Council agrees €1 billion support under the European Peace Facility’ , https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/
press-releases/2023/05/05/eu-joint-procurement-of-ammunition-and-missiles-for-ukraine-council-agrees-1-
billion-support-under-the-european-peace-facility/.
Joint R&D Joint procurement
EDF
EDA
European
Peace
Facility
Collaborative
ammunition
procurement

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
Policy Brief | Issue n˚18/24 | July 2024
helped in the gas markets7, while the ammunition plan has fallen short of the initial ambition.
Scaling up these schemes, however, requires substantial political will.
4 Feasibility of joint procurement schemes
Despite the potential advantages, using joint procurement to shape the EU’s turn towards
an industrial policy faces an uphill political battle, especially in the defence sector. We focus
on three main points that would determine whether a joint procurement scheme is feasible:
availability of a legal basis, government support and popular support.
4.1 Legal basis
The legal basis for joint procurement agreements varies depending on the specific policy
field: in other words, there is no horizontal legal basis that permits the EU to pursue joint
procurement routinely in all fields of action. However, an indication in the EU Treaties that
the EU shares some responsibility in a policy field has been typically seen as enough for the
EU to pursue joint procurement whenever EU countries support it in order to face a particular
challenge.
For instance, the first introduction of a Joint Procurement Agreement to procure medical
countermeasures was signed in 20148, building on Article 168 of the Treaty on the Function-
ing of the European Union (TFEU) which states that “a high level of human health protection
is to be ensured in the definition and implementation of all Union policies and activities” . The
agreement was signed by EU countries, other countries in the European Economic Area
(EEA) and a number of countries outside the EEA9. Participation in these health-related
joint-procurement agreements is voluntary and different groups of countries may participate
in different initiatives10.
In relation to energy, the legal basis is instead found in TFEU Article 122(1), which enables
7 Collaborative procurement of vaccines has been generally assessed as successful. A World Health Organisation
(WHO, 2022) systematic comparison of procurement schemes (within and beyond the EU) showed, among
advanced countries, a median price for multilateral procurement that was about half of that for direct
procurement from AstraZeneca. For Moderna and Pfizer, multilateral procurement was 10 percent and 30 percent
cheaper, respectively. Data on a direct comparison between the EU and prices for other countries is harder to
find, but some reports show that the EU generally paid substantially less per dose than the United Kingdom, and
also less than the US (with the exception of Moderna, where the EU paid around 20 percent more than the US,
but about half that for the UK). See Carmen Ang, ‘COVID-19 Vaccine Prices: Comparing the U.S. and EU’ , Visual
Capitalist, 7 June 2021, https://www.visualcapitalist.com/covid-19-vaccine-cost-eu-versus-us/; and The Week,
‘What Covid vaccines cost - and the countries paying over the odds’ , 30 March 2021, https://theweek.com/951750/
what-do-covid-vaccines-cost-who-pays-what. In the gas markets, assessment is harder, because (1) the EU platform
only facilitates negotiations between private partners, but the details of the agreements are usually not disclosed;
(2) the platform is not compulsory, so agreed quantities are not known; (3) there is no counterfactual to compare
prices to, given the unique dependence of the EU on Russian markets prior to Russia’s full-scale invasion of
Ukraine. Still, negotiations have indicated gas supply offers through the mechanism outstripping demand by
a factor of about three, which suggests a downward trend in prices through this purchasing mechanism; see
Reuters, ‘EU’s latest joint gas buying round near three-times over-subscribed, Commission says’ , 28 February 2024,
https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/eus-latest-joint-gas-buying-round-near-three-times-over-subscribed-
commission-2024-02-28/. Notably, the EU role is weaker in the gas purchasing mechanism, so the effects of joint
procurement are likely more limited.
8 See European Commission Decision C(2014) 2258 final of 10 April 2014, https://health.ec.europa.eu/publications/
commission-decision-c2014-2258-final_en.
9 As of end April 2020 there were 37 signatories.
10 In the words of the European Commission (2021), in the context of the joint procurement of medical
countermeasures: “it provides for a voluntary mechanism enabling participating countries and EU institutions to
jointly purchase medical countermeasures for different categories of cross-border health threat, including vaccines,
antivirals and other therapeutics”.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
Policy Brief | Issue n˚18/24 | July 2024
the Council to decide “in spirit of solidarity between member states” to implement measures
to address severe difficulties in the supply of certain products, which was then implemented
starting with Council Regulation (EU) 2022/2576. Finally, in the field of defence, the EU role
in joint procurement finds a legal basis in Article 45.1(c, e) of the Treaty on EU, which estab-
lishes the European Defence Agency with the goal of pursuing joint projects and implement-
ing measures to strengthen the European military-industrial base.
All in all, the somewhat liberal use of Articles 122 and 168 TFEU indicates that, whenever
the political will is present among enough EU countries, the legal bases provided in the Treaty
in its current form suffice to pursue joint procurement, especially if this is done on a volun-
tary basis. In principle, joint procurement could be deployed to pursue the various objectives
listed under Article 3 TFEU, including peace, security and the safeguarding of the internal
market, as long as it can be shown that joint procurement as such contributes to better fulfil-
ment of these objectives. The fundamental issue, therefore, is not availability of legal bases,
which are already sufficiently developed to allow joint procurement when a clear added
value is present, but of political support between and within member states, many of which
remain sceptical about delegating public procurement to the EU, even when it produces clear
benefits.
4.2 Popular support
While national government officials often exhibit political opposition to joint-procurement
initiatives, experimental survey evidence collected over the past five years suggests convinc-
ingly that, in times of crisis, European public opinion strongly backs joint procurement. Two
experimental surveys carried out respectively at the end of March/beginning of April 2020,
at the beginning of the COVID-19 crisis (Beetsma et al, 2021), and in November 2022 at the
height of the energy crisis caused by the full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine (Nicoli et al,
2023a, 2023b) tested variants of policies that could be considered as constituting, respectively,
a health union, an energy union and a defence union11.
The surveys found that, generally, respondents support joint procurement. The energy and
defence union experiments carried out in November 2022 included the presence or absence
of joint procurement of gas and oil, and of armaments, respectively. The March 2020 experi-
ment was dedicated entirely to joint procurement of medicines, going into detail on the vari-
ous ways of organising a joint procurement policy (for example, whether joint purchases only
cover a limited set of medicines for stopping large-scale disease outbreaks, or all medicines
for which joint procurement can be financially beneficial).
Figure 2 reports the results for different variations of joint procurement models. It shows
that, for example, the level of support for joint defence procurement increases by more than
two percentage points when procurement of weapons and ammunition is included. For
energy there is little difference in the level of support, whether or not joint purchasing of oil
and gas is included, suggesting that Western European respondents are more sensitive to the
efficiency gains associated with joint procurement in the military, than in the energy sector.
Both experiments include several other dimensions, such as size, governance mechanisms,
financing alternatives, opt-outs, and centralization/decentralization.
11 We used the IPSOS online sampling methodology to collect a sample of 2000 respondents in France, Germany,
Spain, Italy and the Netherlands for the 2020 wave, and 1500 respondents for the 2022 wave. Quota sampling
includes quotas for age, education, gender, regional distribution and profession, as well as ‘soft’ quota for income
distribution. We slightly oversampled Eurosceptic voters. See Beetsma et al (2021, 2022) for a more detailed
discussion of the sampling, methodology and peer-reviewed results.
Survey evidence
suggests that, in times
of crisis, European
public opinion
strongly backs joint
procurement

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
Policy Brief | Issue n˚18/24 | July 2024
Figure 2: Level of public support for policies including joint ammunition, energy or medicines purchases (% of
respondents)
Source: Bruegel. Note: Defence union and energy union refer to EU level governance and policy integration. Different options were proposed to survey respondents, covering criteria includ-
ing governance mechanisms, financing alternatives, opt-outs and degree of centralisation/decentralisation. For details see Burgoon et al (2023) (defence) and Nicoli et al (2023) (energy).
For details of the health union survey see Beetsma et al (2021). Defence/energy union survey data collected in November 2022; health union survey data collected in March 2020.
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1. Defence union (no joint procurement of ammunition)
2. Defence union (with joint procurement of ammunition)
3. Energy union (no joint procurement of gas and oil)
4. Energy union (with joint procurement of gas and oil)
5. Joint procurement of medicines: narrow scope, distribution based
on contributions, national governance
6. Joint procurement of medicines: wide scope, distribution based on
contributions, national governance
7. Joint procurement of medicines: wide scope, distribution based on
need, national governance
8. Joint procurement of medicines: wide scope, distribution based on
need, European governance
In relation to joint procurement of medicines, there is substantially more support for
‘solidaristic’ models (the two right-hand columns in Figure 2): solidarity-based models are
nearly 20 percentage points more supported than packages including pre-allocated stock-
piles depending on contributions12. There is also a preference for a shift towards institutional
coherence, with EU-level procurement decisions accompanied by EU-level allocation deci-
sions (right-hand column of Figure 2).
All in all, public opinion data suggests that there is substantial public support for joint
procurement policies at the EU level, that this support cuts across policy and industrial areas,
and that – at least in the case of joint medicines procurement – citizens recognise all three
fundamental rationales for joint procurement: efficiency, consistency and solidarity, with the
latter playing an overwhelming role in determining public support13.
12 An alternative explanation to solidarity is the insurance motive: countries insure each other again disease
outbreaks at national level, thereby protecting everyone, as urgent action where need is highest reduces or
eliminates the spread of the disease between countries. Note that insurance-like mechanisms are still solidaristic
in nature, but have an inter-temporal self-serving logic.
13 Contrary to what one might expect, the shift from distribution based on contributions towards based on need
is not substantially different between countries traditionally sceptical of further EU financial integration and
those more in favour of it. For instance, the increment in support associated with the solidarity-based version is
22 percentage points for Germans, higher than the average increase by 20 percentage points, and 19 percentage
points for the Dutch, only 1 percentage point lower than the average.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
Policy Brief | Issue n˚18/24 | July 2024
5 Conclusions and recommendations
The EU is increasingly seeking to use joint procurement. In relation to industrial policy, joint
procurement has the potential benefits of economies of scale, monopsony power, prevent-
ing a race to the bottom, leveraging the European single market and providing solidarity. Of
course, not all joint procurement needs to take place at EU level. Joint procurement initiatives
make sense only for initiatives with substantial scale that would benefit multiple countries or
the entire EU. Hence, there is a subsidiarity argument for conducting such procurement at the
level of the EU Furthermore, joint procurement can be enacted in a number of different ways
and through several approaches with greater or lesser degrees of centralisation. Thus, the
precise design of joint procurement initiatives is crucial and should be tailored to the specific
requirements of each policy and context.
Joint procurement initiatives face political obstacles. Some countries may fear that they have
redistributive consequences, ie they will pay for more than their own allocation. In cases of
critical goods or services, such as scarce vaccines, individual countries may have an incentive to
deviate from the collective agreement and secure their own supplies. A second critical limita-
tion of joint procurement as a tool for common industrial policy is that in some highly conse-
quential policy fields, for instance defence or energy, the single market is highly segmented,
characterised by ‘national champions’ with strong ties with their respective governments. These
special industrial-political relationships make the initiation of joint procurement harder, even
though the contextual need to increase public expenditure in defence may offer, at least for this
sector, a window of opportunity for joint procurement action that does not a priori produce
re-distributive effects between such national champions. In other words, the EU might create a
competitive subsidiary marketplace in which national champions could compete fairly against
each other without – at least initially – endangering their national positions.
Moreover, our data shows that while governments might feel reluctant about joint pro-
curement, public opinion is generally favourable towards joint procurement, especially if it
leads to cost-saving, better capabilities or performance and more efficient delivery.
Against this background, we make a number of recommendations aimed at harnessing the
industrial-policy potential of expanding joint purchases, while maintaining political support.
• A starting point could be extending the framework contracts approach, as in the case of
vaccine procurement. These contracts allow for joint setting of the main elements of the
contract (the frame) under which many different purchase contracts can be agreed over
time, saving time and coordination costs. This type of contractual approach also leaves
more space for member states to commit to specific quantities at a later stage, and means
substantial cross-country redistribution can be avoided. Extending the use of framework
contracts may result in initial steps that meet relatively little political resistance. When
successful, this approach can be expanded into full-fledged joint contracting mechanisms
at a later stage.
• Second, innovative procurement practices can be enacted to ensure that procurement
guarantees to the greatest extent a level playing field while also providing a market-build-
ing function. In the first case, to avoid being too dependent on a small number of large
suppliers and to promote entry of new contestants into markets with little existing com-
petition, a staggered contracting approach could be introduced, with, at least initially,
separate competitions for smaller suppliers. This might be particularly important in those
markets with both significant economies of scale and strong industrial-government links,
such as defence, where there is a risk that a full single market would make smaller players
uncompetitive, raising concerns about national strategic autonomy. Market-building
can be achieved by ensuring multiple-awards strategies that select a sufficiently diverse
number of platforms (as in the case of COVID-19 vaccines in the EU, or of NASA launch
services competitions), and that avoid the creation of monopolies.
Joint procurement
initiatives face
political obstacles;
some countries may
fear they will pay for
more than their own
allocation

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
Policy Brief | Issue n˚18/24 | July 2024
• In the medium term, it may be useful to provide for explicit instruments within the next
EU budget cycle (after 2027) for joint-procurement initiatives. This could take place both
through direct budgetary allocations made to a dedicated, flexible reserve fund, and by
providing common support to certain coordinated national actions. The European Semes-
ter, the EU’s surveillance system for member-state economic policies, could be adapted
to coordinate national purchasing strategies, coupling EU instruments with Commission
coordination of national purchases.
• Importantly, since public support for these initiatives is substantial, European authorities
should explicitly develop a communication strategy on industrial policy aimed at the
public, ensuring that the main advantages that joint procurement can deliver – lower costs
and market-building – are well understood and ‘owned’ by European voters.
To conclude, given the increasing geopolitical challenges facing Europe, there are growing
calls for a European industrial policy and for an expansion of EU competences across policy
fields. While the latter can be politically challenging if they require a Treaty change, the
former can distort the single market. Joint procurement is a second best to expansion of EU
competences. While it does not deliver the top-down industrial policy that some favour, it
can offer a pathway to market-enhancing industrial policy that can deliver cost savings and
augment common capabilities, while counting on substantial public support.
References
Atkinson, S.E. and J. Kerkvliet (1989) ‘Dual Measures of Monopoly and Monopsony Power: An
Application to Regulated Electric Utilities’ , Review of Economics and Statistics 71(2): 250–257, available
at https://doi.org/10.2307/1926970
Beetsma, R., B. Burgoon, F . Nicoli, A. de Ruijter and F . Vandenbroucke (2021) ‘Public support for
European cooperation in the procurement, stockpiling and distribution of medicines’ , European
Journal of Public Health 31(2): 253-8, available at https://doi.org/10.1093/eurpub/ckaa201
Beetsma, R., B. Burgoon, F . Nicoli and F . Vandenbroucke (2022) ‘What kind of EU fiscal capacity?
Evidence from a randomized survey experiment in five European countries in times of corona’ ,
Economic Policy 37(111): 411–459, available at https://doi.org/10.1093/epolic/eiac007
Boltz, W., K.D. Borchardt, T . Deschuyteneer, J. Pisani-Ferry, L. Hancher, F . Lévêque, B. McWilliams, A
Ockenfels, S. Tagliapietra and G. Zachmann (2022) ‘How to make the EU Energy Platform an effective
emergency tool’ , Policy Contribution 10/2022, Bruegel, available at https://www.bruegel.org/policy-
brief/how-make-eu-energy-platform-effective-emergency-tool
Burgoon, B., D. Van Der Duin and F . Nicoli (2023) ‘What would Europeans want a European defence
union to look like?’ Working Paper 09/2023, Bruegel, https://www.bruegel.org/working-paper/what-
would-europeans-want-european-defence-union-look
Caranta, R. (2023) ‘The EU’s Role in Ammunition Procurement’ , European Papers 8(3): 1047-1056,
available at https://www.europeanpapers.eu/en/europeanforum/eu-role-ammunition-procurement
Chown, J., D. Dranove, C. Garthwaite and J. Keener (2019) ‘The Opportunities and Limitations of
Monopsony Power in Healthcare: Evidence from the United States and Canada’ , NBER Working Paper
26122, National Bureau of Economic Research, available at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26122
Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani and S. Korgaonkar (2015) ‘Deregulation, Competition and the Race to
the Bottom’ , mimeo, available at https://haas.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/Deregulation-
Competition-and-the-Race-to-the-Bottom.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14
Policy Brief | Issue n˚18/24 | July 2024
European Commission (2021) ‘ Annexes to COM(2021) 355 final – EU strategy on Covid-19 therapeutics’
Karjalainen, K. (2011) ‘Estimating the cost effects of purchasing centralization—Empirical evidence from
framework agreements in the public sector’ , Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 17(2):
87-97, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pursup.2010.09.001
McWilliams, B., S. Tagliapietra and C. Trasi (2024) ‘Smarter European Union industrial policy for solar
panels’ , Policy Brief 02/2024, Bruegel, available at https://www.bruegel.org/policy-brief/smarter-
european-union-industrial-policy-solar-panels
Muller, R.A., S. Mestelman, J. Spraggon and R. Godby (2002) ‘Can Double Auctions Control Monopoly
and Monopsony Power in Emissions Trading Markets?’ Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 44(1): 70-92, available at https://doi.org/10.1006/jeem.2001.1195
Nicoli, F ., D. van der Duin and B. Burgoon (2023) ‘Which Energy Security Union? An experiment on
public preferences for energy union alternatives in 5 western European countries’ , Energy Policy,
183:(2023): 113734, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2023.113734
Tagliapietra, S., R. Veugelers and J. Zettelmeyer (2023) ‘Rebooting the European Union’s Net Zero
Industry Act’ , Policy Brief 15/2023, Bruegel, available at https://www.bruegel.org/policy-brief/
rebooting-european-unions-net-zero-industry-act
Von der Leyen, U. (2024) Europe’s Choice: Political Guidelines for the Next European Commission,
available at https://commission.europa.eu/document/download/e6cd4328-673c-4e7a-8683-
f63ffb2cf648_en?filename=Political%20Guidelines%202024-2029_EN.pdf
WHO (2022) ‘C-19 vaccine price data from public source and as reported by countries to WHO. Market
Information Access to Vaccines’ , Working document, 15 May, World Health Organisation, available
at https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-source/immunization/mi4a/price-analyses-covid-
vaccines-updated-period-4-2022-final.pdf
Yeh, C., C. Macaluso and B. Hershbein (2022) ‘Monopsony in the US Labor Market’ , American Economic
Review 112(7): 2099-2138
