
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
WORKING PAPER | ISSUE 07 | 27 NOVEMBER 2020
Enrico Bergamini is a PhD candidate at Collegio Carlo Alberto, Turin
Georg Zachmann (georg.zachmann@bruegel.org) is a Senior Fellow at Bruegel
The authors would like to thank Donovan Tokuyama for excellent research assistance, and
Robert Kalcik and Catarina Midões for their fundamental inputs and suggestions. We would also
like to thank Antoine Mathieu-Collin, Alexander Roth, Claudia Ghisetti and Reinhilde Veugelers
for their valuable comments.
Recommended citation:
Bergamini, E. and G. Zachmann (2020) ‘Understanding the European Union’s regional potential
in low-carbon technologies’ , Working Paper 07/2020, Bruegel
ENRICO BERGAMINI AND GEORG ZACHMANN
Our research identifies existing and potential specialisation in green
technologies in European Union regions, and proposes an approach to identify
policies that can help to realise this potential. Using the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development’s REGPAT database for regionalised
patent data, we estimate the potential advantage European NUTS2 regions
could have in 14 green technologies. We use network proximity between
technologies and between regions to understand technological/regional
clusters, and build the regressors for estimating potential regional advantage in
specific technologies via zero-inflated beta regressions. We construct a dataset
of lagged potentials and labour market, economic and demographic variables,
and perform an elastic net regularisation to understand the association with
current revealed advantages. Our approach indicates an association between
technological advantage in green technologies in EU regions and participation
rates in labour markets, sectoral employment in science and technology,
general higher education, duration of employment, percentage of GDP spent
on research and development (public and private), and other expenditure on
R&D. If confirmed by causality tests, the established associations could help in
designing horizontal economic policies to enable specific regions to realise their
specialisation potential in specific green technologies.
UNDERSTANDING THE
EUROPEAN UNION’S
REGIONAL POTENTIAL
IN LOW-CARBON
TECHNOLOGIES
WORKING PAPER | ISSUE 03 | 2020

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
1 Introduction and literature review
Keeping the global temperature increase below 2 ◦C above pre-industrial levels will require the almost
complete decarbonisation of our energy system early in the second half of this century. This will
require the increasing and diverse deployment of green technologies (including vehicles, power
plants, appliances and batteries), which will replace the existing stock of high-carbon technologies.
Regions with strong climate policies – such as the EU – will become pilot markets for low -carbon
technologies. But being a pilot market does not automatically translate into a competitive edge in the
new technologies, as the limited success of photovoltaic cell production in Europe shows. To enable
domestic companies to flourish in these new sectors, policymakers seek to complement the creation
of early markets for decarbonisation technologies with some form of industrial policy.
In this paper, we argue that not all regions have the potential to excel in all green technologies, and
that a fundamental characteristic of green industrial policies should be the conside ration and
inclusion of a tailored regional aspect. Our analysis relies on systematic evidence originating from the
complexity-based literature triggered by Hidalgo and Hausmann (2009), and builds on analysis of
green technologies patenting and the current advantages of similar regions. Hidalgo and Hausmann
(2009) also employed the concept of relatedness between different technologies.
The literature that builds on these theoretical frameworks and empirical approaches has advanced
the European efforts to pursue so-called Smart Specialisation Strategies (Foray et al, 2011). Based on
empirical work on geographically granular data, these analyses identify competitive advantages in
terms of regions’ knowledge bases, labour markets, geographical characteristics or industrial
structures, and provide guidelines for diversification opportunities at regional level. The idea is that
regions can build on local characteristics in order to diversify into technologies related to their
existing structures (Balland et al, 2019). Van den Berge and Weterings (2014) explored the potential
for regions to diversify in eco -technologies. They found that in regions in which the knowledge base
was previously characterised by the presence of green innovations, the likelihood of develop ing new
technologies is greater. Montresor and Quatraro (2018) also explored the role of relatedness in green
technology in a regional context, finding that the relatedness of the existing knowledge base can
facilitate the entry of green technologies. They also found that the process of innovation makes green
innovation desirable also for regions with stocks of related non-green knowledge.
2

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Our empirical work builds on the idea of related diversification (Boschma and Frenken, 2011):
comparative regional adva ntages in specific green technologies and sectors can be built on top of
existing strengths in related technologies and sectors. Accordingly, the first step in our analysis is to
identify regional green technology potential based on the relatedness to green technologies of
current regional comparative advantages. In order to identify potential advantages, we refer to the
framework conceptualised in Hausmann et al (2019), building on the regression -based forecasting
technique in Zachmann and Roth (2018), to estimate future potential advantage at the regional level,
and we focus specifically on green technologies.
The second step in our analysis focuses on identifying policies that can help to realise regional
potential in low -carbon technologies. A growing bo dy of empirical literature is studying the policy
relevance of Smart Specialisation, and regional innovation. Boschma and Gianelle (2014) argued that
an experienced entrepreneurial base, labour mobility across related industries, and inter -regional
collaboration are factors for success in the diversification process. Santoalha and Boschma (2020)
confirmed that the presence of green -related capabilities in a region, and political support for green
development at the regional level, can foster innovation. Steen et al (2016) found that lack of political
support for green objectives, also at the national level, is a barrier to regional innovation. Crespo et al
(2017), explained how “developing new growth paths in related industries or technological domains
increases the probability of regional competitive advantage because the shorter cognitive distance
enhances mutual learning, knowledge spillovers and actors’ redeployment of skills from one domain
to another.”
In the second stage of our research we investigate observed regional characteristics, from labour
markets to policy and institutional aspects, which might lead regions to create, realise and exploit this
potential. We use an innovative methodology and a novel dataset to do so. We essentially ask: which
labour market, economic and demographic conditions are associated, together with potential
specialisation, with stronger relative technological advantage?
Hence, our analysis is based on a two -stage approach in which we first estimate potential and
revealed green specialisation, and subsequently select labour market, demographic and economic
variables that are associated with it.
The paper proceeds as follows: section 2 explains the data sources used, technological definitions
and regionalisation of patents. In section 3, we build an empirical strategy to estimate regional
technological advantage, and use a regression -based technique to estimate potential advantage.
3

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Section 4 explains our methodology for the second stage regressions in which we perform a data -
driven selection of variables. In section 5, we discuss limitations and results. Section 6 concludes and
discusses possible policy implications.
2 Data
In the field of innovation economics, the most widely- used source of data is patents statistics.
Patents are not only an indicator of technological specialisation in innovation activities, but also a
proxy for regional economies’ sectoral specialisation s. The PATSTAT database contains information
gathered from statistical offices worldwide, and is commonly analysed as a proxy for innovation
activity. The advantage of this data is that it contains very granular information, covering full patents
texts, as well as inventor-level data.
However, a well -known issue in the use of PATSTAT for geographical analysis is missing information,
especially at sub-national level. We exploit the Organisation for E conomic Co-operation and
Development’s REGPAT database, a plugin for the PATSTAT database with enhanced geocoding ,
providing information consistently geocoded at the regional level. The number of patents attributed to
a region is based on the location of patent inventors that applied to the European Patent Office or for
international patents under the Patent Cooperat ion Treaty (PCT). The earliest application of individual
patent families is used and attributed in fractions to all inventor countries and technology codes.
REGPAT contains patents listed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty and the European Patent Office.
We combine the patents from both sources, preferring EPO to PCT, by keeping the PCT entries only
where the patent is not filed under both.
In terms of technological definitions, patents are classified under different technological classes :
under the Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) scheme and the International Patent Classification
(IPC). These schemes provide a very granular product identification, which we can aggregate in a
tailored technological definition. We select ed the definition of low -carbon technologies based on the
Joint Research Cent re’s definition, as in Fiorini et al (2017). CPC codes are grouped for 14
technologies, namely solar panels, hydrogen -related technologies, solar and thermal energy, wind
energy, hydro energy, energy management, efficient lighting, efficient heating and cooling,
combustion, residential insulation, bio -fuels, batteries, electric cars, efficient rail transport and
nuclear energy. The list of relevant CPC -Y codes is in table A.1 of the Appendix. We use IPC definitions
for all the technologies and we use only the Y class CPC codes to identify low-carbon technologies.
4

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
In the following sections, we provide details about the estimations of revealed technological
advantage and potential technological advantage, which will be included respectively in the left and
right-hand side s of our final dataset. Meanwhile, the economic, demographic and labour market
variables included in the second part of the analysis are based on the full Eurostat and Urban Data
Platform1 databases, and cover a very wind range of fields. We discuss these sources in detail in
section 4.
3 Empirical strategy
3.1 Estimation of potential advantage
First, we define the technological advantage of regions in specific technologies. In this s ection, we
largely build on the previous work of Zachmann and Roth (2018), which offered a detailed description
of the steps involved. The main difference is in the geographical scope of the estimations . While
Zachmann and Roth (2018) worked at the national level, we work here on the NUTS22 level.
We start from the definition of Revealed Technological Advantage (RTA) , calculating the relative
specialisation in patents of a region . This measure is based on the same concept as the Balassa -
inspired measures of Revealed Comparative Advantage (RCA), which are built on export, rather than
patent, data . These measures ‘ standardise’ patent counts, indicating the relative specialisation of a
region in a particular technology. Formally, the revealed technological advantage in for a region is a
fraction of two shares:
(1)
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 =
𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
∑ 𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
∑ 𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
∑ 𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖,𝑖𝑖

where:
xil is the number of patents of technology i in region l
xil is the sum of patents of technology i across all regions
xil is the sum of all patents across all regions
1 The Urban Data Platform was created jointly by the European’s Commission Joint Research Center and the
Directorate General for Regional and Urban Policy (DG REGIO). Available at: https://urban.jrc.ec.europa.eu.
2 Each of the 244 NUTS2 regions has between 800,000 and 3 million inhabitants.
5

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
For the subsequent estimations, a ll the RTAs are generated while excluding green technologies from
the sample. RTAs are, in turn, standardised in the following way:
(2)
𝑠𝑠
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 =
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅
𝑅𝑅−1
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅+ 1 + 1
2
where RTA is derived as in equation (1).
In order to estimate the potential revealed technological advantage of regions (pRTA), we apply the
methodology inspired by Hausmann et al (2019) and thus bring the work of Zachmann and Roth
(2018) to a sub-national level.
This methodology assumes a relationship between the comparative advantage of different products
or technologies. For instance, a region’s comparative strength in one product can imply a potential
strength in another product. This is because there can be a link, a similarity, either between the pair of
products or between the pair of regions. The intuition behind potential advantage is the attempt to
estimate correlations between regions and technologies that are based on latent factors that are
unknown a priori. For example, the latent factors that make regions similar could be factor costs,
infrastructures, geography or domestic market sizes. These correlations could also be based on
technological links (eg similar value chains, technological spill-overs, degree of complexity).
We structure the dataset in three non-overlapping five-year sums of patent counts, from 2001 to
2016, in order to smooth out the volatility in patent activity. We build location -technology cross -
tables at four geographical levels (country, NUTS2 region, inventor, application). We apply equation
(1) and (2) to the cross-tables, and obtain RTAs.
As in Roth and Zachmann (2018), we construct 18 different regio n-technology proximity networks.
We borrow the definitions of the technological networks from two papers (Yan and Luo, 2017; Stellner,
2014). The methods applied include simple correlations, minimum pairwise conditional probabilities,
class-to-class cosine similarity, class -to-patent cosine similarity, co -classification, co -occurrence to
generate the networks on the four different aggregations , geographic (regions and countries) and
personal (inventors and applicants).
At this stage, we obtain 18 different matrices of technology- region proximity measures, of 258 NUTS2
regions and 637 technology codes. In a final step, all the matrices that contain the weighted product
and region d ensities are stacked vertically, in order to construct two column vecto rs of IPC class -
6

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
regions pairs. The column vectors represent 18 weighted networks of technologies and regions
(Hidalgo et al, 2007). These 18 networks are very collinear, and contain largely similar information,
and summarise the latent and observed characteristics of the networks. W e apply a Prin cipal
Component Analysis and reduce the dimensionality from 18 to 2 principal components . Figure 1
illustrates the portion of variance explained by t he principal components, based on the 18
technology-region networks. The correlation between the networks and the first principal component
is on average higher than 0.93. The procedure of bringing the dataset from patent counts to principal
components is applied separately for a ll the different, non -overlapping time stacks, in which we
originally divided REGPAT data.
At this stage, we can proceed with the estimation of potential advantage, using a regression -based
technique as in Roth and Zachmann (2018). For our estimates, we ma ke use of a zero-inflated beta
regression. The use of a zero- inflated model is necessary in order to model this information, which
has been aggregated from largely sparse matrices (Ospina and Ferrari, 2012) . First, we regress the
principal components in t 1 on t 2 RTA values . Once the parameters of this model are estimated, we
subsequently fit them on the matrices at t 2 and obtain the predicted values for technological
advantage for t3.
Figure 1: Principal components of 18 technology-aggregation networks
Source: Bruegel.
As per the implementation , we rely on the R package GAMLSS and its function BEZI . We repeat the
same approach using linear regressions in order to have a baseline evaluation of our model. The zero-
inflated beta regressions show a mean squa red error of 0.05 compared to the baseline, and an
average R2, for all the stacks, not higher than 0.35. The statistics, if compared to Roth and Zachmann
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Proportion of variance
explained
Principal component
7

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
(2018), which performed a country-level analysis, exhibit poorer performance of our regional models.
We discuss the implications of this and possible ways to improve the models in section 5.1.
The predicted data resulting from fitting the regressions, will be at t 3, and represents our measure of
potential technological advantage (pRTA). In the following s ection, we present some of our pRTA
estimations, and give examples of proximity network between regions and technologies.
3.2 The geographical dimension of potential advantage
In this section, we explore and visually present the estimated pRTAs, which will be used as regressors
in the next part of the paper. After calculating the revealed technological advantage and estimating
the potential technological advantage, we observe that certain low-carbon products show a pattern of
strong concentration in few regions, such as Rhô ne-Alpes in France, Dresden and Stuttgart in
Germany and Lombardy in Italy: well- known industrial districts and technological hubs. This
phenomenon is even more evident when looking at patent counts themselves.
Over time, we observe a general increase in low-carbon technological advantage across Europe,
although our measure of RTA seems to be quite volatile, despite the five -year smoothing already
mentioned. At this stage, in fact, the trade -off is between the granularity of patent data at the regional
level, the time dimension necessary to create a panel, and our technological definitions. The
necessity of defining peculiar groups of patents as ‘ technologies’, combined with the sliced time
dimension, spur s the volatility in patent activity, especially when observed as RTA. In terms of
innovation specialisation, certain technologies, such as nuclear, remain exclusive to a smaller
number of regions that are already strong in nuclear technology innovation, as shown in Figure 3.
Other technologies, such as wind and hydro power, appear to be promising for many regions.
In Figure 2 , it is possible to observe how wind -related technologies had similar geographical
distribution for RTAs in 2013 as for potential RTAs for the successive period, 2019. Countries including
Denmark, Germany and Spain have at least one region with some degree of specialisation in wind that
resulted in a country-level advantage in 2013. Some regions, instead, exhibit strong potential future
advantage in wind, despite only modest actual advantage in 201 3. This is the case across Scotland,
or the Pays de la Loire in the north-west of France.
This, most likely, has to do with the technological complexity involved in producing these products. As
mentioned, the other effect at play is the trade- off between technology definitions, time and
categories. Because of this effect, nuclear technologies s hows much less patenting activity
8

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
compared to patenting, for example, in solar panels. While the production of products for nuclear
power plants involves many sophisticated technologies, the entry barrier for companies is high. Other
low-carbon technologie s allow easier access for newcomers and thus a wider spread over several
countries. Industrial hubs have an advantage or a potential advantage in many low-carbon
technologies, as these regions ’ strengths in various technology areas provide a lot of points of
contact also for low-carbon technologies.
Figure 2: Revealed and potential technological advantage in wind technologies

 (a) RTA 2013 (b) pRTA 2019
Source: Bruegel.

9

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Figure 3: Revealed and potential technological advantage in nuclear technologies

 (a) RTA 2013 (b) pRTA 2019
Source: Bruegel.
In the following maps, we present the estimates for pRTA values for different technologies, as of
2019.
Figure 4: Potential technological advantage in 2019

 (a) pRTA 2019: batteries (b) pRTA 2019: electric vehicles
10

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
(c) pRTA 2019: solar and thermal energy (d) pRTA 2019: insulation technologies
Source: Bruegel.
In very complex and typically clustered technologies, such as electric vehicles, our measure of
potential advantage seems to be more clustered in highly innovative regions . We correlate the
measures for pRTA with the European Commission’s innovation scoreboard for the same year . The
scoreboard assesses how innovative regions are, based on a set of indicators, including patent
activity, workforce education, data from the Community Innovation Survey and other information.
In the first column of Table 1, we present the correlation coefficients, for all the low -carbon
technologies observed, between the Commission’s indicator for 2019, and the pRTA fo r the same
year. In the second column, we present the correlation between the same indicator and the RTA
values, both in 2015. We find high correlation with pRTA for most of the technologies, particularly the
most innovative (batteries, electric vehicles and energy management technologies). The volatility
issues for the RTA calculations could explain the lower correlation with RTA. Interestingly, however,
the discrepancy in correlations could also indicate that our pRTA measure is, indeed, picking up some
of those latent factors, ‘hidden’ in patent data, and observed by the innovation scoreboard.

11

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Table1: Correlations between revealed and potential advantage with the Regional Innovation
Index (European Commission, 2019), across low-carbon technologies

pRTA (2019) RTA (2015)
Energy managament 0.67 0.28
Solar PV 0.62 0.37
Batteries 0.60 0.27
Electric vehicles 0.59 0.34
Efficient lighting 0.59 0.21
Biofuels 0.58 0.46
Efficient heating/cooling 0.54 0.32
Efficient combustion 0.53 0.38
Insulation 0.49 0.30
Rail 0.39 0.28
Solar thermal 0.34 0.27
Wind 0.29 0.24
Nuclear 0.24 0.25
Hydro 0.10 0.18
Source: Bruegel.
3.3 European networks of green innovation
The networks of proximity that we estimated, as described in section 3.1, can be very informative
about the state of low -carbon innovation in Europe. A growing body of literature applies network
theory to patent analysis. The technological space is a useful tool for visualisation of technological
proximity and might allow forecasts of the direction of technology development in for
countries/regions with strength in specific technology areas . Mariani et al (2019) focused on patent
citations and use d network centrality for technological forecasting. Wu and Yao (2012) create d and
tested on a specific technical field an artificial intelligence -based method for network analysis,
combining text-mining techniques. Song et al (2016) applied overlay patent networks to analyse the
design space evolution by looking at co -references of p atents, in order to understand the possible
directions of the most likely expansion paths.
In this section, we start by looking at the technological space, with a focus on low -carbon
technologies. The technological space resembles the concept of the product space (Hidalgo et al ,
2007), showing to what extent different technologies are related, based on how often they are
patented together. For this, we keep the definition of proximity as simple as possible, using a simple
co-patenting figure. Figure 5 plots the European technologi cal space . This graph is built by
constructing a technology -technology matrix between of IPC classes for all the technologies and Y -
12

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
CPC classes for low -carbon ones. Each nod e is a 4 -digit IPC class or a green technology, and the
weight of the nodes is given by the correlation s between RTAs in different regions, for the 2013 time
stack.
Figure 5: European product space based on patents registered in REGPAT 2018

Source: Bruegel. Note: the network is built on the RTA correlations between IPC 1-digit technological classes and low-
carbon technologies based on the relevant CPC Y-codes.
Since the network is extremely dense, as all technologies are connected to some degree to one
another, we present here a visuali zation of the Maximum Spanning T ree (the graph that maximises
the total weights of the edges). We can observe how solar panels, energy management, batteries and
electric cars seem to have good proximity in the network. Nuclear technologies are closer to classes G
and F (physics and mechanical and energy engineering). As expected , r ail technologies position
close to the class B (performing operations, transportation).

13

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Figure 6: Proximity of NUTS2 regions based on revealed comparative advantage in 2013

Source: Bruegel. Note: nodes are weighted by a measure of centrality in the graph (betweenness), edges represent
correlations in RTA across 637 technological categories .
In the same way , this matrix can be inverted, to show how close regions are. The proximity of regions
is based on their technological proximity. In Figure 6, we create a region -region network, in order to
understand the proximity of European regions based on the correlations between the technological
structures of their economies. The size of the nodes represents their degrees (number of connections
with other nodes) . A general first observation from this graph is that European regions have product
mixes which go beyond country borders . Looking closer at the division, we notice the wedge between
productive regions ( bottom-left clusters) and less productive regions ( mid-right branch). The regions
that cluster on the left around Veneto (ITH3) include highly- productive regions, powertrains of
European economy, such as Upper Franconia (DE24) or Rhône-Alpes (FR71). Here, the regions of
northern Italy and most of the highly industrialized regions of the Germany branch out. Another
interesting cluster to the bottom-right: the Dutch region of Noord -Brabant (NL41), a renowned high-
tech region, is close to East Anglia (UKH1), the Danish capital region of Hovedstaden (DK01) and Ile
14

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
de France (FR10). These visualisations are interesting, although more research is needed in order to
properly assess the quality and ro bustness of the clusters, attempting to measure proximities with
different metrics.
This network is based on the relative technological advantage of all the 637 4- digit IPC codes , and
thus reflects the general innovation activity of regions . In order to observe how European regions
collaborate in patenting low -carbon technologies, and observe green industrial clusters, we build
networks based on simple co-patenting figures, rather than minimum pairwise correlation probability.
Figure 7: Co-patenting of European regions in low-carbon technologies

Source: Bruegel.
In Figure 7, we plot a graph based only on low-carbon technologies, in which the size of the nodes is
relative to the number of patent applications, and the weight of the edges (i.e. the lines connecting
the circles) represents the number of co- patents between two regions. The network is then clustered
based on its modularity, a structural measure that tells us how well the graph can be divided in to
different modules. Specifically, the OpenOrd algorithm (Martin et al, 2011) is applied.
15

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Two clusters emerge, although quite tightly connected. One is dominated by Ile de France (FR10), the
region of the capital of France. The other is dominated by Germany, with Oberbayern (DE21) and
Stuttgart (DE11). The United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Belgium and Sweden, among other, seem to
be clustered more tightly with France, whereas on the other side we see Italy, Germany, Slovakia and
Austria. The finding of highly concentrated centres of green innovation is in line with the literature.
While the agglomeration phenomena of technological development are well -known, recent studies
have focused on green technologies in particular. Barbieri et al (2020) found that the nature of green
technologies is more complex than non-green technologies. This is illustrated by the agglomeration of
low-carbon innovation in high- tech centres such as Paris and Oberbayern. In fact, this is in line with
the path- dependency nature of complex technological products, and is logically related to the
knowledge base of the region, and spill-over effects across different industries.
In addition, we compute the same co- patenting networks considering one low -carbon technology at a
time. In the four panels of Figure 8, we show the examples of batteries, electric vehicles, wind and
nuclear technologies. Which are the clusters of innovations? In the case of batteries and electric
vehicles, we can see the clusters in France and Germany, whereas for wind , Denmark and Germany
are the most central. In these three panels, we filter out the nodes that have no co- patenting and a
small number of patents . For nuclear we cannot do this, as most nuclear -patenting regions do not co -
patent nuclear patents with other nuclear-patenting regions. Moreover, observed nuclear co-patenting
reflects national boundaries.
Figure 8: Co-patenting for European regions based on applicant’s location, 1990-2016

 (a) Batteries (b) Electric Vehicles
16

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
(d) Nuclear
Source: Bruegel.
4 Dimensionality reduction: a data-driven selection of variables
After having calculated the RTA and estimated the pRTA we can now assess w hich labour market,
economic and other regional characteristics are associated, together with potential specialisation, with
a higher green RTA.
We investigate this by making use of a large, novel dataset of regional characteristics , and an
exploratory approach . We begin with an agnostic view about wh at regional chara cteristics could be
associated with RTA. First, we build a wide dataset at the NUTS2 level with all the variables present in
the Eurostat database and in the Joint Research Centre’s Urban Data Platform. The time dimension
corresponds to the three-year non-overlapping period of the patents -based measures. Empirically, we
rely on dimensionality reduction algorithms. We aim at understanding the association between our
measures for revealed advantage and potential advantage in a region, and the large number of
regressors on the right-hand side. We select relevant variables in the dataset by applying an elastic net
regularisation to isolate the significantly associated coefficients.
In section 4.1, we explain the imputation methodology that we apply to the panel dataset at the NUTS2
level, in order to fill in the gaps across regions and time. In section 4.2, we present our elastic net
regularisation for a selection of data-driven variables.

17

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
4.1 Data and imputation methodology
We start to build our database with an indiscriminate systematisation of all the NUTS2- level variables
present in the Eurostat Database and the Cambridge Econometrics data, publicly available at the Joint
Research Centre’s Urban Data Platform. Data collection of regional statistics at the NUTS2 level, though
improving, is highly inconsistent. As a result, many of the data sheets used to generate our dataset are
incomplete in terms of time and location.
As a consequence of the indiscriminate scraping and querying techniques used to generate it, the
dataset is incomplete and highly multicollinear, containing several repeated and aggregated
indicators. Proper utilisation of NUTS2 regional statistics , especially in cases where full datasets are
necessary, is therefore a cha llenge given such complications. Limitations will be discussed further in
section 5.1.
Regularised regression techniques , such as the widely- known LASSO regressions, are often used to
reduce dimensionality through variable selection. H owever, these techniq ues fail in the presence of
missing data , making complete datasets necessary. Therefore, we choose to impute missing values
before using any data-driven variable selection technique.
Multiple Imputation by Chained Equations (MICE) is a data imputation algo rithm which can attempt to
capture the uncertainty associated with missing data values by “ randomly drawing multiple
imputations from a distribution of imputations and also by introducing additional error variance to
each imputation” (Lodder, 2014). MICE makes the assumption that data is missing at random (MAR),
meaning that the presence of an underlying relationship between the propensity of a region to be
missing data and the value of the missing data causes any results taken from imputation to be
problematic (ie due to estimator bias). Additionally, MICE fails when imputing on non- invertible
matrices. Therefore, it is important to reduce collinearity as much as possible prior to imputation.
Given the poor performance of advanced imputation methods on high-dimensional low-rank matrices,
we first hand -select indicators based on the domain knowledge. We reduce the total number of
collected indicators, with respect to the indiscriminate scraping, from 476 to 245, by removing , for
example, similar measures of population density, broken down by different demographic s.
Additionally, we remove regions defined as extra NUTS2 regions (encoded with a ZZ) . We also remove
overseas territories (eg PT20 or FRY1) or regions with NUTS2 codes that have been replaced (eg UKI 1
or IE01), but still persist in Eurostat or Urban Data Platform databases.
18

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Further, these methods often utilise linear regressions to estimate missing values and lose a great
deal of stability above certain thresholds of absence. Addo (2018) showed that MICE imputation
using non- Bayesian linear regression exhibits stability for datasets missing up to 50 percent of
observations. For our purposes, we place this threshold at 30 percent to get a dataset of 110
indicators for 258 NUTS2 regions.
Figure 9: Visualisation of dataset with missing data shown in white

Source: Bruegel. Note: horizontal patterns of absence indicate data missing across regions while vertical patterns indicate
absence within a region.
Using the Python missing data visualisation package missingno, we examine our dataset for patterns
which might invalidate the MAR assumption. Investigation shows that several areas of absence can
be attributed to lack of availability (ie Denmark in 2005). Given these patterns and the complete ness
of the remaining data, we proceed under MAR assumptions and impute with MICE.
In line with MICE common practice, we first allow the algorithm to identify constant or collinear
variables which could present problems during the imputation step. Three covariates are identified as
being collinear and are removed. We then impute using MICE using non -Bayesian linear regression.
See Figure 10 for histograms showing the results of imputation on selected covariates.

19

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Figure 10: Distributions of selected variables before and after imputation
 (c) 10c (d) 10d

 (a) 10a (b) 10b

Source: Bruegel.
4.2 Dimensionality reduction
After using MICE imputation to fill in the gaps without biasing the distributions of the variables, we
apply elastic net regularisation to the dataset. To be able to assess which regional characteristics
(and potentially regional policies) might be promising to engineer regional specialisation, we explore
the relation ship between current specialisation in green technologies on the one hand, and past
potential specialisation and current and past regional characteristics on the other hand. As
mentioned, we use an experimental approach , more in line with a machine -learning exercise rather
20

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
than economic modelling. Therefore, we do not seek to make any causal inference at this stage, but
only to look at associations. Future research should encompass causality.
We build a dataset based on four time stacks of RTAs and pRTAs estimated for non -overlapping
periods of three years (2006, 2009, 2012, 2015). W e aim to observe, row -wise (hence, for each
region r at time t), the potential in that same technology at t- 1, in order to account for the path
dependency in green technologie s. Including both the Eurostat and Urban data platforms, it contains
1032 observations and 110 variables, after the first selection from the Eurostat database to reduce
multicollinearity, filtering explained in the previous paragraph.
We define RTA, an obs erved advantage for the low -carbon technology i in region r at time t, as a
function of all the right -hand side variables. In turn, the right hand side is composed of all the
indicators at time t (first term), t-1 (second term) and t-2 (third term), as well as potential advantage
for that same technology in t-1:
(3)
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑟𝑟,𝑡𝑡,𝑖𝑖 = β0 + �ω𝑘𝑘𝑥𝑥𝑟𝑟,𝑡𝑡,𝑖𝑖,𝑘𝑘
𝐾𝐾
𝑘𝑘=1
+ �γ𝑘𝑘𝑥𝑥𝑟𝑟,𝑡𝑡−1,𝑖𝑖,𝑘𝑘
𝐾𝐾
𝑘𝑘=1
+ �θ𝑘𝑘𝑥𝑥𝑟𝑟,𝑡𝑡−2,𝑖𝑖,𝑘𝑘
𝐾𝐾
𝑘𝑘=1
 + θp𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑟𝑟,𝑡𝑡−1,𝑖𝑖
Where:
r = 258 (NUTS2 regions)
i = Low-carbon technology
t = 3 years non overlapping timestack
K = 110
Our empirical strategy aims at establishing which of the coefficients is significantly associated with
RTA. We implement this specification using a regularisation technique. The two most common
applications of regularisation regression are LASSO (Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection
Operator) and Ridge regressions. The intuition behind these techniques is to apply a penalty score to
the magnitude of the co efficients of an OL S regression, maximising the relevant ones and shrinking
the others to 0.
In the literature, there are two typical definitions of regularisation techniques: L1 and L2. The L1 type
is known as Ridge regression , while L2 is known as LASSO regression. The main difference between
the models is in the application of the ‘penalty factor’ to the cost function. LASSO regularisations can
21

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
shrink coefficients all the way down to zero, perfor ming a real variable selection. However, in
presence of a large number of multicollinear variables, the selection of the feature is done random ly.
On the other hand, Ridge can handle the issue of multicollinearity without selecting variables at
random, but performs poorly with a high number of dimensions.
Elastic net regul arisation combines L1 and L2 approaches, overcoming the respective limitations.
This method is more flexible to our purpose, being able to better handle the high multi- dimensionality
and collinearity of our dataset. In order to estimate the coefficients fo r the right -hand side, we first
subset the panel to four cross-sectional datasets based on the 2006, 2009, 2012 and 2015 stacks.
We make use of the ElasticNetCV module of the python library sklearn to perform the regularisation .
The module allows an automatic choice of the L1 -L2 ratio, influencing the weight given to each
penalty factor, by feeding in an array of possible values. The L1 -L2 ratio ranges from 0 to 1, and tells
how skewed the model should be towards LASSO or Ridge. The array chosen is sk ewed towards the
LASSO-type regression, including more values above 0.5 than below. The ElasticNetCV library
optimises the parameter selection based on a typical 10-fold cross-validation approach. In the same
fashion, the alpha level (overall magnitude of the penalty score) is also selected.
Figure 1 1 shows the results of the regularisation for electric vehicles, for 2012 and 2015. On the
horizontal axis we plot the 110 coefficients estimated, and on the vertical axis their magnitude. The
coefficient distancing from the others on the right -hand side is the potential technological advantage
(pRTA) at t-1. The representation in Figure 11, represents the results of the regularisation: on the y -
axis we can see the magnitude of the coefficients for the 2012 (in yellow) , and for the 2015 (in blue)
time stacks.

22

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Figure 11: Results of the Elastic net regularization where for electric vehicles in the 2012 (yellow)
and 2015 stacks (blue)

Source: Bruegel.
After applying the regularisation to each low -carbon technology, we obtain a list of significant
variables. These variables are associated with RTA for a low -carbon technology, with non- zero
coefficients (both negative and positive) . We combine together a count of all the ‘ surviving’ variables.
Tables 3 and 4 in the appendix present the results respectively for the 2012 and 2015 cross-
sections. We provide a count of surviving variables at time t, t-1 and t-2, and in total. Potential
advantages at t-1 are found to be always the highest -ranking coefficients, and are omitted from the
tables. As expected , the variables surviving more often are related to the presence of a highly -
educated labour force, higher wages and people employed in scientific fields. We discuss these
results in the next section.
At this stage, the count of surviving variables is only based on the separate cross -sectional exercises.
The panel structure is not exploited, as the cross-sections are considered separately.
In order to observe time -varying effects of these v ariables, we rescale the panel dataset to have a
mean of zero, following a two-way fixed effects approach as in Imai and Kim (20 20). However, unlike
the two-way methodology, the panel is only rescaled for region-fixed effects.
23

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
We subtract from each variable the average value for that region over the year, on a region -time basis.
Subsequently, we perform an elastic net regularisation, similar to the previous estimates, this time
under the assumption of fixed effects estimation. We rely on the R library glinternet for this
implementation. The results of the fixed effects regularisation are presented in Table 5 in the
appendix. The R 2 values yielding from this model are all lower than 0.5 percent, suggesting that the
variation in RTA comes more from cross-sectional differences rather than time-varying effects. It is not
possible to perform regularisations that include interaction terms, in this fixed effects setup, as
explained by Giesselmann and Schmidt-Catran (2018).
5 Results
5.1 Variables that associate with RTA
Tables 2, and 3 ( set out in more length in the appendix), summarise the results of the regularization
via elastic net, by showing the number of times a coefficient is found to be non -zero, at time t, t-1, t-2
and in total. None of our results are causally identified, and should only be read as associations . The
variable that survives the greatest number of times is the activity rate (labour participation) of people
that have an ISCED level of education3, higher than the upper secondary level.
Table 2: Cross-sectional estimation 2012
 t t-1 t-2 all
Activity rate of population 15 16 21 52
Total duration of employment 13 21 14 48
Scientists and engineers 4 7 7 18
HH Paid current taxes on income wealth etc. mil EUR 5 6 5 16
HH Social benefits other than social transfers in kind recived mil EUR 5 8 3 16
Persons employed in science and technology 8 2 4 14
Long-term unemployment (12 months or longer) in thousands 6 3 5 14
Unemployment rate by age 4 5 5 14
Highest counts of coefficient survival for the 2012 stack, in an elastic net implementation.
Source: Bruegel.

3 International Standard Classification of Education, classified by UNESCO.
24

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Table 3: Cross-sectional estimation 2015
 t t-1 t-2 all
Activity rates of population 12 14 13 39
Total duration of employment 11 12 10 33
Scientists and engineers 6 7 5 18
Average number of usual weekly hours in main job by age in hours 7 4 5 16
Persons employed in science and technology 8 4 4 16
HH Paid current taxes on income wealth etc. mil EUR 4 6 4 14
Long term unemployment (12 months or longer) in thousands 7 2 4 13
Highest counts of coefficient survival for the 2012 stack, in an elastic net implementation.
Source: Bruegel.
A longer duration of employment is also associated positively in many of the specifications with the
advantage in low -carbon technologies. The number of engineers and scientists is also significant. In
general, higher educational attainments of the population are associated with more innovation in
green technologies. We also find some evidence of a positi ve association with tertiary educational
attainment and (lower) unemployment rates of women.
In addition, different measures for R&D expenditure survive for all the green technologies . Both
private and public sector spending result from our analysis , and seem to appear more often at time t
rather than as a lag . The measure that scores higher in our framework, for the fixed effects model, is
the percentage of GDP spent by the government on R&D. Intramural expenditure, defined by the OECD
as the: ”amount of m oney spent on R &D that is performed within a reporting unit” (Frascati Manual,
2015). In a causal model, future research shall try to establish the precise relationship between R&D
expenditure in the private sector, in higher education institutions and companies.
Tables 4 and 5, meanwhile, present the count s of coefficients indicated by the regularisation
procedure, one- way demeaned panel approach discussed in the previous section. Table 4
summarises the main effects, while table 5 summarises the interaction factors that we force with
pRTA at t-1 . Overall, our fixed- effects regularisation approach does not yield different results
compared to the cross -sectional specifications. As mentioned, the lower R
2 could be indicative of a
higher variation coming from the cross-regional rather than from time-varying effects.

25

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
5.2 Limitations and further research
The first stage of this paper used zero inflated beta regressions to predict pRTA values. Looking at the
R2 statistics, not higher than 0.35, suggests that the modelling could be improved. pRTA values
correlate at 0.4, on average, with RTA. The definition of the stacks (three years versus a longer period),
appears to be less problematic than the modelling, as it does not seem to have too much effect on the
volatility of the RTAs, although it makes the RTA measures probably more precise. In further research,
a model with less volatile RTAs could yield more consistent predictions for pRTAs.
The most significant limitation of this study is data availability at the NUTS2 level. Prior to
dimensionality reduction, over 70 percent of indicators were missing more than 10 percent of
observations. Of these, around 60 percent are time -lagged and 40 percent are non -lagged. As a
consequence of this missing information , the 30 percent threshold used for keeping covariates is
higher than preferred , and yet causes a large loss in availability of data eventually included. As
mentioned, the performance of multiple imputation on high dimensional matrices with significant
amounts of missing data is improving. However, the stability and quality of imputed values would
obviously be much better given a more complete starting dataset. Moreover, because of the need to
reduce dimensionality and missing data when using multiple imputation and regularised regression,
we may be eliminating covariates or interactions among covariates and pRTA/RTA which have
significant predictive power. For s ome covariates, though, the lack of data is so pervasive that the
ability to achieve meaningful predictive power is precluded. Better and more consistent data collection
at the regional level will help solve these dilemmas.
Related to the data availability problem, MICE imputation assumes that the absence mechanism of
the underlying data is MAR. This would imply, conditional on our observed values, that the values of
missing data have no relation to the missing data. After reviewing the patterns of missing data by
indicator, region and time, it could be argued that absence is heterogeneous in its mechanism, with
some being MAR and others being missing not at random (MNAR). Given a high proportion of missing
data being consolidated across similar indicators and time periods, we felt comfortable making a
blanket MAR assumption; however, a much closer evaluation of missing data should be performed to
confirm this assumption.
Relatedly, adding different NUTS2 level datasets and types of variables could lead to different results.
In particular, we believe that the use of datasets with diverse scope s and extensions could be
26

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
particularly relevant, notably focusing on the infrastructural dimension, market structure,
competitiveness and institutions.
Within our current framework, particularly exploratory and inductive, we have recognised the
association between our right -hand side variables . Further research should try to establish with a
causal approach the relationship between potential advantage in a region and its characteristics in
terms of education, labour markets and public and private R&D spending. Furthermore, our empirical
methodology should move forward to take into account time -varying effects and the interaction
factors between potential and right-hand side variables.
Although RTAs represent the regional specialisation in a technology, the same approach could make
use of different models for patent counts (or other types of data that captures innovation) to conduct
similar exercises. In this sense and given that our results point towards what is generally recognised
as good policy for innovation, further research should also try to model a better counterfactual in
terms of what distinguishes green innovation from general technological innovation, leading to more
precise policy recommendations.
6 Discussion and possible implications
In this paper we have explored, at European regional level, the extent of innovation in low -carbon
technologies. The motivation for our study stems from th e necessity that European states will face in
the years to come to foster innovation in low-carbon technologies. This is not just because of the need
to contain global warming below 2 ◦C above pre -industrial levels . The decarbonisation process will
also lead to a strong change in our production systems, and consequently in labour markets and
industrial sectors.
We start ed by exploring network -based methodologies to predict what advantages regions have in
green technologies, based on observed specialisations, and latent, unobserved factors. The first
contribution of our study is to provide an atlas of potential specialisation in green technologies for
European NUTS2 regions, using regression -based forecasts. Furthermore, by clustering networks of
co-patenting, we find that European regions have a good degree of in -country technological
diversification, and that European policies could address smart specialisation in green technologies
based on a clustering that is country-independent, and is linked to the local economic characteristics.
Our representations of co- patenting figures across Europe seem to confirm the agglomeration effects
present in innovation in the context of green technologies. In fact , as expected, a small number of
27

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
leading regions (notably in France and Germany) are pushing t he frontier of green patenting.
However, we find a large number of others have potential to develop a technological specialisation in
the low-carbon technologies in the future.
The European Union Green Deal aims to guide the decarbonisation process, while maintaining
industrial competitiveness. Whereas these overarching objectives provide a clear direction,
implementation should be informed at regional level, with strategic positioning of regions and low -
carbon technologies. Our contribution aims to provide a tool based on innovative methodologies,
within the broader concept guiding Smart Specialisation Strategies, which focuses on green
technologies.
The second part of this study makes an exploratory contribution to the debate around a horizontal
green industrial policy for regions, with a purely data-driven approach. Our results, despite being
subject to strong methodological limitations, are generally in line with the common understanding of
horizontal industrial policy. Clearly, endogeneity and reverse causality are the most difficult issues to
overcome in empirical industrial policy exercises . Our contribution is a first attempt to investigate the
role of horizontal green industrial policies for technological sp ecialisation, making use of innovative
methodologies at the regional level.
We find an association between a regional advantage in low -carbon products for which there is a
higher activity rate for people who have a level of education above upper secondary, and a greater
presence of science and technology knowledge- intensive workers. In addition, in terms of labour
markets, we have evidence of this association where the total duration of employment is longer. In
terms of R&D spending the correlations seem to be significant for both public general spending in
R&D, as well as expenditure in the private sector and in higher education institutions. Although our
results are in line with those of the literature, our empirical approach has several significant
limitations, and should be further refined in order to bring the data -driven selection of variables to a
more rigorous third-stage approach aiming to establish robust causal linkages, from which we could
infer more informed policy recommendations.
Although other factors play a role in determining competitive advantage, technological specialisation
can promote competitive industries, thereby shaping long -run growth dynamics . Policy can leverage
strength in similar technologies by shaping innovation paths, strengthening learning capabilities,
targeting sector-specific innovation regimes, and coordinating sectoral, national and regional policies.

28

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
References
Addo, E.D. (2018) ‘Performance Comparison of Imputation Algorithms on Missing at Random Data’,
Electronic Theses and Dissertations, Paper 3422, available at https://dc.etsu.edu/etd/3422
Balland, P-A., R. Boschma, J. Crespo and D.L. Rigby (2019) ‘Smart specialization policy in the
European Union: relatedness, knowledge complexity and regional diversification’, Regional Studies
53(9):1252-1268
Barbieri, N., A. Marzucchi and U. Rizzo (2020) ‘Knowledge sources and impacts on subsequent
inventions: Do green technologies differ from non-green ones?’ Research Policy 49(2): 103901
Boschma, R. and K. Frenken (2011) ‘The emerging empirics of evolutionary economic geography’,
Journal of Economic Geography, 11(2): 295-307
Fiorini, A., A. Georgakaki, F. Pasimeni and E. Tzimas (2017) Monitoring R&I in Low-Carbon Energy
Technologies, JRS Science for Policy Report, Publications Office of the European Union
Frascati Manual (2015) Guidelines for collecting and reporting data on Research and Experimental
Development, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Developement
Giesselmann, M. and A. Schmidt-Catran (2018) ‘Interactions in Fixed Effects Regression Models’, DIW
Berlin Discussion Paper No. 1748
Hausmann, R., C.A. Hidalgo, D.P. Stock and M.A. Yildirim (2019) ‘Implied Comparative Advantage’, HKS
Faculty Research Working Paper Series RWP14-003
Hidalgo, C.A., B. Klinger, A.L. Barabasi and R. Hausmann (2007) ‘The product space conditions the
development of nations’, Science 317(5837): 482-487
Hidalgo, C.A. and R. Hausmann (2009) ‘The building blocks of economic complexity’, Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 106(26): 10570-10575
Imai, K. and I. Kim (2020) ‘On the Use of Two-Way Fixed Effects Regression Models for Causal
Inference with Panel Data’, Political Analysis, 1-11
Lim, M. and T. Hastie (2015) ‘Learning interactions via hierarchical group-lasso regularization’,
Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 24(3): 627-654
Lodder, P. (2014) ‘To impute or not impute: That’s the question’, in G.J. Mellenbergh and H.J. Adèr
(eds) Advising on research methods: Selected topics 2013, Johannes van Kessel Publishing
Mariani, M.S., M. Medo and F. Lafond (2019) ‘Early identification of important patents: Design and
validation of citation network metrics’, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 146: 644-654
Martin, S., W. Brown, R. Klavans and K. Boyack (2011) ‘OpenOrd: An Open-Source Toolbox for Large
Graph Layout’, Proceedings of SPIE, The International Society for Optical Engineering 7868: 786806
Montresor, S. and F. Quatraro (2019) ‘Green technologies and Smart Specialisation Strategies: a
European patent-based analysis of the intertwining of technological relatedness and key enabling
technologies’, Regional Studies, pp.1-12
29

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Oketch, T. (2017) ‘Performance of Imputation Algorithms on Artificially Produced Missing at Random
Data’, Electronic Theses and Dissertations, Paper 3217, available at https://dc.etsu.edu/etd/3217/
Ospina, R. and S.L. Ferrari (2012) ‘A general class of zero-or-one inflated beta regression models’,
Computational Statistics Data Analysis 56(6): 1609-1623
Stellner, F. (2014) ‘Technological distance measures: theoretical foundation and empirics’, paper for
DRUID Society Conference 2014

Song, B., G. Triulzi, J. Alstott, B. Yan and J. Luo (2016) ‘Overlay patent network to analyze the design
space of a technology domain: the case of hybrid electrical vehicles’, in DS 84: Proceedings of the
DESIGN 2016 14th International Design Conference: 1145-1154
UNEP/EPO (2015) Climate change mitigation technologies in Europe – evidence from patent and
economic data, United Nations Environment Programme and the European Patent Office
Wu, C.C. and C.B. Yao (2012) ‘Constructing an intelligent patent network analysis method’, Data
Science Journal, 011-003
Yan, B. and J. Luo (2017) ‘Measuring technological distance for patent mapping’, Journal of the
Association for Information Science and Technology 68.2: 423-437
Zachmann, G. (2016) ‘An approach to identify the sources of low-carbon growth for Europe’, Policy
Contribution 2016/16, Bruegel
Zachmann, G. and A. Roth (2018) ‘Learning for Decarbonisation: start early, concentrate on promising
technologies, exploit regional strength and work with your national system’, Policy Brief October
2018, COP21 RIPPLES project
Zachmann, G. and R. Kalcik (2018) ‘Export and patent specialization in low-carbon technologies’,
Global Innovation Index 107
Zou, H. and T. Hastie (2005) ‘Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net’, Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, series B (statistical methodology), 67(2): 301-320
30

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Appendix
A) List of CPC-Y codes for low-carbon technologies definitions
Technology CPC-Y codes (patents)
Solar PV Y02E1050, Y02E1052, Y02E1054, Y02E10541, Y02E10542, Y02E10543, Y02E10544,
Y02E10545, Y02E10546, Y02E10547, Y02E10548, Y02E10549,
Y02E1056, Y02E10563, Y02E10566, Y02E1058
Solar Thermal Y02E1040, Y02E1041, Y02E1042, Y02E1043, Y02E1044, Y02E1045, Y02E1046,
Y02E10465, Y02E1047
Wind Y02E1070, Y02E1072, Y02E10721, Y02E10722, Y02E10723, Y02E10725, Y02E10726,
Y02E10727, Y02E10728, Y02E1074, Y02E1076, Y02E10763,
Y02E10766
Hydro Y02E1020, Y02E1022, Y02E10223, Y02E10226, Y02E1028
Energy management Y02B7030, Y02B7032, Y02B703208, Y02B703216, Y02B703225, Y02B703233,
Y02B703241, Y02B70325, Y02B703258, Y02B703266, Y02B703275,
Y02B703283, Y02B703291, Y02B7034, Y02B70343, Y02B70346
Lighting Y02B2010, Y02B2012, Y02B20125, Y02B2014, Y02B20142, Y02B20144, Y02B20146,
Y02B20148, Y02B2016, Y02B2018, Y02B20181, Y02B20183,
Y02B20185, Y02B20186, Y02B20188, Y02B2019, Y02B2020, Y02B20202, Y02B20204,
Y02B20206, Y02B20208, Y02B2022, Y02B2030, Y02B2032, Y02B20325, Y02B2034,
Y02B20341, Y02B20342, Y02B20343, Y02B20345, Y02B20346, Y02B20347,
Y02B20348, Y02B2036, Y02B2038, Y02B20383, Y02B20386, Y02B2040, Y02B2042,
Y02B2044, Y02B20445, Y02B2046,

Y02B2048, Y02B2070, Y02B2072
Heating and cooling Y02B3008, Y02B3010, Y02B30102, Y02B30104, Y02B30106, Y02B30108, Y02B3012,
Y02B30123, Y02B30126, Y02B3014, Y02B3016, Y02B3018, Y02B3020, Y02B3022,
Y02B3024, Y02B3026, Y02B3028, Y02B3050, Y02B3052, Y02B3054, Y02B30542,
Y02B30545, Y02B30547, Y02B3056,
Y02B30563, Y02B30566, Y02B3060, Y02B3062, Y02B30625, Y02B3064, Y02B3066,
Y02B3070, Y02B3072, Y02B3074, Y02B30741, Y02B30743, Y02B30745, Y02B30746,
Y02B30748, Y02B3076, Y02B30762, Y02B30765,
Y02B30767, Y02B3078, Y02B3080, Y02B3090, Y02B3092, Y02B3094
Combustion Y02B8010, Y02B8012, Y02B8014, Y02B8020, Y02B8022, Y02B8024
Y02B8026, Y02B8028, Y02B8030, Y02B8032, Y02B8034, Y02B8040, Y02B8050
Residential insulation Y02E2010, Y02E2012, Y02E2014, Y02E2016, Y02E2018, Y02E2030, Y02E2032,
Y02E20322, Y02E20324, Y02E20326, Y02E20328, Y02E2034, Y02E20342,
Y02E20346, Y02E20348, Y02E2036, Y02E20363, Y02E20366, Y02E20185,
Y02E20344
Biofuels Y02E5010, Y02E5011, Y02E5012, Y02E5013, Y02E5014, Y02E5015, Y02E5016,
Y02E5017, Y02E5018, Y02E5030, Y02E5032, Y02E5034, Y02E50343,
Y02E50346
31

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Batteries Y02E6012, Y02E60122, Y02E60124, Y02E60126, Y02E60128, Y02T1070, Y02T107005,
Y02T107011, Y02T107016, Y02T107022, Y02T107027, Y02T107033, Y02T107038,
Y02T107044, Y02T10705, Y02T107055, Y02T107061, Y02T107066, Y02T107072,
Y02T107077, Y02T107083, Y02T107088, Y02T107094, Y02T1072, Y02T107208,
Y02T107216, Y02T107225, Y02T107233, Y02T107241, Y02T10725, Y02T107258,
Y02T107266,
Y02T107275, Y02T107283, Y02T107291
Electric cars Y02T1064, Y02T10641, Y02T10642, Y02T10643, Y02T10644, Y02T10645, Y02T10646,
Y02T10647, Y02T10648, Y02T10649, Y02T1062, Y02T106204, Y02T106208,
Y02T106213, Y02T106217, Y02T106221, Y02T106226, Y02T10623, Y02T106234,
Y02T106239, Y02T106243, Y02T106247,
Y02T106252, Y02T106256, Y02T10626, Y02T106265, Y02T106269, Y02T106273,
Y02T106278, Y02T106282, Y02T106286, Y02T106291,
Y02T106295
Rail transport Y02T3000, Y02T3010, Y02T3012, Y02T3014, Y02T3016, Y02T3018, Y02T3030,
Y02T3032, Y02T3034, Y02T3036, Y02T3038, Y02T3040, Y02T3042
Nuclear Y02E3030, Y02E3031, Y02E3032, Y02E3033, Y02E3034, Y02E3035, Y02E3037,
Y02E3038, Y02E3039, Y02E3040

B) Potential in low-carbon technologies for EU regions (2018)

 pRTA 2019 - Batteries pRTA 2019 - Electric Vehicles
32

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
pRTA 2019 – Solar and thermal energy pRTA 2019 - Insulation technologies

 pRTA 2019 - Biofuels pRTA 2019 - Heating and Cooling
33

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
pRTA 2019 – Solar panels pRTA 2019 - Wind technologies

C) Variables selection summary tables

Table 2: Cross-sectional estimation 2012
 t t-1 t-2 all
Activity rates by age education attainment level and citizenship 15 16 21 52
Total duration 13 21 14 48
Scientists and engineers 4 7 7 18
HH paid current taxes on income wealth etc. € milliions 5 6 5 16
HH social benefits other than social transfers in kind received € millions 5 8 3 16
Persons employed in science and technology 8 2 4 14
Long-term unemployment (12 months or longer) in thousands 6 3 5 14
Unemployment rate by age 4 5 5 14
Average number of usual weekly hours in main job by age in hours 6 1 5 12
Participation rate in education and training (last 4 weeks) total age 25-64 0 6 5 11
Gross domestic expenditure on R&D € millions government 5 6 0 11
Self-employed persons 2 4 5 11
HH net social contributions € millions 3 4 4 11
Gross domestic expenditure on R&D, € millions business enterprise sector 6 4 0 10

34

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Table 3: Cross-sectional estimation 2015
t t-1 t-2 all
Activity rates by age education attainment level and citizenship 12 14 13 39
Total duration 11 12 10 33
Scientists and engineers 6 7 5 18
Average number of usual weekly hours in main job by age in hours 7 4 5 16
Persons employed in science and technology 8 4 4 16
HH paid current taxes on income wealth etc. € millions 4 6 4 14
Long term unemployment (12 months or longer) in thousands 7 2 4 13
Self-employed persons 3 2 6 11
Proportion of population aged 20-39 4 2 5 11
Participation rate in education and training (last 4 weeks) total age 25-64 0 6 5 11
HH social benefits other than social transfers in kind received € millions 4 7 0 11
Gross domestic expenditure on R&D € millions government 8 3 0 11
Persons with tertiary education (ISCED) and/or employed in science and
technology % of active population 2 4 3 9
Unemployment rate by age 2 5 2 9
T
able 4: Fixed effects estimator, main effects
t t-1 t-2 all
Total duration 12 12 17 41
Activity rates ISCED>3 11 12 13 36
Age dependency ratio (0-19 and over 60 to pop. aged 20-59) 4 5 5 14
Scientists and engineers 6 4 4 14
Long term unemployment (12 months or longer) in thousands 6 2 6 14
Students (ISCED 5-6) at regional level - as % of total country level
students (ISCED 5-6)
0 6 7 13
Persons employed in science and technology 8 3 2 13
Gross domestic expenditure on R&D € millions business
enterprise sector
6 4 3 13
T
able 5: Fixed effects estimator, interactions
t t-1 t-1 all
Total duration of employment 0 2 3 5
Activity rates ISCED >3 2 1 1 4
HH Net social contributions € millions 0 1 1 2
Self-employed persons 0 2 0 2
Total R&D personnel business enterprise sector full-time
equivalent (FTE) 1 1 0 2
Unemployment Rate (Females) 2 0 0 2
35

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
© Bruegel 2020. All rights reserved. Short sections, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted in the
original language without explicit permission provided that the source is acknowledged. Opinions expressed
in this publication are those of the author(s) alone.
Bruegel, Rue de la Charité 33, B-1210 Brussels
(+32) 2 227 4210
info@bruegel.org
www.bruegel.org
