
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
WORKING PAPER | ISSUE 18/2024 | 09 OCTOBER 2024
THE TENSI ON BETWEEN
EXPLODING AI INVESTMENT
COSTS AND SLOW
PRODUCTIVITY G ROWTH
BERTIN MARTENS
This working paper explores the tension between rapidly increasing artificial intelligence
investment costs and the slower pace of productivity growth, raising concerns about
a potential ‘economic winter’ for AI. AI has shown significant technological progress,
particularly with machine learning and generative AI models such as ChatGPT.
Investment in AI has surged. But there are concerns about whether these investments will
yield proportional returns.
Training costs for a single frontier AI model are increasing exponentially, from $1,000 in
2017 to nearly $200 million in 2024, driven by constant returns to scale in AI model training
data, compute capacity and model complexity. Costs could reach billions of dollars by
2030, despite a rapid fall in unit costs per computing operation over the same period.
Global AI infrastructure costs in hardware could exceed $1 trillion by the mid-2030s.
Amortizing these huge fixed costs requires business models that can be rolled out across a
very large user market.
Estimates about AI’s contribution to productivity growth vary, from a modest 0.5 percent
per year to a very optimistic 10 percent per year. Research shows that productivity
usually catches up slowly compared to costs. Without significant productivity gains, the
current investment cost trajectory is unsustainable. We estimate that 3 percent annual
productivity growth across advanced economies would be required to sustain AI model
cost extrapolations to 2030. In an optimistic scenario, productivity increases would result
in accelerated economic growth.
Bertin Martens (bertin.martens@bruegel.org) is a Senior Fellow at Bruegel
Recommended citation:
Martens, B. (2024) ‘The tension between exploding AI investment costs and slow
productivity growth’, Working Paper 18/2024, Bruegel
WORKING PAPER|ISSUE 03| 2020

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
1
1 Introduction
Optimism about artiﬁcial intelligence as a breakthrough technology with substantial economic impact
has been growing since 2010. At that time, machine learning in neural networks started to show
promise, in particular with the “transformer” deep-learning technology (Vaswani et al, 2017) that led to
the current generation of large language models or generative AI (GenAI) models, including ChatGPT1.
Since then, AI has been riding a wave of astonishing technological progress and massive investment. It
has propelled stock market valuations of big-tech companies to dizzying heights.
But analysts worry that AI investment spending will exceed returns2, both for AI model developers and
users. Companies can only aﬀord the AI expenditure if it increases their revenues, but nevertheless,
they are continuing to double down on AI capital expenditure, arguing that they cannot aﬀord to miss
the opportunities that AI will bring. Stock markets seem to reward them for doing so. How long can this
tension between spending and revenue continue? If the current pace of exponential growth in the size
of GenAI models continues, AI investment costs would reach macro-economic signiﬁcance within the
next ﬁve years and become totally unaﬀordable within a decade. How much GenAI-driven productivity
growth would be needed to keep pace with that cost trajectory?
This working paper looks at the drivers of the currently fast-growing AI costs and the economic
conditions under which continued cost growth may or may not be sustainable. It takes inspiration from
the analysis of dual-speed economies by Nordhaus (2021) to explore some medium-term economic
scenarios for AI. Will a rapidly growing share of AI expenditure in GDP accelerate growth, or will AI
absorb too much capital without a concomitant rise in productivity, and lead to an economic ‘AI
winter’? AI has been through ‘winter’ periods before, when investment dried up because of lack of
technological progress3. This time, investment may dry up because returns do not justify the costs. Are
there alternative AI trajectories that would avoid this scenario?
Section 2 provides some empirical evidence on exponentially growing GenAI investment costs, cost
components and the scaling law that drives exponential growth. Section 3 takes an economic
perspective and compares that cost explosion with the beneﬁts side, in the form of GenAI-induced
productivity growth. Section 4 brings the cost and beneﬁts side together and shows that they are on an
unsustainable trajectory. Section 5 goes beyond economics and explores some non-economic drivers
of AI investment. Section 6 concludes.
1 Large language models and generative AI models respond to prompts to produce, respectively, new text and new images
or other audiovisual material, based on ‘learning’ from very large datasets.
2 Skye Jacobs, ‘Big Tech needs to generate $600 billion in annual revenue to justify AI hardware expenditure’, TechSpot, 7
July 2024, https://www.techspot.com/news/103699-big-tech-needs-generate-600-billion-annual-revenue.html; Hannah
Murphy, ‘Meta’s revenue growth reassures investors as Zuckerberg plots AI spree’, Financial Times, 31 July 2024,
https://www.ft.com/content/edbe2580-0b 64-4339-9be2-4b4fee46211b; C amilla Hodgson , ‘Microsoft’s slower cloud
growth fails to impress Wall Street’, Financial Times, 1 August 2024, https://www.ft.com/content/cc781bd9-315a-4e9c -
9730-393ca14fbcbb.
3 See for example https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AI_winter.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
2
2 Exponentially growing AI costs
GenAI models are statistical prediction models that need to be trained with large amounts of data
(Agrawal et al, 2018). Older AI models required relatively small amounts of annotated data for training.
Annotation identiﬁes what the data is referring to. It is slow and costly because it is done by humans.
They could only respond to questions related directly to the data on which they were trained. New
generative AI models are much more ﬂexible and require less annotation, but need much larger
amounts of training data.
They also need more computing capacity to crunch the data. Figure 1 illustrates the exponential
growth in computing requirements, starting with Google’s transformer model (Vishwani et al, 2017),
which laid the foundation for generative AI technology. Computing requirements, expressed in
petaﬂops4, increase by an order of magnitude (x10) for each new generation of models, from less than
10,000 petaﬂops for the ﬁrst transformer model in 2016 to more than 100 billion petaﬂops for recent
models (2023). Computing costs have been rising proportionally to computing requirements (Figure
1, y axis), from around $1000 for the ﬁrst transformer model in 2017, to Google’s Gemini Ultra model in
2023 that cost $120 million to train. As of late 2024, training costs for top-ranking GenAI models are
nearer to $200 million.
Figure 1: Training costs and computing needs for selected AI models
Source: Bruegel based on Epoch (2023) and AI Index Report 2024, p 65-66.
Cottier et al (2024) estimated that GenAI model training costs increased exponentially by a factor of
2.4 to 2.6 per year, or around 240 percent per year, from 2016 to 2023. Starting from the cost of the
4 FLOP stands for ‘FLOating-Point operation’. A ﬂoating-point operation is a single arithmetic operation involving ﬂoating -
point numbers, such as addition, subtraction, multiplication or division. Flops are a measure of the computational power of
a computer. 1 petaﬂop = 1015 ﬂops per second.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
3
largest frontier models at the end of 2023 – OpenAI’s GPT4 and Google’s Gemini Ultra – and
extrapolating to 2030 would lead to an estimated training cost for a single GenAI model of $60 billion.
Currently, there are dozens of frontier GenAI models, and new ones are coming out every month.
Further extrapolation to 2035 would produce an almost unimaginable ﬁgure of nearly $6 trillion, nearly
half of EU GDP. That does not look very plausible.
On top of training costs, AI requires investment in hardware and infrastructure in the form of data
centres. Cottier et al (2024) estimated the cost of computing infrastructure at ten times the cost of
model training. That infrastructure can be used to train several models. The same authors estimated
the hardware amortisation rate at 140 percent/year, or 100 percent depreciation in 8.5 months5. By
that time, a new generation of AI computing chips will have arrived with superior performance.
Infrastructure costs for GPT4 by end 2023 may have been as high as $800 million (Cottier et al, 2024).
Extrapolation could push that ﬁgure up to $500 billion by 2030 and many trillions of dollars by the
mid-2030s6. And that infrastructure cost could be replicated across at least half a dozen hyper-scaling
big tech ﬁrms. When infrastructure is written oﬀ for model training, it can still be used for other
purposes, including for ‘inference’ or daily running of GenAI models for business use to reply to user
queries. Running costs come on top of training costs.
Cottier et al (2024) broke down model training costs into ﬁve components: staﬀ, AI chips, other server
costs, network interconnection costs and energy consumption. In accounting for hardware costs, they
assumed that the AI modeller owns the hardware that is amortised over the duration of the model
training period. Alternatively, modellers can pay market rental rates for cloud infrastructure during the
training period. Cost estimates cover the entire development cycle of an AI model, from pre-training
experiments needed to design new model features and components, to model calibration and the ﬁnal
model training run.
Figure 2 presents an estimated break-down of these ﬁve components for some recent AI models. Staﬀ
is often the largest cost component. Skilled AI staﬀ are scarce. AI companies compete for each other’s
employees. Staﬀ are usually paid a salary plus equity beneﬁts, which are hard to estimate, especially
for AI start-ups with volatile stock values. Staﬀ costs include data collection and cleaning costs, often
carried out by large teams of lower-skilled staﬀ.
Specialised AI accelerator chips are the second most expensive component. The market for AI chips is
very monopolistic, with a single market leader (Nvidia). Markets for hyper-scaled cloud infrastructure
are also tightly controlled by half a dozen players. Other server and cluster interconnection costs
account for the remaining model training costs. Most of these inputs are sold in markets that
5 This depreciation rate is based on the estimated growth rate in processor price- performance (Hobbhahn et al, 2023). This
depreciation rate is for AI processor chips only. Other hardware parts of the cloud computing infrastructure may have longer
economic lifetimes.
6 With that perspective in mind, Sam Altman’s search for investors to ﬁnance a trillion dollar AI computing centre suddenly
sounds more plausible, though not necessarily more realistic. See Keach Hagey, ‘Sam Altman Seeks Trillions of Dollars to
Reshape Business of Chips and AI’, Wall Street Journal, 8 February 2024, https://www.wsj.com/tech/ai/sam-al tman-seeks-
trillions-of-dollars-to-reshape-business-of-chips-and-ai-89ab3db0.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
4

experience supply bottlenecks that drive up prices (Martens, 2024). Electricity is only 4 percent to 6
percent of the total. Power supply for server farms may come from local suppliers. Data centres might
also set up their own power plants. Note that electricity costs are estimated for AI developers in the
United States. In the EU, electricity prices are several times higher than in the US.
Training costs may vary considerably between models. Google’s Gemini Ultra uses Google’s own Tensor
Processing Units (TPU). That avoids paying mark-ups to external chip suppliers. Moreover, TPUs are an
order of magnitude more eﬃcient in computing terms because they operate at lower eight-bit
precision levels compared to the 32-bit standard (Hobbhahn et al, 2023). Other AI computational
performance factors aﬀect cost outcomes, including chip-to-chip communication bandwidth that
increases with new technologies.
Figure 2: Breakdown of costs for AI model training and experimentation

Source: Bruegel based on Cottier et al (2024), p 9.
The main driver of the AI model training cost explosion is the so-called ‘scaling law’ for GenAI models.
Kaplan et al (2020) found that improvements in the cognitive performance of GenAI models are
subject to constant returns to scale in complementary inputs, including the number of model
parameters, the volume of training data and the available computing capacity. For optimal model
performance, all three factors must be scaled up simultaneously. Diminishing returns occur when one
of these three factors is not scaled accordingly. The volume of training data only needs to be increased
by 0.74 times the increase in the number of parameters, indicating that larger models are more data
eﬃcient than smaller models. Kaplan et al (2020) expected constant returns to scale to continue to
hold for the foreseeable future. The red line in Figure 1 illustrates that point.
The cost explosion is happening despite a rapid decline in computing costs. Hobbhahn et al (2023)
estimated that the cost of computations halved every 2.1 to 2.5 years from 2016 to 2022.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
GPT3 Opt 175B GPT4 Gemini Uitra
Staff AI accelerator chips Other server components Cluster interconnect Energy

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
5

Aschenbrenner (2024, p 23) claimed even faster falling computing costs. But GenAI models increased
demand for computing capacity by about twelve orders of magnitude between 2010 and 2024
(Aschenbrenner, 2024, p 21). Figure 1 suggests an expansion of eight orders of magnitude between
2016 and 2023, from 1000 to 100 billion petaﬂops per GenAI model. Clearly, the quantity eﬀect
dominates the price eﬀect.
Vast increases in the scale and complexity of AI models have contributed to substantial improvements
in cognitive performance in the last couple of years, as measured by the best human performance
benchmarks on many tasks. The most advanced models are now performing close to or even above
human benchmarks on tasks including image recognition, language understanding and mathematics
(Maslej et al, 2024). New performance benchmark tests that exceed human performance will be
needed. Still, there are basic tasks for which human intelligence is still far superior to AI. For example,
3D vision and visual sorting of objects, tasks that can easily be accomplished by children, are still
problematic for AI, though improvement is within reach with further scaling. A general AI model that
outperforms humans in every aspect, is still far away, if it is even possible.
It may be possible to achieve increasing returns to scale and to increase the eﬃciency of input use
(data, computing capacity) in GenAI models. Kaplan et al (2020) calibrated their scaling law on the
current generation of transformer AI models that started in 2017. New ways of using these models
may aﬀect the scaling law, in particular for data.
Algorithmic eﬃciency gains can reduce the computational capacity required to train a model. Erdil and
Besiroglu (2022) estimated that the amounts of computations required for training the same AI model
decreased by about 500 percent per year between 2012 and 2021 because of increases in the
eﬃciency of AI training algorithms. These gains enable AI models to train on smaller datasets, with
lower computing capacity, to achieve the same outcomes. For example, OpenAI’s GPT-4o is much
smaller than ChatGPT-4, can be implemented on less powerful computers and still achieves
comparable outcomes. Quantum computing is a promising technology to reduce the cost of
computation by many orders of magnitude. However, that depends on if and when quantum computing
capacity can be scaled up suﬃciently to accommodate large AI models. That is not yet within reach.
Another potential source of increasing returns is what Aschenbrenner (2024) called the “unhobbling”
of AI models – ﬁnding new ways in which AI models deal with problems. Each model has its own
approach to problem solving and sticks to that approach. But there may be other and more eﬃcient
ways to solve problems. Human feedback through prompting and ‘chain-of-thought’ reasoning7 may
give models human guidance on how to approach problems. Combining several AI models in a
collaborative division-of-labour may also make models more eﬃcient. AI engineers are experimenting
with expanding the context or explaining the problem setting. The ﬁrst GenAI could only handle 2000
words of context; the latest models can handle more than 1 million words.

7 See IBM, ‘What is chain of thoughts (CoT)?’ undated, https://www.ibm.com/topics/chain-of-thoughts.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
6

The current wave of GenAI models is trained on human-generated data. They learn to imitate human
behaviour. However, GenAI models are now being used in conﬁgurations that depart from this human
imitation scenario and facilitate learning and knowledge generation without human behavioural data,
or with a small patch of human data as examples to initiate a learning process. For example, Google
DeepMind developed the AlphaFold AI model (Jumper et al, 2021) to predict possible protein
structures. The model learned the basics of protein structures from about 100,000 human-discovered
protein structures and then set out to discover billions of additional protein structures.
Two or more AI models can also be put in an adversarial conﬁguration in which they compete to
discover better responses to challenges. This is how DeepMind’s AlphaGo model discovered new
strategies to play the Go game, superior to known human strategies, starting only from a set of basic
rules for the game. Adversarial conﬁgurations are widely applied in strategic settings, such as military
and security applications of AI models, to discover more eﬃcient strategies that have never been
played by humans, or would have been impossible for humans because they require very fast data
processing and response times that humans are unable to muster (Scharre, 2023).
A move away from the imitation of human behavioural data will become increasingly necessary
because the rapidly expanding data requirements of GenAI models are hitting the so-called data wall,
the maximum amount of human-generated data available (Maslej et al, 2024). Frontier AI models
currently need many trillions of tokens or training data points. There is not enough text data on the
internet and in other text archives to meet the requirements of the largest models. Stringent
application of copyright law and opt-outs may further reduce the volume and increase the cost of
available training data (Martens, 2024b).
AI model developers are trying out various methods to overcome this constraint, for instance
converting speech into text or using synthetically generated data. Some claim that synthetic data
reduces model quality and may result in the complete collapse of AI models (Shumailov et al, 2024).
Others are more optimistic (Ben Allal et al, 2024). Generating new data and knowledge in AI training
settings that reach beyond what humans can produce is thus a necessary condition for continued
growth in AI. That will inevitably steer the evolution of AI models away from transformer-type GenAI
models, and thus from the scaling law that these models are subject to.
Aschenbrener (2024) argued that an important step in generating non-human data and knowledge will
be reached when AI can write its own code and solve its own research questions. Lu et al (2024)
claimed to have achieved this task, at least for AI research (this claim at time of writing has not had
wider conﬁrmation or rejection). Nordhaus (2021) reformulated this is a more general way: AI should
be able to take over and automate task automation, rather than leaving it to humans to invent task-
automation solutions.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
7

3 The beneﬁts of AI: productivity growth
The main economic beneﬁt expected from AI is productivity gains. Humans will be able to complete
tasks faster and more eﬃciently. But what is known about these productivity gains?
Brynjolfsson et al (2020) made a general observation on technology-induced productivity gains. They
argued that embedding digital technology in ﬁrms requires costly investment in all kinds of
complementary tasks and activities. That slows down the productivity uptake of new technologies and
initially drags down productivity before it rises fast afterwards when the beneﬁts mature. They found
evidence of this productivity J-curve eﬀect in computer software and suggested that this may also be
the case for AI. Brynjolfsson et al (2020) recognised the productivity potential of AI but underscored
that the AI roll-out across the economy can be expected to be much slower than the development of AI
models.
The J-curve roll-out eﬀect is spread out over time, across the entire economy and across a wide range
of GenAI models, not only the most powerful models at the technology frontier. Much of the roll-out
across the economy will come from AI models below the technology frontier, including smaller models
that can be trained with far less computing power than large foundational models, compressed models
that are derived from large frontier models but redesigned to run at far lower computing costs8
(Grootendorst, 2024) and specialised models designed for speciﬁc tasks. Developers of large
foundation models are building ecosystems of satellite models around core large models. For example,
OpenAI set up a ChatGPT applications store that contains millions of speciﬁc applications of ChatGPT.
OpenAI also made available a much more compact version of its leading GPT4 model, ChatGPT4o-mini,
designed to run on laptops and smartphones for all kinds of daily uses, such as children doing their
homework or parents planning holidays. This branching out of large AI models into many derived
models and applications that build on top of the foundation GenAI model will help to amortise the huge
ﬁxed costs of foundation AI models across a wide range of applications.
The cognitive returns to AI constitute the primary driver to boost productivity growth: completion of
tasks by humans will be done more cheaply by machines. However, Acemoglu (2024) saw only limited
prospects for human-machine substitution and productivity growth. He estimated that an AI-driven
productivity increase will not exceed 0.5 percent in the next decade. By contrast, Goldman-Sachs
economists put that estimate at nearly 10 percent (Nathan et al, 2024). The diﬀerence between the
two arises from Acemoglu’s very conservative estimates of the share of human tasks that will be
aﬀected by AI, cost savings and expansion of new tasks, and more capital deepening in the economy.
The substitution approach has very little to say about the emergence of cognitive tasks that humans
cannot carry out because of cognitive limitations on human brainpower, or on the automated
automation of tasks.

8 See Maarten Grootendorst, ‘A Visual Guide to Quantization’, 22 July 2024,
https://www.maartengrootendorst.com/blog/quantization/.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
8

The empirical evidence on AI productivity eﬀects is not yet very insightful. Several studies found
positive productivity impacts of earlier AI technologies that pre-dated the arrival of GenAI (Alderucci et
al, 2024; Da Silva et al, 2024; Czarnitski et al, 2022). There have been so far very few studies on the
productivity eﬀects of the current wave of GenAI models. Noy and Zhang (2023) found that ChatGPT
raises productivity and quality in writing tasks by 0.8 and 0.4 standard deviations respectively.
Brynjolfsson et al (2023) found a 10 percent productivity increase when call-centre operators are
assisted by GenAI models. There are too few studies to generalise the ﬁndings. However, the number of
ﬁrms that subscribe to ChatGPT and other GenAI models for professional use by their employees is
growing very rapidly. An average professional business subscription currently amounts to less than
€60/month/employee. That low price ensures wide penetration in business markets. Widespread use
is a good indication that businesses expect signiﬁcant returns from their investments in AI
subscriptions.
4 Bringing the cost and beneﬁt sides together
At the current rate of exponential cost growth, AI infrastructure investment and modelling costs will
reach macro-economic signiﬁcance over the next decade. The International Monetary Fund World
Economic Outlook 2024 (IMF, 2024) estimates that World GDP will reach $139 trillion by 2029, with 27
percent of GDP or $37 trillion going to investment. The WEO forecast does not extend to 2030 or 2035.
But a simple extrapolation of the 2025-2029 3.1 percent real growth rate to 2035 would bring world
GDP to around $143 trillion in 2030 and $156 trillion in 2035, of which about $36 trillion and $40
trillion respectively would go to investment. Assuming that there would still be competition between at
least ﬁve very large ﬁrms with their own state-of-the-art AI hardware infrastructure, AI investment
could reach $2.5 trillion in 2030 and $250 trillion in 2035. That would amount to a whopping 7 percent
of world GDP in 2030 and an impossible 160 percent of GDP in 2035. Clearly, these growth rates are
not sustainable and something will have to give.
How can the rapidly escalating costs of AI be matched with the much slower emergence of AI
productivity beneﬁts?
Nordhaus (2021) suggested following Baumol’s (1967) demand-side perspective on a two-speed
economy, in which a rapidly advancing technology is subject to declining prices that are not matched
by growth in demand. As a result, the share of that technology in GDP declines and the increasing
relative cost of traditional technologies slows down GDP growth. Baumol called this “cost disease”. The
opposite can also happen: rapidly declining prices for new technologies can trigger fast growth in
demand, increase their share of GDP and accelerate GDP growth. However, Nordhaus (2021) showed
that even for information technology sectors that experienced rapid price declines over the last two
decades, including phones, computers and telecommunication services, there is no conclusive
evidence either for rising or declining shares of these sectors in GDP .
The issue can also be examined from a supply-side perspective, comparing a quasi-constant or slow-
growing volume of human and other types of capital with a rapidly growing volume of information

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
9

capital. The volume of information capital – in computers, software, data or AI – in GDP will rise if the
volume of information capital expenditures rises faster than the relative price of information capital
declines, compared to other capital. Nordhaus (2021) called this “growth euphoria” on the supply side
– the reverse of Baumol’s (1967) “cost disease”: the quantity eﬀect dominates the price eﬀect and
boosts GDP growth, to the point where a growth acceleration might emerge, not only through
Keynesian multiplier and accelerator eﬀects, but also because the increasing share of investment in
GDP further accelerates GDP growth. The point might be reached where investment dominates
economic growth and triggers a signiﬁcant growth acceleration – an economic “singularity” in
Nordhaus’s words. Using US data from the past decades, he found that a rising share of capital in GDP
and a rising share of information capital in total capital pass the singularity test, but only just. Their
growth trajectories are so slow that any singularity or growth acceleration event is at least a century
away.
Nordhaus (2021) used relatively old data for his empirical test, dating back to before the arrival of
GenAI. With exponential growth in the cost of AI models, the cost of information capital in total capital
and in GDP is rising much faster than implied by Nordhaus’s historical data for digital technologies.
Would that bring the singularity horizon nearer?
A simple back-of-the-envelope productivity growth calculation can clarify this. Assume that digital
ﬁrms represent 10 percent of GDP and jointly invest $1 trillion in AI models, a ﬁgure that could easily
be reached in the next few years. Assume also that this triggers a signiﬁcant 3 percent productivity
increase in 90 percent of the economy, generating a 2.7 percent increase in total GDP . Note that 3
percent would already be quite an improvement compared to the 1.5 percent or so current rate. The
GDP or market scale required to reach break-even for these AI investment costs would be $37 trillion if
all productivity gains accrue to the digital ﬁrms that invest in AI
9. More realistically, if only 50 percent
of the gains accrue to digital ﬁrms, and the rest to AI users, the required GDP would be $72 trillion.
According to the IMF (2024), GDP for the advanced economies amounts to $75 trillion. A 1 trillion AI
investment is thus a credible choke-point, unless the AI investment were to continue to expand and/or
trigger even higher productivity growth, above 3 percent, to achieve a growth ‘singularity’.
5 Non-economic drivers of AI investment
The reasoning above is conﬁned to purely economic considerations. But other factors drive AI
investment, beyond economic rationality. Human emotions and fears are an important push factor in
AI investment.
People are motivated by the ‘altruism factor’: a large part of the AI scientiﬁc community is driving ‘AI for
good’, the application of AI technology to good causes that will improve human wellbeing in terms of,

9 Productivity gains of 2.7 percent on a GDP of $37 trillion amount to $1 trillion in economic value gains. That covers the AI
investment cost.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
10

for example, health, environment, transport and combating climate change10. For example, OpenAI,
one of the market leaders in AI, was originally established as a non-proﬁt organization with the ‘AI for
good’ purpose in mind. OpenAI is now a private for-proﬁt company because AI has become big
business that requires very large investments. An important part of that altruism movement is focused
on ensuring alignment of AI model responses with human values. Developing general AI, on par or
exceeding the capacities of human intelligence, is considered by some as an important contribution to
the well-being of mankind11, but by others as a major threat to mankind (McLean et al, 2023).
Firms are motivated by the ‘chicken game factor’. None of the big tech companies involved in AI
development is willing to reduce AI investment, fearing they will miss out on a big opportunity.
Investors subscribe to that view and downgrade the stocks of companies that show any sign of
slowing down on AI investment, even when proﬁts are under pressure12. Of course, investors know that
new technologies are subject to hype-cycles of exuberance and crashes. But they will want to ride the
cycle until the very last moment before the crash.
Countries meanwhile are motivated by the ‘China factor’: AI is perceived as the most important frontier
in military and security technology (Scharre, 2023). Mastery of the most advanced AI technologies will
determine the outcome of future conﬂicts. The US and China are locked in an AI arms race they cannot
abandon, whatever the costs (Scharre, 2023). As was often the case in the past, arms races are a
major driver of technological development. General AI (Goertzel, 2014), the holy grail of AI, is seen as
the ultimate military technology (McLean et al, 2023). AI as a non-rival digital technology can
overcome any hardware and manpower constraints in conﬂict situations, provided unlimited
computing capacity and data are available. This argument could be more generally reformulated as a
national security factor that becomes increasingly important in a rapidly fragmenting and polarising
geopolitical world. It also holds for the EU and its attempts to boost EU AI investment. Should the EU
remain dependent on US big tech ﬁrms in terms of computing capacity and AI technology?
6 How will this end?
Nordhaus (2021) reaﬃrmed that AI is the ﬁrst human-invented technology that replaces not only
human labour but also human reasoning and knowledge accumulation – a production factor on which
mankind has had a natural monopoly until very recently. Since there is no limit to knowledge growth,
Dyson’s (1960) observation should perhaps be heeded: highly intelligent societies are necessarily
computing-intensive. AI machines are needed to overcome human cognitive capacity constraints.
Since computing requires energy, Dyson predicted that super-intelligent societies will want to capture
all the energy available to feed their computers. They would literally burn the planet to harvest that

10 See for example the ‘AI for Good’ summit meetings, organised by the United Nations, and the very broad policy agenda
that it promotes: https://aiforgood.itu.int/.
11 OpenAI’s mission statement refers to this. See OpenAI, ‘Planning for AGI and beyond’, 24 February 2023,
https://openai.com/index/planning-for-agi-and-beyond/.
12 Intel is a recent example. See Anton Goncalves, ‘Intel’s weak position in AI chip market leads to mass layoﬀ’, TechTarget, 2
August 2024, https://www.techtarget.com/searchdatacenter/news/366599761/Intels-weak-position-in-AI-chip-market-
leads-to-mass-layoﬀ.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
11

energy. Mankind has fortunately not reached that point yet. But the rapid development of AI models is
moving in that direction. Investment in AI computing power will continue and mankind will ﬁnd the
means to pursue that goal, possibly beyond economic rationality.
It is obvious that single- or even double-digit productivity growth scenarios are unable to keep pace
with exponentially growing AI investment costs. At best, the point of reckoning might be postponed.
The quantity eﬀect – increased demand for computing power for AI – will continue to overwhelm the
price eﬀect of rapidly falling computing costs. That brings the economy closer to Nordhaus’s (2021)
“growth euphoria” scenario in which the share of AI investments in GDP will increase – until economic,
political and social pressures slow it down. A pessimistic new ‘AI winter’ scenario in which AI
investments freeze for economic reasons is certainly possible. An optimistic scenario with
accelerating productivity and GDP growth rates looks less likely at this point, unless Nordhaus’s
(2021) ultimate AI scenario becomes a reality: AI automating the automation of production processes.
Researchers have already taken steps in that direction (Lu et al, 2024).
Less dramatic intermediate scenarios look more likely. Technological change in computer hardware,
software and AI model architecture may bend the GenAI scaling law of Kaplan et al (2020) towards
increasing returns to scale. That could fend oﬀ, or at least postpone, the economic-freeze scenario.
Moreover, the scaling law applies to GenAI models only. They may be replaced by other types of AI
model that will be less dependent on human-generated data for training. They may generate their own
learning and knowledge.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
12

References
Agrawal, A., A. Goldfarb and J. Gans (2018) Prediction Machines: The Simple Economics of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, Harvard Business Review Press
Alderucci, D., S. Baviskar, L. Branstetter, N. Goldschlag, E. Hovy, A. Runge, P. Tambe and N. Zolas (2024)
‘Quantifying the Impact of AI on Productivity and Labor Demand: Evidence from U.S. Census Microdata’,
mimeo, available at https://www.aeaweb.org/conference/2020/preliminary/paper/Tz2HdRna
Aschenbrenner, L. (2024) ‘Situational awareness, the Decade Ahead’, mimeo, available at
https://situational-awareness.ai/
Baumol, W. (1967) ‘Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of Urban Crisis’, The
American Economic Review 57(3): 415-426
Ben Allal, L., A. Lozhkov and D. Van Strien (2024) ‘Cosmopedia: how to create large-scale synthetic data
for pre-training’, Blog Post, Hugging Face, 20 March, available at
https://huggingface.co/blog/cosmopedia
Brynjolfsson, E., D. Rock and C. Syverson (2020) ‘The productivity J-cuve: how intangibles complement
general purpose technologies’, NBER Working Paper 25148, National Bureau of Economic Research
Brynjolfsson, E., D. Li and L. Raymond (2023) ‘Generative AI at work’, NBER Working Paper 31161,
National Bureau of Economic Research
Cottier, B., R. Rahman, L. Fattorini, N. Maslej and D. Owen (2024) ‘The rising costs of training frontier AI
models’, mimeo, available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.21015
Czarnitski, D., G. Fernandez and C. Rammer (2022) ‘AI and ﬁrm-level productivity’, ZEW Discussion
Paper 22-05, ZEW – Leibniz Centre for European Economic Research
Da Silva L., A. Rincon-Aznar and F. Venturini (2024) ‘Productivity performance, distance to frontier and
AI innovation: Firm-level evidence from Europe’, mimeo, available at
https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4728017
Dyson, F. (1960) ‘The search for artiﬁcial interstellar infrared radiation’, Science 131(3414): 1667-
1668
Erdil, E. and T. Besiroglu (2022) ‘Algorithmic progress in computer vision’, mimeo, available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.05153
Hobbhahn, M., L. Heim and G. Aydos (2023) ‘Trends in Machine Learning Hardware’, EpochAI, 9
November, available at https://epochai.org/blog/trends-in-machine-learning-hardware

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
13

IMF (2024) World Economic Outlook, April 2024, International Monetary Fund, available at
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/weo-database/2024/April
Jumper, J., R. Evans, A. Pritzel, T. Green, M. Figurnov, O. Ronneberger … D. Hassibis (2021) ‘Highly
accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold’, Nature 596: 583–589
Kaplan, J., S. McCandlish, T. Brown, B. Chess, R. Child, S. Gray … D. Amodei (2020) ‘Scaling Laws for
Neural Language Models’, mimeo, available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08361
Lu, C., C. Lu, R.T. Lange, J. Foerster, J. Clune and D. Ha (2024) ‘The AI Scientist: Towards Fully Automated
Open-Ended Scientiﬁc Discovery’, mimeo, available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.06292
Martens, B. (2024) ‘Economic arguments in favour of reducing copyright protection for generative AI
inputs and outputs’, Working Paper 09/2024, Bruegel
Martens, B. (2024) ‘Why artiﬁcial intelligence is creating fundamental challenges for competition
policy’, Policy Brief 16/2024, Bruegel
Maslej, N., L. Fattorini, R. Perrault, V. Parli, A. Reuel, E. Brynjolfsson … J. Clark (2024) The AI Index 2024
Annual Report, AI Index Steering Committee, Institute for Human-Centered AI, Stanford University
McLean, S., G. Read, J. Thompson, C. Baber, N. Stanton and P . Salmon (2023) ‘The risks associated with
Artiﬁcial General Intelligence: A systematic review’, Journal of Experimental and Theoretical AI 35(4): 1-
17
Nathan, A., J. Grimberg and A. Rhodes (2024) ‘GenAI: too much spend, too little beneﬁt?’ Global Macro
Research Issue 129, Goldman Sachs
Nordhaus W. (2021) ‘Are We Approaching an Economic Singularity? Information Technology and the
Future of Economic Growth’, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 13(1): 299–332
Noy, S. and W. Zhang (2023) ‘Experimental Evidence on the Productivity Eﬀects of Generative Artiﬁcial
Intelligence’, Science 381(6654): 187-192
Scharre P . (2023) Army of None: Autonomous Weapons and the Future of War, W W Norton
Shumailov, I., Z. Shumaylov, Y. Zhao, N. Papernot, R. Anderson and Y. Gal (2024) ‘AI models collapse
when trained on recursively generated data’, Nature 631: 755-759
Vaswani, A., N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. Gomez, L. Kaiser and I. Polosukhin (2017)
‘Attention Is All You Need’, mimeo, available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
© Bruegel 2024. All rights reserved. Short sections, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted in the
original language without explicit permission provided that the source is acknowledged. Opinions expressed
in this publication are those of the author(s) alone.
Bruegel, Rue de la Charité 33, B-1210 Brussels
(+32) 2 227 4210
info@bruegel.org
www.bruegel.org
WORKING PAPER|ISSUE 03|2020
