
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Mia Hoffmann (mia.
hoffmann@bruegel.org)
is a Research Assistant at
Bruegel
LAURA NURSKI (laura.
nurski@bruegel.org) is a
Research Fellow at Bruegel
Executive summary
Artificial intelligence (AI) is considered a key driver of future economic development,
expected to increase labour productivity and economic growth worldwide. To realise these
gains, AI technologies need to be adopted by companies and integrated into their operations.
However, it is unclear what the current level of AI adoption by European firms actually is.
Estimates vary widely because of uneven data collection and lack of a standard definition and
taxonomy of AI.
What is clear is that AI adoption in Europe is low and likely running behind other parts
of the world. Discussions on the barriers to AI advancement often mix up different stages
of innovation – research, development and adoption. Each stage is constrained by the
availability of skills, data and financing in the European market, but there are nuances in how
these barriers arise in each of the three stages.
This Policy Contribution focuses on the final stage, AI adoption. We discuss theoretical and
empirical evidence of the drivers of AI adoption. We outline the relevant barriers to adoption
for European firms in terms of human capital, data availability and funding, and make
international comparisons where possible.
To accelerate the roll-out of AI technology across the European Union, policymakers
should alleviate constraints to adoption faced by firms, both in the environmental context
– labour market, financial market and regulation – and in the technological context – data
availability, basic digitisation of businesses and technological uncertainty.
Recommended citation
Hoffmann, M. and L. Nurski (2021) ‘What is holding back artificial intelligence adoption
in Europe?' Policy Contribution 24/2021, Bruegel
Policy Contribution
Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021 What is holding back
artificial intelligence
adoption in Europe?
Mia Hoffmann and Laura Nurski

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
1 Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is considered a key driver of future economic development. Firms
that have filed AI patents have been shown to experience labour productivity increases of
three to four percent1. Widespread adoption of AI could therefore boost growth in European
economic activity by almost 20 percent by 2030 (Bughin et al, 2019). To realise these gains at
macroeconomic level, AI technologies need to be adopted and integrated at firm level.
However, AI adoption in Europe is running behind other parts of the world. To accelerate
the take-up of AI in European firms, policymakers need to understand the barriers that hold
firms back from adopting AI. Insights into firms’ technology adoption decisions are needed
to steer policy and to ensure that AI technologies benefit workers – by making the technology
trustworthy, easy to use and valuable in day-to-day work (Hoffmann and Nurski, 2021).
2 Measuring AI advancement in Europe
Understanding the goals and status of AI advancement in Europe requires an understanding
of each of the steps in the AI production chain: AI research, AI development and AI adoption.
AI research refers to the discovery of new techniques for making intelligent decisions based
on data, and is usually done by universities or private research laboratories. AI development
refers to application of those new techniques to develop AI products or services that address
business needs; this is usually done by technology companies (either big tech or AI start-ups
and scale-ups). Finally, AI adoption refers to the use of AI products or services in companies’
internal production processes or service delivery (Table 1).
Promoting AI development matters for Europe’s strategic autonomy because the devel-
opment of AI technologies in Europe means less dependence on foreign technologies. It also
helps to ensure that AI technologies align with European values. However, when it comes to
increasing the productivity of European firms and ensuring their international competitive-
ness, promoting AI adoption is much more relevant. AI development can be tracked by the
number of European AI patents or unicorns2, while AI adoption requires indicators of the
acquisition of AI products (or investment) by regular non-AI European businesses.
Such a detailed understanding helps in analysing the constraints or barriers facing AI
research, development and adoption. For example, the lack of public funding and venture
capital are often cited as financial barriers to AI advancement in Europe (Tricot, 2021).
However, these financial resources are mostly relevant for AI research and AI development.
The financial constraints on AI adoption by regular (non-tech) firms can be better addressed
using other instruments, such as tax deductions or AI technology investment subsidies.
A similar analysis can be done for the lack of access to external (private and public) data-
sets in Europe, another often-cited barrier to AI advancement (Castro et al, 2019; Linck, 2021).
While large datasets from external sources are crucial for testing new techniques (AI research)
and for training new models in AI products (AI development), they are less crucial for AI
adoption by regular businesses. For non-AI firms that want to buy AI products or services, the
availability of their own internal data sources is much more crucial. For example, a French
language AI chatbot might be trained on a large repository of French language texts during
development. However, when a French retailer buys this chatbot for integration into its cus-
tomer services, the bot needs fine tuning using that business’ own customer interaction data
1 Based on studies of firms in the United States and firms worldwide. See Alderucci et al (2020) and Damioli et al
(2021).
2 A ‘unicorn’ refers to a privately held startup company valued at over $1 billion.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
(previous emails, phone calls, chats with its customers). Therefore, the lack of internal data is
a more crucial barrier to adoption than the availability of external data.
Finally, breaking down AI advancement into its separate steps is also crucial in terms
of the skills necessary for AI advancement. While the number of academic AI researchers
is important for pushing AI research forward, the overall number of awarded AI and data
engineering degrees (PhD and Masters) is more relevant for supporting AI development.
Finally, when it comes to integrating AI into regular non-AI businesses, the availability of
computer science, IT infrastructure and data management skills in the workforce are the
relevant barrier.
The breakdown of AI advancement we have set out is partly reflected in the European
Commission’s proposed digital goals for 2030 (European Commission, 2021). In the area
of the ‘digital transformation of businesses’ , the Commission wants to double the number
of EU unicorns, which reflects its goals on AI development in Europe. On AI adoption, the
Commission aims for 75 percent of companies to take up advanced technologies including
artificial intelligence (AI), cloud computing and big data analysis3. While the number of EU AI
unicorns can be easily counted, reliable estimates of AI adoption are much harder to collect
(Box 1).
3 The Commission even plans to name and shame lagging countries that fail to achieve their targets, in order to
motivate national governments to take action (Prpic, 2014). See also Valentina Pop, ‘Europe Starts Feeling Pinch
from Its Green Transition’ , Financial Times, 13 September 2021, https://www.ft.com/content/99c159ae-274f-4ab4-
b273-431c58c23355.
T able 1: Production chain of AI and metrics for tracking AI advancement
AI research AI development AI adoption
Who Universities, private research
laboratories
Technology companies (big
tech & AI start-ups/scale-ups)
(Non-AI) Firms across all sectors of
the economy
What
Discovering new techniques
to make decisions based on
data
Developing an AI product
or service for a business
application
Buying an AI product or service
for use in production processes or
service delivery
Examples
Discovering new language
processing techniques
Developing AI product for
screening CVs
Buying CV-screening algorithm for
use in hiring process
Discovering new image
recognition techniques
Developing AI product for
detecting quality deviations
Buying quality control algorithm for
use in manufacturing process
Importance for EU
policy
Priority-setting
Relevance & applicability
Strategic autonomy
Standard-setting
Productivity
Competitiveness
Metrics of success
Number of paper/
conference citations
Number of AI start-ups
Number of AI unicorns
Number of AI patents
% of firms adopting AI
Barriers to success
Skills Academic AI researchers AI PhD’s & Master degrees Computer science degrees
Financial constraints Public funding Venture capital R&D subsidies or tax deductions
Data availability External (public & private)
data for testing techniques
External (public & private)
data for training models Internal data for finetuning models
Source: Bruegel.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
Box 1: Measure what you treasure: data on AI adoption
It is unclear what the current state of AI adoption in Europe actually is, as estimates of the
use of AI by European companies differ widely. Even two European institutional sources give
very different rates of 7 percent adoption (Eurostat, 2021) to 42 percent (European Commis -
sion, 2020). Differences in methodology do not fully explain the differences in estimates,
as both surveys have the same time and geographical coverage and aim for representative
sampling design. Eurostat’s survey excludes financial sector companies and micro-enter -
prises with fewer than 10 employeesoyees, but these exclusions do not explain the difference
as micro-enterprises generally have lower adoption rates (so excluding them would bias the
average upward) while financial sector adoption hovers around the average. The European
Commission (2020) survey’s final sample size is much smaller than Eurostat’s (9640 com-
pared to 142,000), but the survey still designed to be representative in terms of countries and
firm size.
It is more likely that the gap in estimated adoption of AI results from differences in
response rates to the two surveys. The response rate to the Eurostat survey ranged from 31
percent in Germany to 98 percent in Lithuania, reaching a respectable average of 74 percent
and a median of 80 percent across countries. The response rate to the European Commission
(2020) survey however ranged from 5 percent and 19 percent at country level, averaging 7
percent. This implies that the adoption rates given in the latter are biased upwards, as firms
that were already using AI were more likely to participate.
After accounting for the bias induced by non-responses, the remaining differences in the
estimates of AI adoption can be explained by the differences in the definition and taxonomy
of AI in the survey questions. The Eurostat survey asked about the following four types of AI:
1. Analyse big data internally using machine learning (ML);
2. Analyse big data internally using natural language processing (NLP), generation or speech
recognition;
3. Use of a chat service where a chatbot or virtual agent replies to customers;
4. Use of service robots (autonomous machines).
These categories focus on a limited set of specific AI applications, and are not mutually ex-
clusive either. NLP (type 2) is a form of machine learning (type 1), and training chatbots (type
3) requires fine-tuning NLP algorithms on internal data (type 2). Finally, the use of service
robots (type 4) typically requires the use of internal data using machine learning (type 1) to
train or fine-tune the robot.
The European Commission (2020) survey takes a wider approach and asks about the use
of ten different categories of AI:
1. Speech recognition, machine translation or chatbots (NLP);
2. Visual diagnostics, face or image recognition (computer vision);
3. Fraud detection or risk analysis (anomaly detection);
4. Analysis of emotions or behaviours (sentiment analysis);
5. Forecasting, price optimisation and decision-making using ML algorithms;
6. Process or equipment optimisation using AI;
7. Recommendation and personalisation engines using AI;
8. Process automation using AI, including warehouse automation or robotics process auto-
mation;
9. Autonomous machines, such as smart and autonomous robots or vehicles;
10. Creative and experimentation activities, such as virtual prototyping, data generation,
artificial music or painting.
While this taxonomy does a better job of setting out mutually exclusive categories
and covering a wider range of AI applications, it is still a combination of technologies (for

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
example, NLP and computer vision) and business applications (for example, forecasting and
risk analysis).
When comparing pair-wise estimates of similar categories, the differences between the
two surveys are smaller: NLP reaches about 3 percent in the Eurostat survey (types 2 and
3) and about 10 percent in the European Commission survey (type 1), while autonomous
robots reach 2 percent in the Eurostat survey and 9 percent in the European Commission
survey. However, a sizeable difference still remains, which we attribute to the non-response
issue discussed above. Nonetheless, the EU should develop a standard definition of AI and
its subcategories, and explicitly differentiate between technologies and business applications
(Hoffmann and Mariniello, 2021).
3 The state of AI adoption in Europe
According to Rogers’s Diffusion of Innovations (DOI) theory, new technologies spread across
an economy incrementally, rather than instantaneously (Lundblad, 2003; Rogers, 1983). The
decision to adopt entails costs and risks. It requires upfront investment in infrastructure and
the technology itself, while the potential returns are unknown. Moreover, deployment implies
costly operational and organisational adjustments, which not every organisation can make at
the same time.
Economies therefore consist of different group of adopters. Innovators (2.5 percent of
firms), usually venturesome and large organisations, introduce the innovation to the econ-
omy. Early adopters (13.5 percent of firms), which are open to change but more risk averse
than innovators, are next in line to adopt. Their decision serves as a signal to the rest of the
economy that reduces uncertainty around the investment, and is key to achieve critical mass.
The early majority (34 percent) are more prudent but still adopt the innovation just before
the average firm does. At this point, the technology has dispersed throughout half of the
economy. The second half consists of the late majority (34 percent) and laggards (16 percent),
which are considered sceptical or even suspicious of innovations. By the time laggards adopt,
innovators may have already adopted the next innovation.
Notwithstanding the shortcomings of the European Commission (2020) survey in terms
of response rate (and acknowledging its upward bias in estimating adoption, Box 1), it still
provides the best data source for comparing the uptake of different types of AI across the
economy, since it covers such a wide range of applications. Figure 1 shows that firms are
quicker to adopt AI in ‘traditional’ applications of data-driven intelligence such as fraud
and risk analysis, equipment optimisation and process automation – applications that were
previously driven by classical statistics and programmable logic controllers, but which are
now being supplemented by machine learning. Newer domain applications including speech
recognition (NLP) and image recognition (computer vision) are still in the earlier phases of
adoption, while the most fringe applications, including sentiment analysis, art and design, are
just crossing over from the innovators to the early adopters.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
Figure 1: Diffusion of AI technologies in Europe
Bruegel based on Rogers (1983) and European Commission (2020).
Diffusion across industries of these specific sub-categories of AI also shows clear clusters
(Table 2). The primary and secondary sectors (agriculture and manufacturing) mainly use AI
in production and process applications (robots, process automation and equipment optimi-
sation). Tertiary sectors use relatively more NLP , recommendation engines and the more
creative and innovative AI applications for sentiment analysis, art and design. The Eurostat
data covers fewer categories of AI, but also shows that service robots (type 4) are taken up
mostly in the manufacturing sector, while the ICT sector has a very strong lead in all other
types (machine learning, NLP and chatbots).
N L P ( s p e e c h )
C o m p ute r v i s i o n
F o r e c a s ti n g
R e c o m m e n d a ti o n
R o b o ts
0
0 .1
0 .2
0 .3
0 .4
0 .5
0 .6
0 .7
0 .8
0 .9
1
% o f ﬁr m s t hat hav e ad o p t e d A I
Innovators
2.5%
Early adopters
13.5%
Early ma jority
34%
Late ma jority
34%
Laggards
16%
European Commission proposed target
Cu m u l a t i v e d i s t ri b u t i o n o f a d o p t i o n
F r a ud a n d r i s k
E q ui p m e n t o p ti m i s a ti o n
Pr o c e s s a uto m a ti o nA r t a n d d e s i g n
Pr o b a b i l i ty d e n s i ty o f a d o p ti o n
S e n ti m e n t a n a l ys i s
T able 2: Adoption of AI applications by sector and type of AI
 % of firms
adopting an AI
application of
type …
All sectors
Agriculture,
forestry &
fishing
Manufacturing
Construct.,
waste, water
& electricity
Trade,
transport,
hospit. &
recreation
IT , finance,
real estate
& scientific
Education,
health &
social work
Fraud and risk 13% 15% 13% 10% 13% 15% 16%
Equipment
optimisation 13% 13% 15% 11% 11% 13% 14%
Process
automation 12% 14% 17% 9% 10% 13% 13%
Robots 9% 18% 15% 8% 7% 7% 10%
Computer vision 9% 14% 8% 9% 8% 11% 9%
Forecasting
(non-stats) 10% 10% 10% 8% 12% 10% 10%
NLP (speech) 10% 4% 8% 8% 9% 14% 15%
Recommendation 9% 7% 8% 7% 9% 11% 10%
Art and design 7% 9% 9% 8% 5% 8% 11%
Sentiment
analysis 3% 3% 1% 2% 2% 4% 5%
Source: Bruegel based on European Commission (2020). Note: The table shows the percentage of firms that report that they are currently using an AI application of a specific type by
sector. The colours reflect the intensity of adoption: green means high adoption, red means low adoption. The clusters are described in the text above, the colours show a pattern of
clusters (see text above).

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
The data suggests that the EU is still in the early stages of AI adoption. This is true for most
individual European countries as well. Since both the European Commission (2020) survey
and the Eurostat data include NLP as a sub-category of AI4, we compare in Figure 2 the esti-
mate of NLP adoption across countries from both data sources. Again, adoption is estimated
at a higher rate in the European Commission (2020) survey, ranging from 2 percent in Malta
to 19 percent in Germany and Austria, while the Eurostat data ranges from 1 percent in
Greece to 8 percent in Finland. Surprisingly, the correlation of the two data series at country
level is -0.02, meaning the two data series bear almost no resemblance to each other. While
some countries, such as Lithuania and Sweden, score high in both series, others like Malta
find themselves at different ends of the distribution.
Finally, as Rogers’s DOI theory predicts, adoption indeed correlates strongly with firm size.
Using the same sub-category of AI as before (NLP5), the European Commission survey data
finds adoption by large firms (more than 250 employeesoyees, 16 percent) to be twice as high
as by small firms (fewer than 50 employeesoyees, 8 percent), and in the Eurostat data adop-
tion by large firms (11 percent) is almost four times higher than by small firms (3 percent).
4 Comparing type 1 NLP & chatbots from European Commission (2020) with type 2 NLP + type 3 chatbots from
Eurostat (2021).
5 Comparing type 1 NLP & chatbots from European Commission (2020) with type 2 NLP + type 3 chatbots from
Eurostat (2021).
NLP adoption according to European Commission (2020) NLP adoption according to□ Eurostat
8%
9%
11%
7%19%
3%
3%
4%
8%
2%
6%
2%4%
10%
15%
9%
0% 20%
% of ﬁrms
Figure 2: Diffusion of natural language processing across European countries, comparison of European
Commission survey and Eurostat data
Source: Bruegel based on European Commission (2020) and Eurostat (2021). Note: The maps show the percentage of firms that report that they are currently using an NLP application by
country. From the European Commission survey we use type 1 (NLP & chatbots), from the Eurostat data we use the sum of type 2 (NLP) and type 3 (chatbots).

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
4 Drivers of technology adoption
4.1 Three factors that influence technology adoption
Technology adoption decisions at the firm level are influenced by technological, organisa-
tional and environmental factors (Baker, 2012; Tornatzky et al, 1990).
The technological context is determined by comparing the firm’s own state of techno-
logical development to the technological frontier (Oliveira and Martins, 2011). This gap
comprises different types of innovations, which can be ranked by the degree of change their
adoption requires, from incremental to synthetic to radical (Baker, 2012). Incremental tech-
nologies require the least amount of adjustment, and are comparable to upgrading software
or equipment that is already in use. Innovations that provoke so-called synthetic change are
those where existing technologies are combined in a new way to create innovative applica-
tions and use cases. Radical or disruptive technologies lead to major changes in processes
and technologies that demand quick and decisive adoption decisions in order to maintain
competitiveness. Those kinds of innovations can be competence-enhancing or destroying,
meaning that they either build on existing expertise to augment and improve processes, or
that their adoption renders existing expertise and technologies obsolete. Intuitively, organi-
sations tend to adopt incremental and synthetic technologies more easily and frequently than
disruptive ones.
This technological readiness is especially important for AI, since digital technologies are
hierarchical, meaning the use of AI systems requires other ‘lower’ technologies such as data
storage and computing power (Zolas et al, 2020). Without a way to collect, store, move and
transform data, companies cannot begin to learn from their data or use it to support intelli-
gent decision making (Figure 3). The importance of technological readiness is also reflected
in the split of AI adoption by type of application (Figure 1), which shows that firms are more
likely to build AI on top of existing data-driven applications than to invest in completely new
applications. Besides compatibility with existing systems, firms base adoption decisions on a
technology’s relative advantage over technology they already have, and the visibility of these
improvements (Lundblad, 2003). A high degree of triability, ie the ability to experiment with
an innovation before commitment, reduces uncertainty and facilitates adoption. Finally,
simple technologies are adopted more easily, as complex technologies require more organi-
sational adjustments (Lundblad, 2003).
Figure 3: The hierarchical nature of digital technologies
Source: Bruegel based on Monica Rogati, ‘The AI hierarchy of needs’, Hackernoon, 12 June 2017, available at https://hackernoon.com/the-ai-hierarchy-of-needs-18f111fcc007.
A I
I nf e r e nc e , e x p e r im e nt s
A v e r a ge s, t o t a ls, t r e nd s, se gm e nt s
M issing v a lue s & o ut lie r s, st a nd a r d iz ing & no r m a liz ing
R e lia b le d a t a ﬂo w a nd st o r a ge
D a t a f r o m int e r na l o r e x t e r na l so ur c e s
Technology needed People needed
D ecide or predict B i g d a ta i n fra s truc ture M L e n g i n e e r
Analyse S ta ti s ti c a l s o ftw a re Da ta s c i e n ti s t ,
s ta ti s ti c i a n
Aggregate B us i n e s s i n te l l i g e n c e
s o ftw a re , d a s h b o a rd s Da ta a n a l ys t
Prepare Da ta m a n a g e m e n t
s o ftw a re Da ta e n g i n e e r
Store S e r v e rs , n e tw o rk ,
d a ta b a s e s
N e tw o rk/ c l o ud
e n g i n e e r
Collect S e n s o rs , w e b l o g g i n g ,
A PI s
Da ta i n fra s truc ture
e n g i n e e r

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
Organisational characteristics that affect technology adoption relate to leadership, struc-
ture and networks (Lundblad, 2003). Positive attitudes towards change among management
facilitate adoption. Similarly, decentralised power structures and lower levels of formality
stimulate innovation, as do high levels of knowledge and staff expertise. Some organisational
slack (excess capacity) is also helpful (Baker, 2012). Finally, closely-knit (in)formal networks,
both intra- and inter-firm, are associated with faster technology adoption. The effect of firm
size on technology adoption is ambiguous. In theory, firm size serves as a proxy for resource
endowment (financial, but more importantly, skilled labour) and risk-taking capacity, both of
which are conducive to technology adoption (Baker, 2012). Empirical evidence on e-business
adoption, however, shows mixed results, fuelling the argument that the hierarchy, bureau-
cracy and structural inertia associated with large corporations may also slow effective tech-
nology adoption (Oliveira and Martins, 2010; Zhu et al, 2006b) see section 3.2 for more detail
on AI adoption by European SMEs).
The environmental context describes the setting in which a firm conducts its business, and
includes the market structure, external factor endowment and policy environment (Baker,
2012). Competition incentivises technology adoption, as does the adoption of an innova-
tion by trading partners, by raising the benefits of adoption (Bloom et al, 2016; Oliveira and
Martins, 2011). Similarly, innovation happens at a faster rate in growing industries. External
environmental constraints on technology adoption are the availability of skilled labour and
suppliers of technology, as well as access to financing. Government policy, such as regulation
or tax incentives, can be a promoter or inhibitor of innovation. Finally, social and cultural
determinants, including consumer preferences and competitive trends, exert pressures
on organisations (Oliveira and Martins, 2011). As a result, firms in the same sector tend to
become more similar as organisations mimic the industry leader (DiMaggio and Powell,
1983).
4.2 The significance of firm size: adoption of AI by European SMEs
The theory outlined in section 3.1 predicts two opposing forces that grow with firm size: that
increasing resource endowment and risk-taking capacity facilitate adoption by large firms,
while bureaucracy and the structural inertia of large firms slow down adoption. Looking at
both data sources (European Commission, 2020, and Eurostat, 2021), it seems that the first
effect largely dominates.
European Commission (2020) shows a positive correlation between firm size and AI adop-
tion, with the adoption rate increasing by 2 percentage points on average with each jump in
firm-size category. However, the correlation is only significant for the largest two categories of
firms: the rate of adoption by large firms (more than 250 employeesoyees) is 5.7 percentage
points higher than by micro firms (fewer than 5 employeesoyees), and the rate of adoption by
medium-sized firms (49-250 employeesoyees) is 2.3 percentage points higher than by micro
firms, while there is no statistical difference between the rate of adoption by micro firms and
small firms (5-9 employeesoyees).
In terms of the diffusion by type of AI application (Table 3), large corporations lead the
way across all types of AI, and medium sized firms follow steadily, yet we see two different
patterns emerging among micro firms and small firms. While six out of 10 technologies still
show a steady increase in adoption with firm size among micro and small firms, the other four
technologies show a U-shaped trend, with micro firms actually adopting at a faster rate than
small firms6.
6 Since we do not have data on the variation within these groups (by type of AI and firm size), we cannot calculate
whether the differences at this level of aggregation are statistically significant.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
The Eurostat data also shows a clear increasing trend of AI adoption across firm size, with
large firms adopting at a rate that is three to five times faster than small firms, which is an
even more rapid increase than shown in European Commission (2020). Since Eurostat
excludes micro enterprises (<10 employeesoyees), we cannot detect any non-linearities at the
lower end of the size distribution.
Overall, based on the two data sources, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the two
opposing forces stemming from firm size result in non-linearities in adoption across firm size.
However, it does seem that the endowment effect largely dominates over the inertia effect,
leading medium-sized and large firms to adopt AI more rapidly than small firms.
4.3 Lessons from previous and foreign innovation waves
The last big innovation comparable to today’s AI was the adoption by firms of digitisation and
e-business operations in the early 2000s. Empirical findings on adoption drivers and barri-
ers for European firms back then may help inform policymakers today and help to facilitate
AI take-up. For example, organisations with skilled staff and good IT infrastructure adopted
e-business operations faster than others (Oliveira and Martins, 2010). Importantly, a major
concern guiding e-business adoption was security, in particular in relation to data privacy
and online fraud, paired with uncertainty about the legal framework (Zhu et al, 2006a, 2006b).
In early stages of diffusion, the lack of e-business adoption by trading partners strongly held
back firms’ own e-business use. Limited consumer willingness to engage in online activities
constrained expected returns and therefore had similar effects (Zhu et al, 2003).
 Comparable constraints likely hinder AI adoption in the EU today, since AI serves as
both an internal operational and an external customer-facing technology. While empirical
evidence on drivers and barriers to AI adoption in Europe is still scarce, we can learn from
experiences studied in other regions.
T able 4: Adoption of AI applications by firm size and type of AI, Eurostat data
All firms Small 10-49
employees
Medium 50-249
employees
Large >250
employees
Analyse big data internally using ML 2% 2% 4% 11%
Analyse big data internally using NLP 1% 1% 2% 5%
Chatbot or a virtual agent replies to customers 2% 2% 3% 6%
Service robots 2% 2% 4% 11%
Source: Bruegel based on Eurostat (2021). Note: see table 3.
T able 3: Adoption of AI applications by firm size and type of AI, European Commission data
All firms Micro 5-9
employees
Small 10-49
employees
Medium 50-249
employees
Large >250
employees
Fraud and risk 13% 13% 11% 15% 21%
Equipment optimisation 13% 12% 11% 15% 17%
Process automation (RPA) 12% 10% 11% 14% 21%
Forecasting (non-stats) 10% 9% 10% 13% 15%
NLP (speech) 10% 9% 8% 12% 16%
Recommendation engine 9% 9% 8% 10% 12%
Robots 9% 7% 8% 11% 15%
Computer vision 9% 8% 8% 9% 12%
Art and design 7% 7% 7% 7% 10%
Sentiment analysis 3% 2% 2% 3% 4%
Source: Bruegel based on European Commission (2020). Note: The table shows the percentage of firms in each size category that report they are currently using an AI application of a
specific type. The colours reflect the intensity of adoption: green means high adoption, red means low adoption, the colours show a pattern of clusters (see text above).

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
A study on smart manufacturing technology adoption by Iranian and Malaysian SMEs
showed that, given the extensive changes in workflows, operational processes and structures
required for its implementation, compatibility of the system with organisational goals and
strategies was a crucial determinant of adoption. The availability of a strategic roadmap was
described as “one of the most significant discriminators between adopters and non-adopters”
(Ghobakhloo and Ching, 2019: 12). The study also found that external pressure from the
government, customers or suppliers positively affected smart-tech adoption decisions. While
competitive pressure did not impact the adopt-or-not decision, it did affect the level of invest-
ment for those that did adopt.
Big data analysis adoption by Chinese logistics and supply-chain firms was found to be
primarily driven by the technology’s economic (cost-saving or risk-minimising) benefits and
top management support (Lai et al, 2018). High-level management involvement ensured
that sufficient financial and administrative resources were devoted to developing analytics
capabilities (in terms of personnel and infrastructure). This effect of management support
increases with big data analysis adoption by suppliers and competitors, and with supportive
government policy. This is likely because strategic management is sensitive to regulatory
changes and shifts in market structure.
5 Barriers to AI adoption
5.1 Reported barriers to AI adoption in the EU
The empirical evidence we have outlined substantiates the theoretical importance of the
external and internal drivers and barriers to firms’ technology adoption decisions. European
Commission (2020) asked firms which factors they consider as major and minor obstacles
to AI adoption. While the low response rate to this survey seriously biases its estimates on
adoption, this doesn’t reduce the relevance of the reported barriers. Given that the survey was
more likely to be answered by firms that recently adopted AI or are considering AI adoption,
these firms probably have a good understanding of the barriers they currently or have recent-
ly faced.
Skills and financial constraints are the leading reported barriers across adopters and
non-adopters (adding up major and minor barriers), with about 80 percent of respondents
citing a lack of skills in their internal workforce and in the external labour market, as well
as the high cost of buying the technology and adapting their operational processes around
AI – which includes getting workers on board (Hoffmann and Nurski, 2021). Relating to the
previous state of digitisation, companies perceive their lack of (compatible) IT infrastructure
as a greater barrier than their lack of data (Figure 4). However, without the proper IT infra-
structure, firms cannot start collecting and storing the data which the basis for adopting AI
(Figure 3).
There are significant differences between AI-adopters and non-adopters in their current
endowments of IT and labour resources, confirming the importance of the previous state of
digitisation: non-AI adopters report a higher degree of insufficient IT resources (74 percent vs
68 percent), lack of internal data (58 percent vs 52 percent) and lack of skills among existing
staff (81 percent vs 76 percent). This lagging digitisation is reflected in other data sources as
well: despite being relatively established systems, only 33 percent of European companies use
customer relationship management (CRM) systems, and 36 percent use enterprise resource
planning (ERP) software7. And, while 36 percent of enterprises invest in cloud computing
services, only 12 percent of firms perform any kind of big data analysis8. Despite being a top
7 Eurostat, isoc_ci_eu_en2 and isoc_eb_iip.
8 Eurostat, isoc_cicce_use and isoc_eb_bd.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
priority of the European Commission, an analysis of spending on the digital transformation in
the EU recovery programme has concluded that investment in business digitalisation still falls
far short of meeting existing funding gaps (Darvas et al, 2021).
Finally, non-adopters differ significantly from adopters in their perception of legal and
regulatory uncertainty as a barrier to adoption. Non-adopters are more concerned about
the liability risk for damage caused by AI (63 percent vs 55 percent) and the reputational risk
linked to using AI (47 percent vs 43 percent), supporting the claim that reducing uncertainty
is a crucial element in pushing adoption from the early adopters to the early majority, and to
achieve critical mass (Rogers, 1983) (Figure 4).
Figure 4: Non-adopters are held back most by internal barriers
Source: Bruegel based on European Commission (2020), adding up ‘major’ and ‘minor’ obstacles reported by firms in the survey.
Given the slower rate of adoption by European SMEs, differences in reported barriers can
be analysed by firm size. A first observation is that most differences can be found between
large enterprises (more than 250 employeesoyees) and SMEs (fewer than 250), while there is
not much difference in the barriers reported by micro, small and medium-sized firms.
SMEs report approximately the same skill barriers as large enterprises, although large
firms perceive a slightly greater lack of skills in the external labour market, while SMEs
perceive a slightly greater lack of skills in their internal workforces. The same pattern can be
observed among the data barriers: large firms worry mostly about lack of access to external
data, while SMEs report a lack of internal data. Both patterns in the skill and data barriers
point to the lagging internal digitisation of European SMEs. Finally, in terms of financial
constraints, the lack of public or external funding is a higher barrier for SMEs, pointing to the
lower resource endowment and more binding credit constraints SMEs face.
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
0 % 1 0 % 2 0 % 3 0 % 4 0 % 5 0 % 6 0 % 7 0 % 8 0 % 9 0 %
SKILLS
Di ﬃ c ul ty h i r i n g n e w s t a ﬀ w i th th e r i g h t s k i l l s
L a c k o f s k i l l s a m o n g e x i s ti n g s ta ﬀ
C o m p l e x a l g o r i th m s a r e d i ﬃ c ul t to u n d e r s ta n d a n d tr us t
FINANCIAL
T h e c o s t o f a d o p ti o n
T h e c o s t o f a d a p ti n g o p e r a ti o n a l p r o c e s s e s
L a c k o f p u b l i c o r e x te r n a l f un d i n g
DATA & INFRASTRUCTURE
I n s uﬃ c i e n t o r i n c o m p a ti b l e I T i n f r a s tr uc tur e
S tr i c t s ta n d a r d s f o r d a ta e x c h a n g e
L a c k o f i n te r n a l d a ta
L a c k o f a c c e s s to p r i v a te d a ta
L a c k o f a c c e s s to p ub l i c d a ta
UNCERTAINTY
L i a b i l i ty f o r d a m a g e c a us e d b y A I
T h e n e e d f o r n e w l a w s o r r e g ul a ti o n
L a c k o f tr us t a m o n g s t c i ti z e n s
R e p uta ti o n a l r i s k s l i n k e d to us i n g A I
Pe r c e n ta g e o f ﬁr m s th a t r e p o r t a s b a r r i e r
N o n - a d o p te r s
A d o p te r s
* S ig n iﬁc an t
d iﬀ er en c es in
r ep or ted b ar r ier s
b etw een :

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
Figure 5: SMEs report higher internal barriers, while large enterprises report higher
external barriers in terms of skills and data
Source: Bruegel based on European Commission (2020).
5.2 Comparing the EU to the US and China
The potential of AI to boost productivity is today internationally recognised. It implies a
competitive advantage for those businesses that manage to leverage AI’s potential at scale
early on. Aside from the EU, many economies have published national AI strategies and
plans to foster AI advancement, in particular the US and China (Zhang et al, 2021). Given this
international attention, we aim to understand how the EU is doing in comparison with other
economies in terms of AI adoption, and in particular whether the barriers we describe are
universal, or whether they are holding back EU companies in particular.
Regional differences in AI adoption
As we have noted, the measurement of AI adoption is highly dependent on the definition and
taxonomy used. There is no common international metric that allows the exact measurement
and comparison of AI adoption rates in different countries. Based on a small-sample interna-
tional survey of about 2700 executives, Boston Consulting Group provided an estimate of AI
diffusion in the private sectors of France, Germany, the US and China, among other countries
(Figure 6) (Duranton et al, 2018). AI adoption appears to be significantly more advanced in
China than Western economies, while the gap between the US and EU countries appears
relatively small. Importantly, the speed of diffusion seems faster in China, with the majority of
firms already piloting AI functions, which implies a widening of the gap in the future.
0 % 1 0 % 2 0 % 3 0 % 4 0 % 5 0 % 6 0 % 7 0 % 8 0 % 9 0 %
R e p uta ti o n a l r i s k s l i n k e d to us i n g A I
L i a b i l i ty f o r d a m a g e c a us e d b y A I
UNCERTAINTY
L a c k o f i n te r n a l d a ta
L a c k o f e x te r n a l d a ta
DATA & INFRASTRUCTURE
L a c k o f e x te r n a l f un d i n g
T h e c o s t o f a d o p ti o n
FINANCIAL
L a c k o f i n te r n a l s k i l l s
Di ﬃ c ul ty h i r i n g e x te r n a l s k i l l s
SKILLS
S M E , m a j o r c h a l l e n g e S M E , m i n o r c h a l l e n g eLarge companies, m a j o r c h a l l e n g e Large companies, m i n o r c h a l l e n g e

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
Figure 6: Estimated AI adoption rates, 2018
Source: Bruegel based on Duranton et al (2018).
While we believe the exact level of the estimates should not be taken at face value, the
adoption rates in Duranton et al (2018) nonetheless provide some valuable insights. First,
their numbers confirm that the ‘race’ for leadership in AI has several aspects. AI adoption
is important, but is quite distinct from AI research and development, in which the US is still
widely considered to be in a leading position (Brattberg et al, 2020; Bughin et al, 2019; Zhang
et al, 2021). Second, the estimates corroborate the findings of a growing number of reports
that the EU is beginning to fall behind in the international competition for AI leadership.
Regional differences in barriers
To investigate how Europe-specific the barriers to adoption identified by European firms are,
we compare key indicators for the EU, US and China that relate to the availability of skills,
data, funding and regulation. Since different types of skills, data and funding are required to
advance in AI research, development and adoption, a label indicates which step is primarily
affected by the indicator we present. To enhance readability and comparability, the data is
indexed to 100 for the highest value among the three economies.
On skills availability, the EU appears well-equipped for frontier AI research, thanks to
an extensive talent pool of academic researchers (Figure 7). However, the relative interna-
tional impact of EU-based AI studies appears to be declining, surpassed by China, which has
doubled its share of global citations since 2013 (Zhang et al, 2021). Crucially, the EU appears
unable to leverage this expertise for AI adoption by the private sector. The indicator for skill
intensity in business is based on the average number of AI researchers employeesoyed in
the economy’s top AI firms, which in the US is almost twice as high as in the EU (Castro et al,
2019)9. Given the low AI adoption rate among US firms (Figure 6) it may well be, however, that
AI research skills in the US private sector are highly concentrated in a few industry leaders, a
hypothesis for which Wang et al (2021) recently found evidence.
In addition, firms’ adoption of AI technology likely depends on being able to recruit capa-
ble computer scientists, programmers and data engineers, who can tailor existing algorithmic
and deep-learning software to practical operational needs. A proxy for the availability of such
skills in the labour market is the number of computer science degrees awarded per million
inhabitants (Figure 7, column 4). Although the data is slightly dated, it indicates that EU
enterprises may find the recruitment of the right skills much more difficult than their US and,
in particular, Chinese counterparts.
9 The Chinese estimate is based on only one firm that fulfilled the criteria for top AI firm in 2017, Huawei, which is
why their estimate may not be too comparable.
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
G e r m a n y F r a n c e U S C h i n a
% o f ﬁr m s th a t a d o p te d A I
% of ﬁr m s p i l o ti n g A I

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
15
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
Figure 7: Skill constraints on AI advancement
Source: Bruegel based on Anderson et al (2020), Castro et al (2019) and Zhang et al (2021).
Second, EU companies lack funding compared to their Chinese and American counter-
parts, which affects both AI development and adoption (Figure 8). Importantly, the gap with
the US and China in this respect is considerably larger than for the other indicators. Private
investment in AI in the EU represents less than 25 percent of that in China and less than 10
percent than that in the US, a pattern mirrored in venture capital for AI startups.
Figure 8: Financing constraints on AI advancement
Source: Bruegel based on OECD.AI (2021) and Zhang et al (2021).
A third aspect to consider is data availability. In the European Commission (2020) survey,
EU firms identified a lack of internal data and insufficient access to public and private datasets
as barriers to AI adoption. Data limitations prevent us from comparing business data availability
or public records accessibility. Instead, Figure 9 compares the generated amounts of big data
stemming from internet of things devices and other productivity data. Machine-generated data
and technical, operational business data can be used to train ML algorithms for example in man-
ufacturing or retail. Figure 9 shows that data generation in the EU appears to be trailing behind
the US and China, which we believe could be driven by the low levels of digitisation in business,
administration and even infrastructure in the EU. Importantly, looking at data generation alone
does not take into account the accessibility of these datasets.
The EU has made efforts to improve the availability of such data across member-state borders.
Its directive on open data and the re-use of public sector information in 2019 (Directive (EU)
2019/1024) addressed in particular the availability of public (anonymised) data sources, also
known as ‘open data’ initiatives. With respect to non-personal information like machine-gener-
ated data, the Commission has taken action to improve cross-country accessibility via a frame-
work for the free-flow of non-personal data in the EU (Regulation (EU) 2018/1807). It remains to
be seen how effective these initiatives will be in making high-quality data available.
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
S h a r e o f g l o b a l
c o n f e r e n c e / j o ur n a l
c i ta ti o n s , 2 0 2 0
N u m b e r o f A I r e s e a r c h e r s
( p e r m i l l i o n i n h a b i ta n ts ) ,
2 0 1 7
A I s k i l l ' i n te n s i ty ' i n
b u s i n e s s , 2 0 1 7
A w a r d e d c o m p ute r
s c i e n c e Ph D a n d m a s te r ' s
d e g r e e s ( p e r m i l l i o n
i n h a b i ta n ts ) , 2 0 1 4 / 1 5
Research Research De velopm ent Adoption
E U
U S A
C h i n a
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
Pr i v a te i n v e s tm e n t i n A I ( $ millions) Ve n tu r e c a p i ta l i n v e s tm e n ts i n A I s ta r tup s ( $ millions)
De velopm ent and adoption De velopm ent
E U
U S A
C h i n a

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
Figure 9: Data constraints on AI advancement
Source: Bruegel based on Castro et al (2019).
Finally, none of the three economies has so far put in place comprehensive regulations
on AI, even though proposals are advancing in each of the jurisdictions. As such, regulatory
uncertainty with respect to the use of AI applications, for example in terms of liability for
damages caused by AI, is likely similar across all three regions. The degree of clarity and speci-
ficity of the emerging legislative environment will play a major role in reducing this uncer-
tainty in the private sector and stimulating AI adoption.
Importantly, emerging AI policies build on existing data protection laws. In comparison to
the EU’s established GDPR, such regulation is nascent in China10, and fragmented in the US11.
Despite criticism that strict data privacy laws such as the GDPR stifle AI advancement, this
link is not established and the overall impact on AI adoption is likely ambiguous. Regulation
might raise barriers by aggravating compliance and bureaucratic loads. However, it provides
regulatory certainty which is important for innovation. The GDPR is widely seen as successful
in establishing global data privacy norms in the digital world (Brattberg et al, 2020). Through
its principles of accountability and transparency, the GDPR will likely play an important role
in building citizens’ trust and acceptance of future AI technology and may even be seen as
a strong foundation on which to build future AI regulation, which puts the EU in a leading
position compared to the US and China (Brattberg et al, 2020; MacCarthy, 2020).
In conclusion, comparing international differences, it appears that lack of financing is
the most crucial barrier, followed by the limited transfer of academic AI talent into practical
AI and data skills in private businesses. In terms of data availability, policymakers can focus
on opening up public (anonymised) data and stimulating the collection of non-personal
business data by private businesses. Alleviating these most pressing constraints in terms of
skills, financing and data could go a long way to promote AI advancement in Europe, without
weakening the EU’s first-rate privacy protection.
10 See Scott Pink, ‘What China’s New Data Privacy Law Means for US Tech Firms’ , TechCrunch, 10 September 2021,
https://social.techcrunch.com/2021/09/09/what-chinas-new-data-privacy-law-means-for-us-tech-firms/, and Eva
Xiao, ‘China Passes One of the World’s Strictest Data-Privacy Laws’ , Wall Street Journal, 20 August 2021, https://
www.wsj.com/articles/china-passes-one-of-the-worlds-strictest-data-privacy-laws-11629429138.
11 See Thorin Klosowski, ‘The State of Consumer Data Privacy Laws in the US (And Why It Matters)’ , NYT Wirecutter, 6
September 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/wirecutter/blog/state-of-privacy-laws-in-us.
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
Amount of big data analytics
(productivity) data generated
(Terabytes, millions), 2018
Amount of internet of things
data generated (Terabytes,
millions), 2018
Research and De velopm ent Research and De velopm ent
E U
U S A
C h i n a

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
17
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
6 Policy recommendations for supporting AI
adoption in Europe
In order to accelerate the roll-out of AI technology across the EU, policymakers should take
action to alleviate constraints to adoption faced by firms, both in the environmental context –
skills, financing and regulatory uncertainty – and in the technological context – data availabil-
ity, basic digitisation of businesses and technological uncertainty.
In terms of the environmental context, the recruitment of skilled staff and upgrading
the skills of existing staff is considered a major obstacle by the majority of firms. Interna-
tional comparisons confirm that despite the EU’s large number of academic AI researchers,
it doesn’t deliver the same amount of skilled labour to private firms, resulting in a lack of
skilled data scientists that can put AI to practical commercial use. This suggests that the
labour market is a binding constraint on AI adoption and a crucial policy field for the EU and
member states. Improving opportunities for adult learning (both for the employeesoyed and
the unemployeesoyed) and making data skills part of more educational curriculums are the
first steps to take.
Lack of financing is a second major barrier to AI adoption as both the acquisition of
the technology and the adaptation of operational processes around AI are costly. SMEs in
particular find the lack of external or public funding troublesome. International comparisons
often focus on the EU’s huge lack of venture capital investments in AI, which is crucial for AI
development. But to stimulate adoption of AI among regular non-tech firms and SMEs, gov-
ernments might better look towards tax deductions or subsidies that support the acquisition
of AI technology and its related services.
Legal and regulatory uncertainty, including around the liability for damages caused by AI,
is a third obstacle that policymakers should address. Firms can only begin to assess poten-
tial risks and returns on investment in AI technology in a stable and predictable regulatory
environment. Despite having a clear regulatory foundation in terms of data privacy, the lack
of legal certainty in the EU with respect to the use of AI delays the absorption of existing tech-
nologies in the private sector. Policymakers therefore need to draw up a clear, future-proof
regulatory framework for the use of AI in business.
In terms of the technological context, given that algorithms need data and computing
power, Europe’s lagging digital transformation is a serious barrier to AI adoption. While
access to external (private and public) data is necessary for AI research and development,
internal data is more crucial for AI adoption by non-R&D-firms. SMEs especially are running
behind in basic digitisation of internal processes, leading to a lack of internal data on which
AI algorithms can be fine-tuned to their specific businesses. Governments should therefore
first promote the digitisation of business (including the collection of business data) and sup-
port the investments needed to improve technological readiness necessary for AI adoption.
Reducing the technological uncertainty surrounding the economic returns to AI by
increasing its triability also accelerates its adoption. This may be a way to accelerate the
uptake of pilot programmes by European firms, and narrow the increasing adoption gap with
China. Governments can play a role in this by facilitating the provision of AI ‘sandboxes’12 so
companies and public administration can experiment with different use cases and share their
experiences.
Finally, measure what you treasure. Policymakers can only know where to intervene if
they know the state of AI adoption in Europe. Tracking AI adoption requires its own metrics
to measure success and barriers, which are different from metrics for R&D in AI. We therefore
recommend that the EU develops standard definitions of AI, its subcategories and the notion
of ‘adoption’ , to be used across all its surveys and targets.
12 See eg Sanbox Vlaanderen: https://www.civtechalliance.org/sandbox-vlaanderen.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
References
Alderucci, D., L. Branstetter, E. Hovy, A. Runge and N. Zolas (2020) ‘Quantifying the Impact of AI on
Productivity and Labor Demand: Evidence from U.S. Census Microdata’ , mimeo, Allied Social Science
Associations – ASSA 2020 Annual Meeting
Anderson, J., P . Viry and G.B. Wolff (2020) ‘Europe has an artificial-intelligence skills shortage’ , Bruegel
Blog, 27 August
Baker, J. (2012) ‘The Technology–Organization–Environment Framework’ , in Y.K. Dwivedi, M.R. Wade and
S.L. Schneberger (eds) Information Systems Theory: Explaining and Predicting Our Digital Society, Vol.
1, New York, NY: Springer
Bloom, N., M. Draca and J. Van Reenen (2016) ‘Trade Induced Technical Change? The Impact of Chinese
Imports on Innovation, IT and Productivity’ , The Review of Economic Studies 83(1): 87–117
Brattberg, E., R. Csernatoni and V . Rugova (2020) ‘Europe and AI: Leading, Lagging Behind, or Carving Its
Own Way?’ Working Paper, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
Bughin, J., J. Seong, J. Manyika, L. Hämäläinen, E. Windhagen and E. Hazan (2019) ‘Notes from the AI
Frontier: Tackling Europe’s Gap in Digital and AI’ , Discussion Paper, February, McKinsey Global
Institute
Castro, D., M. McLaughlin and E. Chivot (2019) Who Is Winning the AI Race: China, the EU or the United
States? Center for Data Innovation, available at https://datainnovation.org/2019/08/who-is-winning-
the-ai-race-china-the-eu-or-the-united-states
Damioli, G., V . Van Roy and D. Vertesy (2021) ‘The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Labor Productivity’ ,
Eurasian Business Review 11(1): 1–25
Darvas, Z., J.S. Marcus and A. Tzaras (2021) ‘Will European Union Recovery Spending Be Enough to Fill
Digital Investment Gaps?’ Bruegel Blog, 20 July
DiMaggio, P .J. and W.W. Powell (1983) ‘The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism and Collective
Rationality in Organizational Fields’ , American Sociological Review 48(2): 147–60
Duranton, S., J. Erlenbach and M. Pauly (2018) Mind the (AI) gap, Boston Consulting Group, available at
https://www.bcg.com/mind-the-ai-gap-leadership-makes-the-difference
European Commission (2020) European Enterprise Survey on the Use of Technologies Based on Artificial
Intelligence: Final Report, Study prepared for the Directorate-General for Communications Networks,
Content and Technology by iCite and IPSOS, available at https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2759/759368
European Commission (2021) ‘2030 Digital Compass: The European Way for the Digital
Decade’ , COM(2021) 118, available at https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/
TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52021DC0118
Eurostat (2021) ‘ Artificial Intelligence in EU Enterprises’ , Eurostat Products News, 13 April, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-eurostat-news/-/ddn-20210413-1
Ghobakhloo, M. and N. T . Ching (2019) ‘ Adoption of Digital Technologies of Smart Manufacturing in
SMEs’ , Journal of Industrial Information Integration 16: 100107
Hoffmann, M. and M. Mariniello (2021) ‘Biometric technologies at work: a proposed use-based
taxonomy’ , Policy Contribution 23/2021, Bruegel
Hoffmann, M. and L. Nurski (2021) ‘Workers Can Unlock the Artificial Intelligence Revolution’ , Bruegel
Blog, 30 June
Lai, Y., H. Sun and J. Ren (2018) ‘Understanding the Determinants of Big Data Analytics (BDA) Adoption
in Logistics and Supply Chain Management: An Empirical Investigation’ , The International Journal of
Logistics Management 29(2): 676–703

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
19
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚24/21 | November 2021
Linck, A. (2021) ‘Data Governance Act: What’s in it for AI-Developing SMEs?’ European DIGITAL SME
Alliance, 15 February, available at https://www.digitalsme.eu/blog/2021/02/15/data-governance-act-
whats-in-it-for-ai-developing-smes
Lundblad, J.P . (2003) ‘ A Review and Critique of Rogers’ Diffusion of Innovation Theory as It Applies to
Organizations’ , Organization Development Journal 21(4): 50
MacCarthy, M. (2020) ‘ AI Needs More Regulation, Not Less’ , Brookings, 9 March, available at https://www.
brookings.edu/research/ai-needs-more-regulation-not-less
OECD.AI (2021) ‘VC Investments in AI by Country’ , Policy Observatory Live Data, available at https://
oecd.ai/en/data-from-partners (accessed 26 October 2021)
Oliveira, T . and M.F . Martins (2010) ‘Understanding E‐business Adoption across Industries in European
Countries’ , Industrial Management & Data Systems 110(9): 1337–54
Oliveira, T . and M.F . Martins (2011) ‘Literature Review of Information Technology Adoption Models at
Firm Level’ , Electronic Journal of Information Systems Evaluation 14(1): 110-121
Prpic, M. (2014) ‘The Open Method of Coordination’ , At a Glance, European Parliamentary Research
Service, available at https://www.europarl.europa.eu/EPRS/EPRS-AaG-542142-Open-Method-of-
Coordination-FINAL.pdf
Rogers, E.M. (1983) Diffusion of Innovations, Third Edition, New York: The Free Press, Macmillan
Publishing
Tornatzky, L.G., M. Fleischer and A.K. Chakrabarti (1990) Processes of Technological Innovation,
Lexington Books
Tricot, R. (2021) ‘Venture capital investments in artificial intelligence: Analysing trends in VC in AI
companies from 2012 through 2020’ , OECD Digital Economy Papers No. 319
Wang, J., G. Petropoulos, and S. Steffen (2021) ‘Concentration of Artificial Intelligence and Other Frontier
IT Skills’ , Bruegel Blog, 21 October
Zhang, D., S. Mishra, E. Brynjolfsson, J. Ethcemendy, D. Ganguli, B. Grosz … R. Perrault (2021) The AI
Index 2021 Annual Report, AI Index Steering Committee, Human-centered AI Institute, Stanford
University, available at https://hai.stanford.edu/research/ai-index-2021
Zhu, K., S. Dong, S.X. Xu and K.L. Kraemer (2006a) ‘Innovation Diffusion in Global Contexts:
Determinants of Post-Adoption Digital Transformation of European Companies’ , European Journal of
Information Systems 15(6): 601–16
Zhu, K., K.L. Kraemer and S. Xu (2006b) ‘The Process of Innovation Assimilation by Firms in Different
Countries: A Technology Diffusion Perspective on E-Business’ , Management Science 52(10): 1557–76
Zhu, K., K. Kraemer and S. Xu (2003) ‘Electronic Business Adoption by European Firms: A Cross-Country
Assessment of the Facilitators and Inhibitors’ , European Journal of Information Systems 12(4): 251–68
Zolas, N., Z. Kroff, E. Brynjolfsson, K. McElheran, D. Beede, C. Buffington … E. Dinlersoz (2020)
‘ Advanced Technologies Adoption and Use by U.S. Firms: Evidence from the Annual Business Survey’ ,
NBER Working Paper No. 28290, National Bureau of Economic Research
