
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Mia Hoffmann (mia.
hoffmann@bruegel.org)
is a Research Assistant at
Bruegel
Mario Mariniello
(mario.mariniello@bruegel.
org) is a Senior Fellow at
Bruegel
This Policy Contribution
was produced within the
project ‘Future of Work and
Inclusive Growth in Europe’ ,
with the financial support
of the Mastercard Center for
Inclusive Growth
Executive summary
Biometric technologies have in principle the potential to significantly improve worker
productivity, security and safety. However, they are also a source of new risks, including
exposure to potential personal data abuse or the psychological distress caused by permanent
monitoring. The European Union lacks a coherent regulatory framework on the mitigation of
risks arising from the use of biometric technologies in the workplace.
We propose a taxonomy to underpin the use of artificial intelligence-powered biometric
technologies in the workplace. Technologies can be classified into four broad categories
based on their main function: (1) security, (2) recruitment, (3) monitoring, (4) safety and
well-being. We identify the benefits and risks linked to each category.
To be more effective, EU regulation of artificial intelligence (AI) in the workplace should
integrate more detail on technology use. It should also address the current scarcity of granular
data by sourcing information from users of AI technologies, not only providers.
There is an untapped potential for technology to address workplace health hazards.
Policymakers should design incentive mechanisms to encourage adoption of the technologies
with the greatest potential to benefit workers.
Artificial intelligence users, in particular bigger companies, should be required to assess
the effect of AI adoption on work processes, with the active participation of their workforces.
Recommended citation
Hoffmann, M. and M. Mariniello (2021) ‘Biometric technologies at work: a proposed use-
based taxonomy’ , Policy Contribution 23/2021, Bruegel
Policy Contribution
Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021 Biometric technologies at
work: a proposed use-based
taxonomy
Mia Hoffmann, Mario Mariniello

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
1 Introduction
Traditionally, the analysis of the impact of technology on labour markets has focused on
measurement of the quantitative effects on aggregate employment. Researchers often ask
whether technology will create more jobs than it will destroy, or which jobs are more exposed
to the risk of disappearing because machines will replace humans. But a parallel question is
becoming increasingly pressing. Technology may not have a significant negative impact on
the quantity of jobs available to humans, but it certainly transforms them, changing how jobs
are performed, with implications for workers’ quality of life and for productivity. Hence the
focus shifts from a quantitative to a qualitative perspective.
Addressing this has become even more pressing in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic,
which has pushed companies to increase their adoption of digital technologies, with vary-
ing impacts on the wellbeing of workers (for example, during the pandemic investment by
employers in monitoring and surveillance software has increased significantly; see Kropp,
2021; Mascellino, 2020). Meanwhile, the disruptive potential of the pandemic has provided
employers with an opportunity to introduce new work processes and redesign workplaces
to address long-standing issues, such as workplace health hazards, that technology can help
deal with.
We focus on artificial intelligence (AI)-powered biometric technology used in the work-
place. Biometrics refers to the automated recognition of a person based on their physical and
behavioural characteristics (Sabhanayagam et al, 2018; Sundararajan and Woodard, 2018).
Identity recognition includes identification (‘Who are you?’) and verification (‘Are you really
who you say you are?’). But the use of AI-powered biometric technologies in the workplace
can go well beyond recognising identity. For the purposes of this Policy Contribution we
define biometric technologies as AI technologies that rely on biometric data to derive infer-
ences about the individual whose data is collected. Such inference can include individuals’
moods, their level of concentration, their health or personality. Even when the purpose of
such soft biometrics is not to identify individuals, their deployment still has far-reaching
implications for workers and workplaces, not least with respect to privacy (McStay, 2020).
The global biometrics market is growing fast. Estimates from 2019 expected global reve-
nues to almost double within the next four years, and reach $55.42 billion in 2027 (Figure 1).
This data includes the use of biometrics across all domains, including law enforcement and in
customer-centric applications.
Figure 1: Global biometric technology market revenue in $ billions, 2018-2027
Source: Bruegel based on Statista, https://www.statista.com/statistics/1048705/worldwide-biometrics-market-revenue. Note: Values from
2020 on are forecasts.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
Comprehensive data on the use of biometric technology in workplaces is scarce,
a problem that should be addressed by policymakers. Because the adoption of new
technologies in the workplace has significant potential to affect workers’ well-being, a first key
step is to improve the ability of public authorities to accurately monitor this phenomenon as
it unfolds. According to one survey (European Commission, 2020), 42 percent of enterprises
in the EU use at least one kind of AI technology, but information is lacking about whether
the AI technologies are applied to employees or customers, and no distinction is made
between biometric and non-biometric systems1. Analysis in European Commission (2020)
by individual technology shows that those that can be classified as biometric technologies
are among the less-utilised: natural-language processing (speech recognition, machine
translation or chatbots) has been adopted by only one in ten firms, while 9 percent of
enterprises use computer vision (visual diagnostics, face or image recognition), and the use
of sentiment analysis (analysis of emotion and behaviour) is even rarer, at 3 percent2. A few
sectors, including social work, education and real estate predominantly adopt AI systems
related to biometrics, but overall adoption levels are very low. Skill shortages, both in the
labour market and internally, represent major obstacles to the adoption of AI technologies
in general. However, for the adoption of sentiment analysis, reputational risks and lack of
citizen’s trust represent significant adoption barriers. These barriers are not considered very
problematic for other technologies.
The increasing interest of regulatory authority in these markets is therefore not coinciden-
tal. The European Union, for example, has been increasingly active in recent years in attempt-
ing to define a legal framework to mitigate the risks of abuse arising from advanced technol-
ogy. The general data protection regulation (GDPR), which entered into force in 2018, is the
bluntest example. In April 2021, the European Commission proposed harmonised rules on
artificial intelligence, commonly referred to as the ‘ AI Act’ proposal (European Commission,
2021a). The main goals of the proposed AI Act are to create the conditions for ethical AI and
the concrete enforcement of rules that mitigate AI risk, especially as experienced by the most
vulnerable. For the workplace, the proposed AI Act specifically lists as high-risk:
• “ AI systems intended to be used for recruitment or selection of natural persons, notably
for advertising vacancies, screening or filtering applications, evaluating candidates in the
course of interviews or tests;
• “ AI intended to be used for making decisions on promotion and termination of work-related
contractual relationships, for task allocation and for monitoring and evaluating perfor-
mance and behavior [sic] of persons in such relationships” (European Commission, 2021a).
The proposed AI Act, however, does not provide details about the identified sources of
risk when artificial intelligence is used in the workplace. Nor does it explain through which
mechanisms risk can arguably translate into harm for workers. However, such explanations
are needed to disentangle potentially harmful from potentially beneficial use of technology.
Furthermore, the proposed AI Act would impose a number of requirements for providers and
users of high-risk AI applications. These include risk management and assessment of poten-
tial current and future risks. However, no specific guidelines are given on how that assessment
should be done (for example, what should be considered a ‘foreseeable risk’ associated with
the use of biometric technology in the workplace?).
We aim to fill the gap in the proposed AI Act by classifying technologies and explaining
1 European Commission (2020) is a survey of firms that provides useful general insights but does not enable
conclusions to be drawn about specific use cases.
2 European Commission (2020), while aiming for representativeness, suffers from a low response rate of only 5
percent on average, which likely biases the adoption rate upwards. Therefore, the accuracy of the exact adoption
rates may be limited. We believe, nonetheless, that in the absence of more reliable estimates the relative scarcity of
biometric technologies compared to other technologies considered, is a realistic assessment.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
how technology in the workplace can harm workers. To our knowledge, this is the first
attempt to propose a taxonomy of biometric technologies used in the workplace3. Our
analysis furthermore suggests improvements that could be made to the AI Act draft text.
In particular, the text should include a bigger emphasis on the role played by users of AI
applications. As drafted by the European Commission, the proposed AI Act does not entail
sourcing data on high-risk applications directly from, for example, companies that adopt
them. However, lack of granular use data can significantly hamper regulators’ ability to
understand how harm to workers can unfold at plant level. Moreover, the AI Act is geared
to compelling providers of high-risk AI applications to improve their products. However, AI
applications may have significant redistributive effects when they are adopted, depending
on the environment in which they are used. Such risks may not be entirely foreseeable by AI
providers. It would thus be desirable that users should also engage in strategies that mitigate
potential risks. In particular, bigger companies could be required to assess the effects of
high-risk AI applications on their workforces, with workers actively participating in such
assessments.
2 Biometric technologies at work: a
proposed use-based taxonomy
Biometric technologies can be categorised into three groups:
• Physical;
• Physiological;
• Behavioural.
Physical biometrics refers to data on static and unique bodily characteristics. Examples
include DNA, fingerprints, iris and retina patterns and physiognomy, but thanks to techno-
logical progress, options now extend to include ear, palm and vein patterns and many more.
Raw biometric data is collected through a live scan or a digital image, which is then processed
and translated into unique code. In facial recognition, for instance, this code reflects the size
of the mouth, position and shape of the nose, the distance between the eyes, and so on (Sab-
hanayagam et al, 2018).
Physiological biometrics is data on a person’s physiological functioning, such as their
heart rate, blood pressure, oxygen level and muscle use. While monitoring of this data is
common in healthcare, physiological biometrics are increasingly moving into workplaces,
especially for workplace health assessment (Mettler and Wulf, 2019).
Behavioural biometrics use patterns of human behaviour as the basis for analysis and are
driven by deep-learning techniques. The underlying concept of the technology is to exploit
distinct patterns of human behaviour as a means for authentication and identification, either
in real-time or retrospectively (Liang et al, 2020). Behavioural biometrics extract information
not from the outcome of an action, but from the way it is executed. For example, identity is
verified by a worker’s gait, while mood is evaluated from the pitch of their voice. A benefit is
that data is collected without interrupting individuals in their ongoing activity in a way that
an ID check or employee survey would. The ubiquity of smart devices, cameras and sensors
contributes to the technology’s growing importance in workplaces.
Regardless of the type of biometric technology, data analysis follows a similar, automated
process. Raw biometric data is collected via sensors, cameras, microphones or other devices
3 An extended version of the taxonomy with more detail is available in Hoffmann and Mariniello (2022).

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
and pre-processed to remove noise and clean the data. This is followed by feature extraction.
Features are specific biometric data points or patterns considered to be indicative or pre-
dictive of the outcome of interest. For example, for identification, one of the features could
be the distance between the eyes, or the pressure applied on certain keys while typing. It
could be the percentage of speaking time to assess personality, and the breathing rhythm to
judge stress levels (Han et al, 2017; Liang et al, 2020; Sabhanayagam et al, 2018; Vinciarelli
and Mohammadi, 2014). Depending on the type and amount of raw data, this step requires
more or less computing power. Depending on the use case, the extracted features are fed into
diverse AI models that determine the outcome of interest (such as classification, authentica-
tion or identification).
Biometric AI systems can serve a wide range of functions in the workplace. Providing secu-
rity by verifying and identifying workers is one, but as we will illustrate in the next sections, there
are many other purposes, including those relying on physiological and behavioural biometric
data. An important emerging field in this regard is affective computing (Yanushkevich et al,
2020). This refers to the computational analysis of data on human behaviour, such as facial
expressions, gestures and language, or physiology, for its emotional information to derive
conclusions about a person’s affective state, including emotions (Balan et al, 2020; Richardson,
2020), mood (Zenonos et al, 2016), personality (Mehta et al, 2020; Vinciarelli and Mohammadi,
2014) or stress levels (Khowaja et al, 2021). The analysis builds on several biometric technolo-
gies including facial expression recognition, tone analysis and natural language processing, and
is typically based on the assumption that there are common and universal forms of emotional
expression regardless of culture, gender, age or race (Barrett et al, 2019; Richardson, 2020).
We propose to classify biometric technologies according to their use by employers. We iden-
tify the following four groups of use (Table 1)4:
• Security: Security represents the classic use case for biometric technologies in workplaces.
Allowing access to company resources to only authorised personnel is traditionally done
using passwords, pin codes or key(card)s, but biometric authentication, such as face or
4 It should be noted that this classification is, to a certain extent, artificial: the boundaries between different uses
of technologies are often blurred. So for example a technology used for security may also be used for monitoring.
Nevertheless, we propose a classification which, in our view, best captures the differences between the
applications that have been so far developed.
T able 1: A taxonomy for biometric AI systems in the workplace
Purpose Technologies used Use case Real life example/brand
Security Facial, fingerprint, gait,
keystroke recognition
Access control, continuous
authentication BehavioSec, Innovatrics, FaceKey
Recruitment
Affective computing based
on computer vision, voice
and speech recognition and
natural language processing
(NLP)
AI-powered job interviews
and personality assessments
to evaluate candidates
Pymetrics, HireVue, Retorio
Monitoring
Affective computing based
on voice recognition and
NLP; wearable movement
trackers; eye movement
trackers; smart mouse
Worktime control,
productivity and activity
tracking, performance
measurement
Cogito, WorkSmart, Geodis,
Humanyze
Safety and wellbeing Smart wearables; Computer
vision
Accident prevention;
physical and psychosocial
health risk management
StrongArm Technologies, Fitbit,
(many technologies in development)
 Source: Bruegel.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
fingerprint recognition, offers benefits in terms of accuracy, security and efficiency.
• Recruitment: The purpose of AI systems in recruitment, including biometrics, is to create
objective, data-driven candidate evaluations, for example through automated interviews or
psychometric assessments.
• Monitoring: The digitalisation of work in many sectors has created new possibilities for
uninterrupted and comprehensive worker surveillance. With biometric AI, employers can
keep track of productivity, for example through keyboard logging or movement sensors, or
measure performance using affective computing, concentration tracking or social metrics.
• Safety and wellbeing: One of the arguably most promising use cases for AI in workplac-
es is to improve worker health and safety. AI can help address a wide range of causes of
morbidity by reducing the risk of accidents, burnout and musculoskeletal disorders. Most
of the biometric systems we review rely on physiological data gathered through smart
sensors and wearable devices that track muscle use, movement, fatigue or stress levels.
2.1 Security
T able 2: Biometric AI for security
Employees Employers
Risk Benefits Risks Benefits
Privacy issues,
surveillance,
function creep
Contactless identification,
simplification, no risk of losing
keycards/forgetting passwords
Data protection
liability
Higher security,
reduced risks of
insider fraud
Source: Bruegel.
Security represents the classic use case for biometric technology in workplaces. Companies
have an interest in restricting access to their facilities, data and resources to authorised per-
sonnel only, which necessitates a process of identity verification. Figure 2 shows the rate of
use of biometric authentication methods in EU countries and in the United Kingdom, in 2019.
One in ten of all EU companies rely on biometric authentication and verification in the work-
place, with use rates ranging from as high as 24 percent in Malta to only 4 percent in Slovenia
and Bulgaria. Fingerprint recognition is by far the most popular type of biometric authentica-
tion, followed by facial recognition, according to a survey of IT professionals5.
Figure 2: Use of biometric authentication in enterprises, 2019
Source: Eurostat. Note: Data for the Netherlands is not available.
5 Peter Tsai, ‘Data Snapshot: Biometrics in the Workplace Commonplace, but Are They Secure?’ , Spiceworks, 12
March 2018, available at https://community.spiceworks.com/security/articles/2952-data-snapshot-biometrics-in-
the-workplace-commonplace-but-are-they-secure
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
M T I E E S F I L T PT DK C Z DE H U L V B E E U 2 7 A T S E U K H R L U S K C Y E E PL E L F R R O I T B G S I
% o f al l e nt e r p r i s e s

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
There are several benefits to biometric authentication compared to conventional secu-
rity systems. In contrast to knowledge-based (passwords, pin codes) or token-based (key
cards) security systems, biometric authentication systems rely on characteristics inherent to
someone’s person. While passwords and key cards can be lost or stolen, biometric recogni-
tion guarantees that the individual in question is physically present. Biometric authentication
is also more time- and cost-efficient, since the automated process only takes seconds, if that,
and no human identity check is needed. Moreover, biometric features cannot be forgotten
and therefore time-consuming recovery or reset processes needed for forgotten passwords or
key cards are avoided. The passive nature of behavioural biometrics such as gait or keystroke
recognition allows continuous authentication to ensure that the person accessing company
data, accounts or other resources is indeed the one authorised to do so. For these reasons,
behavioural biometrics are increasingly used for fraud detection and insider threat manage-
ment (Hu et al, 2019; Liang et al, 2020). Therefore, enhancing conventional security systems
with biometric identity recognition is to date the most secure, effective and efficient way to
secure access to company property (Sabhanayagam et al, 2018)6.
Reliance on employees’ personal biometric characteristics for security has significant
implications for workplaces and workers. Privacy is at the core of concerns about the col-
lection, storage and processing of biometric data (Carpenter et al, 2018; Holland and Tham,
2020).
Beyond being a unique feature of a person, biometric data can contain a wide range of
additional, personal information, which can potentially be extracted. For example, the con-
tinuous recording of keystrokes for authentication will also capture the content that is typed,
including potentially sensitive personal information. Physical biometrics, such as fingerprints
or hand geometry, may reveal private medical information. For example, Holland and Tham
(2020) explained that fingerprints can be used to detect genetic disorders, and Carpenter et
al (2018) argued that biometric samples allow the extraction of genetic markers that reveal
potential health issues, such as hand swelling associated with sickle cell disease. The mere
possibility of extraction of this information from biometric data opens up new questions
about privacy, and could lead to discrimination between workers.
The use of workers’ biometric data for undisclosed purposes without their knowledge
and consent is a central concern (Carpenter et al, 2018; Holland and Tham, 2020). Beyond
assessing medical risks, organisations could use the data to conduct background checks or,
as is being done in the US, cross-reference biometrics with immigration records to identify
undocumented immigrants (Goldstein and Alonso-Bejarano, 2017). Organisations could use
the data to expand monitoring and surveillance, for instance by retracing employees’ activ-
ities using historical authentication data. The GDPR prohibits function creep via the princi-
ples of data minimisation and purpose limitation. Employers that want to expand the use of
biometric data beyond previously agreed functions would need to obtain renewed employee
consent. Critics point to the challenges of enabling meaningful and informed consent for data
collection in an employer-employee relationship7.
Finally, there are concerns about potential data breaches and third-party access to per-
sonal (biometric) data. One of the key benefits of biometric systems, the fact that they rely
on inherent characteristics rather than on knowledge or tokens, also implies that biometric
features are irreplaceable: in case of a compromise, biometric ID cannot be changed like a
password.
6 An additional potential benefit is the potential of touchless biometric security to limit infectious disease
transmission: US-based IT firm Hewlett Packard Enterprise adopted a facial recognition access system to reduce
COVID-19 infection risk compared to, for example, machines requiring PIN code entry. See: https://www.
hpe.com/us/en/newsroom/press-release/2020/06/hpe-to-deliver-five-new-return-to-work-solutions-to-help-
organizations-accelerate-recovery-in-wake-of-covid-19.html, accessed 6 August 2021.
7 For a discussion of the complexity of meaningful consent to data collection within the employer-employee
relationship, see Moore (2020).
Privacy is at the core
of concerns about the
collection, storage
and processing of
biometric data

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
2.2 Recruitment
T able 3: Biometric AI for recruitment
Employees Employers
Risk Benefits Risks Benefits
Discrimination,
spurious correlations,
bias, lack of feedback
Potentially
more objective
interview
Liability, loss
of talent due to
spurious correlations
Cost reduction,
potentially more
equality in the hiring
process
Source: Bruegel.
Recruitment is an obvious application field for AI-driven analytics because hiring decisions
are known to be riddled with human bias and discrimination (Bertrand and Mullainathan,
2004; Carlsson and Eriksson, 2019; Drydakis, 2009; Rooth, 2009; Tilcsik, 2011). Hence, many
AI-powered recruitment tools are developed and adopted specifically with the aim of elimi-
nating this problem from the selection process by offering an objective, data-driven and com-
parable assessment of candidates (Sánchez-Monedero et al, 2019). Virtually every Fortune
500 company is currently using some form of applicant-tracking system in their hiring pro-
cesses8. However, to the best of our knowledge, representative, reliable data on the use of AI in
recruitment, in particular interview systems or other biometrics, currently does not exist.
There is certainly potential for AI systems to enhance recruitment processes. Cowgill
(2018) showed that AI can be better than a human counterfactual if certain conditions are
met. He found that using a machine-learning algorithm to screen curriculum vitaes can do
better than humans if the training data is sufficiently noisy. The algorithm was built on text
mining and natural language processing assessing factors including education and work
experience, as well as soft skills. The algorithm led to selection of candidates who were more
likely to pass the interview process, accept job offers and be more productive once hired9. The
algorithm was more likely to select candidates who graduated from non-elite colleges without
job referrals or prior experience, but who had strong non-cognitive soft-skills.
Biometric data is primarily collected during the interview process or through personality
assessments, in which candidates’ behaviour – including their facial expressions, pitch and
choice of words – feed into an AI-driven assessment of competences and personality10. In
order to assess a candidate’s suitability for a vacancy, interview systems are trained using data
on the company’s existing staff. Their test scores are combined with corporate performance
benchmarks to identify correlations between the AI’s analysis and job success. The AI then
compares candidates’ scores with those of the existing staff and groups applicants according
to their probability of job success. Unilever, which relies on such an AI-enhanced recruitment
tool for entry-level positions, claims the software has contributed to raising ethnic and soci-
oeconomic diversity among new employees, in addition to saving 100,000 hours of interview
time and $1 million in recruitment costs each year11.
Drawing conclusions about emotional states or personality from video or tone recordings
8 Linda Qu, ‘99% of Fortune 500 Companies Use Applicant Tracking Systems’ , Jobscan, 7 November 2019, available at
https://www.jobscan.co/blog/99-percent-fortune-500-ats/
9 The experiment was designed so that the algorithm’s recommendation randomly overrode the choices of human
recruiters about who to invite for interview. The effects measured were derived from candidates selected by the
algorithm but not by the human recruiter.
10 Drew Harwell, ' A face-scanning algorithm increasingly decides whether you deserve the job', Washington Post, 6
November 2019, available at https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2019/10/22/ai-hiring-face-scanning-
algorithm-increasingly-decides-whether-you-deserve-job
11 Minda Zetlin, ‘ AI Is Now Analyzing Candidates’ Facial Expressions During Video Job Interviews’ , Inc., 28 February
2018, available at https://www.inc.com/minda-zetlin/ai-is-now-analyzing-candidates-facial-expressions-during-
video-job-interviews.html

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
without human intervention is however challenging and potentially problematic, in particu-
lar when the automated evaluation is the basis for hiring decisions.
A key question that needs answering even before considering its potential usefulness in
the workplace is whether or not AI is capable of doing what it claims. A review of the literature
by Barrett et al (2019) emphasised that technology companies overestimate the scientific
validity of their base assumption that there is universal emotional expression. Instead, the
authors found that emotional facial expression is highly context-specific, and that this vari-
ation is still understudied. They concluded that not only it is premature to use technology to
draw conclusions about people’s internal states, such analyses may completely lack validity if
they fail to include the context of the individual (Barrett et al, 2019).
Furthermore, there is a major transparency issue (Raghavan et al, 2019; Sánchez-
Monedero et al, 2019). It is currently not possible for researchers to evaluate the validity of the
assessments. Developers of AI-powered hiring tools are reluctant to make their code or data
available for independent audits, given their proprietary and sensitive natures. They further-
more rely on their own definitions of unbiased or fair algorithmic assessment, as currently
there are no regulations in force that provide a legal standard for these terms. Given that the
tool is trained on the set of current staff for each vacancy, characteristics of performance vary
from job to job. Sánchez-Monedero et al (2019) concluded that even the most transparent
providers fail to disclose how job-seekers can learn how their performance affected the sys-
tem’s evaluation. AI-backed systems are not geared to provide information on which factors
(ie facial expression, voice, pitch) and parameters influence their assessments. In the case of
the recruitment tools, this implies that neither candidates nor human resources managers
can follow and retrace AI-based decision-making. The key risk, as a result, is spurious corre-
lations. It is, for example, known that factors including lighting feature obstruction (such as
covering part of the face with the hand), and expression intensity influence significantly the
outcome and accuracy of computer-vision affective computing models (Patel et al, 2020).
Finally, one of the most important discussions around AI is the prevalence of bias. Rhue
(2018) found that a vision-based sentiment-analysis AI assigned more negative feelings to
black faces. Similarly, racial bias has been found in algorithms for natural language process-
ing because of lack of knowledge and understanding of the cultural determinants of linguistic
emotional expression (Sap et al, 2019). Furthermore, affective computing and recruitment
AI tools are ‘ableist’ by default, by assigning certain features of speech, body language and
facial expression paramount importance for job performance, though they have little to do
with actual suitability and are unattainable for people with disabilities (Whittaker et al, 2019).
While some technology companies claim to undertake efforts to counter such bias by contin-
uously auditing their algorithms, decision-making processes continue to lack transparency
and traceability. AI systems are known to frequently encode and perpetuate existing patterns
of bias, and the rapid rollout of such tools without meaningful requirements or regulations
imposed on them leads to the suspicion that they will exacerbate discrimination through their
in-group and out-group classification systems (Crawford et al, 2019)
2.3 Monitoring
T able 4: Biometric AI for workplace monitoring
Employees Employers
Risk Benefits Risks Benefits
Surveillance; loss of autonomy
and control; mistrust between
employee and employer,
reduced job quality
Objective
accounting
of work
efforts
Lower job
quality could
lead to higher
employee
turnover
Reduce time theft
(‘buddy-punching’);
enhance productivity;
improve performance
Source: Bruegel.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
Monitoring employees is not a new concept. Yet, in contrast to direct supervision by a
physically present superior, the digitalisation of work and the internet of things (IoT) enables
continuous and comprehensive tracking of all of workers’ activities (Edwards et al., 2018).
Interest in using technology to monitor and control what workers do is booming. The
COVID-19 pandemic and the shift to remote work has exacerbated a trend already present
before the crisis. In 2018, Gartner found that more than half of large corporations had adopted
non-traditional monitoring techniques, up from 30 percent in 2015 (Kropp, 2019)12. During
the pandemic, demand for biometric-monitoring AI soared, and one out of four companies
introduced technologies to track their employees’ behaviour passively (Kropp, 2021; Mascel-
lino, 2020).
Workplace applications centre on tracking attendance, activity or performance. The
most frequent technological methods of workplace surveillance tend to be monitoring of
work emails, browser histories and files, CCTV and the recording and logging of phone calls
(however, no granular data on use of monitoring technologies by EU companies is available).
Monitoring via wearable devices is more common in workplaces that require a lot of physical
activity, such as warehouses or construction sites.
Many workplaces re-apply biometric security devices for the purpose of worker monitor-
ing. For example, fingerprint-based attendance tracking systems are widely commercially
available. Advocates of the technology claim that such systems make attendance tracking
more efficient while preventing some workers from clocking-in for others, improving produc-
tivity for both management and workers. However, these systems were ruled illegal in Ger-
many in 2020, barring exceptional circumstances (Burt, 2020). Because the systems collect
highly personal data, they run afoul of European GDPR laws.
When biometric data is combined with productivity-centred algorithms, the technology
can be used to push efficiency and accuracy, potentially at the cost of surveillance and lower
job quality (Gutelius and Theodore, 2019). Headlines about the deeply automated tracking
processes in an Amazon warehouse offer an exemplary description of the risks of algorithmic
monitoring and management. According to one report13, workers wear a type of tracker that
monitors their location and movements as well as their work activity. Based on historic data,
an algorithm establishes standardised productivity rates and benchmarks to be attained by
each employee. The tracking device also measures time-off-task and sends automatic alerts
to workers if the period between measured work activities becomes too long. Reportedly, the
AI system included an automated termination process: it would autonomously fire workers
when quality or productivity benchmarks weren’t maintained. Since thresholds were set to
near-unattainable standards, workers were put under such significant time pressure that they
would skip bathroom breaks in order to fulfil their artificially set benchmarks.
Discouraging and timing toilet breaks represents a questionable control over basic human
needs and also raises issues around equality, illustrated by a number of reported instances
in Europe where female employees (not of Amazon) were asked to wear specific clothing to
signal when they were menstruating to receive permission to use the restrooms more often14.
In office settings, a similarly comprehensive picture is painted by AI-driven sociometric
devices: small, wearable badges capable of tracking individual and collective behaviours
at work based on audio, movement, proximity and location data. In combination with
12 Gartner defines monitoring as “analysing the text of emails and social-media messages, scrutinising who’s meeting
with whom, gathering biometric data and understanding how employees are utilising their workspace. ”
13 Information in this paragraph is taken from Colin Lecher, ‘How Amazon Automatically Tracks and Fires
Warehouse Workers for “Productivity” ’ , The Verge, 25 April 2019, available at https://www.theverge.
com/2019/4/25/18516004/amazon-warehouse-fulfillment-centers-productivity-firing-terminations
14 See for example Kate Connolly, 'German supermarket chain Lidl accused of snooping on staff', The Guardian,
27 March 2008, available at https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/mar/27/germany.supermarkets, and Ian
Sparks, 'Boss orders female staff to wear red bracelets when they are on their periods', MailOnline, 30 November
2010, available at https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1334400/Female-staff-Norway-ordered-wear-red-
bracelets-period.html.
Interest in using
technology to
monitor and control
what workers do is
booming; COVID-19
and the shift to
remote work have
exacerbated this

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
corporate metrics on output and performance, AI can link specific behaviours, such as
talkativeness, or whether a worker dominates conversations, to productivity, identify (un-)
productive processes and make suggestions to improve organisational efficiency (Eveleth,
2019; Ito-Masui et al, 2021). Although linking a badge to the wearer’s identity requires consent
according to the developers, critics argue that surveillance opportunities remain within reach,
in particular in small or medium-sized entities (Moore, 2020).
Affective computing can also play a role in monitoring work performance. A US start-up
called Cogito developed an AI system for call centres which assesses the mood of customers
during phone calls and cues agents to adapt their way of speaking accordingly. Using voice
analysis and natural language processing, the technology detects over 200 indicators of
emotional state of both the customer and the agent in real-time. When it identifies a certain
emotional state in a customer – for example frustration – it alerts the agent to speak more
slowly, or display more empathy. Importantly, the AI serves not only as a tool to improve cus-
tomer satisfaction, but also to monitor workers, as supervisors have “the ability to proactively
listen to live calls with no extra setup required [and] are automatically alerted to calls in which
a customer is having a poor experience”15.
Automated monitoring may ensure that well-performing workers are identified and
rewarded in a more consistent and objective manner. However, this comes at a cost of con-
stant surveillance. The psychosocial risks associated with constant algorithmic monitoring
are real and must be taken into account (Nurski, 2021).
2.4 Safety and wellbeing
T able 5: Biometric AI for health, safety and wellbeing
Employees Employers
Risk Benefits Risks Benefits
Surveillance; collection
of intimate health data;
function creep; privacy
Prevention of
accidents and adverse
health outcomes
Liability
for data
protection
Reduction in incident
costs
Source: Bruegel.
Workplaces can be dangerous. In 2018, 3332 workers in the EU died in an accident at work16.
In addition, there were over three million serious non-fatal accidents in European workplaces17.
In the EU, most workplace accidents occur in a handful of sectors. Agriculture, manufacturing,
construction and transport account for over 65 percent of all fatal accidents. The most prevalent
causes of workplace accidents in industrial settings are, in decreasing order of frequency, falls
from heights, strikes by moving or falling objects, machine contact, ie when a worker is caught
between parts of a machine, and being hit by moving vehicles (Svertoka et al, 2021).
Non-fatal illnesses also burden workers. Musculoskeletal disorders, together with cancer
and circulatory illnesses, are the leading causes of work-related morbidity in the EU (Elsler et al,
2017). Workplace accidents, deaths and health problems generate massive costs that burden not
only employers and employees but also public budgets and society as a whole. The European
Agency for Safety and Health at Work (EU-OSHA) estimated that the costs of work-related acci-
dents and illnesses in the EU amount to at least €476 billion per year, equal to about 3.3 percent
of EU GDP (Elsler et al, 2017).
Technology may offer a solution to improve workplace safety. More and more smart
technological solutions are available to address a wide range of work-related health issues.
Instead of a reactive approach to accidents and health problems, these systems enable pre-
15 See https://cogitocorp.com/product/.
16 Eurostat hsw_n2_02.
17 Eurostat hsw_n2_01. Serious is defined as causing at least four days absence from work

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
ventive action by detecting hazards and risks before they manifest themselves in accidents
or illnesses (Pavón et al, 2018). Through sensors, these systems gather data from the workers
and their surroundings aimed at environmental sensing, proximity detection and location
tracking (Awolusi et al, 2018; Svertoka et al, 2021). Biometric AI systems typically combine
data collected on workers from physiolytic equipment, with environmental data gathered
from other sensors or cameras (Svertoka et al, 2021). Physiolytics are wearable devices that
use measurements of body functions, such as heart rate, muscle use or blood oxygen level,
in machine-learning models and data analytics, from which AI draws conclusions about the
physical and sometimes psychosocial state of the wearer (Mettler and Wulf, 2019). Weara-
bles include fitness trackers, smart watches, patches and sensors attached to the body, smart
clothing and personal protective equipment (PPE) (Svertoka et al, 2021).
Biometrics can help through five broad channels: (1) increasing compliance with PPE
requirements and preventing falls; (2) addressing hazard caused by fatigue; (3) reducing
sedentary behaviour and physical inactivity; (4) limiting psychosocial stress; (5) reducing
physical stress and musculoskeletal disorders18.
1. Increasing compliance with PPE and preventing falls. Records from the US Bureau of Labor
show that in most incidents resulting in severe injury, workers were not correctly wearing
PPE, suggesting that the severity of the incident could have been reduced with full PPE
compliance (Kritzler et al, 2015). AI-driven solutions to PPE compliance are typically based
on either computer vision or smart wearable technology. For example, a smart helmet can
detect whether it is worn or not and determine the instant it is taken off using humidity
sensors (Tan et al, 2021). In other instances (eg see Kritzler et al, 2015), workers may wear a
smartwatch that signals which PPE is required for the task and recognises whether it is worn
at that point in time. When a worker approaches a work station, the machinery and indus-
trial equipment will only activate if she wears the right gear, as determined by the watch.
Similarly, AI systems can help reduce the number of falls by identifying hazardous areas in
workplaces using recordings of stumbling or loss of balance from smart sensors. Supervisors
can use the data to detect hazardous locations on their worksites before an incident occurs,
and address specific risks with targeted measures, without disrupting workers in their tasks.
2. Addressing hazard caused by fatigue. According to neuroscientific research, constant and
long-term exposure to high-risk environments, such as construction sites, and the resulting
familiarity with hazardous surroundings, lowers people’s risk sensitivity and risk-judge-
ment capabilities (Niv et al, 2012). A range of wireless, wearable sensing devices has been
developed to measure and assess the level of attention or situational awareness of workers
in real-time using physiological biometrics such as eye-movement or brain signals. Amazon,
for example, deploys AI-powered cameras in its delivery vehicles to improve safety following
a number of serious car accidents19. The vision system observes and records all drivers at all
times and issues alerts for unsafe driving behaviour, such as speeding, fatigue or distracted
driving. However, reports suggest that the technology sometimes unduly penalises drivers,
negatively impacting their ability to earn income20.
3. Reducing sedentary behaviour and physical inactivity. A number of health risks, including
obesity, cardiovascular diseases and back pain, are associated with a lack of physical
activity and extensive sedentary behaviour, typical of office environments. Workplace
interventions to promote wellbeing and physical activity among employees often involve
providing workers with wearable fitness trackers, such as FitBits, to monitor and track their
18 A detailed analysis of each of the five channels is reported in Hoffmann and Mariniello (2022).
19 See Tyler Sonnemaker, ‘ Amazon Is Deploying AI Cameras to Surveil Delivery Drivers “100% of the Time” ’ , Business
Insider, 3 February 2021, available at https://www.businessinsider.com/amazon-plans-ai-cameras-surveil-delivery-
drivers-netradyne-2021-2.
20 See Sarah Jackson, ‘ Amazon’s AI-powered cameras punish its delivery drivers when they look at side mirrors
or when other cars cut them off, report says’ , Business Insider, 20 September 2021, available at https://www.
businessinsider.com/amazon-delivery-drivers-netradyne-ai-cameras-punished-when-cut-off-2021-9

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
daily physical activities (Glance et al, 2016; Nikayin et al, 2014). Large-scale collection and
analysis of workers’ data can provide the basis for specific health interventions to address
emerging risks early on. However, whether this justifies constant monitoring of physical
activity, in particular outside of working hours, should be judged by each individual worker.
4. Limiting psychosocial stress. A study by the World Health Organisation and International
Labour Organisation identified a direct relationship between overwork and premature
death (Pega et al, 2021)21. Lasting psychosocial stress at work increases the risk of illness and
death from heart disease and stroke. Moreover, chronic stress can lead to negative mental
health outcomes. It is, for instance, a crucial cause of burnout (Salvagioni et al, 2017). More
than half of the European labour force reports commonly experiencing work-related stress-
ors in their jobs (EU-OSHA, 2013). Recent technological advances in biometric technology
have enabled the direct measurement of stress in the workplace. The benefits are straight-
forward: early identification of chronic stress and its underlying causes can enable targeted,
effective and timely preventive action by employers to mitigate the risk of adverse health
outcomes in their organisations.
5. Reducing physical stress and musculoskeletal disorders. Physical stress can lead to muscu-
loskeletal disorders (MSDs), one of the leading causes of occupational morbidity. Pro-
cesses and environments in certain workplaces, like construction sites, assembly lines and
warehouses, pose several risk factors for MSDs, including repetitive motions, force and
awkward postures (Nath et al, 2017). However, ergonomic risks also emerge from tasks and
occupations that do not require heavy labour but entail very repetitive motions, for example
typing on a keyboard (Valero et al, 2016) or scanning products at a supermarket check-out
(Peppoloni et al, 2016). Biometric or biomechanical measurement tools, usually consisting
or sensors worn on the worker’s body, directly and accurately measure individual body
movements over time and allow the identification of unsafe movements and detection of
hazardous kinetic patterns (Nath et al, 2017; Valero et al, 2016).
Biometric technology used for safety purposes appears to have the greatest potential to
benefit workers and employers alike. Nonetheless, its use is not risk-free. Workers may be
concerned about their behaviour being constantly monitored. Workers’ safety data may be
accessed by their employers to assess their performance, undermining the primary goal of the
adopted technology. Physical and mental health information should not be used as a workforce
management tool. Mood-recognition AI trained to associate biophysical states with stress levels
and mood can allow employers to “use this information to understand the general feeling of the
work environment at any given time without explicitly asking any employees” (Zenonos et al,
2016), which would to many appear to be a strong encroachment on privacy, in particular since
changes in mood are not necessarily related to work. In addition to implications for data secu-
rity, access by third-parties and function creep, the potential use of stress and mood-detection
AI in workplaces raises the question of whether employers should come to know these things
when their staff choose not to communicate them.
21 Measured effect of 55+ working hours per week compared to regular (35-40) working hours.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
Box 1: Computers are everywhere except in workplace safety statistics
Biometric technologies have a great potential to increase safety at work. However, in
sectors in which adoption of digital technologies has constantly increased in the past years,
there has been no corresponding drop in injury rates. Statistical information on the use of
AI-powered biometric equipment in the EU is not yet available, but we can use proxies: it is
reasonable to assume that sectors in which digitisation and robotisation are higher also tend
to have a higher rate of adoption of biometric technologies. Figure 3 compares the trend of
robot adoption with workplace accidents in Europe. It might be expected that, as production
processes become more automated, injuries would also become less frequent. However,
that is not observed in the data: most of the growth in adoption of robotics took place after
2013/2014, but injury rates declined mostly before that. While the insights from this analysis
cannot be conclusive because of the lack of detailed data on the type of technology adopted
by companies, they nevertheless suggest that worker safety does not seem yet a significant
driver of companies’ technological investment.
Figure 3: Workplace accidents and robotics adoption in industry, EU28
Source: Eurostat and World Robotics. Note: number of fatal accidents in manufacturing and number of non-fatal accidents in construction
expressed on the right axis.
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
500000
600000
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
C o n s t r u c t i o n
F at a l ac c i d e n t s
F at a l ac c i d e n t s
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
500000
600000
700000
800000
900000
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Man u f ac t u r i n g
N o n -f at al ac c i d e n t s
N o n -f at al ac c i d e n t s R o b o t s t o c k R o b o t installed
R o b o t s t o c k R o b o t installed

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
15
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
3 From theory to practice to policy
The taxonomy of biometric technologies used in the workplace that we have described above
has one primary purpose: to help make more concrete what the European Commission has
only sketched in broad terms in its AI Act proposal. The Commission is right to emphasise
that using AI in the workplace can be very risky. But grasping the dynamics through which
technology and actual harm are linked is an essential condition for effective regulation.
We note that there is a significant scarcity of data at granular level. This scarcity prevents
observers from monitoring the implications of the adoption by employers of new technolo-
gies. While progress is being made in terms of data collection on technological adoption by
European companies (for example, Eurostat has now indicators that monitor uptake of AI
technology), statistics still lack detail on the type of biometric technology used. The AI Act
may help partially to address that issue, in that it imposes notification obligations to providers
of high-risk applications. The European Commission plans to establish a system for register-
ing standalone high-risk AI applications in a public EU-wide database, and this is a welcome
development. Yet, the database will be mostly driven by the information supplied by the AI
application providers, which may not be able to accurately foresee all potential risks that can
emerge at user level. It would be preferable to design coherent statistical systems for captur-
ing information directly from EU employers about AI use.
The AI Act should also broaden the scope of what it considers ‘biometric data’: it currently
relies on the definition adopted in the GDPR, which hinges on the application of the informa-
tion collected to identify individuals. However, as we have discussed, biometric technologies
may have detrimental effects on workers even if not strictly used for personal identification
(for example, data can be lawfully collected at personal level, but raw aggregate biometric
data can be stored and used to control the workforce collectively).
For individual workers, biometric technologies in the workplace pose a variety of risks.
There are privacy concerns: devices collect a myriad of detailed, sensitive data, with the risk
that these may be accessed by (unauthorised) third parties or used by the employer without
the employee’s consent for purposes other than initially foreseen. These risks are pervasive
and represent a significant barrier. There is a potential loss of personal freedom or control
over how employees organise their work. Knowing their employer has constant access to real-
time metrics on their effort level can induce workers to change their behaviour and eventu-
ally leave them with less motivation and engagement. There is a risk of overreliance on the
technology. This is particularly problematic when a technology’s accuracy is overestimated.
Not only can this leave workers unorganised in the case of a technology outage, it can also
cause them to trust the device’s recommendations more than their own feeling of wellbeing
at the time. From the perspective of workers, this also raises the question of whether it can
be assumed that employers are capable of interpreting the output from AI correctly, or if they
take the results as truth, though results are potentially biased.
Nevertheless, some technologies have huge potential to address long-standing issues. This
in particular refers to safety and security in the workplace which is a major, often underrated,
problem in European labour markets. It is thus important to ensure that any new regula-
tory requirement does not dissuade employers from adopting technologies that have a high
potential to protect workers from injury or other health hazards. Based on our taxonomy, it
should be possible to design systems of incentives for providers to deploy innovative solution
that maximise benefits while complying with the risk-mitigation rules, having in mind the
final effect on workers. Likewise, users could be steered to invest more in technologies that
can help address workers’ issues, rather than exacerbate them. For example, any discussion
related to taxation of digital technologies (Christie, 2021) should be informed by that trade-
off: ‘robot taxes’ do not necessarily need to focus on the quantity of jobs potentially destroyed
by technology. Rather they could be informed by the balance of risks and benefits which we
have described in this paper. For example, it would be desirable to craft a taxation system
For individual
workers, biometric
technologies pose a
variety of risks; these
are pervasive and
represent a significant
barrier

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
that would reward employers that adopt technologies with high potential to increase safety at
work while, if anything, penalising use of technology that can harm workers through intensive
monitoring or automated emotional scrutiny. The European Commission in June 2021 issued
the ‘Strategic Framework on Health and Safety at Work 2021-2027’ , which outlines actions
to improve workers’ health and safety in a changing world of work (European Commission,
2021b). In this strategy, the Commission also recognises the potential of new technologies,
including artificial intelligence, to improve occupational health, safety and wellbeing.
On a broader level, our analysis clearly indicates that no biometric technology can be
considered intrinsically bad or good for workers. In other words, working hard to ensure that
technology delivers accurate results, and that artificial intelligence systems are not condi-
tioned by bias at any level of the value chain (development, data sourcing, distribution and
use), do not guarantee no harm. Addressing bias is a necessary but not sufficient step to pro-
tect humans from harm. Unbiased biometric monitoring of workers may deliver fairer assess-
ments of worker performance, but it can still entail a worsening of their wellbeing, increasing
their stress levels, for example. That conclusion emphasises the role of risk management
at local level by users of high-risk AI applications. Employers should not mindlessly adopt
biometric technologies in their facilities or offices. Nor can they rely on providers’ reassur-
ances about the potential risks of the applications they develop (as it is currently suggested by
the proposed AI Act). Employers of significant size should rather be required to evaluate the
impact of the implementation of high-risk technologies before adoption, possibly though the
active involvement of their workforce. After adoption, employers should survey their workers’
feelings and assess the effects on their wellbeing.
References
Awolusi, I., E. Marks and M. Hallowell (2018) ‘Wearable Technology for Personalized Construction Safety
Monitoring and Trending: Review of Applicable Devices’ , Automation in Construction 85: 96–106
Balan, O., G. Moise, L. Petrescu, A. Moldoveanu, M. Leordeanu and F . Moldoveanu (2020) ‘Emotion
Classification Based on Biophysical Signals and Machine Learning Techniques’ , Symmetry 12(1): 21
Barrett, L.F ., R. Adolphs, S. Marsella, A.M. Martinez and S.D. Pollak (2019) ‘Emotional Expressions
Reconsidered: Challenges to Inferring Emotion From Human Facial Movements’ , Psychological
Science in the Public Interest 20(1): 1–68
Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2004) ‘ Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than Lakisha and Jamal?
A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination’ , American Economic Review 94(4): 991–1013
Burt, C. (2020) ‘Biometric Time and Attendance Systems Restricted by European Data Protection Rules,
Dutch Authority Issues Fine’ , Biometric Update, 4 May, available at https://www.biometricupdate.
com/202005/biometric-time-and-attendance-systems-restricted-by-european-data-protection-
rules-dutch-authority-issues-fine
Carlsson, M. and S. Eriksson (2019) ‘ Age Discrimination in Hiring Decisions: Evidence from a Field
Experiment in the Labor Market’ , Labour Economics, Special Issue on European Association of
Labour Economists, 30th Annual Conference, Lyon, France, 13-15 September 2018, 59: 173–83
Carpenter, D., A. McLeod, C. Hicks and M. Maasberg (2018) ‘Privacy and Biometrics: An Empirical
Examination of Employee Concerns’ , Information Systems Frontiers 20(1): 91–110
Christie, R. (2021) ‘Do robots dream of paying taxes?’ Policy Contribution 20/2021, Bruegel
Cowgill, B. (2018) ‘Bias and Productivity in Humans and Algorithms: Theory and Evidence from Resume
Screening’ , Columbia Business School, Columbia University 29

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
17
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
Crawford, K., R. Dobbe, T . Dryer, G. Fried, B. Green, E. Kaziunas ... M. Whittaker (2019) AI Now 2019
Report, AI Now Institute
Drydakis, N. (2009) ‘Sexual Orientation Discrimination in the Labour Market’ , Labour Economics 16(4):
364–72
Edwards, L., L. Martin, and T . Henderson (2018) ‘Employee Surveillance: The Road to Surveillance is
Paved with Good Intentions’ , mimeo, available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=3234382
Elsler, D., J. Takala, and J. Remes (2017) An International Comparison of the Cost of Work-Related
Accidents and Illnesses, European Agency for Safety and Health at Work.
EU-OSHA (2013) ‘European Opinion Poll on Occupational Safety and Health 2013’ , European Agency
for Safety and Health at Work, available at https://osha.europa.eu/en/facts-and-figures/european-
opinion-polls-safety-and-health-work/european-opinion-poll-occupational-safety-and-health-2013
European Commission (2021a) ‘Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council
Laying down Harmonised Rules on Artificial Intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act) and Amending
Certain Union Legislative Acts’ , COM(2021) 206
European Commission (2021b) ‘EU Strategic Framework on Health and Safety at Work 2021-2027
Occupational Safety and Health in a Changing World of Work’ , COM(2021) 323
European Commission (2020) European Enterprise Survey on the Use of Technologies Based on Artificial
Intelligence: Final Report, available at https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2759/759368
Eveleth, R. (2019) ‘Your Employer May Be Spying on You – and Wasting Its Time’ , Scientific American, 16
August, available at https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/your-employer-may-be-spying-on-
you-and-wasting-its-time/
Glance, D.G., E. Ooi, Y. Berman, C.F . Glance and H.R. Barrett (2016) ‘Impact of a Digital Activity
Tracker-Based Workplace Activity Program on Health and Wellbeing’ , DH’16: Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Digital Health Conference
Goldstein, D.M. and C. Alonso-Bejarano (2017) ‘E-Terrify: Securitized Immigration and Biometric
Surveillance in the Workplace’ , Human Organization 76(1): 1–14
Gutelius, B. and N. Theodore (2019) The Future of Warehouse Work: Technological Change in the U.S.
Logistics Industry, UC Berkeley Center for Labor Research and Education and Working Partnerships
USA
Han, L., Q. Zhang, X. Chen, Q. Zhan, T . Yang and Z. Zhao (2017) ‘Detecting Work-Related Stress with a
Wearable Device’ , Computers in Industry 90: 42–9
Hoffmann, M. and M. Mariniello (2022) 'Artificial intelligence in the workplace: tackling the biometrics
challenge', Working Paper, Bruegel, forthcoming
Holland, P . and T .L. Tham (2020) ‘Workplace Biometrics: Protecting Employee Privacy One Fingerprint at
a Time’ , Economic and Industrial Democracy, April
Hu, T ., W. Niu, X. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Lu and Y. Liu (2019) ‘ An Insider Threat Detection Approach Based on
Mouse Dynamics and Deep Learning’ , Security and Communication Networks, vol. 2019, Article ID
3898951
Ito-Masui, A., E. Kawamoto, R. Esumi, H. Imai, and M. Shimaoka (2021) ‘Sociometric Wearable Devices
for Studying Human Behavior in Corporate and Healthcare Workplaces’ , BioTechniques 71(1): 392–9
Khowaja, S.A., A.G. Prabono, F . Setiawan, B.N. Yahya and S.-L. Lee (2021) ‘Toward Soft Real-Time Stress
Detection Using Wrist-Worn Devices for Human Workspaces’ , Soft Computing 25(4): 2793–820
Kritzler, M., M. Bäckman, A. Tenfält, and F . Michahelles (2015) ‘Wearable Technology as a Solution
for Workplace Safety’ , Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous
Multimedia

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
Kropp, B. (2019) ‘The Future of Employee Monitoring’ , Gartner, 3 May, available at https://www.gartner.
com/smarterwithgartner/the-future-of-employee-monitoring
Kropp, B. (2021) ‘9 Work Trends That HR Leaders Can’t Afford to Ignore in 2021’ , Gartner, 6 April, available
at https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/9-work-trends-that-hr-leaders-cant-ignore-in-2021
Liang, Y., S. Samtani, B. Guo, and Z. Yu (2020) ‘Behavioral Biometrics for Continuous Authentication in
the Internet-of-Things Era: An Artificial Intelligence Perspective’ , IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7(9):
9128–43
Mascellino, A. (2020) ‘Union Warns against Biometric Monitoring of Employees amid Increase in Remote
Work’ , Biometric Update, 30 October, available at https://www.biometricupdate.com/202010/union-
warns-against-biometric-monitoring-of-employees-amid-increase-in-remote-work
McStay, A. (2020) ‘Emotional AI, Soft Biometrics and the Surveillance of Emotional Life: An Unusual
Consensus on Privacy’ , Big Data & Society 7(1)
Mehta, Y., N. Majumder, A. Gelbukh and E. Cambria (2020) ‘Recent Trends in Deep Learning Based
Personality Detection’ , Artificial Intelligence Review 53(4): 2313–39
Mettler, T . and J. Wulf (2019) ‘Physiolytics at the Workplace: Affordances and Constraints of Wearables
Use from an Employee’s Perspective’ , Information Systems Journal 29(1): 245–73
Moore, P . (2020) Data Subjects, Digital Surveillance, AI and the Future of Work, Panel for the Future of
Science and Technology, European Parliamentary Research Service
Nath, N.D., R. Akhavian and A.H. Behzadan (2017) ‘Ergonomic Analysis of Construction Worker’s Body
Postures Using Wearable Mobile Sensors’ , Applied Ergonomics 62: 107–17
Nikayin, F ., M. Heikkilä, M. de Reuver and S. Solaimani (2014) ‘Workplace Primary Prevention
Programmes Enabled by Information and Communication Technology’ , Technological Forecasting
and Social Change 89: 326–32
Niv, Y., J.A. Edlund, P . Dayan and J.P . O’Doherty (2012) ‘Neural Prediction Errors Reveal a Risk-Sensitive
Reinforcement-Learning Process in the Human Brain’ , Journal of Neuroscience 32(2): 551–62
Nurski, L. (2021) ‘ Algorithmic Management Is the Past, Not the Future of Work’ , Bruegel Blog, 6 May,
available at https://www.bruegel.org/2021/05/algorithmic-management-is-the-past-not-the-future-
of-work/
Patel, K., D. Mehta, C. Mistry, R. Gupta, S. Tanwar, N. Kumar and M. Alazab (2020) ‘Facial Sentiment
Analysis Using AI Techniques: State-of-the-Art, Taxonomies, and Challenges’ , IEEE Access 8: 90495–
519
Pavón, I., L.F . Sigcha, P . Arezes, N. Costa, G. Arcasand J.M. Lopez Navarro (2018) ‘Wearable Technology
for Occupational Risk Assessment: Potential Avenues for Applications’ , in P .M. Arezes, J.S. Baptista,
M.P . Barroso, P . Carneiro, P . Cordeiro, N. Costa, R.B. Melo, A.S. Miguel and G. Perestrelo (eds)
Occupational Safety and Hygiene VI, CRC Press
Pega, F ., B. Náfrádi, N.C. Momen, Y. Ujita, K.N. Streicher, A.M. Prüss-Üstün ... T .J. Woodruff (2021) ‘Global,
Regional, and National Burdens of Ischemic Heart Disease and Stroke Attributable to Exposure to
Long Working Hours for 194 Countries, 2000–2016: A Systematic Analysis from the WHO/ILO Joint
Estimates of the Work-Related Burden of Disease and Injury’ , Environment International 154: 106595
Peppoloni, L., A. Filippeschi, E. Ruffaldi and C.A. Avizzano (2016) ‘ A Novel Wearable System for the
Online Assessment of Risk for Biomechanical Load in Repetitive Efforts’ , International Journal of
Industrial Ergonomics, New Approaches and Interventions to Prevent Work Related Musculoskeletal
Disorders 52: 1–11
Raghavan, M., S. Barocas, J. Kleinberg, and K. Levy (2019) ‘Mitigating Bias in Algorithmic Hiring:
Evaluating Claims and Practices’ , ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency,
2020
Richardson, S. (2020) ‘ Affective Computing in the Modern Workplace’ , Business Information Review 37(2):
78–85

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
19
Policy Contribution | Issue n˚23/21 | November 2021
Rooth, D.-O. (2009) ‘Obesity, Attractiveness, and Differential Treatment in Hiring A Field Experiment’ ,
Journal of Human Resources 44(3): 710–35
Sabhanayagam, T ., V .P . Venkatesan and K. Senthamaraikannan (2018) ‘ A Comprehensive Survey on
Various Biometric Systems’ , International Journal of Applied Engineering Research 13(5): 2276–97
Salvagioni, D.A.J., F .N. Melanda, A.E. Mesas, A.D. González, F .L. Gabani and S.M. de Andrade (2017)
‘Physical, Psychological and Occupational Consequences of Job Burnout: A Systematic Review of
Prospective Studies’ , PLoS ONE 12(10): e0185781
Sánchez-Monedero, J., L. Dencik, and L. Edwards (2019) ‘What Does It Mean to ‘Solve’ the Problem
of Discrimination in Hiring?’ Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency, January 2020
Sap, M., D. Card, S. Gabriel, Y. Choi, and N.A. Smith (2019) ‘The Risk of Racial Bias in Hate Speech
Detection’ , Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Association for Computational Linguistics
Sundararajan, K. and D.L. Woodard (2018) ‘Deep Learning for Biometrics: A Survey’ , ACM Computing
Surveys 51(3): 65:1-65:34
Svertoka, E., S. Saafi, A. Rusu-Casandra, R. Burget, I. Marghescu, J. Hosek and A. Ometov (2021)
‘Wearables for Industrial Work Safety: A Survey’ , Sensors 21(11): 3844
Tan, Y.H., A. Hitesh and K.H.H. Li (2021) ‘ Application of Machine Learning Algorithm on MEMS-Based
Sensors for Determination of Helmet Wearing for Workplace Safety’ , Micromachines 12(4): 449
Tilcsik, A. (2011) ‘Pride and Prejudice: Employment Discrimination against Openly Gay Men in the
United States’ , American Journal of Sociology 117(2): 586–626
Valero, E., A. Sivanathan, F . Bosché and M. Abdel-Wahab (2016) ‘Musculoskeletal Disorders in
Construction: A Review and a Novel System for Activity Tracking with Body Area Network’ , Applied
Ergonomics 54: 120–30
Vinciarelli, A. and G. Mohammadi (2014) ‘ A Survey of Personality Computing’ , IEEE Transactions on
Affective Computing 5(3): 273–91
Whittaker, M., M. Alper, C.L. Bennett, S. Hendren, L. Kaziunas, M. Mills … S. Myers West (2019) Disability,
Bias, and AI, AI Now Institute
Yanushkevich, S., S. Eastwood, K. Lai, and V . Shmerko (2020) ‘Emerging Biometrics: Deep Inference and
Other Computational Intelligence’ , ArXiv: 2006.11971
Zenonos, A., A. Khan, G. Kalogridis, S. Vatsikas, T . Lewis and M. Sooriyabandara (2016) ‘HealthyOffice:
Mood Recognition at Work Using Smartphones and Wearable Sensors’ , 2016 IEEE International
Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communication Workshops (PerCom Workshops)
