
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
To promote their economic security, or simply to inflict damage on other nations, countries are increasingly
weaponising trade policy. To do so, trading nations must sidestep the rules-based system established in
the aftermath of the Second World War because this system, in letter and spirit, opposes such behaviour.
However, neglecting the rules-based system leads to uncertainty, and uncertainty incentivises trading
nations to intensify their pursuit of national economic security, thus undermining the multilateral edifice
even more.
It does not have to be this way, however. Based on an analysis of trade in semiconductors (a product market
in which there is clear weaponisation of trade policy), we argue that, while a comprehensive negotiation on
economic security may be currently unrealistic, a sectoral agreement within the World Trade Organization
would be both feasible and appropriate, and could provide a template for regulating economic security. Such
an agreement should include non-discriminatory trade in high-end semiconductors and a negotiated list of
segments of the covered product market, in which signatories will be allowed to erect barriers to protect
economic/national security without being obliged to compensate affected parties.
JEL Classification: K40
Key Words: WTO; semiconductors; economic security
Mario R. Palacios is Managing Director, Government Affairs & Head of International Trade Policy at Applied
Materials
Petros C. Mavroidis (petros.mavroidis@bruegel.org) is a Non-resident Fellow at Bruegel
We are indebted to Simon Evenett for sharing his data with us, and to Kyle Bagwell, Emanuel Ornelas,
Bernard M. Hoekman, Henrik Horn, Merit E. Janow, Matteo Maggiori, Inu Manak, Chris Miller, Stratos Pahis,
Lucio Pench, Niclas Poitiers, Tom J. Prusa, Stephen Redding, André Sapir, Alan Sykes, Reinhilde Veugelers
and Jeromin Zettelmeyer for numerous discussions on the issues discussed in this paper. We especially
thank Ignacio Garcia Bercero for excellent detailed comments that helped improve our original draft.
A plan for a World Trade Organization
sectoral agreement on semiconductors
Petros C. Mavroidis and Mario R. Palacios
Working Paper 21/2026
Recommended citation:
Mavroidis, P. C. and M. R. Palacios (2026) ‘A plan for a World Trade Organization sectoral agreement on
semiconductors,’ Working Paper 21/2026, Bruegel, available at https://doi.org/10.64153/LXWL4325

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
Contents
1 Introduction 3
2 A history of economic security in theory and practice 4
3 The semiconductor industry 15
4 Segmenting the world semiconductor market 19
5 A sectoral agreement on semiconductors 21
References 31

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
1 Introduction
The past decade has seen a resurgence of national industrial policy initiatives in the
semiconductors market. The rationale for these interventions is not simply rent-seeking in
a promising market: it is the proclaimed protection of national and economic security. The
United States, European Union, China, Japan, Korea, T aiwan and many other economies
have seen increasing government intervention1. Various instruments are used: subsidies
to boost domestic competitiveness or export restrictions to deprive others of critical
inputs – or final products, for fear of reverse engineering.
This paper argues that the World T rade Organization is ill-equipped to deal with such
challenges as, unless the issue of economic security is brought under the aegis of the
multilateral system and acknowledged as a legitimate objective that permits deviations
from obligations, trading nations will be forced to continue exercising the ‘outside’ option
to achieve their economic security priorities. The ‘outside option’ is the tendency for
countries to pursue policies outside of or incompatible with WTO rules, weakening the
institution.
The WTO’s relevance has been waning for some time. Its judicial function has been
seriously undermined by the Appellate Body being in abeyance, while its legislative arm
has only added three agreements since 19952. Now, with the steep increase in measures
taken by its members, which are impossible to reconcile with the existing WTO framework,
the institution’s policy relevance is waning even faster.
T o help redress the current situation, this paper argues that, inspired by past practice,
WTO members should opt for a sectoral agreement on semiconductors. This agreement
would require WTO members to trade semiconductors in line with multilateral rules,
thereby enhancing economic security by promoting non-discriminatory trade without
weakening the WTO.
Section 2 provides an overview of the state of world trade today, starting with the
Hirschman (1945) argument that trade openness is welfare-enhancing but creates
vulnerabilities as well, an oft-forgotten consequence of trade liberalisation. The section
also explains why the General Agreement on T ariffs and T rade (GATT)/WTO did not
immunise itself against this risk.
Section 3 focuses on the semiconductors market and explains why it serves as the
most appropriate case for nations to achieve economic security. Section 4 assesses the
way nations have segmented the semiconductor market in pursuit of economic security
and highlights why international law as it currently stands cannot guarantee legitimate
concerns for economic security. Section 5 lays out a proposal for a sectoral agreement
on semiconductors, which is both feasible and has the main merit of preserving and
promoting non-discriminatory trade liberalisation. Section 6 recaps the main conclusions.
This paper contributes to an expanding literature on industrial policy, geoeconomics
1 OECD data leaves no room for doubt in this respect. See OECD, ‘ MAGIC Database of Industrial Subsidies’,
https://www.oecd.org/en/data/dashboards/magic-database-industrial-subsidies.html.
2 The ITA (Information T echnology Agreement), the Fisheries Subsidies Agreement and the Agreement on
T rade Facilitation (TFA).
With the steep
increase in
measures that
are impossible to
reconcile with the
WTO framework, the
institution’s policy
relevance is waning
fast

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
and trade integration. Clayton et al (2024) provided a framing paper of the issues involved.
We distinguish between two strands in the literature: papers such as Rotunno and Ruta
(2025), who discussed the effects of the responses to trade-segmenting measures
adopted first by the United States; and papers such as Carvalho et al (2025) and Mattoo
et al (2024), which discuss the effects of unilateralism (such as the 2025 tariffs adopted
by the T rump Administration) on the multilateral trading system. This paper belongs to
the latter category.
2 A history of economic security in theory
and practice
In 1748, the French political philosopher Baron de Montesquieu argued in De l’esprit des
loix (The Spirit of Laws) that trade civilises communities:
On peut dire que les lois du commerce perfectionnent les moeurs, par la même
raison que ces mêmes lois perdent les moeurs. . . . L’effet naturel du commerce est
de porter la paix. Deux nations qui négocient ensemble se rendent réciproquement
dépendantes . . . toutes les unions sont fondées sur des besoins mutuels3.
With these words, Montesquieu expressed the idea of ‘doux commerce’, or mutual
interest and contributing to peace as the lynchpins of the civilising force of trade. His
ideas found support in academia and among policymakers. Cordell Hull, US Secretary
of State during the Franklin D. Roosevelt administration (mid-1930s to mid-1940s),
espoused ‘doux commerce’. Hull’s deep conviction that trade dovetails with peace was
the driving force behind the advent of the GATT4.
The first to cast doubt on the civilising influence of trade integration was Hirschman
(1945). He claimed that trade openness is welfare-enhancing but comes at the cost of
increasing vulnerability. His focus was on the attitude of mercantilists – specifically of
Germany in the pre-Second World War era. Hirschman identified two distinct routes
through which international trade can affect a state’s power: the so-called ‘supply effect’
and the ‘influence effect’. The former refers to the effect of imports (goods and services)
on a country’s overall trade position; the latter, to the ability of a state to interrupt its own
exports and imports. Building on these two effects, Hirschman claimed that there is a link
between gains from trade and dependence on trade, meaning that as the benefits from
trade increase, so too does dependence on it. His critique was a precursor to the later
3 De l’esprit des Lois, IV, XX, 1, 2. T ranslation: “We can say that the laws of commerce perfect morals, for the
same reason that these same laws destroy morals.... The natural effect of trade is to bring about peace. Two
nations which negotiate together make each other mutually dependent ... all unions are based on mutual
need”. A translation of ‘Republican Government’ from Montesquieu (1748) is available at https://press-pubs.
uchicago.edu/founders/documents/v1ch4s2.html.
4 Hull (1948) included extensive references to his battles with the other members of the administration.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
concept of the weaponisation of international trade by those with sufficient bargaining
power. This link to power made the trade-integration process vulnerable, in Hirschman’s
view. In a similar vein, Viner (1948) demonstrated that the ability to separate the gains
from trade from the exercise of power was not a unanimously accepted proposition.
T oday, much is written about the weaponisation of trade policy, the emergence of trade
chokepoints and the ensuing risks. These papers analyse how economic interdependence
is routinely leveraged by states (Clayton et al, 2024; Farrell and Newman, 2019; Fishman,
2025). Conceptually, however, the weaponisation debate has not evolved. For example,
McLaren (1997) wrote long before the advent of geoeconomics about ‘Judge Bowker’s
objection’. Inspired by a Canadian story, he showed how trade liberalisation between two
countries (a large country and a small one, ie the US and Canada), assuming irreversible
investments, could lead to the smaller country ending up worse off, than if it had opted for
autarchy. The reason put forth is that investors in a liberal trade environment will invest in
the export sector and thus make the smaller country dependent on trade with the larger
partner. McLaren (1997) argued that, in this scenario, the smaller country’s bargaining
power is undermined 5. Indeed, McLaren’s prediction came to pass a few decades later,
when the US under President Donald T rump began weaponising trade against its smaller
neighbour.
The preconditions for the weaponisation of trade to succeed are concentrated
production and low substitutability. The aggressor should not be reliant on supplies from
the target country: it must have alternative, stable supply chains, whereas the target
country must be heavily dependent on the aggressor for key imports. The US offers
an obvious example with the pressure on Dutch firm ASML (Advanced Semiconductor
Materials Lithography) to stop selling machinery to China 6. ASML cooperated but the
US administration was willing to escalate its threats of retaliation in the case of non-
cooperation.
2.1 The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)
GATT was Chapter IV of a wider negotiation that would lead to the establishment of the
International T rade Organization (ITO). Chapter V of the ITO, entitled ‘Restrictive Business
Practices’7, included nine provisions, some addressing head on the concentration of
market power. Article 46.1 of the ITO Charter stated:
Each Member shall take appropriate measures and shall co-operate with the
Organization to prevent, on the part of private or public commercial enterprises,
business practices affecting international trade which restrain competition, limit
access to markets, or foster monopolistic control, whenever such practices have
5 McLaren’s analysis was prompted by a pamphlet by a Canadian judge (Judge Bowker) who had anticipated
that by signing the US-Canada FTA (free-trade agreement), Canada would be worse off than otherwise
because Canadians would be making irreversible investments to profit from trade integration with the US.
6 T oby Sterling, ‘ASML CEO says US restricts servicing some China equipment, won’t hurt earnings’, Reuters,
24 April 2024, https://www.reuters.com/technology/asml-ceo-says-us-restricts-servicing-some-china-
equipment-wont-hurt-earnings-2024-04-24/.
7 Thus, while GATT (Chapter IV) focused on state practices, Chapter V was about disciplining private practices
that segmented trade.
The preconditions
for the
weaponisation of
trade to succeed
are concentrated
production and low
substitutability

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
harmful effects on the expansion of production or trade and interfere with the
achievement of any of the other objectives act forth in Article 18.
Article 46.2(d) went beyond the GATT and sanctioned (besides export restrictions;
these are banned in both agreements) “limiting production or fixing production quotas”.
Finally, Article 46.3(g) included an anti-circumvention provision, stating clearly that the
ITO would have jurisdiction to assess “any similar practices which the Organization may
declare, by a majority of two thirds of the Members present and voting, to be restrictive
business practices”.
Members were obliged by Article 50 to avoid the restrictive business practices
mentioned in Article 46 (including limiting production, price fixing, exclusion of certain
enterprises, price discrimination, etc). Article 49 recognised the right of the ITO to
conduct studies into these restrictive business practices and recommend actions to
bring them into compliance with members’ obligations.
With the ITO ultimately failing (as a result of the refusal of the US administration to
submit it to Congress for approval in the early 1950s, fearing that it would transfer too
much sovereignty to the international level), the GATT was left without a strong framework.
Article XXIX of the GATT linked to the ITO, but it is admittedly a weak obligation. In the
absence of antitrust law disciplines, the fight against concerted practices became a
question for national law. Not all jurisdictions adopted antitrust laws at the time, though.
GATT members were not, however, totally helpless. The GATT framework was more
lenient towards non-cooperative behaviour and concession-extraction: subsidies were
largely unconstrained and there were few if any compromises on existing export duties9.
Nevertheless, the original hegemon (US), and subsequent dominant players (US, EU)
made moderate use of this flexibility10.
This begs the question of why past behaviour, when not legally constrained, still
leaned towards cooperation. Two basic reasons explain why.
First, security concerns about the Soviet Union and its satellites reduced GATT
members’ motivation to weaken the alliance. Both Jackson (1969) and Irwin et al (2008)
argued that the GATT was a contractual arrangement between the like-minded winners
of the Second World War who had become both military and economic allies. The original
GATT members either belonged to the North Atlantic T reaty Organization (NATO), or were
8 “Increase the production, consumption and exchange of goods” was one of the objectives explicitly
mentioned in the body of Article 1 of the ITO Charter.
9 There were few concessions anyway, and most of them were offered by small players who could not have
affected terms of trade through similar measures, see WTO, ‘Article II, Schedules of Concessions’, https://
www.wto.org/english/res_e/publications_e/ai17_e/gatt1994_art2_gatt47.pdf.
10 In practice none of them imposed export duties. Over the years, the US adopted a hostile attitude towards
subsidies. The EU disallowed member states’ subsidies in principle (in order to avoid distortions of its
internal market), whereas most EU-level subsidies were concentrated in the farm markets.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
friendly to NATO forces 11. Restricting the original GATT to such like-minded countries
was a clear priority for negotiators 12. Relations between these countries and the Soviet
Union and its satellites was regulated through the Coordinated Committee for Multilateral
Export Controls (COCOM) initially, and the Wassenaar Agreement later on. The major
economies thus behaved like Kindleberger’s (1973) hegemon13, rather than as Hirschman
(1945) had feared.
The second reason is that the level of economic integration was left to the sovereign
choice of the members14. A safeguard clause was included to allow for breathing space in
case the original calculations proved to be wrong15. Finally, the GATT included a national
security clause (Article XXI). This however was almost never used, as the GATT included
allies, originally at least. The ‘Eastern bloc’ countries that joined the GATT subsequently
(Hungary, Poland, Romania, Yugoslavia) were too small to threaten the incumbents, and
anyway, because of the nature of the commitments they assumed, were living outside
the GATT disciplines anyway. COCOM continued to be relevant when it came to trade
between them and the GATT incumbents.
The GATT regime thus provided an adequate safe haven for concerns relating to
the national security, owing more to the attitude of the participants than to institutional
protections against the weaponisation of trade policy.
2.2 The end of history
The WTO was negotiated during the ‘apex’ of liberalism between 1986-1994. Halfway
through the negotiation, the Berlin wall fell – the most symbolic event signalling the end
of the Cold War. Francis Fukuyama (1992) called it the “end of history” and the advent of a
unipolar world. Previous enemies and rivals became increasingly like-minded, all rushing
into the multilateral house. Consequently, the Uruguay round negotiators (the Uruguay
round started in 1986) did not amend the GATT Article XXI to include a discussion on
economic (in addition to national) security).
Reich’s discussion of the perils of techno-nationalism 16 did not initially gain much
11 This statement might seem an oddity in light of the inclusion of Brazil, China and Czechoslovakia among
the negotiators of the original GATT. Brazil’s then president, Eurico Gaspar Dutra, outlawed the Communist
Party and signed the 1947 Rio T reaty, a security agreement with the US, while opening on US investment.
US-Czechoslovakia relations were in a delicate state, and the latter had even accepted an initial offer to join
the Marshall Plan, which it later refused following pressure by Stalin. A coup in Czechoslovakia took place in
March 1948, when the GATT had already been negotiated. The US was on good terms with the Nationalist
Kuomintang, but China was going through a civil war at that time, and left practically no footprint in the GATT
negotiations.
12 The Soviet Union satellites that joined the GATT (Hungary, Poland, Romania, Yugoslavia) were too small to be
a military concern for the big GATT players. The same is true also for Czechoslovakia, which was an original
GATT member and changed sides three months after the entry into force of the GATT.
13 Kindleberger stated that it is in the interest of a hegemon (which is not facing a competitive fringe) to
assume the requisite cost and invest in a multilateral regime that smaller nations will find it in their interest to
adhere to.
14 Clayton et al (2024) advanced an alternative and yet similar explanation, when arguing that Hirschman’s work
precedes the advent of the international liberal order, which made weaponisation of trade policy a remote
possibility.
15 Bagwell and Staiger (2002) provided an authoritative account on the economics of trade agreements and
the GATT.
16 Robert Reich, ‘The Rise of T echno-Nationalism’, The Atlantic Monthly, May 1987, https://www.theatlantic.
com/magazine/archive/1987/05/the-rise-of-techno-nationalism/665772/.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
prominence. Reich had warned that technology was “leaky” and that policies aiming
to contain technological developments within national frontiers were bound to fail.
Shortly thereafter however, it all changed. China’s accession to the WTO in 2001 proved
especially tough to manage. Ideological heterogeneity within the membership increased
substantially, but this was momentarily overlooked after the fall of the USSR. China was
accused of not becoming a market economy 17, and China was disillusioned by how the
West (and especially the US) handled of the 2008 global financial crisis. The COVID-19
pandemic further eroded trust, as WTO members turned inwards to ensure their own
financial security and adequate supplies of personal protective material. By this time,
it was too late to revisit the WTO’s legal arsenal. The consensus-based approach to
adopting decisions proved to be a major impediment to action.
Though the COVID-19 pandemic passed, the issues raised by China’s rapid growth
did not. The first T rump administration imposed unilateral tariffs on imports from
China before negotiating a WTO-inconsistent agreement. This, the so-called Phase
1 Agreement, was never implemented by China, leading to the re-imposition of tariffs.
The Biden administration and second T rump administration adopted roughly the same
attitude towards China, imposing export controls on semiconductors and more generally
on high-tech products. Mavroidis (2025) discussed how the Biden administration made
extensive use of the ‘direct product’ rule, which subjects foreign-produced items to US
jurisdiction if they are a direct product of specific, US-origin technology, software or are
manufactured by a facility that is itself a direct product of such technology.
Additionally, the US initiated a series of Section 232 investigations that led to the
imposition of safeguards on steel products from some WTO members 18. A series of
WTO panels outlawed these measures, yet the US refused to change course. Uncertainty
about future US trade policy continued to increase, especially as the Biden administration
did not remove any of the tariffs on China.
2.3 The present moment
The environment that was supposed to provide certainty for international trading became
increasingly wobbly (Handley and Limão, 2017). The US-China rivalry is a key reason, but
not the only reason for this.
Herz (1950) claimed that one state’s actions to increase its security – which could
take different forms, from building up military strength to forming alliances to investing in
strategic sectors – could be perceived as a threat by other states, which would then in turn
adopt similar strategies to increase their own security. This theory applies to economic
security as well. Nations have subscribed to Herz’s ‘security dilemma’ (Figures 1 and 2).
17 Mavroidis and Sapir (2021) explained why accession to the WTO by itself could not act as catalyst for a
change of regime in China.
18 Section 232 of the US T rade Expansion Act of 1962, as amended (19 U.S.C. §1862) allows the president to
impose restrictions on goods imports or enter into negotiations with trading partners if the Secretary of
Commerce determines, following an investigation, that the quantity or other circumstance of those imports
“threaten to impair” US national security.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
Figure 1: Protecting and liberalising measures at the global scale
Figure 2: US and Chinese protectionist and liberalising measures
Source: Evenett et al (2024).
Evenett et al (2024) offered their own coding of trade-liberalising as opposed to
trade-obstructing measures. What mattered for them is the potential effect of adopted
measures.
The world’s two largest economies were not alone in their drift towards protectionism,
and soon other countries began to mimic their policies. Evenett et al (2024) showed the
rationale for protectionist measures enacted by countries since 2010.
Figure 3: Revealed objectives of trade-restricting measures
Source: Evenett et al (2024). Note: cumulative stock of measures. For measures with multiple motives, each
motive is given equal weight.
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Liberalising
Protecting
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Protecting (China) Protecting (U.S.)
Liberalizing (China) Liberalizing (U.S.)
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2024
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Cumulative stock
GVC Resilience
National Sec / Geopolitical
Climate Mitigation
Strategic Competitiveness

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
Figure 4: Stated motives for industrial actions by period
Source: NIPO by Global T rade Alert, December 2025. Note: ‘The West refers to Australia, the EU, the G7 and
South Korea.
The trend continues to strengthen. As Jakubik et al (2026) stated:
“… 2020 marks a structural shift in the number of industrial policy interventions....
The COVID-19 pandemic, commencing in January 2020, was clearly catalytic, but
policy activity still remains elevated well after countries have exited the pandemic....
In other words, prior to 2020, countries implemented relatively more industrial
policies targeting products in which they already had a strong global market
presence, but this has since switched, implying a shift in focus to new and less
established sectors. An example would be a country that previously supported
firms in heavy industries refocusing its support to downstream, higher value-
added manufacturing”.
Jakubik et al (2026) added:
“Prior to 2020, countries implemented relatively fewer industrial policies targeting
products imported from geopolitical rivals, but this has since reversed, suggesting
growing interest in reducing geopolitical risks from dependencies”.
The choices of China, the US and EU are telling. China is a clear example of acting
alone. Through the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) it has influenced the policy choices of
recipient countries as a quid pro quo for Chinese loans for infrastructure and energy
systems upgrades. It has brought Chinese investment into resource-rich countries in
Africa and elsewhere19.
The US policy is a mix: it has certainly acted alone under President T rump, especially in
April 2025 when it unilaterally decided to do away with its most basic WTO commitments by
raising US tariffs to unprecedented levels. T rump’s second administration has attempted
19 Niarchos (2025) provided an excellent account of Chinese penetration into the African market.
2009-2016
2017-2019
2020-2021
2022-2023
2024-2025
0
20
40
60
80
100
Share (%)
81%
70%
60%
48%
54%
12%
19%
34%
35%
19%
5%
9%
5%
12%
25%
34%
35%
32%
25%
29%
14%
13%
24%
22%
20%
49%
41%
37%
25%
11%
11%
7%
28%
39%
Rest
Rest
Rest
Rest
Rest
West
West
West
West
West
Strategic competitiveness
Security of supply
Climate change mitigation
National security and geopolitical concern

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
to build alliances with specific players in specific strategic markets. Of immediate
interest is the ‘pax silica’ initiative 20, which aims to strengthen and to coordinate global
value chains (GVCs) for advanced technologies, including semiconductors, artificial
intelligence (AI), infrastructure, critical minerals, advanced manufacturing and logistics.
Australia, Greece, Israel, Japan, Qatar, South Korea, Singapore, the United Arab Emirates
and the United Kingdom have signed it. India joined on 20 February 202621.
The trade truce that China and the US signed on 12 May 2025 was not a binding
international agreement. Using ‘pax silica’, the US has led efforts to reduce dependency
on China’s near-monopoly on critical minerals and rare earth elements, which it has been
weaponising. The US has initiated the Forum on Resource Geostrategic Engagement,
with the aim of creating a preferential trade zone with enforced price floors for critical
minerals. It is the successor to the 2022 Minerals Security Partnership 22, another US-led
international initiative that aimed to secure critical mineral supply chains and reduce
dependence on China 23. Fifty-four countries participated in the 2026 Critical Minerals
Ministerial to discuss a plan of action. President T rump has also announced the ‘Project
Vault’, a plan for stockpiling REEs, that will be funded with a $10 billion loan from the US
Export-Import Bank, and nearly $1.67 billion through private capital24.
The EU’s policy is also a mix. It has adopted frameworks for state aid to boost strategic
sectors25 and participates in the T rump administration’s initiatives discussed above. The
EU’s target, formalised in the Critical Raw Materials Act (Regulation (EU) 2024/1252), is
for at least 25 percent of its annual consumption of strategic raw materials, including
rare earth elements, to be sourced from domestic recycling by 2030. Earlier industry
initiatives, such as those from the European Raw Materials Alliance, aimed for 20 percent
of European rare earth needs for magnet manufacturing to be met via recycling by 2030,
a goal supported by a €1.7 billion investment plan to boost urban mining. And the EU has
concluded free-trade agreements with Australia, India and MERCOSUR 26 to find reliable
trade partners. The EU, though often plagued by internal divisions, also has enough
economic weight to weaponise trade, should it choose to do so (Barth and Eisl, 2026).
 Regardless of whether they act in concert or alone, it is quite clear that reducing
uncertainty through diversification is a key objective for the EU and US, whereas China
addresses the risk of uncertainty mainly by trying to secure supplies through investment
20 See U.S. Department of State, ‘Pax Silica’, undated, https://www.state.gov/pax-silica.
21 See Government of India press release of 20 February 2026, ‘India Joins Pax Silica Initiative, Signs the Joint
Statement on India-U.S. AI Opportunity Partnership’, https://www.mea.gov.in/press-releases.htm?dtl/40800/
India+Joins+Pax+Silica+Initiative+Signs+the+Joint+Statement+on+IndiaUS+AI+Opportunity+Partnership.
22 On governance of critical minerals in more general terms, see Sasmal (2026).
23 Among the most important critical minerals are a group of seventeen metals known as rare earth elements
(REEs). They are a key input into the production of semiconductors.
24 Crebo-Rediker and Khan (2026) called for alternative strategies that the US should adopt: instead of
replicating China, it should adopt innovative strategies, such production of rare earth-free and reduced-
content magnets. They also argue that the US should build alliances to embed innovation-led mineral
security, as going alone in this context is not an option. See also Michael Froman, ‘US Allies Aim to Break
China’s Dominance’, Expert Take, 6 February 2026, Council on Foreign Relations, https://www.cfr.org/
articles/u-s-allies-aim-to-break-chinas-critical-minerals-dominance.
25 The payment of aids is at the state level, the EU limiting itself to providing the rulebook stating the conditions
for lawful subsidisation.
26 Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
in resource-rich countries. Hirschman (1945) would feel vindicated after all these years.
He feared rightly that trade openness creates vulnerabilities.
2.4 Why economic and national security, not economic/
national security
Economic and national security are overlapping concepts, but they are not synonymous.
An abstraction of the concept is as follows: state A and state B are asymmetrically
exposed to international trade. Assume A trades only with B, whereas B trades with the
world. A will behave in accordance with ‘doux commerce’: it is not in its interest to upend
its relationship with B, for B is the exclusive supplier of and market for its goods. A will
not risk its national security by engaging in warlike behaviour towards B, even though A
is economically very insecure: if B becomes less open, A will suffer a substantial welfare
reduction.
On the other hand, B is economically secure because of its diversification of supplies
and export markets. B can afford to behave as it pleases and even adopt belligerent
behaviour towards another nation. Its dependence on a specific source is minimal.
Economic security is best served when trade is conducted in smaller volumes with many
suppliers. In other words, whereas national security is about promoting the existence of
a state, economic security is about protecting the national GDP .
2.5 The resulting uncertainty
The WTO is a rules-based system which all its members have agreed to. In such a
system there is no room for deviant behaviour, even by those with large bargaining
power. Kindleberger (1973) explained why it is in the interest of a hegemon to maintain
its commitment to the rules, and Carvalho et al (2025) provided a theoretical framework
supporting this. A rules-based system provides certainty via the predictability of
members’ behaviour. This is not to say that ‘rules-based’ systems are complete contracts.
But competition will occur in accordance with pre-defined rules. When nations operate
outside of the rules, uncertainty creeps in. The US has been the most frequent culprit in
this regard, with its practices being found to be inconsistent with its WTO commitments
by various panels. The legality of the practices of others has yet to be challenged.
Caldara et al (2020) developed the T rade Policy Uncertainty (TPU) index. It tracks
the frequency of terms related to ‘trade policy’ and ‘uncertainty’ appearing in major
newspapers. It is clear from their work that the Uncertainty Index has reached new
heights after January 2025, when the second T rump Administration arrived at the White
House. T o this day, it shows no signs of retreating to its pre-2025 levels.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
The 20 February 2026 US Supreme Court decision to outlaw the 2 April 2025 Liberation
Day tariffs that President T rump enacted by invoking the International Emergency
Economic Powers Act (IEEPA)27 was immediately followed by T rump’s decision to invoke
Section 122, allowing him to impose a flat, non-discriminatory tariff of 15 percent28. This
decision affects the deals that various nations signed with the US, and it remains to be
seen at time of writing how this will be reconciled. The risk of further uncertainty in global
trade is thus quite substantial.
WTO economists have revised their trade projections lowering their estimate for 2026
to 0.5% (down from the previous forecast of 1.8%). T rade growth is expected to slow in
2026 as the global economy cools and as the full impact of higher tariffs is finally felt
for a full year. The WTO’s forecast for world commercial services trade in volume terms
has also been revised in light of recent developments. Although not directly subject to
tariffs, services trade can be affected indirectly through links to goods trade and output.
Services export growth is now expected to slow from 6.8% in 2024 to 4.6% in 2025, and
down to 4.4% in 2026. “Slowbalization”, e.g., the prolonged deceleration of slower trade
growth, this more stagnant phase to put it in blunt terms, is the natural consequence of
the reigning uncertainty regarding the conduct of trade policies by especially the bigger
players.
2.6 Uncertainty, ‘slowbalisation’ and no hegemon in sight
The weaponisation of trade policy has created uncertainty which has in turn led to
‘slowbalisation’, or a backing off from globalisation (WTO, 2025). Despite multiple crises,
the world economy has shown remarkable resilience. Devesa et al (2026) showed that
in 2024 and 2025 trade grew faster than the world economy in general, even though
trade between geopolitically distant players (eg trade between the US and China) shrank
substantially. But there are countervailing forces: artificial-intelligence-related shipments
have increased considerably; China has managed to find new markets (since the US
market has been closed in part to this exports); the US has increased its volume of imports
from other South East Asian countries; and finally, President T rump does trade policy for
“optics, not for outcomes” 29. A number of announced tariff-restricting measures were
either not implemented, or simply abandoned.
At time of writing, uncertainty persists. Certainty is provided only by playing in line
with the multilateral rulebook; a less and less common practice in international trade.
Linking trade to power (for those who can afford it) has provoked a quest for economic
security by players with lower bargaining power. The WTO as-is does cannot adequately
deal with this new policy priority, and so should be amended. Is it possible? Legislative
amendments require consensus to be enacted, and consensus is in short supply in the
27 Supreme Court of the United States, ‘Learning Resources, Inc., et al. v. T rump, President of the United States,
et al.’, https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/25pdf/24-1287_4gcj.pdf.
28 See The White House, ‘Fact Sheet: President Donald J. T rump Imposes a T emporary Import Duty to
Address Fundamental International Payment Problems’, 20 February 2026, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
fact-sheets/2026/02/fact-sheet-president-donald-j-trump-imposes-a-temporary-import-duty-to-address-
fundamental-international-payment-problems/.
29 As put by Richard Baldwin, ‘Why Didn’t T rump T ariffs Wreck the World T rade System’, Richard Baldwin
Substack, 28 March 2026, https://rbaldwin.substack.com/p/why-didnt-trumpian-tariffs-wreck.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
current global environment. Someone needs to take the lead in proposing reforms; the
GATT regime was possible because of the efforts of a hegemon. Kindleberger (1973)
understood the hegemon to be a super-dominant player that faces no competitive fringe.
Hegemonic stability theory posits that a hegemon will opt for a rules-based system
because of the potential hold-up problem 30. Power might be dispersed among many
small players, but they might still be unwilling to participate in a power game from which
they have nothing to win.
Carvalho et al (2025) attempted to formalise this theory, adding some important
nuances. They distinguished between a hegemon, dominant players and subordinates31.
While the hegemon and small players prefer a rules-based system, the preference of
dominant players is for a power-based system. Dominant players face a prisoner’s
dilemma: while their best option would be to jointly pursue and support a rules-based
system, in the absence of any leader their next-best policy is to go it alone (a power-
based system).
Coordination costs should not be underestimated. Most-favoured nation (MFN) and
compulsory third-party adjudication are probably the two quintessential features of
the multilateral system. In proposals by China, the US and the EU on WTO reform 32, two
of the three tend to agree or they do not agree at all. The EU and US have espoused
‘conditional’ MFN status as the recipe for future trade integration. China continues to
support MFN as it currently stands. China and the EU on the other hand, are supporters of
compulsory third-party adjudication within the WTO, which the US opposes. This leaves
the EU agreeing sometimes with the US, sometimes with China, and the US and China
disagreeing on everything.
The WTO is thus facing a ‘Kindleberger trap’ 33. The question arises of whether this
the end of multilateralism. Should the world trading community abandon the multilateral
game and retreat to regional integration34? We believe not. But first, it is time to delve into
the specific of the semiconductor industry.
30 This is a fundamental economic and contract theory concept according to which two parties could work
together efficiently but refrain from doing so because of the fear that one party will exploit the relationship to
gain all the bargaining power and profits after an initial, unrecoverable investment has been made.
31 The hegemon in their model faces no competitive fringe. The dominant players have bargaining power but
face no competitive fringe from each other. Subordinates have no bargaining power.
32 WTO Docs. WT/GC/W/989 of 18 February 2026 (China); WT/GC/W/984 of 15 December 2025 (US); and WT/
GC/W/986 of 21 January 2026 (EU).
33 Joseph S. Nye, ‘The Kindleberger T rap’, Project Syndicate, 9 January 2017, https://www.project-syndicate.
org/commentary/trump-china-kindleberger-trap-by-joseph-s--nye-2017-01.
34 Pahis (2025) made a persuasive case for a plurilateral agreement to address the issue of national security in
an effort to preserve the relevance of the multilateral process.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
15
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
3 The semiconductor industry
Semiconductors are a dual-use good with both commercial (civilian) and military uses.
Semiconductors are also a key component in the AI industry. Demand for AI infrastructure,
high-performance memory chips and cloud computing has led some analysts to state
that the semiconductor industry is experiencing a new business super-cycle35.
2026: Semiconductor Market Surpasses USD 1.5 Trillion Driven by
Extraordinary Memory Expansion
Following exceptionally strong results in late 2025 and early 2026, the global
semiconductor market is now projected to grow 90 percent in 2026, reaching USD 1.51
trillion.
 The sharp upward acceleration is overwhelmingly driven by the Memory segment,
which is forecast to surge by around 250 percent year over year, reaching more than
USD 800 billion in 2026. Continued strong demand for AI infrastructure, high-bandwidth
memory (HBM), and accelerated computing platforms remains the primary growth
catalyst for the semiconductor industry. Logic is expected to remain another major
contributor, growing 37 percent in 2026.
Other product categories are forecast to expand at more moderate rates, reflecting
a broader industry growth: Microprocessors 20 percent, Analog 10 percent, Discrete
Semiconductors 8 percent, Sensors and Optoelectronics with 3 percent.
Regionally, all major markets are projected to show strong growth. The Americas are
expected to more than double in 2026 with 112 percent growth, driven by the concentration
of AI-related semiconductor demand and cloud infrastructure investments. Asia Pacific
is forecast to grow 87 percent, while Europe and Japan are projected to grow 58 percent
and 28 percent respectively.
2027 Outlook: Growth Continues Above Historical Industry Trends
For 2027, WSTS forecasts the global semiconductor market to grow a further 27 percent,
reaching approximately USD 1.9 trillion.
Memory is again expected to lead market expansion with projected growth of 32
percent, while Logic is forecast to increase by 27 percent. Continued deployment of AI
systems, advanced computing infrastructure, and expanding semiconductor content
across end markets are expected to support ongoing industry momentum. All geographic
regions are projected to continue growing in 2027, led by the Americas and Asia Pacific.
35 Resilinc, ‘AI Has Sparked a Supercycle, but Can Semiconductor Supply Chains Keep Up?’ 3 December 2025,
https://resilinc.ai/blog/ai-has-sparked-supercycle-can-semiconductor-supply-chains-keep-up/.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
3.1 Unpacking the semiconductor industry
Semiconductors can be memory chips (ie DRAM, NAND 36) which store data and
programs on computers and/or computing systems and servers, or logic chips (ie CPUs,
GPUs, FPGAs, NPUs 37) which process data. There are also ASICs (application-specific
integrated circuits), which are single purpose, and SOCs (system-on-chip). Alternatively,
analogue chips perform repetitive routines, for example barcode scanning, while SOCs
integrate several chips and circuits into a single chip device, usually combining graphics,
audio, camera, video and Wi-Fi.
Undergirding the vast multitude of semiconductor device types is a complex network of
chip designers, manufacturers and fabricators. The principal business models are fabless
chip designers, foundries and integrated design manufacturers (IDMs). Notable examples
include Nvidia (fabless), TSMC (foundry) and Micron (IDM). These business models and
firms are supported by a global network of design software (EDA), manufacturing/
assembly equipment, testing and packaging, raw materials and components suppliers.
T oday, the major semiconductor industry market segments are:
• Chip design (firms that are either fabless or integrated device manufacturers who
design their own chips) – top suppliers are headquartered in the United States, T ai-
wan, South Korea, the European Union, and China.
• Foundries (firms that only fabricate chips on behalf of customers on a contract
basis, foundries work with “fabless” companies—businesses that design chips but
outsource production) – top suppliers are headquartered in T aiwan, South Korea, the
United States, and China.
• Integrated Device Manufacturers or IMDs (firms which design and manufacturer/
fabricate) – top suppliers are headquartered in the United States, Japan, the Europe-
an Union, and China.
• Memory (firms which only design and manufacture/fabricate memory chip devices,
such as DRAM, and NAND) – top suppliers are headquartered in South Korea, the
United States. Japan, and China.
• Electronic Design Automation (commonly referred to as “EDA”, are firms which only
provide software and hardware used to design, simulate, verify, and manufacture
semiconductor chips) – top suppliers are headquartered in the United States, the
European Union and Japan.
• Wafer Fabrication Equipment or “WFE” (firms in this category design and manufac-
ture the specialized equipment used in semiconductor device fabrication facilities) –
top suppliers are headquarted in the United States, the European Union, and Japan.
3.2 Legacy and advanced semiconductors
When assessing the critical parts of the semiconductor industry, policymakers have
36 DRAM refers to Dynamic Random Access Memory; NAND refers to ‘Not AND’ – a type of Boolean logic gate
that is fundamental to digital electronics.
37 Central processing units, graphics processing units, field-programmable gate arrays and neural processing
units.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
17
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
labelled device types as either ‘legacy’ or ‘advanced’ (see for example Goujon et al,
2024). They ignore the function of each device type. Semiconductor devices can be
categorised as ‘analogue’ or ‘digital’ integrated circuits. Analogue devices account for
about 10 percent of the chip market value. These devices process discrete 0s and 1s
for data processing and storage. Logic and memory chips are ‘digital’ integrated circuits.
About one-third of the semiconductor market comprises leading-edge logic chip, one-
third is memory devices and the remaining third is legacy logic, analogue and power
devices. Commonplace labels such as ‘legacy’ and ‘advanced’ ignore the important
technical characteristics of each type of device.
Policy discussions are commonly focused on the node size or the dimensions
(measured in nanometres or nm; one-billionth of a metre) of a chip’s transistors38. A chip
node size refers to the smallest feature size of a transistor on a single chip. However, this
notion has not been true for some time. Until 1995, when chips were 0.35 micrometres
or 350 nm, nodes described physical gate length in logic chips (ie the actual, measured
physical dimension of a transistor’s gate electrode, which controls electron flow). T oday,
node size is more of a marketing label for a generation of technology.
According to the 2022 US CHIPS and Science Act, ‘advanced’ chips are typically
those devices for which the transistor’s smallest nodes are approximately under seven to
five nm. ‘Legacy’ chips typically have transistor nodes sizes greater than28 nm. It should
be noted that the notion of an ‘advanced’ chip is a moving standard. What was considered
advanced a decade ago, is considered a legacy chip today. Thus, any sectoral agreement
focused on advanced computing must be able to address semiconductor obsolescence
to prevent the agreement’s product scope from becoming irrelevant. Additionally, the US
CHIPS and Science Act device does not define 16nm, 14nm, 12nm and 10nm
semiconductor devices as either advanced or legacy land categorically are not defined in
either category. 
Furthermore, both these labels focus on ‘digital logic’ devices: devices that are data
processing units (ie CPUs, GPUs), though the term digital logic has been expanded to
include high bandwidth memory (HBM) chips as well 39. Most leading-edge computing
systems, including AI systems, use advanced logic chips with an advanced feature size of
5nm/4nm. Even in the most advanced computing systems, however, there are collections
of various chip types, including analogue legacy chips. We focus on advanced chips
that are crucial in leading-edge computing systems: AI and machine learning, high-
performance computing (HPC), advanced graphics and gaming, data centres.
In assessing strategic computing assets, it is essential to define a chip’s technical
features, the capabilities of the devices it powers and how those devices are used. Chips,
whether logic or analogue, advanced or legacy, serve specialised computing functions.
Legacy chips, while once stateoftheart, are now refined and costefficient, produced on
38 See for example U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, ‘Public Report on the Use of
Mature-Node Semiconductors’, December 2024, https://www.bis.gov/media/documents/public-report-use-
mature-node-semiconductors-december-2024.
39 Dylan Patel, Myron Xie, T anj Bennett, Ivan Chiam and Jeff Koch, ‘Scaling the Memory Wall: The Rise and
Roadmap of HBM’, Semianalysis, 12 August 2025, https://newsletter.semianalysis.com/p/scaling-the-
memory-wall-the-rise-and-roadmap-of-hbm.
Any sectoral
agreement focused
on advanced
computing must
be able to address
semiconductor
obsolescence

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
fully depreciated equipment using optimised processes, which has expanded global
participation in their production. By contrast, advanced chips remain scarce and difficult
to produce, requiring significant technical expertise, proprietary knowledge and high
investment, creating substantial barriers to entry and sustained competitive advantage.
T o add some context, Nvidia has invested more than $58.2 billion in research and
development since its inception, indicating the scale of investment needed to achieve
advanced computing capabilities (Nvidia, 2025). In relation to advanced chips, competitors
focus on harnessing specialised hardware architecture features. For example, unlike
CPUs, which process tasks sequentially, GPUs contain thousands of small cores that
perform thousands of operations simultaneously.
Policies targeted at semiconductor supply chains, such as through the US CHIPS and
Science Act, have focused on advanced logic chips because they power cutting-edge
technologies including AI, quantum computing and neuromorphic systems.
However, the semiconductor supply chain is highly global and interdependent,
with no single country or company controlling all stages of design, development and
manufacturing. A major vulnerability is that most advanced GPUs used for AI training are
produced in T aiwan, creating a significant concentration risk in the global supply chain.
3.3 The irresistible appeal of semiconductors
From connected devices to smartphones, artificial intelligence and electric vehicles,
today’s most common devices can point to an integrated semiconductor device as the
source of their communication and functional capabilities. Semiconductor innovation
has significant potential for economic prosperity. It is projected that the electric/
autonomous vehicle market will be valued at approximately $1.5 trillion by 2030. Grouped
with the renewable energy (market valued at approximately $4.5 trillion), the data centre
AI industry (valued at approximately $8 trillion by 2030) and the aggregated device AI
market (valued at approximately $2 trillion by 2030), the revenue returns for an economy
are massive.
T echnological dominance in this area will thus result in huge economic and societal
advantages. Furthermore, competitiveness in technology sets the stage for leadership
in standardisation and leadership in standardisation provides a first-mover opportunity
to drive technological innovation. If a country can be first to develop and commercialise
technological innovations, it can have a technological advantage that sets the direction
for all global technological utilisation (Palacios, 2026).
Adding to the governmental sense of urgency is the increased link between technology
and defence applications, as contemporary commercial innovations are integrated into
defence areas. This digital transformation moves defence from traditional domains to a
connected battlefield, requiring new approaches to maintain national security: integrating
commercial innovations such as AI, drones, cloud computing and satellite tech into
military operations to create faster, more adaptable and efficient forces, enhancing
strategy, logistics and battlefield awareness (Lang et al, 2026).
In an era of heightened geopolitical tension and rapid technological advancement,
the United States continues to prioritise defence innovation to maintain its global
leadership and national security. Funding proposals in the US Department of Defense

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
19
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
Appropriations Act, 2026, include roughly $148 billion for research, development, test
and evaluation (RTD&E) and continued funding support for the US Defense Innovation
Unit (DIU), Accelerate the Procurement and Fielding of Innovative T echnologies (APFIT)
and the Office of Strategic Capital (OSC)40.
With the diffusion of semiconductor design, development and manufacturing
capabilities across the globe, agile firms are the main source of technological innovation,
influencing policymakers to facilitate R&D (basic research, applied research and
experimental development), innovation and strategic investment. Harnessing the
innovation lifecycle in the globally competitive semiconductor industry is an opportunity
to control strategic assets, especially those dual-use technologies at the intersection of
trade, technology and security. As a result, the conceptualisation of a trade agreement
that covers trade in both tangible and intangible goods in the advanced semiconductor
sector, and which factors in the national and economic security aspects, would be a
means to facilitate advanced computing innovation opportunities (ie high-value systems,
driven by materials engineering, chip architecture innovations and breakthroughs in
advance chip packaging).
4 Segmenting the world semiconductor
market
Data from NIPO41 confirms that US, China and the EU are the frontrunners by volume on
industrial policy measures targeted at semiconductors. Figure 8 shows that US activity is
rising. In more modest manner, the EU follows, whereas China has been adopting fewer
measures (the overall number of interventions, not their value).
40 See House Committee on Appropriations press release of 18 July 2025, ‘House Passes FY26 Defense Bill,
Investing in America’s Military Superiority’, https://appropriations.house.gov/news/press-releases/house-
passes-fy26-defense-bill-investing-americas-military-superiority.
41 Global T rade Alert (2026). We thank Simon Evenett for allowing us to use his data in the paper.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
Figure 8: Industrial policy targeting semiconductors
Source: NIPO.
All the measures counted in Figure 8 may run afoul of the WTO:
• Import duties, to the extent that they exceed the level ‘bound’ (‘capped’) during the
Uruguay round negotiations (the last concluded round of trade negotiations), violate
GATT Article II;
• Import quotas violate GATT Article XI;
• Import licensing schemes must observe the disciplines of the WTO Import Licensing
Agreement (ILA), in which non-discrimination features prominently;
• Export quotas violate GATT Article XI;
• Subsidies, as per the current Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
(SCM) are either illegal (export- and local content subsidies), or countervailable (eg
could lead affected parties to impose duties above and beyond the capped level,
equivalent to the amount of the subsidy provided). In other words, a WTO member
subsidising its domestic production risks that its goods when exported to third
countries will in any case be burdened (beyond the agreed customs duty) by an
amount equal to the amount of the subsidy paid per unit. Such costs could be higher
if domestic subsidies are characterised as export subsidies or as subsidies that
include a local-content requirement. In this case, the country could be requested to
withdraw the scheme altogether or face retaliation (above and beyond the agreed
customs duties) for the amount of damage caused to foreign producers worldwide42;
• The national security (‘essential security requirements’) exception embedded in
GATT Article XXI could in principle justify most (and maybe all) of the above-men-
tioned violations, but case law has made this impossible:
42 Economists have criticised the current WTO regime consistently. Grossman and Sykes (2025) provided an
excellent discussion on this issue.
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Brazil
China
EU-27
India
Japan
Rest of South-East Asia
South Korea
USA

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
21
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
o The absence of any mention of economic security in the body of Article
XXI begs the question of the scope of this provision. In DS512 (Russia –
T raffic in T ransit)43, the panel confirmed the narrow scope of this provision:
only measures adopted during war or war-like circumstances could be
justified under this provision. This would mean that none of the measures
we have listed (see Figure 9) could conceivably come under Article XXI (as
constructed in DS512 and all subsequent case law), because of the absence
of a war-like scenario;
o Furthermore, it remains unclear whether subsidies can be justified by
recourse to this provision at all. Case law has avoided the question of
whether an Annex 1A WTO Agreement (like the SCM Agreement) can be
justified by a GATT provision.
Despite the various measures employed to promote economic security in relation
to semiconductors breaching the WTO Agreement, it is unlikely that trading nations
will relinquish their economic security postures, especially now that mistrust has crept
in even between the transatlantic partners. Continuation of the current policies will
contribute to the further weakening of the multilateral system. But it does not have to be
this way. The next section shows how the trend can be reversed will still allowing nations
to promote their security objectives.
5 A sectoral agreement on
semiconductors
A small but still significant number of trading nations is involved in the production of
semiconductors: more for legacy chips, fewer for high-end semiconductors. No country
has the ‘structural’ power to single-handedly impose the regime we outline here, though
some might have ‘relational’ power and be in position to force a certain behaviour on
specific targeted nations. The final agreement would have to be an agreement across
coalescing forces44.
The world trading system has long experience with sectorals 45. Our proposal works
whether or not the membership opts for a critical mass MFN agreement, or for variable
geometry, eg an agreement that will bind only signatories, and to which accession will
be in function of meeting the requirements met by the original signatories. In our view, a
43 See WTO, ‘Russia — Measures Concerning T raffic in T ransit’, https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/
cases_e/ds512_e.htm.
44 Strange (1988) distinguished between relational power (the power of A to influence B), and structural power
(the power of either A or B to determine the rules and constrains of the game). See also Bachrach and Baratz
(1962).
45 The WTO Secretariat issued in 2005 a paper entitled ‘Sector Specific Discussions and Negotiations on
Goods in the GATT and the WTO’, which discussed the history of sectoral agreements that have been
concluded since the advent of the GATT, WTO Doc. TN/MA/A/S/13 of 24 January 2005.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
critical mass MFN would be preferable to another FTA or sectoral agreement outside the
WTO.
5.1 The mechanics
The technical modalities of introducing these agreements into the WTO are as follows.
5.1.1 The process for implementing the suggested sectoral
Recall that by virtue of GATT Article II.7: “The Schedules annexed to this Agreement are
hereby made an integral part of Part I of this Agreement.”
A formal process has been put into place to guide changes in schedules 46. The
1980 ‘Decision on Procedures for Modification and Rectification of Schedules of T ariff
Concessions’47 is the legal instrument that allows for unilateral changes to a schedule
(which is what we propose for semiconductors), but subjects them to a multilateral
process. Changes can comprise either ‘rectifications’ or ‘amendments’. A rectification
does not affect the substance of the negotiated commitment, while an amendment does.
No matter how the WTO member concerned qualifies the change, it must submit
it to the WTO Secretariat’s Market Access Division. The latter will circulate it to the
membership. If no objection arises within three months, it will include the change in
the member’s schedule (certification). If an objection is raised, it will not. Whatever the
case, a dispute can subsequently be submitted, even if there were no objections to the
inclusion of a new concession. Certification does not confer legality 48. It is a process to
verify the accuracy of commitments entered into. The legality of commitments that have
been certified can be challenged, as can the legality of commitments that have been
challenged and consequently have not been certified 49. WTO members affected by the
inclusion of dubious ‘entries’ in a national schedule can protect their interests even if they
did not react when the certification process was underway, and even if it was completed
without them raising an objection.
5.1.2 Scope of the sectoral
The trading nations could opt for one of two possible scenarios. The expansive scenario
would be to write an agreement for trade in all semiconductors. The narrower design
would limit product coverage to advanced semiconductors only. High-end semiconductor
capabilities are defined by cutting-edge performance features, advanced manufacturing
processes and the use of specialised materials (via advances in material science) to
enable high compute-demanding applications such as AI, autonomous systems and
high-performance computing. The membership affected would depend on which of the
two alternatives is privileged, as only a handful of nations produce the advanced goods.
Consider the following key segments:
46 What now follows borrows heavily from Hoekman and Mavroidis (2017).
47 GATT Doc. BISD 27S/25-26.
48 The Appellate Body in EC-Bananas III ruled as much; see also Santana and Jackson (2012).
49 Hoekman and Mavroidis (2017) discussed the relevant case law. This approach was followed for the
implementation of the ITA and the Joint Initiative on Services Domestic Regulation.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
23
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
Table 1: Leading suppliers in advanced semiconductor segments
Semiconductor Sector Leading Suppliers
Foundry fabrication Taiwan (TSMC), S. Korea (Samsung), US (Intel)
Equipment & materials Lithography: EU-Netherlands (ASML), Japan (Nikon,
Canon)
Process Equipment: US (Applied Materials, LAM, KLA),
Japan (TEL), Netherlands (ASM)
Materials: Japan (Shin-Etsu Chemical, JSR)
Fabless design USA (Nvidia, AMD, Broadcom), Taiwan (Mediatek)
Memory DRAM (high bandwidth memory) Republic of Korea (SK Hynix, Samsung), US (Micron)
Source: Bruegel.
Restricting the membership (at the initial stage) would facilitate the negotiation of
the arrangement. However, ‘wider’ product coverage could be seen as more legitimate,
especially because more trading nations would be asked to condone the new ‘economic
security’ clause that, in our view, should be an essential element of the agreement.
Our preference is for an agreement limited to advanced semiconductors. Legacy
semiconductors are available practically everywhere and the design, development and
manufacturing capabilities for these devices are spread across a wide swath of countries,
taking advantage of mature fabrication technologies. There is a huge market for re-use/
re-furbished manufacturing equipment, which has facilitated entry into this market with
less R&D cost compared to advanced chips. Legacy chip firms focus on maintaining
stable, high-volume production for essential, low-cost applications using older, well-
established manufacturing processes with cheaper, widely available equipment.
Plus, to our knowledge, trade in legacy chips is not restricted at all, especially for
general-purpose commercial civilian devices. Furthermore, importing countries do not
burden them with tariffs, because of the Information T echnology Agreement (ITA) and
ITA 250.
However, there could be some consideration made for legacy devices that feature
new innovative capabilities, incorporating advanced materials such as silicon carbide,
or gallium nitride. But like devices used in advanced computing, opening the potential
agreement to a specific set of legacy chips should be focused on specific compute
uses: optoelectronics, power electronics and high-frequency electronics. However, as
mentioned above, trade in these devices is not generally subject to disruptive trade
restrictions and is not affected by national and economic security concerns.
Conversely, advanced semiconductors present with a host of issues that have caused
much acrimony, especially in relation to national security. Dual-use chips link to advanced
computing and the inherent economic and national defence significance of these
capabilities to countries globally. Additionally, the massive R&D expenditure on advanced
chips is driven by the relentless challenge of Moore’s Law (or what’s left of it: “chipmakers
are relying more and more on exotic materials, advanced packaging technologies and
more complex 3D transistor designs to deliver improved chip performance” 51) and the
50 See WTO, ‘Information T echnology Agreement’, https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dtt_e/dtt-ita_e.htm.
51 See ASML, ‘Moore’s Law’, undated, https://www.asml.com/en/technology/all-about-microchips/moores-law.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
intense global competition to innovate at nanoscale. A realpolitik-inspired negotiation in
this narrow context could prove beneficial for a more general updating of GATT Article
XXI.
Our recommendation of an agreement on advanced semiconductors will of course
have a bearing on the identity of the negotiators. The following economies have a legacy
semiconductor supply-chain connection: the US, EU, Japan, Korea, T aiwan, Canada,
China, India, Israel, Malaysia, New Zealand, Norway, Thailand, Indonesia, Singapore,
Switzerland, Vietnam and the Philippines. Only a few (Canada, the US, EU, India, Israel,
Japan, Korea, T aiwan) possess high-end chip capability.
China does not currently possess the indigenous technology, hardware and
equipment to fully fabricate an advanced logic chip (less than 7-5nm). Chinese foundries
leverage western equipment (ie lithography from the Netherlands, etch and deposition
from Japan) for 7nm production. While China is rapidly advancing its DRAM industry,
with Changxin Memory T echnologies (CXMT) producing 16nm DDR5, narrowing the
technology gap with global leaders, it remains heavily reliant on western semiconductor
manufacturing equipment.
5.1.3 MFN trade
Signatories accept that the end product of their negotiations should be subject to
MFN. This should be an issue only with respect to the producers that refuse to accept
commitments. The problem could be circumvented by introducing coverage of a
high percentage of world production as a pre-condition for the entry into force of the
arrangement (‘critical mass’). Signatories should agree to continue to import duty-free
all covered products, except for those listed as sensitive on national-security (and
economic-security) grounds. Each signatory should be allowed to insert a fixed number
of products into this list.
This raises a legal question of interest to ITA signatories. The ITA already covers
some semiconductors, though not the most recent that have been developed since the
conclusion of the ITA. For this latter category, no issues arise at all. But legal issues could
arise for those semiconductors already covered by ITA and ITA 2 with respect to their
tariff treatment.
The non-tariff elements in ITA I and II are limited in scope and cover the guidelines
on electromagnetic compatibility and interference, not the issues we discuss here. But
under our proposal, a signatory might include a product already covered by the ITA (I
or II) in its list of security exceptions. The effects on signatories of both the ITA and our
proposed agreement, and signatories of only the ITA, should be distinguished. The latter
category will have agreed to the new rules and by virtue of lex posterior (subsequent
agreement) will have no claim for compensation as they have voluntarily agreed to that.
The former though could have a legitimate claim for compensation as they might be hurt
by subsidies (for which we propose a safe haven), or measures restricting trade.
As far as the subsidies component of our proposal is concerned, countries will have to
show damage on the basis of demonstration that high-end and legacy semiconductors are
substitutes with respect to specific functions. This could very well be the case. Signatories
of our proposed agreement, when exporting subsidised high-end semiconductors could

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
25
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
face countervailing duties (CVDs). This is unlikely, as importers would have an interest
in importing similar products, but possible. When shunning legacy semiconductors
from their markets (assuming always that they compete with legacy semiconductors
originating in ITA signatories), signatories might be called to pay compensation. But as
time passes, and industry switches progressively to high-end products, this will become
less likely. Nevertheless, to avoid this eventuality, we recommend a bargaining solution
with the ITA signatories that do not join the proposed agreement.
When it comes to justifying exports, signatories of the proposed agreement, without
a re-orientation of current case law, will find it hard to justify their measures under GATT
Article XXI. Consequently, export-restricting measures could be found inconsistent with
WTO rules.
Once again, unless if a bargaining solution has been reached with the signatories
of the ITA, those adopting similar measures will have to accept the imposition of
countermeasures. Note, nevertheless, that the quantification of damage will be very hard
for the plaintiffs, as they will have to quantify the damage resulting from the impossibility
to import high-end semiconductors.
With this in mind, we turn, for our purposes, to the understanding of the term ‘economic
security’ (see also section 2).
Economic security has been defined in some national statutes. For example, a US
domestic statute defines it as meaning: “...the condition of having secure and resilient
domestic production capacity, combined with reliable access to the global resources
necessary to maintain an acceptable standard of living and to protect core national
values”52.
In similar vein, the Council on Foreign Relations (2025) defined economic security as:
“...anything related to the economy that affects national security. That includes,
for example, research and development (R&D), the defense industrial base, and
essentially any government policy that significantly shapes the contribution of the
economy to national security. Since the US economy underpins diplomatic and
military power, an overly broad approach to economic security can quickly become
impractical, as most economic activities touch on national security in some way”.
This is an open-ended definition, but a very plausible one. Economic security is a
context-dependent term that is elastic by construction. The US definition quoted above
could of course provide useful inspiration for a definition that could find its way within
the WTO. However, it would be wise if the WTO membership avoided defining the term
‘economic security’. We have no reliable metric of the term ‘economic security’ in this
context. Some nations are more risk averse than others; some have larger and some
smaller bargaining power. Some have reliable allies, and some do not. T o come up with one
common definition would be difficult. Thus, the term should rather become a negotiated
instrument than a matter for definition.
Furthermore, as noted in Mavroidis (2025), parties supplying evidence about
52 6 USC§ 474 (c)(2).

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
security might legitimately be disincentivised from doing so, especially because of the
WTO’s inadequate judicial framework when it comes to guaranteeing the security of
confidential information. And of course, the risks of ‘incomplete’ definitions should not
be underestimated; the ‘incompleteness’ of Article XXI led the adjudicators in DS512 (the
‘leading’ case in the context; see section 4) to narrow the applicability of Article XXI to war
and war-like situations only. This formula has been replicated in all subsequent case law.
It would be more sensible to negotiate a list of dual-use goods, agreed by all WTO
members, for which the uninhibited trade would present an unacceptable risk 53. The
list would include products on which restrictions (import, export) could be legitimately
placed54. The list should of course be periodically updated to reflect modern realities 55.
The goods to be included should be those that each signatory to our proposed agreement
considers necessary in order to achieve its national and/or economic-security objectives.
The negotiation should aim to minimise the potential for active industrial policy
under the guise of promoting economic security. T o this effect, we suggest a two-step
procedure:
1. First, ensure that products included in the list are genuine dual-use (eg industrial,
military) goods. Some semiconductors, such as legacy node logic chips, older
memory chips (DRAM using a node technology above 18 nanometres), low-density
storage (eg NAND flash memory with fewer than 128 layers), consumer electronic
components (eg sensors or standard computing peripherals), automotive/industrial
chips (standard analogue chips, micro-controllers) and even basic components
(diodes, transistors, passive components) are not dual-use goods. They need not
be part of the agreement.
2. Second, perform an additional sorting across the remaining semiconductors
depending on the availability of the products. It would make little to include in the
agreement products that enjoy wide availability. What constitutes ‘wide’ or ‘sufficient’
availability is something the negotiators could usefully agree.
A less ambitious (but maybe more acceptable approach) would be for the membership
to prepare an open-ended definition of economic security complemented by an indicative
list of products for which restrictions would be appropriate to serve economic security.
The indicative list would help those entrusted with the enforcement of the agreement
to avoid type II errors (false negatives), whereas the definition would help prevent
circumvention: inspired by the indicative list, the members, in case of dispute, could add
to the list.
53 See the relevant discussion in Mavroidis (2025).
54 Of course, to the extent that a WTO member has not bound them, it remains free to impose export duties,
provided that it observes the MFN principle. Lester and Zhu (2019) were the first to table a proposal along
these lines – that is, to make security a negotiable instrument.
55 National governments have been working with national lists for some time, so there is already a basis for an
international negotiation in this context. See for example the 16 critical infrastructure sectors identified by
US National Security Memorandum 22, ‘Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience’, 30 April 2024, https://
www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/national-security-memorandum-critical-infrastructure-security-and-
resilience.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
27
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
This innovation should qualify as WTO-inconsistent. Why so? Simply because the
signatories of our proposed agreement will be withdrawing advantages granted under
the ITA, under which they promised the WTO membership elimination of tariffs for
semiconductors and semiconductor-manufacturing equipment on an MFN-basis. As per
GATT Article XXVIII, bound duties cannot be increased unilaterally. Compensation needs
to be paid to those negatively affected. But those affected will be part of the negotiation
anyway.
Finally, negotiators could be inspired by the EU’s practice of determining ‘adequacy’
in relation to data protection 56. The European Commission can determine whether a
non-EU country offers an adequate level of data protection (equivalent to that of the EU),
providing a legal basis for transfers of data. Similarly, signatories to the agreement could
exonerate some participants from trade restrictive measures, provided they do so based
on transparent and verifiable criteria. MFN would then apply against this background, that
is, if beneficiaries can adequately take care of the concerns of exporting nations. In other
words, ‘trusted’ partners will not be subjected to export restrictions.
Each signatory will thus have the right to include a limited number of listed products
(HS classifications). Restrictive measures can be taken by observing a transparency
obligation to this effect, that is, by explaining which measure has been adopted and with
respect to which listed product. The list of HS classifications to be included could be
inspired by the list of critical technologies developed by the US Office of Science and
T echnology Policy and other similar entities. The term ‘critical technologies’ originates
in the so-called Bucy report from 1976 (Defense Science Board T ask Force, 1976). This
understood the term to roughly cover companies that produced sophisticated technical
data, and recommended that restrictive measures to promote security should be
confined to products with these characteristics, though applying the definition proved
difficult in practice. The periodic updating of the list we propose will ensure that it does
not become outdated. T o avoid confusion, we propose that each member issues one list
and it is this list that it will be updating through periodic re-negotiations.
Every other restrictive measure will have to be justified. The listed products will
be restricted on grounds of economic security, whereas the national security clause
could be invoked for all products covered by the proposed agreement that have not
been included in the list that each signatory to our proposed agreement has issued;
for these, restrictions can be lawfully imposed. The national security clause should
be non-justiciable (Mavroidis, 2025). Similar issues are better handled by committees
behind closed doors (in light of the confidentiality of issues involved, and probably even
reputation costs in case of abuse). Furthermore, besides disagreements between parties
over the content of the term ‘national security’, the inherent incompleteness of the term
implies a high risk of judicial error, as per Wolfers (1962):
“When political formulas such as ‘national interest’ or ‘national security’ gain
popularity they need to be scrutinized with particular care. They may not mean
56 See European Commission, ‘Adequacy decisions’, https://commission.europa.eu/law/law-topic/data-
protection/international-dimension-data-protection/adequacy-decisions_en.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
the same thing to different people. They may not have any precise meaning at all.
Thus, while appearing to offer guidance and a basis for broad consensus, they may
be permitting everyone to label whatever policy he favors with an attractive and
possibly deceptive name” [emphasis added]57.
Scrutiny yes, judicialisation no, is the essence of our recommendation. The common
interest of trading nations will be better served if they rekindle the management of their
disputes (as during the GATT years) instead of rushing to adjudicate ultra-sensitive issues
such as national security. Of course, as things stand, GATT Article XXI is justiciable.
5.1.4 Subsidies
With respect to subsidies, our suggested agreement should state that:
• It takes precedence over the generic SCM Agreement, as far as semiconductor
subsidies are concerned;
• Unlike the SCM Agreement, it provides for a ‘safe haven’ for some subsidies. There
are significant knowledge spillovers and, without the possibility for subsidies, a
coordination failure (‘hold-up’ problem) might arise, as rational investors might be un-
willing to spend money that will profit free riders. A cap reflecting a realistic amount
dedicated to R&D subsidies should thus be introduced to guarantee a level playing
field across all participants;
• Similarly, a provision should be made for production that observes environmental
norms (either unilaterally designed, or multilaterally agreed). The semiconductor
industry is a concern for environmental protection related to its intensive use of
energy, water and hazardous chemicals, from raw-material extraction to manufactur-
ing and end-of-life disposal. T o the extent that signatories are willing to subsidise the
cost associated with pollution, they should be allowed to do so;
• Include a process to scale the product scope, which is focused on keeping pace with
chip innovation to ensure that the advanced semiconductors included in the agree-
ment, plus the manufacturing equipment used to fabricate them, are genuinely those
considered ‘advanced’ by industry. As today’s high-end goods become ‘legacy’ over
time, they will be excluded from national lists allowing for restrictive measures.
5.1.5 Export restrictions
Negotiators should include an export licensing agreement (ELA) that will replicate the
existing import licensing agreement (ILA) disciplines. Export restrictions are increasingly
seen either in finished goods (semiconductors) or in inputs to the finished product (rare
earths). An ELA will help streamline restrictions, just as the ILA has so far58. Our proposed
ELA should apply to all products not included in the ‘security’ list that we propose. As is
57 Wolfers (1962) went on to quip that national security is of course the cardinal preference of nations and
associated policies subordinate other interests to that of the nation itself. He concluded that, beyond that,
the term has very little meaning.
58 Mavroidis (2025) discusses this point in detail.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
29
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
the case with the ILA, conformity with the ELA will of course be justiciable. Consequently,
signatories wishing to impose restrictions above and beyond the security list, will have to
comply with the disciplines embedded in the proposed ELA.
5.1.6 Enforcement
Disputes about the practice of national security (including economic security) can arise,
as nations have differing views on this issue. It would make better sense to entrust such
discussions to a WTO committee in which delegates would discuss and, if needed, agree
to disagree. They should learn to manage and not necessarily resolve their disputes.
Enforcement of R&D spending caps and/or the improper inclusion of items in lists of
‘sensitive’ goods should be points for discussion. Conversely, there should be no room
for adjudication that challenges trade-restricting measures on goods that have been
properly included in the ‘sensitive’ list. The review of the agreement will be monitored by
the signatories of the agreement only.
Our proposed agreement could provide a framework within the WTO for trade in
sensitive, dual-use goods. The intention is to enable the uninhibited pursuance of
plausible objectives while providing relative certainty to the world trading community
about the rules.
Table 2: A schematic representation of our proposal
Coverage Participants MFN Security
exception
Export
restrictions Subsidies
High-end
semiconductors
All producers
of high-end
semiconductors
All
high-end
goods
covered
Negotiated
based on
our two-step
procedure
Disciplines
replicate the
WTO ILA
R&D
expenditure
capped
Source: Bruegel.
5.2 What our proposal can achieve
In previous club agreements, the private sector has played a major role in the negotiation
and the implementation of the final deal. Engagement with industry can take the form of
indirect consultations with industry groups and associations, or directly with company
representatives. Such engagement helped both the original ITA I and the expanded ITA II
to reach successful conclusions. But it is one thing to agree a text. Implementation must
also be adequate.
Industry involvement can lead to pro-liberalisation or pro-protectionism outcomes.
The Multi-Fiber Agreement 59, for example, was clear a market-segmenting agreement,
whereas the ITA is a liberalisation device. Our suggested agreement is clearly a
liberalization device, as it aims to bring order to the unilateral measures that hamper trade
in semiconductors.
Ideally of course, the agreement should be ‘wide’, with disciplines on inputs into
59 GATT Doc. COM. TEX/W/102 of 15 July 1981, available at https://www.wto.org/gatt_docs/English/
SULPDF/90630047.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
semiconductors (rare earths) also part of the negotiation. This however would require the
simultaneous presence of the US and China in negotiations, which is why it is not a make-
or-break issue in our proposal. If the US and China did agree to that, their participation
would substantially increase the legitimacy of the end agreement.
Product coverage could be delimited by introducing the HS classifications of the
products concerned, or by describing some of the products (as it might prove necessary
to extend the coverage to technology that goes beyond the strict definition of a
‘semiconductor’), or both, eg include HS classifications whenever possible and act based
on to descriptions of items when necessary.
On the proposed subsidy discipline, two potential criticisms arise. First, how can
a part of the WTO membership impose a relaxation of the subsidy discipline on the
WTO membership? Second, why is a relaxation necessary? We propose a relaxation of
the subsidy regime to facilitate the introduction of a safe haven for R&D subsidies (to
encourage innovation, address knowledge spillovers, etc). We are actually proposing a
re-introduction of this category of subsidies, as the original Article 8 of the SCM made
room for them. But Article 8 of the SCM expired after five years (SCM Article 31) and
was not renewed. Why is it necessary to re-introduce a provision along these lines with
more realistic sums involved this time? After all, one might legitimately argue that similar
subsidies are only ‘actionable’ 60. Consequently, those who object to subsidies can at
best request a retreat from subsidisation. But of course, this risk is close to zero, as all
producers of semiconductors will have signed our proposed agreement. And why would
consumers (who, if at all, will profit from the lower prices resulting from the subsidisation)
challenge the legality of relaxing the current discipline?
The real risk originates in the ‘completion’ of the contract through case law. The agency
design for adjudicating disputes in the WTO is insufficient. There are numerous examples
of unsatisfactory results (Mavroidis, 2022). If the door to ‘permissible’ subsidies is
closed, WTO panels might blur the distinction between ‘actionable’ and ‘prohibited’. The
evidentiary standard for the latter is very low, and opportunistic members might indulge
in litigation for purely selfish reasons (eg to fend off legitimate claims from subsidisers
of semiconductors about other issues). Errors will not be confined to the jurisprudence
regarding semiconductors, but will expand to the understanding of the SCM Agreement.
Critics might also find our proposal too deferential to national qualifications of security.
But the counterfactual is the current situation, in which panels routinely interpret GATT
Article XXI in roughly the same way, and culprits refuse to implement the final reports.
Furthermore, the current interpretation of this provision makes no room for promotion
of economic security, a concept distinct from essential security interests (the term
appearing in the GATT statute). Our proposal, if taken seriously, will lead to a negotiation
of items for which restrictions are permissible thus providing some certainty on trade in
semiconductors.
Our solution is inspired by the negotiation of the original GATT. Faced with the question
of how to define ‘protection’ in order to tame it, the negotiators, instead of defining it,
adopted a less-ambitious but functional attitude: they reduced ‘protection’ to one
60 We owe this argument to Jeromin Zettelmeyer, who pushed us to think this issue through.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
31
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
negotiable instrument, namely, tariffs. They outlawed quantitative measures at the border
and obliged members to apply their behind-the-border policies in a non-discriminatory
manner. Consequently, trading nations wishing to protect domestic producers could only
do so through tariffs.
Similarly, instead of attempting to define ‘economic security’, we suggest that WTO
members should reduce it to a negotiable instrument. Each of them would draw up a list
of goods that could be subjected to trade-restrictive measures. The remaining product
markets could be protected only through the existing contingent protection instruments.
And anyway, it is not easy to imagine how one could go beyond our framework
without pushback. Nations are unwilling to compromise economic security. The reigning
uncertainty has divided even staunch allies, such as the transatlantic partners. Those
who see parallels in history compare modern times with the situation before the First
World War (Westad, 2026). Our proposed agreement is an effort to re-establish channels
of communication across nations globally. There are ways and means to advance the
concerns of trading nations without moving outside the disciplines embedded in the
multilateral edifice.
In this respect, we would like to underscore the potential positive external effects of our
recommendation: if it works, trading nations might wish to re-engage with the multilateral
machinery once again. This would be the biggest gain for the world community.
References
Bachrach, P . and M.S. Baratz (1962) ‘Two Faces of Power’, The American Political Science Review
56: 947-952, available at https://doi.org/10.2307/1952796
Bagwell, K. and R.W. Staiger (2002) The Economics of the World Trading System, MIT Press, avail-
able at https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262524346/the-economics-of-the-world-trading-system/
Barth, J. and A. Eisl (2026) Relearning the Language of Power: Geopolitical Coalitions and Pooled
Geoeconomic Deterrence as Europe’s Plan B for a Post-WTO World, Geostrategic Europe
T askforce, available at https://www.geostrategic-europe.org/publications/relearning-the-lan-
guage-of-power
Bucy, J. (1976) An Analysis of Export Controls of US T echnology, Office of the Director of Defense
Research and Engineering, available at https://dsb.cto.mil/wp-content/uploads/2025/12/76-1_EX-
PORT-CONTROL-OF-U.S.-TECHNOLOGY .pdf
Caldara, D., M. Iacoviello, M. Molligo, A. Prestipino and A. Raffo (2020) ‘The Economic Effects of
T rade Policy Uncertainty’, Journal of Monetary Economics, 109: 38-59, available at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmoneco.2019.11.002
Carvalho, C, D. Monte and E. Ornelas (2025) ‘Equilibrium T rade Regimes: Power- vs. Rules-Based’,
mimeo, available at https://www.aeaweb.org/conference/2026/program/paper/RdHDNNed
CFR (2025) U.S. Economic Security, Winning the Race for T omorrow’s T echnologies, T ask Force Re-
port 83, Council on Foreign Relations, available at https://www.cfr.org/task-force-reports/us-eco-
nomic-security
Clayton C., M. Maggiori and J. Schreger (2024) ‘A Framework for Geoeconomics’, Working Paper
24/01, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, available at https://siepr.stanford.edu/pub-
lications/working-paper/framework-geoeconomics

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
Crebo-Rediker, H.E. and M. Khan (2026) ‘Leapfrogging China’s Critical Minerals Dominance’, Coun-
cil Special Report 101, Council on Foreign Relations, available at https://www.cfr.org/reports/leap-
frogging-chinas-critical-minerals-dominance
Devesa, T., J. Seong, O. White, N. Leung, C. Lamanna and J. Rebled (2026) Geopolitics and the
Geometry of Global Trade, McKinsey Global Institute, available at https://www.mckinsey.com/mgi/
our-research/geopolitics-and-the-geometry-of-global-trade-2026-update
Evenett, S., A. Jakubik, F. Martin and M. Ruta (2024) ‘The Return of Industrial Policy in
Data’, IMF Working Paper 2024/001, International Monetary Fund, available at https://doi.
org/10.5089/9798400260964.001
Farrell, H. and A.L. Newman (2019) ‘Weaponized Interdependence: How Global Economic Networks
Shape State Coercion’, International Security 44(1): 42-79, available at https://doi.org/10.1162/
isec_a_00351
Fishman, E. (2025) Chokepoints: How the Global Economy Became a Weapon of War, Elliot &
Thompson, available at https://eandtbooks.com/books/chokepoints/
Fukuyama, F. (1992) The End of History and the Last Man, Free Press
Global T rade Alert (2026) New Industrial Policy Observatory (NIPO), available at https://global-
tradealert.org/reports/new-industrial-policy-observatory-nipo
Goujon, R., J.P . Kleinhans and L. Gormley (2024) Thin Ice: US Pathways to Regulating China-Sourced
Legacy Chips, Rhodium Group, available at https://rhg.com/research/thin-ice-us-pathways-to-reg-
ulating-china-sourced-legacy-chips/
Handley, K. and N. Limão (2017) ‘Policy Uncertainty, T rade, and Welfare: Theory and Evidence for
China and the United States’, American Economic Review 107(9): 2731–2783, available at https://
www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20141419
Herz, J. (1950) ‘Idealist Internationalism and the Security Dilemma’, World Politics 2(2): 157-180,
available at https://doi.org/10.2307/2009187
Hirschman, A.O. (1945) National Power and the Structure of Foreign Trade, California University
Press, available at https://www.ucpress.edu/books/national-power-and-the-structure-of-foreign-
trade/paper
Hoekman, B.M. and P .C. Mavroidis (2017) ‘MFN Clubs and Scheduling Additional Commitments in
the GATT: Learning from GATS’, European Journal of International Law 28(2): 387-407, available at
https://doi.org/10.1093/ejil/chx022
Irwin, D.A., P .C. Mavroidis and A.O. Sykes (2008) The Genesis of the GATT, Cambridge University
Press, available at https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511817953
Jackson, J.H. (1969) World Trade and the Law of the GATT, Bobbs-Merrill: Indianapolis
Jakubik, A., M. Ruta and S. Pienknagura (2026) ‘The New Era of Industrial Policy, Evidence
and Implications’, EconPol Forum 27(1): 4-8, available at https://www.econstor.eu/bit-
stream/10419/336189/1/195112958X.pdf
Kindleberger, C.P . (1973) The World in Depression 1929-1939, University of California Press
Lang, N., P . Lavigne, G. Mallory, R. Rafih, J. Lampert and D. Zuluaga Martínez (2026) ‘The Defense
T echnology Frontier’, Article, 9 February, Boston Consulting Group, available at https://www.bcg.
com/publications/2026/the-new-frontier-of-defense-technology-and-security
Lester, S. and H. Zhu (2019) ‘A Proposal for “Rebalancing” to Deal with “National Security” T rade
Restrictions’, Fordham International Law Journal, 42(5): 1451-1474, available at https://ir.lawnet.
fordham.edu/ilj/vol42/iss5/5/
Mattoo, A., M. Ruta and R.W. Staiger (2024) ‘Geopolitics and the World T rading System’, NBER Work-
ing Paper 33293, National Bureau of Economic Research, available at https://www.nber.org/papers/
w33293

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
33
Working Paper | Issue n˚21/26 | July 2026
Mavroidis, P .C. and A. Sapir (2021) China and the WTO, Why Multilateralism Still Matters, Princeton
University Press, available at https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv13qfvq5
Mavroidis, P .C. (2022) The WTO Dispute Settlement System: How, Why And Where? Edward Elgar
Publishing, available at https://doi.org/10.4337/9781803921747
Mavroidis, P .C. (2025) Industrial Policy, National Security and the Perilous Plight of the WTO, Oxford
University Press, available at https://doi.org/10.1093/9780197795132.001.0001
McLaren, J. (1997) ‘Size, Sunk Costs, and Judge Bowker’s Objection to Free T rade’, American Eco-
nomic Review 87(3): 400- 420, available at https://www.jstor.org/stable/2951352
Nvidia (2025) 2025 NVIDIA Corporation Annual Review, available at https://s201.q4cdn.
com/141608511/files/doc_financials/2025/annual/NVIDIA-2025-Annual-Report.pdf
Pahis, S. (2025) ‘Can Plurilaterals Solve the WTO’s National Security Crisis?’ The Journal of World
Investment and Trade 26: 189-218, available at https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4971174
Palacios, M. (2026) The Semiconductor Rivalry: How Chips Became a Flashpoint, Elgar Publishing,
forthcoming
Rotunno, L. and M. Ruta (2025) ‘T rade Partners’ Responses to US T ariffs’, IMF Working Paper
2025/147, International Monetary Fund, available at https://www.imf.org/-/media/files/publications/
wp/2025/english/wpiea2025147.pdf
Santana, R. and L.A. Jackson (2012) ‘Identifying Non-tariff Barriers: Evolution of Multilateral Instru-
ments and Evidence from Disputes (1948-2011)’, World Trade Review 11(3): 462-478, available at
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1474745612000316
Sasmal, S. (2026) ‘Let’s Get Critical: Critical Minerals Mini Deals as Evolving Models of T rade
Cooperation’, World Trade Review 25(2): 267-302, available at https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1474745625101444
Strange, S. (1988) States and Markets, Continuum
Viner, J. (1948) ‘Power versus Plenty as Objectives of Foreign Policy in the Seventeenth and Eigh-
teenth Centuries’, World Politics 1(1): 1-29, available at https://doi.org/10.2307/2009156
Westad, O.A. (2026) The Coming Storm, Power, Conflict, and Warnings from History, Henry Holt
Wolfers, A. (1962) Discord and Collaboration, Essays on International Politics, Johns Hopkins Press
WTO (2025) Global Trade Outlook and Statistics, Update: October 2025, World T rade Organization,
available at www.wto.org/english/news_e/news25_e/stat_07oct25_e.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
© Bruegel 2026. Bruegel publications can be freely republished and quoted according
to the Creative Commons licence CC BY -ND 4.0. Please provide a full reference, clearly
stating the relevant author(s) and including a prominent hyperlink to the original publication
on Bruegel’s website. Y ou may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that
suggests the author(s) or Bruegel endorse you or your use. Any reproduction must
be unaltered and in the original language. For any alteration (for example, translation),
please contact us at press@bruegel.org. Publication of altered content (for example,
translated content) is allowed only with Bruegel’s explicit written approval. Bruegel
takes no institutional standpoint. All views expressed are the researchers’ own.
Bruegel, Rue de la Charité 33, B-1210 Brussels
(+32) 2 227 4210
info@bruegel.org
www.bruegel.org
