
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Alicia García Herrero (alicia.
garcia-herrero@bruegel.org)
is a Senior Fellow at Bruegel
Michal Krystyanczuk
(michal.krystyanczuk@
bruegel.org) is a Data
Scientist at Bruegel
This paper is an output of
China Horizons, Bruegel’s
contribution to the project
Dealing with a Resurgent
China (DWARC). This
project has received funding
from the European Union’s
HORIZON Research and
Innovation Actions under
grant agreement No.
101061700.
Policy Brief
Issue n˚29/25 | November 2025 What can Europe learn
from China’s critical-tech
innovation push?
Recommended citation
García Herrero, A. and M. Krystyanczuk (2025) ‘What can Europe learn from China’s critical-
tech innovation push?’ Policy Brief 29/2025, Bruegel
Alicia García Herrero and Michal Krystyanczuk
Executive summary
This Policy Brief examines China’s rapid ascent in frontier innovation across artificial
intelligence, semiconductors and quantum computing, and the most important companies
behind these breakthroughs. In these three areas, the United States leads overall, but
China continues to narrow the gap and now excels in areas including semiconductor
fabrication, AI video and audio processing and aerial vision. China lags the most in quantum
computing. The European Union lags significantly behind both the US and China in patent
breakthroughs, with slightly better relative performance in quantum.
When it comes to the diffusion of such breakthroughs, Chinese and US innovators are
much faster than their European counterparts at replicating novel patents from other
countries. European innovators take more than twice as long to replicate US or Chinese
breakthroughs, whether in AI, semiconductors or quantum. That Chinese replication happens
nearly as rapidly as US replication, even in areas subject to strict export controls, is another
signal of China’s rapidly advancing innovation capabilities in critical technologies.
China stands out in terms of the diversity of companies and institutions that dominate
the filing of novel patents. In the US, breakthroughs are heavily concentrated in the big-tech
companies. Novel patents originating in the EU are filed by a mix of companies and public
research centres, with the telecoms sector dominating more than in other geographies.
Furthermore, China is moving up the ladder in homegrown innovation in basic
research. This is offering an edge, especially in semiconductors, to which China has dedicated
huge energy and funding resources. By contrast, Europe’s fragmented markets and reliance
on public research limit scale and hold back commercialisation. To close the gap, Europe
must increase research and development in critical technologies while further integrating its
national innovation ecosystems.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
Policy Brief | Issue n˚29/25 | November 2025
1 Introduction
Supremacy in critical technologies, in particular artificial intelligence, semiconductors and
quantum computing, has become a cornerstone of economic and strategic power. These
technologies underpin everything from autonomous weapons to climate modelling. Control
over them shapes global supply chains, national security and economic resilience.
China’s ascent in these technologies has been so quick that there is a general belief that
it might already have caught up with the United States, guaranteeing the self-reliance that
China has long pursued1. For example, the groundbreaking release of DeepSeek’s cost-effi-
cient, open-source AI model in early 2025, which outperformed benchmarks from US giants
such as Meta while navigating chip export restrictions, reinforced the perception that China
is rapidly outpacing the US in AI innovation. The European Union, meanwhile, is considered
to be lagging when it comes to generating breakthroughs in these technologies (Draghi, 2024).
In this Policy Brief, we show, based on analysis using large language models (LLMs; García
Herrero et al, 2025a), where China stands on AI, semiconductors and quantum computing
compared to the US and the EU. We assess the three economies according to their basic
research in these fields and examine how quickly each replicates breakthroughs patented by
innovators in the others. This question is important because if such technological spillovers
happen rapidly, they can mitigate the consequences of a lack of breakthroughs for countries
or regions that are not at the frontier of critical technologies.
Finally, we look at the companies or research institutions that create most of these break-
throughs, and how they differ in China, the US and the EU. Our analysis of this is based on
Garcia Herero et al (2025b).
China appears to be succeeding in AI, semiconductors and quantum computing, though
with some caveats. Understanding how China has managed to move up the innovation ladder
so quickly, and why the EU may have fallen behind, is crucial if Europe is to design a more
effective innovation strategy in these technologies. A better strategy will help close the gap
between the EU and the US and, in many cases, between the EU and China.
2 Where does China stand?
Since 2019, numbers of Chinese patent filings in AI, semiconductors and quantum computing
have skyrocketed, but, up to 2023, China had not yet outstripped the US (Figure 1)2. In terms
of patents for ‘radical novelties’ , which we define as new patents for which there are no prior
similar patents and which are then repeated at least five times in subsequent patents (García
Herrero et al, 2025a), China is second after the US in AI and semiconductors. The EU is in a
distant third place, except for quantum technologies, for which the EU and China are about
on par in terms of radical novelties, though both are still very much behind US.
1 Justin Riggi, ‘How China Is Outperforming the United States in Critical Technologies’ , Innovation Files, 23 September
2025, Information Technology & Innovation Foundation, https://itif.org/publications/2025/09/23/how-china-is-
outperforming-the-united-states-in-critical-technologies/.
2 Patent data goes beyond the end of 2023, but our approach requires at least an additional year to identify a patent as
a radical novelty as it must be replicated five times to fulfil the criteria.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
Policy Brief | Issue n˚29/25 | November 2025
Figure 1: Radical novelties by company headquarters (2019-2023)
Source: García-Herrero et al (2025a). Note: see the text for a definition of a ‘radical novelty’.
Chinese progress is particularly evident in semiconductor-related radical novelties,
followed by AI and, to a much lesser extent, quantum (Figure 2). The US clearly dominates
quantum. It also dominates AI, although China is getting closer. For semiconductors, China
seems to have moved into the lead but we miss two major players in this field in our analysis:
South Korea and Taiwan. These are closer to the US ecosystem and feed it with breakthroughs
not captured in our analysis.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
China United States European Union
Sem iconductors
AI
Quantum
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
2 0 1 9 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 1
AI Semiconductors Quantum computing
2 0 2 2 2 0 2 3
0
1 0 0
2 0 0
3 0 0
4 0 0
5 0 0
6 0 0
7 0 0
8 0 0
9 0 0
2 0 1 9 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 1 2 0 2 2 2 0 2 3
0
1 0 0
2 0 0
3 0 0
4 0 0
5 0 0
6 0 0
7 0 0
8 0 0
2 0 1 9 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 1 2 0 2 2 2 0 2 3
C hi na E u r o p e an U n i o n U ni t e d S t at e s
Figure 2: Evolution of radical novelties, 2019-2023
Source: García-Herrero et al (2025a).
However, dominance of a field as broad as AI, semiconductors or quantum computing
may not be very informative. Figure 3 on page 5 summarises a more granular analysis of sub-
fields of these critical technologies.
Starting with AI, China has made the greatest strides in computer vision for surveillance
and autonomous systems. China is responsible for over 40 percent of China/US/EU radical
novelties in these fields. China’s comparative advantage in these areas has quickly moved to
implementation, with the rapid implementation of smart-city digital infrastructure that pro-

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
Policy Brief | Issue n˚29/25 | November 2025
cesses millions of data points daily3. In drone and aerial vehicle AI, Chinese firms lead with
55 percent of all of the China/EU/US breakthroughs. In particular, China has been pioneering
swarm intelligence for logistics, surpassing the US, let alone the EU4.
In semiconductors, China’s lead is anchored in hardware-intensive and production-ori-
ented subfields. In these areas, China accounts for 65 percent of total novel patents filed
by China, the EU and the US, with a clear focus on 3D stacking for high-density memory
(García-Herrero et al, 2025a). This technology is critical for cutting-edge AI devices, meaning
that China could probably produce AI chips if it did not face other constraints, especially in
lithography5. China’s rapid chips upgrade has been accompanied by very strong governmen-
tal support through programmes such as Made in China 20256. The expansion from semi-
conductor manufacturing and materials to robotics and automation also reflects a deliberate
strategy to internalise formerly imported capabilities, turning industrial coordination into a
technological multiplier.
The field in which China seems to lag the most is quantum. The US dominates most of
the quantum subfields, especially quantum computing. Nevertheless, China excels in some
quantum subfields, such trapped-ion systems for scalable sensors that enhance precision
measurement for applications such as earthquake prediction (Omaar and Makaryan, 2024).
While China has clearly moved up the ladder in critical technologies, the US remains
dominant overall for two reasons. First, the US tends to dominate the most advanced
subfields, including machine learning, chip design, materials engineering and quantum
systems control. Second, the US has a more vertically integrated structure, focusing on
deepening algorithmic and design specialisation, which can then serve as basis for hardware
breakthroughs. This interconnection accelerates diffusion across technologies. For example,
algorithmic improvements in AI enhance chip design, while advances in quantum control
feed back into computing architectures. The same companies and institutions often operate
across these boundaries, sustaining innovation cycles even if manufacturing is offshored. The
result is an ecosystem in the US that is less diverse than China’s, but hard to replicate because
it retains control of the design, optimisation and data integration stages, which generate the
greatest spillovers throughout the value chain.
Europe remains strong in select subfields, including robotics, medical AI, power electron-
ics, lithography and quantum photonics, but these strengths are clearly more fragmented
and isolated than those of the US and China. Opportunities for the EU to catch up emerge in
complementary niches. In quantum photonics, the EU has 28 percent of China/US/EU radical
novelties, which is more than China. In AI ethics and explainable models, the EU trails min-
imally at 18 percent versus China’s 20 percent, with novelties in bias-mitigation frameworks
that align with the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR, Regulation (EU) 2016/679),
offering a pathway to exportable standards. For semiconductors, Europe’s 15 percent share in
lithography understates a clear advantage, bolstered by Dutch company ASML ’s near-monop-
oly on extreme ultraviolet (EUV) tools (VerWey, 2024).
All in all, the advantages enjoyed by the US and China advantages are different but both
strong, while the EU lags. China’s concentration in manufacturing-related technologies
3 Ni Tao, ‘From Sensors to Smart Cities: China’s Digital Leap Forward’ , CKGSB Knowledge, 17 July 2025, Cheung Kong
Graduate School of Business, https://english.ckgsb.edu.cn/knowledge/article/china-smart-cities-digital-evolution-
at-scale/.
4 Evelyn Cheng, ‘ AI integration gives China supply chains an even greater advantage’ , CNBC, 4 June 2025, https://
www.cnbc.com/2025/06/04/cnbcs-the-china-connection-newsletter-china-supply-chains-ai-edge.html.
5 Jacob Wentz and Anita Lin, ‘Breakthroughs or Boasts? Assessing Recent Chinese Lithography Advancements’ , Blog
Post, 24 September 2025, Center for Strategic and International Studies, https://www.csis.org/blogs/strategic-
technologies-blog/breakthroughs-or-boasts-assessing-recent-chinese-lithography. Note, the numbers of patents
originating in Taiwan and South Korea (not included in our analysis) are also likely very large.
6 See for example, Kaiser Kuo, ‘Made in China 2.0: The future of global manufacturing?’ Deep Dive, 26 June 2025,
World Economic Forum, https://www.weforum.org/stories/2025/06/how-china-is-reinventing-the-future-of-
global-manufacturing/.
The US tends to
dominate the most
advanced subfields,
including machine
learning, chip design,
materials engineering
and quantum systems
control

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
Policy Brief | Issue n˚29/25 | November 2025
Figure 3: Evolution of radical novelties by subsector
Source: García-Herrero et al (2025b).
underpins its capacity to scale up following the logic of industrial breadth. The United States
achieves rapid feedback between design and application through tight integration. Europe’s
flatter profile reflects excellence in individual areas but weak connectivity. In other words,
Europe exhibits depth without density or scale.
0
1 0 0
2 0 0
3 0 0
4 0 0
5 0 0
6 0 0
7 0 0
8 0 0
9 0 0
1 0 0 0
0 %
1 0 %
2 0 %
3 0 %
4 0 %
5 0 %
6 0 %
7 0 %
8 0 %
9 0 %
1 0 0 %
M a c h i n e l e a r n i n g
C o m p ute r v i s i o n
N a tur a l l a n g ua g e p r o c e s s i n g
R o b o ti c s
I m a g e p r o c e s s i n g
Da t a a n a l yti c s
A d v a n c e d m e d i c a l t e c h n o l o g i e s
A ud i o p r o c e s s i n g
T e l e c o m m un i c a ti o n s
Vi d e o p r o c e s s i n g
H e a l th c a r e a n a l yt i c s
A e r i a l v e h i c l e t e c h n o l o g y
C y b e r s e c ur i ty
A uto n o m o us d r i v i n g
O th e r
G e n e r a ti v e a i
B i o m e tr i c s e c ur i ty
Da t a s to r a g e
T o t al num b e r o f r ad i c al no v e l t i e s (m ar ke r s )
S har e o f r ad i c al no v e l t i e s (s t ac ke d b ar )
0
2 0 0
4 0 0
6 0 0
8 0 0
1 0 0 0
1 2 0 0
0 %
1 0 %
2 0 %
3 0 %
4 0 %
5 0 %
6 0 %
7 0 %
8 0 %
9 0 %
1 0 0 %
S e m i c o n d uc to r m a n uf a c tur i n g
Di s p l a y te c h n o l o g y
O p to e l e c tr o n i c s
M e m o r y te c h n o l o g y
M a te r i a l s s c i e n c e
Micro-electromechanical systems
Po w e r e l e c tr o n i c s
S e m i c o n d uc to r p a c k a g i n g
S e m i c o n d uc to r d e s i g n
S e n s o r te c h n o l o g y
S e m i c o n d uc to r d e v i c e
Ph o to n i c s
S e m i c o n d uc to r d e v i c e te s ti n g
I m a g i n g te c h n o l o g y
N a n o te c h n o l o g y
O th e r
B i o m e tr i c s s e c ur i ty
T o t al num b e r o f r ad i c al no v e l t i e s (m ar ke r s )
S har e o f r ad i c al n o v e l t i e s (s t ac ke d b ar )
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
1 2 0
1 4 0
1 6 0
1 8 0
0 %
1 0 %
2 0 %
3 0 %
4 0 %
5 0 %
6 0 %
7 0 %
8 0 %
9 0 %
1 0 0 %
Q ua n tum h a r d w a r e
Q ua n tum s ys te m s a n d c o n tr o l
Q ua n tum p h o t o n i c s
Q ua n tum c r yp to g r a p h y
Q ua n tum s e m i c o n d uc to r te c h n o l o g y
Q ua n tum c o m m un i c a ti o n
O th e r
Q ua n tum c h e m i s tr y
Q ua n tum c yb e r s e c ur i ty
Q ua n tum n e tw o r k i n g
T o t al num b e r o f r ad i c al no v e l t i e s (m ar ke r s )
S har e o f r ad i c al no v e l t i e s (s t ac ke d b ar )
AI Semiconductors
Quantum computing
C h i n a E ur o p e a n U n i o n U n i te d S ta te s

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
Policy Brief | Issue n˚29/25 | November 2025
3 Which companies are driving innovation?
Innovation ecosystems in China, the US and the EU differ sharply (García-Herrero et al,
2025b). Chinese innovators by type are much more diverse than in the US, while Europe lies
in between, though it relies more on public research centres.
In the US, tech companies dominate the whole spectrum of radical novelties. Microsoft,
IBM, Intel and Qualcomm stand out for involvement in multiple critical technologies, while
Micron Technology, Google and Amazon also among the top-ten US innovators by number
of novel patents. This high concentration in tech is a risk, but also offers the advantage of
fostering synergies. Furthermore, this concentrated ecosystem, backed by the world’s largest
venture capital market, ensures rapid commercialisation, though it risks siloing innovation in
the digital realm, rather than diversifying across industries.
US companies are strongest in design and software-driven areas. In particular, AI com-
panies including Microsoft, Google, IBM and Nvidia lead breakthroughs in machine learn-
ing and natural language processing, while Amazon focuses on applied natural language
processing. In semiconductors, US companies innovate more than Chinese or EU companies
in chip design, materials and power electronics, with Intel, Qualcomm, Applied Materials and
Micron building a dense network of cooperation across the value chain7.
In quantum computing, IBM, along with some key universities, leads in hardware and
control systems, combining research with early commercial products. These links between AI,
semiconductors and quantum show strong cross-sector spillovers, helping new ideas move
fast from labs to market. For example, Google’s Willow quantum chip, built with advanced
semiconductors and AI error correction, enables quick qubit scaling for battery and drug
simulations, with open-source tools speeding lab ideas to market in minutes for tasks beyond
classical supercomputers8.
The heavy concentration of tech companies in the US innovation ecosystem for critical
technologies points to the US’s real strength: the deep integration of research, engineering
and commercialisation. This translates cutting-edge science into scalable technologies. This
is especially true for critical technologies because their ecosystems reinforce one another: AI
depends on advanced chips and quantum progress relies on AI-assisted design.
However, the concentration of basic research in a few companies also has limits. First,
smaller innovations are easily captured by the big-tech companies, which might inhibit new
routes, potentially leading to technological path dependence. In other words, the dominance
of tech companies, while positive in terms of synergies, may stem from innovation by smaller
players that cannot compete with such big companies, and which are quickly taken over by
those tech companies, making it difficult to move into different innovation paths. Second, the
realms of scientific excellence tend to be closely linked to what these companies need: digital
and algorithmic technologies, with less attention paid to industrial or hardware applications.
In sum, the US critical technology ecosystem is successful but narrow. For the US to stay
ahead, maintaining its speed and depth in 'research and development might not be enough,
unless wider participation across industries is fostered.
7 See Applied Materials news release of 22 May 2023, ‘ Applied Materials Convenes Leaders from Industry, Academia
and Government at “Summit to Advance Semiconductor Leadership” ’ , https://ir.appliedmaterials.com/news-
releases/news-release-details/applied-materials-convenes-leaders-industry-academia-and/.
8 Hartmut Neven and Vadim Smelyanskiy, ‘Our Quantum Echoes algorithm is a big step toward real-world
applications for quantum computing’ , Google Blog, 22 October 2025, https://blog.google/technology/research/
quantum-echoes-willow-verifiable-quantum-advantage/.
In semiconductors,
US companies
innovate more
than Chinese or EU
companies in chip
design, materials and
power electronics

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
Policy Brief | Issue n˚29/25 | November 2025
T able 1: Top-ten US critical tech patentees
Artificial intelligence Semiconductors Quantum computing
Qualcomm Onsemi Zapata Computing
Oracle Texas Instruments University of Maryland
Nvidia Qualcomm Rigetti
Microsoft Microsoft Red Hat
Micron Micron Microsoft
Intel Lumileds IonQ
IBM Intel Intel
Google IBM IBM
Amazon Applied Materials Google
Adobe Apple Amazon
Source: García-Herrero et al (2025b).
Contrasting clearly with the US, China has a balanced mix of private and public entities,
but its true differentiator is the involvement of very different companies from varied sec-
tors, making the ecosystem more diverse and with different types of synergy. While Huawei
dominates all three breakthrough fields (AI, chips and quantum), underscoring its impor-
tance, there is much greater variety in types of companies working in these areas than in the
US. Innovation champions in semiconductors (TCL Technology, Changxin Memory, Yangtze
Memory and SMIC) coexist with telecoms giants such as Huawei, but breakthroughs also
come from, for example, Ping An, an insurance firm, which leads in AI novelties for predictive
health analytics, adapting models from finance to biotech for nationwide telemedicine.
Tech platforms including Tencent and ByteDance innovate in video-processing AI, but so
do robotics players Autel and UBTECH, pioneering quantum-enhanced sensors for industrial
automation. Consumer goods firm Haier contributes to efficient cooling for data centres. This
diversity – spanning more than 15 sectors with tight industry-academia ties, such as via Tsi-
nghua University’s hubs – enables diffusion into areas including surveillance AI and e-com-
merce logistics. China’s model incentivises any firm with high R&D intensity, via industrial
policy programmes such as ‘Little Giants’ (García Herrero and Krystyanczuk, 2024).
China’s more diverse ecosystem has a different strength to the US: it blends industrial
policy with market experimentation. Public funding and coordination provide direction,
while private firms compete to deliver practical applications at scale. The result is a fast-mov-
ing innovation base that links digital technologies with manufacturing, in line with national
priorities.
T able 2: Top-ten Chinese critical tech patentees
Artificial intelligence Semiconductors Quantum computing
UBTECH Robotics Yangtze Memory Tencent
Tencent TCL Technology TCL Technology
Ping An SMIC South China Normal University
Oppo Ningbo Semiconductor Shenzhen Polytechnic
Huawei InnoScience Shenzhen Jingtai Technology
CloudMinds Robotics Huawei QuantumCTek
ByteDance Enkris Semiconductor Origin Quantum
Baidu Changxin Memory Huawei
BOE Technology Group BOE Optoelectronics Hengtong Qasky Quantum
Autel Robotics AAC Acoustic China Electronics Technology Group
Source: García-Herrero et al (2025b).

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
Policy Brief | Issue n˚29/25 | November 2025
Europe relies more heavily on public research centres, particularly in quantum for which
institutions including CEA (France) and universities (RWTH Aachen, Valencia, Delft) lead
novelties, generating 60 percent of EU quantum radical novelties. Private company involve-
ment is more limited than in the US and China, especially in AI and semiconductors. There
are, however, notable exceptions, including Ericsson and Nokia in AI for 5G computing, and
Infineon at 42.9 percent of total China/EU/US novelties in power semiconductor devices
(García-Herrero et al, 2025b).
Europe also has two entities that excel in all three fields: Sweden’s Ericsson and France’s
CEA (Commissariat à l’énergie atomique, Atomic Energy Commission). While very different in
nature (a private telecoms company and a public research centre), they have very important
factors in common: more R&D expenditure than their peers9 and extensive cooperation with
other research leaders10.
Notwithstanding these relatively more successful cases, the reality is that the number and
depth of European breakthroughs in digital technologies is simply less than in China and the
US. This is probably associated with the lack of an integrated market for basic research and
with the fragmentation of the single market, which constrains the ability of companies to
commercialise innovation in a profitable way.
T able 3: Top-ten EU critical tech patentees
Artificial intelligence Semiconductors Quantum computing
Stanley Robotics Siemens equal1.labs
Siemens STMicroelectronics RWTH Aachen
Safran Robert Bosch Polytechnic University of Valencia
SAP Osram Opto Semiconductors IQM Finland
Robert Bosch Nexperia Ericsson
Nokia Infineon Delft University of Technology
Ericsson Ericsson Compsecur
Carl Zeiss CEA CEA
CEA Aledia Bull
Accenture ASM IP Holding Buendia Jose
Source: García-Herrero et al (2025b).
4 Speed of knowledge spillovers: quick for
China and the US, slow in Europe
While competition for top positions in novel patents is important, so is the ability to replicate
great innovative ideas. To assess how China, the EU and the US replicate breakthroughs in
critical technologies, García-Herrero et al (2025b) conducted a spillover analysis, yielding
really sombre results for Europe. Spillovers in this context refer to the spread of new
technologies or ideas from one region to others. They are calculated by measuring the time
lag between the publication of an original, radically novel patent and the appearance of
9 CEA receives more than €2.5 billion in public funding annually, while Ericsson invests heavily in R&D:
approximately €4.7 billion in 2024, up from from €4.3 billion in 2023.
10 CEA cooperates with Europe’s top research labs, including IMEC (Belgium) and Fraunhofer (Germany), as a
‘crown jewel’ in semiconductor R&D. Ericsson partners with companies including Intel and IBM, leaders in these
fields in the US.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
Policy Brief | Issue n˚29/25 | November 2025
similar technologies in patents from other regions.
Among the three critical technologies analysed, AI spreads the fastest (Figure 4). China
excels by replicating novel patents from the US or EU in only in six months. Bidirectional
US-China flows (eg Nvidia designs inspiring Huawei alternatives) are quite obvious as the US
also replicates Chinese patents quickly. When it comes to chips, China is about half as fast
than it is in AI and quantum in replicating US patents. This resonates with most US export
controls relating to semiconductors11.
EU countries, meanwhile, take 18-24 months to replicate novelties from China or the US,
whether AI, chips or quantum. Interestingly, EU innovators take slightly less time to replicate
Chinese novel patents than US novel patents, especially in AI and quantum. For chips, the
EU’s replication lag is about the same for US and Chinese patents.
Europe’s much slower replication of US or Chinese patents is clearly a problem. It is
further aggravated by the fact that, within the EU, the speed of replication is also very slow.
In other words, the average time for a breakthrough from one EU country to be replicated by
an innovator in another EU country is as long, if not longer than the time taken by a Euro-
pean innovator to replicate a Chinese patent (with replication of US breakthroughs still the
slowest).
This finding is as striking as worrying, warranting a further analysis of the reasons why this
is the case. Our analysis on the fragmentation in the fields of research excellence in Europe,
and the differences in the profiles of its innovators compared to the US and China, offers
some hints:
1. Dependence on public funding in the EU versus the depth of the US venture capital
markets, with private investment the most important source of funding for critical
technologies in the US.
2. The lack in the EU of cash-rich tech companies, which can take on bold innovation and
replication tasks.
3. Language and regulatory complexity in the EU, and potentially excessive data protection
standards.
4. The fragmentation of the single market and the difficulties to scale when commercialising
innovation is surely relevant (Draghi, 2024).
Figure 4: Cross-regional spillovers by direction (average number of days)
Source: García-Herrero et al (2025b).
11 It should be noted that export controls imposed by the US Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and
Security (BIS) are on products and not patents but, at the highest end of the technology spectrum, the correlation
between the two is high.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Average spillover in days
AI Quantum Sem iconductors
US to
US
EU to
EU
China to
China
US to
EU
US to
China
EU to
US
EU to
China
China to
US
China to
EU

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
Policy Brief | Issue n˚29/25 | November 2025
5 Implications and recommendations
The US continues to lead in the production of radical novelties across AI, semiconductors and
quantum computing, bolstered by a concentrated ecosystem of private tech giants that excel in
high-value subfields and foster rapid commercialisation. This model sustains a 35 percent to 40
percent of China-EU-US radical innovations, turning theoretical breakthroughs into trillion-
dollar industries.
China has emerged as a formidable second-place contender, particularly in semiconductor
fabrication and selected AI applications, such as surveillance vision and aerial drone swarms.
This is thanks to its hybrid model and state-supported scale that allows for quick absorption and
adaptation of breakthroughs. By contrast, the EU, despite pockets of strength in quantum pho-
tonics and explainable AI, generates far fewer novelties that the US or China, and struggles with
sluggish spillovers, limiting its ability to keep pace. In certain niches, Europe dominates – such
as ASML ’s EUV monopoly – but fragmentation of innovation is a clear shortcoming.
The disparity could worsen if the EU does not quickly step up efforts to innovate more on
critical technologies and to create the right ecosystems to enable faster replication of break-
throughs. It must also expand the number of innovators. One important aspect in China’s rapid
catch up with the US, compared to Europe, is funding. Ironically, the EU spends more on basic
research than China – $47. 5 billion in 2024, compared to China’s $34.7 billion (OECD, 2025).
However, China’s growth in basic research expenditure is double that of the EU (over 10 percent
versus 5 percent). In other words, convergence is happening very rapidly.
Beyond this, China has stepped up its industrial policy, with particular attention paid to
critical technologies, especially semiconductors. China’s push for semiconductors started with
the industrial policy master plan China launched in 2015, Made in China 2025. The industrial
effort on chips was funded by two major efforts, the Big Fund I and the Big Fund II, which pulled
in the equivalent of $90 billion (García Herrero and Weil, 2022). The results of those efforts are
now starting to be appreciated. China has moved up the ladder in particular in the fabrication of
chips, while challenges remain in terms of design. More generally, China’s enormous econo-
mies of scale help make basic research more easily commercialisable, with deployable products
for which a large single market exists, in addition to China’s huge export machine.
While industrial policy is an important factor behind’s China innovation drive, a simplistic
judgement attributing China’s success to large subsidies should be avoided. China’s industrial
policy strategically aligns long-term objectives outlined in Five- Year Plans with flexible imple-
mentation mechanisms, including the selection of specialised firms through programmes
such as the ‘Little Giants’ . These prioritise R&D intensity and sectoral concentration to channel
resources efficiently into different technologies, including the critical areas we have analysed.
The policy levers also include tax breaks for R&D and underscore China’s ability to take the lead
in targeted domains.
The EU cannot copy China’s industrial policy given the marked institutional differences,
but must do more on innovation. A critical lesson for Europe is that in a world in which scale
and speed define technological leadership, fragmented excellence risks obsolescence. The US’s
private vigour and China’s state-orchestrated agility contrast with Europe’s regulatory caution.
Without reform, the EU will continue to cede ground to the US and China. By learning from
China’s ascent, particularly its precision with subsidies, spillover efficiency and cross-sector
dynamism, the EU can reshape its innovation policies. The EU also needs to focus, much more
than the US and China, on the scale of its market, not only for goods and services, but also for
innovation.
Europe should implement a multifaceted strategy to enhance basic research while also
accelerating diffusion, integrating the single market and strengthening commercialisation
linkages. In addition to funding, this requires institutional redesign, drawing selectively from
China’s industrial playbook, especially on the innovation focus, while preserving EU values of
openness and sustainability. Specifically:
In certain niches,
Europe dominates,
but fragmentation of
innovation is a clear
shortcoming

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
Policy Brief | Issue n˚29/25 | November 2025
1. EU-wide sandboxes (or testing environments) should be established for patent licensing
and technology transfer. Such dedicated regulatory environments would support cross-
border research collaboration and reduce bureaucratic barriers that currently mean
Europe’s replication times are double those of China.
2. EU research funding (Horizon Europe) might need to be focused more on critical technol-
ogies, especially on deployment, by incorporating direct financial incentives for private
firms to prototype and commercialise novelties – much like the Chinese subsidies that have
propelled its semiconductor ecosystem.
3. Leveraging public procurement as a demand-generation tool is essential. By requiring the
incorporation of critical technologies in public contracts – from AI in public services to
quantum-secure communications in infrastructure – the EU can create immediate markets
that pull innovations from labs to deployment, fostering the virtuous cycle of product dif-
fusion and reinvestment that sustains China’s current edge over the EU. The EU’s €2 trillion
public procurement market could be expanded through a ‘critical tech mandate’ that would
require 30 percent of contracts (eg defence, transport) to feature EU-sourced AI or semicon-
ductors by 2028, with penalties for non-compliance.
4. An EU Critical Tech Observatory should be created, possibly under the European Commis-
sion, to provide real-time monitoring of global patent trends, enabling proactive ‘fast-fol-
lower’ strategies that identify and replicate high-potential novelties.
5. Finally, Europe’s push for increased – but also more integrated – military spending should
create demand for dual-use technologies.
References
Draghi, M. (2024) The Future of European Competitiveness, available at https://commission.europa.eu/
topics/strengthening-european-competitiveness/eu-competitiveness-lookingahead_en
García-Herrero, A. and M. Krystyanczuk (2024) ‘How Does China Conduct Industrial Policy: Analyzing
Words Versus Deeds’ , Journal of Industry, Competition and Trade 24: 10, available at https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10842-024-00413-w
García-Herrero, A., M. Krystyanczuk and R. Schindowski (2025a) ‘Radical novelties in critical
technologies and spillovers: how do China, the US and the EU fare?’ Working Paper 07/2025, Bruegel,
available at https://www.bruegel.org/working-paper/radical-novelties-critical-technologies-and-
spillovers-how-do-china-us-and-eu-fare
García-Herrero, A., M. Krystyanczuk and R. Schindowski (2025b) ‘Which companies are ahead in frontier
innovation on critical technologies? Comparing China, the European Union and the United States’ ,
Working Paper 08/2025, Bruegel, available at https://www.bruegel.org/working-paper/which-
companies-are-ahead-frontier-innovation-critical-technologies-comparing-china
García-Herrero, A. and P . Weil (2022) ‘Lessons for Europe from China’s quest for semiconductor self-
reliance’ , Policy Contribution 20/2022, Bruegel, available at https://www.bruegel.org/sites/default/
files/private/2022-11/PC%2020%202022.pdf
OECD (2025) ‘Main Science and Technology Indicators’ , Dataset, Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, available at https://www.oecd.org/en/data/datasets/main-science-and-
technology-indicators.html
Omaar, H. and M. Makaryan (2024) How Innovative Is China in Quantum? Information Technology &
Innovation Foundation, available at https://www2.itif.org/2024-chinese-quantum-innovation.pdf
VerWey, J. (2024) ‘Tracing the Emergence of Extreme Ultraviolet Lithography’ , Analysis, Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, available at https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/tracing-
the-emergence-of-extreme-ultraviolet-lithography/

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Republishing and referencing policy
© Bruegel 2025. Bruegel publications can be freely republished and quoted according to the Creative
Commons licence CC BY-ND 4.0. Please provide a full reference, clearly stating the relevant author(s)
and including a prominent hyperlink to the original publication on Bruegel’s website. You may do so in
any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the author(s) or Bruegel endorse you or your
use. Any reproduction must be unaltered and in the original language. For any alteration (for example,
translation), please contact us at press@bruegel.org. Publication of altered content (for example,
translated content) is allowed only with Bruegel’s explicit written approval. Bruegel takes no institutional
standpoint. All views expressed are the researchers’ own.
Bruegel, Rue de la Charité 33,
B-1210 Brussels
(+32) 2 227 4210
info@bruegel.org
www.bruegel.org
