
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
KIEL
REPORT
Alex Burilkov, Katelyn Bushnell, Juan Mejino-López,
Thomas Morgan, Guntram B. Wolff
No. 3 | June 2025
Fit for war by 2030?
European rearmament
efforts vis-à-vis Russia
Kiel Institute for the World Economy
ISSN 2944-0785

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Abstract
This report updates and expands the data-driven work of our initial study from September 2024,
which concluded that Europe would only be fit for war in several decades. We show that the situation
today is even more concerning if Europe aims to be fit for war by 2030.
First, Russia continues to outproduce four European countries across multiple weapon systems. We
demonstrate that production must increase by a factor of around five to tilt the balance decisively
in Europe’s favour. Procurement needs to accelerate and be frontloaded, as delivery delays of three
years or more persist.
Second, transatlantic tensions are weakening the strength of the U.S. security guarantee. Europe
depends heavily on the U.S. not only for readily deployable troops but also for strategic enablers.
While overall U.S. weapon imports are not excessive, reliance on American systems in critical modern
capabilities remains a concern.
Third, military strategy and technology are evolving rapidly. Military planners must modernise
weapons and strategy while simultaneously scaling existing and effective systems—a major chal-
lenge for often slow and bureaucratic procurement structures. Investment in European technology is
essential for modernisation. European weapons tend to be expensive due to low production volumes
in a fragmented market; a focus on cost-effectiveness is vital to ensure the EU’s planned€800 billion
defence spending is sufficient and fiscally sustainable.
JEL Codes: H41, H56, H60, L64, N44
Keywords: Defence, Armament, Weapon industry, Budget, Germany, Europe, Russia

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Contents
List of abbreviations 2
Executive Summary 3
1 Introduction 8
2 Tracking the Russian military build-up 15
3 Existing stocks in European military capabilities 26
4 What do European nations order? The Kiel Military Procurement Tracker 30
4.1 Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2 United Kingdom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.3 Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.4 France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5 Understanding domestic and foreign purchases 53
5.1 Insights from the Kiel Military Procurement Tracker. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5.2 Cross-checking import dependency with Comtrade, NATO and SIPRI data . . . . . . 60
5.3 Digging further into the foreign purchases puzzle: how big is Europe’s dependency
on US imports? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6 From procurement to effective capacities: assessing delivery delays, production
capacity, and development times for new systems 64
6.1 Expected delivery dates in ordered equipment from the Kiel Military Procurement
Tracker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
6.2 Gradually growing production capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
6.3 Developing new technologies to lead . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
7 European Readiness 2030: What is needed? 75
8 Conclusions 84
References 90
Annex 93
1

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
List of abbreviations
AI Artificial Intelligence
APC Armoured Personnel Carrier
AEW&C Airborne Early Warning and Control
BARS Combat Army Reserve System
CCA Collaborative Combat Aircraft
DCC Drone Capability Coalition
EDIS European Defence Industrial Strategy
EU European Union
EUR Euro
FCAS Future Combat Air System
FMS Foreign Military Sales
FPV First-Person-View (Drone)
GBP Great Britain Pound
GCAP Global Combat Air Programme
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GIUK Greenland-Iceland-UK
IFU International Fund for Ukraine
IFV Infantry Fighting Vehicle
IfW Kiel Institute for the World Economy
IISS International Institute for Strategic Studies
IMF International Monetary Fund
IMV Infantry Mobility Vehicle
IRIS Infrastructure for Resilience, Interconnectivity and Security
IRBM Intermediate-Range Ballistic Missile
ISR Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance
LEO Low Earth Orbit
MBT Main Battle Tank
MGCS Main Ground Combat System
MLRS Multiple Launch Rocket System
MUM-T Manned-Unmanned Teaming System
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization
ORBAT Order of Battle
SATCEN Satellite Centre
SHORAD Short Range Air Defence
SIPRI Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
SLBM Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missiles
SP howitzer Self-Propelled Howitzer
TOE Tables of Organisation and Equipment
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
UGV Unmanned Ground Vehicles
UK United Kingdom
US United States
USD United States Dollar
VKS Russian Air and Space Forces
WWII World War II
2

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Executive Summary
European countries have increased their spending on defence from 1.4% of GDP to more than 2%
of GDP, and these numbers are set to increase further. With rising defence spending, spending
for military equipment more than doubled. This report focuses on assessing European rearmament
efforts. We are the first to publicly capture a wide array of different dimensions of rearmament and
make them publicly available, including by publishing an updated military procurement tracker for
Germany, the UK, Poland and, with limitations, France. This comprehensive approach is necessary
to understand Europe’s relative position at a moment when (a) Russia continues to be aggressive,
(b) the US position to European defence shifts, and (c) technological developments rapidly change
modern warfare.
First, we estimate the quantitative increases in production for key weapon systems such as
tanks, infantry fighting vehicles (IFV), artillery, drones, and advanced fighter jets in Russia. In
our assessment, the Russian military has grown qualitatively and quantitatively significantly since
2022. Production has doubled across the board or increased even further, as in the case of tanks.
Surprisingly, Russian spending is almost the same as that of the EU and UK measured in purchasing
power parity.
Second, we summarise military capacities in four key countries: Germany, France, the UK, and
Poland. Equipment stocks across multiple weapon systems have fallen strongly since the end of the
Cold War and recent rearmament efforts have not yet translated into larger stocks. Europe has also
significant gaps when it comes to strategic enablers such as military satellites, with low numbers and
very limited launch capacities.
Third, we analyse a newly compiled database for military procurement, which we make avail-
able. The Kiel Military Procurement Tracker database can be downloaded fromhttps://www.ifw-
kiel.de/publications/kiel-military-procurement-tracker-33232/ . Procurementvolumes
have increased substantially in Germany, Poland and the UK. French data are less granular and there-
fore big trends are more difficult to assess. German procurement started to pick up speed only in
late 2023. The numbers of procured equipment remain low compared to Cold War periods or Rus-
sian numbers. Gaps in equipment of German armed forces remain substantial and are persistent.
France, Germany and the UK procure strongly from domestic producers while Polish procurement
leans more heavily towards international suppliers at least for larger equipment, in particular the US
and South Korea. Fourth, military procurement does not automatically translate into an increase in
capacity. Time lags between procurement decision and estimated delivery are often three years or
more. We document production increases in Europe. While production volumes for artillery shells
3

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
and howitzers have increased substantially and are close to meeting demand, production volumes for
tanks, infantry fighting vehicles, missiles and fighter jets remain low. In terms of employment, the 10
largest European defence companies have increased their employment by 11% since 2021. European
development and production of the most advanced systems such as rocket artillery, unmanned and
autonomous systems, AI-integrated systems, 6th generation aircraft including Collaborative Combat
Aircraft (CCA; drone wingman capability), strategic lift, integrated air defence, airborne early warn-
ing and control (AEW&C), satellites, long-range missiles for ground and sea attack, and hypersonic
missiles remain limited at best and absent at worst. The import dependency on US producers is
large for such modern systems. Current development times show that technological dependencies
will last for at least a decade unless policy is focused on addressing this technological backwardness
and dependency.
Fifth, we provide two rearmament scenarios of 25 and 50 additional brigades. The latter is
often the benchmark in war game scenarios for US troops in Europe and is mentioned by the EU
commissioner for defence. We thus consider the ambitious scenario to be particularly needed if (a) US
support to Europe became more unreliable or (b) in case of a ceasefire in Ukraine, due to which Russia
could rapidly continue its rearmament without any attrition. At least the less ambitious increase of
land force capacity is necessary for Europe to withstand a possible Russian attack, for example in the
Baltics. We estimate that production of land force systems must increase by a factor of around 3-6
if the aim is to substantially decrease the force advantage of Russia relative to European countries
in the next five years (also see E.1 and E.2). Production of other systems such as air defence and
other modern technology would need to increase even more.
4

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure E.1: Stocks and needed increases for selected equipment in two scenarios.
Note: Procured equipment refers to the equipment ordered yet to be delivered.
Source: authors’ own elaboration.
Figure E.2: Additional production needed for main military equipment.
Source: authors’ own elaboration.
Traditional land force systems need to be modernised to be able to operate in conditions of
modern drone warfare and increasingly integrate autonomy and AI tools. At the start of the war,
Russia and Ukraine produced thousands of drones and their current production targets are higher
than 3 million units per year. Hence the capacity to produce large numbers of drones and unmanned
and autonomous ground and sea vehicles is critical to modern warfare. Due to rapid technological
change, it is important to invest in technological capabilities rather than in building stocks that are
quickly outdated. A substantial investment into missile production capacities, including hypersonic
missiles, and into air defence is indispensable for Europe to increase stocks needed for deterrence.
5

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Our overall assessment is that while some progress has been made on procurement, neither
numbers nor quality has substantively improved since we published our report last year. Europe thus
remains highly vulnerable and dependent on the US. Besides missing quantities, modernisation is
progressing slowly: production or even access to high-end capabilities and strategic enablers remain
limited.
Unlocking significant financing at the European and national levels is welcome, but spending
needs to translate into capabilities and sustained growth in European force generation, sustainment,
and military modernisation. Put differently, Europe needs to shift its societal debate from fiscal
numbers to actual military capabilities needed, i.e., how to purchase and produce what is actually
needed to be successful on the modern battlefield and how to ensure timely delivery with concrete
targets for closing critical capability gaps. For that, the effectiveness of military procurement is
critical – a topic barely discussed as national defence ministries continue relying on existing and
often inflexible national agencies.
Our bottom-up estimates of spending needs on selected weapon systems shows that the price
differences between similar types of equipment are very large. In our estimates, the envisaged€800
billion under the EU’s ReArm Europe/European Readiness 2030 programme will be too small, if
equipment is bought at current high prices. Europe thus needs to focus on cost-effectiveness of
procurement.
Finally, Europe investments in military R&D are limited compared to other major powers. In 2024,
Europe invested€13 billion in military R&D1 – but the latest figures for the US ($145 billion in 2023)2
and China (€21 billion in 2024)3 are significantly higher, and neither neglected and underfunded
military R&D for a decade or more as most European countries did. A large increase in R&D
spending will be critical for Europe to increase its strategic autonomy at a moment of uncertain
transatlantic relations.
Overall, wehighlightthefeasibilityofmakingsubstantialprogressthrough2030butemphasisethe
urgent need to come up with a coherent European rearmament strategy that includes a modernisation
strategytoreducedependenciesontheUS,astrategythatbringsdowncostsandsetsconcretetargets
for production, procurement, and adoption to ensure funding is translated into European military
readiness.
1https://eda.europa.eu/docs/default-source/brochures/1eda---defence-data-23-24---web---v3 .pdf
2https://comptroller.defense.gov/portals/45/documents/defbudget/fy2024/fy24_green_book.pdf
3https://www.sipri.org/yearbook/2023
6

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
The responsibility for the contents of this publication rests with the authors, not the Institute. Any comments should be sent
directly to the corresponding author.
Corresponding author:
Prof. Dr. Guntram Wolff
Professor of Economics at Solvay Brussels School, Université libre de Bruxelles
Bruegel and Kiel senior fellow
Email: guntram.wolff@bruegel.org
7

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Fit for war by 2030?
European rearmament efforts vis-à-vis Russia
Alex Burilkov, Katelyn Bushnell, Juan Mejino-López,
Thomas Morgan, Guntram B. Wolff
1 Introduction
Europe’s security situation continues to remain challenging. Compared to the autumn of 2024, when
we published the first report on “European rearmament” (Wolff, Burilkov, Bushnell, and Kharitonov:
2024a) three major security developments have emerged that explain Europe’s rising defence budgets
and create the need to take stock of Europe’s rearmament process with a new report.
First, a new US administration has created substantial uncertainty among European
countries as to the transatlantic security partnership.Among the triggers of the uncertainty
was the changing US positioning at the Munich security conference, the direct US negotiations with
Russia disregarding European countries, as well as the interruption of US intelligence sharing with
Ukraine. The aggravating transatlantic trade relation further adds to the European worry: weak
security capabilities constrain the EU’s willingness to retaliate against unjustified tariffs. Meanwhile,
the US has become the biggest source of geopolitical uncertainty, possibly triggering a global “Trump
recession”.
European countries are actively working on a European rearmament strategy that could,
in the worst case, replace US forces in Europe.This would broadly require building substantial
mass, i.e., being able to have sufficient trained personnel and material to fight a peer conflict if
necessary, and it also requires acquiring strategic assets that currently none of the European countries
has on its own – such as satellite-based intelligence and communication, strategic airlift capacities,
air defence capabilities, missile capacities, and others. Even the question of nuclear deterrence
capability is now firmly on the table (Gilli and Nicoli: 2025). The German decision to station a
brigade in Lithuania shows just how difficult and long-lasting the effort is. So far, only some 400
soldiers have been stationed in Lithuania and equipment for the Panzer Brigade needs to be taken
from other brigades in Germany.
Second, the war in Ukraine continues with its attritional and positional character and
Russia’s war economy is large compared to Europe and growing.The war consumes large
amounts of military equipment on both sides and with heavy casualties. Russia’s war economy has
further increased the production of military goods and has been able to access Western advanced
8

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
technology despite sanctions (Hilgenstock et al.: 2025; Bilousova et al.: 2024). Russia remains the
largest economy of Europe in purchasing power parity (see Figure 1.1) and has devoted substantial
resources to its military production. Russia spends almost 7% of its GDP on its military and more
than 35% of its federal budget. Meanwhile the comparison of military spending in PPP shows that
Russia still is at least on par with European countries collectively. According to IISS, Europe spent
less than Russia measured in PPP in 2024.4
Figure 1.1: Gross domestic product in purchasing power parity (trillion USD).
Source: authors based on IMF, World Economic Outlook.
4https://www.politico.eu/article/russian-defense-spending-overtakes-europe-study-finds/
9

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 1.2: Defence spending in military PPP USD billion for main NATO countries, Ukraine and Russia in
2024.
Source: authors based on Robertson (2022).
Russia has made significant advances across much of the front, especially in the southern
Donbass, but it has not managed to return to manoeuvre warfare and large-scale breakthroughs.
Furthermore, while the Russians have been continually on the offensive since October 2023, the pace
of territorial advances has slacked somewhat since February 2025. Figure 1.3 shows that Russia
initially managed to occupy a large area of Ukrainian territory and after the liberation of parts of it,
land gains of Russia have become gradual. Ukraine had seized parts of the Russian Kursk oblast in
August 2024 in a lightning offensive. In a grinding battle resulting in high losses for both sides, the
Russians (including regular troops, conscripts, various special forces, and North Korean auxiliaries)
eventually expelled the Ukrainians (some of the best of Ukrainian military) from the bulk of Kursk
by March 2025 – with Russian military successes particularly large in the week when US intelligence
sharing with Ukraine was stopped.
10

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 1.3: Total area of Ukraine occupied by Russia, 2022–2025 (square kilometers)
Note: Reliable data not found for February-March 2022. Ukrainian incursions into Russian
territory are not accounted for. In the initial phase of the war, manoeuvre warfare was still possible
for Russia, which explains why there have been rapid increase but also losses of territory. It also
needs to be highlighted that territorial definitions of occupied territory are somewhat uncertain in
the initial phase, therefore the data are “dashed”.
Source: authors based on Deep State UA (2025).
Third, the technology and strategy of modern warfare is changing rapidly, requiring
European rearmament efforts to focus not just on acquiring mass but also accelerating
modernisation. Drone warfare has become extremely powerful in Ukraine’s war of resistance against
theRussianaggression. TheUkrainiancapacitytoattackairfieldsdeepinRussianterritorywithtruck-
based drones highlights not only new approaches causing significant damages.5 It also highlights how
relatively cheap technology can be used effectively in audacious military operations. It also raises
far-reaching questions on the protection and security of civilian and military infrastructure across
Europe against state and non-state actors.
European defence budgets have gone up and are set to increase further.Military spending
in Europe (including Russia) rose by 17% to $693 billion from 2023 to 2024 (SIPRI: 2025). In NATO
Europe, defence spending has now reached 2% (see Figure 1.4). Among the European countries with
rapidly rising defence budgets, it is worth highlighting the rising spending in the North-East of Europe.
Poland’s defence budget is now 4.7% of GDP. Germany’s defence spending has increased to 2% and
the new German chancellor succeeded in changing the constitutional debt break in Germany to allow
funding further increases in the defence budget with deficits.
5see, for example:https://www.ft.com/content/132e4327-11da-4412-b36b-7363604879e6
11

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 1.4: Defence spending in NATO Europe (left scale) and spending on military equipment (right scale)
in percent of GDP.
Note: NATO Europe refers to all NATO Members except the US and Canada. Data between
1980 and 1989 does not include the Western Balkans, Bulgaria, Czechia, Slovakia and the Baltic
countries, and some observations are estimates. Before 1989 the observation for German refers to
the Federal Republic of Germany only.
Source: authors based on NATO, SIPRI and IMF.
With European defence budgets rising, spending for military equipment has been rising,
reaching now 0.7% of GDP.European increases in defence budgets went disproportionally into
equipment spending with the share of equipment spending in total defence spending rising from
only 14% to now above 30%. Many European countries therefore now comfortably achieve the 20%
NATO target of equipment spending relative to total defence spending (see Figure 1.4). Eventually,
these proportions are likely to adjust again. In Poland, we find that more than 70% of the defence
spending increases between 2022 and 2024 went to equipment spending. In Germany, the increase
was almost exclusively spent on equipment. These effects are bound to change as personnel costs will
tend to rise again as European militaries will need to attract troops. European equipment spending
has therefore caught up substantially with US equipment spending but is still only half of US total
spending (see Figure 1.5).
12

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 1.5: Average annual expenditure on military procurement. USD billion 2015 prices.
Source: authors based on NATO.
More military spending does not automatically and immediately translate into military
capabilities, especially if the defence industrial base is strained. First, price increases for
military equipment might absorb large parts of budget increases, which will be particularly the case
if supply is constraint, i.e., the supply elasticity of equipment is low. The top US general in Europe
recently stated that “this question of the elasticity of our defence industrial base, again, on both
sides of the Atlantic, is one of the great strategic questions of the next 10, 15 years."6 Burilkov et al.
(2024) document that the US military defence industrial base is currently facing substantial strains
as visible in delayed deliveries and relatively low production output.Second, spending and delivery
do not automatically correspond as many complex products are paid for during several years until the
final operational product becomes available.Third, the equipment spending might be focused on
the wrong type of equipment. Modernisation needs challenge traditional procurement processes. For
example, purchasing 3D printers for mass drone production might be more effective than developing
advanced new weapon systems but will require breaking with traditions.Fourth, military spending
in NATO definition does not automatically mean military capabilities, for example as spending on
retired soldiers is included (McKinsey: 2025).7 Specifically, the study excludes nuclear deterrents
(in France and the United Kingdom), pensions from historic conflicts and other spending on retired
personnel, donated material (for example, to Ukraine), and spending on community engagement
6General Cavoli, SACEUR, in a US senate hearing.https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/
4325fulltranscript.pdf
7https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/aerospace-and-defense/our-insights/a-different-lens-on-
europes-defense-budgets?utm_som
13

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
(such as museums).Finally, equipment spending might only just compensate for the depreciation of
existingequipmentstocks–afterdecadesofunderinvestmentduringwhichstocksrapidlydepreciated
and equipment spending did not suffice to sustain capacity levels.
When studying Europe’s military industrial production, it is worthwhile to highlight that
Ukraine is increasingly producing with its own defence industrial base.Mass production of
drones – including very long-range models – cruise missiles, tanks, and artillery has compensated
for fluctuations in Western arms deliveries. This “porcupine strategy” has done much to enable
continued organised Ukrainian resistance. It also bodes well for post-war Ukraine’s capability to
resist any potential further Russian aggression, as well as the potential of Ukraine to become a
major contributor to the broader European defence ecosystem. Kirkegaard (2025) highlights that
the Ukrainian military industrial base has become a major supplier of weapons and could play a
role for all of Europe. It is also increasingly integrated with Western producers that are opening
production sites in Ukraine. A European rearmament strategy needs to not only draw on
Ukraine’s experience in warfare but also increasingly on its industrial base.
DependencyonforeignproductionandtechnologyisagrowingconcerninEurope. Europe
currently imports substantial amounts of weapons, with imports having increased from approximately
$3.4 billion for the period 2019-2021 to $8.5 billion for 2022-2024 in EU countries according to trade
statistics .8 Yet, these increases have been less than the overall increases in equipment spending.
We study import dependencies of various European countries and show that in general equipment
spending tends to go to domestic producers or joint ventures. Dependency on foreign suppliers
is thus overstated and not a general concern. However, our analysis suggests substantially larger
dependency when it comes to the most advanced technologies.Greater emphasis on advancing
the European technological independence is critical.
European rearmament efforts need to find the right mix between different weapon sys-
tems as well as new and “old” technologies.This report cannot offer a concrete rearmament
strategy, a task that is the responsibility of military planners. Yet, we do assess how procurement
priorities have shifted in the last years. We also discuss recent evidence that shows that new tech-
nologies such as unmanned systems, AI technology, and drones have to be incorporated into military
strategy and procurement planning as they have become indispensable in modern warfare as observed
in Ukraine. We also highlight Europe’s needs to build satellite capacities as well as other strategic
enablers currently exclusively provided and controlled by the US.
Europe’s rearmament strategy has set itself a tight timeframe of five years given the
high security concerns and might need to increase ambitions.European leaders have endorsed
8https://comtradeplus.un.org/ , using HS Code 93 “Arms and ammunition; parts and accessories thereof”,
covering within others artillery weapons (e.g., howitzers), firearms, ammunition or rocket launchers.
14

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
the year 2030 as the year in which Europe needs to be able to defend itself in a peer conflict.9 NATO
findings suggested that Russia might be ready to attack in the next 4-5 years10. German defence
minister Boris Pistorius has endorsed this warning11. Yet, the timeline might need to be compressed
further. The negotiations between Russia, the US, and Ukraine might mean that hostilities may
come to an end.12 At that point, Russia will be able to regroup its substantial existing capacities –
which could very quickly represent a direct threat to EU states. Moreover, Russia’s war industry will
likely build further capacities at a rapid pace based on its strong military industrial output. Achieving
military readiness earlier than 2030 might therefore be warranted.
The aim of this report is to assess the state of progress in Europe’s rearmament efforts.
Section 2 assesses Russia’s military production.We show that military production has increased
further since the last publication of the report and has now likely plateaued.Section 3 summarises
existing military stocks across several European countries.Military stocks in 2024 were not
substantially different to those in 2021 before the full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Needs therefore
remainvery high andgapssubstantial. Section4assessesmilitaryprocurementinfourEuropean
countries based on a new database.The Kiel military procurement tracker updates theGerman
data of Wolff, Burilkov, Bushnell, and Kharitonov (2024b) to date. We have now added a new
procurement tracker for theUK and Poland, and we summarise official information from France
as well. Section 5 studies where military procurements are made: domestically, in European
partner countries, in the US, and elsewhere.Section 6explores the evolution ofdelivery delays, the
build-up of the industrial military capacity and the existingtechnology gapsin Europe. Section 7
maps targets for European 2030 readiness into yearly procurement and production capacity
and the final section assesses the needs of increased production and capacity.
2 Tracking the Russian military build-up
This chapter continues the analysis presented in September 2024 in the IfW Kiel report “Fit for war
in decades: Europe’s and Germany’s slow rearmament vis-à-vis Russia.” That report’s analysis ended
in July 2024, while this new report extends the analysis to March 2025. Although the fundamental
nature of the war as a grinding, attritional peer conflict (Vershinin: 2024) has not changed, this
eight-month period has seen noteworthy developments.
9See for example: https://www.eeas.europa.eu/eeas/white-paper-for-european-defence-readiness-
2030_en
10https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/opinions_231348.htm
11https://www.politico.eu/article/vladimir-putin-russia-germany-boris-pistorius-nato/
12It has not, however, translated into a reduction of the intensity of the fighting. Until settlement, both combatants
have very strong incentives to fight on all the harder until the end of hostilities, as the final outcome of territorial
control is highly likely to freeze alongside the demarcation line at the conclusion of hostilities.
15

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Conceptualising the Russian threat
The most likely scenario for Russian military coercion and aggression against Europe is through the
massed power of its land forces. Scenarios typically invoke rapid breakthroughs by Russian ground
units against the Baltic states, which are geographically vulnerable. The Suwalki Gap separating
Kaliningrad from Belarus is a classic instance, but the eastern regions of Estonia, centring on the city
of Narva, are even more vulnerable. The topography is more conducive to manoeuvre warfare and
Russian supply lines would be substantially shorter. Such incursions would be absolutely contingent
on speed of action, as the likelihood of a successful breakthrough decays rapidly within 30 days of
combat.
What of coercion via airpower and precision missiles and drones? If anything, the war in Ukraine
has shown the limitations of strategic bombing for achieving strategic and political goals, at least for
a military like Russia’s: powerful enough to be in the same category as China and the US, but whose
air force (the VKS) is no match for the US Air Force. Russia has expended more than 10,000 precision
munitions against Ukrainian strategic targets without achieving its political goals. Therefore, Russian
missile stockpiles are likely to be most impactful if deployed tactically in conjunction with ground
forces to enable rapid breakthroughs, rather than on strategic missions alone.
Finally, what of the Russian Strategic Rocket Forces? The Russian nuclear arsenal remains the
largest on the planet and is highly sophisticated. It enjoys the full nuclear triad and continually
modernising delivery vehicles, including multiple hypersonic systems. Notably, the nuclear-capable
Zircon hypersonic cruise missiles have struck Kyiv, and theOreshnik intermediate-range ballistic
missile (IRBM), a conventional variant of the nuclearRubezh IRBM, targeted a military industrial
complex in Dnipropetrovsk. Russia also has a very diverse arsenal ranging from tactical to strategic,
giving Moscow the full range of possible options in a nuclear escalation scenario, unlike Europe,
which only has strategic nuclear weapons: the French and British nuclear submarine-launched ballistic
missiles (SLBM). However, European possession of this credible submarine-based nuclear deterrent
also makes crisis initiation directly through nuclear means highly risky for Russia.
Methodology for estimating Russian production
This chapter’s methodology continues the approach from the September report. This is relevant
as the nature of the fighting has not fundamentally changed, including continual Russian offensive
action with tangible results. To briefly summarise, Russian units fighting in Ukraine are catalogued
to get at the Russian order of battle (ORBAT). The composition of Russian forces, from brigades
and regiments down to their constituent battalions and batteries, gives us the total number of
such standardised units in theatre. Finally, taking these units’ tables of organisation and equipment
(TOE) gives us the “paper strength” of the Russian contingent in Ukraine: the total maximum
16

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
possible number of each system in theater.
The attrition rate of Russian forces corresponds to established benchmarks for conventional
warfare. We estimate the monthly production rate needed to maintain the combat effectiveness
of the Russian contingent in theater. Additionally, we close with a brief look at exports, which
are deprioritised as compared to sustaining the troops in Ukraine and generating new forces for
confronting NATO.
Weapons systems
Production has begun to plateau from Q1 2024 on. This is indicative of limits on maximum Russian
force generation. Furthermore, depending on the weapons system category, production relies to a
variable degree on retrofitting rather than entirely new systems. This is most pronounced for tanks,
tracked artillery, and certain IFVs, and less so for other systems.
Approximately 75% of Russian land power is currently deployed to Ukraine, and sustaining this
force is the ceiling on Russian production for the time being. Of note is the apparent decrease in
Lancet production. This is likely a function of how we measure Lancet production, which is by
counting confirmed Lancet strikes from video footage. The limitation of this approach is that it
cannot directly account for potential stockpiling.
Table 2.1:Russian quarterly production of key weapons systems.
Quarter Tank IFV/IMV Artillery SHORAD Lancet
Q4 2022 123 585 60 9 93
Q1 2025 444 1641 168 30 336
Total increase 260% 180% 180% 233% 261%
Increase 2024 only 23% 27% 21% 11% -24%
Source: authors’ own calculations.
Monthly production rates fluctuate significantly, increasing rapidly before eventually plateauing
as Russian force generation slows. Each following graph shows three different lines summarising pro-
duction. Sustainment shows what is needed for the forces currently fighting in Ukraine. Generation
summarises the new materiel needed for the 25th Combined Arms Army and the 40th and 44th Army
Corps, new formations intended to bulk up Russian mass and likely combat capable by October 2024.
Finally, production ceiling shows the maximum possible production if Russia chooses to produce at
the intensity needed to generate new units as well as sustain troops already in Ukraine.
17

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Even as drones have shifted to become the main killer in Ukraine13, frontline systems – tanks
and other armoured vehicles – remain critical for supporting the infantry. Notably, ample provision
of such systems is necessary to keep casualties down. For instance, both Ukrainian and Russian
observers have praised the US-produced M2 Bradley as an excellent, resilient vehicle that has saved
many times a squad of Ukrainian soldiers from Russian firepower. Armoured vehicles are also critical
for casualty evacuation in environments saturated by air defence, which makes helicopter casualty
evacuation highly risky.
Figure 2.1: Frontline systems: tanks (MBT) and other armoured vehicles (IFV/APC/IMV), estimated
monthly production.
Source: authors’ calculations.
Russian tank production has peaked at nearly 150 per month, while that of other armoured
vehicles at 550 per month. The consequences of relying on retrofitting will be most keenly felt for
tanks and IFVs, which will have to compete for limited numbers of hulls. Lighter systems, especially
IMVs, face fewer constraints, but also provide more limited protection, especially from drones.
Rear systems production also surged before plateauing. Notably, air defence production remains
higher than in Europe, although the rapid transformational advances in drone technology will also
eventually lessen the importance of traditional, missile-based SHORAD as it shares the air defence
space with gun-based air defence and even more consequentially with directed energy solutions.
13https://www.euronews.com/my-europe/2025/06/08/win-win-partnership-french-companies-to-
manufacture-drones-in-ukraine
18

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 2.2: Frontline systems: artillery and air defence, estimated monthly production.
Source: authors’ calculations.
There is a notable shift to wheeled artillery, which is lighter, far cheaper, and does not compete
with tank production for hulls. While artillery has been eclipsed – for now – as the dominant killer
on the battlefield by drones, it nonetheless retains a role in delivering massed firepower capable of
suppressing entire units. Russian production of artillery of all types has reached 56 per month, but
it is notable that corresponding Ukrainian production of the wheeled Bohdana howitzer has reached
20 per month. Taking into account European production, this indicates that while Russia has had a
significant quantitative head start in artillery, its capabilities can be matched by combined Ukrainian
and European production.
It should be noted that modern artillery tactics – both Ukrainian and Russian – have evolved to
maintain a role for towed artillery. Unlike self-propelled artillery that must use “shoot and scoot”
tactics, remaining mobile for survivability, towed artillery can remain stationary and concealed at
long ranges for extended periods of time, as the systems are far smaller and lack the engine and
sensor signatures of self-propelled artillery. Additionally, they can rely on smaller, distributed crews,
increasing dispersion and therefore mitigating casualties. When using modern guns and guided
munitions, towed artillery is no less deadly than its self-propelled counterpart. In the case of Russia,
the available Giasint-B 152mm towed howitzer are relied upon. It is likely that such systems will
continue to be integrated into the Russian military, further increasing the firepower of Russian units.
Munitions
The Lancet long-range loitering munition has played a key role on the battlefield since its introduction
in large quantities. For instance, the saturation of the Kursk battlespace with Lancets in the first
days of the August 2024 Ukrainian offensive was instrumental in blunting the Ukrainian spearheads,
19

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
eventually allowing Russian reinforcements to cordon off the area and return the fighting to positional,
attritional warfare.
Figure 2.3: Lancet long-range loitering munition production and use.
Source: authors’ own calculations.
Lancet production increased rapidly once its effectiveness became evident. Production and use
appear to have peaked in the spring of 2024. Since then, use, and therefore production, took a
downward trajectory that eventually stabilised at roughly 120 produced in January 2025. It is likely
this stabilisation indicates the stockpiling of Lancets for other purposes than the direct fighting in
Ukraine. This could include the training of new drone specialists, stockpiling for a future conflict, or
the intention to export Lancets to interested parties.
Furthermore, Russia unveiled the export version, the Lancet-E, in late 2024. Openly, this system
does not yet have clients. However, it merits observation whether it appears in conflict zones,
especially in the Middle East. This would be a significant signal of excess production capacity. It
is also a sign that Lancet drones might be used less frequently in Ukraine as their effectiveness has
decreased due to a drop in effectiveness of the Orlan drones that provide targeting for them.
20

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Future Russian military power
This section outlines scenarios for future Russian force generation. As outlined, Russia is likely to
remain an adversary and to continue building up and modernising its military going forward. The
Russian ground forces pose the most immediate and likely threat to Europe. However, the Navy and
Air Force are strategic enablers for the ground forces, and that is their formal function first in Soviet
then Russian doctrine. Therefore, a look at their near-future prospects is warranted.
Land forces
As previously outlined, Russian production relies to a variable degree on retrofits, reaching up to an
estimated 80% for tanks and systems that rely on tank hulls, such as tracked self-propelled artillery
(Watling and Somerville: 2024). These systems are taken out of storage and modernised to the
current battlefield by the addition of improved armour, sensors, and electronic warfare capabilities.
This is a finite resource, however, limited by what the Red Army left behind, and likely to constrain
Russian ambitions from 2026 onwards. Nonetheless, the decision to increase the semi-annual con-
scription classes in 2025 to 160,000 strongly indicates that Moscow is contemplating post-conflict
force generation.
In a post-conflict scenario, the reliance on retrofits will be balanced out by the lack of attrition,
which currently causes very significant yearly losses on Russian stocks. The reliance on retrofits is
variable. It is highest for tanks and IFVs, which rely on older hulls – although this problem is shared
by Western armour production. The Kremlin has deliberately tried to address this for artillery by
switching production over from the Msta and Koalitsiya-SV howitzers, which compete with tanks
for limited hulls, over to the wheeled Malva howitzer. The Malva is undergoing trials to integrate
the Koalitsiya-SV’s advanced 152mm gun. This mirrors switches over to wheeled artillery in other
militaries due to their higher mobility and lower cost, such as integrating the PzH2000’s gun into
the wheeled RCH 155. Finally, the IMVs that bulk out the vehicle contingents of motor rifle units
rely on entirely new production and would therefore decrease less than other systems.
There are further constraints on future Russian force generation. Not all production can go to
generation, even if the Kremlin wishes to radically increase land combat power. Some must be
diverted to maintenance, exports, and force modernisation. Furthermore, personnel will become a
serious constraint. While large cash payouts have secured substantial numbers of contract soldiers for
the war, augmented by reservists, mercenaries, and volunteers, the financial burden will be difficult
to sustain indefinitely. Without an active conflict, the nationalist motivation for enlisting will also
gradually lose its appeal as wartime mobilisation fades.
Taking purely production into account, the maximum number of new motor rifle brigades that
could be generated through 2030 is 32. This, however, would also translate into an additional 160,000
21

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
troops for these brigades alone, not accounting for the additional “tail” of support troops that would
also be significant. In September 2024, Putin issued a decree to increase the number of active
servicemembers in the Russian military by 180,000, from 1.32 million to 1.5 million.14 Therefore, a
more realistic assessment of Russian force generation through 2030 would range the number of new
brigades between 12 and 16, with a significant reserve of materiel for sustained peer conflict. The
availability of armour – tanks and IFVs – will remain a constraint and boundary condition on Russian
offensive ambitions.
The Navy
In April 2025, the Kremlin announced major new funding for the Navy:€90 billion through 2050 for
expansion and modernisation.15 This includes tight integration of hypersonic missiles and unmanned
systems into the fleet. New warship construction is to take place in the first decade of this program.
As expected according to Soviet and Russian doctrinal tradition, the first focus will be on the strategic
nuclear forces. This means modernising the “bastion defence” of Russian strategic ballistic missile
submarines under the Arctic pack ice, in this case of continuing the expansion of the Borei class
submarine fleet, and its gradual replacement by the Arcturus class from 2037 on.
Conventional capabilities will take a backburner to the strategic mission but are not to be ne-
glected. This means prioritising the expansion of the fleet of nuclear-powered attack submarines of
the Yasen class. This is a versatile platform intended both as hunter-killer and for carrying conven-
tional hypersonic missiles for land- and sea attack missions. Furthermore, following the demonstrated
success and value of unmanned systems in various theatres, there is to be a substantial increase in
funding and integration into existing platforms.
The concentration of Russian maritime power has always been hampered by the disjointed, multi-
theater strategic context of Russia. Each of its fleets – Northern, Baltic, Black Sea, Caspian, and
Pacific – acts more or less independently of each other and in wildly different strategic environments.
This means that for Europe, the main challenge from Russian maritime power will come from the
Northern Fleet, as the Baltic and Black Sea fleets are less substantial, and in particular the Baltic
Fleet must now operate in a “NATO lake.”
The Northern Fleet commands 32 surface warships, whose main task is to defend the White
Sea. It also commands 33 submarines. Of these, 7 are devoted to the nuclear deterrence mission,
and the rest can be used in conventional attack missions. The most relevant would be maritime
interdiction in the North Atlantic, with submarines and surface warships augmented by long-range
14https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/putin-orders-russian-army-grow-by-180000-soldiers-
become-15-million-strong-2024-09-16/
15https://www.navaltoday.com/2025/04/16/russia-unveils-massive-financial-injection-for-naval-
sector-100-8-billion-for-new-warships/
22

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Russian naval aviation. Just as in the Cold War, the GIUK Gap (Greenland-Iceland-UK) is once again
a key defensive line for Europe. In March 2025, NATO increased its presence in the GIUK Gap.16
This will be a key area for maritime patrol in the future.
Unmanned maritime systems – surface and undersea – are set to become critical capabilities for
navies. Such systems have seen success in the Black Sea in combat operations, and are essential for
maritime patrol, especially undersea, at scale. The Kremlin understands this, and Russian unmanned
capabilities will grow, including undersea capabilities to target vulnerable critical infrastructure. Eu-
ropean unmanned capabilities should grow in kind, not only to patrol the North Atlantic, but to
provide capabilities of reaching into the White Sea and proactively addressing the threat of the Rus-
sian Northern Fleet.
The Aerospace Forces (VKS)
Similarly to the Navy, the Aerospace Forces have grown qualitatively and quantitatively since 2022.
Notably, production of the 5th generation Su-57 aircraft has doubled since 2022 with the addition of
a second production line. The current production variant is the Su-57M1, an enhanced version that
takes into account the lessons of the war, including a new and superior engine, AI integration, and the
Su-70 stealth drone wingman for Collaborative Combat Aircraft (CCA; drone wingman) capability.
Between 8-10 were delivered in 2023. Total numbers of Su-57 are likely to be between 30 and 40,
making it a niche capability in the VKS. By 2030, the VKS would have between 80 and 115 Su-57,
compared to over 400 5th generation F-35 variants in European air forces.
Following Soviet and Russian doctrine, Russia would compensate for a smaller air force through
an oversized integrated air defence network and Russia’s strategic depth, which allows distributing
forces and shield key assets deep enough in Russian territory to be out of range of intruding aircraft
and missiles. For instance, the Engels strategic bomber base is more than 1,400km from potential
launch points in European airspace, while Orenburg, which likely houses the new Rubezh conventional
medium-range ballistic missiles, is over 1,900km away. Production centres in the Volga Basin and
the Urals are more than 1,400km and 2,000km away respectively.
Russian strategic depth provides enhanced defence against conventional means, but could not
prevent the audacious June 1, 2025 Ukrainian covert operation that used drones smuggled deep into
Russia to target the Russian strategic bomber fleet directly in their air bases. The attack struck 41
aircraft, likely destroying 12. There are several key lessons here. One is the vulnerability of large, fixed
assets – like air bases, ports, and large industrial facilities like refineries – to asymmetric methods
empowered by unmanned and autonomous systems and AI tools. Another is that such attacks and
16https://mc.nato.int/media-centre/news/2025/nato-naval-task-group-increases-presence-and-
patrols-in-the-giuk-gap
23

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
methods are not exclusive to this conflict and are likely to be replicated elsewhere. Western air bases
and aircraft on the ground are just as vulnerable as Russian ones.
However, the Su-57 has also found some success in the export market. Algeria has chosen to
procure it and will receive 6 aircraft in 202517, with further orders likely. Russia will be pitching the
Su-57 to Asian clients aggressively in 2025. India is a likely client, as its Rafales and MiG-29s suffered
one-sided losses against Pakistan’s modernised air force, boasting Chinese aircraft and long-range
missiles. Additionally, Pakistan is likely set on expedited acquisition of China’s 5th generation J-35,
strongly increasing Indian incentives to acquire the Su-57 to prevent overmatch.
It should be noted that just as the US and China, the VKS has many niche capabilities that
European air forces lack. These include the Tu-22M3 and Tu-160M strategic bombers, the Su-
35 dedicated ground attack aircraft, and the high-speed MiG-31, which can carry either ultra-long
range air-to-air missiles or Kinzhal hypersonic missiles. The Tu-22M3 can also act as a naval bomber
carrying heavy anti-ship missiles, which is relevant for the Arctic and the North Sea.
Air-to-air combat at scale has been very scarce in Ukraine due to the size disparity of the air
forces and Ukraine’s defensive strategy relying on mobile ground-based air defence. This is coupled
with comprehensive, real-time NATO intelligence and surveillance that enables missions by very small
numbers of Ukrainian aircraft to evade Russian aircraft and air defence, while the Russians cannot
target NATO assets without triggering a wider conflict. The Ukrainian air force has nonetheless
suffered constant attrition in aircraft and skilled pilots, including several Western-provided F-16 lost
in combat.
This scenario is atypical for modern warfare. A more standard scenario for large-scale aerial
warfare played out in the May 2025 Indo-Pakistani clashes.18 India’s Operation Sindoor saw the
largest clash of 4th and 4.5th generation aircraft, with 42 on the Pakistani and 72 on the Indian
side. Pakistan’s defensive posture and effective use of Chinese aircraft, long-range Chinese PL-15E
air-to-air missiles, and Swedish SAAB Erieye airborne early warning and control (AEW&C) aircraft
to target Indian aircraft and coordinate Pakistani units saw the engagement end with between 3 to
5 Indian aircraft losses to zero Pakistani, potentially including 3 French Rafales. Notably, Pakistani
missiles outranged Indian ones, which proved a critical factor. However, Indian missiles and drones hit
and damaged multiple targets in Pakistan. The Pakistani retaliation, launched from within Pakistani
airspace, showed very limited effectiveness as India’s Russian-provided air defence network largely
neutralised it, with the S-400 air defence system showing excellent performance.19
17https://www.timesaerospace.aero/features/defence/algeria-confirms-acquisition-of-su-57
18https://nationalinterest.org/blog/buzz/how-chinese-missiles-routed-indias-air-force-over-
pakistan
19https://warontherocks.com/2025/05/operation-sindoor-and-the-evolution-of-indias-strategy-
against-pakistan/
24

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
What is emerging is that modern air operations are fought at ranges longer than ever before,
with sensors, low-observability features, and increasingly AI playing critical roles in survivability
and mission effectiveness. The air force of the future will increasingly integrate unmanned and
autonomous systems at scale, exemplified by CCA capability fusing manned aircraft and their drone
wingmen. This form of warfare is also one where industrial might and production rates are more
critical than anywhere. Whereas land forces can find ways to compensate for inferior firepower
and technology, the same is not the case for air forces. Unless there is a significant mismatch in
technological level – for instance the Gulf War or the Kosovo War – production rates for missiles and
aircraft are a key determinant of victory.
25

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
3 Existing stocks in European military capabilities
In this section we summarise the data of the military equipment stocks for the armies of Germany,
France, the UK, and Poland. We firstly look at the stock levels for main military equipment between
1992 and 2024. Data are from the ‘Military Balance’, a report published by the International Institute
for Strategic Studies (IISS). The report focuses on deployable, ready-to-use, weapons.20
While the IISS covers a high level of granular data for military stocks, the level of depreciation
of the weapons is not included. Thus, the aggregate information should be interpreted with caution.
Similarly, small differences with the actual official numbers can occur due to either the original as-
sessment or changing in the stocks after the data compilation. For instance, latest French documents
from the Defence Ministry indicate 6 TRF1 and 30 CAESAR Howitzers delivered to Ukraine in 2024,
and only 12 CAESAR Howitzers delivered to France’s military. The IISS only shows a decrease in 16
CAESAR Howitzers, however. So IISS data therefore only provide approximate estimates of stocks.
Being aware that possible discrepancies may exist, we proceed to analyse the evolution of the
equipment stocks for the following equipment 1) main battle tanks (MBTs), 2) infantry fighting
vehicles (IFVs), 3) other armoured vehicles (light tanks and armoured vehicles), 4) artillery (towed
and self-propelled howitzers and MLRS), 5) anti-aircraft weapons (towed and self-propelled missile
systems and guns), and 6) combat aircraft. Table 3.1 documents the decrease in the size of stocks
since the early 1990s until 2021 as already documented by Wolff, Burilkov, Bushnell, and Kharitonov
(2024a). Tables contained in Annex A1 offer a more granular level of information by equipment items
and country. The message remains that compared to the beginning of the peace dividend years (1990s
to 2014), European armies have substantially reduced sizes of equipment – with numbers falling by
factors of 5-20. Put differently, European armies are far from having the masses that were considered
critical during the Cold War.
The question is whether IISS data suggest any improvements in the last three years, i.e., from
2021-2024. For the four considered countries, the number of MBTs or IFVs is the same or even
smaller than in 2021. In the case of Howitzers and MLRS, only Poland has increased its stocks with
the acquisition of the South Korean K9 and Krab self-propelled Howitzer models and the MLRS
Homar-K. In air defence, numbers have increased in Poland and Germany but not in France and the
UK.
In the next section, we analyse procurement of new material. IISS data certainly suggest that
some combination of (a) delayed or insufficient ordering, (a) long delivery times, and (c) equipment
donations to Ukraine has meant that stocks of military equipment have not meaningfully changed in
20Following Wolff, Burilkov, Bushnell, and Kharitonov (2024a), we do not consider in this paper the weapons
categorised as “in store”, meaning “held away from front-line units”, by the IISS.
26

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
the past few years.
Table 3.1:German, French, British, and Polish Arms Stocks 1992–2024.
1992 2004 2013 2019 2020 2021 2024
Germany
Main Battle Tanks 6648 2398 322 323 323 319 313
Light Tanks 118 343 128 175 175 175 180
Infantry Fighting Vehicles 3250 2122 395 651 710 674 680
Armoured Vehicles 12977 3646 2114 1933 2067 2067 2234
Howitzers 3214 978 130 121 121 121 109
Long-Range Anti Aircraft 300 0 14 30 30 30 70
Medium-Range Anti Aircraft 0 0 0 0 0 0 3
Short-Range Anti Aircraft 680 0 2 12 12 12 20
MLRS 237 100 55 41 41 41 38
Combat Aircraft 553 423 205 228 228 226 226
France
Main Battle Tanks 2001 614 254 222 222 222 200
Light Tanks 171 28 28 0 0 0 0
Infantry Fighting Vehicles 0 0 530 625 605 706 622
Armoured Vehicles 6242 6185 5311 4075 4233 4317 4565
Howitzers 786 375 152 121 120 120 104
Long-Range Anti Aircraft 180 98 0 40 40 40 40
Medium-Range Anti Aircraft 69 26 0 0 0 0 0
Short-Range Anti Aircraft 150 331 0 24 24 24 26
MLRS 30 61 26 13 13 13 9
Combat Aircraft 215 222 238 227 227 228 235
United Kingdom
Main Battle Tanks 1276 543 227 227 227 227 213
Light Tanks 627 464 200 176 176 176 59
Infantry Fighting Vehicles 605 575 350 388 388 388 388
Armoured Vehicles 5626 4054 2763 2586 2590 2579 2353
Howitzers 723 344 233 215 215 215 179
Long-Range Anti Aircraft 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Medium-Range Anti Aircraft 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Short-Range Anti Aircraft 200 192 74 74 74 74 50
MLRS 47 64 35 35 35 35 26
Combat Aircraft 274 510 285 162 162 167 169
Poland
Main Battle Tanks 2800 947 893 637 808 797 662
Infantry Fighting Vehicles 1471 1281 1636 1611 1611 1611 1525
Armoured Vehicles 1437 468 436 733 828 828 675
Howitzers 2222 1014 401 427 394 410 451
Long-Range Anti Aircraft 250 125 1 1 1 1 16
Medium-Range Anti Aircraft 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Short-Range Anti Aircraft 160 216 81 81 98 81 178
MLRS 261 249 180 180 179 179 199
Combat Aircraft 332 242 106 98 94 94 85
Note: This table shows the absolute number of weapons in selected cate-
gories. It does not distinguish between the quality of the weapons. The large
increase in numbers of anti-aircraft is a result of IISS counting each launcher of
a Patriot system separately.
Source: IISS (1992, 2004, 2014, 2020, 2021, 2022, 2025).
European satellite and space capacities limited
27

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Next, we also document commercial (Figure 3.1) and military satellites stocks of European nations
compared to the US, China and Russia (Figure 3.2). Some of the military satellites included in
the graph serve dual purposes such as meteorological data collection, which may be used by both
the military and other Government agencies. Given rising uncertainty of access to US intelligence,
the two charts show a grim picture and highlight the necessity to advance Europe’s various space
programmes and current capabilities.Europe lags substantially in satellite capacities compared
to the great powers and even compared to Russia.
Nevertheless, EU institutions have advanced programmes for European satellite capaci-
ties. The Infrastructure for Resilience, Interconnectivity and Security by Satellite (IRIS2), a European
Commission project to provide connectivity services, is set to start its service in 203021 and will be
an EU owned institution able to provide both civil and military services like connectivity or surveil-
lance for defence or crises management. The IRIS2 will complement the existent GOVSATCOM2223
programme, which currently uses national and private operators to provide these services as well
as the Copernicus24 and Galileo25 programmes providing environmental and navigation information
respectively. The scale of the programmes is however limited compared to Starlink, the American
competitor, with already more than 7000 low earth satellites (LOE) satellites versus the less than 300
initially expected from IRIS2. Moreover, the expansion of the space industry is ongoing worldwide26,
with projects in China aiming at having a constellation of 648 LEO satellites by the end of 2025 and
“thousands” in 2030 (Alkire: 2025).
On the operational side at the European level, the EU Satellite Centre (SATCEN) provides spatial
and aerial data services to the EU as well as support to member states in the fields of foreign and
security policies.27
The need for technological advances and autonomy not only applies to satellites, but also to
rocket launching technologies, for which the EU was still relying on Russia in 202228 to put in orbit
satellites like those part of the Galileo programme. Arianespace29, a European competitor, had the
second launch of the Ariane 6 space rocket in April 2025, while Space X’ Falcon 9 has completed to
date almost 500 launches30. European private startups such as Isar Aerospace might still need some
21https://defence-industry-space.ec.europa.eu/eu-space/iris2-secure-connectivity_en
22https://defence-industry-space.ec.europa.eu/eu-space/govsatcom-satellite-communications/
govsatcom-system-overview_en
23https://www.euspa.europa.eu/eu-space-programme/secure-satcom/govsatcom
24https://www.euspa.europa.eu/eu-space-programme/copernicus
25https://www.euspa.europa.eu/eu-space-programme/galileo
26https://www.ft.com/content/b635423f-e721-454c-b75c-98d0ad8fedf1
27https://www.satcen.europa.eu/
28https://www.space.com/russia-halts-soyuz-launches-french-guiana
29https://newsroom.arianespace.com/ariane-6-performs-first-commercial-flight-with-successful-
launch-of-cso-3-satellite
30https://www.spacex.com/vehicles/falcon-9/
28

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
time until they can launch satellites.
Figure 3.1: Number of (commercial) satellites in low Earth orbit, Starlink vs main European competitors.
Source: authors based on FT and company data.
Figure 3.2: Number of military satellites deployed by country in 2024.
Note: Europe includes France, Germany, Italy, United Kingdom, Spain and
Luxembourg. ISR stands for “intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance”.
Source: authors based on IISS (2025).
29

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
4 What do European nations order? The Kiel Military Procurement
Tracker
Defence expenditure has constantly increased in the last years, with Europe as whole currently
fulfilling the 2% NATO target. At the same time, the share of the defence expenditure dedicated to
equipment has increased substantially across NATO countries, driven mainly by the increases within
the European members (Figure 4.1). The collective equipment expenditure of the EU27 has almost
doubled in real terms between 2018 and 2023.
Figure 4.1: Average share of defence equipment expenditure of total defence expenditure for NATO
countries.
Source: authors on NATO data.
To better understand the weapons European governments have purchased in the last years, the
military expenditures related to these weapons, and when these purchases were made, we have
compiled a detailed procurement database, which is available for download viahttps://www.ifw-
kiel.de/publications/kiel-military-procurement-tracker-33232/ . TheKielMilitaryPro-
curement Trackersystematically and comparatively tracks the military procurement of key European
countries. By taking official announcements and press releases from European countries’ ministry
of defence websites, we can record military orders. In the previous iteration of this report (Wolff,
Burilkov, Bushnell, and Kharitonov: 2024a), we built the database for Germany.31 Following this, it
has been updated to April 2025. Moreover, it now features four countries in varying levels of detail
given the data available: Germany, the United Kingdom, Poland and with much fewer details also
France.
Our database tracks information on the item ordered, the company from which it is ordered, the
31The first country whose procurement we tracked was Germany, due to its central role in Europe and strong industrial
base.
30

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
number of units ordered, the earliest and latest expected delivery dates, the monetary amount of
the order, the budgetary vehicle providing funding, and whether the order is part of a framework
agreement. It also records the country in which the headquarters of the company responsible for
fulfilling the order is located as well as the physical production or manufacturing country of the order
in cases where the information is available. To be as robust as possible, in cases where a domestic
company taking an order is a foreign subsidiary, we count them as partnerships with the country of
origin for the parent company.
We classify orders into 15 general item types: tanks, armoured vehicles, artillery, ammunition, air
defence systems, missiles (further differentiated into land, naval, and air variants), drones, infantry,
mines, helicopters, aircraft, naval, modernisation (refers to the improvement of the armed forces as
a whole), and other. Each general item type has a subcategory for research and development in that
category.
The database only includes items mentioned as military orders or expenses by official government
news and press release pages. Orders for which an official source has not been found are excluded
completely. Information from government sources forms the basis of the database and carries the
most weight and authority in case of discrepancies with other sources. In cases where the government
source omits important information pertaining to an order, unofficial news sources such as company
webpages that specifically refer to the order and contain missing details may be used to supplement
the official source and fill out the database as much as possible.
In this report, we extend the analysis beyond Germany by capturing procurement data for the
United Kingdom and Poland with relatively high levels of detail and following a similar approach.
For the original dataset see Wolff, Burilkov, Bushnell, Kharitonov, et al. (2025). We also present
findings for France, though data are not as complete as the official government sources provide less
information.
Germany has the most complete data, and we provide an update to the first release of the Kiel
Military Procurement Tracker. According to German law, the Bundestag Budget Committee must
approve any military procurement over€25 million. In all but a few cases, the date we associate
with an order is the date the Budget Committee approved the order. For remaining cases, the date
we associate with an order is the date of the official government announcement. Between January
2020 and April 2025, we capture 213 orders containing nearly 300 items with a total value of€170.5
billion.
The United Kingdomis introduced in theKiel Military Procurement Trackerwith a comparable
level of information per order thanks to the regularity and detail of official procurement press releases.
However, there are no equivalent rules to mandate parliamentary scrutiny of orders over a threshold
31

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
size, so we can only report on what the Ministry of Defence and the British Armed Forces voluntarily
publishes. For almost all orders the date given is the date of announcement. Between January 2020
and April 2025, we capture 140 orders and 151 items with a total value of £59.5 billion. The UK
also coordinates a number of multilateral funding mechanisms like the International Fund for Ukraine
(IFU). For IFU orders where it can be shown that certain items were paid for wholly by the UK, these
items have been split and included in the core UK data. Otherwise, IFU orders are shown separately
Figure 4.2.5, with the understanding that the UK’s share of funding is not fully known. There are
11 such orders worth £1 billion.
To trackPoland’s procurement for major military equipment, we follow the same procedure as
withGermanyandtheUK,analysingofficialnewsannouncementsfromthePolishMinistryofDefence
website. We supplement our findings with data from the Ministry detailing Poland’s Technical
Modernisation Plan for 2021-2035, which is currently implemented32 and foresees a budget of around
€120 billion. To complement these official sources, we also gather pricing and more granular data like
delivery dates from specialised press articles or press releases from the companies involved. To our
knowledge, we cover the same level of granularity as for the German and British procurement. We
cover purchases carried by the Polish Government since 2019, including the type of weapons, prices,
and origin for most of the procurement identified. The aggregate monetary amount we identify adds
up to €66 billion. Since 2021, this represents around 55 % of the total budget of the Technical
Modernisation Plan, with the remaining likely covering the next 6 years of the plan.
For France we merely summarise the main orders of the French Ministry of Defence since 2020.
These data are published every year in the annexes of the equipment budgets of the French military.
Specifically, we look at the “Projet annuel de performances Annexe au projet de loi de finances
pour [year]. Programme 146/147 Équipement des Forces”. Using the items and quantities ordered
mentioned in these budgets as a basis, we can then search for other sources and identify more
granular data like the prices, companies involved, or delivery periods. The degree to which more
details concerning an order are available is highly inconsistent, especially for details related to an
order’s monetary value, so we are unable to conduct the same level of analysis as we can with
Germany, the UK, and Poland. We can, however, observe the overall patterns for orders over the
period analysed in terms of type of equipment purchased.
32https://www.gov.pl/web/obrona-narodowa/modernizacja-techniczna-szrp
32

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
4.1 Germany
Spanning January 2020 to April 2025, theKiel Military Procurement Trackeridentifies 213 orders
containing 291 items worth a total of€170.5 billion for Germany.Figure 4.1.1 and Figure 4.1.1a show
the pattern of these orders. Five main results stand out:
Germany placed no substantial orders between July 2021 and April 2022.This period
includes the lead-up to the federal election in September 2021 and the appointment of the new
government in December 2021.
No noticeable increase in procurement activity occurred in the year and a half after the
invasion began.On the contrary, order volume fell: between January 2020 and June 2021, Germany
ordered €47.8 billion, whereas between January 2022 and June 2023, orders totalled€27.3 billion.
Order volume in the twelve months following the invasion (€21.3 billion) was lower than either of the
two years preceding the invasion (€25.5 and€22.3 billion respectively, illustrated in Figure 4.1.1a).
The war therefore does not seem to have initiated a rapid increase in items ordered in its first year.
A substantial increase in order volume and frequency began in spring 2023.From March
2023 to February 2024, Germany made military purchases worth€45.9 billion, and this grew in the
twelve months thereafter to€55.5 billion. In the whole period since the war started – from March
2022 to April 2025 – 148 orders containing 218 items were placed, for a total volume of€122.7
billion.
There is significant heterogeneity in monthly order volume. In some months there are
substantial spikes, which are usually associated with purchases of expensive equipment such as ships
or aircraft. The three largest specific items were a military vehicle maintenance contract in November
2023 (€13.4 billion), 35 F-35A fighters in December 2022 (€8.3 billion), and 60 CH-47F Chinook
helicopters in July 2023 (€7 billion). Many orders contain multiple items without prices for individual
items; the largest example was an order of just under 40 items in December 2024 totalling€20 billion.
Of this, we were only able to accurately cost€5.8 billion, leaving€14.2 billion still bundled together.
No items were ordered from February to April 2025.The federal election in February 2025
was followed by a government formation process completed only in May with the ascension of the
new cabinet under Chancellor Merz. We reasonably expect a high volume of orders in the months
following this report’s publication as the Bundeswehr ’catches up’ on missed months, assuming the
trend of higher order volume since spring 2023 continues.
33

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 4.1.1: Germany total military orders, January 2020 - April 2025 (billion EUR).
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al.
(2025).
34

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 4.1.1a: Germany total military orders, 2020 - 2025, twelve-month windows beginning in March (billion
EUR).
Note: No orders are recorded in January and February 2020, nor in March
and April 2025, meaning this chart includes 100% of total orders even though it
does not span the entire period recorded.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
Germany’s orders are additionally broken down by category (land, sea, air, or other) in Fig-
ure 4.1.2, and these categories are aggregated pre- and post-invasion in Figure 4.1.3.
German investment in land capabilities was slow to pick up after the war began.Despite
the immediate and pressing strategic needs of Ukraine and NATO’s eastern front, the first major
land orders were only made in the second half of 2023. Alongside Figure 4.1.2, these orders are
shown in more detail in Annex A2, Figure A2.1. A significant share of land orders is in big-ticket
items imported from the US; total post-invasion land spending is€38.9 billion. While it may appear
that there have been no major land orders since July 2024, the remaining€14.2 billion of the€20.0
billion package ordered in December 2024 (categorised ‘other’) contains, among other items, NH-90
35

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
helicopters and Dingo 2 A4 armoured vehicles, as well as small arms.33 Finally, we record no new
ammunition frameworks or updates to existing frameworks since July 2024.
Investment in naval and air forces is high in average order volume but decreasing in order
frequency. Since the first iteration of this report in July 2024, neither category has seen significant
spending, save a€5 billion order for U212 submarines; the last large air order was the December 2022
purchase of 35 F-35A fighters for€8.3 billion. For comparison, two thirds of pre-invasion spending
was in air and navy (65% combined).
There has been a shift in procurement priorities towards land forces post-invasion. We observe
a clear overall reorientation towards land forces pre- and post-invasion (Figure 4.1.3). Land orders
represent a third of overall orders between January 2022 and April 2025 (32%), up from 11% between
January 2020 and December 2021. The fall in the share of air orders (31% to 9%) and naval orders
(34% to 12%) reflects this. Compared to the first iteration of theKiel Military Procurement Tracker,
all three categories have fallen relative to ‘other’ orders. This is largely due to the aforementioned
€14.2 billion package in December 2024 and€6.5 billion invested in IT system modernisation in
October 2024. The largest item was €13.4 billion for military vehicle maintenance in November
2023.
A significant portion of German military procurement has only gone towards replacing
weapon commitments to Ukraine and, accordingly, the increase in German capacities is less
than the procurement data suggest.Figure 4.1.4 documents the estimated change in 2021 stocks
as a result of new equipment orders that are expected to be delivered as well as weapon commitments
to Ukraine. It should be noted that a significant quantity of ordered equipment has not yet been
delivered. Likewise, a significant proportion of the weapons Germany committed to Ukraine, taken
from the Ukraine Support Tracker, has also not yet been delivered. The key result from this chart
is that the ordering activity of the last two and a half years has barely changed the stocks available
to the German army. In most instances, they have merely been enough to replace the reduction in
stocks due to commitments to Ukraine.
33The authors reached out to members of the Bundestag Budget Committee, and it was confirmed that full details
of the remaining items in this package were not yet public.
36

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 4.1.2: Germany total military orders by weapon category, January 2020 - April 2025 (billion EUR).
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
Figure 4.1.3: Germany shift in procurement priorities since the start of the Russia-Ukraine war.
Note: This figure compares the monetary amount Germany ordered in mili-
tary procurements in each category (Air, Sea, Land, Other) in the periods from
January 2020 to December 2021 and from January 2022 to April 2025. It also
shows the percentage of total orders for each category for each time period.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
37

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 4.1.4: Impact of orders of new weapons and commitments to Ukraine on the stock of six major
weapon categories in Germany.
Note: This figure shows the comparison between German key weapon stocks
in 2021; units ordered (February 2022 to April 2025); units promised to Ukraine
(February 2022 to April 2025); and the remaining number available (or to be
delivered) to the Bundeswehr as of April 2025. The key weapon categories are:
(1) combat aircraft; (2) main battle tanks (MBTs); (3) infantry fighting vehicles
(IFVs) (orders include both new vehicles and retrofits of existing vehicles); (4)
otherarmouredvehicles(stocksandordersexcludeinfantryfightingvehicles, light
and main battle tanks); (5) artillery howitzers; and (6) anti-aircraft, air defence
weapons(stocksincludelong-rangeanti-aircraftsystems, andordersincludelong-
and medium-range systems). In this figure, we assume that providing units to
Ukraine is the only outflow of German stocks.
Source: IISS (2025) and Trebesch et al. (2023), Wolff et al. (2025).
38

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
In terms of funding, Germany’s small regular defence budget is supplemented by a special
debt vehicle (the Sondervermögen) and a budget line for the support of third countries
(Einzelplan 60).The current regular defence budget, Einzelplan 14, is only€53 billion, i.e., around
1.2% of GDP34. It is, however, supplemented by the Sondervermögen, a debt-funded fund of around
€100 billion that is mostly used for purchasing new equipment. The special fund was created in 2022
through an amendment to the German constitution to allow a special debt vehicle outside of the
German constitutional debt brake. Moreover, spending for purchases that benefit third countries,
in particular Ukraine, comes from a third budget line, Einzelplan 60. Figure 4.1.5 separates the
purchases into the three budget vehicles and shows that the Sondervermögen has become by far the
dominant source of funding for military procurement.
Figure 4.1.5: Germany total military orders by budgetary fund, January 2020 - April 2025 (billion EUR).
Note: €42.1 billion worth of orders is attributed to both the Sondervermögen
and regular defence budget, Einzelplan 14. In the absence of further details, we
assume that these orders are funded by the Sondervermögen until the fund is
exhausted in 2027 and then any additional costs will be paid by the regular
defence budget. In these cases, we attribute the value of the whole order to
the Sondervermögen. Around €1 billion worth of orders is attributed to the
Sondervermögen and Einzelplan 60. We count these orders as Einzelplan 60.
Furthermore, in cases where the funding vehicle is not specified, we attribute the
value of the order to the regular defence budget, Einzelplan 14.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
34https://www.bundeshaushalt.de/static/daten/2025/soll/draft/epl14.pdf
39

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Up to€74 billion of orders total has been paid for through the Sondervermögen so far,
of which €31.9 billion includes no other budget lines, while spending using only the core
defence budget has in fact decreased since February 2022. The majority of orders funded
solely by the Sondervermögen are expensive items mostly from foreign suppliers. From the US this
includes 35 F-35 fighters (€8.3 billion), 60 CH-57F Chinook helicopters (€7 billion), and 3 P-8A
Poseidon aircraft (€1.1 billion); from Israel, the Arrow 3 air defence system and missiles (€4 billion).
Procurements paid for with both Einzelplan 14 and the Sondervermögen amount to€42.1 billion,
but in the absence of further details, we assume they are fully paid for by the Sondervermögen until
its exhaustion. Finally, as shown in Figure 4.1.6, spending solely through Einzelplan 14 between
January 2020 and February 2022 was€47.3 billion, but from March 2022 to April 2025 has been
only €43.8 billion.
Figure 4.1.6: Germany total military orders by budgetary fund overview, January 2020 - April 2025 (billion
EUR)
Note: €42.1 billion worth of orders is attributed to both the Sondervermögen
and regular defence budget, Einzelplan 14. In the absence of further details, we
assume that these orders are funded by the Sondervermögen until the fund is
exhausted in 2027 and then any additional costs will be paid by the regular
defence budget. In these cases, we attribute the value of the whole order to
the Sondervermögen. Around €1 billion worth of orders is attributed to the
Sondervermögen and Einzelplan 60. We count these orders as Einzelplan 60.
Furthermore, in cases where the funding vehicle is not specified, we attribute the
value of the order to the regular defence budget, Einzelplan 14.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
The Sondervermögen will deplete around 2027 but does not necessarily need renewal due
40

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
to the amendment of debt rules.Fiscal rules around Bundeswehr spending are being significantly
loosened to accommodate continued defence spending in excess of the 2% NATO target. Through
an additional constitutional amendment agreed on in March 2025, defence spending above 1% of
GDP will be exempted from the debt brake and borrowing limits. This should allow the sustainable
and permanent financing of increased defence spending after the Sondervermögen runs out and is
supplemented by additional rules to allow aid for Ukraine to also be exempted from borrowing limits.
4.2 United Kingdom
For the UK, theKiel Military Procurement Trackeridentifies 139 orders containing 151 items worth
£59.5 billion total.35 Figure 4.2.1 and Figure 4.2.1a show the pattern of these orders.
UK order frequency stays remarkably constant over the considered period.For years 2021
to 2024 inclusive, we record 29-30 items ordered each year, along with 14 in 2020 and 19 between
January and April 2025. We record no orders for seven months in total. Unlike Germany, which
experienced a number of ‘droughts’ in orders (especially from mid-2021 to early 2022), there are no
cases for the UK where no orders are placed for two or more consecutive months.
However, a noticeable and permanent increase in order volume is apparent after the
invasion began in February 2022.As shown in Figure 4.2.1a, order volume grew from £5.8 billion
in the twelve months preceding the invasion to £15.2 billion across March 2022 to February 2023.
While this was followed by a fall to £9.4 billion in the twelve months thereafter (still much higher
than pre-invasion), March 2024 to February 2025 saw over £20 billion of orders made. £3.6 billion of
orders have been made in March and April 2025.There is a very high degree of variance in order
volumes across 2020 to 2025.As Figure 4.2.1 shows, the regular flow of orders is interspersed
with particularly expensive single item orders, which consistently grow in volume from 2020 to 2025.
Indeed, while the average monthly order volume is £0.9 billion, four months see volume above £4
billion and an additional eight see more than £2 billion volume. The £20 billion ordered across March
2024 to February 2025 for example includes £9 billion for nuclear submarine reactors (January 2025),
and a £6.5 billion investment in R&D (July 2024).
With a swift general election in 2024 and majority governments either side of it, there
is nearly no mark on order activity from political mechanisms, unlike in Germany.As a rule,
the six weeks prior to British general elections see government departments placed under ‘heightened
sensitivity’, where departmental announcements and decisions are put on pause. We accordingly
observe no orders in June 2024 during the lead-up to the July 2024 general election, but with seven
35Including orders from the UK-administered and partially funded International Fund for Ukraine (‘IFU’) and Drone
Capability Coalition (‘DCC’) brings this to 150 orders containing 176 items worth a total of £60.5 billion. IFU/DCC
orders are not included in UK data but are discussed at the end of this chapter.
41

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
other months also recording no orders, it is not out of the ordinary. And while the two changes in
government leadership in September and October 2022 happen to coincide with a lull in orders, these
changes were internal party processes and in principle ought not to have affected the day-to-day work
of government departments like the Ministry of Defence.
Figure 4.2.1: UK total military orders, January 2020 - April 2025 (billion GBP).
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al.
(2025)
42

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 4.2.1a:UK total military orders, 2020 - 2025, twelve-month windows beginning in March (billion
GBP)
Note: £0.5 billion of orders are recorded in January and February 2020, and
£3.6 billion in March and April 2025, which are not included in this chart.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
British orders are additionally broken down by category (land, sea, air, or other) in Figure 4.2.2,
and these categories are aggregated pre- and post-invasion in Figure 4.2.3.
Sea power is by far the main priority in procurement, with nearly half of all recorded
spending going towards the Royal Navy.The £26.7 billion total worth of naval orders, almost
all from January 2022 onwards, are spread over multiple strategic directions (details shown in Annex
A2 Figure A2.1). Orders relating to submarines make up the bulk of naval spending, including
a number of high-profile orders like £9 billion for nuclear reactors and £1.9 billion for sonar and
sensor support. Orders have been made for new attack submarines (as with £4 billion in October
2023 for AUKUS submarine parts, the class to replace the current Astute-class) and new ballistic
nuclear missile submarines (as with £2 billion in May 2022 for Dreadnought-class design, replacing
43

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
the current Vanguard-class). The surface fleet also saw a number of orders, like £4.2 billion for Type
26 Frigates in November 2022, as did the auxiliary fleet, with a £1.6 billion order for solid support
ships in January 2023.
British investment in land capabilities is fair, yet still less than half of naval spending.£9
billion was invested in land forces across 2020 to April 2025 of which £3.6 billion was in 2020 and
2021, and £5.4 billion in 2022 onwards. The major land items appear to be a £2.4 billion munitions
contract in November 2020, a £0.8 billion order for Challenger 3 tanks in May 2021, £2 billion for
Chinook helicopters in March 2024, and £1.6 billion for Lightweight Multirole Missiles for Ukraine36
(details shown in Annex 2 Figure A2.2). Aside from these, the land orders that we observe are small
in volume and sporadic in frequency. Four additional packages worth £0.6 billion total were also
ordered that contain mostly (or entirely) land items but are marked ‘other’ because they have items
from multiple categories that cannot be split apart.
Air procurement is relatively insignificant both pre- and post-invasion.Growing from £1.6
billion in 2020 and 2021, to £3.3 billion in 2022 onwards, this number includes £2.4 billion for
Eurofighter radar development and £0.8 billion for fighter jet design and development (the GCAP
programme). Air defence procurement also remains patchy throughout the period, not filling the
gaps in stocks.
Over £700 million was spent by the UK on orders for drones or drone development.
Unilateral orders in these two categories are shown in Figure 4.2.4. From January 2020 to April
2025, not including multilateral orders with other countries, the UK ordered at least 16 Protector
long-range strike drones worth a total of £260 million, 264 portable/packable surveillance drones
worth £129 million, and unknown quantities of Altius loitering munitions drones and first-person-view
(FPV) drones for Ukraine.
36Orders for multi-role missiles like these are recorded as ‘land’ because they were placed for Ukraine, who operates
them only as surface-to-air or surface-to-surface missiles, even if the UK may use them as air-to-air or air-to-surface
missiles as well.
44

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 4.2.2: UK total military orders by weapon category, January 2020 - April 2025 (billion GBP).
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al.
(2025).
Figure 4.2.3: UK shift in procurement priorities since the start of the Russia Ukraine war.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al.
(2025).
45

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 4.2.4: UK military orders for drones by month, January 2020 - April 2025 (million GBP).
Note: Unilateral orders only.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
TheUKleadsselectedmultilateralprocurementmechanismsandfundingvehiclesthrough
which over £1 billion worth of orders have been made.The main example is the International
Fund for Ukraine (IFU), a funding mechanism administered by the UK on behalf of five partner
countries and six additional donors, with a total reported size of approximately £1 billion. In cases
where the UK has made an order through the IFU, and it is clearly marked as being paid for solely by
the UK, we record it as a UK order and not an IFU order. Figure 4.2.5 illustrates the remaining £1
billion of orders placed through the IFU, as well as orders through the much smaller Drone Capability
Coalition (DCC), a partnership with Latvia and other countries worth just under £0.05 billion total
that focuses on drones.
These multilateral procurement mechanisms have a focus on the needs of the Ukrainian
armed forces, especially drones.The largest individual item ordered with a published price was
£300 million of 152mm howitzer rounds (120,000 in total) ordered in July 2024. At least 40,000
first person-view (FPV) drones have been ordered too through the IFU and DCC at a cost of £170
million, as well as a minimum of 150 surveillance drones for £40 million. Most orders are given
as packages with multiple items in unknown quantities, and many such packages include additional
orders for drones, air defence systems, missiles, and other items.
46

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 4.2.5: UK-administered International Fund for Ukraine total military orders by weapon category,
January 2020 - April 2025 (million GBP).
Note: Multilateral orders only. It is unclear what the UK’s exact contribution
is in many of these orders. Also includes orders through the Drone Capability
Coalition in partnership with Latvia and other countries.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
4.3 Poland
In the case of Poland, we have identified a total of 97 orders for the period between January 2019
and May 2025, covering a monetary value of around€66 billion.
Polish stocks are likely to increase in the coming years(Figure 4.3.1). The substantial
purchases carried out mainly since 2022 will start refilling Polish stocks from 2025 onwards until
2032, with some of the products being currently delivered and those others about being delivered in
the coming years. This will particularly replace some of the equipment donated to Ukraine and that
being erased during the last decades of underinvestment.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has marked a turning point in Polish procurement(4.3.2).
While we identify some significant purchases at the beginning of 2020 and mid-2021, the period
before the war is marked by an overall lack of procurement. The vast majority of the Polish orders,
around 80 %, has been carried after 2022 once the invasion started.
Investment in land capabilities is the main priority in the Polish procurement(Figure 4.3.3
and Figure 4.3.4). Procurement in other areas has remained relatively stable, with no significant
increases. This is in stark contrast with the UK, where the procurement is dominated by naval
orders, but comparable to Germany which also did enact a priority shift towards land forces.
47

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Considerable investment in land capabilities across multiple systemsis also prioritised, see
Figure 4.3.3). We can highlight the purchase of MLRSs (around 300 HOMAR-Ks and a framework
agreement for almost 500 units of HIMARS), MBTs (more than 300 Abrams, and 180 K2 tanks, with
800 more yet to be purchased as part of a framework agreement). The acquisition of South Korean
howitzers is similarly remarkable, with more than 350 purchased between 2022 and 2024. For air
defence, Poland has purchased 6 PATRIOT systems as part of the WISŁA air defence programme.
Also remarkable is the purchase of 96 AH 64E Apache attack helicopters in 2024.
In the case of the air force, two major acquisitions stand out: the purchase of the 48 FA-50
South Korean aircraft in 2022 as well as the 32 F-35 aircraft purchase in 2020.In the case of
the sea forces, 3 frigates and 2 naval missile units constitute the major investments. While further
investment may be needed, we can expect major deliveries of equipment to Poland in the next 5 years,
with considerable increases in MLRSs, MBTs or self-propelled howitzers. If other major European
countries do not increase their stocks accordingly, this would place Poland as the first European army
in size in terms of some major military equipment in the land forces.
Figure 4.3.1: Polish defence procurement by equipment category (billion EUR).
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
48

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 4.3.2: Polish total military orders, 2019 - 2025, twelve-month windows beginning in January 2019
(billion EUR).
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
Figure 4.3.3: Total military orders by weapon category, January 2020 - May 2025 (billion EUR).
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
49

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 4.3.4: Poland shift in procurement priorities since the start of the Russia-Ukraine war
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
4.4 France
To our knowledge, in the case of the military procurement in France, there is no comparable level
of transparency to that of Germany, the UK, or Poland. Specific budget allocations to the different
purchases are not always made available. While we sometimes can track procurement orders for
certain items using Ministry of Defence news announcements, in many cases the data is just not
publicly available on a consistent basis. This is especially true for data for the monetary amounts of
orders. What we can find however is an overview of the quantities of different military items ordered
and delivered in a given year from the annexes of the military equipment budgets published by the
French Ministry of Defence. We look at the period 2020-2025. Using these items and quantities as a
basis, we can then search for and piece together more specific information about an order. However,
the monetary value is missing for too many orders, so we cannot perform the same level of bottom-up
analysis for France as we do for the other three European countries. The specific order and delivery
data are detailed in the Kiel Military Procurement Tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
What we do find is that during the last 6 years, the French military conducted major orders
in a number of weapon types. For the Air Force and Navy, France ordered several transport and
surveillance aircraft like the A330 before the start of the Ukraine War, as well as a large order of
Rafale fighter jets in 2023. Also notable is the number of orders for new armoured vehicles and
Leclerc tank refurbishments for the Army – almost 2700 combined – and the regularity with which
these orders were made. Finally, France ordered a large number of CAESAR 155mm howitzers and
50

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
800 missiles, over 300 of which are surface-to-air missiles. In all but one of these orders, one for
3 Hawkeye surveillance aircraft in 2020, France purchased from either French or trans-European
companies with French participation.
Investment in the French military is dictated by the ‘lois de programmation militaire’ (LPM), or
military programming laws, which are multi-annual budgetary commitments for a number of years
to fulfil specific goals related to military investment and modernisation. These laws ensure that
military equipment and infrastructure are continually serviced and replaced on a sustained basis37.
The military programming law that overlaps the most with our period of analysis is the LPM 2019-
2025, which allocates a total of€295 billion for military equipment spending over seven years38.
The current military programming law, LPM 2024-2030, allocates a total of€413 billion until 2030
39, which represents a 40% increase from the previous period. This increase demonstrates that,
even though we cannot provide a detailed analysis of French military procurement, France is indeed
responding to the urgency of the situation that Europe is facing and is taking decisive action to
rearm its military (see also Table 4.4.1).
37https://www.info.gouv.fr/actualite/la-loi-de-programmation-militaire-quest-ce-que-cest
38https://www.defense.gouv.fr/ministere/loi-programmation-militaire-2019-2025/fiches-lpm-2019-
2025-plan-bataille-concret-remontee-puissance
39https://www.defense.gouv.fr/ministere/politique-defense/loi-programmation-militaire-2024-2030
51

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Table 4.4.1:France orders by weapon types from 2020 to 2025 (units).
Weapon Type 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Total
Combat Aircraft 0 0 0 42 0 0 42
Other Aircraft 13 1 2 0 0 0 16
Main Battle Tank 0 50 50 0 100 0 200
Armoured Vehicle 677 120 564 442 515 120 2438
Artillery Howitzer 0 0 0 127 0 0 127
Missile 0 59 418 320 3 0 800
Note: This table shows the main orders ("principales commandes") of main
weapon types by France from 2020 to 2025 contained in the annexes of the mil-
itary equipment budgets published by the French Ministry of Defence and sum-
marised by the Kiel military procurement tracker. ‘Missile’ relates to all types
of missiles (Land, Air, Naval). All vehicles (‘Main Battle Tank’ and ‘Armoured
Vehicle’) orders include both new purchases and refurbishments of existing vehi-
cles. Other aircraft includes aircraft orders for both the Air Force and Navy.
Source: Projet annuel de performances Annexe au projet de loi de finances pour
2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024, 2025. Programme 146/147 Équipement des
Forces; Kiel military procurement tracker, Wolff et al. (2025).
To conclude section 4, Figure 4.5 summarises the procurement efforts of Germany, Poland and
the UK. We can clearly see the substantial and lasting increase in procurement activity in Germany
and Poland but also the UK. France also increased its procurement activities with rising numbers,
but we cannot fully track their monetary value.
52

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 4.5: Country summary procurement value from January 2020 to April 2025 (billion EUR).
Note: This figure shows the summary of the Kiel military procurement tracker
for Germany, UK, and Poland for the years 2020-2025 in€ billion. We exclude
France because there is not enough monetary data available to make a com-
parable analysis with the other countries. For all countries, there is no way to
verify how much military procurement spending we are missing, and we are not
aware of a viable method of benchmarking the data. Hence, our results should
be interpreted cautiously and as a lower bound.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker, Wolff et al. (2025).
5 Understanding domestic and foreign purchases
Several reports have argued that Europe depends critically on foreign supplies of weapons. Maulny
(2023) reports that 78% of defence acquisitions is being procured from outside the EU between
February 2022 and June 23. The number was later also taken up by Draghi (2024). The Euro-
pean Commission also referenced this number in the European Defence Industrial Strategy (EDIS)
communication, and the different targets set for European procurement are indirectly linked to this
reference as they assume such existent reliance. These numbers however could not be replicated.
Mejino-Lopez and Wolff (2024) look at trade statistics, the German public procurement from the
Kiel military procurement tracker (Wolff et al.: 2025) , as well as other national governments’ data
and find that the current foreign imports from European countries are nowhere close to the 70%
of total equipment purchases indicated above. The highest share of imports to defence equipment
expenditure we find is for Poland. Schreer (2024) argues that in the period between February 2022
53

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
and September 2024, the number of procurements directed to European manufacturers was actually
above 50%, since he notices that the number estimated by Maulny (2023) did not take account of
the domestic purchases, and hence estimated an overreliance.
5.1 Insights from the Kiel Military Procurement Tracker
With the Kiel Military Procurement Tracker, we are able to identify whether the order is given to
a domestic company, a company from another European country, a joint venture company or a
foreign, non-European company. Concretely, while Rheinmetall producing in Germany would be fully
Germany and Lockheed Martin producing in the US would be fully foreign, Raytheon production in
Germany of Patriot missiles would be counted as “Germany and foreign partnership”. For the UK,
similar examples include BAE Systems (fully domestic), Thales Group (foreign, from France), and
naval maintenance by subsidiary Thales UK counted as “UK and foreign partnership”.
About half of procurement in Germany is from domestic German companies, while only
a relatively small part of equipment spending, 16%, is from foreign producers without any
German involvement in the production. Figure 5.1.1 and Figure 5.1.2 provide a breakdown
of the geographical regions of companies from which Germany has placed orders in the period
analysed. While some high-profile orders such as the F35 fighter jets come from a US producer,
almost half (49%) of orders go to purely German companies, and some 35% from a consortium
involving foreign and German producers. The US by itself is the source of 15% of orders. What is
particularly noteworthy is the very low share of orders from other European countries without German
involvement (0.5%). Finally, orders from the US have become much more substantial in the last two
years compared to 2020 and 2021.
The German order flow goes to multiple companies, with ten companies involved in
supplying two thirds (64%) of overall volume and no single company supplying more than
10% of total order volume. Among them are three federally owned companies which provide
in-house services: BWI (9% of total order volume, highest overall), providing€15.8 billion worth
of IT system modernisation; HIL (8%, second highest), provider of military vehicle maintenance
services for which there was a single contract extension worth€13.4 billion; and BwBM (7%, fourth
highest), supplier of€12.7 billion worth of soldier clothing and personal equipment. The top non-
federally owned company is Rheinmetall, the main company for€13.3 billion of total orders (8%,
third highest). In fifth place is Airbus Defence and Space (7%), followed by Boeing (6%), Damen
Schelde Naval Shipbuilding (5%), Lockheed Martin (5%), Raytheon (4%) and ThyssenKrupp Marine
Systems (4%). We cannot confirm the main company for around€21.1 billion worth of orders, 12%
of the overall total order volume.
54

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 5.1.1: Germany total military orders by country of origin of the company which received the order,
January 2020 – April 2025 (billion EUR)
Note: This figure refers to the country where the headquarters of the com-
pany that received the order is located. As such, the location of actual item
production and manufacturing may differ. “Germany and foreign partnership”
refers to cases where either (a) a German and non-German company jointly re-
ceive an order, i.e., they work together on developing and producing an item; or
(b) a non-German company receives an order but the item is produced in Ger-
many. We cannot confirm development country for around€19.8 billion worth
of total orders.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
55

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 5.1.2: Germany share of total military orders by country of origin of the company which received the
order, January 2020 – April 2025 (billion EUR).
Note: This figure refers to the country where the headquarters of the com-
pany that received the order is located. As such, the location of actual item
production and manufacturing may differ. “Germany and foreign partnership”
refers to cases where either (a) a German and non-German company jointly re-
ceive an order, i.e., they work together on developing and producing an item, or
(b) a non-German company receives an order but the item is produced in Ger-
many. We cannot confirm development country for around€19.8 billion worth
of total orders.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
Procurement in the UK is even more clearly tilted towards domestic producers than in
Germany. Around 50% of spending is to domestic companies in our sample and UK companies and
foreign partnerships come second at 47%, with only a very small part of purchases coming straight
from foreign producers (Figure 5.1.3 and Figure 5.1.4). There is a high representation of UK-based
companies under foreign ownership like Thales UK (Thales Group, from France) and Leonardo UK
(Leonardo, from Italy) which are developing, not just manufacturing, procurements. This is much
more rarely the case in available German and Polish data. We count these orders as partnerships
between UK and foreign companies even though they are not contracted to the parent companies
per se. The largest single item under UK and foreign partnership was a £6.5 billion investment in
R&D conducted by MBDA UK, the British arm of the European multinational MBDA.
The British procurement is more concentrated with four main companies representing
two thirds of total order volumes and features no major government-owned companies.In
many cases, major contracts are given to a main company with the expectation that they handle
56

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
subcontracting and delegation to other firms. BAE Systems appears dominant, being the main
company for £17.9 billion of orders (30% of total order volume). Rolls-Royce is next (£9.1 billion,
15%), followed by MBDA UK (£7.5 billion, 13%), Thales UK (£4.6 billion, 8%), Boeing (£2.3
billion, 4%), Babcock (£2.2 billion, 4%) and BMT (£1.6 billion, 3%). We cannot confirm the main
company for around £3.4 billion worth of orders, 6% of the overall total order volume. Finally, we
note the prevalence of foreign (often US) ownership of shares in domestic companies, though it is
beyond the scope of this paper to explore these dynamics.
Figure 5.1.3: UK total military orders by country of origin of the company which received the order,
January 2020 – February 2025 (billion GBP).
Note: This figure refers to the country where the headquarters of the com-
pany that received the order is located. As such, the location of actual item
production and manufacturing may differ. “UK and foreign partnership” refers
to cases where either (a) a British and non-British company jointly receive an
order, i.e., they work together on developing and producing an item; or (b) a
non-British company receives an order but the item is produced in the UK. We
cannot confirm development country for around £3.3 billion worth of total orders
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
57

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 5.1.4: UK share of total military orders by country of origin of the company which received the
order, January 2020 – April 2025 (billion GBP).
Note: This figure refers to the country where the headquarters of the com-
pany that received the order is located. As such, the location of actual item
production and manufacturing may differ. “UK and foreign partnership” refers
to cases where either (a) a British and non-British company jointly receive an
order, i.e., they work together on developing and producing an item, or (b) a
non-British company receives an order but the item is produced in the United
Kingdom. We cannot confirm development country for around £3.4 billion worth
of total orders.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
Poland’s military purchases stand in stark contrast to the UK and Germany:they were
mainly directed to foreign providers, in particular to the US and South Korea. About 69% of all
purchasesweredirectedtoforeigncompanies 40. Thisincludedbothland(MBTs, howitzers, transport
and attack helicopters), as well as aircrafts (F-35 or FA050 aircrafts) or air defence systems (see
Figure 5.1.5 and Figure 5.1.6). The production of some of these weapons is being manufactured in
Poland, and by Polish companies in some of the cases. Around 70% of the non-European purchases
from Poland are contracted with US companies and the remaining mainly with South Korean firms.
Lockheed Martin and Boeing account for most of the US purchases, and Hanwha Aerospace and
Hyundai Rotem for those from South Korea. The orders allocated to national companies refer mainly
to either the public holding company PGZ or Huta Stalowa Wola, a subsidiary company of PGZ.
40This may not mean that the manufacturing occurs in a foreign country, however.
58

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 5.1.5: Poland total military orders by country of origin of the company which received the order,
January 2019 – May 2025 (billion EUR).
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
Figure 5.1.6: Poland share of total military orders by country of origin of the company which received the
order, January 2019 – May 2025 (billion EUR).
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
Finally, France shows almost no reliance on foreign, non-European partners.The majority
of French procurement is contracted with French companies, or alternatively with European ones.
The case of purchases for major equipment like transport aircrafts (A400M; Airbus), combat aircrafts
(Rafale; Dassault), or self-propelled howitzer (CAESAR; Nexter) relate to equipment for which both
development and manufacture are known to be done by French companies. While the granularity of
59

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
the data does not allow us to observe the origin of smaller equipment like ammunition, this is likely
either locally produced or from European partners when considering imported equipment (see section
5.2). Having analysed the procurement data for these four countries, we now proceed to cross-check
our findings with trade statistics and transfers of military equipment data.
5.2 Cross-checking import dependency with Comtrade, NATO and SIPRI data
To further understand the dependency on foreign suppliers, we next turn to trade data also covering
other European countries. Figure 5.2.1 (left) shows the share of imported military equipment by
country using UN Comtrade bilateral data for the period 2021 and 2024, with intra-EU imports
often around 50% of the total imports for most of European countries. The level of imports to total
equipment spending reflects low levels of reliance on third countries, and a high concentration of the
military procurement on the national industries (Figure 5.2.1, right).
Figure 5.2.1: Share of military equipment imports by origin for different countries between 2021 and 2024
(left) and share of imports to total equipment spending (right).
Notes: Trade data for France in the year 2024 is not available and uses 2023 data instead.
The left figure uses UN Comtrade Data. The right figure uses UN Comtrade data (HS Com-
modity Code 93) for imports (numerator) and equipment spending from NATO (denominator).
Source: authors based on UN Comtrade and NATO data.
These trade data face limitations, however. In particular, we cannot differentiate between imports
of final goods or intermediate goods. This could overestimate the level of imports for some countries
using foreign intermediate military goods for production. And secondly, underreporting in the data
may exist due to confidentiality applying to military purchases, which in turn would lead to an
underestimation of the imports.
We therefore complement the analysis further by using the SIPRI database that covers interna-
tional transfers of major conventional arms41.
41These transfers are measured in TIV (see here), a unit of measure which aims at capturing the transfer of military
resources rather than the financial value. While this means we cannot make direct financial comparisons, it is possible
60

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
The SIPRI data depicts an important role of the US within Europeanimports but does not relate
imports to total equipment purchases. Put differently, the data are useful to track origins of imports
but not to assess whether European countries depend excessively on imports in the first place as
domestic production is not included in the data. Figure 5.2.2 shows the origin of arms imports for
the EU and selected European countries. The US is the main trading partner for military equipment
both for the EU and the main European countries except for France. Overall, intra-European imports
play a much smaller role, comparable to imports from third countries (e.g., South Korea).
Figure 5.2.2: Major conventional arms imports by origin 2021-2024, SIPRI data.
Source: authors based on SIPRI.
5.3 Digging further into the foreign purchases puzzle: how big is Europe’s depen-
dency on US imports?
The different data analysed so far do not point to an excessive reliance on foreign countries, with the
exception of Poland. However, the volume of European imports in the EU has continuously grown
since 2020 (Figure 5.3.1), with the US imports clearly leading the increase despite concerns over the
US industrial capacity to provide sufficient weapons without major delays (Burilkov et al.: 2024).
to capture the intensity of imports from the different countries.
61

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 5.3.1: Arms imports measured in TIV million for the EU by origin.
Note: The EU category here refers to intra EU trade.
Source: authors based on SIPRI.
Besides increasing worries about the reliability of the US as a political and military partner, a
special focus on the US is warranted as the US is the leading global exporter of military equipment
(SIPRI: 2025). Between the fiscal years (FY) 2017 and 2021, the Foreign Military Sales (FMS)
portfolio for European allies of the US averaged $11 billion while in FY2024 reached $68 billion
(Cavoli: 2025). While the US also transfers military equipment through other instruments than the
FMS (see Annex A3 for an overview), the latter covers most of the transfers of major, strategic,
military equipment. We thus focus on the exports via FMS so that we can assess (a) the type of
equipment acquired, and (b) the financial scale of the equipment across time and how it compares to
the other available data. We do so based on the US Foreign Military Sales (FMS) notifications which
we have compiled from the US Department of Defense website and put into a new, readily accessible
database – the Bruegel US foreign military sales database (Mejino-Lopez and Wolff: 2025). In line
with Cavoli (2025), our FMS database shows a substantial increase in the US potential sales to
main European countries, with the monetary value. Figure 5.3.2 does document that since 2022,
several EU countries did reach agreements with the US for transfers of major defence equipment
of high-value. It is important to highlight that the numbers capture notifications but not actual
deliveries. Both Poland and Germany showcase that the potential sales captured in our database
are likely to be concluded, as in the case of the F-35s or the M1A1 Abrams purchase of Germany
and Poland respectively. In terms of the type of military equipment purchased, combat aircrafts,
transport helicopters, and air defence systems seem to be the most demanded items by European
62

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
countries. In financial terms, since 2022 the aggregate potential notified sales to European countries
accounted for almost€140 billion.
Figure 5.3.2: Value of FMS notified potential sales by country and year (billion USD).
Note: The items should be interpreted as main item of the specific potential
sale and not unique item. Additional equipment and technical services are usually
included within a potential sale notification.
Source: Bruegel database on US foreign military sales (FMS).
Inthissection, wehaveprovidedadetailedanalysisoftheamountandtypeofimportedequipment
from third countries and specifically the US. From the gathered evidence, we can make the following
conclusions:
The reliance on the US for military equipment is overstated.Neither the procurement data
nor the trade data corroborate any number close to the 80% that is commonly suggested as the
percentage of total military equipment purchased in Europe that is imported from the US.
Demand for US military equipment has however increased substantially after Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine. The data from the US Foreign Military Sales database indicate significant
demand for specific high-end equipment like combat aircrafts or air defence systems.
On the whole, domestic purchases do indeed dominate the European procurement with
the exception of some countries such as Poland. However, for imports of specific major
and high-end defence equipment, the US is the most significant partner while the intra-EU
trade plays a rather minor role.
63

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
6 From procurement to effective capacities: assessing delivery de-
lays, production capacity, and development times for new systems
Havingstudiedwhathasbeenordered, wenowmovetothecrucialquestionofdeliveryandproduction
capacities. In section 6.1, we report on the expected delivery estimates as we have been able to
capture them in theKiel Military Procurement Tracker. Section 6.2 provides some data on increased
production capacities for key weapon systems. Section 6.3 focuses on the development of newer
systems and the key technological gaps that Europe has.
6.1 Expected delivery dates in ordered equipment from theKiel Military Procure-
ment Tracker
Expected equipment delivery dates are recorded in the Kiel Military Procurement Tracker, in detail
for Germany and the UK, and where possible, for Poland as well.
For German items with both an earliest and latest expected delivery date (42% of total),
the average delivery time is around 3 years, and no official latest delivery date is provided for
50% of items.Average delivery time is shown in Figure 6.1.1, and a three-month moving average
of the proportion of orders with no latest expected delivery date is shown in Figure 6.1.2. For the
former, there is some variation over time but no systematic trend. For the latter, it appears that
the share of orders with no latest expected delivery date has been increasing over time. This could
well be an indication of increasing capacity constraints at a moment of rising military procurement
activity, but other explanations might also be possible.
For British items with both an earliest and latest expected delivery date (36% of total),
the average delivery time is around 3-4 years, and no official latest delivery date is provided
for 53% of items. Average delivery time is shown in Figure 6.1.3, and a three-month moving
average of the proportion of orders with no latest expected delivery date is shown in Figure 6.1.4.
Average delivery time appears volatile, with spikes that can be attributed in part to the long timespan
of naval orders and training contracts (some of which go as late as 2040). Still, for regular items,
the average tends to be 3-4 years. The share of items with no latest expected delivery date appears
to stay stable over time.
For Polish items, the average delivery time is around 3 years from when the equipment
has been ordered. We note however that almost half of the orders we identify do not show an
expected delivery time.
On the whole, the procurement data for all three countries offer an important message:
if the 2030 timeline is to be met, procurement must occur in the next 2 years as otherwise
64

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
deliveries will be too late.
Figure 6.1.1: Germany quarterly estimate of the number of years needed to deliver the ordered equipment
where available, January 2020 – April 2025.
Note: Out of the 291 ordered items recorded for the years 2020-2025, 122 have both
an earliest and latest expected delivery date. In cases where the order is not an item to be
delivered per se (e.g. a maintenance contract), the “delivery date” refers to the expected
date where the contractor’s obligation to provide a service to the Bundeswehr ends. This
figure shows the estimated number of years it takes for an order to be fulfilled after it has
been placed as a function of time. It shows the quarterly average years until an earliest
expected delivery date and until a latest expected delivery date. We take a further average
of these two quarterly values to estimate the average years it takes to fully deliver an item
or fulfil an order.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
65

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 6.1.2: Germany proportion of ordered items without a latest expected delivery date, three-month
moving window (January 2020 – April 2025).
Note: This figure shows the proportion of ordered items that do not have a latest
expected delivery date within a three-month rolling window consisting of each month and
the two months prior. These items have either (a) no expected delivery date, or (b) only
an earliest expected delivery date. Altogether Germany has ordered 291 items of which
146 have no latest expected delivery date.
Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025)
66

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 6.1.3: UK quarterly estimate of the number of years needed to deliver the ordered equipment where
available, January 2020 – April 2025.
Note: Out of the 151 ordered items recorded for the years 2020-2025, 53 have both
an earliest and latest expected delivery date. In cases where the order is not an item to be
delivered per se (e.g. a maintenance contract), the “delivery date” refers to the expected
date where the contractor’s obligation to provide a service ends. This figure shows the
estimated number of years it takes for an order to be fulfilled after it has been placed as
a function of time. It shows the quarterly average years until an earliest expected delivery
date and until a latest expected delivery date. We take a further average of these two
quarterly values to estimate the average years it takes to fully deliver an item or fulfil an
order.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
67

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 6.1.4: UK proportion of ordered items without a latest expected delivery date, three-month moving
window (January 2020 – April 2025).
Note: This figure shows the proportion of ordered items that do not have a latest
expected delivery date (80 total) within a three-month rolling window consisting of each
month and the two months prior. These items have either (a) no expected delivery date,
or (b) only an earliest expected delivery date. Altogether the UK has ordered 151 items.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
6.2 Gradually growing production capacity
While the production of military equipment may be low in the near term, the literature shows that
sharp production increases have historically been possible in actual war times (see short review in
Wolff, Steinbach, et al. (2025)). According to Rapping (1965), the monthly aircraft production in
Nazi Germany increased from 30 to 425 between 1933 and 1936, and in 1939 it further increased by
60% with respect to these levels. By the end of 1939, German production of tanks per month was
placed around 70. Harrison (1990) finds similar patterns for the UK, with the output increasing by
a factor of 4 between the first quarter of 1942 and the end of 1939. During the peak of production
in 1944, the UK was producing more than 500 aircraft and 1.5 million artillery shells per week.
Rapping (1965) studies American shipbuilding output during the Second World War as well, finding
a productivity increase of 122%, and an annual increase in production of 40% between the end of
1941 and 1944, both possibly being explained by the effects of cumulative learning and adaptation.
The documented evidence, however, builds mostly on exceptional war time, and mainly on the
Second World War – a situation different to today on many dimensions. We therefore compile
production data for specific military equipment looking at the production rates before Ukraine’s
invasion and the production rates expected to occur before 2027. As Table 6.1 shows, the increase
68

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
in production capabilities since 2022 is substantial for all the items we look at. The most notable
increase has occurred for artillery shells production. Artillery shell production in Europe is now
substantially larger than that of the US but still somewhat smaller than the combined Russian-North
Korean production. Moreover, self-propelled howitzer production has increased substantially with
various European producers (including Ukraine) now producing 442 units per year (with the most
expensive German system playing virtually no quantitative role). These numbers are now close to
Russian production numbers.
Table 6.1:Increase in production of selected military equipment since 2022.
Equipment Company Production by 2022 Expected production (Year) Increase %
Artillery shells
Artillery shells Rheinmetall 70,000 1,100,000 (2027) 1471%
Artillery shells CSG - 300,000 (2026) -
Artillery shells Nexter - 400,000 (2027) -
Artillery shells Mesko - 150,000 (2027) -
Total European artillery shells production 1,950,000
Self-propelled howitzers (SP howitzer)
CAESAR, SP howitzer KNDX 72 144 (2025) 100%
Zuzana-2, SP howitzer Konstrukta 20 40 (2025) 100%
Archer, SP howitzer BAE Systems AB 4 12 (2025) 200%
Panzerhaubitze 2000, SP howitzer KNDS, Rheinmetall - 6 (2025) -
2S22 Bohdana, SP howitzer Kramatorsk 72 240 (2025) 233%
Total European SP howitzer production 202 (442 including Ukraine)
Main Battle Tanks (MBT)
Leopard 2A8, MBT KNDX - 50 -
Total European MBT production 50
Other systems
Abrams M1A2, MBT General Dynamics 57 135 (2025) 137%
Taurus missile MBDA/SAAB 60 60 (2025) -
PAC-3 missiles Lockheed Martin 380 650 (2027) 71%
HIMARS, MLRS Lockheed Martin 48 96 (2024) 100%
Javelin missiles Lockheed Martin 2400 3,960 (2026) 65%
Note: Other manufacturers for artillery shell production exist in Europe such as BAE Systems or Nammo,
however we could not gather numbers on the production data. Estimates should overall be interpreted with
caution considering the existing uncertainty over the actual production capacities.
Sources: Authors based on company reports and specialised press. See Annex A4 for detailed sources.
When it comes to main battle tanks, European production is concentrated on the Leopard 2A8,
with an annual expected production of 50. In the US, the reported production of Abrams tanks has
increased substantially reaching 135 units per year. These numbers are substantially smaller than
Russian production numbers. When it comes to fighter jets, no clear increase in production output
is visible for the four most prominent Western combat aircraft (see Table 6.2).
69

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Table 6.2:Deliveries and orders for military combat aircrafts/fighter jets, 2020–2024.
Deliveries & (Orders) 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Eurofighter 1 (38) 2 (0) 11 (20) 19 (0) 6 (25)
F-35 120 (102) 142 (16) 141 (256) 98 (126) 110 (145)
Rafale 13 (0) 25 (49) 14 (92) 13 (60) 21 (30)
Gripen 1 (0) 6 (0) 2 (0) 1 (4) 0 (4)
Source: Authors based on companies’ annual reports and Bloomberg.
A different approach to gauge increases in military production capacities across Europe is to
look at the increases in employment in key European defence companies. Table 6.3 shows that
total employment among the top 19 companies has increased by 11% from 2021 to 2024. Industry
association such as ASD report an industry level increase of employment of 14.5% in 2023 compared
to pre-pandemic years42.
42https://umbraco.asd-europe.org/media/amoenldy/asd_facts-figures-2024_1119.pdf?rmode=pad&v=
1db3a84f57bffc0
70

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Table 6.3:Employment numbers for major European companies in 2021–2024.
Company Defence Employment 2021 Defence Employment 2024 Increase 2021–2024
Thales 41,291 41,291 0%
Leonardo 37,810 40,175 6%
Airbus 21,934 27,149 24%
Rheinmetall 16,005 22,743 42%
Safran 16,104 19,296 20%
Saab 16,033 19,239 20%
PGZ 15,712 18,028 15%
MBDA 12,859 14,837 15%
Naval Group 17,191 14,668 -15%
Indra 9,896 10,973 11%
Dassault Aviation Group 8,606 9,414 9%
KNDS 8,335 9,023 8%
Fincantieri 7,395 7,646 3%
Hensoldt 5,841 6,388 9%
CEA 7,312 7,519 3%
Diehl 4,156 4,550 9%
ThyssenKrupp 4,505 4,460 -1%
Navantia 2,795 3,456 24%
Total 253,779 280,856 11%
Note: The employment number is estimated through the defence revenue share for 2024. Data for the closest
period of time is used when data for a specific year is not available.
Source: authors based on company annual accounts and official documents.
6.3 Developing new technologies to lead
Europe lacks some top military technologies and development times are often decades instead of few
years. Table 6.4, taken from Wolff et al. (2025), provides estimates of current time horizons for the
development of weapons, assuming continuity from the past. These estimates are based on standard
planning horizons outside of major urgency.
71

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Table 6.4:Time horizons for the development and production of weapon systems.
Equipment Time horizon
Next generation of main battle tanks 2040
Sixth-generation aircraft >2045
Air defence 2030–2035
Rocket artillery systems (like HIMARS) ~2045
Transport helicopters (like Chinook) 2030
Satellites (like IRIS 2 for communication) 2030
Europe has 10–44 military satellites, compared to 100s for the US 43 2030–35 44
Note: For the next generation of main battle tanks and the sixth-generation aircraft, the time horizon refers to
first product deliveries. For other products, it refers to European autonomy.
Source: Wolff et al. (2025) based on Kiel Institute, MGCS, and sources indicated in footnote.
A reduced or even completely missing technological lead in warfare is becoming an
increasing concern across Western militaries and is particularly an issue for Europe.Both
RussiaandChinahavesubstantiallyadvancedtheirproductioncapacitiesas wellastechnologicalheft.
For example, in a recent fight between Pakistan and India, the Chinese fighter jet J-10 reportedly
downed a number of French Rafale jets on May 7. Despite the still sketchy evidence on the precise
circumstances, the stock market prices of the two companies immediately reacted (see Figure 6.3.1).
43IIIS number: 44. According to French General Philippe Steininger, Europe has just 10 military satellites – five
French and five Italian – compared to “hundreds” for the United States and China. France24, ‘Europe’s new Ariane 6
rocket successfully puts French spy satellite into orbit’, 6 March 2025.https://www.france24.com/en/live-news/
20250306-%F0%9F%94%B4european-rocket-ariane-6-launches-on-first-commercial-mission
44There are six annual launches of European Ariane rockets and the hope is to increase this number to 12. If there is
one military satellite per launch, Europe would need 10 years to reach numbers closer to the US. But a smaller number
may be sufficient if the focus is primarily Europe and its neighbourhood. In terms of rocket launches, Europe relied on
Russia’s Soyuz rocket until 2022, when Russia stopped its cooperation in response to economic sanctions. Europe has
since relied on US launches. New European aerospace companies, such as Isar Aerospace, may soon allow commercial
launches of satellites.
72

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 6.3.1: Stock price evolution of Dassault and Chengdu companies. May 1st = 100.
Source: authors based on Bloomberg.
Technology evolves rapidly, posing significant challenges in Europe’s rearmament efforts.
Defence technologies are evolving fast with totally new weapon systems playing an increasingly
important role. The F35 fighter jet might still be the world’s top fighter jet. Yet the usefulness of
manned fighter jets is increasingly put into question. While drones cannot replace or stop fighter
jets45, they can serve as platforms from which air-to-air missiles can be fired, possibly reducing the
military effectiveness of fighter jets. More effective air-based or ground-based anti-aircraft capacities
will increasingly challenge the role of fighter jets, further eroding the technological lead of Western
militaries. Unmanned systems will play an increasing role in all domains, land, sea, air, and cyber.
Increasingly, these systems will also be autonomous or semi-autonomous. European armies (other
than Ukraine) appear to be further behind on such developments compared to the US.
Increasing use of dronesThe use of drones in the invasion of Ukraine was rather modest at
the beginning of the conflict, but it has steadily increased. The use of UAVs by Russia has increased
by a factor of 8 between September 2023 and March 2025.46
To keep up with the extensive use, drone production has experienced sharp increases both in
45Elon Musk is arguing that swarms of drones can stop fighter jets.
46https://www.iiss.org/online-analysis/military-balance/2025/04/russia-doubles-down-on-the-
shahed/#:~:text=Russia’s%20commitment%20to%20the%20use,increase%20these%20numbers%20through%
202025
73

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Russia and Ukraine. For instance, the target for production of first-person-view (FPV) drones in
Ukraine for 2025 is around 4.5 million while that for Russia is between 3 and 4 million47 , with the
levels of production at the beginning of the war being much more limited. Drones appear critical
and according to reports are now responsible for 60-70% of damage currently caused to Russian
equipment48. At the same time, military analysts in Ukraine stress the complementary nature of
drones, artillery, and armoured vehicles.
Scale leading to lower pricesWith the increases in the manufacturing, the unit costs have
fallen, with examples of production for these simple drones at negligible costs from Ukrainian man-
ufacturers49. Similarly, the increase in competition can lead to lower margins for the companies and
better prices (see footnote 5).
Drone manufacturing in EuropeEuropean start-ups in the field are emerging, and their pro-
duction of more sophisticated drones is increasing50 51. While growing, European start-ups still
have a limited scale compared to American competitors (Wolff et al, 2025), and in the case of long-
stablished firms, joint-ventures appear as a possibility to increase scale and market access52. Contrary
to other military equipment like artillery shells or armoured vehicles, stockpiling for small FPV drones
is of limited use. The technology is evolving rapidly so that drones of more than 6 months age may
already have lost substantially in effectiveness relative to increasingly capable defensive capacities.
It is therefore important to think of drones in terms of production capabilities. Europe must develop
the capacity to be at the technological frontier and of course also the capacity for personnel training
and integration of the technology into warfare strategy and exercise.
The overall very dynamic technological developments render military procurement plan-
ning extremely challenging. On the whole, a key question for military planners is thus how to
balance the needs to fill large existing gaps when it comes to conventional weapon systems, with the
needs to invest into existing high-end technologies such as F35 fighter jets and finally investing and
also forecasting how new technologies might completely change the battlefield in the coming years,
quickly rendering even some of the most sophisticated current military systems obsolete.
47https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidaxe/2025/03/12/45-million-drones-is-a-lot-of-drones-its-
ukraines-new-production-target-for-2025/
48https://static.rusi.org/tactical-developments-third-year-russo-ukrainian-war-february-
2205.pdf
49https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2024-07-11/diy-bomb-carrying-drones-change-the-
economics-of-war-big-take
50https://helsing.ai/newsroom/helsing-to-produce-6000-additional-strike-drones-for-ukraine
51https://www.ft.com/content/e085334b-8697-4824-80fe-a558b869ec5c
52https://www.ft.com/content/8f88276b-6194-4f43-80fd-71838b635700
74

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
7 European Readiness 2030: What is needed?
This section outlines core needs for European rearmament through 2030. The focus is on ground
forces and their enablers, such as unmanned air and ground systems. The main scenarios for a
Russian threat lie on the eastern flank and such scenarios primarily would be fought by ground
troops. However, we also cover air defence, which as demonstrated by the Russian strategic bombing
campaign in Ukraine, is a critical component of peer conflict.
Future-proofing European defence: the complementarity of mature capabilities and fu-
ture technologies
An early inkling of the kind of force generation that might be needed came from Commissioner
Kubilius, who suggested that European forces should increase by an additional 49 brigades (Kubilius:
2024). Thiswouldtranslatetoanywherebetween250,000and300,000newtroops. Wolff, Steinbach,
et al. (2025) suggested similar numbers by comparing the US presence in Europe that specific war
simulation games had shown.
Whythefocusonlandwarfare? IfthereisonekeylessonofthewarinUkraine, itisthatultimately,
peer conflict is likely to devolve into industrial warfare, where victory is decided by territorial control
and production rates to sustain forces for attrition. While mature systems like tanks and artillery are
still foundational to land warfare, they have been joined by new technologies like drones and AI.
Unmanned systems in general are now indispensable to all domains of war. In Ukraine, drones now
cause more casualties than artillery. That is not to say artillery is now obsolete: the combination
of drones, precision munitions, and artillery – especially guided munitions – is significantly more
potent than all three capabilities individually. This is further enhanced by AI-assisted battlefield
management systems that increase reaction speed and survivability. The same can be said for other
facets of ground warfare. AI will become even more critical as agentic AI models are adopted that
multiply the speed of action and breath of intelligence that commanders can access.
Mechanised infantry in Ukraine is increasingly augmented by unmanned ground systems (UGV)
for additional firepower and logistics. Increasing the number and use of such UGVs not only enhances
the traditional work of infantry mounted in IFVs or other armoured vehicles, but it also enhances
the survivability of the infantry by replacing them in tasks by UGVs. The most common short-range
drones used on the Ukrainian battlefield are significantly less effective against armoured vehicles than
against unprotected infantry. This disparity will widen further as more effective counter-drone sys-
tems – such as directed energy weapons – become operational and are introduced at scale. Therefore,
a future-proofed European rearmament strategy will have to find the right balance between invest-
ing into traditional “heavy metal” capabilities – tanks, IFVs, artillery – and training, research and
75

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
development, and will be have to be supported by a robust industrial capacity for new capabili-
ties like unmanned systems, 6th generation aircraft, AI, directed-energy weapons for air defence,
electromagnetic systems for the navy, and quantum computing.
The Russian threat on the eastern flank
The most serious threat posed by Russia to Europe is that of a breakthrough by Russian land
forces managing to occupy and hold European territory. The Baltics are the obvious flashpoint. The
Suwalki Gap scenario, of Russian forces operating out of Kaliningrad and Belarusian territory linking
up to cut off the Baltic countries from the rest of NATO, is commonly invoked. However, there is
also the Narva scenario, of Russian forces leveraging the Russian minority in eastern Estonia for an
invasion and occupation. This scenario places the action even closer to Russian home bases, and
without the need to rely on Belarusian compliance.
Russian mass, in number of units and in firepower, would be the key enabler of a breakthrough.
The longer that coalition troops would be able to sustain the defence and prevent a breakthrough,
the less likely it becomes, as breakthroughs are reliant on mass, speed of action, and surprise. This
requires matching conventional Russian land capabilities with European ones. Experience in Ukraine
shows that the new technologies of the battlefield, such as drones and AI, are highly complementary
of these older capabilities, and if integrated together form a potent warfighting force fully capable of
utilizing the Reconnaissance-Strike-Complex that defines modern warfare.
It is relevant to also consider the impact of the Sino-American rivalry. The 2027 scenario – a
Chinese blockade or invasion of Taiwan – would place a very high load on American capabilities
given China’s dramatic qualitative and quantitative growth in military capabilities and the size and
sophistication of its defence industrial base. Such a possibility would have two consequences. One is
that the US, regardless of political will, would find it difficult to be able to commit to the European
theatre. Second is that this would potentially create a window of opportunity for further Russian
aggression on a shorter timeline than typically predicted. The Kremlin is nothing if not strategically
opportunistic.
Fusing mature and future capabilities for survivability
Experience from Ukraine and the Middle East also shows that whenever infantry, which remains
critical for actually holding ground, operates without the “heavy metal” of armour, it sustains severe
casualties. Armoured vehicles are still the best protection for infantry, and if deployed in bulk,
can significantly mitigate attrition. The European experience in low-intensity interventions such as
Afghanistan has been of a gold standard of casualty evacuation by helicopter. For instance, France
sustained 71 killed in action and 725 wounded in action, for a killed to wounded ratio of 1:10.
Experience in Ukraine shows that the casualty ratio there, in a true peer conflict, is much closer to
76

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
1:3. The 1:3 ratio is also commonly accepted for conventional war, and matches US casualty ratios
since 1990 in specific battles that were intense enough to approach peer conflict.
Another key lesson of the war in Ukraine is that casualty evacuation by helicopter near the
frontline is nearly impossible in a contested airspace, where both sides have air forces and integrated
air defence. Helicopters are particularly vulnerable to long-range anti-air missiles. In a hypothetical
conflict with Russia, European forces are highly unlikely to have air superiority, especially in the
opening stages of the conflict where the Russian Air Force and extensive air defence network are
intact. Therefore, casualty evacuation by helicopter, as was the case in Afghanistan, will not be
possible at scale. As is the case in Ukraine, casualty evacuation will fall on IFVs and other armoured
vehicles, which is the standard practice for both Ukrainian and Russian forces. Such vehicles have
the best combination of speed, protection, carrying capacity, and widespread availability.
Any measure that can reduce potential European casualties in a conflict must be fully pur-
sued. Further development and procurement of UGVs is critical. Their ability to provide expend-
able firepower and logistical support that partially replaces troops in these roles is central to the
Manned-Unmanned Teaming System (MUM-T) that is gradually being integrated in many militaries
worldwide, including the US, Russia, Ukraine, China, and in Europe.
Additionally, experiments are already underway to fully automate existing weapons systems, start-
ing with artillery. Therefore, it can be expected that “legacy” systems such as tanks and IFVs can
eventually be fully or partially automated as well. This would further reduce casualties and provide
an extended life for these systems as the number of crew for systems is reduced or even eliminated.
Finally, as outlined above, a Russian breakthrough is the most serious threat to Europe, but it
also requires mass, speed of action, and surprise. It is highly likely that Moscow is aware of this,
especially given its experience in Ukraine. Therefore, generating European forces to provide that
mass on the eastern flank is a very powerful deterrent, because it directly reduces the likelihood
of a successful Russian breakthrough, and therefore would factor into Moscow’s strategic decision-
making. It is European mass, and therefore the willingness and capability to fight an industrial war
and sustain the attrition needed to win such a war, that would best deter the Kremlin’s designs.
European vs. Russian future force generationIf deterring the Kremlin and ensuring European
security demands further force generation and sustainment, what could that look like? On the one
hand, we have estimates of additional 250,000 troops for Europe in 50 brigade-equivalent units. On
the other hand, our estimates show that Russian force generation through 2030 would likely add
between 12 and 16 brigades to the already substantial number of Russian brigades.
As outlined, a future-proofed European force structure would fuse mature and future technologies.
It does not need to match Russian capabilities one-to-one. However, in the interest of mass and
77

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
resilience, it will be necessary to supplement the development and fielding of future technologies like
unmanned systems and AI with mature systems like tanks and artillery, and to maintain a ratio of
such capabilities with Russia so that Europe is not overmatched on the Eastern flank.
Below we present two scenarios for European rearmament. In the minimum scenario, Europe
procures sufficient materiel for an additional 25 brigade-equivalent units. This would be sufficient
to match the growth of Russian forces and partly close the gap between Russian and European
capabilities. In the maximum scenario, Europe commits to a full additional 50 brigade-equivalent
units. This would nearly match Russian ground forces, and provide, in conjunction with Ukrainian
forces, a very serious deterrent to Russian aggression.
We can think of the two scenarios as also representing different needs in different geopolitical
contexts. The minimum scenario may represent a scenario in which the war in Ukraine continues
and Russia does not have far reaching success on the battlefield while the US continues to remain
engaged in Europe. In this scenario, Europe would gradually increase its contribution to European
defence but would not be able to ensure its defence alone by 2030. The maximum scenario would
involve a sharp acceleration in the rhythm of weapon acquisition and would also correspond to a
substantial increase in troops so that US troops in Europe could be replaced and the US would
substantially scale down its commitment to Europe.
The minimum scenario: 25 brigades
The table below takes 2024 stocks as its starting point. It compares stocks in the four European
countries in the study – the UK, France, Germany, and Poland – to the estimated growth in Russian
forces. As outlined in section 2, Russia intends to add 180,000 troops to reach 1.5 million active
soldiers. The ground forces will receive the bulk of personnel, with an estimated 12 to 16 new
brigade-equivalent units. In comparison, the minimum scenario for European rearmament envisions
25 new brigade-equivalent units.
The Ratio column shows how the ratio between Russian and European stocks would change over
time. The Production Target column shows needed European production to achieve the scenario.
This would close the relative gap vis-à-vis Russia, compared to 2024, by 10% for the weapons systems
shown.
78

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Table 7.1:Russian force generation and European production targets (25 brigades: minimum scenario).
Russian and European stocks in 2024
Russian
stocks
(tanks)
Ratio
to Europe
Europe
stocks
(tanks)
Russian
stocks
(IFV/IMV)
Ratio
to Europe
Europe
stocks
(IFV/IMV)
Russian
stocks
(artillery)
Ratio
to Europe
Europe
stocks
(artillery)
2024 2730 1.7 1627 10693 0.82 13042 3415 3.06 1115
Estimated Russian force generation through 2030 and European production targets (annual average)
Russian prod.
to new
units(tanks)
Needed
European prod.
(tanks)
Russian
prod. to new
units(IFV/IMV)
Needed
European prod.
(IFV/IMV)
Russian
prod. to new
units(artillery)
Needed
European prod.
(artillery)
2025–2030 136 122 366 679 62 42
Outcome in 2030: 25 brigades
Russian
stocks
(tanks)
Ratio
to Europe
in 2030
European
stocks
(tanks)
Russian
stocks
(IFV/IMV)
Ratio
to Europe
in 2030
Europe
stocks
(IFV/IMV)
Russian
stocks
(artillery)
Ratio
to Europe
in 2030
Europe
stocks
(artillery)
2030 3580 1.52 2359 12887 0.75 17116 3789 2.77 1366
Note: The Ratio column shows (a) the ratio between Russian and European stocks in 2024, (b) how it would
change if Europe increased production to close the gap, and (c) the projected ratio in 2030 assuming successful
European production scaling.
Source: Authors’ own calculations.
Gradual increases in European production would be able to match and even outpace Russian
production, shrinking the gap between Russian mass and European resilience. A defensive fighting
scenario, extensive training and preparation, and appropriate investment in new technologies and
capabilities would do the rest and fully enable European defence and deterrence.
Note that if European procurement remains stagnant, the ratio with Russian capabilities will
worsen through 2030, and will enable significant Russian mass that can be brought to bear on the
eastern flank. Without growth in European production, the Russia-Europe ratios would reach 2.2 for
tanks, 0.99 for IFV/IMV, and 3.4 for artillery. This begins to approach ratios in strength that would
enable a Russian breakthrough, especially as with their experience in the war in Ukraine, it is highly
unlikely the Russians will lag on drone warfare and its countermeasures.
Itshould benotedthatEuropeanproductionhere canincreasingly focus onunmanned groundsys-
tems, whether adapted from existing systems or entirely new. This would fit the Manned-Unmanned
Teaming System (MUM-T) that is increasingly adopted globally. Furthermore, this is particularly
relevant for the IFV/IMV category. Decreasing reliance on manned systems for mechanised forces
would reduce casualties in the branch of the service that is most vulnerable to casualties due to its
frontline combat role. Increasing the proportion of unmanned systems – including those based on
or inspired by existing armoured vehicles – would go a long way towards mitigating casualties in
attritional warfare.The maximum scenario: 50 brigades
The table below replicates the approach of Table 7.1 but now envisages a maximalist outcome
of 50 new European brigades, that would be required if the US scaled down commitment to Europe
79

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
and the war in Ukraine ended while Russia continued its rapid rearmament. The achievement of
the production targets under this scenario would close the relative gap vis-à-vis Russia, compared to
2024, by 38% for tanks, 28% for IFV/IMV, and 34% for artillery. More specifically, Europe begins to
reach Russian capabilities and would be able to even achieve overmatch over Russian forces, which
would effectively remove the possibility of a Russian breakthrough on the eastern flank. European
forces would have the mass and resilience to defend the European theatre, and if necessary, sustain
and carry out attritional, industrial warfare – although the growth of European capabilities would
likely form such an effective deterrent that no such worst-case scenario would actually take place.
Table 7.2:Russian force generation and European production targets (50 brigades: maximum scenario).
Russian and European stocks in 2024
Russian stocks
(tanks)
Ratio to
Europe in 2024
Europe stocks
(tanks)
Russian stocks
(IFV/IMV)
Ratio to
Europe in 2024
Europe stocks
(IFV/IMV)
Russian stocks
(artillery)
Ratio to
Europe in 2024
Europe stocks
(artillery)
2024 2730 1.7 1627 10693 0.82 13042 3415 3.06 1115
Estimated Russian force generation through 2030 and European production targets (annual average)
Russian prod.
to new units
(tanks)
Needed European
prod.
(tanks)
Russian prod.
to new units
(IFV/IMV)
Needed European
prod.
(IFV/IMV)
Russian prod.
to new units
(artillery)
Needed European
prod.
(artillery)
2025–2030 136 216 366 1200 62 94
Outcome in 2030: 50 brigades
Russian stocks
(tanks)
Ratio to
Europe in 2030
Europe stocks
(tanks)
Russian stocks
(IFV/IMV)
Ratio to
Europe in 2030
Europe stocks
(IFV/IMV)
Russian stocks
(artillery)
Ratio to
Europe in 2030
Europe stocks
(artillery)
2030 3580 1.23 2920 12887 0.64 20239 3789 2.26 1679
Source: Authors’ own calculations.
It should be noted that this scenario would rely even more than the minimum scenario on the tight
integration of unmanned systems. The large increases of armoured vehicles would ideally and to a
largeextentflowtovastlyincreasingtheproportionofunmannedgroundsystemsinmechanisedforces
following the Manned-Unmanned Teaming (MUM-T) concept. This would increase the survivability
and reduce potential casualties even as European forces grow substantially.
The personnel question
The limiting factor is likely to remain personnel, not production. Induction rates of troops would
need to ramp up significantly. Training soldiers to a high standard is highly time-intensive for the
complex skill set necessary for modern warfare. Extensive and lengthy training is also imperative
for reducing casualties and for creating a pool of reservists. Twelve months for infantry and longer
for specialists are the likely targets. This is especially relevant for unmanned systems specialists,
which have to master a complex skill set. Training for operational brigades would also need to
remain constant to maintain combat effectiveness and adapt to new developments and innovations
in warfighting.
Plans to reintroduce conscription should be mindful of training requirements for modern combat
effectiveness. Conscripts, even with a full year of training, are likely to be best suited for rear
80

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
echelon duty such as logistics. Conversely, retaining professional troops by expanding the reserves
is imperative. Experience in Ukraine shows this clearly. For instance, the Russian BARS (Combat
Army Reserve System) that retains professional soldiers as reservists after their contract ends has
proven highly effective. BARS units are some of the most skilled and motivated troops in the Russian
military. A possible strategy might therefore be to increase the attractiveness of professional careers
in the military, including with higher salaries and better working conditions, and open the career
track to European citizens regardless of passport status.
Integrating modern capabilities is critically important In addition to these traditional
warfare capabilities, Europe needs a reliable strategy for drone warfare.Drone technology
changes rapidly – so building large stocks of drones is not a useful strategy as stocks will quickly
be outdated. Yet it is critical that European militaries train their troops across all domains in drone
warfare. Moreover, maintaining industrial capacities for the development and production of drones is
of central importance. A concrete approach is to provide Ukraine with sufficient funding to procure
drones not only from domestic Ukrainian producers but also from companies in EU countries. This
would allow building production capacity as well as advancing European technological capabilities.
Finally, it will also force European producers to become more cost effective, which is a key aspect of
the success of drones: using them in large numbers and at low costs per unit.
European nations will also need to invest in critical strategic enablers.First, European
nations will need to decide if and how they want to build capabilities that are now largely in the
hands of the US in the context of NATO. Wolff et al (2025) suggest that critical capabilities such as
satellites should be procured, controlled, and owned by a European defence mechanism. A critical
problem, however, is the lack of some of these technologies in the Europe defence industrial base
and the current long development and production times. The scale of current production is not
encouraging, particularly when it comes to expensive strategic enablers. For example, in 2023, there
were 19 Eurofighter deliveries and 13 Rafale deliveries, both fighter jets of the fourth generation,
while there were 98 deliveries worldwide of US F-35s (a fifth-generation fighter)53. Moreover, long
development cycles suggest that Europe might take decades to develop some of the top technology
products (see Table 6.4). This suggests that the reliance on US manufacturers may be difficult to
overcome. Yet, development cycles can accelerate substantially in moments of dramatic increases
in defence spending and re-prioritisation of defence, while production costs should fall substantially.
The most important recent example is the increase in production capacity, including of effective
drones, is the Ukrainian military industrial base.
53Based on the 2023 annual reports of Dassault, Lockheed Martin and Airbus.
81

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure 7.1: Possible configuration of 160km air defence systems across strategic sites in European NATO
countries.
Note: Map shows one possible configuration of 160km-ranged air defence systems
based on naval and air force bases in France, Germany, Italy, Poland, and the UK, as well
as major seaports and airports. We attempt to remove redundancies maximising coverage
with the smallest number of units, giving priority to military infrastructure if it overlaps with
civilian infrastructure. Finally, we attempt to include a contiguous line of small airports
on NATO’s eastern border. Before removing redundancies, there are a total of 214 sites,
spanning 94 military bases, 112 major seaports and airports, and 8 smaller airports on
NATO’s eastern border. There are 89 batteries shown.
Source: authors’ own calculations, map: Runfola et al. (2020)
82

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Air defence: a case study
Europe has taken serious measures to address the complex question of air defence with the
European Sky Shield Initiative. Considering the specificities of the Russian threat, European air
defence is a complex problem. While ground-based ballistic missiles like the Iskander have shorter
ranges, there are air-launched and sea-launched missiles in the Russian arsenal capable of reaching
deep into Europe. This is especially true for sea-launched cruise, ballistic, and hypersonic missiles
from the Borei and Yasen class submarines. There are also conventional versions of ballistic nuclear
missiles, like the Oreshnik missile, that have extreme range and payload.
In Figure 7.1 we show one quick calculation for broad coverage of the continent using long-range
SAM such as Patriot or SAMP-T. Such air defence would be augmented by air-to-air missiles from
aircraft, but ground-based air defence remains critical. As the number of batteries shown – 89 –
indicates, this would be a costly endeavour: more than€220 billion in batteries, and tens of billions
of euros in interceptors at current prices54.
Furthermore, relying on missile-based interceptors alone is suboptimal from the perspective of
future-proofing European air defence. Ukrainian interception data shows that for the more advanced
classes of Russian missiles, such as the Kh-101 stealthy cruise missile, the air-launched Kinzhal
ballistic missile, the anti-ship Oniks missile, and the hypersonic Zircon missile, interception rates,
even using multiple interceptors, are below 25%. This means that even theoretically covering Europe
with more than 100 batteries of strategic air defence would be insufficient for preventing Russian
strategic bombardment. Experience from the Middle East also shows that Iranian and Houthi cruise
and hypersonic missiles have been able to penetrate Israel’s air defence, including its THAAD and
Arrow-3 ballistic missile defence systems.
Aside from strategic bombardment, drones are a concern. Saturation of the frontline battlespace
by drones can overwhelm combat units. Saturation of the airspace with long-range drones of the
Geran type can facilitate strikes by more advanced cruise and ballistic missiles. Experience from
Ukraine and the Middle East shows that combating swarms of cheap drones with interceptor missiles
is costly and unsustainable. Gun-based systems like the German Gepard are one mature, proven
solution.
However, even more promising are rapid advances in directed-energy weapons, which could in
the near-future allow the neutralisation of entire drone swarms at close range for next to no cost.
The British Dragonfire system is one example in an advanced stage of development55. Such systems
could eventually be mounted on aircraft to dramatically increase the range and mobility of air defense.
54In trying various configurations to maximise coverage and minimize batteries, we found that coverage begins to be
seriously compromised when going below around 80 batteries.
55https://ukdefencejournal.org.uk/britain-plans-240m-two-unit-dragonfire-laser-weapon-buy/
83

===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
InformationfromChina’s6thgenerationJ-36aircraftshowsthatitishighlylikelythatdirected-energy
air defense modules will be integrated into the J-36. European 6th generation programs – the GCAP
and FCAS – should follow suit.
Finally, as outlined interception rates for advanced missiles are low with contemporary technology.
Arguably, the best defence would be deterrence via the acquisition of a European hypersonic arsenal.
This would reduce the asymmetry of firepower between Europe and Russia and enable hard to counter
strikes deep into Russian territory to neutralise strategic assets like air bases, and logistics nodes,
thereby degrading the capacity of the Russian strategic arsenal to strike into Europe with impunity.
We consider major investments into the European hypersonic arsenal therefore as a critical part of
European rearmament.
8 Conclusions
Russian military capabilities have grown quantitatively and qualitatively since 2022.In light
of the threat, European countries have increased their spending on defence from 1.4% of GDP to
more than 2% of GDP, numbers that are set to increase further. With rising defence spending,
spending for military equipment more than doubled. This report focused on assessing European
rearmament efforts.
We showed that procurement volumes have increased substantially in Germany, the UK, and
Poland since 2020. Substantial increases in orders for land forces have been recorded in Germany and
Poland while the UK has mainly focused its spending increases on its sea forces. France, Germany,
and the UK procure strongly from domestic producers while Polish procurement is dominated by
international suppliers, in particular US and South Korean suppliers. Dependency on US producers
is, however, larger for more modern systems across the board.
Our overall assessment is that while progress has been made, substantial gaps remain
that will have to be addressed.While unlocking significant financing at the European and national
levelsispositiveandwelcome, thekeystepwillbetranslatingspendingintorealcapabilitiesand
sustained growth in European force generation, sustainment, and military modernisation.
Put differently, Europe needs to shift its political debate from fiscal numbers to actual military
capabilities purchased and delivered in the coming years. For military procurement to truly be
effective, it is critical that European industry develops the capacity to produce and deliver items
quickly and that equipment prices are decreased and kept low.
84

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Modernisation is another key point, as access to high-end capabilities and strategic en-
ablers is the best path for Europe to become autonomous with regards to defence and reduce
dependencies on the US.This would also stabilise and future-proof the transatlantic relationship.
This is crucial as both the current US administration and any future administrations, regardless
of who holds the presidency, will operate under a strategic context where American attention will
primarily be focused on the Indo-Pacific due to the increasingly rapid qualitative and quantitative
growth in Chinese military capabilities and the potential for a 2027 scenario of a Chinese blockade or
invasion of Taiwan. Additionally, should such a scenario materialize, Europe would be effectively left
on its own, regardless of political will in Washington, as a Sino-American conflict would consume all
of the US’ military capabilities.
Capabilities in the land domain are a key step to countering the threat of further Rus-
sian aggression. Achieving mass in European defence by 2030 is possible and highly desirable.
The required increases in production numbers for the essential systems in ground combat – tanks,
armoured vehicles, and artillery – are within achievable ranges. This is especially accurate in the
context of likely scenarios for further Russian force generation, which anticipate an additional 12-16
new brigades by 2030, for a force ceiling of 1.5 million active soldiers in the Russian military. Eu-
rope has already reached minimum and maximum production targets for artillery. When it comes
to armoured vehicles and tanks, production numbers are, however, still insufficient and would need
to increase by a factor of between 2 and 6 depending on scenarios. Procurement numbers are also
far below numbers to fulfil NATO targets except for tanks in the minimum scenario and howitzers
in both scenarios (see Table 8.1). Further production of armoured vehicles such as tanks and IFV
should stress the integration of unmanned ground vehicles to enable Manned-Unmanned Teaming
(MUM-T). This would significantly reduce casualties in a potential conflict and additionally reduce
the stress of finding large numbers of new personnel for European armed forces.
85

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Table 8.1:Comparison between current production, procurement, and production needed for main
traditional military equipment.
Equipment
Current annual
production
(Russia)
Current annual
production
(Europe)
European
annual
procurement
Annual production
needed
(Minimum scenario)
Annual production
needed
(Maximum scenario)
Main Battle Tank 1776 50 153 122 216
SP Howitzer 672 202 124 42 94
IFV 6564 214 30 679 1200
Note: European annual procurement refers here to the four countries studied, i.e., Germany, France, Poland and
the UK.
Source: authors’ own calculations.
Nevertheless, we are cautiously optimistic that the gaps for these “traditional” systems
can be filled with political will.Historical evidence as well as European technological capacities,
for example in car production, suggests that production numbers can be increased fairly rapidly – so
that 2030 armament goals can realistically be reached.Given current delivery times of around
3 years after procurement, procurement quantities will have to increase in the next two
years to achieve targets.Time lags in the procurement process itself also need to be substantially
shortened. Preventing an increase in corruption and misuse in this phase of military build-up is
critical.
Military modernisation and access to European strategic enablers will be critical.These
include a variety of systems that European militaries either have in limited numbers compared to the
US or Russia, or not at all. These include rocket artillery such as HIMARS which can also fire ballistic
missiles (highly effective in Ukraine), 6th generation aircraft including Collaborative Combat Aircraft
(CCA; drone wingman capability), strategic lift56, integrated air and missile defence, airborne early
warning and control (AEW&C), satellites, long-range missiles for ground and sea attack, and an
integrated command and control structure.
Reducing dependency on US systems and the overstretched US defence industrial base
will be a challenge. For instance, the German Navy’s new white paper indicates a strong focus
on the Baltic and includes the purchase of substantial quantities of American Tomahawk long-range
cruise missiles (up to 2,000km). Such procurement is highly topical given the ever-increasing ranges
at which modern warfare is fought. However, the Navy’s choice of the Tomahawk also indicates
that the Navy does not feel it can rely on the European defence industrial base to provide such
56For the USAF, moving a single Patriot battery from the Indo-Pacific to the Middle East required 73 C-17 flights.
86

===== PDF_PAGE 89 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
a capability in the near term, despite the existence of the European Long-Range Strike Approach
(ELSA) program for producing a European long-range missile. Given that the Tomahawk is mature
technology – a subsonic cruise missile with extended range – this demonstrates the challenges ahead
in Europe developing domestic strategic enabler capabilities. Longer-range missiles will be essential
for restoring a degree of strategic parity with Russia. This includes the development of hypersonic
missiles, which are very difficult to intercept with current technology, and would provide a strong
conventional deterrence capability on land and at sea. When it comes to short-range missiles, Europe
does have a production capacity. Current stocks of Taurus and Storm Shadow are, however, too
low for a large-scale, sustained air campaign.A substantial investment into missile production
capacities is indispensable for Europe.
For Europe to reduce its still very high technological dependency on the US defence
industrial base for key technologies, major investments into research and development efforts
will be needed.In fact, European R&D investment into defence substantially lags that of the US.
The DoD allocated $148.3 billion to defence R&D for FY202457. In Europe, it was only€11 billion
in 202358. A major recommendation is therefore to increase public R&D spending in defence. For
example, a European DARPA could usefully complement corporate investments. At the national
level, innovation agencies such as the German Agentur für Sprunginnovation are scheduled to move
into the space of defence innovation59. Defence R&D spending can also have positive growth
effects (Antolin-Diaz and Surico: 2025) on the wider economy and could therefore help ease fiscal
sustainability concerns of the European rearmament efforts.
European rearmament will be expensive and cost effectiveness is critical for achieving
military targets. The European institutions aim to mobilise€800 billion via the “Rearm Europe”
strategy. NATO leaders speak of the 3.5% target in defence spending, which would mean an annual
increase in spending compared to today in the order of magnitude of some€300 billion. These
top-down numbers, however, do not allow an understanding of how and on what funds will be spent.
Moreover, they include all defence spending, including on personnel and non-arms related spending.
Bottom-up estimates of spending needs on selected weapon systems for the European
Union under different scenarios show the importance of price effectiveness.Table 8.2 shows
the range of estimates based on a minimum and a maximum rearmament scenario for selected
57https://www.defense.gov/news/releases/release/article/3326875/department-of-defense-releases-
the-presidents-fiscal-year-2024-defense-budget/
58https://eda.europa.eu/docs/default-source/brochures/1eda---defence-data-23-24---web---v3 .pdf
59https://www.spd.de/fileadmin/Dokumente/Koalitionsvertrag2025_bf.pdf line 129
87

===== PDF_PAGE 90 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
systems, based on current low and high prices for these respective types of arms. Estimates range
between €50 and €200 billion for the purchases of tanks, artillery howitzers, and infantry fighting
vehicles alone. If we add the cost of air defence, costs increase by another€200-300 billion. Missile
capabilities, the modernisation of forces, as well as investments into air and see would further increase
the numbers substantially, showing that the€800 billion number used by the European institutions
may be too low. Importantly, Table 8.2 reveals thatprice differences between existing weapons
are the major driver of the price range– high quantities at lower prices will constitute a smaller
fiscal burden than low quantities at high prices.
Table 8.2:Bottom-up estimation for the cost of additional tank, SP howitzers and IFV equipment.
Production targets in units of equipment, cost estimates in EUR billion.
Equipment Price range
(EUR m.)
Lower
production target
Cost range
(EUR bn.)
Higher
production target
Cost range
(EUR bn.)
Tanks 17.9–29 732 13.1–21.2 1293 23.1–37.5
SP howitzers 1.6–17 251 0.4–4.3 564 0.9–9.6
IFV 8.6–21.7 4074 35–88.4 7197 61.9–156.2
Cost; MBT, SP howitzers, IFV 48.5–113.9 85.9–203.3
Cost; air defence 300 300
Source: Authors’ own calculations based on estimated European production targets and estimated prices of
military equipment for developed economies.
Beyond the possibility that technical differences between various weapons explain a part of the
price difference, the numbers suggest that European procurement lacks cost effectiveness linked
to economic nationalism and market fragmentation (Wolff et al, 2025)60 . If Europe reformed its
fragmented market structure in defence production, it could reap economies of scale that should
lower unit prices.
Overall, we highlight the feasibility of making substantial progress through 2030, while
remaining mindful of the challenges. Funding is there and is likely to remain stable and high
as the Russian threat is evident and consensus exists. However, translating funding into concrete
capabilities, and doing so with a systematic, forward-looking strategic, and operational plan, will be
the real challenge. Defence spending in Europe must operate towards concrete goals and timelines
for increasing European readiness through force generation, sustainment, and military modernisation.
This process must also closely hew to developments in Russia, including force generation and military
60The production and cost of military equipment deserves attention. One example is a light infantry fighting vehicle,
the German Caracal. It can cost almost€600 thousand according to our estimates, while the price for an American
ISV model is closer to€200 thousand. The cost of Russian similar models (e.g. Sarmat-3) seems to be similar to the
ISV. Around 1500 Caracal vehicles ordered by Germany in 2023 and 1700 ISV on current order.
88

===== PDF_PAGE 91 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
modernisation. A European rearmament strategy is urgently needed to move from broad fiscal
numbers to clear operational procurement goals and a strategy to increase cost-effectiveness through
deeper integration of military production capacities. Deeper military integration would further allow
to increase the effectiveness of deterrence.
Beyond bringing European forces back to a state of readiness, where they are capable of
repelling any potential incursion into European territory,looms the greater challenge of increasing
autonomy and reducing dependency on US forces.This would not only secure Europe but also
mitigate discord in the transatlantic relationship as the US becomes increasingly capable to focus
on other theatres, first and foremost the Indo-Pacific. Ramping up R&D spending is the first step,
as it is far lower than comparable military powers. Beyond generating mass in land forces, Europe
must urgently acquire capabilities in key strategic enablers. Ramping up the various European space
programmes is, for example, critical. This would enhance European security and restore deterrence
with Russia. After all, increased deterrence capabilities are critical to prevent war.
89

===== PDF_PAGE 92 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
References
Alkire, B. (2025).The Expansion of China’s Military Space and Counterspace Capabilities and Im-
plications for Space as a Contested Domain. https://www.rand.org/pubs/testimonies/
CTA3951-1.html. RAND Corporation.
Antolin-Diaz, J. and P. Surico (2025). The long-run effects of government spending. American
Economic Review. Forthcoming.
Bilousova, O., B. Hilgenstock, E. Ribakova, N. Shapoval, A. Vlaysuk, and V. Vlasiuk (2024).Chal-
lenges of export controls enforcement: how Russia continues to import components for its military
production. https://kse.ua/wp-content/uploads/2024/01/Challenges-of-Export-
Controls-Enforcement.pdf. KSE Institute.
Burilkov, A., J. Mejino-Lopez, and G. Wolff (2024).The US defence industrial base can no longer
reliably supply Europe. https://www.bruegel.org/sites/default/files/2024-12/the-
us-defence-industrial-base-can-no-longer-reliably-supply-europe-10561.pdf .
Bruegel Analysis.
Cavoli, Christopher G. (2025).Statement Of General Christopher G. Cavoli, United States Army
United States European Command 3 April 2025. https://www.armed- services.senate.
gov/imo/media/doc/general_cavoli_opening_statements.pdf.
Deep State UA (2025).DeepStateMap.Live. https://deepstatemap.live/.
Draghi, Mario (2024).The Future of European Competitiveness. https://commission.europa.
eu/topics/strengthening-european-competitiveness/eu-competitiveness-looking-
ahead_en.
Gilli, A. and F. Nicoli (2025).Europe’s nuclear deterrence trilemma: can it be solved?https://
www.bruegel.org/working-paper/how-can-europes-nuclear-deterrence-trilemma-
be-resolved. Bruegel working paper 12/2025.
Harrison,M.(1990).AvolumeindexofthetotalmunitionsoutputoftheUnitedKingdom,1939–1944.
The Economic History Review43.4, pp. 657–666.
Hilgenstock, B., E. Ribakova, A. Vlasyuk, and G. Wolff (2025). Enforcing export controls: learning
from and using the financial system. Global Policy 16, pp. 190–199. doi: 10 . 1111 / 1758 -
5899.13463.
IISS (1992).The Military Balance 1992. https://www.tandfonline.com/toc/tmib20/92/1.
— (2004). The Military Balance 2004. https://www.tandfonline.com/toc/tmib20/104/1.
— (2014). The Military Balance 2014. https://www.tandfonline.com/toc/tmib20/114/1.
— (2020). The Military Balance 2020. https://www.tandfonline.com/toc/tmib20/120/1.
90

===== PDF_PAGE 93 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
IISS (2021). The Military Balance 2021. Taylor & Francis.https://www.taylorfrancis.com/
books/9781003177777.
— (2022). The Military Balance 2022. Taylor & Francis.https://www.taylorfrancis.com/
books/9781003294566.
— (2025). The Military Balance 2025. https://www.routledge.com/The-Military-Balance-
2025/forStrategicStudiesIISS/p/book/9781041049678.
Kirkegaard, J.F. (2025).Ukraine: European democracy’s affordable arsenal.https://www.bruegel.
org/policy-brief/ukraine-european-democracys-affordable-arsenal . Bruegel Policy
Brief 10/2025.
Kubilius, A. (2024). Hearing of Andrius Kubilius, Committee On Foreign Affairs Committee On
Industry, Research And Energy. https://hearings.elections.europa.eu/documents/
kubilius/kubilius_verbatimreporthearing-original.pdf.
Maulny, J. (2023). The impact of the war in Ukraine on the European defence market. https:
//www.iris- france.org/wp- content/uploads/2023/09/19_ProgEuropeIndusDef_
JPMaulny.pdf. IRIS Policy Paper.
McKinsey (2025).European defense tech start-ups: In it for the long run?https://www.mckinsey.
com/industries/aerospace- and- defense/our- insights/european- defense- tech-
start-ups-in-it-for-the-long-run .
Mejino-Lopez, J. and G. Wolff (2024).A European defence industrial strategy in a hostile world.
Bruegel Policy Brief 29-2024.https://www.bruegel.org/sites/default/files/2024-
11/PB%2029%202024.pdf.
— (2025). Bruegel US Foreign Military Sales database. forthcoming.
Rapping, L. (1965). Learning and World War II production functions.The Review of Economics and
Statistics, pp. 81–86.
Robertson, P. (2022). The real military balance: International comparisons of defense spending.
Review of Income and Wealth68.3, pp. 797–818.doi: 10.1111/roiw.12536.
Runfola, D. et al. (2020). geoBoundaries: A global database of political administrative boundaries.
PLoS ONE 15.4, e0231866.doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231866.
Schreer, B. (2024).Europe’s defence procurement since 2022: a reassessment. https://www.iiss.
org/online-analysis/military-balance/2024/10/europes-defence-procurement-
since-2022-a-reassessment/ . Military Balance Blog.
SIPRI(2025). TrendsinInternationalArmsTransfers,2024 .https://www.sipri.org/publications/
2025/sipri-fact-sheets/trends-international-arms-transfers-2024 .
91

===== PDF_PAGE 94 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Trebesch, C., A. Antezza, K. Bushnell, A. Frank, P. Frank, L. Franz, I. Kharitonov, B. Kumar, E.
Rebinskaya, and S. Schramm (2023).The Ukraine Support Tracker. Tech. rep. Kiel Working
Paper No. 2218. Kiel Institute.
Vershinin, A. (2024).The Attritional Art of War: Lessons from the Russian War on Ukraine. https:
//www.rusi.org/explore- our- research/publications/commentary/attritional-
art-war-lessons-russian-war-ukraine . RUSI.
Watling, J. and G. Somerville (2024).A Methodology for Degrading the Arms of the Russian Fed-
eration. https://www.rusi.org/explore- our- research/publications/occasional-
papers/methodology-degrading-arms-russian-federation . RUSI Occasional Paper.
Wolff, G., A. Burilkov, K. Bushnell, and I. Kharitonov (2024a).Fit for war in decades: Europe’s and
Germany’s slow rearmament vis-a-vis Russia. https://www.ifw- kiel.de/publications/
fit- for- war- in- decades- europes- and- germanys- slow- rearmament- vis- a- vis-
russia-33234/. Kiel Report 1.
— (2024b). Kiel military procurement tracker – release 1.0. https : / / www . ifw - kiel . de /
publications/kiel-military-procurement-tracker-33232/ . Kiel Institute.
Wolff, G., A. Burilkov, K. Bushnell, I. Kharitonov, J. Mejino-Lopez, and T. Morgan (2025).Kiel
military procurement tracker – release 2.0. https://www.ifw-kiel.de/publications/kiel-
military-procurement-tracker-33232/ . Kiel Institute.
Wolff, G., A. Steinbach, and J. Zettelmeyer (2025).The governance and funding of European rearma-
ment. https://www.bruegel.org/policy-brief/governance-and-funding-european-
rearmament. Bruegel Policy Brief 15/2025.
92

===== PDF_PAGE 95 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Annex A1: European stocks of key weapon systems over time
Table A1.1:Germany’s stocks of key weapon systems over time.
Germany 1992 2004 2013 2019 2020 2021 2024
Main Battle Tanks 6684 2398 322 323 323 339 313
Leopard 1 2084 670 0 0 0 0 0
Leopard 2 2083 1782 322 323 323 339 313
Soviet Tanks 1868 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other 649 0 0 0 0 0 0
Light Tanks 118 343 128 175 175 175 180
Wiesel 118 343 128 175 175 175 180
Infantry Fighting Vehicles 3250 2122 395 651 710 674 680
Marder 2100 2122 390 383 376 324 330
Puma 0 0 5 268 334 350 350
BMP-1/BMP-2 1150 0 0 0 0 0 0
Armoured Vehicles 12977 3646 2114 1933 2067 2067 2234
M-113 2902 2067 296 162 37 37 37
Fuchs, Eagle IV/V 0 1023 950 1012 1004 1004 1046
Soviet BTRs and BRDMs 7695 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other 2380 556 868 759 1026 1026 1151
Howitzers 3214 978 130 121 121 121 109
PzH2000 0 165 130 121 121 121 109
M-109 573 499 0 0 0 0 0
FH-77D 216 196 0 0 0 0 0
M-110 221 0 0 0 0 0 0
Soviet Howitzers (2S1, 2S3, M-30, M-46,
D-20 etc)
1844 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other 360 118 0 0 0 0 0
Long Range Anti Aircraft 300 0 14 30 30 30 70
Patriot launchers 288 NA 14 30 30 30 70
S-200/VEGA 12 0 0 0 0 0 0
Medium Range Anti Aircraft 0 0 0 0 0 0 3
IRIS-T SLM 0 0 0 0 0 0 3
Short Range Anti Aircraft 680 0 2 12 12 12 20
Mantis 0 0 2 12 12 12 0
Roland 238 0 0 0 0 0 0
Soviet SAM launchers (KUB/Sterla) 226 0 0 0 0 0 0
MIM-23 HAWK 216 0 0 0 0 0 0
ASRAD Ozelot 0 0 0 0 0 0 20
Anti Aircraft Guns 3295 1509 0 0 0 0 0
Gepard 432 354 0 0 0 0 0
Rh 202 1989 1155 0 0 0 0 0
Soviet ZU/ZSU 426 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other 448 0 0 0 0 0 0
MLRS 237 200 55 41 41 41 38
M270 0 0 0 41 41 41 38
unknown MLRS 33 150 55 0 0 0 0
LARS 204 50 0 0 0 0 0
Combat Aircraft 553 423 205 228 228 226 226
Eurofighter Typhoon 0 8 101 140 140 138 138
Tornado 161 262 104 88 88 88 88
Phantom II 223 152 0 0 0 0 0
Other 169 1 0 0 0 0 70
Source: IISS: 1992, 2004, 2014, 2020, 2021, 2025
93

===== PDF_PAGE 96 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Table A1.2:France’s stocks of key weapon systems over time.
France 1992 2004 2013 2019 2020 2021 2024
Main Battle Tanks 2001 614 254 222 222 222 200
Leclerc 0 370 254 222 222 222 200
AMX-30 2001 244 0 0 0 0 0
Light Tanks 171 28 28 0 0 0 0
VCBC-90 28 28 28 0 0 0 0
AMX-13 143 0 0 0 0 0 0
Infantry Fighting Vehicles 0 0 530 625 605 706 622
VBCI 0 0 530 625 605 706 622
Armoured Vehicles 6242 6185 5311 4075 4233 4317 4565
VAB 3840 3700 3126 2255 2248 2208 1740
VBL 240 1442 1594 1424 1418 1416 1677
Panhard AML 709 0 0 0 0 0 0
AMX-10RC 1141 701 256 247 245 245 192
Other 312 342 335 149 322 448 956
Howitzers 786 375 152 121 120 120 104
AMX-GCT/AU-F1 253 273 32 32 32 32 32
CAESAR 0 5 77 77 76 76 60
OB-155-50 BF 206 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other 327 97 43 12 12 12 12
Long Range Anti Aircraft 180 98 0 40 40 40 40
Roland 180 98 0 0 0 0 0
SAMP/T 0 0 0 40 40 40 40
Medium Range Anti Aircraft 69 26 0 0 0 0 0
MIM-23 HAWK 69 26 0 0 0 0 0
Short Range Anti Aircraft 150 331 0 24 24 24 26
Mistral 150 331 0 0 0 0 0
VL/MICA 0 0 0 0 0 0 6
Crotale NG 0 0 0 24 24 24 20
MLRS 30 61 26 13 13 13 9
M270 0 0 0 13 13 13 9
unknown MLRS 30 61 26 0 0 0 0
Combat Aircraft 215 222 238 227 227 228 235
Mirage-2000 0 158 153 107 107 122 94
Mirage F-1 173 54 5 0 0 0 0
Rafale 0 10 80 120 120 116 141
Other 42 0 0 0 0 0 0
Source: IISS: 1992, 2004, 2014, 2020, 2021, 2025
94

===== PDF_PAGE 97 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Table A1.3:United Kingdom’s stocks of key weapon systems over time.
United Kingdom 1992 2004 2013 2019 2020 2021 2024
Main Battle Tanks 1276 543 227 227 227 227 213
Challenger 1 426 386 277 277 277 277 213
Challenger 2 0 156 0 0 0 0 0
Chieftain 850 1 0 0 0 0 0
Light Tanks 627 464 200 176 176 176 59
Scimitar 315 327 200 176 176 176 0
FV101 Scorpion 312 0 0 0 0 0 0
Sabre 0 137 0 0 0 0 0
Ajax (intest) 0 0 0 0 0 0 59
Infantry Fighting Vehicles 605 575 350 388 388 388 388
MCV-80 Warrior 605 575 350 0 0 0 0
FVS 10 Warrior 0 0 0 388 388 388 388
Armoured Vehicles 5626 4054 2763 2586 2590 2579 2353
AIFV 0 1675 0 0 0 0 0
FV103 Spartan 525 597 275 252 252 252 97
FV432 2013 1121 0 0 0 0 0
Saxon 1138 649 0 0 0 0 0
BvS-10 Viking 0 0 18 99 99 99 99
FV4 30 Bulldog 0 0 880 409 409 409 409
Mastiff 0 0 420 396 396 396 256
Foxhound 0 0 330 399 399 399 398
Other 1950 12 840 1031 1035 1024 1094
Howitzers 723 344 233 215 215 215 179
AS90 8 178 89 89 89 89 39
L118 Light gun 212 166 144 126 126 126 126
FV433 Abbot 200 0 0 0 0 0 0
M-109 111 0 0 0 0 0 0
Archer 0 0 0 0 0 0 14
Other 192 0 0 0 0 0 0
Short Range Anti Aircraft 200 192 74 74 74 74 50
FV4333 Stormer with Starstreak 0 135 60 60 60 60 38
CAMM (Land Ceptor) 0 0 0 0 0 0 12
Rapier 200 57 14 14 14 14 0
MLRS 47 63 35 35 35 35 26
M270 0 0 35 35 35 35 26
unknown MLRS 47 0 0 0 0 0 0
Combat Aircraft 274 510 285 162 162 167 169
Typhoon/Tornado 198 254 220 144 144 144 137
Jaguar 53 62 0 0 0 0 0
Harrier 0 79 62 0 0 0 0
Hawk 0 115 0 0 0 0 0
Buccaneer 23 0 0 0 0 0 0
F-35B 0 0 3 18 18 23 32
Source: IISS: 1992, 2004, 2014, 2020, 2021, 2025
95

===== PDF_PAGE 98 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Table A1.4:Poland’s stocks of key weapon systems over time.
Poland 1992 2004 2013 2018 2020 2021 2024
Main Battle Tanks 2880 947 893 637 808 797 662
T-72 785 586 533 158 329 318 78
T-55 and PT-76 2095 0 0 0 0 0 0
PT-91 Twardy 0 233 232 232 232 232 206
Leopard 2A4 0 128 128 142 142 142 22
Leopard 2A5 0 0 0 105 105 105 105
Leopard 2PL 0 0 0 0 0 0 64
K2 0 0 0 0 0 0 71
M1A1 Abrams 0 0 0 0 0 0 116
Infantry Fighting Vehicles 1471 1281 1867 1636 1611 1611 1525
BMP-1 1409 1248 1297 1277 1252 1252 916
BMP-2 62 0 0 0 0 0 0
Rosomak IFV 0 0 570 359 359 359 605
BRM-1 0 33 0 0 0 0 0
Borsuk 0 0 0 0 0 0 4
Armoured Vehicles 1437 468 436 733 828 828 675
BRDM-2 685 435 237 369 369 369 220
BRDM-2 R5 0 0 0 0 0 0 90
BWR-1D/S 0 0 0 0 0 0 38
Rosomak APC 0 0 0 211 300 300 0
Other 752 33 199 153 159 159 327
Howitzers 2222 1014 401 427 394 410 451
2S1 Gvozdika 0 533 290 292 227 227 206
M-77 Dana 111 111 111 111 111 111 108
Dana-M 0 0 0 0 0 0 3
Krab 0 0 0 24 56 72 26
K9A1 0 0 0 0 0 0 108
Other (Soviet) 2111 370 0 0 0 0 0
Long Range Anti Aircraft 250 125 1 1 1 1 16
2K11 Krug 0 75 0 0 0 0 0
S-200C Vega 0 50 1 1 1 1 0
S-125/S-200 250 0 0 0 0 0 0
M903 Patriot PAC03 MSE 0 0 0 0 0 0 16
Short Range Anti Aircraft 160 316 81 81 98 81 178
SA-9 Gaskin 0 232 0 0 0 0 0
9K33 Osa-AK (SA-8 Gecko) 0 64 64 64 64 64 57
S-125 Neva 0 20 17 17 34 17 14
GROM Poprad 0 0 0 0 0 0 79
CAMM (Narew) 0 0 0 0 0 0 6
2K12 Kub (RS-SA-6 Gainful) 0 0 0 0 0 0 20
ZSU-23-4 0 0 0 0 0 0 2
unspecified soviet SAM system 160 0 0 0 0 0 0
MLRS 262 249 180 180 179 179 199
BM-21 232 219 75 75 75 75 27
RM-70 30 30 30 30 29 29 29
WR-40 Langusta 0 0 75 75 75 75 75
m142 HIMARS 0 0 0 0 0 0 18
K239 Chunmoo (Homa-K) 0 0 0 0 0 0 50
Combat Aircraft 332 242 106 98 94 94 85
MiG-21 254 99 0 0 0 0 0
MiG-23 37 0 0 0 0 0 0
MiG-29 9 45 32 32 28 28 14
MiG-17 24 0 0 0 0 0 0
Su-20 8 0 0 0 0 0 0
Su-22 0 98 26 18 18 18 11
FA-50 Fighting Eagle 0 0 0 0 0 0 12
F-16 0 0 48 48 48 48 48
Source: IISS: 1992, 2004, 2014, 2020, 2021, 2025
96

===== PDF_PAGE 99 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Annex A2:Kiel Military Procurement Trackerorders for land or naval
forces and country summary of procurement of weapons
Figure A2.1: Germany military orders for land forces by month, January 2020 - April 2025 (billion Euros).
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
97

===== PDF_PAGE 100 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure A2.2: UK military orders for land forces by month, January 2020 - April 2025 (billion GBP).
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
Figure A2.3: Poland military orders for land forces by month, January 2019 - May 2025 (billion EUR).
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
98

===== PDF_PAGE 101 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure A2.4: UK military orders for the navy by month, January 2020 - April 2025 (billion GBP).
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff et al. (2025).
99

===== PDF_PAGE 102 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Table A2.5:Country summary of procurement of weapon systems from 2020 to 2025 (units)
Year 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Total
Germany
Combat Aircraft 38 0 35 0 0 0 73
Main Battle Tank 0 0 0 18 105 0 123
Infantry Fighting Vehicle 0 154 143 50 0 0 347
Other Armoured Vehicle 0 16 140 1785 65 0 2006
Artillery Howitzer 0 0 0 22 5 0 27
Anti-Aircraft / Air Defence 0 0 0 7 8 0 15
United Kingdom
Combat Aircraft 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Main Battle Tank 0 148 0 0 0 0 148
Infantry Fighting Vehicle 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other Armoured Vehicle 0 0 60 70 500 50 680
Artillery Howitzer 0 0 0 14 0 0 14
Anti-Aircraft / Air Defence 0 0 0 0 0 15 15
Poland
Combat Aircraft 32 0 48 0 0 0 80
Main Battle Tank 0 250 180 116 0 0 546
Infantry Fighting Vehicle 0 0 0 0 111 0 111
Other Armoured Vehicle 40 0 70 400 452 96 1058
Artillery Howitzer 20 0 468 638 418 0 1544
Anti-Aircraft / Air Defence 0 0 0 6 0 0 6
France
Combat Aircraft 0 0 0 42 0 0 42
Main Battle Tank 0 50 50 0 100 0 200
Infantry Fighting Vehicle 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other Armoured Vehicle 677 120 564 442 515 120 2438
Artillery Howitzer 0 0 0 127 0 0 127
Anti-Aircraft / Air Defence 0 0 0 0 8 0 8
Total Four Countries
Combat Aircraft 70 0 83 42 0 0 195
Main Battle Tank 0 448 230 134 205 0 1017
Infantry Fighting Vehicle 0 154 143 50 111 458
Other Armoured Vehicle 717 136 834 2697 1532 266 6182
Artillery Howitzer 20 0 468 801 423 0 1711
Anti-Aircraft / Air Defence 0 0 0 13 16 15 44
Note: This table shows the summary of the Kiel military procurement tracker for
Germany, UK, Poland, and France for the years 2020-2025 in units of various weapon
systems. Data for Poland goes to May 2025 instead of April 2025. Orders for new items
and refurbishments of existing items are counted equally.
Source: Kiel military procurement tracker – second release, Wolff, Burilkov, Bushnell,
Kharitonov, et al. (2025).
100

===== PDF_PAGE 103 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Annex A3: European military equipment imports from the US
In this annex, we further analyse the data on European imports of military equipment, specifically
focusing on the U.S. exports to Europe. There exist three main instruments that the U.S. uses to
export arms to third countries. These are:
1. Direct Commercial Sales (DCS): Foreign governments can buy directly from U.S. firms with
the corresponding license.
2. Foreign Military Sales (FMS): The U.S. Government procures military equipment in an inter-
mediary condition for the foreign purchaser with the U.S. defence company.
3. Foreign Military Financing (FMF): Military financing provided by the U.S. through loans or
grants to foreign governments procuring U.S. arms.
The exports conducted through these three instruments have considerably grown between 2021
and 2024 (Figure A3.1), in particular those from the DCS and the FMS.
Figure A3.1: Value of US arms transferred by exporting programme and year. USD billion.
Notes: Direct Commercial Sales (DCS), Foreign Military Sales (FMS), Foreign Military
Financing (FMF).
Sources: authors based on US Department of State.
101

===== PDF_PAGE 104 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Data on the DCS is sketchier and typically does not cover major military equipment and tech-
nological systems exports. In the case of the FMF, the programme has been mainly used to export
military equipment to Israel during the last years, and to a much lower extent to Poland in 2023
(Figure A3.2).
Figure A3.2: Value of military equipment transferred through FMF program in Poland and Israel. USD
billion.
Source: authors based on Historical Sales Book, Defence Security Cooperation Agency
(DSCA).
Figure A3.3 shows the aggregated value of arms transferred through the FMS programme by
country. Overall, only Germany and Poland show significant transfers of weapons, with Germany in
particular showing a $14 billion transfer in 2023. The magnitude of this number suggests it might be
grouping different purchases, as no other available data seems to explain such transfer of equipment.
Considering the military equipment expenditure for Germany in 2023, this would imply that almost
100% would have been spent in equipment transferred via the FMS. For Poland, the data suggests
a similar issue, with the FMS purchases surpassing the total defence equipment expenditure of the
country for 2020 and 2022.
102

===== PDF_PAGE 105 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure A3.3: Value of military equipment transferred through FMS program by country. USD billion.
Source: authors based on Historical Sales Book, Defence Security Cooperation Agency
(DSCA).
Figure A3.4 shows the arms imports from the US using now the SIPRI dataset. While the data
does capture certain trends in the increase in imports, for example in Poland or Israel, it does not
show a similar picture for countries like Germany or the Netherlands. One possible reason behind this
disparity might be related to the transfers of US equipment via DCS rather than FMS or FMF. This
difference should however be small as the SIPRI data covers major weapons61 for which most would
lie under the FMS purchase programme. While we do not have disaggregated yearly data for the total
value of transfers via DCS, we can estimate the share of Germany in the total authorised sales under
the DCS for a given year. In the case of Germany, this would translate into less than 1% of the US
sales authorizations for 2023, that is around $1 billion in value. In other words, a way lower amount
thantheoneobservedfortheFMStransferstoGermanyreachingalmost$14billionforthesameyear.
61https://www.sipri.org/databases/armstransfers/sources-and-methods
103

===== PDF_PAGE 106 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Figure A3.4: Arms imports from the US. TIV million.
Source: authors based on SIPRI.
Overall, the analysis on European imports of military equipment confirms the considerable in-
crease in foreign purchases since the invasion of Ukraine in 2022, specifically in equipment areas
like air defence or combat aircrafts. It however does not confirm the claims of excessive reliance on
foreign countries for the overall procurement of military equipment. Similarly, US overall exports of
military equipment have more than doubled in nominal terms between 2021 and 2024.
Finally, the analysis also shows the importance that transparency in procurement plays to assess
possible dependencies. Similarly, as most of the procurement is often a multi-year programme and
the lifespan of the investment lasts decades, any assessment on the matter should take a complete
approach assessing both (i) sufficiently long time frames and (ii) different databases to account for
existing differences in the accounting.
104

===== PDF_PAGE 107 =====
KIEL REPORT NO. 3 | JUNE 2025
Annex A4: Increase in defence production, data sources
Table A4.1:Increase in production per year of military equipment since 2022, data sources.
Equipment Company Source
Artillery shells Rheinmetall Rheinmetall, Bloomberg
Artillery shells CSG Reuters
Artillery shells Nexter Defense Post
Artillery shells Mesko Defence 24
CAESAR, SP howitzer KNDX Army Recognition
Zuzana-2, SP howitzer Konstrukta CEPA
Archer, SP howitzer BAE Systems AB Defense Express
Panzerhaubitze 2000, SP howitzer KNDS, Rheinmetall Kiel Institute
2S22 Bohdana, SP howitzer Kramatorsk The Economist
Leopard 2A8, MBT KNDX RBC-Ukraine
Abrams M1A2, MBT General Dynamics Defense Express
Taurus missile MBDA/SAAB Defense Express
PAC-3 missiles Lockheed Martin Lockheed Martin
HIMARS, MLRS Lockheed Martin Lockheed Martin
Javelin missiles Lockheed Martin Lockheed Martin
Source: Source: authors’ own elaboration.
105

===== PDF_PAGE 108 =====
IMPRESSUM
Publisher:
Kiel Institute for the World Economy
Kiellinie 66, 24105 Kiel, Germany
Phone: +49 (431) 8814-1
Fax: +49 (431) 8814-500
Email: info@ifw-kiel.de
Berlin Office:
Kiel Institute for the World Economy
Chausseestraße 111, 10115 Berlin
Phone: +30 30830637-5
Email: berlin@ifw-kiel.de
The Kiel Institute for the World Economy —
Leibniz Center for Research on Global Economic
Challenges is an independent foundation under
the public law of the German federal state of
Schleswig-Holstein.
Board of Directors:
Prof. Dr. Moritz Schularick, President
Prof. Dr. Christoph Trebesch, Vice President
Birgit Austen, Executive Administrative Director
Value Added Tax Id.-Number:
DE 251899169
Photo:
Cover: © Adobe Stock | Framestock
Responsible Supervisory Authority:
Ministry of General Education and Vocational
Training, Science, Research and Culture of the
German federal state of Schleswig-Holstein
Jensendamm 5, 24103 Kiel
© 2025 Kiel Institute for the World Economy.
All rights reserved.
https://www.ifw-kiel.de/en/publications/kiel-policy-brief/
