
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Translation

The following is a translation of the full text of a Chinese government notice giving Chinese companies

guidelines on how to build “open innovation platforms” for developing AI technology. This notice,

issued by the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), builds on the authoritative New Generation

AI Development Plan
 issued by China’s State Council in 2017, which identified open-source platforms

1
as crucial to building China into the world leader in AI by 2030. Since 2017, prominent Chinese tech

companies such as Baidu, Tencent, and Megvii have built several of these platforms, including 10 new

ones launched in late August 2019.
 Each platform is designed for a specific subset of AI applications,

2
such as machine learning, speech recognition, computer vision, and “smart home” products. This

document details how MOST will approve new platforms and how it oversees existing ones, and

reserves for MOST the right to shut down any of these platforms at any time for any reason.

Title

Ministry of Science and Technology Notice on the Publication of the
​
Guidance on National New Generation

Artificial Intelligence Open Innovation Platform Construction Work

科技部关于印
发
《国家新一代人工智能开放
创
新平台建
设
工作指引》的通知

Author

Ministry of Science and Technology (
科技部
; MOST)

Source

MOST website, 1 August 2019

The Chinese source text that this translation is based on is available at:

http://www.most.gov.cn/mostinfo/xinxifenlei/fgzc/gfxwj/gfxwj2019/201908/t20190801_148109.htm

Headings rendered in
​
boldface
​
 in the source text are similarly rendered in this translation.

Translation Date

17 September 2019

Translator

Ben Murphy, CSET Translation Lead

To science and technology departments (or committees, or bureaus) in every province,

autonomous region, and centrally administered municipality (
直
辖
市
) and their planning units,

and to the Science and Technology Bureau of the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps:

The Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) has established
​
Guidance on National

New Generation Artificial Intelligence Open Innovation Platform Construction Work
​
 to

thoroughly implement the
​
State Council Notice on the Issuance of the New Generation Artificial

Intelligence Development Plan
 (
《国
务
院关于印
发
新一代人工智能
发
展
规
划的通知》
)

3
1
 An English translation of this document, and a link to the Chinese source text, is available at:

https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/full-translation-chinas-new-generation-artific
ial-intelligence-development-plan-2017/

2
 For a Chinese-language news article describing these 10 new platforms, see:

https://www.yicai.com/news/100312280.html

3
 See footnote 1.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
(National Development and Reform document no. 35 [2017]), to give full play to the leading

role of top artificial intelligence (AI) companies and research institutions, to promote profound

harmonization of AI with the real economy, to further advance the construction of national new

generation AI open innovation platform, and to promote technical innovation and industrial

development in AI. We now publish this for you. Please do a good job of carrying out this work

in a way that suits the actual situation in your regions.

MOST

1 August 2019

(Actively publicize the following)

Guidance on National New Generation Artificial Intelligence Open Innovation Platform

Construction

In accordance with the overall requirements for planning and arranging the AI

innovation platforms in the
​
State Council Notice on the Issuance of the New Generation

Artificial Intelligence Development Plan
​
(National Development and Reform document no. 35

[2017]), as well as with the overall objectives and immediate objectives set forth by the major

Science and Technology Innovation 2030: “New Generation Artificial Intelligence” project (
科技
创
新
2030——“
新一代人工智能
”
重大
项
目
) the below work guidance is established, in order to

further clarify the significance of the goal of, the principles for the construction of, the basic

conditions for, and the main tasks of the national new generation AI open innovation platforms.

These instructions guide and promote the orderly development of the national new generation

AI open innovation platforms.

I. Significance of the Goal

The new generation AI open innovation platforms (henceforth abbreviated “open

innovation platforms”) are focused on key sub-domains (
细
分
领
域
) of AI. They bring fully into

play the leading model role of leading companies and research institutions in the AI industry.

They effectively integrate technological resources, supply chain resources, and financial

resources. They are an important vehicle for innovation that consistently generates core R&D

capabilities and service capabilities in AI. “Openness and sharing” are important concepts

driving China’s technical innovation and industrial development in AI. By constructing the open

innovation platforms, we help improve our technical innovation and R&D strength, and we help

improve the capacity for open and shared services of our foundational software and hardware.

We encourage open-source and openly available software and technology. We support

innovative and entrepreneurial individuals, groups, and medium-, small-, and micro-sized

companies in throwing themselves into AI technology R&D. We promote the dissemination of

AI technical achievements, and their transformation into applications. We will make AI into a

new engine driving the construction of the real economy and the development of social

endeavors.

II. Principles for Construction

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
(1) Applications are the driving force. Making the requirements for the major

applications of AI into the driving force, and relying on the open innovation platforms to

develop AI-related basic theory, key and core technologies, and software and hardware support

systems, products, and applications, make achievements in AI innovation that have

international influence and broad coverage.

(2) Companies are the actors. Encouraging leading companies in AI sub-domains to

establish open-source, open platforms is a move aimed at making AI technical R&D resources

publicly available. This will export AI technology service capability to society, promote industrial

applications for AI technology, nurture leading companies in the industry, and support the

growth of medium-, small-, and micro-size companies.

(3) Marketization mechanism. Encourage the use of a marketized organizational

management mechanism. Rely on work units to be the main source of funding for and

investment in the open innovation platforms, but also provide sustained support for

development of the open innovation platforms by other means, such as authorizing the transfer

of technological achievements (
技
术
成果
转让
授
权
) or through pay-to-use technology (
技
术
有
偿
使用
).

(4) Coordinated innovation (
协
同式
创
新
). Encourage local governments, industry,

scientific research institutes, universities, etc. to participate together in advancing the

construction of the open innovation platforms. Build an open ecosystem and promote the

transformation of core technological achievements into commercial products (
核心技
术
成果
产
业
化
) through the integration of human, technical, data, and supply chain resources.

III. Basic Criteria

Leading AI technology companies will drive the construction of the open innovation

platforms. They are encouraged to invite research institutes and universities to participate in

their construction and to provide knowledge and technical support. The open innovation

platforms will be organized and built around the sub-domains of AI that require major

applications, namely those involved in the key tasks defined in the
​
New Generation Artificial

Intelligence Development Plan
​
. In principle, one new generation AI open innovation platform

will be built for each concrete sub-domain. The sub-domains that the different open innovation

platforms belong to should have distinct differences and emphases.

Those who submit applications to build open innovation platforms should ensure that

their platforms meet the following basic criteria:

(1) The open innovation platform should possess outstanding technological strength and

industrial innovation influence, and should be able to put into full play the leading model role of

the AI industry.

(2) It should have a technical foundation and service capacity that provide open, shared

service to society, ones that can effectively integrate technological resources, supply chain

resources, and financial resources. It should possess the technical capability for

rapid-turnaround external service, such that it can greatly lower the use threshold (
使用
门槛
)

for R&D and technology in the industry, and it must propel coordinated innovation and

development among medium-, small-, and micro-size companies.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
(3) The unit entrusted with constructing the open innovation platform must commit to

making sustained investments of funding, human resources, infrastructure, and so on, so as to

provide a guarantee for the open innovation platform’s development.

(4) It should possess a clear-cut, reviewable open service operation mechanism, one

that establishes a very comprehensive organizational framework and a mode of operation that

supports the sustainable development of the open innovation platform.

IV. Key Tasks

(1) Launch technological innovation in AI sub-domains. Integrate the existing technical

foundation and industrial resources of the open innovation platform’s sub-domain. Bring

together the innovation power of strong companies, scientific research institutes, universities,

etc. Work together to promote the basic theories, model methods, and basic software and

hardware research of AI. Serve and support the cutting-edge basic theories and key

technological innovations of AI.

(2) Promote the dissemination of technical achievements and their transformation into

applications. Actively explore a mechanism for transforming the achievements of the open

innovation platforms into applications. Driven by innovative achievements, effectively integrate

the relevant technological, supply chain, and financial resources. Bring together the innovative

power of upstream and downstream elements. Build a complete technical and industrial

ecosystem. Promote high-quality economic and social development and the improvement of

the people’s livelihoods.

(3) Provide open, shared services. Build standard test datasets on the open innovation

platforms aimed at sub-domains of AI. Promote data openness and sharing, and create

standardized, modular models, middleware, and application software. Provide open and shared

software and hardware services to society through methods such as an open interface,

modeling library (
模型
库
), and algorithm bundles (
算法包
).

(4) Guide innovation and entrepreneurship among medium-, small-, and micro-size

companies and among industry developers. Create communities for information sharing and

exchange of experience in the AI sub-domains. Guide medium-, small-, and micro-size S&T

companies and innovative entrepreneurs in carrying out product R&D and application testing

on the open innovation platforms. Lower the technical and resource use threshold. Create a

good atmosphere for coordination, innovation, and entrepreneurship throughout the entire

industry.

V. Organization and Management

(1) Recommendation and application.

Entities that meet the aforementioned criteria and are willing to provide public

innovation services should assemble their technical foundations and development ambitions,

choose a clear-cut, concrete AI sub-domain, fill out a
​
National New Generation AI Open

Innovation Platform Construction Application Form
​
, and obtain either a self-recommendation

from the entrusted work unit (
依托
单
位
) or a recommendation from the provincial-level S&T

management department it is subordinate to (
所属省
级
科技管理部
门
). The best applications

will be sent on to MOST for approval.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
(2) Comprehensive examination.

MOST will organize experts who will conduct a comprehensive examination of each

application. These experts will be drawn both from overall experts (
综
合
专
家
) and from

domain experts (
领
域
专
家
). The overall experts will be chosen from among the members of the

consulting expert group (
咨
询专
家
组
) for the major Science and Technology Innovation 2030:

“New Generation Artificial Intelligence” project, and from among people in charge of

already-built open innovation platforms. The domain experts will be chosen mainly from among

experts who have guided and arranged major projects (
重大
项
目指南
编
制
专
家
). The

comprehensive examination will unfold mainly in the form of examination meetings. The

examining experts will review the open innovation platform construction application, and hear

a report from the work unit that applied. Based on factors such as the logic of the concept

behind the application, the foundation and capabilities of the work unit entrusted with building

the platform, the feasibility of the construction plan, and the anticipated results of the open

service, the experts will make a thorough inquiry and make a determination, thus forming an

opinion of the application based on the comprehensive examination.

(3) Confirmation and announcement.

Taking into account both the comprehensive examination opinions and an overall

consideration of the development requirements, construction plan, and the overall

arrangements for new generation AI technology, MOST will select the best open innovation

platforms and the work units entrusted with them, and, in accordance with procedure, confirm

the winners and announce them to society.

(4) Operations and management.

The work units thus entrusted are the entities which will construct and be responsible

for the national new generation artificial intelligence open innovation platforms. The entrusted

work units are encouraged to actively explore high-efficiency organizational management

models that suit their own development characteristics. They should build efficient mechanisms

for resource integration, cooperative innovation, open service, and profit allocation. They are

encouraged to build a mechanism for technological cooperation, exchange of experience, and

resource-sharing between each open innovation platform.

Each entrusted work unit should build a system for annual reports and for reports on

important matters. At set intervals, the open innovation platforms should sum up their work

situation and compile an annual summary report. After being examined by the provincial-level

S&T management department that the entrusted work unit is subordinate to, the report will be

sent to MOST. MOST will actively support the construction of the open innovation platforms

and will promote the coordinated development of the platforms with construction of the

national new generation AI innovation and development experimental zones (
国家新一代人工
智能
创
新
发
展
试验
区
). Provincial-level S&T management departments should combine the

development characteristics of their regions, actively advance the construction of the open

innovation platforms, help with the popularization and application of their technology, and

provide them with the relevant supportive policies to benefit their development.

Each entrusted work unit should build a launch mechanism for its open innovation

platform. The entrusted work unit for each open innovation platform should comply with the

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Governance Principles for New Generation Artificial Intelligence
 (
《新一代人工智能治理原
4
则
》
), develop responsible (
负责
任
) AI, actively and dependably advance technological

innovation and industrial development in AI, and unstintingly explore performance

management and evaluation mechanisms for the open innovation platforms. Provincial-level

S&T management departments should report back to MOST in a timely way on any problems

that crop up in the process of building the open innovation platforms; MOST will shut down an

open innovation platform if its entrusted work unit is unable to continue carrying out its duties,

or if the platform produces a negative effect on society.

Appendix: Outline of the Application Materials for Building the National New Generation

Artificial Intelligence Open Innovation Platforms

Appendix

Outline of the Application Materials for Building the National New Generation Artificial

Intelligence Open Innovation Platforms

I.
Background and Significance of the Construction of the Platform

1.
The state of the industry and its development trends

2.
An analysis of the resource situation for technological innovation

3.
An analysis of the necessity of the construction of the platform

II.
The Objective and Nature of the Construction of the Platform

1.
The objective of the construction of the platform

2.
The nature of the construction of the platform

3.
The schedule for the construction of the platform

4.
Indicators to be used in examining the platform

5.
The status of the entrusted work unit

6.
The status of resource integration

III.
The Mechanism for and Nature of the Open Service

1.
Organizational structure and operations mechanism

2.
Nature and means of the open service

3.
Indicators to be examined, and anticipated results

IV.
Proof of Meeting the Criteria

1.
Financial investment status

2.
Personnel investment status

3.
Other coherent proofs

4
 An English translation of this document, and a link to the Chinese source text, is available at:

https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/translation-chinese-expert-group-offers-gove
rnance-principles-responsible-ai/
