Center for Strategic and International Studies


TRANSCRIPT
Online Event
“The China Innovation Challenge: A Conversation with
Professor Jonathan Barnett”


DATE
Friday, December 9, 2022, at 10:00 a.m. ET



FEATURING
Jonathan Barnett
Torrey H. Webb Professor of Law, University of Southern California Gould School of Law




CSIS EXPERTS
Sujai Shivakumar
Director and Senior Fellow, Renewing American Innovation, CSIS

Andrei Iancu
Senior Adviser (Non-Resident), Renewing American Innovation, CSIS









Transcript By
Superior Transcriptions LLC
www.superiortranscriptions.com

Sujai
Shivakumar:
Welcome to CSIS. I’m Sujai Shivakumar, senior fellow and director of the
Renewing American (Innovation) Project here at CSIS. It’s my pleasure to
welcome you today to a conversation with Jonathan Barnett, professor at
the University of Southern California, on the issue of the China challenge
and patents.

Leading the conversation will be Andrei Iancu, who is a cofounder of the
Renewing American Innovation Project, and a former director of the
USPTO. So, without further ado, Andrei, I turn it over to you.


Andrei Iancu: Thank you very much. Thank you, Sujai, for the kind introduction. Thank
you to CSIS for hosting this event. And thank you for everybody for
watching this program. And welcome, Professor Barnett. I very much look
forward to our conversation.

But before we do that, very briefly, just by way of introduction, Jonathan
Barnett is Torrey H. Webb Professor of Law at USC, the University of
Southern California. And he is the director of the law school’s Media,
Entertainment and Technology Law Program. Professor Barnett teaches
primarily intellectual property law, antitrust, along with a whole host of
other issues that he focuses on, including contracts, corporate law, and
the like. Professor Barnett, prior to academia, worked as a lawyer in
private practice.


He has an undergraduate degree from the University of Pennsylvania, a
Masters of Philosophy from Cambridge University, and a J.D. from the Yale
Law School – a stellar combination. Obviously, you’re not UCLA Law
School, but we’ll forgive you for that transgression. Professor Barnett is
highly published as well, with lots and lots of academic papers. Most
importantly, last year he published a terrific book called “Innovators,
Firms and Markets: The Organizational Logic of Intellectual Property.”
And he currently is working on a new book, and we will talk about both
of them now.


So, let’s start, professor, with perhaps you can tell us a little bit about
your book that was published last year.

Jonathan
Barnett:
Sure. Thank you, Andrei. And thank you to CSIS for the opportunity to
speak to you today.

The book that you mentioned looked at 120 years of U.S. economic
history and legal history. And what it shows is that the source of U.S.
competitive advantage in the innovation economy relies, to a surprising
extent, on the patent system. Why is the patent system so important?
Because the patent system often levels the playing field between the
inventor, whose key asset is an idea, and large, established companies

who have scale and scope that is very difficult to compete with.

If you look at some of the most fertile periods of U.S. innovation history –
the late 19th, early 20th century where we get inventions like the
airplane, the automobile, electrification, early wireless communications.
You look again at the late 19th, early 20th centuries, you get the biotech
revolution, and you get the smart phone revolution, what you see in
common in both of those areas, robust enforcement of patents and
creative disruptors coming into the innovation economy, what I like to
call maverick inventors who have a new idea, that challenge the dominant
design. Patents are part of the magic that makes that happen.

Why? Because patents bring in risk capital that allows them to cultivate
the invention and to disrupt the established market. And I saw this
pattern repeating itself over and over. Why did I write the book? I wrote
the book because our current policy trajectory is undermining the source
of this competitive disadvantage by weakening the patent system, the
infrastructure that is part of this creative disruption engine that makes
our innovation economy so unique.


Mr. Iancu: So, I do want to segue in a minute to your new book and what you see the
future holding, but let’s delve just a little bit deeper for our audience into
the reasons as to why the patent system and patents in particular play
such an important role in innovation creation, disruptive innovation, and
overall economic growth.

Because there is an argument that some are making that, look, innovation
just happens. It will happen if you provide the right economic conditions.
You invest sufficient resources, both from the government and private
sector, in research and development. And then all the patents will do after
that is effectively pull the ladder behind you – behind the innovators, to
that it blocks access to the next generation of innovators. And the
argument says, those folks who make that argument will say, why can’t
we just make it free for all? Wouldn’t that be better, and more readily
accessible if we just – we create innovation and just let everybody just
have free access to it?

Prof. Barnett: Sure. Well, we don’t have to guess the answer to that question. From
roughly the late 1930s through the late 1970s, as I discuss in my book, we
pursued that very same policy. The federal government at that time was
the chief funder of R&D, and the R&D was subject to various types of legal
contractual restrictions that made it very difficult or, in many cases
impossible, to patent the fruits of that R&D, and to then take that into the
market. If you look at committee reports during that time, agency
reports, there’s consistent reports about the reluctance of the private
market to commercialize that technology.

And what the agencies and the committees start to realize is, what’s the
missing piece? The missing piece is a property right. It simply is not
commercially rational for a private market to sink the tens of millions,
sometimes hundreds of millions of dollars that are required to take an
idea that is funded at the basic research level and to do all the work that’s
required to turn that into a commercially and technically viable product.

What happens when we rejuvenate the patent system, as we did in the
early ’80s, when we take away the restrictions on patenting federally
funded R&D, which we did with the Bayh-Dole Act in 1980? We see a
flowering of innovation. The biotech revolution, the start of that,
coincides almost exactly with the resurgence of the patent system. This is
– this is a success story not just for innovation. It’s a success story for
competition. What happens in biotech? Instead of all of the R&D and
commercialization happening inside big pharma, we have startups doing
that, partnering with big pharma. Again, it’s the patent that makes that
happen. It allows the inventor to attract the risk capital, and it allows the
innovator to safely interface with a larger company.

Mr. Iancu: In your various research, have you found any example in economic
human history where explosive innovation growth has happened in the
absence of a robust intellectual property system?

Prof. Barnett: Yeah, let me be clear. I am not of the view that if we were to drastically
continue to weaken the patent system that innovation would come to a
halt. Because if we look at economic history, at least in the U.S., what we
find, again, if we look at that postwar period – is that an innovation
desert, the postwar period? Not at all. But where did innovation take
place? It took place inside large corporate labs. AT&T , which had
statutory national monopoly, GE, DuPont, RCA.

So, what happens when you pull the patent system out? You get what I
call a hierarchical innovation economy. The entrepreneur doesn’t have a
place anymore because they don’t have a viable business model. Let me
illustrate this for you with a data point. In 1957, according to NSF data,
roughly 5 percent of all private R&D expenditures were attributed to
small firms, the finest firms, with less than 1,000 employees. Let’s take
that all the way through 1980, where we continue to have a weak patent
system. Antitrust makes it very difficult to license IP . What’s the number
in 1980? It’s roughly still around 5 percent.


We now have the resurgence of the patent system with the establishment
of the federal circuit in the early ’80s and Bayh-Dole. By the 1990s
roughly a quarter of all private R&D expenditures in the United States are
now attributed to small firms. Why is this happening? Again, the property
right equalizes the patent field between the inventor, between the
maverick, and the established firm. This is – again, it’s a success story for
innovation. It’s a success story for competition. And segueing, I think, into
some of the topics we’ll be discussing today, it’s a segue for the U.S.’s
national competitive advantage in the global economy.


Mr. Iancu: OK. So, with all of that in mind, despite all the evidence of success that a
robust property right provides for economic growth, there has been a
trend and an effort in the past decade, maybe more, you’ll tell us, to
rewrite the rules and to weaken the intellectual property system. Can you
talk a little bit about that? And maybe this is an opportunity for you to tell
us what your next book is about that you’re working on.

Prof. Barnett: Sure. I think the key juncture point, if we just want to zero in on a
particular event, would be the Supreme Court’s decision in 2006 in the
case involving eBay v MercExchange. And while the court may or may not
have intended for this effect to transpire, but the way that that decision
has been interpreted by the lower courts is that to simplify matters to a
certain extent in the IT space today, it is very difficult to secure an
injunction against a – against an adjudicated patent infringer.

So, let’s appreciate what we’ve done there. In the IT space today,
inventors are operating under something like a compulsory licensing
system. What is – what is the problem with this? Well, if the patent
equalizes or does something to balance out the playing field between the
maverick inventor and the large established firms, well, when we weaken
the patent system – and specifically we weaken the key property-like
feature of the patent system – what we’ve done is we’ve made that
playing field again uneven for the benefit of firms that have more
resources to litigate, that have the resources to take existing innovations
and to turn them into products where, in many cases, compensation is
not being made to the individuals and the firms that invented that in the

first place.

Building on my previous research, again over a century’s worth of
research, we are heading down a trajectory where we’re undermining the
source of disruptive innovation that is the key distinguishing feature of
the U.S. innovation economy. Other countries innovate, but we innovate
from the bottom up. We innovate through the entrepreneur. And the
patent system is essential for that. My new book is about that. My new
book is about how the rules of the patent system have been rewritten – in
many cases inadvertently, with the best of intentions – in a way that
undermines the property right system that is the – that is the backstop,
that is the infrastructure that is necessary for an entrepreneurial
innovation economy.


Mr. Iancu: Who benefits from rewriting the intellectual property rulebook to
weaken the property right?

Prof. Barnett: Yeah. What I think has happened here is that we’ve had a confluence of
the views of certain advocates – again, with the best of intentions – to
open up the – open up information assets to increase access. And on the
other hand, we have certain portions, not all, certain portions of the tech
industry that operate under a business model that thrives under a weak
intellectual property system. It’s a business model that takes
informational assets, that aggregates it, that assembles it. It’s an
innovative contribution in its own right. However, over the longer-term
trajectory it’s not healthy for the innovation ecosystem. Again, why?
Because it takes away the property right that is necessary for the
innovator to attract investment and to translate that innovation into
commercializable products.

Mr. Iancu: One industry group in the United States that clear benefits from a weaker
IP system are the established, large, big technology companies. First of all
– well, let me just ask, why is that? And then, I’d like to explore who else
also benefits – has an aligned interest. But, I mean, established firms
inherently benefit from weaker intellectual property rights to some
extent on balance anyway, to prevent a disruptor coming through, as you
have indicated. But why in particular the big technology companies?
Because there are other big companies out there that perhaps don’t
benefit to the same extent. Like the big pharma companies, it’s a different
model. Some big manufacturing companies in the traditional space. Why
in particular the big tech companies?

Prof. Barnett: Yeah. So, let’s – to make things simple, let’s set aside pharma, because
pharma is an area where, big or small, we’re not familiar with any known
business model today that is not patent dependent in pharma. But to
address – so in IT , we have a greater diversity of business models, to the
extent to which they are dependent on the patent system. So, a large,
integrated firm, if we look at AT&T from the postwar period or we if we
look at Google or Apple today, why are they not dependent on the patent
system? Because they’ve constructed an integrated product services
ecosystem where, whether they innovate or whether they use
innovations that have been innovated by others, it can be monetized
within a complex product services ecosystem that is very difficult for
anyone else to replicate.

But who is dependent on the patent system? There’s two types of entities
that are dependent on the patent system in the IT space. One I’ve
mentioned, which is our hero the maverick, the individual, the small firm
inventor. The investor’s only asset is the idea, the technology. The
inventor requires capital. It requires the infrastructure of the larger firm
to monetize that component. And the inventor needs that patent to safely
interface with the Google, the Apples, or, in the old days, AT&T , RCA, and
so forth. It makes that transaction happen. It’s actually good for both
parties.

There’s another entity, which is not necessarily of small size in the IT
space, which is dependent on the patent system. And that is an entity that
monetizes innovation through a licensing structure. These are today’s
idea factories. Thomas Edison in Menlo Park, New Jersey called his –
called his enterprise an idea factory, an invention factory. In the wireless
space, if you’re using your smartphone, the brains of that smartphone are
being invented and refined day-in, day-out, by only four or five companies
located all in the U.S. or Europe. They all rely on the same business model.
It’s a licensing-based business model. They generally are not
manufacturers of the devices that we use, but they’re manufacturers of
the chip designs and other components that make that happen. The
patent system is necessary for that business model to be commercially
viable.


Mr. Iancu: At the same time, we are in a global technology competitive race with
China – and other countries, but mainly China – given their size and focus
on gaining a competitive advantage. Where does China play in this
international IP ecosystem? And how do they view, on balance, the
strength of intellectual property rights?

Prof. Barnett: Sure. What’s really interesting, and part of what the new book is about, is
that domestically we have a conflict of business models in the IT space.
On the one hand, we have the integrated ecosystem-based business
model. This thrives under big silo-type ecosystems. There are very few
companies that can sustain it. On the other hand, we have what I’ll call
the brain trust model, which is based on focusing on the invention factory
and licensing that out to tens, sometimes hundreds, of device producers.

This conflict between business models then recapitulates itself at a
national/international level, because, again, focusing on the wireless
industry, the China-based companies who are leaders in the wireless
space, they use an integrated model, or they are only device producers.
They are generally not located at the top of the tech supply chain. And for
that reason, they are using far more IP in general than they are making.
And of course, their rational interest is therefore to adopt policies,
whether it’s through patent law, through antitrust law to the extent it
impacts patent law, to devalue IP rights.


For the very simple reason that if you’re operating through an integrated
model, if you’re at the middle of the supply chain, you’re not generating
the technological inputs that make the device happen for the most part,
IP is an input. And like any manufacturer, it’s perfectly rational to take
every step that you can to reduce the price of that input as low as
possible. What’s unique about China is that they seem to have used their
patent and antitrust law policies and apparatus in service of the device –
local device producers, to reduce their input costs. And I can talk a little
bit more in detail about how that has happened.


Mr. Iancu: I’d love you to do that, but what I’m wondering first is does China, as a
whole country, behave approximately, collectively, like a large,
established, integrated product company? And the reason I ask that is, if
on balance they are net – meaningfully a net consumer of other people’s
innovation, as opposed to a net producer of original innovation – don’t
they, likewise, want to reduce just overall the price of accessing that
innovation and acquiring as much as it can, through whatever means, but
at a lower cost?

Prof. Barnett: Yes, absolutely. In the wireless space – and I don’t want to speak more
generally – but in the wireless smartphone space – and let’s understand,
actually, what’s at stake when we talk about wireless. Because we are no
longer – as we move into 5G and 6G further out on the horizon, we are
not just talking about smartphones. We shouldn’t even – instead of the
word “wireless” I’ll try to use the word “connectivity.”  We already see this
moving into the – into mobility space, right?

Mr. Iancu: The automobiles.

Prof. Barnett: With the automobile. The car today is a computer on wheels, right? It will
move into the smart home, the smart buildings. So, it’s very hard to
overestimate the importance of this particular industry. And again, as you
said, in the current configuration, to the best of our knowledge, the China-
based companies that are – that are leaders in this area, they are leaders
in device manufacturing. They excel in processes and in developing
processes. However, they are not leaders at the very top of the supply
chain and therefore, as a result, through business negotiation, through
business practices – but what is – again, what is unique about China? It’s
that the patent and antitrust laws have been deployed in service of a
national interest, a rational national interest, in reducing the costs of that
particular input, which in this case is technology.

Mr. Iancu: So there seems to be an amazing alignment of interests between the
large, established technology IT firms in the United States and Chinese
national interests, at least with respect to connectivity issues.

Prof. Barnett: Absolutely. And in my new book, I call this the accidental confluence, or
the accidental alliance. It’s an accidental confluence of interests between
the large platform tech business model of U.S.-based companies – again,
why? Because in certain technology areas, technology for those
companies, in your smartphone device but in all of the connectivity
devices more generally, technology – certain technologies are an input for
the platform companies. And therefore, in their advocacy and lobbying,
it’s perfectly rational to push for policies that reduce patent protections
and reduce the cost that is necessary to acquire those technologies.

That same business model is then extrapolated at the level of an entire
country, in the case of China, where they’re located at roughly the same
point in the supply chain, and therefore we see similar not only advocacy
but implementation of these policies to weaken patent protections. This
reduces the input cost for the producer or for the platform-based
company. However, what is the harm? The harm is not only that it reduces
the renumeration to those who innovate. The fundamental harm is that
the ecosystem is damaged. Not only the national; the international, the
global innovation ecosystem is damaged. Why? I go back to my original
point: We need a disruptor. We need the maverick to have the incentives
to go into that very risky endeavor which is known as innovation.

In particular, in the connectivity space, I don’t – it’s not widely
appreciated why the licensing model is so beneficial to the market. And
so let me just talk about that for a second. The licensing model is

sometimes disparaged as a tax. This really reflects a misunderstanding.
The licensing model is a – is a win from a policy perspective because it
pushes out the technology to every device producer who wants to use it.

What’s the alternative? The alternative is AT&T circa 1965. We have a
national monopoly. Is it innovative? Yes, it is. But all the innovation is
happening inside the AT&T silo. If we compare that to wireless, to
connectivity, we have a handful of firms who specialize in innovation, but
we have tens to hundreds of producers in the world who are able to
produce the devices that use it.


Mr. Iancu: To some extent, it democratizes technology and innovation and economic
growth, which is basically the core of the American experiment, so to say,
and the great economic growth over the past couple hundred years.

Prof. Barnett: Exactly. It’s very counterintuitive. The patent system actually opens up
access. Why? Because it takes the technology, and it puts it into what I call
a property envelope. Now with that property envelope, I can put my
technology on the negotiating table, we can set a price. Markets start to
develop. We’re very, very familiar with this idea in tangible goods. We
need property rights in order for markets to develop. The same logic
applies with intangible goods, with technologies.

If we have a secure property right system if I know as an innovator that if
you infringe my innovation, I can go get an injunction. Well, with that
property rights backstop now we can start setting prices, we can start
creating all types of primary and secondary markets that are based on
those innovations. Now when we change the legal system and we say,
well, you might not get an injunction, you probably won’t get an
injunction, all of those markets start to degrade, they start to wither away.
Does that mean innovation collapses? No. Innovation goes back to the silo
inside the big – the big ecosystem model.


Mr. Iancu: Well, and I would argue – and not having done the personal research –
but I would argue still that while innovation might still happen in that
alternative system, where it goes back into a silo, it’s not going to be at
the same level, because you’re going to have fewer firms, fewer people,
fewer minds actively pursuing, competing against each other to bring out
more and more ideas, and better ideas, it seems to me.

Prof. Barnett: Yeah, well – yeah. What technology history shows, if we look at the
percentage of GDP invested in R&D, you know, over roughly several
decades going back to the early 20th century, is that the share of – share
of GDP allocated to R&D doesn’t move that much in the U.S. And so right

now where we are in the U.S., the share of – the share of GDP invested in
R&D is about at historical levels. But what we do see is that when the
patent system is weakened, innovation becomes conservative. It becomes
incremental. And it’s about refining the existing design. And again, that
goes back to my original point. Why is that?

Because the maverick doesn’t thrive in the big corporate atmosphere. The
maverick thrives as a startup founder, as a startup CEO. But in many
technology industries, the startup is not economically viable. It’s not – it’s
not an attractive economic proposition to investors without the patent
system to work towards rebalancing, equalizing the playing field in the
interface between the large established firm.

Mr. Iancu: And in fact, to your point precisely, there a recent article in The Wall
Street Journal from last month titled “Stagnant Scientific Productivity
Holding Back Growth.” And they basically articulate precisely your point.
R&D investment in the United States, it’s at roughly historical norms of
about 3 percent of GDP , going back to the ’60s and thereabouts. Roughly
about the same, give or take a little bit, through the present. Yet, the fruits
of that effort, according to The Wall Street Journal, have been
diminishing.

And the – according to the article, the best metric for it – the best metric
for this is the contribution of innovation to growth. And it has slowed
down to about half the historic rates. So, in other words, despite the fact
of level, more or less, investment in research and development, the
output of that is about half of what it used to be. And the article posits
lots of thoughts and questions as to why that is. It doesn’t mention
patents at all. But really, you know, it’s actually not that big of a mystery,
right? What is the missing piece?

Prof. Barnett: Yeah, so I like to think of the innovation ecosystem in this ecological
sense. We’ve got different parts of the ecosystem, and they need different
policy instruments. So, I think the enactment of the CHIPS Act is a great
achievement. And the money that's going into basic research is a great
contribution because government has an important role to play in basic
research. Basic research generates so many gains and so many positive
externalities that it's often not rational for a private entity to fund that.
And it's great, the focus on chip manufacturing, obviously essential.

But, yes, there’s the missing piece. And the missing piece is how do you
translate that research into commercially and technically viable
products? And if you look at various industries, often the most capital-
intensive – and it’s also technically demanding – is the commercialization
process. Taking the basic research and translating that into products that
consumers and the target industry can use. That’s where we need the
patent system. The patent system creates the property envelope. It allows
the inventor to interface with the VC firm. It allows the biotech inventor
to interface with big pharma.


Let me illustrate this for you. We’re coming out of the pandemic. One of
the reasons the pandemic, thankfully, did not last any longer than it did
was the amazing development of vaccines. And let’s look just at one, the
BioNTech-Pfizer vaccine. This illustrates beautifully this ecosystem
model. The BioNTech-Pfizer vaccine built on many years of government-
funded basic research into mRNA technology. But how is that translated
into the actual vaccine that has helped millions, tens – hundreds of
millions of people? Through a scientist-founded startup. The tech is
transferred out of the academic space, it’s protected by a patent. The
startup attracts VC capital. The startup is able to interface with big
pharma. Big pharma is necessary to bring the scale, the scope, the
expertise to do the manufacturing and the testing.


So, I can’t think of a better illustration of something that we’re all familiar
with. The benefit is tangible. And the patent system is – was critical for
making that happen, just as the basic research is critical. But both pieces
need to be there. Otherwise, what we’re liable to do is we’re going to
throw a lot of money but we’re not going to get a lot of value for our
investment, as some of the data you’re referencing is suggesting.

Mr. Iancu: And, going back to the CHIPS Act, there’s a very good example. You know,
if fully funded the CHIPS Act promises to provide $200 billion worth over
the next several years of taxpayer money into the silicon chip
manufacturing industry. But there is nothing within the CHIPS Act or
surrounding the CHIPS Act to address the weakening intellectual
property system surrounding it.

And to your point, you know, there is a worry that, you know, we’re going
to throw all this money at it and it’s going to dissipate. But to me, more
importantly, if we really want to maximize the 200 billion (dollars), or
however much we put into the CHIPS Act from taxpayer money, we want
to leverage private industry alongside with it, and multiply the effects,
and create a public-private partnership. How are we going to do that if
private industry doesn’t have a reliable property right?


Prof. Barnett: Yeah, I couldn’t agree more. There has to be something done. Either the
judicial trajectory reorients itself or legislative intervention or a shift in
antitrust policy with respect to licensing of patents in the wireless space,
in order to reset investment expectations. That when you invest money
into translating basic/applied research into new connectivity products,
and you’re successful in doing so – which only occurs a minority of the
time. But when you’re successful in doing so, you will be able to reap the
rewards from that.

And the other thing to appreciate is that when you have a secure property
right, again, it’s not just about the innovator and the investors reaping
rewards. But a successful innovation has, what I’ll call, a force multiplier
effect that ripples throughout the whole economy. Think of all of the new
business models – if you use Uber, if you use Lyft, if you use DoorDash, if
you use Spotify. All of these are based on the wireless innovations that
took us from 2G to 3G, where we went from voice into rich text and data
transmission. That standard, the WCDMA standard, was based in part on
the inventions of a small firm that relies – that relied and continues – no
longer a small firm – continues to rely on a licensing-based patent model.


Mr. Iancu: You mentioned antitrust several times. So, I want to talk just a little bit
about that. It is – antitrust laws and anti-trust regulations do overlap and
work in conjunction with patents and intellectual property laws, and the
intellectual property ecosystem. Let’s talk a little bit about that, because
that regime, the anti-trust regime in the United States, has also come
under attack. And to some extent, in an unhelpful way, alongside with a
weakening of the intellectual property regime. Maybe you can talk a little

bit about that, and what are the examples in the antitrust world, and
what should we do about it?

Prof. Barnett: Yeah. To fully understand the innovation policy in the IT space, but
specifically in connectivity, mobility, wireless, et cetera, we have to look
not just at the patent system, but antitrust. And why is antitrust so
important? Because antitrust impacts licensing. It impacts what I can do
with that property envelope. It impacts that force multiplier effect of how
I – of the extent to which the innovator, who is not working under the
integrated business models, not inside the big silo, how can that
technology be monetized and disseminated throughout the market.

So unfortunately, since roughly the mid-2000s, where the Supreme Court
started issuing decisions to weaken patent protections – roughly around
the same time antitrust regulators in this country, competition regulators
in the European Union, have been operating – with the exception of the
DOJ antitrust division under the previous administration – have adopted
the view that the license is a tax, that the standard essential patents in the
wireless industry are inflating prices for consumers, and causing the
market to grow at a lower rate than would otherwise be the case.


But everywhere that we look in the wireless industry, that doesn’t seem
to be the case at all. The wireless communications device, which we’re
familiar with in the smartphone, there is no technology in modern history
that has been adopted more rapidly and more widely. And why is that?
Well, if you adjust for quality, the prices of smartphone devices have
actually been declining over time, which explains why they’re adopted so
widely. The licensing model, which is in turn based on the patent system,
is part of the reason for that. Why? Because it pushes out the technology
to any device producer who wants to use it, creates competition in the
device market, it improves access to technology.


The policy of the antitrust regulators in the U.S. and EU in limiting and
impeding the licensing and enforcement of patents in the wireless space
have been posing a threat to what is an amazing success story. It’s hard to
find a bigger success story, either from a technology standpoint or an
economic standpoint. That policy not only threatens innovation, it not
only threatens to create an unproductive outcome from a competition
perspective, right, but also it is eroding the source of the competitive
advantage of the U.S. wireless and the European wireless industry – all of
which rests on a business model which is focused on the patent system.

Mr. Iancu: I want to talk a little bit about the consequences – the ultimate
consequences of all this. And here at CSIS, we are particularly focused on
a variety of things, but national security is a major topic. So, you’ve
spoken about, you know, the reasons what’s happening in the IP world, in
the antitrust world. And the remarkable confluence of goals between the
big technology firms and China’s interests. What are the ultimate
consequences here? Is there an impact on national security, and why, of
these various policies?

Prof. Barnett: Yeah. Thank you for that question. And this is why I was particularly
interested in being able to speak to you today. It’s difficult to overestimate
the significance of the wireless communications technology. Again, it’s
not just about the smartphone. It will permeate every part of personal
and business life. The U.S. and the European Union are currently the
innovation leaders in this space. They occupy the top of the supply chain.
They are constantly generating new innovations to make this wireless
technology happen.

The business model on which every single lead innovator in this space
relies upon requires a robust patent system. It also requires an antitrust
regime that recognizes that licensing is, in general, efficient. It is in
general competitive. And when we move away from that, when we make
the patent system weaker, when we impede the enforcement of patents
that are held by innovators in the wireless space, what we’re doing is
we’re undermining the source of innovation. We’re actually reducing
access to the technology because the industry will be forced to migrate to
an integrated model.


But in the global competitiveness space, in the national – from a national
security perspective, we are inadvertently, with the best of intentions, we
are inadvertently undermining the source of the U.S. and Western
innovation economy. It’s an entrepreneurial innovation economy. It’s a
bottom up, it’s a messy innovation system. And it requires investment by
entrepreneurs, it requires investment by the holders of risk capital. And
at the end of the day, all of those stockholders need a secure, a robust
property rights system in order to make all of that rational.

Mr. Iancu: Look, I couldn’t agree more. And I personally, likewise, cannot emphasize
enough how important this is for the United States, and how critical
immediate attention needs – how critically important that immediate
attention is paid to this issue. China knows what it’s doing. It is very
focused in innovating in its own way. Again, another recent Wall Street
Journal article identifies that the current Chinese government is packing
its ranks with science and technology experts. Nearly 40 percent of the
total seats in the Chinese Central Committee have technical expertise.
And they’re super focused on it. And they’re telling us that they are.

The president, Mr. Xi, said, quote, “We must regard science and
technology as our primary productive force, talent as our primary
resource, and innovation as our primary driver of growth.” They
recognize it at the highest levels. And for the United States to compete in
the face of this increased and focused competition, from China and
elsewhere, we have to maintain and improve our own systems. We have
to compete in our own way. And the way we compete is through the
private market, through disruptive innovation, and growth, as you
indicate, Professor, from the bottom up. If we don’t attend to this, we have
no other engine of economic innovative growth and we’re going to be left
behind.


Prof. Barnett: Yeah. I couldn’t agree more. Putting my – the book I published recently,
the book that I’m currently working on, we have over a century’s worth of
history. We don’t need to guess. The most fertile, the most
entrepreneurial, the most innovative periods in U.S. technology history,
they’ve relied on the maverick inventor. They’ve relied on the
entrepreneur. The entrepreneur needs the property rights system to
make this happen. Again, to go back, but just to refine this point again, the
basic research money from the government is critical. It gets the – it gets
the innovation engine moving. But the missing piece is that property
rights system.

What the property right system does – we’re fully familiar with this
outside the technology system, but the logic applies in tech as well. When
you have a property rights system that is robust, that’s secure, the private
market starts to invest. It allocates that capital to inventions that will take
those wireless technologies and create all sorts of new business models,
not just in communications, in health care, and in all manner of
industries. That’s the magic of the U.S. innovation economy.


It’s a messy innovation economy. It’s not top down. It’s bottom up. But for

bottom up to work, it needs to have a patent system. It needs to have an
antitrust system that recognizes that robust enforcement of patents and
secure licensing of patents – it’s not a tax. It’s a force multiplier effect. It
creates gains, not just for the innovator but it creates actually far more
gains, of far higher orders of magnitude, of all of the consumers and the
businesses that benefit from that.


Mr. Iancu: Forward looking, do you have any specific recommendations for policy
changes? What would be the most important things, immediate things,
that should be attended to?
Prof. Barnett: I would have two things on my wish list. I think one would be an explicit
reaffirmation – it’s already there in the licensing guidelines on
intellectual property at the agencies. But a reaffirmation, a recognition of
the view that licensing is, in general, efficient. It’s, in general, pro-
competitive. It is, in general, pro-consumer. I think that would send an
important signal to the markets and bolster the licensing-based business
model that, as we can see in wireless, produces all of those efficient and
competitive effects.

My wish list on the patent system would be intervention by Congress to
correct the eBay decision or, what I should say more precisely, the
interpretation of the decision, to restore the presumption of irreparable
harm. That if you have – that if you have shown that your patent is valid, if
you have shown that it is infringed, that you are then entitled to an
injunction. That will restore the property rights backstop. And what we’ll
see, I would predict, is that you’ll see the risk capital market, the VC
market, they will respond to that, and they will start putting money back
into the areas that are patent dependent.

And it just so happens that some of the areas of tech economy that are
patent dependent – IT hardware, life sciences – those are some of our
most mission-critical industries today. And restoring greater security of
property rights, resetting expectations would be good, again, not just for
the innovators but, more importantly, for all of the consumers and the
businesses that will ultimately benefit from that innovation.


Mr. Iancu: Yeah, I mean, frankly, one of the most important aspects of any property
right – whether it’s the land that you have for agriculture or your own
home – whatever the property right is, or the personal property that you
have, the watch that you wear, is the right to exclude others, right? The
right to put the fence around it and keep others out or, if they trespass, to

evict them, and – or, if they take your watch away, to have rule of law that
can get it back for you and prevent its theft in the first place. Any
property right, in my view, again, I’m not an academic, but it seems like
you need to have the right to exclude.

And for intellectual property, we know from the Constitution that the
constitutional provision is to provide and secure for inventors the
exclusive right to their discoveries. Now, I recognize that there are
various academic interpretations of this. But the Supreme Court’s eBay
decision that was – the way it was interpreted below, was to make it very
difficult to exclude others, making it very difficult to actually have a
property right in these intellectual assets.


Prof. Barnett: Yeah. And let me just add two things on that. In the wireless connectivity
space in particular, where the U.S. courts are right now on the virtual
inability to secure an injunction in that inventive space, we are becoming
an outlier in that area. If you look at courts in Germany and the U.K., they
are issuing injunctions in this – in this area. And, I should also say,
historically that it has been through the grand sweep of U.S. patent
history – it has never been in doubt, until the eBay decision, that if you –
if the infringer is adjudicated to be an infringer, then you are entitled to
the injunction. Which, again, is the signature element of a property right.

The other point is a more fundamental point I want to point out. Is that
the right to exclude is also part of what I’ll call the enabling function of
the patent. So, when you’re able to set boundaries between those who
have – who have the right to use the asset and those who don’t, what
happens? It enables a whole slew of transactions. Again, our biotech
startup back in the early 1980s, all of a sudden, they are able to monetize
that innovation, they are able to enter into licensing agreements with
large pharmaceutical firms, or not just one, that innovation gets pushed
out in the market.


When we take away the property right, that innovation is going to stay in
house. And this is the counterintuitive point. When the patent system is
weakened, markets actually tend to become less competitive, because
innovation has to take place inside the small firms. So that right to
exclude is actually – it’s an enabling function. It actually increases access.
It also actually lowers entry barriers into markets because it makes it
easier for startups to come into the market.

Mr. Iancu: And it actually increases competition in a dynamic way, you know,
enabling more and more and additive new technologies.

Prof. Barnett: That’s right. And we can see that if we look at – if we look at advocacy, if
we look at lobbying today, again, outside of the pharmaceutical space, we
see other than firms that are relying on licensing-based business models,
our large, established firms in the IT area have lobbied consistently –
whether it’s in the Supreme Court, whether it’s in Congress – to weaken
the patent system. Again, why? It’s either because technology is an input
for those companies, in particular tech spaces, or they operate under an
ecosystem model. Who is lobbying for strong patent rights? The venture
capital community, small firms, and firms that rely on the licensing-based
business model that disseminates technology. It’s a vertically
disintegrated model.

Mr. Iancu: And you’ve said several times today that some of this lobbying to weaken
intellectual property laws is done with the best of intentions. And
potentially we have unintended consequences here, and potentially an
unintended or accidental alignment with China. Yet, I’ve heard you in the
past talk about, and I want to close with this – to give you an opportunity
to talk about this again – I’ve heard you talk about the wonderful term
that I like – I liked when I heard it from you the first time – about
intellectual tyrannies. Maybe you can talk a little bit about what are those
intellectual tyrannies. What do you mean by that?

Prof. Barnett: Yeah. What I mean by that is I think that our intellectual property policy
discussions, both in the patent area and in the antitrust area, have
suffered from a form of group think. Again, it’s this idea of thinking of the
patent as a tax, the patent as a monopoly. And therefore, if that’s true, of
course it makes perfect sense to weaken the patent system. Won’t we
then open up the market, make it more competitive, make it more
innovative?

Again, history tells us that that is not what happens. That when you
weaken the patent system, the innovation system becomes distorted.
Innovation skews towards the larger firms, and the larger firms are great
at process innovation. They’re great at scaling up. They’re not good at
disrupting their own dominant design.


And, again, I’ll close with a point I think I started. The secret to the U.S.
innovation economy is the inventor entrepreneur. And the inventor
entrepreneur has, over and over, relied on the patent system to equalize

the playing field. And that’s where I would hope that policymakers that
are involved with the patent system and are involved with the antitrust
system, that that is a point that can be more deeply appreciated.

Mr. Iancu: Professor, thank you very much. Tremendous insights. And I look forward
to continuing the conversation.

Mr. Barnett: Thank you. Likewise.

Mr. Iancu: Thank you.

(END)
