Imec: A World-Leading 
Cooperative Research 
Center for Microelectronics
AUTHORS
Sujai Shivakumar
Charles Wessner
Thomas Howell
OCTOBER 2024
A Report of CSIS Renewing American Innovation

Imec: A World-Leading 
Cooperative Research 
Center for Microelectronics
AUTHORS
Sujai Shivakumar
Charles Wessner
Thomas Howell
OCTOBER 2024
A Report of CSIS Renewing American Innovation

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  II
About CSIS 
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research 
organization dedicated to advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding former 
U.S. senator Sam Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as 
president and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of 
values—nonpartisanship, independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, 
integrity and professionalism, and talent development. CSIS’s values work in concert toward the 
goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research, 
analysis, and recommendations. We organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media 
appearances that aim to increase the knowledge, awareness, and salience of policy issues with 
relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policymakers and the 
thinking of key influencers. We work toward a vision of a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be 
understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2024 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
Center for Strategic & International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
202-887-0200 | www.csis.org

Imec: A World-Leading Cooperative Research Center for Microelectronics  |  III
Acknowledgments
This report is made possible by general support to CSIS. No direct sponsorship contributed to 
this report.

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  IV
Contents
Introduction 1
Imec’s Origins 3
Business Model 5
Critical Bilateral Partnerships 12
Start-up Support and Investment Arms 15
International Partnerships and Footprint 18
Conclusion 20
About the Authors 21
Endnotes 23

Imec: A World-Leading Cooperative Research Center for Microelectronics  |  1
Introduction
I
nternational competition for the most advanced semiconductors has highlighted the 
importance of cooperative research institutes. These centers, while diverse in their 
memberships and specialties, serve a critical role as aggregators of research and development 
(R&D) resources across firms—as well as shared infrastructure for de-risking emerging technologies 
throughout the semiconductor value chain and for driving the chip industry’s uniquely rapid pace 
of innovation.
Located in the Flanders region of Belgium, imec is perhaps the foremost cooperative research 
organization for semiconductors, a status bolstered by the participation and support of the world’s 
top semiconductor firms in its programs, with the exception of major Chinese entities. 
Imec has pushed the concept of multinational, diverse research collaboration to achieve ambitious 
objectives. To this end, it works closely with other leading semiconductor research centers such as 
the Albany NanoTech Complex, the Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission (CEA)’s 
Leti lab in France, and now Japan’s Leading-Edge Semiconductor Technology Center. 
This research institute’s substantial physical assets, talented staff, reputation for neutrality, strong 
track record, and proven protocols make it ideally situated to advance leadership in semiconductor 
technology among like-minded countries. In fact, to a considerable degree, it is already performing 
this role. As such, the United States should collaborate closely with this research center in its efforts 
to regain technological leadership in chip manufacturing.

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  2
Imec holds major lessons for the development of the U.S. National Semiconductor Technology 
Center and its nonprofit purpose-built operator, Natcast. Imec’ s ability to attract and retain 
leading companies to cooperatively develop cutting-edge semiconductor technologies in a fiercely 
competitive and unforgiving industry represents an outstanding model for international cooperative 
research. The following analysis highlights the unique strengths and approach of this research 
institute in Leuven, Belgium.
Imec’s ability to attract and retain leading companies to 
cooperatively develop cutting-edge semiconductor technologies 
in a fiercely competitive and unforgiving industry represents an 
outstanding model for international cooperative research.

Imec: A World-Leading Cooperative Research Center for Microelectronics  |  3
Imec’s Origins
I
n 1982, the regional government of Flanders launched an “intense mobilisation of industrial 
and scientific actors for a ‘Third Industrial Revolution’” in the area.1 The most important 
expression of this effort was the government’s establishment of the Interuniversity Micro-
Electronics Center (imec) in Leuven in January 1984. Its mission was to promote microelectronics 
in Flanders through R&D projects with companies and universities that anticipated industry needs 
by 3–10 years.2 Research themes eventually came to include microelectronics, nanotechnology, 
information and communications technology, semiconductor packaging, photovoltaics, and chip-
design methods.
Imec was founded by Roger Van Overstraeten, a Flanders-born Stanford PhD graduate who 
returned to Belgium to pursue future-generation semiconductor technology with a group of 
colleagues at Catholic University Leuven (KU Leuven). His vision was to establish “an unparalleled 
research facility dedicated to microchip technology, ” which he pursued despite considerable 
skepticism at the time.3 There was widespread recognition in government circles that while 
Flanders often excelled in research, its ability to support its practical applications was often lacking. 
Focusing on this challenge, Van Overstraeten sought to “drag European microelectronics excellence 
out of the laboratories and into the factories. ”4
When imec was established, policymakers intended for it to focus entirely on support for the 
Flanders region in collaboration with regional universities and companies. Given the lack of 
critical mass in the microelectronics space within the region, this initial concept was not feasible.

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  4
Fortunately, imec’s leadership pivoted to a more international approach, establishing the 
organization as a neutral research center supporting companies and universities worldwide.5

Imec: A World-Leading Cooperative Research Center for Microelectronics  |  5
Business Model
M
ost major microelectronics R&D centers around the world are located in jurisdictions that 
have one or more large semiconductor companies and where, for political and economic 
reasons, the centers tend to support those local producers, whether directly or indirectly. 
Belgium has no large chip firms—but in building a global network of industry partners, this has 
worked to imec’s unique advantage. The center’s current CEO, Luc Van den hove, explained in 
2024 that because no one semiconductor company dominates imec’s strategy, the organization has 
been able to build a “Switzerland of semiconductors” reputation.6 
The center’s broad membership includes companies that often compete with each other but are 
confident that their intellectual property (IP) will be respected. They recognize the value added 
from cooperation on common problems and the advantages of sharing the costs of cutting-edge 
facilities and equipment.7 
The goal of neutrality has been reflected in practice. For example, in 2008, imec declared that it 
would not take part in any R&D projects organized under the auspices of the European Union’s 
Eureka initiative, claiming such programs often serve as “a form of support for national champions” 
and are thus inconsistent with imec’s practice of strictly neutral international collaboration.8 In 
subsequent years, imec did participate in Eureka programs but to a limited degree.9
Partnerships with Industry: The Central Focus
The principal focus of imec’s operations is joint R&D projects with industry partners to develop 
precompetitive technologies for applications in future generations of semiconductor products and

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  6
processes. According to a science and technology counselor for the Flemish government, “This joint 
collaboration model accelerates innovation, by pooling resources and alleviating the ever-increasing 
development costs of new technologies. ”10 
Reflecting its central position in advanced semiconductor manufacturing research, as of 2021 
imec has over 600 industry partners who contribute their own resources to joint projects, 
including their knowledge base, experts, funding, and materials. They may share precompetitive 
intellectual property or use imec’s fabrication services for their own proprietary research, including 
prototyping and low-volume manufacturing. Industry partners can sign up for individual imec 
projects and programs without committing to others—in contrast to the former U.S. chip research 
consortium Sematech, which required an all-or-nothing commitment from member companies.11 
Companies can also collaborate with imec bilaterally for private research, development, or services 
while securing their IP. For example, imec helped ASML fabricate high-quality sensor chips for their 
EUV lithography systems.12
Industry partners can also collaborate with imec to develop new research units and facilities within 
the consortium. In 2000, for example, imec and Philips Research (the R&D arm of Dutch chip 
and electronics firm Royal Philips Electronics) jointly created a permanent department within 
imec, with Philips signing onto all of imec’s process-oriented industrial programs and gaining the 
ability to use the center’s chip fabrication line for its own research on process technologies.13 In 
2003, Samsung, Intel, Infineon, Philips, and STMicroelectronics enabled imec to set up an R&D 
fab for 300-millimeter (mm) chips by joining imec as core partners in its sub-45-nanometer (nm) 
complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) program.14 And in 2010, imec and Intel entered 
into an agreement to establish a new lab dedicated to exascale-class supercomputers, including the 
development of tools and applications.15
Imec’s chip research strategy has two elements. The first, “More Moore, ” seeks to sustain the 
developmental path of established silicon-based technologies through incremental improvements, 
usually through scaling, to maintain Moore’s Law into ever-deeper extremes of miniaturization.16 On 
this front, imec has created the world’s largest ecosystem for CMOS technology, bringing together 
most of the world’s major chip foundries, fabless firms, tool and materials suppliers, electronic 
design automation firms, and application developers.17 CMOS is the chip technology currently 
used to produce most of the world’s integrated circuits, offering advantages such as low power 
consumption, simple structure, high noise tolerance, and strong temperature stability.18 In addition, 
imec’s longstanding commitment to developing extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography with Dutch 
chip toolmaker ASML has been instrumental in the industry’s ability to scale beyond the 14 nm node 
level (as discussed further below). 
Meanwhile, “More Than Moore” pursues innovation that could lead to the emergence of new micro- 
and nanoelectronics technologies and markets. Imec’s long-term assumption is that this branch of 
its research effort will eventually eclipse More Moore. Pursuant to More Than Moore, the center has 
explored specialties such as organic electronics, hybrid semiconductors, organic photovoltaics, and 
biomedical electronics. These projects often involve collaboration with imec’s Dutch affiliate, the 
Holst Center, which it cofounded in 2006.19

Imec: A World-Leading Cooperative Research Center for Microelectronics  |  7
Within the constellation of imec industry partners, a handful of companies are “core partners. ” The 
center’s management may identify research programs of interest, then reach out to interested firms 
from their pool of core partners and provide them the shared facilities to conduct collaborative 
research.20 In 2003, imec recruited several major chipmakers to pursue process technology for 45 
nm and smaller semiconductors—then the next generation of semiconductor technology.21 Core 
partner status meant that the firms involved could participate in all seven of the 45 nm programs 
that comprised imec’s platform at the time and would receive “certain advantages over companies 
that remain outside the core, ” according to then-CEO Gilbert Declerck.22
Substantial and Sustained Public Support
The imec research center was founded in 1984 with an initial investment of around $72 million by 
the government of Flanders.23 Although the regional government continued to make the annual 
contributions crucial for a sustainable research program, it set a target from the outset for imec to 
eventually receive 50 percent of its revenues from nongovernment sources, which it achieved in the 
mid-1990s and has exceeded in every subsequent year. In 2023, imec’s annual revenue totaled 941 
million euros: 75 percent came from industry partners, 16 percent from the regional government of 
Flanders, 6 percent from the European Union, and 3 percent from other government programs.24 
This long-term commitment by the regional government to support and grow the institution is one 
of the keys to imec’s success.
Although Flanders is a relatively small political jurisdiction with a population of about 6.8 million, 
its government wields substantial power to drive internal economic development and plays a 
strong role in supporting imec. A 2012 Japanese study observed that the “strength of the Flemish 
government’s authority in industrial development is equivalent to that of the Japanese federal 
government. ”25 This regional thrust comes as Belgium has shifted from a unitary state to a federal 
state in phases since the 1960s, with central government powers devolving progressively onto the 
regional governments of Dutch-speaking Flanders, French-speaking Wallonia, and the Brussels 
Capital Region, each with its own executive and parliament.26 Although the central government 
retains authority in areas such as foreign relations and national defense, regional authorities lead 
industrial development. Devolution gave the government of Flanders the autonomy to significantly 
increase its investments in innovation, enabling it to more than double outlays on R&D from what 
had been below-average levels relative to the European Union prior to devolution to far above the 
EU average by 1995.27
In a 2024 interview at CSIS, imec CEO Van den hove emphasized the importance of continued 
public funding despite its diminished percentage of total revenue: 
We believe that we’ve been able to realize a phenomenal growth over those 40 years. And 
this has been realized through a growing commitment from industry. But at the same time, 
this commitment from industry was leveraged on top of very strong and stable support 
from the local government. And this, we believe, is important because it allows us to invest 
in new programs which today are probably too early for industry to finance but allow us 
to make sure that we can develop a long-term strategy. . . . Our role is to kind of set the

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  8
roadmap for the next 10–20 years. So we have to pre-invest a lot in some of these [emerging 
technology areas].28
In addition, Flanders and the European Union have also made significant one-time contributions 
to imec for special projects. For instance, Flanders provided imec 35.7 million euros for a new 
research facility that allowed it, among other things, to build a machine to clean silicon plates of 
minute dust particles in 2004.29 In 2009, Flanders gave imec 35 million euros to help finance 75 
million euros that it used to construct a new 2,800-square-meter (0.7-acre) cleanroom to support 
research on 22 nm and smaller CMOS chips and on organic solar cells and biomedical electronics.30 
In 2012, Flanders indicated it would invest in the cost of building cleanroom facilities at imec to 
enable the pursuit of 450 mm wafer technology, estimated at 100 million euros.31 The project 
was shifted to expand the existing 300 mm facility, as the industry did not coalesce around 450 
mm technology.32
In 2016, imec added a second 4,000 square meter 300 mm cleanroom. This new cleanroom 
expansion (including building and equipment) entailed a total investment of more than 1 billion 
euros, one-tenth of which was supplied by the Flemish government. Importantly, more than 900 
million euros in investment were derived from joint R&D with more than 90 industrial partners 
from across the entire semiconductor industry.33 Imec’s semiconductor research cleanrooms now 
total more than 13,000 square meters (nearly 140,000 square feet).34
Most recently, it was announced in May 2024 that imec will receive 1.4 billion euros in combined 
funding from the European Chips Act and the Flanders government—complemented by 1.1 billion 
euros from industry partners—to extend its NanoIC pilot line, a leading technology platform for 
companies to explore new technologies before they are introduced into large-scale production. 
Aiming to accelerate commercialization of sub-2 nm semiconductor technologies, the NanoIC 
pilot line will support a broad range of industries—including automotive, telecommunications, 
and health—to develop products that leverage the latest chip innovations.35 This will include a 
new 4,000 square meter 300 mm Fab 4, bringing total cleanroom space to 17,000 square meters 
(182,000 square feet).36 These ambitious projects feed into what European Commission president 
Ursula von der Leyen has described as an “essential” role for imec in the context of the European 
Chips Act: 
The role imec plays in the European Union’s ambitions will be particularly significant. . . To 
be less dependent on East Asia, we need to scale up our production here in Europe: imec 
is essential for our economic security. For investors who need to research and test their 
innovations before moving to mass production, it is an important place.37 
While imec is strongly supported by Flanders, it enjoys operational autonomy. It is run by an 
executive board and a senior leadership team that plan and execute strategy. The center’s R&D 
targets are set forth in 5-year business plans that are reviewed by both the government of Flanders 
and technical advisory boards comprised of global experts in the various thematic areas in which 
imec is active.38 imec is further overseen by a board of directors, which has four members drawn 
from the faculty of Flemish universities, two from Flemish industry, two designated by the Ministry

Imec: A World-Leading Cooperative Research Center for Microelectronics  |  9
of Economic Affairs, and one picked by the Ministry of Education. In addition, university professors 
and industry researchers drawn from among core partners conduct a critical review twice a 
year of each research project and suggest actions the center could take.39 The relative autonomy 
of the imec leadership enables it to follow the technology—and indeed lead it—without undue 
political constraints.
The Leuven Technology Cluster 
Imec is the main hub of a local technology cluster, which reflects decades of investment by 
Flanders, local governments, the private sector, and imec itself. In addition to five excellent nearby 
research universities, Leuven hosts numerous other world-leading research entities.40
Applying the imec model to similar national efforts around the world has led critics to claim that 
subsidizing the research activities of multinational firms without a local footprint will not help 
the local economy. However, imec’s benefits to the Flemish region have been significant and 
measurable over the past four decades. Young company representatives doing research at imec 
are likely to move up in their own companies, then consider Flanders when later making decisions 
about where to locate research centers or other activities. Hundreds of PhD candidates pursuing 
their research at imec provide a growing talent pool with ties to the region. In addition, imec 
subcontracts many tasks to local companies, helping to strengthen the industrial ecosystem; some 
of these firms have gone on to become “very fast growers. ”41 An independent analysis of imec’s 
economic benefits to the region concluded in 2020 that for each euro of Flemish government 
investment, imec creates 7 euros of value added to the Belgian economy and 3.7 euros of return 
on the subsidy through taxes. Each million euros invested in imec creates 23 jobs at imec and 67 
elsewhere in the Belgian economy.42
Intellectual Property
Given its large pool of researchers and expertise, imec brings very substantial knowledge—some of 
it patented—to any research collaboration, known as “relevant background IP. ” Industry partners 
can pay a fee to join one or more of imec’s Industrial Affiliation Programs, and imec will share its 
background IP applicable to their particular research area. Imec holds the “foreground IP” that is 
developed during the collaboration and licenses it out to all industry partners who participated; this 
becomes part of its background IP for use in future collaborations.43
Industrial partners can take away as little or as much of the IP generated by the joint effort as they 
would like, with the terms being negotiated on a case-by-case basis, usually involving costs to the 
industrial partner, particularly for an exclusive license. These bilateral negotiations are overseen 
by imec lawyers and valuation experts. Imec may seek terms such as payment of the royalties on 
subsequent sales if the industry partner takes the technology to market.44

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  10
Infrastructure
From imec’s inception, companies and academic researchers have been attracted to its research 
partnerships because of its ability to make available the advanced equipment needed to pursue 
cutting-edge research. Imec benefits in this respect since partners “can provide tools, equipment 
and materials for free and that can be provided and tested by other partners when conducting 
R&D at the facility. ” The center also offers other forms of support, including design, prototyping, 
testing, and consulting services, which are particularly important for start-ups and small- to 
medium-sized enterprises.45
In an event at CSIS, imec CEO Van den hove observed that the center’s success is attributable to the 
fact that it has invested in the infrastructure needed to achieve its objectives: “Over those 40 years, we 
probably built out what is. . . the world’s most advanced, independent R&D pilot line. We’ve invested 
more than $5 billion in that facility. And it’s really run as one integrated facility, with a very strong 
focus on operational excellence so that we can deliver value in a very effective way to our partners. ”46 
Imec currently has 8,000 square meters (1.98 acres) of 300 mm cleanroom space and 5,200 
square meters (1.28 acres) of 200 mm cleanroom space. Its class 1,000 300 mm cleanroom has all 
the equipment needed to pursue sub-2 nm CMOS R&D, including advanced lithography based on 
ASML’s newest EUV equipment. It has a vast array of specialized labs pursuing silicon and organic 
photovoltaics, packaging and testing equipment, photonics, gallium-nitride processing, design 
methodology, biosensors, DNA research, imaging, and many other topics.47
Workforce: A Melting Pot
From about 70 employees at its inception, imec’s workforce has grown to over 5,500, with roughly 
10 percent holding PhDs.48 In November 2023, imec forecast that its workforce would add nearly 
2,000 new hires by 2035.49 Research staff are drawn from university partners in Belgium and many 
other countries, and staff are allowed to hold dual appointments at their institutions. An important 
strength of the model is that it allows industry partners to assign their own employees to work on 
site, which brings in cutting-edge, commercially relevant perspectives and the tacit knowledge 
garnered through familiarity with actual production.50
This inclusive approach results in imec having one of the most diverse workforces of any major 
microelectronics center in the world. As CEO Van den hove observed, “We’ve been attracting 
people from all over the world, close to 100 nationalities, and 5,500 of the most advanced, top-
notch researchers. Many of them have experience of more than twenty years either in imec or 
the industry. ”51 One Indian-Finnish employee at imec remarked that the staff is so multinational in 
character that “the Flemish culture does not prevail. . . . You can never see the difference between 
people’s national backgrounds. ”52

Imec: A World-Leading Cooperative Research Center for Microelectronics  |  11
An important strength of the model is that it allows industry 
partners to assign their own employees to work on site, which 
brings in cutting-edge, commercially relevant perspectives  
and the tacit knowledge garnered through familiarity with 
actual production.
Imec’s facilities are colocated with KU Leuven, and its CEOs have all been professors there.53 For 
instance, Luc Van den hove is a member of KU Leuven’s Faculty of Engineering Sciences and 
received his PhD in electrical engineering from the institution while conducting research at imec.54 
When the center was starting up, faculty from various Flemish universities—particularly a group 
of KU Leuven professors who wanted to pursue microprocessor research—served as experts to 
help build its knowledge base.55 This partnership has contributed to Thompson-Reuters rating 
KU Leuven as Europe’s most innovative university in recent years, while the university-based 
leadership has enabled imec to develop a global network of formal and informal relationships with 
other institutions of higher learning. At present, it has collaborations with over 200 universities and 
myriad “non-formal collaborations through a network of scientists, engineers and PhD students. ”56

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  12
Critical Bilateral 
Partnerships
ASML 
Imec’s costly, risky, but successful three-decade research partnership with the Dutch chip 
toolmaker ASML is an important illustration of its capabilities. This collaboration has created an 
ecosystem for proving, testing, and debugging newly developed ASML tools and integrating them 
into manufacturing lines.57 With imec’s support, ASML has produced technological breakthroughs 
such as the development of EUV lithography tools used to produce the chips needed to support 
cutting-edge applications, including artificial intelligence (AI).58 
Prior versions of photolithography for chips utilized deep ultraviolet (DUV) light, but shorter 
wavelengths were needed to continue to make circuit patterns smaller and advance Moore’s Law.59 
EUV uses light with a wavelength of 13.5 nm, which does not occur in nature but can be created by 
zapping drops of molten tin with a carbon dioxide laser until they become plasma. The light emitted 
by this process is collected and passed through a mask with the pattern of the circuitry on it, then 
the pattern is shrunk down to the size of a semiconductor die with a system of ultra-flat mirrors and 
projected onto a silicon wafer. This must all be done in a vacuum.60
Developing and refining this technology into workable lithography tools was a challenge so daunting 
that during the several-decade-long developmental effort, various observers declared that the 
process was a failure, would never work, or could not become reality in the reasonably foreseeable 
future.61 Nevertheless, ASML and imec persevered in a protracted, multi-billion-euro effort, a 
demonstration of how big R&D risks and a long-term focus sometimes pay off in spectacular fashion.

Imec: A World-Leading Cooperative Research Center for Microelectronics  |  13
ASML enjoys a monopoly on the manufacture of the world’s most advanced lithography equipment, 
EUV—representing a major strategic asset for Western powers in their technological competition 
with China. EUV lithography enables the high-volume production of chips with advanced AI 
applications, underpinning advances in a vast array of other critical technology areas that have the 
potential to shape the outcome of future conflicts. Many in the West have underestimated Chinese 
capabilities in adapting and improving complex technologies such as high-speed rail, aircraft, and 
telecommunications. Nonetheless, given the enormous complexity of EUV lithography, China is 
unlikely to possess a comparable capability for many years, especially given U.S. semiconductor 
export controls.
ASML and imec persevered in a protracted, multi-billion-euro 
effort, a demonstration of how big R&D risks and a long-term 
focus sometimes pay off in spectacular fashion. 
While other players made major contributions to the EUV effort—including Intel, IBM, the Taiwan 
Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC), and ASML’s German optics partner, Carl Zeiss—
imec’s role was crucial. Before the first EUV-based lithography tool was available, imec conducted 
EUV tests at Switzerland’s Paul Scherrer Institute and collaborated with six makers of photoresist. 
In 2006, imec received one of the first full-field EUV lithography tools, the Alpha Demo Tool—jointly 
created by engineers at ASML and the College of Nanotechnology, Science, and Engineering (CNSE) 
at the University of Albany, SUNY—so it could assess its commercial viability and identify operational 
challenges on pilot lines in a real factory environment. Since then, imec has worked with ASML to 
prove and test every subsequent generation of EUV tools.62
Summarizing imec’s “very close partnership” with ASML, CEO Luc Van den hove has said “ASML 
focuses on the machine. We develop the process. We develop the ecosystem around the machine. ”63 
This dynamic continues today. In June 2023, imec signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
with ASML to install and service its “full suite of advanced lithography and metrology equipment 
in the imec pilot line in Leuven, ” such as the new 0.55 and 0.33 numerical-aperture (NA) EUV 
machines.64 The high-NA lithography EXE-series machines enable much faster wafer throughput 
than the previous-generation NXE systems introduced in 2010, and can be used to produce 2 nm 
and below semiconductors.65 Imec has secured commitments of 750 million euros each from the 
European Union and the Flanders government to support this project.66
Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company
Over time, imec has come to engage deeply with TSMC.67 A core partner of imec since 2005, TSMC 
dispatched a researcher to Leuven in 2006 to work with the prototype Alpha Demo Tool and 
prepare the technology for high-volume manufacturing; after its work at imec, it eventually ordered 
a development EUV tool from ASML for delivery in 2013, concluding that the technology could be

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  14
refined and used successfully.68 TSMC subsequently deployed its EUV machines in high-volume 
manufacturing in 2019 for use in its N7+ process.69 
In the meantime, the imec-TSMC relationship became more symbiotic. One 2010 partnership 
between them was designed to resolve a chicken-and-egg conundrum facing the Taiwanese 
foundry. TSMC could not safely develop manufacturing processes for certain application-specific 
technologies until it was sure that volume demand would exist, but volume demand would not 
emerge until the process existed. To break the impasse, imec promised to pass on certain new 
technologies to TSMC, which would ramp up their production once imec had demonstrated 
their viability.70
Rapidus
Reflecting its international approach, in late 2022 imec entered into a collaboration with Rapidus, 
a collective of eight Japanese companies that aims to restore an internationally competitive chip 
industry in Japan.71 In 2023, the conglomerate became one of imec’s core partners, gaining access 
to its “advanced technologies, system solutions, state-of-the-art 300 mm pilot line, and extensive 
partner network. ”72 This cooperation complements the partnership at SUNY-Albany’s CNSE 
between IBM and Rapidus, which hopes to gain the ability to manufacture 2 nm chips. The Japanese 
government is committed to this ambitious effort, as reflected in its announcement in April 2024 
that it would contribute $3.9 billion to Rapidus.73

Imec: A World-Leading Cooperative Research Center for Microelectronics  |  15
Start-up Support and 
Investment Arms
T
oday, over 300 high-tech companies are now located in Leuven, many of which are spinoffs 
from KU Leuven and imec. This situation underscores imec’s dynamic effects on the 
region (in the view of Chairman Antoon de Proft) and highlights how imec not only serves 
established high-tech companies but also creates new firms in significant numbers.74 
Notably, imec conducts venturing activities that focus on “deep tech”—fundamental technologies 
that require an extended phase of R&D to commercialize but promise major payoffs, transforming 
“disruptive technologies into disruptive companies. ”75 Imec encourages this dynamic in several 
ways: through spinoffs led by its own researchers; through its technology accelerator, imec.istart; 
and through venture capital investments in its independently managed imec.xpand fund.76
Spinoffs
In the view of imec’s director of venture development, Olivier Rousseaux, spinoffs in particular 
represent a way for imec to help commercialize IP it has developed and capture “a share of the 
upside potential of our innovation. ” He suggests this activity could be expanded further, noting, 
“Today, imec gets paid typical research project fees for innovation that goes into the market and 
generates billions of Euros. We make good money, but peanuts compared to what we could make. ”77 
These spinoff ventures continue to grow. Imec’s website lists 72 companies spun off by the 
consortium between 1986 and 2023, most of which are still operating or have been acquired by 
other firms. Another 68 companies were spun off from iMinds before that organization merged with 
imec in 2016.78 As one would expect with high-tech start-ups, a few of these new companies have

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  16
been liquidated, but the majority have survived and thrived. This is in no small part because imec 
contributes the deep-tech expertise of over 5,000 “highly skilled and dedicated researchers”; access 
to exceptional facilities, particularly cleanroom space and 3.5 billion euros worth of equipment; and 
support through a vibrant regional ecosystem of established partners, “which creates opportunities 
for young spinoffs to collaborate. ”79
The Imec.istart Accelerator
The 12 to 18-month imec.istart program complements imec’s venture activity. Launched in 2011, 
imec.istart is a digital technology business accelerator for supporting start-ups that present a 
working proof of concept, providing access to imec facilities, early-stage financing, mentoring, free 
office space, and introductions to tech communities, among other benefits.80 Participation in imec.
istart is limited to companies that are less than two years old, based in Belgium, and focus on digital 
products or nanotechnologies.81
Imec.istart invests a minimum of 100,000 euros in pre-seed funding for each selected start-up, split 
50-50 between equity and a convertible loan, and may choose to award an additional 150,000 euros 
at its discretion once the start-up is “up-and-running. ” The initial 100,000 euros can be used for 
any business costs, but only up to 30,000 of it can be spent on product development, and none of it 
on salaries.82
In January 2024, imec.istart announced the launch of a new, independently managed future fund 
to enable longer-term and larger-scale investments in promising imec.istart start-ups beyond the 
initial 100,000 euros of seed funding. The investments are expected to average 1 million euros per 
qualifying start-up, totaling an estimated 25 million euros over the first five years. Investors include 
imec, PMV (the Flanders government’s wholly owned investment fund), ING Belgium, and private 
parties such as angel investors and the founders of imec.istart alumni companies.83 
About two-thirds of imec.istart’s portfolio consists of software firms, which have the advantage of 
lower capital costs than hardware developers and can go to market more quickly, making them 
much more attractive to investors. Some of the accelerator’s notable successes include the Ghent-
based food-delivery company Deliverect, data companies Datacamp and PieSync, and medical-
software developer Ugentec.84 Imec.istart now has a portfolio of over 300 start-ups, and in 2023 UBI 
Global named it the world’s top business incubator linked to a university.85
Venture Investment: Imec.xpand
Established in 2017, imec.xpand operates as a venture capital fund, investing in nanotechnology 
hardware start-ups and spinoffs in which “imec knowledge, expertise and infrastructure will be 
the differentiating factor for success. ”86 The fund is independently managed and cofinanced by 
imec, government entities, and private firms (some of which are imec members), who together 
contributed 120 million euros in its first round of investment.87 In May 2024, imec.xpand announced 
the launch of a second, 300-million-euro fund for “accelerating the growth of transformative 
semiconductor and nanotechnology innovations. ”88 According to imec, imec.xpand has invested

Imec: A World-Leading Cooperative Research Center for Microelectronics  |  17
in 23 companies to date—including two unicorns—which have collectively raised close to 1.5 billion 
euros in funding.89

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  18
International 
Partnerships and 
Footprint
Imec in the United States
In addition to its research partnerships with many U.S. firms, imec operates three centers 
of excellence in the United States at sites where it can collaborate easily with local research 
universities. Notable centers and partnerships include:90
  ▪ imec USA–Florida, located near Orlando, which focuses on cryogenic and superconducting 
computing, as well as advanced semiconductor packaging;
  ▪ imec USA–Berkeley, which focuses on innovative AI architectures and the co-optimization 
(redesigning) of system technology;
  ▪ imec USA–San José, which provides design services, multi-project wafer runs, and 
application-specific integrated circuit development;
  ▪ joint research by imec and Purdue University to develop and demonstrate novel 
semiconductor materials, laying the foundation for “the next wave of high-performance 
compute and packaging materials” and aiming to make them more sustainable; and
  ▪ an MoU signed by imec, the University of Michigan, Washtenaw Community College, General 
Motors, the semiconductor firm KLA, and the Michigan Economic Development Corporation 
to pursue semiconductor technologies for the automotive industry.
Imec has proposed further partnerships with U.S. research organizations and companies to 
advance the competitiveness and self-sufficiency of semiconductor production in the two regions. 
Along with partners, imec has expressed its willingness to help CHIPS Act entities ramp up U.S.

Imec: A World-Leading Cooperative Research Center for Microelectronics  |  19
semiconductor programs. As CEO Van den hove has pointed out, the center is well-positioned to 
expand upon its ties with major U.S. chipmaking firms by providing access to its expertise, IP, and 
other complementary operational capabilities. Imec also hopes to work with the newly established 
U.S. National Semiconductor Technology Center on earlier-stage technology research that may take 
seven to ten years before going to market and has proposed assigning imec engineers to the Albany 
NanoTech Complex.91
Europe’s PREVAIL Consortium
In late 2022, Europe’s four leading public research organizations—imec, France’s CEA-Leti, 
Germany’s Fraunhofer Gesellschaft, and Finland’s Technical Research Center (VTT)—established a 
consortium to coordinate their respective 300 mm research facilities to design, evaluate, test, and 
fabricate the advanced chips needed to enable artificial intelligence.92
The consortium, the Partnership for Realization and Validation of AI-hardware Leadership 
(PREVAIL), will initially operate for 42 months and has a budget of 156 million euros—half of which 
is coming from the European Union and half from the host governments of the four organizations 
involved. Most of this budget (86 percent) is allocated to capital outlays, and only 6 percent funds 
the manufacture of demonstration circuits. By February 2024, the consortium announced it was 
finishing up installing cleanroom tools and was almost ready to design and test prototypes from 
across Europe.93 The aim is for the consortium to open up their new, shared pilot lines to smaller 
chipmakers, start-ups, and research institutions by May 2026, allowing them to manufacture, 
assemble, and test AI-embedded devices.94 
Imec Research Center in Spain
In March 2024, imec, the Spanish government, and the regional government of Andalusia signed 
an MoU to establish a public-private partnership to establish a 300 mm R&D facility in Málaga 
called Fab 5. Imec will manage operations, provide the necessary technology and operations, and 
grant access to its global partner network. The two government parties have agreed to finance the 
construction of Fab 5, including equipment for a pilot line, and will provide additional long-term 
support for its operation. However, as the parties are reportedly still negotiating on the level of 
public support, there is no timetable or budget available yet. Complementing the existing imec fab 
in Leuven, which is focusing on CMOS and sub-1 nm fabrication, the Málaga fab will concentrate on 
“process developments and the introduction of materials that are difficult to combine with standard 
CMOS processes, ” as well as R&D of devices with applications to healthcare, photonics, sensing, and 
augmented and virtual reality.95

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  20
Conclusion
A
s one of the world’s premier cooperative research institutions, imec has made remarkable 
contributions to today’s semiconductor ecosystem. These contributions are reflected 
most clearly in the continued active participation of major chip manufacturers, system 
companies, and equipment, materials, and design software suppliers in imec programs, as 
well as the sustained support of the Flanders regional authorities. In addition to its outstanding 
research facilities and staff, the flexibility of the imec structure—allowing for different degrees of 
cooperation—and the independence of its leadership have made it a central node in the global 
semiconductor supply chain. Critically, the center is a major source of the next-generation 
manufacturing technologies needed to keep the Western chip industry continuing along its rapid 
trajectory, with all the economic and social benefits that entails. 
For the United States, expanded collaboration with imec is an opportunity to accelerate the 
progress of U.S. semiconductor research programs, strengthen the transatlantic alliance, and 
minimize needlessly duplicative, costly investments in semiconductor research programs and 
infrastructure.

Imec: A World-Leading Cooperative Research Center for Microelectronics  |  21
About the Authors
Sujai Shivakumar directs the Renewing American Innovation (RAI) program at the Center for 
Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), where he also serves as a senior fellow. Dr. Shivakumar 
brings over two decades of experience in policy studies related to U.S. competitiveness and 
innovation. Previously, he directed the Innovation Policy Forum at the National Academies of 
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine and led major studies of U.S. policies supporting advanced 
manufacturing, small business growth, workforce development, and entrepreneurship. He was 
also a lead contributor to a seminal National Academies study of strategies adopted by U.S. states 
and regions to foster entrepreneurship, drive technology transfer, and encourage regional high-
tech ecosystems. He also helped prepare National Academy of Public Administration studies on 
laboratory technology transfer and the management of space situational awareness. Reflecting 
his expertise in innovation policy, Dr. Shivakumar has testified before the Senate Committee 
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and has been quoted in leading publications such 
as the Financial Times and the Wall Street Journal. His academic background includes a PhD in 
economics from George Mason University and service as an Earhart Foundation scholar at the 
Ostrom Workshop at Indiana University Bloomington, where he authored The Constitution of 
Development (Palgrave Macmillan, 2005) and coauthored with Nobel Laureate Elinor Ostrom The 
Samaritan’s Dilemma: The Political Economy of Development Aid (Oxford University Press, 2005). 
During his tenure at the National Academies, he contributed to over 50 assessments of U.S. and 
foreign innovation programs.
Charles Wessner is currently an adjunct professor at Georgetown University, where he teaches 
global innovation policy. He is active as a speaker, researcher, and writer with a global lens on 
innovation policy and frequently advises technology agencies, universities, and governments on 
effective innovation policies. He served for two decades at the National Academy of Sciences, where 
he achieved the distinguished position of National Academies scholar. He founded and directed the 
National Academies Technology, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship Program and its Innovation 
Forum and directed research addressing the importance of the semiconductor industry for 
innovation and national security. In collaboration with Gordon Moore of Intel and Sematech CEO 
William Spencer, he produced a series of influential reports, including Securing the Future: Regional 
and National Programs to Support the Semiconductor Industry (National Academies Press, 2003) 
and Innovative Flanders: Innovation Policies for the 21st Century (National Academies Press, 2008), 
which reviewed the role of imec. His most recent publication, Regional Renaissance: How New York’s 
Capital Region Became a Nanotechnology Powerhouse (Springer Nature, 2020) documents how state 
and private-sector investments in universities, institutions, and infrastructure created a vibrant 
semiconductor cluster that drove regional growth. He is also a leading U.S. expert on Sematech, the 
U.S. semiconductor consortium; the Manufacturing Extension Partnership; and the Small Business 
Innovation Research (SBIR) program, which provides awards to promising small businesses and 
start-ups. Reflecting his commitment to transatlantic cooperation, he was awarded the Order of

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  22
Merit by the president of France. Reflecting his expertise in global innovation policy, he closely 
cooperates with the director of CSIS Renewing American Innovation.
Thomas Howell is an international trade attorney (currently in solo practice) serving as a 
consultant to CSIS Renewing American Innovation. During the course of his 40-plus year legal 
career, he has represented U.S.-based semiconductor companies and organizations in matters such 
as the U.S.-Japan trade disputes and litigation of the 1980s, the formation of Sematech in 1986–87, 
trade disputes with China (including the first WTO dispute settlement challenge to that country in 
2003), and numerous other public policy initiatives. He served as a member of the Defense Science 
Board on Secure Microchip Supply in 2004. He has also represented U.S.-based industries in trade 
disputes and litigation in telecommunications equipment, soda ash, photographic film and paper, 
flat-rolled steel, and renewable energy equipment. In conjunction with his legal work, he developed 
a specialization in field research in Asia and Europe to produce analytic studies for clients. His 
subjects include industrial, research, and science and innovation policies outside the United States 
and foreign market barriers to U.S. exports and investment. The National Academy of Sciences 
has commissioned and published many of his works, and he has contributed to the academy as a 
contract writer/researcher producing numerous peer-reviewed chapters and book-length studies. 
He has published numerous articles and books, the most recent of which was co-authored with 
Charles Wessner, Regional Renaissance: How New York’s Capital Region Became a Nanotechnology 
Powerhouse (Springer Nature, 2020). He is a graduate of Harvard College (1971) and the Boston 
University School of Law (1977).

Imec: A World-Leading Cooperative Research Center for Microelectronics  |  23
Endnotes
1 Jan Larosse, “The Evolution of Innovation Policy and the Emergence of a ‘New Economy’ in Flanders, ” 
in Government of Belgium, Belgian Report on Science, Technology and Innovation 2001: The Belgian 
Innovation System, Lessons and Challenges, Volume II, ed. Michele Cincera and Bart Clarysse (Brussels: 
Belgian Federal Office for Scientific, Technical and Cultural Affairs, 2002), 43, https://meri.belspo.be/
site/docs/publications/BRISTI_2001%20vol2%20EN.pdf.
2 Kumar Priyadarshi, “How imec Made ASML the Biggest Company in Europe?, ” Techovedas, August 21, 
2023, https://techovedas.com/imec-made-asml-the-biggest-company-in-europe/.
3 “Extremely Small, Profoundly Big: imec’s Forty-Year Microchip Odyssey, ” imec, January 16, 2024, https://
www.imec-int.com/en/articles/extremely-small-profoundly-big-imecs-forty-year-microchip-odyssey.
4 Electronics Weekly, “Roger van Overstraeten: A High-Tech Visionary, ” Electronics Weekly, May 12, 1999, 
https://www.electronicsweekly.com/news/archived/resources-archived/roger-van-overstraeten-a-high-
tech-visionary-1999-05/.
5 Vanessa Peña et al., Lessons Learned from Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) and Options to Establish a 
New Microelectronics PPP (Washington, D.C.: Institute for Defense Analyses, 2021), H-6, https://apps.dtic.
mil/sti/trecms/pdf/AD1200224.pdf.
6 Luc Van den hove and Charles Wessner, “Understanding imec: The Global Center for Cooperative 
Research in Semiconductors, ” CSIS, March 19, 2024, https://www.csis.org/analysis/understanding-imec-
global-center-cooperative-research-semiconductors.
7 Ibid.
8 Peter Clarke, “imec Rejects Participation in Eureka Research Programs, ” EE Times, October 20, 2008, 
https://www.eetimes.com/imec-rejects-participation-in-eureka-research-programs/.

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  24
9 From imec executive vice president, Leuven, Belgium.
10 Jan Wauters, “Government Support for the Microchip Industry – a Perspective from Flanders, ” Silicon 
Semiconductor, May 26, 2023, https://siliconsemiconductor.net/article/116804/Government_support_for_
the_microchip_industry_-_a_perspective_from_Flanders.
11 Peña et al., Lessons Learned, H-5, H-6, L-6.
12 “Imec Produces High-Quality EUV Sensors for ASML’s Next-Generation Lithography Tools, ” Photonics 
Online, October 10, 2011, https://www.photonicsonline.com/doc/imec-produces-high-quality-euv-
sensors-for-0001.
13 Peter Clarke, “Philips Research to Cozy up with imec on Chip Programs, ” EE Times, January 21, 2000, 
https://www.eetimes.com/philips-research-to-cozy-up-with-imec-on-chip-programs/.
14 David Lammers, “Has imec Built a Better Co-Op?, ” EE Times, October 20, 2003, https://www.eetimes.
com/has-imec-built-a-better-co-op-2/.
15 Rick Merritt, “Video: imec Expands Fab, Strikes Lab Deal with Intel, ” EE Times, June 8, 2010, https://
www.eetimes.com/video-imec-expands-fab-strikes-lab-deal-with-intel/.
16 National Research Council, The Flexible Electronics Opportunity, ed. Donald Siegel and Sujai Shivakumar 
(Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2014), 126, https://nap.nationalacademies.org/
catalog/18812/the-flexible-electronics-opportunity.
17 “CMOS Technology: Advanced and Beyond, ” imec, accessed June 20, 2024, https://www.imec-int.com/
en/expertise/cmos-advanced.
18 Yizhe Liu, “Advantages of CMOS Technology in Very Large Scale Integrated Circuits, ” AIEE ’21: 
Proceedings of the 2021 2nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Electronics Engineering 
( July 30, 2021): 82–88, https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3460268.3460280.
19 National Research Council, The Flexible Electronics Opportunity, 126–28.
20 Lammers, “Has IMEC Built a Better Co-Op?. ” 
21 Semiconductor Digest, “Big chip makers join IMEC research platform, ” October 13, 2003, https://sst.
semiconductor-digest.com/2003/10/big-chip-makers-join-imec-research-platform/.
22 Lammers, “Has IMEC Built a Better Co-Op?. ” 
23 Peña et al., Lessons Learned, H-1.
24 Imec, “imec: Contributing to U.S. Leadership on Chip R&D, ” presentation to CSIS, Washington, D.C., 
February 2023.
25 Keiichiro Suenaga, “The Role of Local Government in an Era of Open Innovation: An Analysis Based 
on the Example of a Flemish Government-Funded NPO, ” 地方自治研究 [Journal of Urban Management 
and Local Government Research] 27, no. 2 (August 2012): 1–10, https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/230775968_The_Role_of_Local_Government_in_an_Era_of_Open_Innovation_An_analysis_
based_on_the_example_of_a_Flemish_government-funded_NPO.
26 Wilfried Swenden, “Belgian Federalism Basic Institutional Features and Potential as a Model for the 
European Union, ” paper presented at “Governing Together in the New Europe, ” Cambridge, UK: April 
12, 2003, https://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/default/files/public/Research/Europe/swenden.pdf.
27 Fientje Moerman, “Keynote Address, ” in National Research Council, Innovative Flanders: Innovation 
Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a Symposium, ed. Charles W. Wessner (Washington, D.C.: National 
Academies Press, 2008), 58, https://nap.nationalacademies.org/catalog/12092/innovative-flanders-

Imec: A World-Leading Cooperative Research Center for Microelectronics  |  25
innovation-policies-for-the-21st-century-report-of.
28 Van den hove and Wessner, “Understanding imec. ”
29 Arnoud Veilbrief, “Vlaamse high tech verlekkert” [Flemish High Tech Is Tempting], NRC Handelsblad, 
April 8, 2004, https://www-nrc-nl.translate.goog/nieuws/2004/04/08/vlaamse-high-tech-verlekkert-
7681473-a1170836?_x_tr_sl=nl&_x_tr_tl=en&_x_tr_hl=en&_x_tr_pto=sc.
30 Peter Clarke, “imec Expands Clean Rooms and Research, Creates 300 Jobs, ” EE Times, April 7, 2009, 
https://www.eetimes.com/imec-expands-clean-rooms-and-research-creates-300-jobs/.
31 Peter Clarke, “Flemish Government Promises imec Cash for 450-mm Fab, ” EE Times, July 9, 2012, https://
www.eetimes.com/flemish-government-promises-imec-cash-for-450-mm-fab/.
32 From imec executive vice president, Leuven, Belgium.
33 Cleanroom Technology, “Imec opens new cleanroom serving the semiconductor industry, ” March 
14, 2016, https://cleanroomtechnology.com/imec-opens-new-cleanroom-serving-the-semiconductor-
industry-116523.
34 “Infrastructure: semiconductor cleanrooms and state-of-the-art labs, ” imec, https://www.imec-int.com/
en/infrastructure.
35 Imec, “Crucial Role for imec in EU Chips Act, ” press release, May 21, 2024, https://www.imec-int.com/
en/press/crucial-role-imec-eu-chips-act.
36 From imec executive vice president, Leuven, Belgium.
37 Belga News Agency, “Leuven’s imec ‘Essential’ to Achieve EU Microchip Ambitions, ” Belga News 
Agency, July 7, 2023, https://www.belganewsagency.eu/leuvens-imec-essential-to-achieve-eu-microchip-
ambitions; and Belga News Agency, “Research Centre imec Expects to Hire 2,000 New Employees by 
2035, ” Belga News Agency, November 23, 2023, https://www.belganewsagency.eu/research-centre-imec-
expects-to-hire-nearly-2000-new-employees-by-2035.
38 Peña et al., Lessons Learned, H-6, H-7.
39 Suenaga, “Role of Local Government. ”
40 “High Tech in the Leuven Innovation Region, ” Leuven MindGate, accessed June 20, 2024, https://www.
leuvenmindgate.be/about-the-leuven-innovation-region/high-tech.
41 National Research Council, Innovative Flanders: Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report 
of a Symposium, Session 3 (Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2008), https://nap.
nationalacademies.org/read/12092/chapter/8#73. 
42 Miriam Van Hoed, Valentijn Bilsen, Isabelle De Voldere, and Martina Fraioli, “Review of impact 
assessment studies of RTOs, ” European Association of Research and Technology and Idea Consult, 
October 12, 2022, https://www.earto.eu/wp-content/uploads/EARTO-IDEA-Review-of-Impact-
Assessment-Studies-of-RTOs-Final.pdf.
43 Peña et al., Lessons Learned, H-15.
44 Ibid., H-16.
45 Ibid., H-4, H-12.
46 Van den hove and Wessner, “Understanding imec. ”
47 “Infrastructure: Semiconductor Cleanrooms and State-of-the-Art Labs, ” imec, accessed June 20, 2024, 
https://www.imec-int.com/en/infrastructure.

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  26
48 Imec, “Contributing to U.S. Leadership. ”
49 Belga News Agency, “Leuven’s imec Research Centre Targets 1950 New Hires by 2035, ” The Brussels 
Times, November 23, 2023, https://www.brusselstimes.com/810447/leuvens-imec-research-centre-
targets-1950-new-hires-by-2035.
50 Peña et al., Lessons Learned, H-7.
51 Van den hove and Wessner, “Understanding imec. ”
52 “The Fairy Tale Bubble: Kaustuv’s Take on the Cultural Diversity at imec, ” imec, March 22, 2024, https://
www.imec-int.com/en/articles/fairy-tale-bubble-kaustuvs-take-cultural-diversity-imec.
53 Suenaga, “Role of Local Government. ”
54 “Luc Van den hove, ” and& Leuven, accessed August 24, 2024, https://2018.andleuven.com/en/bio/luc-
van-den-hove.html.
55 Peña et al., Lessons Learned, H-4.
56 Wauters, “Government Support for the Microchip Industry. ”
57 Hanne Degans, “imec and ASML Enter Next Stage of EUVL Collaboration, ” imec, October 22, 2018, 
https://www.imec-int.com/en/articles/imec-and-asml-enter-next-stage-of-euv-lithography-collaboration.
58 “EUV Lithography Systems, ” ASML, accessed August 24, 2024, https://www.asml.com/en/products/euv-
lithography-systems.
59 Sander Hofman, “How Immersion Lithography Saved Moore’s Law, ” ASML, August 2, 2023, https://www.
asml.com/en/news/stories/2023/how-immersion-lithography-saved-moores-law. 
60 Mike Murphy, “Why We Need EUV Lithography for the Future of Chips, ” IBM, June 22, 2023, https://
research.ibm.com/blog/what-is-euv-lithography.
61 Paul McLellan, “EUV Will Never Happen, ” SemiWiki, May 23, 2014, https://semiwiki.com/
lithography/3488-euv-will-never-happen/.
62 Priyadarshi, “How imec Made ASML. ”
63 Van den hove and Wessner, “Understanding imec. ”
64 Nick Flaherty, “imec, ASML Team for Pilot Line for Sub-1nm Development, ” EE News Europe, June 28, 
2023, https://www.eenewseurope.com/en/imec-asml-team-for-pilot-line-for-sub-1nm-development/.
65 Christine Middleton, “5 Things You Should Know about High NA EUV Lithography, ” ASML, January 25, 
2024, https://www.asml.com/en/news/stories/2024/5-things-high-na-euv.
66 Peter Clarke, “imec to Receive €1.5 Billion for Clean Room Expansion, ” EE News Europe, July 10, 2023, 
https://www.eenewseurope.com/en/imec-to-receive-e1-5-billion-for-clean-room-expansion/.
67 Peter Clarke, “imec Appoints Former TSMC Boss to Business Role, ” EE Times, May 4, 2010, https://www.
eetimes.com/imec-appoints-former-tsmc-boss-to-business-role/.
68 Anthony Yen, “Developing EUV Lithography for High-Volume Manufacturing—A Personal Journey, ” IEEE 
Electron Devices Society Newsletter 28, no. 2 (April 2021), https://www.ieee.org/ns/periodicals/EDS/EDS-
APRIL-2021-HTML-V2/index.html.
69 TrendForce, “Decipher TSMC’s Calm Take on High-NA EUV Lithography Machines: Who May Have 
the Last Laugh in the Angstrom Era?” TrendForce, May 25, 2024, https://www.trendforce.com/
news/2024/05/25/news-decipher-tsmcs-calm-take-on-high-na-euv-lithography-machines-who-may-have-

Imec: A World-Leading Cooperative Research Center for Microelectronics  |  27
the-last-laugh-in-the-angstrom-era/.
70 Peter Clarke, “imec Forms ‘More-than-CMOS’ Alliance with TSMC, ” EE Times, May 10, 2010, https://www.
eetimes.com/imec-forms-more-than-cmos-alliance-with-tsmc/.
71 Sujai Shivakumar, Charles Wessner, and Thomas Howell, Japan Seeks to Revitalize Its Semiconductor 
Industry (Washington, D.C.: CSIS, August 2023),  https://www.csis.org/analysis/japan-seeks-revitalize-its-
semiconductor-industry.
72 Peter Clarke, “Japan’s 2nm Hope Rapidus, Joins imec’s ‘Core’ Research Program, ” EE News Europe, 
April 4, 2023, https://www.eenewseurope.com/en/japans-2nm-hope-rapidus-joins-imecs-core-research-
program/.
73 Alan Patterson, “Japan Approves $3.9 Billion Subsidy for Rapidus, ” EE Times, April 4, 2024, https://www.
eetimes.com/japan-approves-3-9-billion-subsidy-for-rapidus/.
74 National Research Council, Innovative Flanders.
75 Pat Brans, “Helping Small Deep Tech Companies Become Giants in Belgium, ” Computer Weekly, June 14, 
2023, https://www.computerweekly.com/feature/Helping-small-deep-tech-companies-become-giants-in-
Belgium.
76 “Venturing, ” imec, accessed August 24, 2024, https://www.imec-int.com/en/what-we-offer/venturing.
77 Brans, “Helping Small Deep Tech Companies. ”
78 “imec Spin-offs, ” imec, accessed August 24, 2024, https://www.imec-int.com/en/spin-offs.
79 Brans, “Helping Small Deep Tech Companies. ”
80 “Accelerator Program, ” imec.istart, accessed August 24, 2024, https://www.imecistart.com/en/our-
program.
81 “Apply, ” imec.istart, accessed August 24, 2024, https://www.imecistart.com/en/apply.
82 “Frequently Asked Questions, ” imec.istart, accessed August 24, 2024, https://www.imecistart.com/en/
faq?current_faq=funding.
83 Pieter Van Nuffel, Ruth Janssens, and Kris Vandenberk, “Nieuw investeringsfonds helpt beloftevolle 
start-ups sneller doorgroeien” [New investment fund helps promising start-ups grow faster], imec, 
January 30, 2024, https://www.imec.be/nl/press/nieuw-investeringsfonds-helpt-beloftevolle-start-ups-
sneller-doorgroeien.
84 Wim De Preter, “Nieuw Fonds van 25 Miljoen Voor Start-Upbegeleider Imec” [New 25 million fund 
for start-up coach imec], De Tijd, January 29, 2024, https://www.tijd.be/ondernemen/management-
ondernemerschap/nieuw-fonds-van-25-miljoen-voor-start-upbegeleider-imec/10522694.html.
85 Jade Liu, “imec Ranked Number One Start-up Accelerator by UBI Global, ” imec, May 16, 2023, https://
www.imec-int.com/en/press/imec-ranked-number-one-start-accelerator-ubi-global.
86 “imec.xpand, ” imec, accessed August 24, 2024, https://www.imec-int.com/en/xpand.
87 Peter Clarke, “imec Creates VC Fund, Targets €100 Million, ” EE News Europe, June 26, 2017, https://
www.eenewseurope.com/en/imec-creates-vc-fund-targets-e100-million/.
88 imec, “imec.xpand Launches EUR 300M Fund amid Global Race for Semiconductor Supremacy, ” press 
release, May 2, 2024, https://www.imec-int.com/en/press/imecxpand-launches-eur-300m-fund-amid-
global-race-semiconductor-supremacy.
89 Ibid.

Shivakumar, Wessner, and Howell  |  28
90 “imec USA, ” imec, accessed June 20, 2024, https://www.imec-int.com/en/usa.
91 Luc Van den hove et al., “Enhancing the Regional Impact of the CHIPS and Science Act, ” event 
at CSIS, May 3, 2023, transcript available at https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-
public/2023-05/230503_Vandenhove_Building_Ecosystems.pdf?VersionId=jj_qbDks_hGqRbin1BSffZNh_
cw9ldQx.
92 “A Multi-Hub Test and Experimentation Facility for Edge AI Hardware, ” PREVAIL, accessed June 20, 
2024, https://prevail-project.eu/.
93 Peter Clarke, “Big Four Research Institutes Partner to Make European Edge AI, ” EE News Europe, 
February 27, 2024, https://www.eenewseurope.com/en/big-four-research-institutes-partner-to-make-
european-edge-ai/. 
94 Ridha Loukil, “L’Europe s’équipe pour faciliter le prototypage de puces d’IA embarquée” [Europe 
equips itself to facilitate the prototyping of embedded AI chips], L ’Usine Nouvelle, March 7, 2024, 
https://www.usinenouvelle.com/article/l-europe-s-equipe-pour-faciliter-le-prototypage-de-puces-d-ia-
embarquee.N2209563.
95 Peter Clarke, “Future of imec’s Spanish R&D Fab Hinges on Government Support, ” EE News Europe, 
March 15, 2024, https://www.eenewseurope.com/en/future-of-imecs-spanish-rd-fab-hinges-on-
government-support/.

COVER PHOTO JOSEP LAGO/AFP VIA GETTY IMAGES
1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
202 887 0200 | www.csis.org
