
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
P olicy Br ief
June 2022
Sust aining and
Gr o wing t he U .S.
Semiconduct or
Adv ant age:
A Pr imer
Aut hor
Ow en J. Daniels
W ill Hunt

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 1
Introduction
The United States and several allies and partners presently enjoy an advantage over
China in collectively producing the advanced semiconductors necessary for artificial
intelligence (AI) and other leading-edge computing technologies. This advantage
stems from their tight control over many parts of the semiconductor supply chain,
including over design and advanced inputs to production like the semiconductor
manufacturing equipment (SME) necessary for advanced chips, and it has promoted
comparatively safe and ethical technology development. Yet the complexities of the
global semiconductor industry do not guarantee a future edge for the United States
and other democratic chipmaking leaders amid strategic competition with China.
Despite its advantages in research, equipment, design software, and intellectual
property (IP), the United States lacks onshore semiconductor fabrication facilities (fabs)
that covert these and other inputs into leading-edge chips. This reality could
undermine the country’s chip access and its leading role in advanced semiconductor
supply chains. The United States overwhelmingly depends on Taiwanese and South
Korean manufacturers for leading-edge logic chip imports, exposing its access to
geopolitical risk. Meanwhile, China hopes to lessen its long-term dependence on
foreign advanced chips by supporting its domestic manufacturers like SMIC and YMTC
and, increasingly, by investing across other parts of the semiconductor supply chain.
With unfettered access to advanced chips, China could pursue leading-edge
computing capabilities in AI and other areas that threaten the interests, values, and
security of the United States and its allies.
The United States should therefore work toward two primary objectives when it comes
to sustaining and growing its semiconductor advantages over China. First, protecting
the U.S. SME advantage entails preventing China from producing leading-edge
chips. The United States will need to work with its allies and partners to protect SME
supply chains from Chinese access and promote their development on friendly shores,
safeguarding U.S. economic and military advantages using tools such as export
controls and end-use monitoring. Navigating competitive economic dynamics among
governments and multinational private sector firms while working toward shared
goals may prove challenging, but will be critically important.
Second, the United States needs to limit potential risks to its own semiconductor
supply by reshoring chipmaking capacity. It can achieve this goal by prioritizing and
allocating incentives to domestic and allied firms through vehicles like CHIPS for
America Act funding that, coupled with regulatory reforms that ease burdens on firms,
would decrease the attractiveness of offshoring chip manufacturing. This brief

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2
discusses incentive prioritization in terms of leading-edge logic, leading-edge memory,
and legacy logic chips. At the same time, exploring legislation to secure access to
skilled foreign labor while investing in domestic education and retraining can help
build the future U.S. semiconductor workforce. Holistically approaching the
protection and reshoring goals could bolster U.S. control over both the IP behind
SME and advanced chips and the physical fabs that produce them.
This brief lays out findings from across CSET’s work on these issues to help
policymakers scope the challenges ahead and identify paths forward.
Context
Strategic competition with China and the global chip shortage recently have
highlighted the challenges to U.S. semiconductor leadership. Though China remains
roughly a decade behind the United States and its allies like the Netherlands, South
Korea, Taiwan, and the United Kingdom (among others) in leading-edge semiconductor
supply chains, it is nonetheless projected to become the world’s largest semiconductor
manufacturer overall (including legacy chips) by 2030.1 While China presently
depends on foreign SME from the United States and its allies to produce chips, in time
China could threaten U.S. dominance in semiconductor supply chains and
manufacturing not only from the IP and economic perspectives, but also in terms of the
physical supply chains themselves.
First, China is making concerted efforts both to acquire foreign SME technology and to
develop its own SME capabilities. China heavily subsidizes its indigenous
semiconductor industry to buy foreign SME technology and related components, as
well as efforts to obtain SME IP and know-how in an effort to boost its leading-edge
chip production abilities. If successful in producing state-of-the-art chips, China would
be free to field technologies and weapons dependent on such chips, like AI,
autonomous systems, or advanced hypersonics, in ways that present risks to human
rights or international security. It has already deployed surveillance technologies
containing GPUs and CPUs made by U.S. firms to alarming ends in monitoring its
Muslim Uyghur population in Xinjiang province.2 Though unlikely for the foreseeable
future, China could one day challenge established innovative and resilient global
supply chains with brittle, Chinese controlled ones.3 The U.S. interest therefore lies in
continuing to prevent China from manufacturing leading-edge chips, maintaining its
dependence on democratic supply chains.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3

The Semiconductor Supply Chain

Note: Blue: Supply chain segment; Red: Business model for production
Source: Saif Khan, Dahlia Peterson, and Alexander Mann, “The Semiconductor Supply Chain: Assessing
National Competitiveness” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, January 2021).
The highly complex semiconductor supply chain is multinational and can be broken
down into seven sectors comprising research and development, chip production, and
inputs to chip production. Steps in chip production include design, fabrication, and
assembly, testing, and packaging (ATP), with inputs feeding each step. Chip
production can be completed either by a single integrated device manufacturer (e.g.,
Intel) or across separate firms that specialize in particular steps, including fabless firms
specializing in design, foundries that exclusively produce chips, and outsourced
semiconductor assembly and test (OSAT) firms focused on ATP.
CSET research has found that the United States has a significant lead over China in
many segments of the semiconductor supply chain, including the research and
development, design, and fabrication steps, and inputs like electronic design
automation, core IP, and SME. The United States benefits significantly from supply
chain integration with allies in areas where it lags, for instance in lithography and
assembly, and in package tools. However, the United States notably lacks leading-
edge logic foundries that can produce AI chips for third-party customers, and it relies
heavily on Taiwan and South Korea for its own leading-edge chips. Disruptions to
imports from these countries would therefore harm U.S. advanced semiconductor
access and supply chains.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4
Second, the possibility of conflict involving China and its neighbors threatens the
physical security of U.S. advanced semiconductor supply chains. These supply chains
are highly globalized, and the U.S. economy, public and private sectors alike, rely
extensively on stable semiconductor access from the automotive industry to the
defense and intelligence communities. While the United States leads in areas critical to
pushing the leading-edge like SME, IP, and design software, China, South Korea, and
Taiwan dominate physical chipmaking. Much of the world’s semiconductor
manufacturing has resided in East Asia since the 1990s. Taiwan manufactures roughly
85 percent of global leading-edge logic chips, and China and Taiwan together produce
63 percent of legacy logic chips. By contrast, the United States has zero onshore
leading-edge capacity and only 8 percent of global legacy logic capacity. A Chinese
invasion of Taiwan would massively disrupt U.S. access to leading-edge logic chips
and threaten U.S. logic consumption for sensitive applications like AI, data centers,
automotives, and the military. Similarly, disruptions to South Korean manufacturing
and exports from either a North Korean invasion or other contingencies would
hamstring U.S. access to dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) chips.4 It is
therefore in the U.S. interest to secure American access to critical semiconductors
by reshoring semiconductor manufacturing in the United States.
Ensuring that the United States can achieve these two goals—maintaining its
advanced chip leadership over China and minimizing risks from disrupted supply chains
for a wide range of semiconductor needs—is essential. It will require cementing the
U.S. and allied lead in advanced SME components and semiconductor supply chains
with well-coordinated export policies, augmented by chip fabs located on American
shores to mitigate global disruptions. It will also require skilled labor—domestic and
foreign—to work these fabs, and a permissive regulatory environment that does not
deter domestic and foreign firms or workers from laying down roots in the United
States.
The next section of this paper offers insights and recommendations from CSET’s
research for tackling these two broad goals and navigating the complex array of
specific policy issues that underpin them.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5
Sustaining and Growing the U.S. Lead
1. Maintaining Chinese Dependence on Democratic Supply Chains
Presently, China is investing tens of billions of dollars per year in its efforts to catch up
to the leading edge in producing advanced chips. But manufacturing leading-edge
semiconductors requires access to a wide range of highly sophisticated equipment and
materials in the semiconductor supply chain, which are produced exclusively by the
United States and a handful of allies. In an effort to increase its domestic advanced
manufacturing capacity, China subsidizes its chip designers’ and factories’ purchases of
foreign equipment and materials—to the tune of $15 billion a year in 2018.5 But in
some cases, these nations are not selling the leading-edge versions to China or
Chinese companies. Most notably, the Netherlands currently does not allow exports of
EUV photolithography equipment to China, which will likely prevent China from
reaching the leading edge in advanced microprocessor manufacturing for the
foreseeable future.
In order to sustain their advantage, the United States and its allies should adopt
“protect” and “promote” policies that undercut China’s attempts to join advanced
semiconductor manufacturing leaders. “Protect” policies should aim to maintain
China’s dependence on foreign imports at the chokepoints mentioned above through
export controls on software, advanced materials like photomasks and photoresists,
and advanced SME, particularly extreme ultraviolet (EUV) photolithography and argon
fluoride (ArF) immersion photolithography tools. Monitoring end-uses and end-users
of advanced chip exports will also be important for ensuring that chips are used in
compliance with international standards and norms without disrupting sales to China
for peaceful, commercial uses.6
On the “promote” side of the ledger, advanced semiconductor leaders should aim to
retain key supply chain sectors on friendly shores. The United States and its allies have
a number of mechanisms to accomplish this goal. Funding public-private partnerships,
reducing unnecessary trade barriers, negotiating against Chinese semiconductor
subsidies, and screening investments for risks of unwanted technology transfers can
all help bolster the effectiveness of export controls. Working in concert with Japan, the
Netherlands, Taiwan, South Korea, the UK, and Germany will be important to success.
Maintaining Chinese dependence on these countries for advanced SME and leading-
edge chips is a first step toward sustaining the United States’ incumbent advantage
over China in advanced chip manufacturing and keeping China at least two generations
behind in semiconductor manufacturing.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6
2. Reshoring Leading-Edge Chipmaking in the United States
Use Incentives to Make U.S. Reshoring More Attractive
Congress’s passage of the CHIPS for America Act was central to the goal of reshoring
U.S. domestic capacity in order to limit risks from offshore disruptions. The bill, which
became law at the start of 2021, authorized the Department of Commerce to
administer about $37 billion in incentives for chipmakers to build fabs on American
soil, with dozens of domestic and foreign firms likely to compete for funding.*
Legislation to appropriate these funds has not yet become law. Ensuring that
manufacturing incentives target the chipmaking capacity most necessary to U.S.
economic and national security will be key. Policymakers need to strike the right
balance in distributing incentives among leading-edge logic, DRAM, and legacy logic
chips in order to best serve U.S. interests.
Leading-edge logic manufacturing should receive the highest proportion of CHIPS
Act incentives based on its strategic importance and disruption risks to foreign
imports. Leading-edge chips are predominantly used in servers and consumer
electronics like tablets, smartphones, and PCs. Incentives totaling $23 billion for
leading-edge logic would potentially reshore enough manufacturing capacity to meet
the entire U.S. demand through 2027.
This incentive amount would be sufficient to support the development of four new chip
fabs among the firms that meet nearly all demand for U.S. leading-logic: Intel (25
percent of demand), Samsung (20), and TSMC (55 percent). By distributing incentives
proportionally, the United States could meet nearly all of its leading-edge logic
demand with two TSMC fabs and one each for Intel and Samsung. Helping these
chipmakers cement plans for new American advanced logic fabs will boost a U.S.
firm—Intel—and guard against supply disruptions to Taiwanese TSMC and South
Korean Samsung, both of which are critical to U.S. industry.
Leading-edge DRAM manufacturing should be the second priority for CHIPS Act
incentive allocation. Attracting a memory chip manufacturer would boost the United
States’ capacity from near-zero and reduce some reliance on East Asian manufacturing,
predominantly from South Korea. By providing $5-10 billion in federal incentives, the

* $37 billion represents the amount most likely to be appropriated for non-DOD manufacturing
incentives. This section does not address the separate $2 billion set aside for the manufacture of trusted
chips for highly sensitive or military applications under the U.S. Innovation and Competition Act, which
has passed the Senate. See Hunt, “Sustaining U.S. Competitiveness in Semiconductor Manufacturing,”
6-10.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7
United States could persuade a firm to develop a new American fab that would be
likely to remain near the leading edge for years to come. As the only U.S.-
headquartered DRAM manufacturer, Micron would be a strong candidate for reshoring
incentives to build a new 100,000 wafer per month fab. Because of the economies of
scale necessary for DRAM investments and their long-term nature, any incentive
recipient should maintain a demonstrated strategy for long-term viability and
commitment to production in the United States; these factors also mean that additional
future incentives may be necessary.
Legacy logic chips are the third priority and should receive any remaining CHIPS
Act incentives. These chips have wide-ranging and important applications for which
leading-edge logic is unnecessary, including some military and sensitive applications
and in the automotive industry, where modern vehicles incorporate thousands of cheap
semiconductors. While the United States has some onshore legacy capacity, incentives
could be deployed to cheaply build two to five additional legacy logic fabs or to
upgrade existing fabs and equipment with $4-9 billion in incentives—the most
sensitive demand for U.S. legacy logic could be met with two fabs.7
Reshoring leading-edge logic will be key to maintaining U.S. semiconductor
competitiveness with China and building future chip and supply chain resilience. But
increasing U.S. production capacity involves more than building new fabs. Limiting the
risk of offshoring will also require creating a regulatory environment that is not overly
burdensome compared to competitors and ensuring that chipmakers can access the
talent they need.
Remove Obstacles to Fab Manufacturing through Regulatory Reform
In addition to providing reshoring incentives for leading-edge logic, the United States
needs to take steps to limit the relative attractiveness of offshoring, or manufacturing
abroad. A first step would involve broadly evaluating ways to make the U.S. regulatory
environment more conducive to fab development. Fab building entails complex
interactions with federal, state, and local regulators given fabs’ unique infrastructure
requirements, and the United States currently builds fabs far more slowly than its
competitors.* From 2010 to 2020, the United States not only undertook fewer total
new fab projects than China (95 vs. 22), but it produced them at a slower rate (2.5
compared to 1.85 years). China and U.S. allies Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan heavily

* Chip fab infrastructure requirements include large plots of land; seismic stability; reliable and stable
supplies of water and electricity; workforce talent; transportation infrastructure, and nearby land for co-
location with key suppliers. See John VerWey, “No Permits, No Fabs: The Importance of Regulatory
Reform for Semiconductor Manufacturing,” (CSET, October 2021), 10-13.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8
subsidize and offer incentives to help attract semiconductor companies to their shores,
exacerbating domestic challenges by attracting American companies like Micron and
GlobalFoundries to build fabs abroad.8
To increase U.S. attractiveness, governments at federal, state, and local levels need to
better match peer semiconductor producers when it comes to offering incentives and
undertaking regulatory reforms. An important starting point would be to implement
fully several key recommendations from the 2017 report on ensuring long-term U.S.
leadership in semiconductors by the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and
Technology. Efforts should include finding and eliminating redundancies between state
and federal permitting regulations for high-tech facilities by streamlining
environmental, health, and safety regulations. For example, federal agencies such as
the Environmental Protection Agency could explore tailoring semiconductor industry-
specific permits that help accelerate new fab construction or existing fab re-tooling.
Regulatory reforms should be complemented with infrastructure investments targeting
utilities, transportation, and supply chain networks to attract semiconductor
manufacturers.9
At the nation-to-nation level, the United States should engage allies and partners to
coordinate domestic manufacturing incentives and build global supply chain resilience.
Preventing undercutting among friendly states could help counter heavy Chinese
subsidization. Establishing the extent to which Taiwan and South Korea presently
subsidize their domestic industries would be the first step toward understanding what
a U.S. negotiating position would look like. Analyzing global semiconductor supply
chains and quantifying demand for key inputs can help clarify competition risks to
address with partners and boost resilience to ensure U.S. fabs can access the raw
materials necessary for chipmaking.10
Help Firms Meet New Demand for Both Foreign and Domestic Talent
To fulfill the reshoring potential made possible by CHIPS Act funding and further
bolster against offshoring, the semiconductor industry must address immediate and
long-term labor force challenges. Based on reshoring estimates for the roughly eight
advanced leading-edge logic, DRAM, and legacy logic fabs it could generate, CHIPS
Act funding could create about 27,000 new jobs over the next decade in the
semiconductor and related component manufacturing industries.11 The current U.S.
labor market is insufficient to meet all of this demand, so fully maximizing the potential
of the CHIPS Act will likely require a mix of domestic and foreign workers. The U.S.
government therefore needs to help create a regulatory environment that not only

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9
incentivizes firms to locate in the United States but also allows them easy access to
the workers they need.
The semiconductor industry will likely need to draw from three primary labor sources.
To satisfy short-term demand as the U.S. workforce catches up to requirements, some
foreign workers with tacit knowledge of high-skill occupations will be required to staff
new fabs. The industry will likely need at least 3,500 highly skilled foreign workers
with prior expertise. Ideally, these workers would have experience working at firms
like TSMC or Samsung, bringing tacit engineering knowledge to leading-edge
chipmaking in the United States and transferring some of this knowledge to American
workers.
The second labor source comprises domestic workers of different skill levels from
other related U.S. industries and master’s and doctoral students at U.S. universities.
Certain lower-skilled roles at new fabs, like inspectors, testers, sorters, samplers, and
weighers, may be able to attract all the talent they need from other U.S. industries.
The third labor source includes highly skilled American workers with relevant master’s
and doctoral degrees. However, sourcing higher-skilled U.S. labor may prove
challenging in the short term given the semiconductor industry’s high demand for such
workers and the necessary retraining required for specialized work. In addition,
drawing engineers from relevant talent pools like engineering services or the
aerospace industry could reduce their availability in other sectors relevant to national
security. With cost- and time-intensive training, U.S. master’s and doctoral students
can also help boost the semiconductor labor force.12
In the short term, the United States should explore creating highly skilled work visa
programs for Taiwanese and South Korean workers to benefit from their tacit
knowledge and ultimately help bolster the success of CHIPS Act-funded fabs.
Precedents for such programs already exist, often as part of trade agreements, and the
Partner with Korea Act, introduced in the House of Representatives and Senate in
2021, could create 15,000 E-4 highly-skilled work visas for South Koreans. Passing
this bill or a similar measure that includes Taiwanese workers would help with the
immediate labor needs created by the spending of CHIPS Act funds. Long-term
investments to boost the pipeline of U.S.-born talent in semiconductor-related
fields, particularly in STEM education and engineering graduate study, should
complement these programs.13

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10
Conclusion
Sustaining and even growing the United States’ semiconductor advantage over China
will be no small feat. China has the potential to greatly disrupt global SME or chip
supply chains, and attracting chipmakers to build new American fabs and developing
the U.S. talent pool will take great effort. However, as the CSET work referenced in
this paper illustrates, the United States can make progress toward maintaining its
semiconductor leadership and mitigating supply chain risks through a combination of
legislative work, incentives to key firms, regulatory reforms, and cooperation with allies
and partners.
This analysis is derived from several existing CSET papers that address these topics in
greater detail. Please see these reports for additional details and author information.
● Securing Semiconductor Supply Chains, by Saif Khan

● The Semiconductor Supply Chain: Assessing National Competitiveness, by Saif
M. Khan, Alexander Mann, Dahlia Peterson

● Sustaining U.S. Competitiveness in Semiconductor Manufacturing: Priorities for
CHIPS Act Incentives, by Will Hunt

● No Permits, No Fabs: The Importance of Regulatory Reform for Semiconductor
Manufacturing, by John VerWey

● Reshoring Chipmaking Capacity Requires High-Skilled Foreign Talent:
Estimating the Labor Demand Generated by CHIPS Act Incentives, by Will Hunt

● Preserving the Chokepoints: Reducing the Risks of Offshoring Among U.S.
Semiconductor Manufacturing Equipment Firms, by Andre Barbe and Will Hunt

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 11
Authors
Owen J. Daniels is a policy communications specialist and Will Hunt is a research
fellow at the Center for Security and Emerging Technology.

Acknowledgments
For their helpful feedback and editorial assistance, we would like to thank Igor Mikolic-
Torreira, Margarita Konaev, Amy Chao, Lynne Weil, Danny Hague, Jessica Shao, and
Adrienne Thompson.

© 2022 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
CSET Product ID #: 20220006
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20220006

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 12

Endnotes
1 Saif Khan, Dahlia Peterson, and Alexander Mann, “The Semiconductor Supply Chain: Assessing
National Competitiveness” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, January 2021), 8,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/the-semiconductor-supply-chain/.

2 James Millward and Dahlia Peterson, “China’s System of Oppression in Xinjiang: How It Developed
and How to Curb It,” (Brookings Institution, September 2020),
https://www.brookings.edu/research/chinas-system-of-oppression-in-xinjiang-how-it-developed-and-
how-to-curb-it/.

3 Saif Khan, “Securing Semiconductor Supply Chains,” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology,
January 2021), 10-11, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/securing-semiconductor-supply-chains/.

4 Will Hunt, “Sustaining U.S. Competitiveness in Semiconductor Manufacturing: Priorities for CHIPS Act
Incentives,” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, January 2022), 2-6,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/sustaining-u-s-competitiveness-in-semiconductor-
manufacturing/.

5 Khan, “Securing Semiconductor Supply Chains,” 9.

6 Khan, “Securing Semiconductor Supply Chains,” 4-5.

7 Hunt, “Sustaining U.S. Competitiveness in Semiconductor Manufacturing,” 8-15.

8 John VerWey, “No Permits, No Fabs: The Importance of Regulatory Reform for Semiconductor
Manufacturing,” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, October 2021), 4-17,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/no-permits-no-fabs/.

9 VerWey, “No Permits, No Fabs,” 2-18.

10 VerWey, “No Permits, No Fabs,” 25-26.

11 Will Hunt, “Reshoring Chipmaking Capacity Requires High-Skilled Foreign Talent: Estimating the
Labor Demand Generated by CHIPS Act Incentives,” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology,
February 2022), 3, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/reshoring-chipmaking-capacity-requires-
high-skilled-foreign-talent/.

12 Hunt, “Reshoring Chipmaking Capacity Requires High-Skilled Foreign Talent,” 4-9.

13 Hunt, “Reshoring Chipmaking Capacity Requires High-Skilled Foreign Talent,” 11-13.
