MAY 2023
Implementing the CHIPS Act
Sematech’s Lessons for the National Semiconductor 
Technology Center
By Charles Wessner and Thomas Howell
The bipartisan CHIPS and Science Act of 2022 appropriates federal outlays of $52 billion to 
increase the domestic supply of semiconductors and encourage the construction and expansion of 
semiconductor fabrication facilities in the United States. Of this, some $11 billion is directed to research 
and development (R&D) programs that help ensure foundational technologies in semiconductor 
manufacturing are researched, developed, and reach scale in the United States. Preeminent 
among these programs is the National Semiconductor Technology Center (NSTC), envisioned as an 
enterprise operating in the space between the U.S. research base and existing and planned domestic 
semiconductor design, manufacturing, and packaging operations.
While the volume of federal aid to the semiconductor industry under the CHIPS and Science Act has 
no U.S. precedent, federal intervention to shore up chipmakers during a national security crisis has 
happened before. In the mid-1980s, the government deployed major trade measures and provided 
significant funding for a research consortium of U.S. chipmakers called Sematech in an effort to reverse 
erosion of the U.S. industry’s competitive position relative to Japan. At that time, policymakers were 
concerned that the erosion of the U.S. chip industry could compromise the U.S. military’s ability to 
confront numerically superior Warsaw Pact forces.
The call for the NSTC in the CHIPS Act has prompted numerous observers to cite the precedent of 
Sematech. One defense analyst recently observed, 
In 1987, the United States created SEMATECH, . . . a public-private partnership that was designed to 
direct research on semiconductor manufacturing between major industry players. 
Today’s situation is reminiscent of the 1980s, when U.S.-based companies were losing ground to 
global competition due to major investments and subsidies by the Japanese government.

Implementing the CHIPS Act  |  2
The question today is whether aspects of that earlier effort—which led to a dramatic turnaround in 
declining U.S. chip competitiveness—remain relevant today.
Broad Benefits of Sematech
When the industry proposed the consortium, Sematech figured prominently in the debate over whether 
the United States should or should not embrace “industrial policy. ” Some believed the U.S. government 
should not take a direct hand in promoting individual companies or even the semiconductor industry as a 
whole. Others, including the Department of Defense (DOD) and many leading semiconductor producers, 
believed a government-industry partnership was needed to counteract the advantages of Japanese 
conglomerates and government-financed cooperative research programs. After much debate, supporters 
of a consortium carried the day. The DOD was tasked with providing $500 million over five years to be 
matched by industry contributions. This consortium, called Sematech, brought together industry and 
government in an industry-led partnership that reduced R&D costs and fostered efficiencies that helped 
revive the U.S. semiconductor industry and its supply chain. 
Drawing on the success of this cooperative partnership model, the CHIPS Act directs the creation 
of the NSTC, a public-private research consortium to serve as “the focal point for research and 
engineering throughout the semiconductor ecosystem, advancing and enabling disruptive innovation 
to provide U.S. leadership in the industries of the future. ” This consortium is the element of the CHIPS 
Act that most closely recalls Sematech, though the NSTC, as envisioned, is substantially larger in 
budget and scope. Like Sematech, the NSTC is likely to be centered on a core facility with research 
infrastructure and organic staff, linked with a network of affiliated and directly funded regional 
research centers addressing specific themes. And like Sematech, the NSTC is expected to play a 
convening role with respect to industry, academic, and government actors in the semiconductor 
ecosystem as a key aspect of the broader U.S. effort to regain technological parity with global leaders.
As the Department of Commerce implements the CHIPS Act, three broad lessons from the Sematech 
experience—followed by more operational lessons in designing the NSTC—are worth noting.
 ▪ Coordination through road mapping. While the semiconductor industry’s development of 
technology road maps predated Sematech, the consortium provided an impetus for developing 
the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS)—in the words of one chip 
industry veteran, “Perhaps the best road-mapping effort of all time in any industry. ” According 
to former Sematech CEO William Spencer and chief strategy officer Tom Seidel, Sematech itself 
was developed in large part through the road mapping process, engaging key industry players 
in workshops convened before and during the consortium’s first year of existence. The NSTC can 
deploy similar road mapping exercises to direct public and private investment resources toward 
necessary technology developmental themes according to an agreed timetable.
 ▪ Precompetitive industry cooperation. One of Sematech’s principal achievements was to mitigate 
long-standing commercial and cultural friction between U.S. chip device makers and their tool and 
materials suppliers. Recognizing this problem from its inception, Sematech worked with equipment 
suppliers to build consensus on performance targets and then negotiated contracts with the suppliers 
to build equipment that met those targets, helping suppliers fund R&D for their next generation

Charles Wessner and Thomas Howell  |  3
of tools. Today, a generation later, device makers and their suppliers have decades of experience 
working closely together on R&D in venues such as Sematech and the Albany NanoCollege (which 
eventually absorbed Sematech). Reflecting on this experience, the soon-to-be-formed NSTC is 
expected to convene the diverse elements of the chipmaking supply chain in research collaborations.
 ▪ Need for robust global supply chains. The NSTC can also learn from Sematech’s failures. Notably, 
Sematech failed to create a chip supply chain based solely on domestic firms. In perhaps the 
consortium’s biggest failure, a $75 million investment in GCA, a U.S.-based manufacturer of wafer 
steppers, ended with the company’s closure and contemporary critics charging that the consortium’s 
fixation on “saving American companies in an increasingly global business is the fundamental problem 
with Sematech. ” Absorbing this lesson, the framers of the CHIPS Act have provided for collaboration by 
U.S. companies with trusted international partners, notably those based in Europe and Japan.
Operational Lessons from Sematech
In addition to these overarching lessons, Sematech’s 35 years of experience offer practical advice 
relevant to today’s global competitive landscape.
FLEXIBLE INDUSTRY LED MANAGEMENT 
 ▪ Importance of industry leadership. In creating Sematech, Congress recognized that an industry 
consortium should be industry led, so it ensured industry direction of Sematech’s research program. 
The consortium’s flexible, comparatively simple industry-driven governance structure proved an 
important aspect of its survival and eventual success. 
 ▪ Not-for-profit status. Sematech was established as a not-for-profit Delaware corporation, barred 
by its charter from engaging in the production of semiconductors for commercial sale. According to 
Larry Browning and Judy Shetler in Sematech: Saving the U.S. Semiconductor Industry, Sematech’s 
board of directors—drawn from industry participants with the exception of a nonvoting member from 
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)—set general policy and chose the CEO. An 
executive technical advisory board (ETAB) established broad priorities for R&D and testing while a 
series of focus technical advisory boards (TABs) advised with respect to specific projects within the 
ambit set by the ETAB. All ETAB and TAB members were from member companies. 
 ▪ Flat management. The management structure was flat, with only three levels under the office of 
the chief executive: directors, managers, and project managers.
 ▪ Flexible structure. Sematech was directed by “a central organization, staffed and managed by 
industry personnel. ” Research projects were implemented and managed from a dedicated central 
facility focusing on critical industry needs, though much of the research was conducted off-site in 
regional Centers of Excellence administered by the Semiconductor Research Corporation, in the 
laboratories of chip equipment suppliers, or in U.S. National Laboratories. According to Spencer, 
who headed Sematech from 1990 to 1997, and Peter Grindley in an article written five years after 
Sematech’s establishment, “The combination of centralized structure and experienced management 
gave the consortium the autonomy and flexibility needed to carry through changes in the research 
agenda as necessary. ” This ability to change and adapt as needed proved to be a key strength.

Implementing the CHIPS Act  |  4
INDEPENDENCE FROM GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS
 ▪ Use of grants. Federal funding of Sematech was provided in the form of grants, not research contracts 
closely tied to predetermined targets—another source of flexibility. The Federal Office of Naval 
Research (ONR) administered the grants. DOD procurement contracts typically lock parties into a 
fixed work program and rigid performance milestones. This is also the case with the structure of 
contemporaneous European industry-government consortia, which commonly feature fixed research 
agendas managed by government “administrators, often with little direct experience in the industry. ”
 ▪ Links to DARPA. Sematech was loosely supervised by DARPA pursuant to a memorandum of 
understanding (MOU). The MOU did not spell out technological objectives or prescribe operational 
methods but provided only that the consortium develops an annual operating plan in consultation 
with the secretary of defense and the interagency Advisory Council on Federal Participation in 
Sematech. This flexible arrangement enabled the consortium to respond to emerging trends 
and problems in its annual operating plans. DARPA’s program manager for Sematech served as a 
nonvoting member of the Sematech board. DARPA, which had the technical and project management 
expertise to monitor Sematech’s R&D efforts, did not supervise operations but “routinely attended 
management and technical advisory board meetings” in which it made its views known. Sematech 
was also subject to annual assessments by the General Accounting Office (GAO).
ADAPTIVE RESEARCH OBJECTIVES
Sematech’s objectives changed over time to adapt to new circumstances in the semiconductor industry, 
which Spencer regards as “arguably one of its strengths. ” In the face of rapidly changing industry 
developments, a contractual relationship with the government with fixed goals and targets years 
into the future would very likely have resulted in the breakup of the consortium. Sematech made the 
crucial decision early on to pivot from a consortium primarily focused on horizontal research by device 
makers to one emphasizing a vertical relationship with suppliers—a major change in direction. Although 
DARPA voiced some concern over the shift from longer-term research to equipment development, 
the transition was relatively smooth within the existing governance structure. As some analysts have 
observed, “Sematech’s ability to shift its research agenda depended crucially on industry involvement 
in program management. ”
Other changes in direction were implemented without major conflicts or litigation with the DOD, or 
between the consortium’s members:
 ▪ Sematech management implemented significant changes in its handling of intellectual property rights. 
 ▪ Soon after the inception of the consortium, a planned workforce of 750 was trimmed to 650 to free 
up funds for more R&D.
 ▪ A plan to build new cleanrooms for each projected technology phase was scrapped.
 ▪ CEO Robert Noyce decided, with the board’s approval, that in 1989 the central fab would be only 
partially completed, which was adequate for starting up, and that substantial funds would be 
allocated to off-site projects at companies and the federal laboratories—a hub-and-spoke approach 
now being advocated for the NSTC.

Charles Wessner and Thomas Howell  |  5
 ▪ According to Shetler and Browning, Sematech’s strategic focus was also expanded to include the 
flexible manufacturing of application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs).
FOCUS ON IMPROVING MANUFACTURING PERFORMANCE
While Sematech’s initial primary focus necessarily shifted from manufacturing R&D to shoring up an 
eroding supply chain, it nevertheless introduced and refined numerous practices that enabled members 
to improve their manufacturing performance by reducing costs, improving quality, and obtaining better 
yields. While the specific performance-enhancing methods Sematech employed decades ago may or 
may not be relevant in the current context, they collectively represent timeless best practices, such as 
brainstorming exercises involving rigorous self-assessment based on data and metrics drawn from actual 
operating experience, used as a basis to improve manufacturing methods and reduce costs.
 ▪ Sematech’s Partnering for Total Quality (PTQ) program. The PTQ program, for which the 
consortium budgeted $10 million, facilitated the sharing of information with manufacturers and 
toolmakers on world-class manufacturing practices and cost and financial management.
 ▪ Short-loop testing. Short-loop testing was a technique used to qualify new semiconductor 
manufacturing equipment individually instead of integrating it into an end-to-end full manufacturing 
line (full-loop testing) as originally envisioned when the consortium was launched. Short-loop testing 
capitalized on advances in computer-aided processes to model and simulate the operation of the tool 
in a full production line, which turned out to yield equally accurate results 25 percent more quickly 
than the end-to-end production line method as described in Shetler and Browning.
 ▪ Developing industry standards. One-third of Sematech’s clean room space was designated the 
tool applications process facility (TAPF), dedicated solely to joint development and testing of new 
chipmaking equipment—a place where device and equipment makers could work side by side and 
consult on manufacturing goals and equipment needs at the chipmakers’ R&D level. Shetler and 
Browning find that the TAPF prepared the way for Sematech’s subsequent effort to develop and 
promulgate broad industry standards.
 ▪ Blind benchmarking. Blind benchmarking was a practice in which members shared about 50 
of their performance metrics on an anonymous basis so that each company could recognize its 
own data but not that of other members. In one case, a member discovered it was paying more 
for electricity than any other member and used the data to secure rate reductions from its power 
vendor. The practice also served as a wake-up call for members that discovered their metrics were 
lagging those of their competitors.
 ▪ Manufacturing Methods Council. Sematech created an internal council that developed and 
shared best practices, engaging equipment productivity teams to target the performance of specific 
tools to identify problems and test solutions. In one case, after a member company found the 
pumps consumed most of the power a tool used, the productivity team identified which pumps 
could be idled at given times, working with the toolmaker to adjust idling modes to substantially 
reduce energy consumption.
 ▪ Troubleshooting. Sematech ran internal workshops and set up councils to address common 
challenges, such as finding second sources for spare parts. Prior to Sematech, there was no forum

Implementing the CHIPS Act  |  6
for chip manufacturing personnel in any semiconductor company to “meet, exchange information, 
and provide consensus technical direction on equipment and materials needs to the supplier 
community. ” By the early 1990s, Sematech was convening over 200 such meetings a year focused 
on chip manufacturing technology, involving personnel from member companies, employees of 
the federal labs, and university representatives. The information exchanges focused on common 
manufacturing issues facing the entire semiconductor community.
LEVERAGING INDUSTRY ASSIGNEES
In its early years, Sematech operated with 650–700 employees, of which roughly 220 were assignees 
from member companies, who typically spent 6 to 30 months working at the consortium. An important 
aspect of the consortium’s success was the fact that many members sent their most talented engineers 
to Sematech, a difficult sacrifice, particularly for smaller firms. Companies committed their best talent 
in part due to cajoling by Noyce and Spencer as successive CEOs and in part because these companies 
wanted to ensure they fully reaped the technological benefits of their financial contributions to the 
consortium. Typically, the assignees brought with them their companies’ best practices, many of which 
were incorporated into Sematech’s operations.
Sematech assignees facilitated the dissemination and application of research results throughout the 
U.S. industry. One assignee recalled, “If you were assigned in a lithography program, you worked in 
the lithography program. But you also were responsible to make sure that the lithography companies 
who were members got the information they needed. ” The prestige these senior engineers enjoyed 
in their own companies made them effective internal advocates for the adoption of the technological 
achievements they had participated in at Sematech.
The assignees also posed challenges for the consortium. Most had technical backgrounds with scant 
experience in forecasting costs, administering project budgets, or aligning projects with an overall 
strategic plan. A number brought with them and advocated pet projects from their companies that had 
little or nothing to do with Sematech’s research strategy. To mitigate the problem of these new projects, 
Shetler and Browning report that Sematech established an investment council that “instituted openly 
understood fiduciary mechanisms and strategic guidelines that reduces [reduced] the detrimental effects 
of having managers in various areas competing to dominate the contract allocation process. ”
The NSTC should emulate the productive use of company assignees, subject to appropriate checks and 
balances, with the caveat that the practice will prove effective only if participating firms contribute 
top talent. According to some accounts, Sematech assignees contributed more to the consortium’s 
research efforts than its organic staff did: “Most of the [Sematech] employees were not in the technical 
mainstream. Most of the technical mainstream were assignees, ” suggesting that the success or failure of 
the NSTC may hinge on the quality of the individuals seconded from member companies.
ESTABLISHING STANDARDS
Establishment of common, accepted standards is essential to the development and deployment of 
next-generation semiconductor manufacturing technology. Standards are required to enable the 
interoperability of sophisticated equipment and systems developed by many different companies. 
Standards make it possible for interested companies to compare, measure, and understand complex 
tools, materials, and processes.

Charles Wessner and Thomas Howell  |  7
The National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) observes that successful standards “are 
not handed down by the government, but produced through a collaborative process” that ensures 
collaborators accept and adopt the standards. A retrospective by NIST, which took part in a Sematech 
project to forge common standards for computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM), found that Sematech 
played a key role in developing and enabling an industry consensus supporting CIM Framework 1.0, 
a jointly developed protocol that allowed software applications to interact in the same way that 
Windows-compatible applications interface through the Windows operating system.
 ▪ Sematech convened user groups drawn from its member companies to develop CIM specifications.
 ▪ Taking the original electronic version of the CIM Framework, the consortium converted it to HTML 
format and posted it online, demonstrating the feasibility of “making the specification available in 
browsable, electronic form without having to distribute the original electronic document. ” 
 ▪ As a member of the information technology (IT) standards organization Object Management Group 
(OMG), the consortium used CORBA, a protocol promulgated under the auspices of OMG, “as the 
basis for binding CIM Framework- conformant applications to a computing infrastructure. ” 
 ▪ Sematech contacted independent suppliers and provided orientation and training with respect to 
the CIM Framework 1.0 in scheduled classes and public conferences.
Because the NSTC is likely to convene a significant part of the U.S. semiconductor device, equipment, 
and materials sectors, it will have a potentially important role in facilitating the development, 
acceptance, and adoption of the new standards required with advances in chip technology. 
DEEPENING COLLABORATION WITH FEDERAL LABORATORIES
The U.S. National Laboratories represent a vast pool of expertise and research infrastructure already 
engaged in advanced research into semiconductor technology, raising the question of how the NSTC 
can best leverage such ongoing work.
 ▪ Sandia National Laboratories in New Mexico has historically pioneered research into 
semiconductor materials and device physics. Its Center for Compound Semiconductor Science 
and Technology (CCSST) features deep competencies in these themes, as well as state-of-the-art 
fabrication facilities and advanced device and material characterization laboratories.
 ▪ Three U.S. National Laboratories—Sandia, Los Alamos, and Lawrence Livermore—recently announced 
a research collaboration with Intel to develop new memory technologies “to extract orders-of-
magnitude performance gains from the basic DRAM [dynamic random-access memory] design itself. ”
 ▪ The NIST is running over 50 research programs in semiconductor-related themes. NIST operates 
two nanofabrication facilities that produce custom microfabricated devices to support its research 
and measurement efforts.
 ▪ The Department of Energy (DOE) has launched the microelectronics Energy Efficiency Scaling for 
2 Decades (EES2) initiative, intended to improve the energy efficiency of semiconductor devices a 
thousandfold over the next two decades. In all, 5 major national laboratories, in addition to DOE’s 
Argonne National Laboratory, and 21 companies and organizations are engaged in this effort.

Implementing the CHIPS Act  |  8
Sematech’s successes in deepening productive research ties between federal laboratories and 
commercial chipmakers remain relevant in the current context. Sematech functioned as a centralized 
matchmaker between the chip industry and several leading-edge federal labs, notably Sandia, Los 
Alamos, Oak Ridge, and NIST. These collaborations proved particularly valuable for leading device 
makers and for smaller equipment makers. Sandia’s staff worked one-on-one with smaller toolmakers, 
and its “technical capabilities easily met and often exceeded SEMATECH’s needs. ”
 ▪ In 1989, Sematech and Sandia concluded a $110 million cooperative research and development 
agreement (CRADA) that gave U.S. firms access to Sandia’s “first-rate facilities and a complete range 
of science-based expertise” to address specific challenges in thematic areas like tool designs and 
methodologies and equipment performance and reliability.
 ▪ In the same year, Sematech and Sandia concluded an agreement to establish the Semiconductor 
Equipment Technology Center (SETEC) to concentrate the lab’s resources on the development of tool 
designs and methodologies. This led, among other things, to a CRADA to create the Contamination-
Free Manufacturing Research Center in 1992 to address defect problems arising from larger die sizes 
and smaller feature sizes that characterized next-generation semiconductor devices.
 ▪ In 1993, Sematech entered into a CRADA with NIST, with Sematech contributing $49.4 million 
and the DOE contributing $53.6 million to address chip manufacturing themes such as materials 
analysis, equipment and software reliability, and equipment modeling and design.
This partnership approach could offer significant opportunities for the NSTC, which could play a similar 
intermediary role, identifying areas of expertise and specialized resources at the federal labs and engaging 
them to address specific technological challenges that arise in its manufacturing R&D activities. 
A Word of Caution
While Sematech’s successes and potential relevance to implementation of the CHIPS Act have been 
widely acknowledged, its limitations as a model for the NSTC should be recognized.
 ▪ Sematech’s initial goals were precisely defined and narrow: to achieve world leadership in the 
manufacture of 0.35-micron silicon-based complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) 
devices by 1993 using U.S. tools and materials. Sematech did not address themes such as computer-
aided design, silicon materials, packaging, testing, and other key aspects of semiconductor 
manufacturing. At present, the NSTC’s mandate and goals are far more comprehensive and the 
technologies involved less homogeneous—factors that may complicate the effort to achieve consensus 
among the actors with respect to research themes, resource allocation, and ultimate objectives.
 ▪ Despite broad agreement on initial goals, Sematech’s first years were characterized by major 
internal conflicts arising out of cultural clashes between participating firms with divergent goals 
and friction with supply chain firms. Three of the original 14 consortium members pulled out. 
While internal differences were partially ironed out over time, there is no guarantee of a similar 
outcome with respect to powerful centrifugal forces that could affect the operations of the 
NSTC. Effective, credible management and sharing of resources to include the needs of smaller 
companies and start-ups will be essential.

Charles Wessner and Thomas Howell  |  9
Assessing Sematech’s Accomplishments
Virtually from its inception, critics proclaimed Sematech a failure, almost as an article of faith. 
This ideological presumption has continued to the present day, with one commentator stating in 
August 2022 that “U.S. government efforts to revitalize the nation’s semiconductor industry, such 
as SEMATECH, failed miserably. ” If this perspective is accurate, use of any aspect of Sematech’s 
experience as a model for implementation of the CHIPS Act would be problematic. Yet the evidence—
which comes directly from firms that participated in Sematech—does not support these claims.
In fact, Sematech is generally recognized today as having played a central role in U.S. firms’ efforts to 
recapture global competitive leadership from Japanese chipmakers in the 1990s, which was its core 
objective. As one comprehensive analysis observed, the participating companies made substantial 
financial contributions to establish the consortium, and they continued contributing their own resources 
long after federal support ended. Their actions suggest these firms saw a clear value proposition even 
after the withdrawal of federal funds, collectively regarding it as “a privately productive and worthwhile 
activity. ” The member firms consistently committed top talent to the consortium, a practice that would 
have been reversed had the effort been perceived as a failure. Ironically, the foreign competitors may have 
had a clearer, less ideological view, with the Japanese chip manufacturers viewing Sematech as a major 
force underpinning the U.S. chipmaking revival and prompting them to support the formation of a new 
generation of Japanese research consortia patterned on Sematech.
Sematech’s principal achievement was an ambitious one—rallying a U.S. chip industry that was on the 
verge of collapse. But some concrete performance metrics exist:
 ▪ Market share. In 1988, U.S. chipmakers trailed their Japanese rivals in both quality and market 
share, controlling 43 percent versus 46 percent of the world semiconductor market. But by 
the early 1990s—a time frame virtually entirely coextensive with Sematech’s first five years of 
operations—those positions had reversed. By 1992 U.S. semiconductor equipment makers reached 
market share parity with Japan, and by 1994 the U.S. semiconductor device global market share 
had reached 48 percent versus 36 percent for Japan.
 ▪ Improved yield. According to the consultancy VLSI Research, Sematech-driven equipment 
improvements enabled U.S. chipmakers to cut the Japanese industry’s yield advantage from 50 
percent in 1985 to 9 percent in 1991.
 ▪ Lower-cost R&D. Prior to Sematech, U.S. producers had to increase R&D outlays by 30 percent 
for each new chip generation, whereas soon after the advent of Sematech, the figure fell to 12.5 
percent and continued to drop into the single digits.
 ▪ Shorter cycles. Sematech enabled the U.S. industry to compress miniaturization cycles from 
three years to two, accelerating innovation for a decade and a half and setting U.S. chipmakers 
on track to overtake their Japanese competitors. The shorter cycles appeared to lengthen 
substantially in 2014 and beyond with the advent of the 14-nanometer node.
 ▪ Higher R&D returns. By the early 2000s, Sematech members were reporting an annual return on 
their R&D investments of 20 to 1. As one participant remarked, “This is what happens . . . when

Implementing the CHIPS Act  |  10
seeming competitors pool their resources. This has brought more than $2 billion in research value 
to members over five years. ”
Critical Role of Sustained Public Funding
Despite its success, the lack of government support after 1993 proved to be a long-term weakness for 
the consortium. The initial result of the end of federal funding was a downsizing of the consortium, 
which was only partially counteracted by inviting foreign firms to participate. This enhanced 
international cooperation but involved less focus on the needs of U.S. industry and did not allow for the 
level of investment needed to keep the organization vibrant. 
This factor in the evolution of Sematech is significant and offers an important lesson for the NSTC. Similar 
organizations such as the Interuniversity Microelectronics Centre (IMEC) in Belgium have prospered 
over time, in no small part due to sustained and substantial public funding, still at 25 percent of a much-
increased budget—after 40 years of operation. A potentially fatal weakness of the CHIPS Act provisions 
for the NSTC is the idea that in five years, it will be self-sustaining. This is most unlikely and is rebutted 
by the sustained public support that has underpinned successful consortia such as IMEC, the German 
Fraunhofer system, and research institutes such as Taiwan’s Industrial Technology Research Institute 
(ITRI). Continued public support will be essential for the ultimate success of the NSTC.
Broad Trade Policy Support
The U.S. government undertook trade negotiations in 1985–86 pursuant to Section 301 of the Trade Act 
of 1974 to stop dumping by Japanese producers, which had threatened to put much of the U.S. industry out 
of business or simply reduce its revenue to the point businesses would be unable to make the investments 
necessary to compete. The 301 negotiations were flanked by antidumping proceedings in DRAMs and 
erasable programmable read-only memory (EPROMs), two important commodity memory device types.
The Semiconductor Trade Agreement of 1986 was remarkable in that it did not stop Japanese-produced 
semiconductors from entering the United States, but it did stop their dumping in the U.S. market and in 
third countries. Initially, the higher prices resulted in a revenue bonanza for Japanese producers, but 
they also enabled the U.S. industry to compete on quality as well as price. The agreement also required 
the closed Japanese market to be opened, which occurred in a phased manner during the 1990s. The 
trade agreement allowed U.S. firms to invest and prosper, while some evolved to newer technologies 
such as microprocessors. The revived U.S. device industry had a correspondingly positive effect on 
U.S. equipment providers, which in turn furnished emerging Korean producers with cutting-edge 
equipment, thereby contributing to a more competitive global semiconductor market.
A key factor in the success of the 1986 trade agreement, after Japanese violations of several previous 
agreements, was the willingness of the administration under U.S. president Ronald Reagan to impose 
sanctions on the Japanese industry, targeting imports of Japanese end products incorporating 
semiconductors rather than the chips themselves. This was a powerful signal to the Japanese 
government, one that ensured enforcement of the Semiconductor Trade Agreement and thus the 
continued viability of U.S. producers. The government commitment may also have been a positive 
signal for the capital markets’ view of the industry, a demonstration that the government was not 
prepared to see the industry crippled by Japanese trade practices.

Charles Wessner and Thomas Howell  |  11
Sematech’s success should be seen in the context of this broader policy response. The recovery and 
subsequent growth of the U.S. industry was a combination of cooperative technology development, effective 
trade policy, and the ability of U.S. companies to invest and innovate. The recovery might be likened to a 
three-legged stool: questions as to which leg matters most are pointless; all three must work together.  
Thomas Howell is an international trade attorney specializing in the semiconductor industry and a 
consultant with the Renewing American Innovation (RAI) at the Center for Strategic and International 
Studies (CSIS). Charles Wessner is a nonresident senior adviser to the CSIS RAI project and teaches global 
innovation policy at Georgetown University.
This report is made possible by general support to CSIS. No direct sponsorship contributed to this report.
This report is produced by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), a 
private, tax- exempt institution focusing on international public policy issues. Its research is 
nonpartisan and nonproprietary. CSIS does not take specific policy positions. Accordingly, all 
views, positions, and conclusions expressed in this publication should be understood to be 
solely those of the author(s).
© 2023 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
