
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Issue Br ief
N o v ember 2022
China ’s AI
W or kf or ce
Assessing Demand f or AI T alent
Aut hor s
Diana Gehlhaus
Joanne Boisson
Sar a A bdulla
Jacob F eldgoise
L uk e K oslosky
Dahlia P e t erson

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 1

Executive Summary
For the United States to build a globally competitive artificial intelligence (AI)
workforce, U.S. AI education and workforce policies must grow, cultivate, attract, and
retain the world’s best and brightest. The AI workforce is global and in high demand,
and a large share of top-tier technical talent in the United States is foreign-born. Given
China is a major producer of AI-skilled talent, understanding its AI workforce could
provide U.S. policymakers with important insight.
While a better understanding of China’s AI workforce would be valuable, surprisingly
little data is available. To date, most current knowledge stems from sporadic Chinese
ministry, university, and company reports, or from news media outlets. A review of
these reports suggests China is heavily investing in AI education and workforce
development, in addition to recruiting native AI talent working abroad. But are these
policies and investments producing the desired AI workforce?
To bridge the Chinese AI workforce data gap, we provide an analysis of the state of AI
workforce demand in China. We assess AI workforce demand using job postings data,
widely used in labor economics for this purpose. We do this using a novel sample of
6.8 million unique job postings in China, built in partnership with AMPLYFI, a UK-
based machine learning company. The AMPLYFI team classified these postings as AI
or non-AI related, using the same two technical and two non-technical occupational
categories as defined in previous CSET research on the U.S. AI workforce.
We find that a sizable share—more than 30 percent—of the 6.8 million job postings
analyzed could be considered AI or AI-related. Of these, 14 percent, or 955,000, are
part of the technical AI workforce, defined here in two teams (Technical Teams 1 and
2) as talent that could be involved in the design, development, and deployment of AI.1
The majority of technical AI job postings—about 53 percent—require a bachelor’s
degree, while most non-technical AI positions do not. Moreover, about 60 percent of
technical postings are located in Guangdong Province, Shanghai Municipality, and
Jiangsu Province, likely due to their economic importance as locations for major
Chinese AI companies and universities. The wide range of median salaries across
Chinese cities and provinces further points to areas where AI-related technical talent
commands relatively high earnings, such as Shanghai and Beijing.
The majority of AI-related positions were also junior in terms of desired experience;
this suggests three things. First, other informal avenues outside of traditional job

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2

boards, such as social networks, university partnerships, and internal referrals, may be
more often used to recruit more skilled or experienced hires. Second, given that many
technical positions require at least a college degree, and given the rising number of
college graduates, it suggests four-year degrees could be a gatekeeper market signal
for technical positions similar to the United States. Finally, among the AI-related job
postings CSET reviewed, many called for “fresh graduates.” This could be a reference
to the pervasiveness of the expected “9-9-6” (nine to nine, six days a week) work
culture in China’s tech community.
Moreover, we find a sizable share of technical job postings are for roles that are
actually involved in AI. Scanning both technical teams’ job postings using a list of AI
keywords, we find that 10 percent, or 36,000, of Technical Team 1 postings (e.g., most
computer and mathematical science occupations) were specific to AI, with “machine
learning” and “robotics” as leading keywords. A larger share of postings containing an
AI keyword also required graduate degrees; 17 percent of Technical Team 1 postings
with an AI keyword did, compared 4 percent of all Technical Team 1 postings. A
review of about 100 postings requiring a PhD showed a wide range of AI applications
being recruited for including robotics, image recognition, blockchain, bioinformatics,
autonomous vehicles, and smart cities.
Overall, our findings highlight the complexity of China’s AI ecosystem and the need to
better understand the state of China’s AI workforce. Investing in more data on China’s
AI workforce could assist the United States in its own national AI strategic planning,
particularly in developing targeted U.S. national security, education, and workforce
policies.
This paper is the first in a series on AI workforce demand in China. It provides the
foundation for future reports by detailing the dataset, methodology, and descriptive
statistics for key fields of interest, such as desired education, experience, and salary.
Future work will analyze these job postings in greater detail by providing insights into
the geographic distribution of jobs, AI applications for which companies are hiring,
skills and fields of study associated with AI job postings, and details of the companies
hiring these workers. We hope this series will provide a holistic assessment of the
nature of China’s AI workforce from a demand-side perspective.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3

Table of Contents
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ 1
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................... 4
China’s AI Education and Workforce Policy ................................................................................... 6
Current Assessment of China’s AI Workforce ............................................................................... 8
Measuring China’s AI Workforce Demand .................................................................................. 10
Defining China’s AI Workforce .................................................................................................... 10
Measuring Demand ......................................................................................................................... 11
China’s AI Workforce Demand ........................................................................................................ 13
Desired Education ........................................................................................................................... 13
Desired Experience ......................................................................................................................... 16
Median Salary ................................................................................................................................... 18
Geographic Distribution................................................................................................................. 22
Job Demand for AI-Specific Positions ........................................................................................... 26
AI-Specific Desired Education ..................................................................................................... 27
Data Limitations ................................................................................................................................... 30
Key Findings and Implications ......................................................................................................... 32
Future Research.................................................................................................................................... 34
Appendix A: Full List of Job Posting Fields ................................................................................. 35
Appendix B: Data Collection and Model Classification ........................................................... 39
Harvesting.......................................................................................................................................... 39
Classifying AI Job Postings .......................................................................................................... 40
Field Normalization ......................................................................................................................... 43
Appendix C: Field Normalization for Analysis ............................................................................ 44
Appendix D: AI Keyword List ........................................................................................................... 50
Authors .................................................................................................................................................... 52
Acknowledgments............................................................................................................................... 52
Endnotes ................................................................................................................................................. 53

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4

Introduction
Not long ago, the United States was unmatched in its ability to recruit and retain the
world’s best AI talent. But current U.S. policies risk being outdated with the growing
size of and demand for the AI workforce, and there are concerns that current limits on
the number of foreign-born researchers able to stay are inadequate.2 Meanwhile, China
is actively targeting the many Chinese-born AI researchers living in the United States
to return, along with incentives for non-Chinese scholars to move. To counter this,
some in the United States are proposing analogous talent attraction programs.3
Having better data on China’s AI workforce—supply and demand—could help inform
the United States’ AI education and workforce policies with the goal of staying
globally competitive. This includes understanding what types of positions Chinese
enterprises are hiring for, where they are located, and what types of education, skills,
and experience are being sought. This is in complement to understanding China’s AI
education ecosystem, discussed in previous CSET research.4
Yet far too little data is currently available. This series of reports bridges the
information gap, providing new data on the state of China’s AI workforce as it relates
to talent demand. We approach this through a demand-side assessment, looking at job
postings for AI and AI-related talent. We analyze job postings as it is a widely used
indicator in economics to measure employer demand for talent.5
Using a novel dataset, we analyzed 6.8 million unique job postings in China as posted
in the first half of 2021. Our data collection methodology was designed to capture a
representative sample of four Chinese job boards. Moreover, due to the strong
representation of one predominant job board for technical talent, 51Job (前程无忧), we
believe our sample allows for some generalization of our findings for technical talent.6
However, this data should not be used for other direct U.S.-China comparisons
because the sample frame of job boards is not representative in the same way as
available U.S. job postings data aggregators such as Lightcast. Planned improvements
will instead allow for more direct comparisons in future work. As such, we refrain from
direct comparisons with the exception of desired education for technical talent job
postings.
This overview paper is the first in a series of reports assessing China’s AI workforce
demand. This first report provides the big picture assessment, along with an
explanation of the methodology for curating the dataset for analysis. For this series,

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5

CSET partnered with AMPLYFI, a machine learning firm specializing in unstructured
data analysis.7 To analyze Chinese AI workforce labor demand, AMPLYFI curated,
cleaned, and normalized Chinese job postings across four major national job boards.
We begin with an overview of China’s AI education and workforce policies, along with
current available data on the state of China’s AI workforce as context for the country’s
investment in cultivating a globally competitive cadre of AI talent. We then provide our
overview of demand for AI talent in China, starting with our definition of China’s AI
workforce and the process by which our data was curated and compiled. We then
provide a high-level analysis of this data. The paper concludes with implications and a
road map to the future reports in this series that will build on this novel dataset.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6

China’s AI Education and Workforce Policy
Global ambitions, significant funding, a growing workforce, and a data-rich
environment are positioning China for a new era of AI innovation. If the country is able
to take advantage of AI's transformative potential with wide-scale AI adoption across
industries, it could give China an important competitive edge.
Among China’s stated AI priorities is to build an AI workforce through domestic
education and training. Since 2017, China has released several strategic plans and
initiatives designed to enhance AI education at each level of education, with strong
emphasis on enhancing industry and academic partnerships. The jumpstarting effort
for China’s AI education drive was the seminal State Council New Generation AI
Development Plan of July 2017, which called for systemic provision of AI education.
China's Ministry of Education (MOE) released another important strategic document in
April 2018, the “AI Innovation Action Plan for Institutions of Higher Education.”8
Among other goals, it called for opening “50 AI schools, research institutes, or
interdisciplinary research centers by 2020.”9 Forthcoming CSET research shows that
China has met and exceeded that goal.10
China’s latest policy push to boost AI workforce development comes via the 14th Five
Year Plan (2021–2025) for National Informatization, released by the Central
Commission for Cybersecurity and Informatization. Its 19 references to talent include
calls to consolidate categorizations of technical job titles, improve talent evaluation
systems, and create big data job certifications.11 The Plan also highlights measuring
AI’s impacts on education and training, and it supports certain third parties to provide
on-the-job training and certifications. Leading companies are also encouraged to
provide training to support higher education institutes, particularly microelectronics
and software institutes.12 Still, the Plan offers few details on the strategic execution.
The implementation of these plans at the postsecondary education level is apparent.
An undergraduate AI major is now offered at 440 universities, all approved by China’s
MOE. In both 2020 and 2021, the AI major was the most popular new addition to
universities’ curricula.13 In addition, AI education is provided through at least 50 AI
Institutes, which are split into 17 research institutes and 33 AI colleges.14 China has
also called for increased supply and training for AI graduate students at the doctoral
level,15 and has stated that AI will be incorporated into the “Special Enrollment Plan
for the Cultivation of High-level Talents in Key Fields Urgently Needed by the State.”16
Talents are called upon to apply AI to industrial innovation, social governance, national

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7

security, and other fields, and to support the mission and needs of major national
projects and development plans.17
At all levels of AI education, China’s AI companies are asked to partner with
universities to train both teachers and students. At the postgraduate level, the
intention is to have a revolving door between industry and universities. First, at the
teaching level, companies are encouraged to train university instructors in the latest
cutting-edge methods.18 Leading researchers at AI companies can also conduct studies
through “double employment” at universities.19 There is also an emphasis on increased
and coordinated funding through university-industry partnerships.20
Overall, prior CSET research shows China appears to be following its strategic plans
for AI education. However, the risk remains that a significant proportion of lower-tier
universities have insufficient resources to properly train students in AI, while schools at
the K–12 level in rural areas continue to struggle with adequate teaching capacity. This
could ultimately affect consistency in providing Chinese youth with AI skills.21

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8

Current Assessment of China’s AI Workforce
While there is good information on AI education in China, compiling an assessment of
the country’s AI workforce is quite difficult. Reliable data is extremely limited, based
mainly on anecdotal or sporadic reporting, with no publicly available official statistics
on the supply of Chinese AI talent. For example, the Chinese government publishes
only highly aggregated employment statistics in its annual Statistical Yearbook.22 Most
discussion instead comes from a range of reports from Chinese ministries, research
institutes, and news media assessing the demand for AI and AI-adjacent talent.23 What
is available is presented here to provide context.
In terms of demand, Chinese ministries, universities, companies, and other media
routinely report talent shortages in critical AI and AI-adjacent areas such as AI R&D,
semiconductors, and cybersecurity.24 Articles and reports cite employer surveys and
the large numbers of unfilled vacancies in these fields, similar to in the United States.25
For example, in 2020 China’s Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security
released a report titled "Analytical Report on Current Employment Prospects for AI
Engineers and Technicians." This report quantified an AI talent gap of more than 5
million workers, with a domestic supply/demand ratio of 1:10 (0.1).26 This report
further states: “If talent development is not strengthened, the talent gap will exceed
10 million by 2025.”27 Another 2020 report from China’s Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology’s (MIIT) Talent Exchange Center, using internally collected
data and data from the Chinese jobs platform BOSS (直聘 or Zhipin in Chinese),
estimated the supply/demand ratios for algorithm research positions and application
development positions to be 0.13 and 0.17, respectively. For AI-specific positions, it
defined critical shortages as anything less than 0.4, estimating ratios of 0.37 for
artificial intelligence chip engineers, 0.23 for machine learning engineers, 0.2 for
natural language processing engineers, 0.09 for computer vision engineers, and 0.08
for intelligent speech engineers.28
The high demand for AI talent stems from the rise of China’s AI community. This
ranges from mega-companies such as Alibaba, Baidu, and Tencent to a robust
ecosystem of AI-related start-ups and state-backed R&D institutes and research
labs.29
That said, some reports suggest demand may dampen going forward. China’s
regulatory crackdown of its tech sector in the past year has led to some anecdotal

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9

reporting that tech companies are downsizing their workforces, reducing the number of
new tech-skilled hires, and lowering starting salaries.30 China’s “zero-COVID” policies
resulting in long and repeated shutdowns of key industrial zones alongside slower
economic growth, associated supply chain issues, and the looming threat of a global
economic slowdown from high inflation could also affect AI-related employment
demand.31
In terms of supply, there appears to be a gap between the specialized technical fields
in demand and technical backgrounds of recent graduates. News reporting of data
from Maimai, China’s LinkedIn, shows a skills mismatch between the rapidly growing
internet sector of years prior and the new emerging technologies seen as the focus of
China’s strategic investment.32 This is also evidenced by recent articles continuing to
suggest that new college graduates, half of whom studied science, technology,
engineering, or mathematics (STEM),33 often struggle to find good jobs that pay well.34
One recent official statement from the Chinese government even suggests new
graduates find work for local governments and organizations located in rural
provinces. At the same time, a record number of Chinese youth are earning bachelor’s
and graduate degrees.35 Previous CSET research also shows that China continues to
increase the number of graduates holding advanced STEM degrees,36 with doctorates
projected to grow rapidly over the coming years.37
Moreover, evidence suggests that China’s AI talent pool is largely domestic. A 2019
report from Chinese job board Liepin states that more than 90 percent of the country’s
AI workforce is native-born.38 This has implications for the active discussion
surrounding Chinese nationals returning from abroad. While CSET research shows
high stay rates for Chinese nationals pursuing STEM doctoral degrees in the United
States,39 other research suggests more graduates may be returning to China in recent
years.40 Still, China is continuing efforts to attract top researchers globally to teach in
its universities,41 in addition to actively marketing to native Chinese talent currently
abroad.42 If it turns out that more STEM graduates are returning to China, this will
further increase the available supply of technical talent.43

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10

Measuring China’s AI Workforce Demand
Gaps in available data limit our ability to describe China’s AI workforce. As a result, we
embarked on curating a novel dataset from which better assessments can be made of
the demand for AI talent in China. This more data-driven assessment sheds light on
the education, experience, salary, and location requirements for a range of AI job
postings.
Defining China’s AI Workforce
In order to analyze China’s AI workforce demand, it is first necessary to define the set
of workers that comprise this cadre of talent. Here the approach mirrors previous CSET
research on the U.S. AI workforce.
Previous CSET research defines the AI workforce as “the set of occupations that
include people who are qualified to work in AI or on an AI development team, or have
the requisite knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs) such that they could work on an AI
product or application with minor training.”44 This definition purposefully includes
technical and non-technical occupations that may not currently be working on AI
applications—but have the KSAs to do so—in order to capture the entire pool of AI
talent. The 54 selected occupations, taken from the 2018 Standard Occupational
Classification (SOC) System, were binned into four categories:
(1) Technical Team 1: occupations that are or could be actively working in AI, are
needed to provide technical inputs into AI applications, or could laterally move
into an AI development role. (Examples: computer scientist, software developer,
network and database administrator.)
(2) Technical Team 2: occupations that have the related knowledge, skills, and
abilities to perform technical roles on an AI team, either as is or with minimal
additional training. (Examples: electrical engineer, web developer, IT support.)
(3) Product Team: occupations that complement AI technical occupations in
product development. (Examples: product managers, legal compliance officers.)
(4) Commercial Team: occupations that provide support for the scaling,
marketing, or acquisition of AI at the organizational level. (Examples: sales
engineers, purchasing agents.)

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 11

Defining China’s AI workforce in this way also allows for comparison with the U.S. AI
workforce. Future reports in this series will make such comparisons as applicable.
Measuring Demand
We analyze job postings to measure employer demand for talent.45 Data on job
openings is important for measuring and evaluating workforce dynamics, because a
high number of openings in a given occupation or field suggests a strong demand in
which to anchor decisions on building supply.46 Coupled with other indicators such as
low unemployment and rising real earnings, persistent high demand could also
indicate the presence of a talent shortage.47 For example, the vitality of the
cybersecurity workforce is so consequential to national security that the U.S.
government, in partnership with Lightcast and CompTIA, created a tool known as
CyberSeek to measure cybersecurity job postings as a way to identify potential talent
shortfalls.48
Using cutting-edge machine learning techniques, in partnership with AMPLYFI, we
compiled a dataset of 6.8 million unique job postings in China in the spring of 2021. Of
these, about 2.1 million, or 31 percent, fell into one of the four categories of AI
occupations. The sample came from four job boards: 51Job (前程无忧), CJOL,
LinkedInCN, and Liepin (猎聘).49
The process of finding and collecting AI job postings involved three general tasks: (1)
acquiring data by harvesting job postings from Chinese job boards and removing
duplicates; (2) classifying each relevant job posting into an AI or non-AI category; and
(3) normalizing the information pulled from those postings.
The steps involved in each of these tasks included several rounds of collaborative
experimentation, iteration, and testing. For example, when developing the AI job
classification model, AMPLYFI experimented with varying training dataset sizes, which
CSET reviewed and provided feedback on at each stage.
Importantly, the tasks of harvesting and building a job classifier model were not
completed chronologically. Each was worked on in parallel, and with iteration based
on the success of attempted methods to incrementally improve results. The result is a
pipeline that begins with the input of harvested job postings and ends with the output
of job postings classified by occupational category with normalized information fields.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 12

This data collection methodology was designed to capture a representative sample of
four major job boards in China. Moreover, due to the strong representation of one
predominant job board for technical talent, 51Job, the sample enables some broader
generalization of this study’s findings.50 The development process is explained at
greater length later in this report. Appendix A contains a complete list of data fields
extracted, and Appendix B contains a full methodology.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 13

China’s AI Workforce Demand
The total number of job postings harvested for our dataset is 10.1 million. Of these, 3.3
million were identified as duplicates, resulting in a final dataset of 6.8 million unique
Chinese job postings.
The final dataset contains approximately 2.1 million job postings that were classified
as “AI” using the definition above, or about 31 percent of all 6.8 million extracted job
postings.51 The breakdown of job postings by category is provided in Table 1.
Table 1. Chinese Job Postings by Category
Category Number Job
Postings Share
Technical Team 1 364,358 5.4%
Technical Team 2 591,074 8.7%
Product Team 453,230 6.6%
Commercial Team 692,420 10.2%
Not AI 4,707,216 69.1%
Total Job Postings 6,808,298 100.0%
Source: CSET and AMPLYFI Chinese job postings dataset.
For comparison, we analyze each AI job category alongside job postings deemed to be
not AI-related. Using the data, we describe summary measures of basic characteristics.
While we provide summary data for all categories of the AI workforce, much of our
analysis focuses on Technical Team 1 and Technical Team 2 job postings due to higher
policy interest. The following sections highlight the distribution of jobs by desired
education, desired experience, average salary ranges, and geographic location.
Desired Education
Desired education varied across AI workforce categories, although the overwhelming
majority of job postings required at least some postsecondary education. However, of
these, more technical positions desired at least a bachelor’s degree, while non-
technical Product and Commercial Team roles were more likely to ask for the

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 14

equivalent of an associate’s degree.52 (Detail on the educational categories used for
this analysis is provided in Appendix C.53)
Figure 1 shows the distribution of job postings by desired educational attainment for
each of the workforce categories. Of all the categories, Technical Team 1 had the most
job postings requiring at least a bachelor’s degree, more than 60 percent. About one-
third of the job postings in Technical Team 1 did allow for less than a bachelor’s
degree, but this compares to almost half of Technical Team 2 and about 60 percent of
both non-technical AI job categories. Relatively few job postings required a graduate
degree, although those that did were mostly for technical roles.54
Figure 1. Most Technical Team 1 Job Postings Require a Bachelor’s Degree

Source: CSET and AMPLYFI Chinese job postings dataset.
Table 2 provides desired education requirements for technical talent in China
compared with technical talent job postings in the United States. For the United States,
we used Lightcast job postings that matched CSET’s definition of technical talent,55
and analyzed the desired educational attainment for those postings.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 15

Table 2. Most Technical Team 1 postings in China and the United States Seek a
Bachelor’s Degree
 Educational Level Technical
Team 1
Technical
Team 2
Chinese AI
Workforce Job
Postings
Less than a
bachelor's degree
31.2% 45.5%
Bachelor's degree
or higher
61.3% 47.5%
No data 7.5% 7.0%
U.S. AI
Workforce Job
Postings
Less than a
bachelor's degree
7.2% 10.1%
Bachelor's degree
or higher
60.0% 57.4%
No data 32.8% 32.5%
Source: CSET and AMPLYFI Chinese job postings dataset; CSET calculations using Lightcast data of
minimum degree requirements for postings in 2021.
When it comes to technical talent, a large share of employers in both China and the
United States are looking for a bachelor’s degree or higher. The implication is that in
both countries, many employers likely view a bachelor’s degree as a gateway
credential, especially for Technical Team 1 positions. That said, shares in the Chinese
job postings analyzed suggest more appreciation for associate’s equivalent degrees
than in the United States. This is especially true for Technical Team 2 job positions,
where the share specifying a bachelor’s degree is almost on par with the share
specifying an associate’s degree (47.5 percent vs. 45.5 percent).

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 16

Desired Experience
Across all 6.8 million job postings analyzed, nearly 80 percent were for entry- or
junior-level positions requiring five years or less of experience.56 The remaining
postings were mostly for mid-level positions requiring 5–15 years of experience, with
very few executive or senior-level positions. Experience requirements across the four
categories of AI jobs were similar, even between technical and non-technical roles,
with about two-thirds of postings requiring 1–5 years of experience. Figure 2 shows
the distribution of required experience across each AI workforce category.
Figure 2. The Majority of Job Postings Analyzed are More Junior

Source: CSET and AMPLYFI Chinese job postings dataset.
The difference between AI workforce job postings and job postings classified as not in
the AI workforce is apparent in the number of postings that require no experience.
Almost one-third of non-AI workforce postings did not require experience, more than

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 17

twice as many as AI workforce postings.57 The difference likely exists because non-AI
workforce job postings encompass numerous industries such as retail, administrative,
and service sector jobs that are less likely to require experience.
There could be several explanations for why such a large number of AI workforce job
postings are for more junior positions. Mid- and senior-level positions may be more
likely to be filled through internal referrals, recruiting firms, or social and personal
networks. Specialized job posting sites, including WeChat, official government
websites, and company web pages might also be more often used for jobs requiring
highly specialized skills or experience.
The importance of personal connections is evident in the literature. In China, the
personal and business connections that make up an individual’s social network are
referred to as guanxi (关系). Guanxi strongly implies mutual obligation between
parties, and it plays a large role in Chinese business culture. Workers with strong
guanxi can leverage those relationships when seeking a promotion or pursuing a new
job.58 As positions increase in seniority, it is reasonable to assume that guanxi would
play an increasing role in filling positions—much as "networking" does for experienced
U.S. positions—potentially explaining the few mid- and senior-level job postings.59
It could also be the case that there are more entry-level positions in the Chinese labor
market because of the occupational and demographic composition of the workforce. In
terms of occupations, generally there are fewer mid- and senior-level positions to hire
for within organizations. Moreover, although many technical job postings may be more
junior in terms of experience, most instead cite a college degree or higher for
educational attainment. Another potential implication relates to the many postings
CSET reviewed, including ones for technical talent, that called for “fresh graduates.”
This could reflect a preference for talent willing to practice the arduous “9-9-6” (nine
to nine, six days a week) informal but expected work schedule pervasive in the Chinese
tech community.
In terms of demographics, it could be that the sharp rise in college enrollments and
graduates is moving the qualification emphasis toward education requirements. This
mirrors the United States, particularly for more junior positions, where employers have
a strong reliance on four-year degrees as a gateway market signal. This is further
supported by the fact that news media reporting suggests placement “tri-contracts”
between graduates, universities, and companies are common.60

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 18

Median Salary
Most salary data provided in the job postings were listed as a range. Therefore, this
analysis uses the median minimum and maximum salaries. These fields were present
for 94 percent of the job postings.61
Figure 3 shows the salary distribution across AI workforce categories. Job postings
across AI workforce categories cited higher median salaries than non-AI workforce job
postings, and Technical Team 1 job postings offered the highest median salaries.62 The
fact that both technical teams offered higher median salaries than non-technical AI
teams and non-AI workforce job postings aligns with the listed desired education.
Figure 3. Median Salaries are Highest for Technical Team 1 and 2 Job Postings

Note: Approximately 6.5 percent of non-AI workforce postings were missing salary information, while
between 5.4 percent and 8.4 percent of AI workforce postings in each category were missing salary
information.
Source: CSET and AMPLYFI Chinese job postings dataset.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 19

We also considered the purchasing power parity (PPP) salaries to enable a more
appropriate value comparison for readers. PPP exchange rates account for the
difference in price levels of goods and services in each country, allowing for a more
direct comparison of the relative value of income. The median minimum and maximum
salary by job category is provided in Table 3, along with the PPP conversion for
2021.63
Table 3: Median Salaries in CNY and USD Using the 2021 PPP Exchange Rate
 Annual Salary in Yuan Purchasing Power Parity in USD

Median
Minimum
Salary
Median
Maximum
Salary
Median
Minimum
Salary
Median
Maximum
Salary
Non-AI Jobs 72,000 96,000 17,196 22,928
Technical Team 1 120,000 180,000 28,660 42,990
Technical Team 2 96,000 132,000 22,928 31,526
Product Team 72,000 120,000 17,196 28,660
Commercial Team 84,000 120,000 20,062 28,660
Source: CSET and AMPLYFI Chinese job postings dataset.
After converting the salary data using PPP, the median value of each job category
ranged between $28,660 and $42,990 for Technical Team 1 postings to $17,196 and
$28,660 for Product Team postings.64 To ensure validity and increase confidence in
these ranges reflecting actual starting salaries offered for these roles, several checks
were conducted on the salary values from the job postings.65
A likely factor behind these salary ranges is the high percentage of entry- and junior-
level postings within the corpus. It follows that these positions may have lower
salaries than jobs requiring more experience, so that actual median salaries paid in
China for these positions may be higher.
Another potential factor is the variability of salary by location. Country-wide PPP
calculations do not take into account regional purchasing power disparities within the
country. As is this case in the United States, it is reasonable to expect a difference in
China’s average salaries by region.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 20

Figure 4 shows median salary ranges by province for Technical Team 1 job postings.
Notably, major population centers such as Beijing and Shanghai had higher median
salaries than did smaller provinces. For comparison, the 2021 PPP conversion to USD
for the median range of salaries in Shanghai, the highest-paying region, was $34,392
to $57,320. The PPP converted median salaries for Heilongjiang Province, the lowest-
paying region, ranged from $14,330 to $22,928.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 21

Figure 4: Provincial Median Salaries for Technical Team 1 Vary Widely (in CNY)

Note: This chart includes only provinces with at least 100 non-missing values; the Tibet Autonomous
Region was excluded because it only had 80 non-missing values. The number of non-values by province
ranged from 116 (Qinghai Province) to 96,877 (Guangdong Province).
Source: CSET and AMPLYFI Chinese job postings dataset.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 22

Geographic Distribution
Job postings for technical talent in China demonstrate a notable geographic
concentration. About 30 percent of the job postings for both Technical Team 1 and
Technical Team 2 are in Guangdong Province alone, which resoundingly dominates job
postings for both categories. Shanghai Municipality and Jiangsu Province also have
large concentrations of job postings, and combined these top three regions account for
almost 60 percent of postings in both categories.
Several factors likely explain the prominence of these areas. According to China’s
National Bureau of Statistics, in 2020 the populations for Guangdong Province,
Shanghai Municipality, and Jiangsu Province were 126 million, 24.9 million, and 84.7
million respectively.66 In addition to being China’s largest province by population,
Guangdong is also known for its advanced technology hub in Shenzhen, China’s Silicon
Valley, and is home to tech giants including genomics company BGI, drone maker DJI,
Huawei, and Tencent. Shanghai has the Instagram-equivalent Xiaohongshu and facial
recognition unicorn Yitu, while Jiangsu Province has a higher concentration of academic
institutions in Nanjing and Suzhou.
These three regions are also economically important in China. Guangdong Province
had the highest gross domestic product (GDP) of all provinces in 2020 at 11.1 trillion
yuan, while Jiangsu ranked second at 10.3 trillion yuan. As a city, Shanghai was
smaller economically, although still among top-performing regions with a GDP of 3.9
trillion yuan.67 However, converting to GDP per capita using the population estimates
above, Shanghai is an economic hub in terms of wealth concentration with a per capita
GDP of over 156,700 yuan ($37,490). This compared to 121,300 yuan ($29,030) in
Jiangsu Province and 88,200 yuan ($21,110) in Guangdong Province, with average per
capita GDP for China at $10,360 in 2020.68
Figures 5 and 6 provide the geographic distribution of job postings classified as
Technical Team 1 and Technical Team 2. As Figure 5 shows, postings for jobs
classified as Technical Team 1 appear to be fairly concentrated in Guangdong
Province, Shanghai Municipality, Jiangsu Province, and Zhejiang Province. Together
these four provinces accounted for about 235,000, or 65 percent, of Technical Team 1
job postings.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 23

Figure 5. Technical Team 1 Job Postings are Concentrated

Note: Of these entries, 2.0 percent were missing location data. Taiwan and Hong Kong are not depicted because the preponderance of the job boards included in
this study concern mainland China.
Source: CSET and AMPLYFI Chinese job postings dataset.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 24

Job postings for Technical Team 2 positions suggest a similar degree of geographic
concentration. Figure 6 shows that four regions—Guangdong Province, Jiangsu
Province, Shanghai Municipality, and Zhejiang Province—accounted for about 406,000,
or 69 percent of all Technical Team 2 job postings in the sample.
Subsequent research will provide a detailed analysis of geographic distribution and
clustering as it relates to key industrial and investment hubs, top-ranked universities,
university-affiliated AI institutes, and organizations affiliated with the People’s
Liberation Army (PLA). It will also explore the top companies hiring for these positions
within each province and municipality.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 25

Figure 6. Technical Team 2 Job Postings are also Concentrated

Note: Of these entries, 1.9 percent were missing data. Taiwan and Hong Kong are not depicted because the preponderance of the job boards included in this
study concern mainland China.
Source: CSET and AMPLYFI Chinese job postings dataset.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 26

Job Demand for AI-Specific Positions
Our definition of AI workforce is intentionally broad, including all technical and non-
technical occupations with the knowledge, skills, and abilities that could work on an AI
product team. While this is valuable, it is also interesting to understand job postings
that are AI-specific in order to better capture AI-specific hiring trends. That is, job
postings that are actively engaged in AI applications as opposed to the broader
interpretation of postings that could be engaged in the design, development, and
deployment of AI.
To capture the share of job postings that are explicitly AI, we conducted analysis on
the subset of AI workforce postings where the job title or description contained an
identified AI keyword (list provided in Appendix D). To minimize the potential
mischaracterization of AI keywords within a job description, and again for policy
relevance, we consider only job postings identified as Technical Team 1 or Technical
Team 2.
A notable share—10 percent, or about 36,000—of all Technical Team 1 job postings
contained at least one AI keyword. Table 4 shows the top ten keywords in descending
order. “Artificial intelligence” and “machine learning” lead the keyword list for
Technical Team 1, with “deep learning,” “robotics,” and “data mining” also having a
sizable number of distinct postings with mentions. “Robotics” is also the leading
keyword in Technical Team 2 job postings, potentially suggesting a stronger focus on
hiring by China’s AI-engaged firms for applications related to machine learning and
robotics. Still, demand for skills related to other AI applications such as computer
vision and human-machine teaming were also visible on the list. Future research will
provide the results of detailed analysis—topic modeling—to identify more granular
themes.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 27

Table 4. Technical Team Chinese Job Postings Containing an AI Keyword
 Technical Team 1 Technical Team 2
Rank Keyword
Number of
Job
Postings Keyword
Number of
Job
Postings
1 artificial intelligence 11,904 robotics 12,352
2 machine learning 10,111 human machine 5,483
3 deep learning 8,322 artificial intelligence 1,811
4 robotics 7,762 machine learning 433
5 data mining 7,658 data mining 327
6 learning algorithm 4,021 deep learning 312
7 computer vision 3,500 autonomous 279
8 pattern recognition 2,685 facial recognition 222
9 human machine 2,619 pattern recognition 158
10
natural language
processing 1,688 computer vision 141
 Top 10 keywords 34,406 Top 10 keywords 21,603
 All keywords 36,198 All keywords 22,031
Note: Totals for top 10 keywords and all keywords are the distinct number of postings containing at
least one keyword to avoid double-counting.
Source: CSET and AMPLYFI Chinese job postings dataset.
Overall, a small share of Technical Team 2 job postings appear to be AI-specific. About
22,000, or 4 percent of identified Technical Team 2 job postings contain an AI
keyword. This is likely due to the nature of occupations classified as Technical Team 2,
many of which are for scientists and engineers, compared with the computer and
mathematical occupations in Technical Team 1.
AI-Specific Desired Education
Far more Technical Team 1 job postings with an AI keyword than without required at
least a bachelor’s degree. More than three-quarters (76 percent) of AI-specific postings

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 28

within Technical Team 1 desired at least a bachelor’s degree, compared to about
three-fifths (61 percent) for all Technical Team 1 postings in the sample.
Moreover, more AI-specific jobs in this category required an advanced graduate
degree. Whereas just 4 percent required a master’s or doctoral degree across all
Technical Team 1 job postings, 17 percent of Technical Team 1 postings containing an
AI keyword did.69 While future research will explore skills and field of study in more
detail, computer science and electrical engineering were commonly specified. Figure 7
provides the distribution of education requirements for AI-specific job postings within
those identified as Technical Team 1.
Figure 7. More Technical Team 1 Job Postings Containing an AI Keyword Desired an
Advanced Degree

Source: CSET and AMPLYFI Chinese job postings dataset.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 29

The number of postings that specifically mentioned a PhD was small, at about 800.
The CSET team reviewed a sample of about 100 of these and found that a wide range
of AI applications and hiring organizations were involved.70 Applications being hired to
develop included robotics, image recognition, blockchain, bioinformatics, autonomous
vehicles, and smart cities, among others. Many postings asked for a record of
publications in high-quality international journals and conference proceedings, and
some explicitly preferred degree attainment from highly ranked institutions.71
In contrast, Technical Team 2 job postings with AI keywords were roughly aligned with
the average for all Technical Team 2 job postings. About half of these postings desired
at least a bachelor’s degree, with a large share (about 40 percent) desiring the
equivalent of an associate’s degree. Figure 8 provides the distribution for AI-specific
postings within Technical Team 2 by desired education.
Figure 8. Technical Team 2 Job Postings Containing an AI Keyword Mirror All Technical
Team 2 Job Postings

Source: CSET and AMPLYFI Chinese job postings dataset.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 30

Data Limitations
Compiling and analyzing demand for AI talent in China was challenging, as no such
dataset previously existed. Building this with open-source data required considerable
innovation in method and technique. With each step of the process came data
limitations that could impact the results. The following section describes the main
limitations by each step in turn.
Sample frame: The data collection methodology was designed to capture a
representative sample of four major job boards in China. However, because it is not
possible to be sure it is fully representative of all Chinese job boards, the
generalizability of the findings presented here is limited. The limited ability to capture
more job board postings with the approach used here was likely in part due to new,
stricter privacy rules on Chinese job boards imposed in May 2021 by the Beijing
Municipal Human Resources and Social Security Bureau after a large-scale data breach
(“Regulations on the Administration of Online Recruitment Services"). While this
harvest for job postings was conducted in 2021, the posting dates themselves ranged
from September 2016 to July 2021. That is, all postings were active within a job board,
but the date range of these postings was well beyond the date of extraction.
Accordingly, no assertions are made or key findings stated that are specific to 2021.
U.S.-China Comparisons: The sample frame was not designed to be representative of
all Chinese job postings, limiting the ability to make U.S.-China comparisons—with the
noted exception for technical talent given the high prevalence of 51Job. This is because
our data on U.S. job postings is representative of U.S.-based job boards, making the
comparison not equivalent. Improved data incorporated into future research will allow
for more direct comparisons, which will be the topic of future research.
Harvesting: A very high percentage of job postings—95 percent—came from just one
platform, 51Job. Notwithstanding this study’s assumption that this represents AI
workforce demand in China due to the dominance of the platform in hiring for technical
talent, it must be acknowledged that 95 percent is a very high share. We also note the
potential for missing duplicate job postings in our approach to deduplication, along
with issues related to inconsistent data availability across platforms. A notable
limitation is that not all data fields were available, particularly for job postings outside
of 51Job, and some initial errors in data extraction required a later re-extraction and
repair.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 31

Annotation: Regarding annotation, the categories of AI workforce used were complex,
leaving open room for error. For example, very granular distinctions across categorical
assignments within general occupation fields such as engineering, sales, and project
management made it a challenge to fine-tune inter-rater reliability on annotations and
model hyperparameter. Moreover, given that some annotation was conducted on an
English translation, there is also the possibility that important context was lost in
assignment.
Classifier Model: The key limitation is the performance of the model, particularly for
Product Team and Commercial Team job postings. Despite best efforts to improve
performance across a range of implemented best practices and testing, model accuracy
scores in terms of precision and recall for these job categories remained lower than
hoped. Moreover, although the classifier model performed better for Technical Team
occupations, we acknowledge errors remain. Precision was optimized over recall,
meaning that while the instance of job postings erroneously classified as Technical
Team occupations was low (false positives), some postings classified as non–technical
were technical (false negatives).
Field Normalization: Of all the normalized fields, salary had the most room for error.
This is because of the large variation in how the data was entered by the hiring entity,
including a range of contract terms and differences in whether pay was hourly,
monthly, or annual. At times the terms were not clear and had to be imputed from
similar postings. Moreover, while some salaries were exact, most were in a large
range, limiting the power of analytic conclusions. Future work will include ongoing
efforts to improve salary data quality. Separately, the high share of junior-level job
postings meant that median salaries, when converting to purchasing power parity,
were lower than might have been expected for technical talent. It is possible our
sample is biased, but likely more job postings are inherently for junior talent.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 32

Key Findings and Implications
This paper provides a first look at demand for AI talent in China. We find that of a
sample of 6.8 million unique job postings across four popular Chinese job boards, over
30 percent could be counted as part of the AI workforce. Of these, 14 percent, or
955,000, could be counted as technical talent.
To account for differences across types of technical jobs, we split job postings for
technical talent into two groups: Technical Team 1 and Technical Team 2. Technical
Team 1 consists of computer and mathematical occupations that could be working in
AI design, development, and deployment. Technical Team 2 consists of engineering,
science, and other technical occupations that have the requisite knowledge, skills, and
abilities to work in AI, but likely would first need some minor retraining or upskilling.
We find that most postings for Technical Team 1 positions require at least a bachelor’s
degree, similar to in the United States. This suggests that a four-year college degree
acts as a gatekeeper to many of these positions, also similar to the United States.
Across all AI workforce categories, we find an overwhelming majority of identified
Chinese AI job postings are junior or entry level. This suggests that hiring for more
advanced talent (e.g., technical positions such as computer research scientists and
machine learning engineers) may be more likely to happen outside of traditional online
job boards, including via social networks, university partnerships, and internal referrals.
Moreover, the high share of junior-level postings could point to a pervasiveness of an
expected intensive work ethic targeted toward younger talent, and could reflect the
large supply of college graduates entering the labor market each year for employers to
choose from.
Moreover, there is evidence of geographic concentration for both Technical Team 1 and
Technical Team 2 job locations. About 60 percent of all job postings for these teams
were concentrated in Guangdong Province, Jiangsu Province, and Shanghai
Municipality, with half of these (30 percent) in Guangdong Province. This is likely
because these regions are important economically, containing many renowned AI
companies and universities. Guangdong Province also has the largest population in
China, likely a large factor in its dominant representation.
Using an AI keyword list to identify postings for jobs actively working in AI, we find
that 10 percent (about 36,000) of job postings classified as Technical Team 1
contained an AI keyword. That is, these are job postings that are likely engaged in AI

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 33

applications as opposed to the broader interpretation of Technical Team 1. Machine
learning and robotics were among the most frequently cited AI keywords within these
positions. We also find that while a similar share of these jobs to all Technical Team 1
postings require a bachelor’s degree (about 60 percent), a far larger share (4 versus 17
percent) require a graduate degree.
For the United States to maintain a competitive edge in AI talent attraction and
retention, the data presented here underscores the need for, yet the complexity of,
understanding the state of China’s AI workforce. China’s government and private
sector are intentionally and strategically investing in developing and deploying AI
capabilities, which could impact the global labor market for AI talent. Moreover, the
geographic distribution of AI-related job postings also highlights the need to
understand what is driving demand for AI talent beyond government strategic plans,
and how changes in these factors could affect future supply and demand. For example,
previous CSET research identified AI investment from public and private sources as
driving AI advancement and adoption,72 and other CSET research highlights the
emphasis in the PLA on deploying various kinetic and non-kinetic AI operational
capabilities.73 Industrial development planning and execution is happening at the local
government level, and a deeper understanding of those efforts could also contribute to
broader understanding of China’s demand for AI talent. The interplay of such factors
on China’s AI workforce dynamics, including Chinese local government AI strategic
plans, will be the focus of a series of forthcoming reports.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 34

Future Research
This is the first report in a series of research papers analyzing the state of AI workforce
demand in China. Future work will analyze these job postings in greater detail. This
will include providing more insights on the geographic distribution of these job
locations, skills and fields of study associated with AI job postings, cluster analysis of
job descriptions to understand the nature of AI applications companies are hiring for,
and an analysis of the companies hiring these workers. An additional harvest of job
postings will further enable year-over-year analysis for changes in trends and
composition. Together, this series will provide a holistic assessment of the nature of AI
job demand in China, and include more direct U.S.-China comparisons.
Regarding geographic location and associated hiring entities, future analysis will
include a series of briefs specific to China’s AI workforce demand based on geographic
location and the hiring company or organization. These papers will: (1) identify where
in China AI job clusters of U.S. national security interest exist, focusing on AI-specific
jobs, surveillance jobs, and PLA-affiliated jobs, along with co-location analysis of
known industrial park clusters, AI innovation pilot zones, and university AI institutes;
(2) employ additional CSET-acquired investment data to discuss the relationship
between public-private and private AI funding mechanisms and the previously
identified job clusters; and (3) indicate where potential AI surveillance job clusters exist
in China and the associated companies. Preliminary analysis indicates that most AI-
related technical centers exist in traditional innovation hubs.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 35

Appendix A: Full List of Job Posting Fields
Table A1 provides a complete list of all fields extracted for each job posting through
the harvesting process.
Table A1. Job Posting Fields
Column name Description
id A unique identifier for the job posting
url_extracted The url of the job posting at the time of harvesting
title_extracted The title of the job posting extracted from the web page
body_extracted The description of the job posting extracted from the web page
body_norm The cleaned description for the job posting
company_name_extracted The company name extracted from the job posting
company_information_extracted The company information extracted from the job posting
release_date_extracted The release date of the posting extracted from the job posting
location_extracted The location of the job extracted from the posting
location_inferred The location inferred from the description if the location_extracted field was empty
salary_extracted The salary extracted from the posting
salary_inferred The salary inferred from the description if the salary_extracted field was empty
salary_exact_monthly_value_pr The exact monthly salary predicted by the salary prediction model
desired_experience_extracted Desired experience extracted from the posting
desired_experience_inferred
Desired_experience inferred from the description if the desired_experience_extracted
field was empty
desired_education_extracted Desired education extracted from the posting
desired_education_inferred
Desired education inferred from the description if the desired_education_extracted
field was empty
retrieve_date The date this posting was retrieved by the harvester
source The source of the job posting, e.g., "51Job"
pipeline_version
Useful in targeting documents for reprocessing should any elements of the pipeline
be updated
job_category_pr The job category predicted by the classifier for this posting
job_category0_distribution_pr The probability of the job posting belonging to category 0

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 36

Column name Description
job_category1_distribution_pr The probability of the job posting belonging to category 1
job_category2_distribution_pr The probability of the job posting belonging to category 2
job_category3_distribution_pr The probability of the job posting belonging to category 3
job_category4_distribution_pr The probability of the job posting belonging to category 4
salary_exact_value_norm
Exact value from the salary derived from either the inferred or extracted field,
depending on which is present
salary_exact_annual_value_nor
m
Exact annual value from the salary derived from either the inferred or extracted field,
depending on which is present
salary_exact_monthly_value_nor
m
Exact monthly value from the salary derived from either the inferred or extracted
field, depending on which is present
salary_minimum_value_norm
Minimum value from the salary derived from either the inferred or extracted field,
depending on which is present
salary_minimum_annual_value_
norm
Minimum annual value from the salary derived from either the inferred or extracted
field, depending on which is present
salary_minimum_monthly_value
_norm
Minimum monthly value from the salary derived from either the inferred or extracted
field, depending on which is present
salary_maximum_value_norm
Maximum value from the salary derived from either the inferred or extracted field,
depending on which is present
salary_maximum_annual_value_
norm
Maximum annual value from the salary derived from either the inferred or extracted
field, depending on which is present
salary_maximum_monthly_valu
e_norm
Maximum monthly value from the salary derived from either the inferred or extracted
field, depending on which is present
salary_currency_norm
Currency value from the salary derived from either the inferred or extracted value,
depending on which is present
salary_recurrence_norm Recurrence derived from either the inferred or extracted value, e.g., "month," "year"
release_date_exact_date_norm Exact date derived from the release_date_extracted field
release_date_minimum_date_no
rm Minimum date derived from the release_date_extracted field
release_date_maximum_date_n
orm Maximum date derived from the release_date_extracted field
release_date_status_norm The status derived from the release_date_extracted field, e.g., release,” “update”
desired_experience_exact_years
_norm
The exact years of experience derived from either the inferred or extracted
desired_experience fields
desired_experience_minimum_y The normalized minimum required years of experience derived from either the

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 37

Column name Description
ears_norm inferred or extracted desired_experience fields
desired_experience_maximum_y
ears_norm
The normalized minimum required years of experience derived from either the
inferred or extracted desired_experience fields
desired_experience_exact_level_
norm
The normalized exact required level of experience derived from either the inferred or
extracted desired_experience fields
desired_experience_minimum_le
vel_norm
The normalized minimum required level of experience derived from either the
inferred or extracted desired_experience fields
desired_experience_maximum_l
evel_norm
The normalized maximum required level of experience derived from either the
inferred or extracted desired_experience fields
desired_education_exact_level_
norm
The normalized exact required level of education derived from either the inferred or
extracted desired_education fields
desired_education_minimum_lev
el_norm
The normalized minimum required level of education derived from either the inferred
or extracted desired_education fields
desired_education_maximum_le
vel_norm
The normalized maximum required level of education derived from either the
inferred or extracted desired_education fields
location_continent_en_norm The continent derived from the extracted or inferred location in English
location_continent_zh_norm The continent derived from the extracted or inferred location in Chinese
location_country_en_norm The country derived from the extracted or inferred location in English
location_country_zh_norm The country derived from the extracted or inferred location in Chinese
location_province_en_norm The province-level location derived from the extracted or inferred location in English
location_province_zh_norm The province-level location derived from the extracted or inferred location in Chinese
location_prefecture_en_norm
The prefecture-level location derived from the extracted or inferred location in
English
location_prefecture_zh_norm
The prefecture-level location derived from the extracted or inferred location in
Chinese
location_county_en_norm The county-level location derived from the extracted or inferred location in English
location_county_zh_norm The county-level location derived from the extracted or inferred location in Chinese
location_township_en_norm
The township-level location derived from the extracted or inferred location in
English
location_township_zh_norm
The township-level location derived from the extracted or inferred location in
Chinese
location_zone_en_norm The industrial zone derived from the extracted or inferred location in English
location_zone_zh_norm The industrial zone derived from the extracted or inferred location in Chinese

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 38

Column name Description
location_details_en_norm Populated for any lower level locations that could not be disambiguated
location_details_zh_norm Populated for any lower level locations ’that could not be disambiguated
location_code_norm
A unique code for the location, ISO 3166 2 for continents and countries and
administrative division code for lower levels.
location_level_norm
The level of the location, to identify the list in which to look for more information
about this location.
body_norm A cleaned version of the "body_extracted" field
is_primary
Whether the job posting was chosen as the primary representative in a set of
duplicates
url_norm The URL of the job posting with query parameters removed
pipeline_date_updated When the posting was last run through the pipeline
Source: AMPLYFI.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 39

Appendix B: Data Collection and Model Classification
This appendix provides more detail on the process of compiling and curating the 6.8
million unique Chinese job postings, including model training and category assignment.
The process of finding and collecting AI job postings involved three general tasks: (1)
harvesting job postings from Chinese job boards and removing duplicates; (2)
classifying each relevant job posting into an AI or non-AI job category; and (3)
normalizing the information pulled from those postings. This is illustrated in Figure B1.
Figure B1. Chinese Job Posting Data Acquisition Process

Note: Several tasks were developed simultaneously. This graphic shows the linear progression of a job
posting through the completed pipeline from website harvest to data output.
Source: AMPLYFI.
Harvesting
The first step in the process was to find Chinese job postings and harvest them into a
data lake. AMPLYFI deployed website crawlers to find and download a representative
sample of web pages that displayed job vacancy announcements. The process of
extracting job postings took place from February to July 2021.
Although four job boards were included, the vast majority, about 95 percent, of
postings came from 51Job. This was due in part to the different measures each site had
in place to detect and prevent web crawling and scraping, but also because 51Job was
a leading site for technically oriented job postings in China. After the website was
downloaded, the HTML pages were parsed to extract relevant information and
populate the fields of the database.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 40

Posting Deduplication
When harvesting job postings from Chinese websites, web crawlers sometimes
downloaded the same posting more than once. To prevent double counting in the
analysis, these duplicate postings needed to be captured and removed.
To address this, the AMPLYFI team conducted a two-step process. They first
normalized URLs by isolating and removing suffixes, as the beginning of the string for
each URL is identical in format but unique to each posting, leading to the extraction of
a unique identifier for each unique posting.74 They then compared these unique
identifiers to identify duplicates and kept one copy. In case of content variations
between the duplicates, the longest version of the posting was kept.75
The types of duplicates identified either were job postings listed several times, edited
by the posting entity (employer) over time, or appeared under different sections of the
websites. All of these resulted in variations to the end of the URLs that had to be
isolated and removed to enable unique identifier comparison. All duplications
discovered and removed were within the same job platform and not across platforms.76
Classifying AI Job Postings
In order to classify job postings into AI workforce categories, data is needed to train,
test, and validate a classifier model. The two main components of the classification
process are the creation of input data for the model and the creation of the model
itself. These components, discussed briefly in the following sections, were constructed
in parallel and with iteration.
Model Annotation
The process of generating training, testing, and validation data for the classifier model
required creating a large set of labeled data. For this process, separate datasets of job
postings for each category were created and annotated using different approaches.77
Three teams worked collaboratively throughout the annotation process: (1) the CSET
team; (2) six hired AMPLYFI annotators; and (3) the AMPLYFI team. The AMPLYFI team
facilitated communication between the first two teams, manually adjudicated
particularly challenging job postings while working alongside the CSET team, and
trained the six annotators.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 41

Each dataset was prepared differently. The CSET team created what was ultimately
used as the test set at the initial stage of annotation. To help train the AMPLYFI team,
the CSET team began by annotating a small set of job postings that contained
examples of positions from each category.78 The AMPLYFI team then used this and the
full list of CSET-defined AI occupations to have their annotators label another set of
job postings in parallel with the CSET team. Working together, the teams compared
the two labeled sets and resolved mislabeled postings, identifying job postings that
had been labeled with high error rates and developing guidelines for labeling edge
cases. The AMPLYFI team also adjudicated their annotation team’s more challenging
cases, at times with input from CSET.
For annotation, CSET and AMPLYFI team members reviewed each job posting’s title,
description, salary, company title and information, education requirement, and other
relevant fields. Upon review of the available information and context, annotators
assigned each posting to one of the four CSET-defined AI workforce categories, or to a
fifth that was created to indicate that the posting did not fall into one of the other four
categories. The work began shortly after initial harvesting and continued throughout
the development of the classifier model.
The complexity and nuance of the AI-job categories added time to the annotation
process. Each category comprised a wide range of occupations, and some occupations
across categories shared key words or skills.79 Further, some categories included
certain occupations while omitting others that could appear similar.80 And finally, some
occupations were only included within relevant sectors (e.g., project managers were
included only if the project was technical in nature). In some cases this was further
complicated by imprecise translation (the CSET team worked primarily in English) or
limited information within key fields.
Using CSET’s test data and AMPLYFI-provided training, AMPLFYI’s annotators labeled
a dataset of about 5,500 job postings. The AMPLYFI team found that labeling job
postings multiple times and conducting disagreement resolution exercises improved
the performance of the classifier. Annotation stopped when the performance of the
classifier stopped improving with additional labeled data.81 The job postings selected
for annotation were a mix of random and targeted samples presumed to be within
each AI workforce category. This was necessary because of the uneven distribution of
AI and non-AI job postings.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 42

Of the 5,500 annotated job postings, about 4,800 were used for the final training set,
and another 650 were used for model validation. The job postings used for the model
test set were the 485 separately annotated by the CSET team. Measures of inter-
annotator agreement (reliability) and agreement against the best-performing classifier
model may be released in future documentation.
Critically, we note that areas with the most inter-annotator disagreement were also
where the classifier ultimately had higher error rates. This mainly affected Product
Team and Commercial Team job postings, which as a result are included in this
analysis in a far more limited scope.
Model Classification
To categorize each job posting into one of the predefined AI workforce categories, the
AMPLYFI team developed a novel machine learning classification model.82 In parallel
to the annotation process, the AMPLYFI team created multiple iterations of this
classifier model, updated with newly annotated data and varied data input formats,
parameter optimizations, and model architecture designs. Different parts of the
classifier were developed and tested independently and iteratively. With each
variation, the model was tested using commonly used metrics: accuracy, precision,
recall, F1-score, and F0.5-scores were calculated to determine the highest-performing
version.83
The AMPLYFI team decided to use a large open-source pretrained transformer model
known as the Bidirectional Encoder Representation from Transformers (BERT)-base-
Chinese model,84 due to its effectiveness in text classification and the availability of
models pretrained in Chinese.85 Other models were tested but added no significant
improvement, and the team used default hyperparameters for most testing before final
tuning at the end of development.
The AMPLYFI team optimized the model for this custom application by varying four
hyperparameters. These hyperparameters were: the number of times the model
passed through the entire training set (epochs); the number of samples the model
reviewed before updating its internal parameters (batch size); the maximum number of
words a model was able to process at once, a constraint imposed by the model
architecture itself (sequence length); and a mechanism for determining how fast the
model learned to solve the problem, because of the tradeoff between fast learning and
reaching an optimal solution (learning rate).

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 43

Once the tuning of hyperparameters was complete, the AMPLYFI team tried additional
ways to improve classifier performance to ensure the best fit. This included merging
job categories into different combinations, training on relevant fields in isolation and
then in different combinations, altering token input formation and length, training on
normalized fields instead of original values, integrating annotator disagreement in the
model input, and discarding labels of which annotators were less confident. These
experiments either confirmed previous assumptions or provided no increase in
performance, providing the AMPLYFI with confidence in the final classifier model.
Field Normalization
Once the dataset was harvested, deduplicated, and each posting classified into AI job
category, extracted fields needed to be standardized for analysis. Several fields of
interest contained related information in differing formats, requiring a dedicated effort
for creating standard values and formats. Fields that were normalized for analysis
included desired experience, desired education, salary, posted date, and location.
Details on the field normalization process for each variable are provided in Appendix C.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 44

Appendix C: Field Normalization for Analysis
Across the extracted job postings contained in the corpus, field normalization—the
process of standardizing fields into consistent values—was required across several
fields. These included salary, posted date, desired experience, desired education, and
location. Null values for the main normalized fields used in this report are provided in
Table C1.
Table C1. Null Count for Fields Used in this Analysis
Field Title Null Count Percentage of Job Postings
desired_education_exact_level
_norm
1,073,933 15.8
desired_experience_exact_level_
norm
431,263 6.3
salary_minimum_value_norm 270,192 4.9
salary_minimum_annual_value
_norm
439,632 6.5
salary_maximum_value_norm 262,768 3.9
salary_maximum_annual_valu
e_norm
432,210 6.3
location_province_en_norm 125,860 1.8
location_province_zh_norm 125,860 1.8
Source: CSET and AMPLYFI Chinese job postings dataset.
For each of these fields, the AMPLYFI team attempted to fill null values. Specifically,
when the education, experience, or salary fields were null, AMPLYFI attempted to fill
them using information from the job description field. AMPLYFI performed regular
expression (RegEx) searches on the description—similar to those used to extract
values from other fields—to fill in missing information about education, experience,
and salary. For example, when the education field was null, AMPLYFI searched the
description field for “博士” to identify additional job postings that desired a doctoral

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 45

degree. AMPLYFI used a different method to fill null values in the geographic location
fields; further details are provided in that subsection.
Extracted information within the corpus was also pulled in more than one language.
Therefore language detection and distribution analysis was an important first step. The
AMPLYFI team was able to detect which languages were used and at what frequency.
They determined that about 97 percent of the job postings were mainly Chinese, with
more than half containing some English words or phrases, and more than 2 percent
bilingual in Chinese and English. The high proportion of postings in Chinese allowed
the AMPLYFI team to focus models solely on Mandarin, removing the need for
multilingual processing of job postings.
Desired Education
The desired education for each job posting was provided as either an exact, maximum,
or minimum level of educational attainment. About 84 percent of postings were in the
exact category. Table C2 gives an overview of Chinese educational levels, which differ
from the U.S. system at the secondary level.
Table C2. Chinese Primary and Secondary Education Levels
High-level Chinese education trajectory
Age School
3-6 Pre-school education
6-12 Primary education
12-18 Secondary education
>18 Higher education
Chinese secondary education
Age School
12-15 Junior middle school
15-18
Senior middle school (if students pass the
entrance exam)
Specialized / Vocational / Technical middle school
(if students don't pass the entrance exam)
Source: AMPLYFI.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 46

After secondary school, the options for postsecondary education are similar to those in
the American system. However, there is no direct equivalent of the U.S. community
college system. Instead, there are two- to three-year specialized or vocational-
technical colleges that are similar to U.S. technical colleges and career and technical
education programs at community colleges granting the equivalent of a U.S.
associate’s degree.
When extracting education requirements from job postings, there was a set number of
specific Chinese phrases within the corpus. These phrases and their English
equivalents are shown in Table C3. The phrases “junior middle school,”
“specialized/vocational/technical middle school,” and “senior middle school” were all
normalized to “middle school” in the final version of the field.
Table C3. Extracted Chinese Characters and Their English Translations
Extracted Education
Requirement in Chinese
English Translation of
Education Requirement
初中 junior middle school degree
中技
specialized/vocational/technical
high school degree
中专
specialized/vocational/technical
high school degree
中专/中技
specialized/vocational/technical
high school degree
高中 high school degree
大专 associate’s degree
本科 bachelor's degree
硕士 master's degree
MBA master's degree
EMBA master's degree
MBA/EMBA master's degree
博士 doctoral degree
Source: AMPLYFI.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 47

Similar to how the desired experience field was handled, using the description field to
fill in missing values fairly effective. The process filled in 22 percent of missing values
in the desired education field.
Desired Experience
Desired experience can be expressed either in years required or in level. In both cases,
it can be an exact value or a range of values. The normalization process for values is
straightforward, and Table C4 shows the conversion used between formats.
Table C4. Desired Experience Range Normalization from Years to Levels
Range Level Synonyms/Translations
0 years No experience
在校生/应届生
(current/graduate students),
无需经验 (no experience
required), 应届 (last year
student), last year student
0-5 years Junior
一年以下 (less than 1 year),
实习 (internship),
internship, entry, associate,
intermediate
5-15 years Mid Mid level (also numerical
values from 5 to 15 years)
>15 years Senior lead, executive, director
Source: AMPLYFI.
Using the description field to fill in missing values was more effective for this field than
for salary, discussed next. This strategy filled in 17 percent of all missing values.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 48

Salary
The salary field required significant normalization in order to conduct meaningful
analysis. In general, the job posting listed a value or a range of values (e.g., minimum
to maximum), a currency, and a recurrence. The AMPLYFI team rescaled values to
monthly and annual rates for easier comparison across job postings.
Normalization proved a difficult task because salaries were provided by year, month or
hour, and sometimes contained errors or lacked pieces of information. Variable weekly
schedules further complicated conversion from hourly or daily salaries to monthly and
yearly. The weekly Chinese standard is 40 hours, similar to the U.S. work week, but
some start-ups follow the 9-9-6 system where people work 72 hours a week.
An investigation into the hourly and daily salaries showed that not only was it not
clear which hourly rate the job paid, but some values were also clearly wrong. Some
postings had a very high value, for instance 5,000 yuan per hour or 15,000 yuan per
day for low qualification jobs. Reading the descriptions indicated that in those cases
the value was not correct, but rather a way to show that the company was willing to
pay well. Further, just over 170,000 postings, or 1.65 percent of the corpus, contained
no payment frequency (e.g., hourly, annually), and slightly more than 3 percent of the
postings did not list a salary. Future analysis may include imputed salary data for
missing values.
Geographic Location
The normalization of the job location field required several steps. China uses
administrative divisions to describe geographic areas at different levels of granularity.
From largest to smallest, the divisions relevant to analysis are: provincial, prefectural,
county, and township levels.
A few locations do not fit perfectly in the administrative division system: the National
Economic and Technological Development Zones, the National High-Tech Industrial
Development Zones and the Border Economic Cooperation Zones. Sometimes these
zones also have their own administrative division, but this can be on the county level
as well as the township level. These zones are very interesting because they likely
have a different job vacancy landscape from their geographical environment, since they
have a high concentration of technical jobs. Because of this, AMPLYFI created a
separate category for these zones.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 49

Job postings did not always specify the same level of administrative division. To rectify
this issue, AMPLYFI developed a process to disambiguate locations to all levels above
the one given. For example, if the location 九江 (Jiujiang) is given at the county level,
we need the prefecture level list to disambiguate this to 九江市 (Jiujiang City) and that
list can then tell us that Jiujiang City lies in Jiangxi Province. This allows for analysis at
higher levels of administrative zones.
This process provided normalized fields for each job posting for every available
administrative zone in both Chinese and English. Table C5 demonstrates with an
example.
Table C5. Example of Geographic Normalization by Administrative Zone
Beilun District, Zhejiang, China
Field Name Field Content
Continent EN Asia
Continent ZH 亚洲
Country EN China
Country ZH 中国
Province EN Zhejiang Province
Province ZH 浙江省
Prefecture EN Ningbo City
Prefecture ZH 宁波市
County EN Beilun District
County ZH 北仑区
Level county
Code 330206
Source: AMPLYFI.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 50

Appendix D: AI Keyword List
Table D1 provides the keyword list used for the AI-specific analysis of Technical Team
1 and Technical Team 2 job postings. The list is provided in English and Chinese;
analysis was done in Chinese, as the origin language of the posting. The list was
developed using CSET staff expertise and a literature review of research that similarly
has attempted to identify AI-specific data in areas such as grants and patents. Some
words were intentionally stemmed (e.g., “recog”) for more inclusive analysis.
Table D1. AI Keyword List
English Term Chinese Term
artificial intelligence 人工智能
\bAI\b
machine learning 机器学习
supervised learning 监督学习
unsupervised learning 无监督学习
reinforcement learning 强化学习
deep learning 深度学习 or 深层学习
neural network 神经网络
computer vision 计算机视觉
natural language processing 自然语言处理
facial recog
人脸识别 or 面部识别 or
面像识别 or 面容识别 or
面孔识别
biometric 生物识别 or 指纹识别
robotics 机器人技术 or 机器人
augmented reality 增强现实
autonomous 自主性
human-machine 人机 or 人机交互

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 51

English Term Chinese Term
learning algorithm 学习算法
classification algorithm 分类算法
image recog 图像识别
data mining 数据挖掘
text mining 文本挖掘
topic model 主题建模 or 主题模型
sentiment analysis
情感分析 or 评论分析 or
评价分析
opinion mining 意见挖掘 or 观点挖掘
pattern recog 模式识别
Source: CSET.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 52
Authors
Diana Gehlhaus is a research fellow at the Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, where Sara Abdulla and Jacob Feldgoise are data research analysts, and
Luke Koslosky and Dahlia Peterson are research analysts. Joanne Boisson is a senior
machine learning engineer at AMPLYFI.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Catherine Aiken, Igor Mikolic-Torreira, Emily Weinstein, Anna
Puglisi, Ngor Luong, Owen Daniels, Amy Chao and Christine Cleary DuFour for their
valuable feedback and assistance. They are grateful to Howard Shatz and Erik Britton
for providing most insightful reviews, to Daniel Chou for his critical data expertise, and
to Ben Murphy for his translations and Chinese character verification. They also thank
Oliver Hayman at AMPLYFI for his dedicated management of this collaboration, and
Luis Espinosa-Anke for his technical expertise as AMPLYFI’s head of machine learning.
Finally, we thank Dale Brauner for fact-checking and the outstanding editorial support
provided by CSET’s external affairs team.
© 2022 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20220003

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 53

Endnotes

1 These teams are broadly defined to include technical occupations that “could be” as opposed to
“actively are” working in AI. Technical Team 1 is more directly related to AI, including most computer
and mathematical science occupations. Technical Team 2 focuses more on engineering and science
occupations.
2 Remco Zwetsloot, James Dunham, Zachary Arnold, and Tina Huang, “Keeping Top AI Talent in the
United States” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET), December 2019). See also Jack
Corrigan, James Dunham, and Remco Zwetsloot, “The Long-Term Stay Rates of International STEM PhD
Graduates” (CSET, April 2022).
3 Graham Allison and Eric Schmidt, “ The U.S. Needs a Million Talents Program to Retain Technology
Leadership,” Foreign Policy, July 16, 2022, https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/07/16/immigration-us-
technology-companies-work-visas-china-talent-competition-universities/.
4 Dahlia Peterson, Kayla Goode, and Diana Gehlhaus, “AI Education in China and the United States: A
Comparative Assessment” (CSET, September 2021).
5 For example, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics tracks job postings explicitly for this purpose, and
publishes a monthly update. For more, see: https://www.bls.gov/jlt/jltprovq.htm.
6 51Job is one of the top 100 internet companies in China and was listed on Nasdaq in 2004. Many well-
known firms and Fortune 500 companies are recruiting talent and posting positions on 51Job. Every
week, users upload more than 50 million resumes to the platform, including for jobs related to internet
and digital industries. For more, see “找工作软件排行榜2022 国内十大找工作app排行榜” (top 10 job
search apps in China in 2022), 安粉丝 (Anfensi, January 13, 2022), https://perma.cc/CK9K-Z23P.
7 Zachary Arnold et al., “Using Machine Learning to Fill Gaps in Chinese AI Market Data” (CSET,
February 2021).
8 Original CSET translation, "AI Innovation Action Plan for Institutions of Higher Education"
(教育部关于印发《高等学校人工智能创新行动计划》的通知), Chinese Ministry of Education, April 2,
2018, https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/ai-innovation-action-plan-for-institutions-of-higher-
education.
9 Original CSET translation, "AI Innovation Action Plan.”
10 A forthcoming CSET publication will provide more detail on China’s AI Institutes.
11 Rogier Creemers, Hunter Dorwart, Kevin Neville, Kendra Schaefer, et al., “Translation: 14th Five-Year
Plan for National Informatization, Dec. 2021,” DigiChina at Stanford University, January 24, 2022,

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 54

https://digichina.stanford.edu/work/analyzing-chinas-2021-2025-informatization-plan-a-digichina-
forum/.
12 Creemers, Dorwart, Neville, Schaefer, et al., “Translation.”
13 Zou Shuo, “AI now most favored major at universities,” China Daily, March 3, 2021,
https://archive.ph/jKNYz.
14 The colleges offer the MOE-approved Artificial Intelligence major, along with other standardized
majors such as Data Science and Big Data Technology and Intelligent Science and Technology. A
forthcoming CSET publication will provide more detail on China’s AI Institutes.
15 Chinese Ministry of Education, National Development and Reform Commission, and Ministry of
Finance, “关于“双一流‘建设高校促进学科融合 加快人工智能领域研究生培养的若干意见” (“Notice on the
Publication of "Certain Opinions on Promoting Curricula Merging at 'Double First-Class' Institutes of
Higher Education and on Accelerating the Cultivation of Graduate Students in the AI Field”) January 21,
2020, https://archive.vn/f7iGx. See CSET’s translation at https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/notice-
on-the-publication-of-certain-opinions-on-promoting-curricula-merging-at-double-world-class-
institutes-of-higher-education-and-on-accelerating-the-cultivation-of-graduate-students-in-the/.
16 Peterson, Goode, and Gehlhaus, “AI Education in China and the United States: A Comparative
Assessment.”
17 “Certain Opinions on Promoting Curricula Merging at ‘Double First-Class’ Institutes of Higher
Education and on Accelerating the Cultivation of Graduate Students in the AI Field.”
18 The central government also requests that companies train graduate students by having them solve
industry needs. For PhD students, enterprises are encouraged to open up "scenario-driven," application-
oriented courses, as well as their data, case studies, tools, and training platforms. Enterprises can also
utilize industry alliances, joint R&D labs, entrepreneurship and skills competitions, and certification
training to help graduate students grow in the field. Instructors are asked to incorporate the latest AI
research findings into PhD courses.
19 Peterson, Goode, and Gehlhaus, “AI Education in China and the United States: A Comparative
Assessment.”
20 Universities are encouraged to coordinate various resources, such as financial investment and
scientific research income, and to obtain angel investment and venture capital financing, to boost major
AI projects and applied research within universities while assisting with talent training.
21 Peterson, Goode, and Gehlhaus, “AI Education in China and the United States: A Comparative
Assessment.”

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 55

22 National Bureau of Statistics of China, “China Statistical Yearbook, 2021” (Beijing: China Statistics
Press), http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/ndsj/2021/indexeh.htm.
23 See, for example, “China Artificial Intelligence Talent Training Report,” an issue group at the Institute
of China’s Science, Technology and Education Policy, Zhejiang University and Baidu, January 2022.
24 See “China’s top talent trends for 2020: tech innovation to drive job market,” Hays, https://www.hays-
china.cn/en/press-release/content/-2020-?s=d3d3LmhheXMuY24=; A. J. Cortese, “China’s Tech Pivot
(Part II): STEM Talent Shortage Stymies Core Innovation?” Macro Polo, May 10, 2022,
https://macropolo.org/chinas-tech-pivot-stem-talent-shortage/?rp=e.
25 China Information Security Evaluation Center (中国信息安全测评中心), “Research Report on the Status
of China's Information Security Professionals (2018–2019)” (中国信息安全从业人员现状调研报告 [2018-
2019] 年度),” translated Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/research-report-on-the-status-of-chinas-information-security-
professionals-2018-2019/.
26 That is, one person for every 10 openings for AI engineers and technicians. This talent is defined by
the Ministry as “engineering and technical personnel engaged in the analysis, research and development
of artificial intelligence–related algorithms, deep learning and other technologies, and design,
optimization, operation and maintenance, management and application of artificial intelligence systems.”
For more, see Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security, “新职业——
人工智能工程技术人员就业景气现状分析报告” (“New Occupations — Analysis Report on Artificial
Intelligence Engineers’ Current Employment Status”), April 30, 2020, https://archive.ph/Dvk4p.
27 Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security, “New Occupations.”
28 Ministry of Industry and Information Technology Talent Exchange Center (工业和信息化部人才交流中
心), Artificial Intelligence Industry Talent Development Report (2019-2020 Edition) [人工智能产业人才发
展报告（2019-2020年版）], translated by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/artificial-intelligence-industry-talent-development-report-
2019-2020-edition/.
29 Kai Shen, Xiaoxiao Tong, Ting Wu, and Fangning Zhang, “The next frontier for AI in China could add
$600 billion to its economy,” McKinsey, June 2022, https://www.mckinsey.com/business-
functions/quantumblack/our-insights/the-next-frontier-for-ai-in-china-could-add-600-billion-to-its-
economy.
30 Bloomberg News, “China’s Youth Unemployment Spikes as Students Graduate,” August 16, 2021,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-08-16/china-s-youth-unemployment-spikes-as-
students-graduate; Martin Quin Pollard, “Analysis: Record numbers of Chinese graduates enter worst
job market in decades,” Reuters, June 23, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/world/china/record-numbers-
chinese-graduates-enter-worst-job-market-decades-2022-06-23/.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 56

31 Yaling Jiang, “Job crisis looms for Chinese graduates as tech, new energy vehicle firms stop hiring
amid Covid-19 lockdowns,” South China Morning Post, May 2022, https://www.scmp.com/tech/big-
tech/article/3178963/job-crisis-looms-chinese-graduates-tech-new-energy-vehicle-firms-stop.
32 Jinshan Hong and Spe Chen, “China Lacks the Right Workers to Boost Xi’s Favored Tech Jobs,”
Bloomberg, September 27, 2022, https://archive.ph/pUrg5#selection-4215.0-4215.61.
33 Statistics here include only “regular” institutions of higher education, not adult- or web-based ones.
Because China’s Ministry of Education does not oversee private or provincial institutions, nor the Seven
Sons of National Defence institutions, all recipients of bachelor’s degrees are not included in this
overview. See the official statistics from China’s Ministry of Education at
http://www.moe.gov.cn/jyb_sjzl/moe_560/2020/quanguo/202108/t20210831_556364.html.
34 Laura He, “China is encouraging college graduates to work in the countryside,” CNN Business, June
13, 2022, https://www.cnn.com/2022/06/13/economy/china-youth-unemployment-countryside-
recruitment-intl-hnk/index.html. The struggle with college graduate underemployment is not new. See
Ralph Jennings, “China's ant tribe’ poses policy challenge for Beijing,” Reuters, February 17, 2010,
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-middleclass/chinas-ant-tribe-poses-policy-challenge-for-
beijing-idUSTRE61H01220100218.
35 In 2022, an estimated record 10.8 million bachelor’s degrees were awarded in China, and another
11.9 million youth took the notoriously difficult national college entrance exam. For more, see the official
enrollment data, National Bureau of Statistics of China, “China Statistical Yearbook, 2021.”
36 Peterson, Goode, and Gehlhaus, “AI Education in China and the United States: A Comparative
Assessment.”
37 Remco Zwetsloot et al., “China Is Fast Outpacing U.S. STEM PhD Growth” (CSET, August 2021).
38 猎聘网 (Liepin), “2019年中国AI&大数据人才就业趋势报告” ("2019 China AI & big data talent
employment trend report"), https://perma.cc/3Y9W-2WKZ.
39 Corrigan, Dunham, and Zwetsloot, “The Long-Term Stay Rates of International STEM PhD
Graduates.”
40 For example, one study on the effectiveness of China’s “Youth 1000 Talents Program” found that
while recruiting “top-tier” researchers back to China remains elusive, recruiting “next best” young
researchers struggling to secure funding in the United States and European Union has been relatively
effective. See Dongbo Shi, Weichen Liu, and Yanbo Wang, “Has China’s Young Thousand Talents
Program Been Successful in Recruiting and Nurturing Next-generation Chinese Scientists?” (SSRN, July
12, 2022), https://ssrn.com/abstract=4043516. In response to this program, some in the United States
are calling for a reciprocal U.S. program. See Allison and Schmidt, “The U.S. Needs a Million Talents
Program to Retain Technology Leadership.”.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 57

41 Emily Weinstein, “Mapping China’s Sprawling Efforts to Recruit Scientists,” DefenseOne, November
30, 2020, https://www.defenseone.com/ideas/2020/11/mapping-chinas-sprawling-efforts-recruit-
scientists/170373/.
42 The BOSS (Zhipin) homepage included a section for overseas returnees, at times with a caption
advertising “exclusive spot for high paying jobs for returnees.” https://perma.cc/JQ98-349X.
43 This is not a statement about the relative quality of the talent, an aspect that is not addressed here.
With that said, more Chinese universities are gaining standing in international rankings. For more on
stay rates for Chinese STEM PhDs in the United States, see Corrigan, Dunham, and Zwetsloot, “The
Long-Term Stay Rates of International STEM PhD Graduates.”
44 Diana Gehlhaus and Santiago Mutis, “The U.S. AI Workforce: Understanding the Supply of AI Talent”
(CSET, January 2021).
45 It is a widely used measure in economics. For example, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics tracks job
postings explicitly for this purpose, and publishes a monthly update:
https://www.bls.gov/jlt/jltprovq.htm.
46 As noted in an earlier section, China’s MIIT Talent Exchange Center also estimates and evaluates AI
occupation job vacancy rates for this reason.
47 See Gehlhaus and Mutis, “The U.S. AI Workforce.” Some characteristics of the background
demanded, such as educational attainment and experience, are likely to reflect talent supply.
48 For more on CyberSeek, see https://www.cyberseek.org/. The number of job openings in cybersecurity
based on this tool is routinely used for cybersecurity workforce policy. For example, see
https://www.whitehouse.gov/oncd/briefing-room/2022/10/03/office-of-the-national-cyber-director-
requests-your-insight-and-expertise-on-cyber-workforce-training-and-education/.
49 ChinaHR (中华英才网), Zhaopin (智联招聘), Zhipin (直聘), and Lagou were also considered, but were
not included due to their implemented restrictions and safeguards against web scraping. This was likely
in part due to new, stricter privacy rules on these Chinese job boards, imposed by the Beijing Municipal
Human Resources and Social Security Bureau in May 2021 after a large-scale data breach (“Regulations
on the Administration of Online Recruitment Services"). After this breach, the Bureau summoned
executives from Zhaopin and Liepin, and additional reports at the time suggest that 51Jobs was also
affected. For more, see http://rsj.beijing.gov.cn/xwsl/mtgz/202103/t20210322_2313339.html;
http://rsj.beijing.gov.cn/xwsl/mtgz/202103/t20210322_2313341.html; and
http://rsj.beijing.gov.cn/xwsl/mtgz/202104/t20210416_2360300.html. However, an updated harvest
will include BOSS (Zhipin) and ChinaHR using a modified data collection approach.
50 “Top 10 job search apps in China in 2022."

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 58

51 Because of this study’s broad interpretation of what constitutes “AI” job postings, which include all
positions with the ability to design, develop, and deploy AI, the number of jobs actively working in AI is
overstated. To address this, the study later provides data for positions that explicitly mention AI.
52 Levels of education in China share many similarities to those in the United States, but there are some
differences in secondary (middle and/or high school) education. From age 12 to 15, students attend
junior middle school. From 15 to 18, if they pass an entrance exam they attend senior middle school;
otherwise they go to an occupational-based middle school. While there is no one-to-one equivalent in
China of the U.S. community college system, there are two- to three-year specialized or vocational
technical colleges that are similar to U.S. technical colleges and to career and technical education at
community colleges. For more information on Chinese post-secondary institutions, see Gerard
Postiglione, “Community Colleges in China,” International Higher Education, March 25, 2015,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/313411891_Community_Colleges_in_China.
53 When data was missing from the “desired education” field, AMPLYFI attempted to fill those cells with
data from the general job description field. Validation checks were conducted, and it was determined
that including the additional data did not change by more than 0.4 points any of the percentage levels
reported in Figure 1 and Table 2.
54 Significance testing was also run for pairings between Technical Team 1 and each other group, for
both bachelor’s and associate’s degrees, using two-sample Z-tests. In addition, two other pairings were
tested with similar proportions: share of associate’s degrees for Product Team versus Technical Team 2,
as well as share of bachelor’s degrees for Product Team versus Commercial Team. All pairwise
differences were statistically significant except for associate’s degrees between Technical Team 2 and
Product Team. The Bonferroni Correction was applied to each significance test to compensate for the
number of tests run.
55 Gehlhaus and Mutis, “The U.S. AI Workforce.”
56 Appendix C provides more detail on using specified years of experience to define entry-, junior-, mid-,
and senior-level positions.
57 Significance testing also showed that differences in the share of jobs requiring no experience for non-
AI postings relative to each category of AI job postings were statistically significant. Endnote 54, above,
provides more detail on the approach.
58 Felicia F. Tian, “Is guanxi unfair? Market reform and the public attitude toward guanxi in urban China,”
Journal of Chinese Sociology (December 22, 2020),
https://journalofchinesesociology.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40711-020-00138-3.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 59

59 Nancy DiTomaso and Yanjie Bian, “The Structure of Labor Markets in the U.S. and China: Social
Capital and Guanxi,” Management and Organization Review (March 28, 2018),
https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/management-and-organization-review/article/structure-of-
labor-markets-in-the-us-and-china-social-capital-and-
guanxi/335D57AF58C845208A83E60991F5A2BA.
60 Jiang, “Job crisis looms for Chinese graduates as tech, new energy vehicle firms stop hiring amid
Covid-19 lockdowns.”
61 Appendix C provides more information on the normalization process.
62 Significance testing also showed that differences in median salary were statistically significant
between non-AI and Technical Team 1 jobs, as well as between non-AI and Technical Team 2 jobs. This
was true for median minimum and median maximum salaries. To test differences in median values, the
independent two-sample Wilcoxon rank sum test was applied.
63 All Chinese yuan to U.S. dollar purchasing power conversions were calculated using the 2021
exchange rate of 4.187, retrieved from the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). For more information, see https://data.oecd.org/conversion/purchasing-power-parities-
ppp.htm#:~:text=Purchasing%20power%20parities%20(PPPs)%20are,in%20price%20levels%20betw
een%20countries. Other PPP measures are available, but this one was selected because of its widely
accepted and used status.
64 Although not directly comparable, a reference point may be insightful. Technical Team 1 closely
aligns with computer and mathematical occupations as defined by the U.S. Standard Occupation
Classification (SOC) system, minus web designers, web developers, and actuaries. In the United States
in 2021, median earnings for computer and mathematical occupations were $97,540. See for more
https://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes150000.htm.
65 For example, the annual salary range for Technical Team 1 tracks closely with official salary statistics
for the “information, software, and IT,” and for “scientific research and technical services” sectors as
published by the Chinese government in its 2021 Annual Statistical Yearbook. For more, see National
Bureau of Statistics of China, “China Statistical Yearbook, 2021,” Table 4-11.
66 National Bureau of Statistics of China, “Communiqué of the Seventh National Population Census (No.
3),” May 11, 2021, http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/PressRelease/202105/t20210510_1817188.html.
67 PR Newswire, “Top 10 Chinese provincial regions with strongest GDP in 2020,” April 2021,
https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/top-10-chinese-provincial-regions-with-strongest-gdp-in-
2020-301270482.html. For official numbers, see estimates for 2020 as reported by the National Bureau
of Statistics of China at https://data.stats.gov.cn/english/easyquery.htm?cn=E0103.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 60

68 Using the OECD PPP 2020 conversion rate of 4.179. For China’s 2020 per capita GDP, see
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/NYGDPPCAPKDCHN.
69 Significance testing showed that these differences were statistically significant between Technical
Team 1 job postings with an AI keyword versus without. Endnote 54, above, provides detail on the
approach.
70 A corresponding wide range of fields of study were cited that were very aligned with the nature of the
associated AI application.
71 Publication in highly cited journals is incredibly difficult, and in many cases involves affiliation with
leading institutions, academics, or collaborators. In effect, some of these hiring organizations
discriminate in very explicit ways.
72 Ngor Luong, Zachary Arnold, and Ben Murphy, “Understanding Chinese Government Guidance Funds”
(CSET, March 2021).
73 Ryan Fedasiuk, Jennifer Melot, and Ben Murphy, “Harnessed Lightning: How the Chinese Military Is
Adopting Artificial Intelligence” (CSET, October 2021).
74 The URLs of the set of identified duplicates differed only in the last segment of their strings.
75 Out of an abundance of caution, the AMPLYFI team created a separate deduplicated dataset of job
postings, leaving the initial non-deduplicated set intact for data quality checks.
76 The lack of cross platform duplicates identified may be in part the result of the harvesting approach, in
which only a fraction of the daily postings were downloaded to limit risk of anti-scraping measures. The
AMPLYFI team did conduct a separate manual and semi-automated review of postings across platforms
to validate the non-duplicity of job postings. While this study does not claim that employers posted a
given job vacancy only on one website, no duplicates were found in this check.
77 The larger training dataset is used to train the classification model. The validation set, or development
set, is used to iteratively test performance of the model while adjusting model parameters to increase
performance. The test set is kept away from the training of the model and is used as the final unbiased
benchmark of model performance.
78 An intentional mix of job postings selected at random and not at random. Some were not selected at
random because of the relatively small share of jobs that were likely considered part of the AI
workforce, in order to include postings across all categories. Moreover, given the nuance of category
definitions, some postings were intentionally selected as edge cases for the model.
79 The skill “data analytics” can appear in occupations across Technical Teams 1 and 2, and the proper
label depends on whether or not the role requires advanced statistical techniques. Engineers also come

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 61

in many varieties; some fall under Technical Team 1, others under Technical 2, still others under
Commercial Team, while some are not in the AI workforce at all.
80 For example, Technical Team 2 includes mechanical engineers while omitting civil engineers, and the
Commercial Team includes sales engineers while omitting most all other sales-based occupations.
81 Discussion of how this was determined is provided in the section on classification.
82 The classifier actually generates a predicted probability distribution across all five categories along
with a predicted label, but functionally this amounts to sorting each posting to the category with the
highest probability.
83 Accuracy measures the number of correct predictions made by the model over all predictions made.
An F0.5-score is similar to an F1-score. While an F1-score equally weights precision and recall, an F0.5
puts more weight on precision and less on recall. This means that it values how many of the labels
within the category are correctly labeled more than do job postings left out of the correct category.
84 This is using a formal model naming convention that identifies types of language processing. For
more, see Qing Xie, Xinyuan Zhang, Ying Ding, and Min Song, “Monolingual and multilingual topic
analysis using LDA and BERT embeddings,” Journal of Informetrics 14, no. 3 (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2020.101055;
Wei-Lin Liao and Wei-Yun Ma, “Roof-BERT: Divide Understanding Labour and Join in Work,” ArXiv,
December 2021, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2112.06736.pdf.
85 A transformer is a type of recurrent neural network architecture that differentially weighs the
significance of each part of the input data and is particularly suited for tasks such as natural language
processing.
