
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
AUTHORS
Wm. C. Hannas
Huey-meei Chang
China’s Access
to Foreign AI
Technology
AN ASSESSMENT
SEPTEMBER 2019
科
技
转
移

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
2
Established in January 201 9, the Center for Security and
Emerging Technology (CSET) at Georgetown’s Walsh
School of Foreign Service is a research organization fo -
cused on studying the security impacts of emerging tech -
nologies, supporting academic work in security and tech -
nology studies, and delivering nonpartisan analysis to the
policy community. CSET aims to prepare a generation of
policymakers, analysts, and diplomats to address the chal-
lenges and opportunities of emerging technologies. During
its first two years, CSET will focus on the effects of progress
in artificial intelligence and advanced computing.
CSET.GEORGETOWN.EDU | CSET@GEORGETOWN.EDU

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
AN ASSESSMENT
AUTHORS
Wm. C. Hannas
Huey-meei Changg
China’s Access to
Foreign AI Technology
SEPTEMBER 2019

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Wm. C. Hannas is author and CSET lead analyst.
Huey-meei Chang is contributing auth or and CSET
research analyst.
Cover illustration: "Technology transfer" in Chinese.
© 2019 by the Center for Security and Emerging
Technology. This work is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0
International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
Document Identifier: 10.51593/20190053

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
i
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1 | INTRODUCTION
2 | CHINESE FOREIGN TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER: MYTH AND
 REALITY
3 | CHINA’S ACCESS TO FOREIGN AI TECHNOLOGY
4 | SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ENDNOTES
iii
1
3
9
23
27
29
Contents

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
6

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
iii
hina’s technology transfer programs are broad, deeply rooted,
and calculated to support the country’s development of artificial
intelligence. These practices have been in use for decades and
provide China early insight and access to foreign technical innovations.
While cyber theft and industrial espionage may or may not be em-
ployed, we judge that the main practices enabling AI-related transfers are
not illegal. This inspires optimism on one level, but many—possibly most—
of these transfers are unmonitored and unknown outside China.
China’s reputation as a copycat is overstated and the formulation itself
is simplistic. China is building indigenous S&T capacity and can innovate
on its own terms, while taking account of global trends to move to new
stages of novel development.
Just as important, creativity is multi-faceted and implemented by differ-
ent cultures in different ways. The belief that liberal democracies, and the
United States especially, are endowed with a creative advantage is not
well supported by evidence.
We have low confidence that any combination of persuasion or disin-
centives will cause China to abandon its idiosyncratic transfer practices. Its
current reliance on external models to supplement indigenous research is
effective, and the alternative (liberalization) is too risky for China.
China’s legal and extralegal technology transfers are likely to contin-
ue. The U.S. government should invest in ways to manage the situation that
are consistent with our values and legitimate security concerns.
C
Executive Summary

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
iv
We propose five policy options to calibrate the problem and address a few of
the United States’ own liabilities that magnify the problem’s effects. They are:
• Expand U.S. government (USG) data collection and analysis;
• Define general standards for evaluating transfers;
• Educate the world on U.S. concerns and expectations;
• Promote immigration of AI skilled persons;
• Expand America’s S&T base.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
1
his paper is a survey of China’s technology transfer practices
and the adaptation of these practices to artificial intelligence (AI)
research and products.
Based on Chinese sources and guided by our understanding of U.S.
government concerns, the study begins by identifying China’s “normal”
foreign technology acquisition methods, such as overseas research and
development (R&D), company buyouts, joint Sino-U.S. research, and its
less typical methods.1 These methods include talent recruitment programs,
“dual base” labs, and mobilization of diaspora populations—in all, a doz-
en distinct access strategies that define the system’s special characteristics.
After identifying the transfer vectors, the paper shows how they are
used by China to facilitate the diffusion of AI knowledge and commercial-
ization of related intellectual products. Examples given are representative;
there is no attempt to be exhaustive, although we point to areas where
additional research might be useful.
Along the way, we clarify some misconceptions about these practices
and their implications, namely, the belief that espionage is the main com-
ponent of Chinese technology transfer; the notion that China’s so-called
“copycat culture” consigns the country to technological inferiority; and
the myth that China’s innovation system lacks the capacity for significant
advances.
A final section suggests policy remedies, including data collection to
support decision making; standards for evaluating transactions; conduct -
ing outreach to alert transfer participants to USG expectations; facilitat -
ing long-term residency for AI skilled immigrants; and growing America’s
S&T base.
Introduction
T
1

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
2
Our thanks to Tim Heath (RAND), James Mulvenon (SOSI), Anna Puglisi (DNI),
and Chenny Zhang (DOD), who read the draft and offered helpful suggestions; to
Zachary Arnold, Remco Zwetsloot, and Roxanne Heston at CSET for substantive
contributions; and to Jason Matheny, Andrew Imbrie, and Lynne Weil at CSET for
editing and critical support.
BILL HANNAS AND HUEY CHANG
Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET)
Walsh School of Foreign Service
Georgetown University

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
CHINA’S TECH TRANSFER INFRASTRUCTURE
Shortly after founding the People’s Republic in 1 949, China began a
multifaceted program to access foreign technologies on a scale that
would allow China to “leap past” (超越) basic R&D and join the ranks
of advanced nations. That program continues to this day.
Students are sent abroad, foreign experts are invited in, technology
outreach offices function within ministries and their affiliated NGOs,2 and
a world-class scientific literature monitoring system works around the
clock. S&T “cooperation societies” (合作协会) worldwide convey “tal-
ent” and ideas to China, while state incentive programs finance long- and
short-term visits by specialists to impart specific knowledge. Professionally
staffed “innovation service centers” (创业服务中心) and “technology
transfer centers” (技术转移中心) commercialize the technology brought
to China “by various means” (以多种方式).
Rounding out the program are legal venues, practices, and access
points, including direct technology purchases, hi-tech Sino-foreign coop-
erative ventures, and targeted acquisitions of foreign companies; and the
illicit technical acquisition and human theft of intellectual property (IP) that
occupies much of the public discourse on Chinese technology transfer.
While one can debate the importance of different aspects of the program,
the overall construct has been described in U.S. government documents3
and commissioned reports,4 scholarly works,5 and by Chinese themselves
working inside the system.6 The existence of the program and scale on
which it operates is incontestable.
It is also evident, from these earlier surveys and the present one, that
most of the features comprising the program are—in terms of vectors
3
Chinese Foreign
Technology Transfer:
Myth and Reality
2

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
4
alone—not necessarily illegal,7 which renders the question of policy response all
the more difficult. A related challenge for policymakers stems from a misunder-
standing of what this program implies about China’s ability to compete. While some
see “borrowing” as an admission of inferiority, and believe that the United States’
ability to innovate offsets the advantages China gains from licit and illicit access,
China’s composite innovation system—a hybrid approach to technological devel-
opment based on foreign models and homegrown initiatives—is competitive, highly
effective, and needs to be taken seriously.
Below is an outline of its major venues and practices as directed toward the
United States.8 These transfer vectors are categories, each with several, to several
thousand, examples.
“Extralegal” indicates that the types of transfer these organizations sponsor
typically are not subject to outside scrutiny, hence the legality of the transactions is
unknowable. Examples of document acquisition facilities are the Institute of Scientif-
ic and Technical Information of China (中国科学技术信息研究所) and its military
analog, the China Defense Science and Technology Information Center (中国国
China-based U.S. subsidiaries Loopholes in trade agreements
Competitions (companies, universities) Patent mining and exploitation
Conferences and colloquia PRC-backed venture capital funds
Direct technology purchases Startup accelerators and incubators
Enrollments at U.S. universities State-backed investments in U.S. research
Investments / acquisition of companies Tech exchanges, trade-for-tech agreements
Joint Sino-U.S. research agreements U.S.-based labs, representative offices
Legal transfers9
Breach of contract Reverse engineering
Computer network exploitation Traditional espionage
Copyright infringement Willful patent infringement
Insider operations Violation of non-disclosure agreements
Illegal transfers

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
5Center for Security and Emerging Technology
防科技信息中心). The China Association for International Exchange of Personnel
is an NGO that fronts for the State Council’s State Administration of Foreign Expert
Affairs. The two organizations share offices and personnel.10 Returnee parks, “pio-
neering” parks, tech transfer centers and technology “incubators”—large physical
complexes that collectively number in the several hundred—share the common mis-
sion of commercializing foreign technology; their distinctions, an artifact of sponsor-
ship, are evaporating.
Extralegal conduits supporting technology transfer also include the Sino-Amer-
ican professional associations—ethnic guilds focused on a technical discipline or
geographic area—with (claimed) memberships that can exceed 10,000. There are
two dozen major groups in the United States and another two dozen worldwide.
The Chinese language versions of their websites usually include some expression of
fealty to the ancestral country (祖国) and pledges to support its development. These
groups derive legitimacy from association with the local People’s Republic of China
consulates, which in turn broker investment and joint research opportunities.
China’s “talent” (人才) recruitment programs spot U.S.-based scientists and
engineers with skills needed for technical projects. These programs offer incentives
for support that range from a year or more onsite to participation in a “two-bases”
(两个基地) schema whereby a candidate remains abroad and sends information
to China. The “Thousand Talents Plan” (千人计划) is the commonly cited example,
but there are hundreds of such programs.
It remains an open question how exactly these venues are mobilized and to
what extent transfer initiatives are coordinated across the different access points. Or-
ders to focus on a class of technologies can be traced—historically and today—from
their first appearance as State Council directives, through implementation policies
by relevant ministries, “talent” calls broadcast by outreach offices, the appearance
Document acquisition facilities Technology transfer centers
Front organizations for PRC offices Technology transfer forums
Overseas scholar returnee facilities Transfer incentive programs
PRC ministry offices (national, local) U.S.-based facilitation companies
Recruiting and brokerage websites U.S.-based student/alumni associations
Sino-U.S. professional associations University-linked “innovation” parks
Extralegal transfers (organizations)

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
6
of international conferences on the theme, and as agenda items in the posted min-
utes of foreign-based advocacy groups and diaspora guilds—all of which typically
cite the original directive. Tailored collection of technology for state-favored proj-
ects, however, is not normally traceable in open sources to an originating office.
Although aspects of the network are highly systematized (patent and standards
exploitation, civilian and military open source procurement, “talent” spotting and
recruitment), much of it is disorganized and duplicative. Parts were designed, but
mostly it is a product of ad hoc initiatives. Periodically a ministry or consortium of
ministries will launch a new incentive program on top of an existing one, tighten
qualifications on imported talent, or consolidate redundant venues (e.g., innova -
tion service centers and returnee parks). But its main elements were in place by
2006-7.11
The system’s growth can also be measured in terms of the type of technology
it targeted. Early transfers were of specific components used for weapons and
products. This practice evolved over time to encompass technologies needed to
manufacture the components, and finally to the basic science from which inno -
vations emerge. Given the abstract nature of AI algorithms, China’s ability to tap
• Professional facilitators
o administrators of returnee parks and tech transfer centers
o diplomats at embassies and consulates (S&T consuls)
o employees of NGOs that front for declared transfer facilities
o managers of ‘talent’ recruitment and other incentive programs
• Scientists, overseas scholars and entrepreneurs
o attendees at overseas exchange forums
o awardees of sponsored transfer incentive programs
o members of overseas Chinese professional associations
o organized alumni of Chinese technical universities
o PRC post-docs at USG research facilities
• S&T intelligence workers (科技情报工作人员)
o talent spotters attached to factories and labs
o members of S&T ‘business intelligence’ groups
o staffers of China’s open source S&T collection network
Extralegal transfers (personnel)

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
7
new developments in this field at early stages is critical to its success. As we shall
see, China has successfully mobilized those parts of its transfer apparatus to meet
this challenge.
At its root, we view Chinese technology transfer less as the output of a system
and more as the product of a particular mindset. We have seen many articles in
theoretical journals and China’s own popular press on the need to “absorb” the
world’s intellectual products. While we also see injunctions against intellectual
property rights (IPR) violations, the use and abuse of external models is not stigma -
tized in China to the same degree as in the United States. It is probably fair to say
there are fewer cultural and institutional obstacles to prevent it.12
Whatever the motivation for this behavior, it is clear that China—more than other
countries13—devotes extraordinary efforts to reduce the risk and cost of innovation
by accessing research done elsewhere.
THE SHIBBOLETH OF “CREATIVE ADVANTAGE”
Does technology transfer support China’s long-term goals? Or are there hidden
costs to a “copycat” model? China clearly perceives benefit from broad access
to foreign technology. The best evidence of this is China’s use of these programs to
achieve parity across a wide spectrum of disciplines, the proliferation of projects
aimed at facilitating access, and its willingness to fund foreign technology acqui -
sition on a scale that at times has rivaled its budget for indigenous R&D. 14 In the
long run, however, China’s appropriation of foreign creative resources has been
assumed—in the United States especially—to be an Achilles heel that guarantees
China will always trail liberal democracies in innovation and in the national pow -
er that innovation is believed to support.
This assumption—which we question below—has some historical, theoretical,
and empirical support.15 In particular, China traditionally has not shown the same
aptitude for “breakthrough” science as nations in the western tradition. While the
causes are many,16 Asian and western scholars agree on the co-existence of unique
Chinese and western preferences for scientific development that bias the former
against radical innovation.17 There is also agreement that these preferences stem
from cultural traditions that accord different weights to theory and practice.18
By this argument, China’s penchant for concrete research and distaste for ab-
straction, nursed over millennia, inhibit China’s ability to compete in theory-driven
science.19 Some also point to “copying” as indicative of a creativity deficit.20 A more
nuanced view distinguishes the type of creativity favored in China, where new ideas
emerge by restructuring a given context and a second type favored elsewhere,
which depends on similarity judgments between a source and target in different
domains.21 Both are models of creativity, although the latter, associated with funda-
mental breakthroughs, is the acclaimed western stereotype.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
8
Western bias notwithstanding, our view is that this alternate form of creativity
in which China clearly excels accounts for most of what happens in science and
should be acknowledged alongside the idealized (“breakthrough”) form of creativi-
ty. We also believe the West’s creative advantage is overstated for several reasons:
• China does important work in fields that it cares about and is closing the
“innovation gap” across the board;22
• Quantity has a quality all its own. The scale of China’s S&T investment itself
increases the likelihood of successes;
• The country has compensated for its creativity problem by tapping into inno-
vations done elsewhere before others see them as viable;
• The ability to innovate in the abstract may matter less in real world terms
than the ability to apply those innovations practically, wherever they are
made;
• The Chinese diaspora and internationalization of science have made discus-
sions of what “China” can and cannot do mostly meaningless.
In sum, we believe China’s “S&T information/intelligence23 operations” (科技
情报工作) will for practical, cultural, and political reasons continue indefinitely.
There is little downside to China’s hybrid foreign-domestic innovation system and
few gains to offset the risks a liberalized culture, primed to produce the occasional
breakthrough, poses to regime stability. Similarly, America’s belief in its innate abili-
ty to out-innovate China is probably untenable.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
9
China’s Access to
Foreign AI Technology
3
ow many of these transfer strategies does China use to access
sources of AI technology? A survey of recent online postings
indicates that most of the access points and support vectors de -
scribed in Section 2 of this report. are in play for AI. 24 That is, the same
venues China has used over past decades to acquire foreign technology
in general are used by China today to supplement indigenous AI re -
search and product development. They are:
We expand on these venues in the remainder of this section.
OFFICIAL POLICY SUPPORT
The importance of foreign technology in China’s AI enterprise is stated
unequivocally in a foundational document released by the State Council
on 8 July 201 7 titled “The New Generation AI Development Plan.25 Un-
der “Key Tasks” (Section 4, “Accelerate the cultivation and gathering of
high-end AI talent”), the plan emphasizes “speeding up the introduction
of top AI talent and younger AI talent worldwide” to form China’s “high
H
Chinese academic institutions Official PRC policy support
Chinese AI companies Online and physical exchange forums
Chinese research and investment abroad Overseas study and research
Co-authorship of academic articles Sino-foreign AI conferences
Foreign research and investment in China Sino-foreign cooperation associations
Government outreach facilities Talent recruitment programs
Government-sponsored labs Technology transfer centers
Innovation and returnee parks Think tanks and professional groups

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
10
ground” (高地) of AI experts. It goes on to recommend several actions to facili -
tate access to this high ground:
• cooperation and interaction with major AI institutes worldwide;
• use of “special channels and policies” to recruit top AI persons;
• the “flexible introduction”26 of AI talent via projects and consultation; and
• coordinating with China’s foreign talent programs (“Thousand Talents”).
Under “Resource allocation” (Section 3, “Coordinate international and domes-
tic innovation resources”), the plan reads in part:
“Support cooperation between domestic AI enterprises and international
AI leading universities, research institutes and teams. Encourage China’s AI
companies to go global (走出去). Facilitate overseas mergers and acquisi-
tions, equity investments, venture capital investments and the establishment
of overseas R&D centers. Encourage foreign AI companies and scientific
research institutes to set up R&D centers in China.”
The plan also urges support for “industry associations, alliances, and service
organizations to build a worldwide service platform” (服务平台) for China’s AI
companies.
This State Council plan was followed by a Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology (MIIT) action plan27 for “full use of bilateral and multilateral interna-
tional cooperation mechanisms” and “attracting high level AI talent and innovative
entrepreneurial talent by various means (以多种方式).”28 MIIT’s plan cites an
earlier guide for use of the Thousand Talents and Ten Thousand Talents plans among
the resources available for China’s AI development.”29
Another example of documented support for access to foreign AI resources is
the Education Ministry’s “AI Innovation Action Plan for Institutes of Higher Edu -
cation” issued 3 April 201 8.30 Its “Key Tasks” are largely foreign-oriented. They
include:
“Increase international academic exchanges and cooperation. Support
the establishment of 1 1 1 Plan ‘foreign intellect bases’31 and joint labo -
ratories for international cooperation in the field of AI; cultivate inter -
national science programs and major scientific projects; accelerate the
introduction of internationally renowned scholars to join in establishing
scientific disciplines and scientific research; organize high-level interna -

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
11
tional academic AI conferences; promote Chinese scholars for import -
ant posts in relevant international academic organizations,” etc.
These state pronouncements—in substance and style—mimic the core documents
prescribing the mechanisms China uses to transfer technology in general.32
OUTREACH ORGANIZATIONS
China’s foreign technology outreach organizations appear to be following a
similar path. Key functions of the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST)
are to attract foreign scientists to China, contact foreign experts, and conduct
training and study abroad. Its sponsorship of AI projects was detailed in a “New
Generation AI Development Planning” kick-off meeting held in November 201 8
to “strengthen international cooperation;” 33 in a workshop convened in February
201 9 by its New Generation AI Development Planning and Promotion Office,
seeking “international exchanges in AI;” 34 and in its 201 8 and 201 9 key projects
for “strategic international S&T innovation cooperation,” which included AI and
robotics.35 An AI focus is also apparent in each of the ministry’s five subordinate
offices charged with foreign outreach operations. 36
Other outreach groups have similar roles. The Chinese Academy of Sciences’
Bureau of International Cooperation (国际合作局) ran a six-week project to in-
tegrate Hong Kong college students into China’s AI ecosphere.37 The China Asso-
ciation for Science and Technology (中国科学技术协会, CAST), with chapters
abroad including a CAST-USA, in January 201 8 convened an “International Coop-
eration Forum on Intelligent Technology” where PRC officials pitched “international
exchange and cooperation on multiple levels” to an audience that included Amer-
ican officials.38 China’s State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs (国家外国
专家局, SAFEA) conducts its own recruiting and functions as the sanctioning body
for the nationwide outreach network. In May 201 8, it co-hosted with the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers a “Forum on New Generation AI and Advanced
Manufacturing.”39
The China International Talent Exchange Association—an NGO under SAFEA’s
“guidance”—had scouts at Japan’s “2nd AI Expo” in April 201 8. The organization,
until recently the “China Association for the International Exchange of Personnel,”
has chapters in 45 China locations and 10 offices abroad. Its website lists some
6,570 instances of foreign intellectual transfers (引智成果),40 including “R&D on a
new generation of human-computer interaction technology based on AI” original-
ly from Iowa State University,41 a wearable device for real-time health monitoring
based on an AI deep learning algorithm from Australian National University,42 and
an AI-based camera researched at the University of Alabama, marketed by a Wu-
han and Silicon Valley-based company.43

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
12
“TALENT” RECRUITMENT PROGRAMS
An additional source of talent (人才) for China’s S&T development are the for -
eign incentive programs run by state, provincial, and municipal offices, the best
known being the “Thousand Talents Plan.” This is a short name for the “Recruit -
ment Program of Global Experts” (海外高层次人才引进计划) founded in 2008
as an arm of the Central Talent Work Coordination Group,44 itself governed by a
consortium of 20 ministry-level organizations. Other popular programs are the Min-
istry of Education’s Spring Light Plan (春晖计划), the Changjiang Scholars Award
Program (长江学者奖励计划), and the progenitor of the series: the Chinese Acad-
emy of Science’s “100 Plan” founded in 1 994 with 1,569 participants to date.45
Thousand Talents had previously posted online46 lists of selectees, including
those in its youth category, but recently discontinued the practice. A keyword search
on the program’s name and AI disciplines, however, yields multiple hits, which we
capped at 100 examples. Within this sample, program selectees were overwhelm-
ingly from the United States, typically university professors—in some cases depart -
mental chairs—with specialties in deep learning, intelligent robotics, blockchain
or applied aspects of AI. Some selectees from U.S. institutions have standing dual
appointments at Chinese academic or research facilities. Others boast resumes
with a history of support from both the U.S. and Chinese governments, including
the U.S. Department of Defense. Searches run on Changjiang Scholars elicited
similar results.
CONFERENCES AND EXCHANGE FORUMS
Chinese businesspeople, scholars, and government officials attend AI confer -
ences abroad and arrange international gatherings within China to keep track of
worldwide AI trends and seek out collaborative opportunities. Some examples
from 201 9 alone:
• On 23 March, the Chinese AI company Sensetime and Beijing’s Zhonggu-
ancun Hi-tech Park hosted the “First International Artificial Intelligence Fair”
to engage secondary school students worldwide, attended by 41 domestic
and foreign groups.47
• On 1 April, the WTO, ITU and a consortium of Chinese official and semi-of-
ficial groups hosted a “201 9 Artificial Intelligence for Health Summit” in
Shanghai to facilitate exchanges, discussions and joint analysis of present
and future trends in AI medicine.48
• On 16 May, UNESCO and China’s MOE jointly hosted an “International
Conference on AI and Education” in Beijing with some 500 participants,
including AI industry leaders, academic experts, policymakers and practi-
tioners.49

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
13
Details on 399 China-sponsored AI conferences from mid-201 7 through the end
of 201 9 are available on a Chinese tech portal.50 Other online forums run by PRC
ministries and foreign-based advocacy groups alert diaspora Chinese51 to China
collaboration and employment opportunities. For example, in April 201 9 the Chi-
nese American Professors and Professional Network (美国华裔教授专家网) ran
a “talent” solicitation notice for Zhejiang’s Pinghu City that included projects in AI
and robotics.52 The Chinese Service Center for Scholarly Exchange (中国留学服
务中心) has links to an announcement by the PRC embassy in Bern for the “Second
All-Switzerland Chinese Scholars AI Seminar.”53 China Human Resources (中华英
才网), a job recruitment website, has a page indexing AI jobs to each of China’s
major cities.54 The official China International S&T Cooperation Net (中国国际科
技合作网) posts hundreds of collaboration opportunities and solicitations for AI-re-
lated technology.55
These virtual media are complemented by physical forums designed to put
diaspora experts in contact with China S&T companies. The best known is an annual
“Guangzhou Convention of Overseas Scholars in S&T” (中国留学人员广州科技
交流会), which now runs concurrently with a Convention on Exchange of Overseas
Talent (中国海外人才交流大会). AI expertise was sought in each of the 201 7 ,
201 8, and 201 9 events.56 Shenzhen’s “China Hi-Tech Fair” (中国国际高新技术成
果交易会, literally “China international exchange fair for new and high-tech prod-
ucts”) devoted kiosks to AI, intelligent manufacturing, intelligent homes, self-driving
cars and 5G.57
CHINA-BASED FOREIGN R&D
High-tech multinational companies establish R&D centers in China to tap China’s
indigenous talent pool as a means of adapting their products to Chinese taste
and expanding their innovation base. In return, China expects the multinationals
to “share” technology—that developed in country and its own core assets—with
its host for access to China’s market. This trade-for-technology formula 58 (“forced
technology transfer”) is the subject of intense debate between U.S. and China
trade officials, and a solution does not seem imminent. 59
Meanwhile, we note in this context the presence in China of most major U.S.
information technology companies that play leading roles in AI research. In 201 8,
Amazon announced its AWS Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Research Institute. The
lab complements its existing Shanghai-Amazon AWS Joint Innovation Center.60
Apple plans four R&D centers located in Beijing, Shenzhen, Shanghai, and Suzhou.
Google’s AI China Center in Beijing has been running since late 201 7. IBM is an
early entrant; its Beijing and Shanghai facilities are staffed with “scientists working
daily to develop core AI capabilities.”61

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
14
Microsoft has operated its Microsoft Research Asia facility in Beijing since
1 998. In 201 8, the company announced a Shanghai branch and a co-located
Microsoft-INESA AI Innovation Center to bring in “world-class AI research ca-
pabilities.”62 These foreign-owned or affiliated labs are staffed with top AI figures
and integrated into China’s state-run ecosystem of “science town” incubators. We
know of no metric to gauge the marginal utility of these joint arrangements for the
United States and China. Our goal is simply to document these access points to AI
research.
TRANSFER CENTERS, INNOVATION HUBS AND OCS PARKS
China’s drive for practical use of innovative technologies—wherever they origi -
nate—is evidenced on a personal level. Entrepreneurs engage in what Sinovation
Ventures CEO Kai-fu Lee calls a “bloody battle” to be first to market. 63 It is also
apparent on a national scale in the form of Technology Transfer Centers ( 技术转
移中心, TTC), offices and compounds found in all major Chinese cities run by a
coalition of state, academic, and industrial sponsors. Their purpose is to “pave the
way for the development and expansion of openly available technology” both
foreign and domestic, support the creation of technology centers within compa -
nies, and “promote the conversion and transfer of technologies held by higher
education.”64
Consider a few examples of their activities. In July 201 7 , the Jiangsu Center of
International Technology Transfer (江苏省跨国技术转移中心) held an “Inter-
national Collaboration Innovation and Technology Transfer Forum” attended by
academics from Carnegie Mellon, UCLA, and other research universities to discuss
transfer opportunities in robotics and AI.65 In November 201 8, the Science Minis-
try and local government co-hosted a conference at Beijing’s China International
Technology Transfer Center (中国国际技术转移中心) to “establish communica-
tion channels and mechanisms for international technology transfer, and promote
transformation of international innovation cooperation results.” AI was a featured
part of the “road show.”66
Close cousin to China’s TTCs are “innovation service centers” (创业服务中
心) and “overseas Chinese scholar pioneering parks” (留学人员创业园), or OCS
parks. Distributed throughout China inside high-tech civilian and military industrial
complexes (the so-called “science towns” 科学城), these multi-story, acres-wide,
subsidized facilities provide safe haven to Chinese start-ups focused on single tech-
nologies acquired abroad. The complexes house tenants responding to calls from
an affiliated ministry or local authority for particular classes of technologies, pub-
licized on PRC government websites, technology brokerage portals, and through
Chinese consular facilities abroad. The calls are highly formulaic, suggesting top-
down coordination. Applicants typically must have a master’s degree or higher from

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
15
abroad and “independent intellectual property rights”67 to an innovative technology
of specified type with strong potential for marketability.
There has been a significant proliferation of such calls. Beginning in 201 7 , these
notices started mentioning “artificial intelligence” among the number of disci-
plines—10 or fewer—sought for the next cycle (calendar 201 8).68 Notably, a 201 8
call listed AI in 8th position; in 201 9, AI ranked second after advanced equipment
manufacturing.69 An online search conducted by the authors returned data on AI,
machine learning, and intelligent manufacturing start-ups in returnee parks locat-
ed in Beijing, Changchun, Changsha, Chengdu, Dalian, Fujian, Hangzhou, Hefei,
Hohhot, Jiangyin, Jieyang, Kunshan, Nanjing, Ningbo, Shanghai, Shenzhen, Tang-
shan, Tianjin, Wuhan, Xiamen, Yantai and Zhuhai. Each of these cases involves IPR
created abroad or as a result of having done research abroad.
GOVERNMENT-SPONSORED AI LABS
The Chinese government controls hundreds of “key labs” ( 重点实验室) centered
around specific scientific or engineering disciplines. Sponsorship is at the national,
provincial, and municipal levels, the most prestigious being the state-run ( 国家)
units of which there were 253 plus six “national research centers” of equivalent
status in 2016.70 71 Only one of these top-level labs—Qinghua University’s State
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems ( 清华大学智能技术系统
国家重点实验) established in 1 990—focused wholly on AI, although others did
so peripherally.72 That changed in February 201 7 , when a National Engineering
Laboratory for Deep Learning Technologies and Applications ( 深度学习技术及
应用国家工程实验室) was established under Baidu’s lead. Months later, MOST
stood up a State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence ( 认知智能国家重点实
验室) under iFlytek’s auspices.
Other second-tier laboratories have been doing AI research for a decade or
longer, including labs in Beijing, Chengdu, Shanghai, Shenzhen, Xi’an, and else-
where. In addition, there are labs affiliated with the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
such as the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing (智能信息处理重
点实验室), its Institute of Automation and, within it, a Research Center for Brain-in-
spired Intelligence (类脑智能研究中心), which has published on neuroinformatics
and multi-scale brain simulation.
Typical of the genre is Xidian’s MOE Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception
and Image Understanding (智能感知与图像理解教育部重点实验室), co-lo-
cated with an International Joint Lab for IntelliSense and Computing and an affili-
ated “International Center.” The lab is part of China’s “1 1 1 Plan” (see above), has
been awarded projects under the “863 Program”73 and has Changjiang Scholar
recipients. These labs are visited by foreign scientists, dispatch staff for academic
exchanges abroad, and engage in collaborative ventures with overseas colleagues.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
16
The following passage on Sichuan’s Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence is rep-
resentative:74
“The laboratory held international academic exchange activities and
sent some ten visiting scholars to academic institutions such as the Univer-
sity of California, the University of Auckland, the University of Ottawa,
the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, and the University of Singapore,
and actively carried out related scientific research. At the same time,
professors from relevant research fields in Mexico, France and the United
States were invited to the laboratory to lecture to the laboratory’s nonlin-
ear research team and graduate students.”
Shenzhen’s Key Laboratory for Big Data and Artificial Intelligence boasts re-
search staff that include academicians from Canada’s Royal Academy of Sciences,
the American Academies of Engineering and Science, international IEEE fellows,
and 2 1 returned overseas scholars. Some of its staff have been U.S. Natural Sci-
ence Foundation grantees and others worked on projects with the U.S. Department
of Defense and the National Institutes of Health.75
THINK TANKS AND PROFESSIONAL GROUPS
China’s earliest AI professional organization, the Chinese Artificial Intelligence
Association ( 中国人工智能协会), was established in 1 98 1 by CAST and the Bei-
jing University of Posts and Telecommunications. For decades it was China’s only
national level AI group. 76 As of 201 7 , its ranks included 22 academicians and 53
“leading AI figures.” 77 Within the past two years, several new China AI industrial
organizations arose, including:
• Shenzhen Artificial Intelligence Industry Association (深圳市人工智能行
业协会), stood up at the end of 2016 by a consortium of AI companies,
including Baidu, with support (支持) from the municipal government.78
• Jiangsu Association of Artificial Intelligence (江苏省人工智能学会),
formed in 201 7 as a non-profit organization of some 1,500 persons and
200 companies involved in AI-related disciplines.79
• Artificial Intelligence Industry Alliance (中国人工智能产业发展联盟), or-
ganized in October 201 7 under MOST and MIIT auspices. Its International
Exchange Work Team “introduces foreign high-quality industry resources,”
i.e., technology and “talent.”80
• Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (北京智源人工智能研究院)
created in November 201 8 by the Beijing city government. Its founding
members include Peking and Tsinghua universities, Baidu and ByteDance.81

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
17
Each of these organizations hosts international conferences, welcomes partici-
pation from AI researchers worldwide, and encourages international exchange and
cooperation.
CHINESE AI COMPANIES
As of May 201 8, there were an estimated 4,040 AI enterprises in China, of which
1,070 of those companies are in Beijing. 82 The largest in terms of AI investment
are Baidu (百度), Alibaba ( 阿里巴巴), and Tencent (腾讯)—the so-called “BAT”
trio, roughly equivalent to Google (search), Amazon (shopping), and Facebook
(social media), respectively. The three companies together have invested in some
53% of China’s top 1 90 AI companies. A second tier of AI-invested Chinese firms
is represented by Huawei ( 华为), JD Research (京东AI研究院) and iFlytek ( 科大
讯飞), which corner another 10%. 83
Baidu’s AI umbrella group (AIG) employs more than 2,000 scientists and engi-
neers spread over five labs in China and Silicon Valley. Its internationally sourced
staff84 are complemented by a Research Advisory Board of distinguished American
scientists.85 Alibaba Damo Academy’s (达摩院) head of machine intelligence holds
a CMU doctorate and was on Michigan State’s computer science faculty. Most of
his research team have U.S. pedigrees, as do the top figures in Damo’s other nine
labs.86 Access to world talent is ensured by an Alibaba Innovative Research Pro-
gram billed as a “bridge” to scholars worldwide, and by fellowships “for research
scholars around the world.”87 Tencent AI Lab boasts “more than 70 scientists from
world-renowned universities.”88 Its Focused Research Program “aims to identify and
support world-class faculties pursuing innovative research” in AI fields.89 A parallel
visiting scholars program seeks faculty from universities or research institutes world-
wide “to identify research problems from real industry scenarios.”90
Tight integration of China’s AI companies with international “talent” is evidenced
within the second and third tier firms as well. JD AI Research maintains offices in the
United States and Europe to attract leading global talent.91 Its Joint JD-Stanford Uni-
versity AI Laboratory scientists work on knowledge mapping, robotics, and scene
recognition.92 iFlytek has “strategic cooperation agreements” with both Princeton
and MIT’s Computer Science and AI Laboratory. DeepBlue Technology, a Shang-
hai-based AI company established by PhD returnees, has linked up with “world-re-
nowned colleagues and universities to explore, cultivate and inspire outstanding AI
talents around the world.”93 There can be no question that China’s AI companies
are plugged into the worldwide pulse of AI development.
CHINESE AI RESEARCH AND INVESTMENT ABROAD
China’s AI companies maintain overseas labs to gauge local markets and ac -
cess foreign research “talent.” The United States is a favored venue. Baidu runs

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
18
an Institute for Deep Learning (201 3) and a Silicon Valley Artificial Intelligence
Lab (201 8) in Sunnyvale CA. Alibaba has outposts in Seattle (Bellevue) and
Sunnyvale, where it is advertising AI positions. Tencent Holdings has an AI Lab in
Seattle (201 7) and is recruiting self-driving car experts in Palo Alto. Sensetime (
商汤科技), a Chinese AI company doing computer vision and deep learning,
has an AI-based health lab in New Jersey, collaborates with MIT on machine
intelligence, and engages in “synchronous development” ( 同步开拓) between its
China and Silicon Valley locations. 94
Smaller Chinese or China-invested AI companies with a U.S. presence num -
ber in the hundreds. For example, Pony AI ( 小马智行), an autonomous driving
vehicle company, is “co-located in the heart of Silicon Valley and China” (Beijing
and Guangzhou). Its top staff hail from Baidu, Google, Nvidia, Facebook, and
Uber.95 ByteDance ( 字节跳动), a Beijing company with expertise in machine
learning (ML) and creator of the ubiquitous “Toutiao” ( 头条) AI-based content
platform, has a branch in Los Angeles. Aibee is a Chinese-invested AI firm run by
the former head of Baidu Research; the company does work in several AI areas at
locations in Beijing and Palo Alto. Roadstar (TOP 无人驾驶公司) is an AI startup
founded by robotics and ML veterans from Google, Tesla, Nvidia, Apple, and
Baidu; it is Chinese-invested with offices in Shenzhen, Beijing and Silicon Valley. 96
These U.S.-based labs are the visible face of China’s AI technology access
strategy. Large investment consortia, so-called “angel fund” investors, play a
more critical role by funding Chinese and Chinese-American AI start-ups. Promi -
nent among them are:
• ZhenFund (真格基金): A Beijing-based angel investment fund that sees
itself as “a bridge for overseas returnees to pursue entrepreneurship in
China.” Its portfolio includes some 33 AI companies, many of which are
located or have branches in the United States.97
• TechCode (太库科技): Headquartered in Beijing with offices worldwide.
Its focus is AI, big data, and new materials. By the end of 201 8, the com-
pany had funded some 1,463 startups, including companies in Boston and
Silicon Valley.98
• Sinovation Ventures (创新工场): Started in 2009 by Kai-Fu Lee, with offices
in Beijing, Shanghai, Shenzhen, Palo Alto and Seattle. Its focal areas are AI,
big data, robotics and deep software.
According to CB Insights, a tech market analysis firm, between 201 2 and
mid-201 7 China-based investors accounted for 641 AI tech investments in the
United States totaling $1 9 billion, focusing on AI, robotics, and augmented or
virtual reality. 99

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
19
Besides these private ventures, the Chinese government invests directly in U.S.-
based AI research and incubation via its Zhongguancun Silicon Valley Innovation
Center (中关村硅谷创新中心) in Santa Clara, a Hangzhou Silicon Valley Incu -
bator (杭州硅谷孵化器) in Redwood City, and the Shanghai Zhangjiang Boston
Enterprise Park ( 上海张江波士顿企业园). The presumption is that benefits from
these projects accrue in both directions, although we lack metrics for comparison.
SINO-FOREIGN PROFESSIONAL COOPERATION
ASSOCIATIONS
Foreign-based professional “cooperation associations” ( 协会), composed mostly
of diaspora Chinese, are viewed by Beijing as an important venue for technology
transfer. The organizations and their members are courted by Chinese consulate
officers domestically and feted by government organizers of exchange forums
during their trips to China. The degree to which these associations identify with
China (and China’s interests) appears to vary: some are loosely organized guilds,
while others—based on their charters and observed behavior—may qualify for
registration under the Foreign Agent Registration Act. Depending on the criteria,
there are some two-dozen major Sino-U.S. science and engineer associations
and an equal number in Europe. 100
The growth in the importance of AI is paralleled by an increase in the attention
given to it by these associations. The North American Chinese Scholars International
Exchange Center (北美洲中国学人国际交流中心), headquartered in McLean
VA, funneled to Tangshan, a city with which it collaborates, only two AI-related proj-
ects in 2010.101 In 201 9, the proposed number was eight.102 In May 201 8, the group
was plugging relocation opportunities for those with AI skills in Tianjin. In 201 7 , 10
members of the Federation of Associations of Chinese Professionals in Southern USA
(美南中国专家协会联合会), an Atlanta-based organization, presented 10 AI and
robotics projects at a Huishan promotion meeting in Jiangsu.103 Houston’s Chinese
Association of Professionals in Science and Technology (中国旅美专家协会) in
May 201 8 demonstrated AI and ML products at a forum attended by persons from
Anhui, with which the group has ties.104
The Association of Chinese-American Scientists and Engineers (旅美中国科学
家工程师专业人士协会), a Midwest group with 1 2 chapters whose members at
one time included currently serving PRC officials,105 featured AI at its 26th annual
meeting in Chicago on 1 3 October 201 8. Two weeks later a branch of the associ-
ation was stood up for big data and artificial intelligence with a goal to “promote
exchange of cutting-edge S&T and strengthen strategic cooperation between the
association, US companies and Chinese enterprises.”106
Santa Clara’s U.S.-China Association of High-level Professionals (美中高层次
人才交流协会) regards itself as “a platform for entrepreneurs and an engine for

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
20
innovation and entrepreneurship” with a claimed membership of 2 1,000 and adver-
tised record of supporting 5,000 start-ups. Its annual “AI CONNECT” conference
serves as a forum to discuss AI “innovation trends.”107 The Chinese Association for Sci-
ence and Technology USA (中国留美科技协会), a bespoke affiliate of its semi-offi-
cial China-based namesake,108 in September 201 8 convened in New York a forum on
AI’s future;109 its engineering counterpart, the Chinese Institute of Engineers USA (美
洲中国工程师学会), met the same month to discuss AI applications.11 0
Similar organizations grew up around the AI theme in other countries in 201 7-
1 8, when Beijing publicized its “New Generation AI Development Plan.” Some
400 Chinese students, PhDs, and entrepreneurs in Japan created the China-Japan
Association for Artificial Intelligence (中日人工智能协会) to facilitate “exchanges,
cooperation and globalization” of AI projects and knowledge between the two
countries.111 A China-Britain Artificial Intelligence Association ( 中英人工智能协
会) “was initiated by a group of Chinese nationals living in London, interested in
the development of artificial intelligence by utilising [sic] the resources and in -
novations being made in both countries.” 112 The German-Chinese Association of
Artificial Intelligence (德中人工智能协会), a mixed group of expatriate Chinese
and “Germans who worked and studied in China,” carry on a similar mission of
cooperation and exchange.113
UNIVERSITIES, STUDENTS AND SCHOLARSHIP
The adaptation of Chinese industry and research to the “AI revolution” ( 人工智能
革命) is paralleled by a structural transformation in China’s system of higher ed -
ucation. According to data compiled by CERNET, 114 43 Chinese universities have
dedicated new AI colleges or research institutes, founded almost entirely over the
past two years. Here is the chronology: 115
Thirty-five universities will receive MOE funds in 201 9 to offer AI majors.11 6 The
ministry is budgeting 50 more university-affiliated institutes and “cross-disciplinary
research centers” by 2020.11 7 Information on the offerings of 33 of these institutes
reads like a detailed ontology of artificial intelligence and related disciplines.118
YEAR AI INSTITUTES FOUNDED
2015 1
2016 1
2017 8
2018 28
201 9 5 (as of April)

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
21
i. CSET analysts have not surfaced a credible number for Chinese nationals doing AI-relevant graduate school or
postdoctoral work in the United States. Very rough estimates of 2,600-3,500 will change by an order of magnitude
with the emergence of hyphenated disciplines and as the field grows in importance and popularity.
Knowledge diffusion is following its usual course: foreign and expatriate profes-
sors lecture in China; honorary degrees are awarded in both directions; overseas
AI experts are appointed to university advisory boards; joint seminars are hosted;
partnerships with foreign universities are formed; collaborative arrangements are
made with U.S. companies, e.g., the Fudan University-Google Technology Innova-
tion Lab;11 9 and academic papers are co-authored.
The relative impact of these academic activities on one country or the other
is hard to measure. As described in Tsinghua (Qinghua) University’s “China AI
Development Report,” China’s output of AI-related scientific papers reached first
place worldwide in 2006 and has maintained that lead to the present.12 0 Based
on this metric, it would appear that diffusion accrues to the world’s greater benefit,
although this conclusion should be tempered by the fact that 53% of these papers
were co-authored by international collaborators.121
The same lack of data, indeterminacy of models, and conflicting value frame-
works stand in the way of assessing the bottom line (long-term) value to the United
States of Chinese AI students at US institutes of higher learning.i Arguments con-
cerning counter-intelligence risks on the one hand and the clear benefits the United
States receives from its ability to attract top talent on the other hand are not easily
reduced to data-based analysis. Certainly, the answer is a mixed bag, which would
suggest in policy terms a need for flexible measures.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
30

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
23
Summary and
Recommendations
4
wo principal facts emerge from this survey. First, the Chinese state,
organizations within China, and China’s diaspora population
have responded with agility and in lockstep to the challenge of
merging indigenous AI development with worldwide talent and trends.
Chinese documents now reference the need to respect IPR—language
seldom seen five years ago 12 2—but the same venues and unsupervised
access points available historically are used by China to transfer AI tech -
nology today. The transfers may be further masked by a diminished need
for physical access.
Second, China’s AI technology acquisition strategies span everything
from licit collaboration to unobservable transfers by “talent” recruits and
advocacy groups. The intricacy of these venues and access points, and
the difficulty of distinguishing between them and China’s own legitimate
development efforts, complicates policy formation by governments eager
to address a perceived loss of industrial competitiveness, or monitor these
transfers for the sake of evaluating global threats. Accordingly, we con-
clude this paper with some recommendations that apply both to AI and the
general problem of technology transfer:
1. Gather information on the transfer issue. Comprehensive data
are needed to inform transfer decisions in a general (policy) sense
and in specific cases where the merit of transfers is or should be
called into question—data that consider historical behavior, the
synchronicity of the transfer system as a whole, and the likelihood
of transfers occurring based on observed gaps. We recommend
establishing an integrated task-force under DNI auspices and
rotating operational control to identify, monitor, and evaluate AI
T

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
24
and other technology transactions on a scale much larger than the present
CFIUS effort.
• To avoid parochialism and loss of focus and to have sufficient resources to
meet this urgent need, the unit should be given access to all-source intelli-
gence and staffed with cleared personnel drawn from the IC, law enforce-
ment, Department of Defense (DOD), State, Commerce, other non-Title 50
USG organizations and contractors with skills in Chinese language, data
science, trade, financial analysis, international business practices, and the
targeted technical disciplines.
This approach will appeal simultaneously to three constituencies, whose
perspectives differ: (a) it supports rational decisions to reject transactions
where and as needed; (b) it highlights opportunities to collaborate where
both countries’ interests are served; and (c) it generates data needed to
monitor and mitigate technological threats.
2. Develop standards and metrics to judge what transactions, or classes
of transactions, benefit U.S. and global interests. We propose an ad hoc
consortium of government, industry, and academic experts be convened to
develop normative criteria on three levels: short-term (immediate impact on
U.S. economy and security), longer-term (impact on trading partners and
international trade practices), and geo-scale (the impact a transaction or
failure to collaborate has on global development).
We do not propose sanctioned technology lists, although standards can
be a precursor to lists and, in particular, to calibration of a “watchboard”
served by data streams (proposed above) to monitor technology develop-
ment and exchange. Hard questions of what makes up value and how to
measure it will challenge the best minds. But we believe that data-driven
criteria, while hard to create, are preferable to the alternative.
3. Institute a comprehensive outreach program, coordinated by the DNI’s
National Counterintelligence and Security Center with active participation
from State, Commerce, and FBI, to alert U.S. businesses, universities, and
research labs; foreign governments; foreign students entering the United
States; and foreign advocacy groups already in the United States to the
risks (penalties) of some forms of unsupervised transfers. In particular, we
recommend:
• implementing a media strategy to foster respect for American tech-
nology, aimed at building a national consensus on acceptable
cooperation between law enforcement and U.S. entities employing
or trading with non-U.S. persons in high-tech sectors;

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
25
• encouraging U.S. companies to think long-term when faced with
foreign competition and to consider the national interest in their
international dealings; also needed are measures to lessen corporate
sensitivity toward exposure of IPR theft;
• engaging positively with China’s official, quasi-official, and private
entities on our expectations of IPR protection, on the benefits of genu-
ine collaboration, and on cooperation in technology risk avoidance.
4. Encourage foreign students and researchers to remain in the United
States, become citizens, and help their new country prosper, especially in
areas such as AI, where we face critical shortages. Among steps that can be
taken to achieve this are:
• Provide AI students and scholars a clear path from temporary status
to permanent residence and citizenship, potentially through dedicat-
ed visa and green card categories for computing talent;
• Address processing delays affecting AI workers in the employ-
ment-based immigration system, including by lifting numerical limits
and country-based caps,12 3 and by tying new security measures to
increased resources for screening;
• Establish reliable immigration pathways for foreign-born AI entrepre-
neurs, who currently have no visa categories available to them;
• Review existing security safeguards related to immigrants and for-
eign visitors in STEM fields, including the State Department consular
interview process and the Mantis interagency screening program,
and revise them as needed to ensure focus on the venues, actors and
practices of greatest concern.
5. Increase America’s S&T base to avoid a zero-sum struggle. Mitigation is
no substitute for positive efforts to expand America’s S&T base. Accordingly,
we favor:
• Primary and secondary school curricula that promote early aware-
ness by U.S. students of AI’s importance, prompt appropriate ac-
ademic decisions, and ensure the students’ competitiveness at US
universities for seats in AI fields;124
• National incentives, including placement in STEM programs, schol-
arships, and low-cost loans to encourage American citizens and
students from other liberal democracies to take up S&T careers in the
United States.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
26
• In global terms, the contributions a strong S&T cadre can make to hu-
man progress and security weigh equally with the benefits America’s
open research environment offers to itself and the world. Both should
be cherished and encouraged.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
27
Bibliography
Atkinson, Robert D. and Caleb Foote, “Is China Catching Up to the United States in Innovation?” Information
Technology & Innovation Foundation. April 8, 201 9.
Baum, Richard. China’s Four Modernizations: The New Technological Revolution. Boulder CO: Westview Press.
1 980.
Brick, Ingar. “The gist of creativity.” In Andersson and Sahlin, eds., The Complexity of Creativity. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers. 201 3.
Brown, Michael and Pavneet Singh. “China’s Technology Transfer Strategy.” DIUX, February 201 7.
CB Insights. “From China with Love: AI, Robotics, AR/VR Are Hot Areas for Chinese Investment In US.” August 1,
2017.
Chen Jiugeng. “Actual Strength of S&T Information Service System in China.” China Information Review, No. 10,
2006.
China Ministry of Education. 制造业人才发展规划指南 (Manufacturing Talent Development Planning Guide). 1 4
February 201 7.
China Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security. 关于开展2018年度中国留学人员回国创业启动支持计
划申报工作的通知 (Notice on 201 8 applications for the start-up support program for returning overseas scholars).
MHRSS document 1 1. 201 8.
China Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security. 关于开展2019年度中国留学人员回国创业启动支持计
划申报工作的通知 (Notice on 201 9 applications for the start-up support program for returning overseas scholars).
MHRSS document 266. 201 8.
China Ministry of Industry and Information Technology. 促进新一代人工智能产业发展三年行动计划 (Three-Year
Action Plan to Promote the Development of New-Generation AI Industry). December 1 4, 201 7.
China Ministry of Science and Technology. 2016国家重点实验室年度报告 (2016 State Key Laboratories Annual
Report). MOST. December 201 7.
Gilli, Andrew and Mauro Gilli. “Why China Has Not Caught Up Yet: Military-Technical Superiority and the Limits of
Imitation, Reverse Engineering, and Cyber Espionage.” International Security, Vol. 43. No. 3 (Winter). 201 8
Hannas, William C. The Writing on the Wall: How Asian Orthography Curbs Creativity. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press. 2003.
Hannas, William C. and James Mulvenon, Anna Puglisi. Chinese Industrial Espionage. Routledge, 201 3.
Herbig, Paul. Innovation Japanese Style. Praeger. 1 995.
Huo Zhongwen (霍忠文) and Wang Zongxia (王宗孝). 国防科技情报源及获取技术 (Sources and Methods
of Obtaining National Defense Science and Technology Intelligence). Beijing: Kexue Jishu Wenxuan Publishing
Company, 1 99 1.
Lee, Kai-fu. AI Superpowers: China, Silicon Valley and the New World Order. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin, Harcourt.
201 8.
Logan, Robert K. The Alphabet Effect. New York: Morrow. 1 986.
Miao Qihao. “Technological and Industrial Intelligence in China: Development, Transition and Perspectives” in

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
28
Prescott and Gibbons, eds., Global Perspectives on Competitive Intelligence. Alexandria VA. 1 993.
Nakamura, Hajime. Ways of Thinking of Eastern Peoples: India, China, Tibet, Japan. Honolulu: University of Hawaii
Press. 1 964.
Nakayama, Shigeru and Nathan Sivin. Chinese Science: Explorations of an Ancient Tradition. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press. 1 973.
Needham, Joseph. Science and Civilization in China: History of Scientific Thought. Cambridge University Press.
1 956.
Needham, Joseph. The Grand Titration: Science and Society in East and West. London: George Allen & Unwin.
196 9.
Nisbett, Richard E., Kaiping Peng, Incheol Choi, and Ara Norenzayan. “Culture and Systems of Thought: Holistic
Versus Analytic Cognition.” Psychological Review 108, No. 2 (April). 2001.
Nisbett, Richard E. The Geography of Thought: How Asians and Westerners Think Differently … and Why. New York:
The Free Press. 2003.
Office of the United States Trade Representative. “Section 30 1 Report into China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices
Related to Technology Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation.” March 27 , 201 8.
Qian Wenyuan. The Great Inertia: Scientific Stagnation in Traditional China. London: Croom Helm. 1 985.
Suttmeier, Richard P. “New Directions in Chinese Science and Technology.” In John Major, ed., China Briefing.
Boulder CO: Westview Press. 1 986, pp. 9 1-102
The Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual Property. “The IP Commission Report.” May 201 3.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
29
1. Known in the technical literature as “informal,” “extralegal,” and more recently “non-traditional collection.”
2. “Outreach office” refers to organizations set up within state and local governments or within nominal NGOs
to facilitate collaboration with, or access to, foreign-based entities that lead to the transfer of technology. Most of
China’s ministries have one or more such departments. “Advocacy group” is the term used by analysts for foreign-
based organizations whose stated goal is to support China’s transfer initiatives.
3. Section 301 Report into China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices Related to Technology Transfer, Intellectual Property,
and Innovation. Office of the United States Trade Representative (27 March 201 8).
4. “The IP Commission Report.” The Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual Property (May 201 3). And
Michael Brown and Pavneet Singh, “China’s Technology Transfer Strategy” (DIUX, February 201 7).
5. Hannas, Mulvenon and Puglisi, Chinese Industrial Espionage. (Routledge, 201 3) hereafter “CIE.”
6. Huo Zhongwen and Wang Zongxia, 国防科技情报源及获取技术 (Sources and Methods of Obtaining
National Defense Science and Technology Information) (Beijing, 1 99 1). And Miao Qihao, “Technological and
Industrial Intelligence in China: Development, Transition and Perspectives” in Prescott and Gibbons, eds., Global
Perspectives on Competitive Intelligence (Alexandria VA, 1 993).
7. They do not violate U.S. legal statutes and laws of other nations subjected to the same aggressive transfer practices.
8. Based on sources in notes 5-8, and primary Chinese sources listed in CIE, pp. 27 4-276.
9. Transfer venues and practices that do not violate the legal statutes of the country from which technology is sought
or obtained.
10. Currently undergoing a name change to “China International Talent Exchange Association” (中国国际人才交流
协会). The website still bears the old English name and logo. (www.caiep.net/achieve/index.php)
1 1. Hannas, Mulvenon, Puglisi. CIE. 201 3.
1 2. “China’s startup culture is the yin to Silicon Valley’s yang: instead of being mission-driven, Chinese companies are
first and foremost market-driven… It doesn’t matter where an idea came from or who came up with it. All that matters
is whether you can execute it to make a financial profit.” Kai-fu Lee, AI Superpowers, p. 27.
1 3. Unclassified annual reports by the National Counterintelligence Executive and its successor, the DNI’s National
Counterintelligence and Security Center invariably rank China first among “informal” collectors of US proprietary
technology. The office at one time considered issuing separate China reports.
1 4. Ministry of Science and Technology statistics for years 1 997 through 2005 cited by Chen Jiugeng, Director of
the Institute of Scientific and Technical Information of China (“Actual Strength of S&T Information Service System in
China,” China Information Review no. 10, 2006, pp 1 7-22).
1 5. Andrea Gilli and Mauro Gilli. “Why China Has Not Caught Up Yet: Military-Technical Superiority and the Limits
of Imitation, Reverse Engineering, and Cyber Espionage.” International Security, Vol. 43, No. 3 (Winter 201 8).
16. See Hannas, The Writing on the Wall (2003) for an overview.
1 7. Baum (1 980), Herbig (1 995), Logan (1 986), Nakamura (1 964), Nakayama (1 973), Nisbett (2001, 2003),
Suttmeir (1 986)
1 8. Joseph Needham’s multi-volume record of China’s S&T accomplishments is universally cited as a marker of
China’s scientific skills. But Needham himself (1 956, p. 1 1; 1 969, p. 1 5) was perplexed by “the lack of theoretical
Endnotes

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
30
science in China” and distinguished China’s practical science from the abstract science that emerged in the West.
1 9. “China’s incapability of developing modern science has been so conspicuous that, even with conscious and
official importation, the state of non-development nevertheless dragged on and on.” Qian Wenyuan (1 985) p. 50.
20. Hannas (2003, 201 3)
2 1. Called “intrarepresentational” creativity or “template matching,” and “interrepresentational” or “analogical,”
respectively. In the former case, a goal-directed search is made of existing mental models that correspond to the
surface features of a problem. In the latter case, two abstract patterns from separate domains are combined, often
fortuitously, yielding insight into problems that resisted solution in their original form. (Hannas, 2003, p. 1 16-7). Also
see Ingar Brick, “The gist of creativity” p. 8, in Andersson and Sahlin, eds., The Complexity of Creativity (201 3).
22. E.g., hypersonics, plasma stealth, inertial confinement fusion, genomics, data visualization, and cryptography.
See also Robert D. Atkinson and Caleb Foote, “Is China Catching Up to the United States in Innovation?” Information
Technology & Innovation Foundation. April 8, 201 9.
23. The Chinese term qingbao (情报)is a unified concept that covers both “information” and “intelligence.”
24. Documented cases of human or technical espionage, if they exist at all, are beyond the scope of this unclassified
study.
25. 新一代人工智能发展规划
26. 柔性引进 (flexible introduction) is a term of art encompassing both formal and informal acquisition processes.
27. 促进新一代人工智能产业发展三年行动计划 (Three-Year Action Plan to Promote the Development of New-
Generation AI Industry), MIIT, 1 4 December 201 7. Section 4, “Accelerate the cultivation of talent.”
28. “By various means” is a canonical expression used in the Chinese technical literature to denote informal access.
29. 制造业人才发展规划指南 (“Manufacturing Talent Development Planning Guide”), Ministry of Education, 1 4
February 201 7.
30. 高等学校人工智能创新行动计划
3 1. The “1 1 1 Plan” is a project begun in 2006 by the MOE and State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs to
recruit some 1,000 top international scientists to serve at 100 centers for “introducing foreign intellect” (引进国外智
力) established at Chinese universities.
32. Hannas, Mulvenon and Puglisi, Chinese Industrial Espionage, pp. 27 4-276.
33. http://www.most.gov.cn/kjbgz/201 7 1 1/t201 7 1 1 20_1 36303.htm
34. 新一代人工智能发展规划推进办公室. www.most.gov.cn/tpxw/201 902/t201 9022 1_1 45 1 37.htm#
35. www.most.gov.cn 国科发资 (201 8) No. 264, 国科发资 (201 9) No. 1 43.
36. MOST’s Foreign Talent Research Center (国外人才研究中心), International Cooperation Office (国际合作
司), China International S&T Cooperation Program (国家国际技术合作专项), China International Talent Exchange
Foundation (中国国际人才交流基金会), and the affiliated China Science and Technology Exchange Center (中国
科学技术交流中心).
37. Summer 201 8. www.ia.ac.cn/xwzx/xshd/201 807/t201 807 1 2_5041 849.html
38. www.cast.org.cn/art/201 8/1 1/2 1/art_36_80397.html
39. http://www.safea.gov.cn/content.shtml?id=1 2750366
40. www.caiep.net/achieve/index.php. 引智 is an abbreviation of 引进国外智力 (baike.baidu.com/item/引智).
See footnote 28.
41. http://www.caiep.net/achieve/content.php?id=7016
42. http://www.caiep.net/achieve/content.php?id=7067
43. http://www.caiep.net/achieve/content.php?id=7040

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
31
44. 中央人才工作协调小组
45. baike.baidu.com/item/百人计划
46. 1000 plan.org
47. www.iyiou.com/p/9555 1.html
48. http://www.caict.ac.cn/xwdt/hyxw/201 904/t201 90404_1 97345.htm
49. en.unesco.org/events/international-conference-artificial-intelligence-and-education
50. www.huodongjia.com/tag/27998
5 1. The web pages are in Chinese or, when bilingual, default to Chinese language.
52. scholarsupdate.hi2net.com/news.asp?NewsID=26701
53. cnedu-ch.org/publish/portal64/tab41 28/info1 40540.htm
54. chinahr.com/jobs/32278
55. www.cistc.gov.cn
56. www.ocs-gz.gov.cn
57. http://www.chtf.com/
58. Hannas, Mulvenon, Puglisi, CIE, 201 3. Chapter 3.
59. USTR, “201 9 Special 301 Report, April 201 9. Pp. 38-48.
60. 上海-亚马逊AWS联合创新中心
61. www.research.ibm.com/labs/china/
62. news.microsoft.com/apac/201 8/09/1 7
63. Kai-fu Lee, AI Superpowers: China, Silicon Valley and the New World Order. 201 8.
64. According to www.tt9 1.com, a Shanghai-based aggregator.
65. std.jiangsu.gov.cn/art/201 7/7/1 3/art_7528_366 1085.html
66. www.cittc.net/news/detail/2467
67. The phrase is 拥有自主知识产权. It is unknown to what extent this requirement is enforced.
68. 关于开展2018年度中国留学人员回国创业启动支持计划申报工作的通知 (Notice on 201 8 applications
for the start-up support program for returning overseas scholars). Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security,
document 1 1 (201 8).
69. 关于开展2019年度中国留学人员回国创业启动支持计划申报工作的通知 (Notice on 201 9 applications
for the start-up support program for returning overseas scholars). Ibid., document 266 (201 8).
70. 2016 国家重点实验室年度报告. MOST, December 201 7.
7 1. zh.wikipedia.org/wiki/中华人民共和国国家重点实验室列表
72. www.tsinghua.edu.cn/publish/cs/4760/index.html
73. China’s State High-Tech Research and Development Plan (国家高技术研究发展计划) established to close the
gap between Chinese and foreign industrial and military technology.
7 4. www.robo1 23.com/info/207.html
75. www.cuhk.edu.cn/zh-hans/page/6 1 54
76. baike.baidu.com/item/中国人工智能协会/19284772
77. www.wukong.com/question/647857356779238222 1. CAAI appears to have dropped off the map. It was
listed by the Ministry of Civil Affairs in 201 8 as one of 307 “suspected illegal organizations.” (www.xuehua.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
32
us/201 8/07/06/中国人工智能协会等307个涉嫌为非法组织名单).
78. www.saiia.org.cn
79. jsai.org.cn
80. www.aiiaorg.cn
81. www.most.gov.cn/dfkj/bj/tpxw/201 8 1 1/t201 8 1 1 23_1 43 106.htm
82. “China has over 4,000 AI enterprises: report,” Xinhua, July 2, 201 8, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/201 8-
07/02/c_1 3729583 1.htm
83. “Three charts show how China’s AI industry is propped up by three companies.” MIT Technology Review,
January 22, 201 9. www.technologyreview.com/s/6 1 28 1 3/
84. http://research.baidu.com
85. http://research.baidu.com/Blog/index-view?id=108
86. damo.alibaba.com/labs
87. damo.alibaba.com/collaborations
88. ai.tencent.com/ailab/en/about
89. ai.tencent.com/ailab/en/together/detial2?num=0
90. ai.tencent.com/ailab/en/together/detial2/?num=1
91. 吸引全球顶尖人才. air.jd.com/#index
92. www.sohu.com/a/207 1 75379_100024677
93. deepblueai.com/about.html
94. www.sensetime.com
95. www.pony.ai
96. roadstar.shixiseng.com/
97. www.zhenfund.com
98. www.techcode.com
99. “From China with Love: AI, Robotics, AR/VR Are Hot Areas for Chinese Investment In US,” CB Insights, August 1,
2017. www.cbinsights.com/research/chinese-investment-us-tech-expert-research/
100. Hannas, Mulvenon, Puglisi. CIE.
101. tsrcw.com/zgjrc/Detial.aspx?id=42 1 1. The group claims to have transferred some 1,440 “innovative projects”
to China by 2010.
102. fn.tsrcw.com/html/detail_1 2 1 97.html
103. www.wxhsdj.gov.cn/detail.php?id=3205
104. www.xinhuanet.com/overseas/201 8-05/02/c_1 29862909.htm
105. CIE, p. 1 2 1.
106. www.acse.org/index.php?sub=bulletin&type=news#Oct%201 3,%20201 8
107. ucahp.com
108. China Association for Science and Technology (中国科学技术协会).
109. www.yuanshihui.cn/detail/84b68b883d9f8ecb1efe7e1f
1 10. chineseradioseattle.com/201 8/09/10/cie_sea_201 8-2/

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
33
111 . “日本と中国の間の交流・連携及びグローバル化” cjaai.com協会について
1 1 2. http://www.cbaia.org.uk/en/cbaia/
113 . www.gcaai.org/zh/index.html#about
1 1 4. China Education and Research Network, managed by China’s MOE.
115 . http://www.edu.cn/rd/gao_xiao_cheng_guo/gao_xiao_zi_xun/201 904/t201 90429_1656772.shtml
1 16. Ibid.
11 7 . tech.sina.com.cn/it/201 8-04-1 3/doc-ifyuwqfa00241 96.shtml
1 1 8. www.sohu.com/a/27355901 1_473283
11 9 . 复旦大学-谷歌科技创新联合实验室
1 20. “201 8 中国人工智能AI发展报告.” Tsinghua University, China Institute for Science and Technology Policy, July
201 8, p. 16.
1 2 1. Ibid., p. 1 8.
1 22. Hannas, Mulvenon, Puglisi, CIE, 201 3.
1 23. As would be done by, for example, the "Fairness for High-Skilled Immigrants Act."
1 24. China’s 201 7 “New Generation AI Development Plan” (op.cit.) calls for establishing AI curricula in primary and
secondary schools. By January 201 9, AI textbooks were available for grades 3 through 8 for use in China’s major
cities beginning in September 201 9. (www.gov.cn/xinwen/201 9-01/24/content_5360752.htm)

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
43

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
CSET.GEORGETOWN.EDU | CSET@GEORGETOWN.EDU
