
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
cset.georgetown.edu
@CSETGeorgetown

Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission
“U.S. Investment in China's Capital Markets and Military-Industrial Complex”

Zachary Arnold
Research Fellow, Center for Security and Emerging Technology, Georgetown University
March 19, 20211

Chairman Borochoff, Chairman Fiedler, members of the Commission: Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
Together with my colleagues at the Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET), a
nonpartisan, data-driven policy think tank within Georgetown University, I research trends
related to global investment in emerging technologies, particularly artificial intelligence (AI)
and advanced semiconductors. My testimony will focus on these areas in addressing the
themes suggested by the Commission. I will cover the following points:
● The technological competition between the United States and China is dynamic and
hard to score; any U.S. advantages cannot be taken for granted. The U.S. and its
allies have advantages in many technologies, but these advantages may not be
durable or geopolitically meaningful.
● Many types of businesses, with varying relationships to the government, are fueling
China’s technological development. China’s cutting-edge tech companies range from
small startups to massive corporations. These firms draw support from the
government in many ways; some are more tightly state-linked than others. Traditional
state-owned enterprises play a limited role.
● China’s technology innovators need capital, and China’s government intervenes
heavily in capital allocation. Individual Chinese companies benefit from the largesse
of the central, provincial, and local authorities, with resultant harm to their
competitors in the U.S. and elsewhere.
● Government guidance funds exemplify the potential strengths, weaknesses, and
uncertainties of China’s approach. These public-private investment vehicles are
channeling massive amounts of capital into strategic technologies. Despite their
potential strengths, they have often faltered in practice, and their contribution to
China’s long-term technological development remains uncertain.

1 Thanks to Ashwin Acharya, Martin Chorzempa, Danny Hague, Saif Khan, Lorand Laskai, Ngor Luong, Anna Puglisi,
Helen Toner, and Lynne Weil for helpful input. All errors are mine.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
● Foreign investors are active in China’s technology sector, but they are not central
players. Capital, particularly American capital, is not currently a limiting factor in
China’s technology industry. Chinese tech firms depend more on other types of
foreign inputs, such as expertise.
● U.S. restrictions on investment on mainland China exchanges are unlikely to
meaningfully affect the state of play. China’s technology strategy doesn’t depend on
these capital flows. Broader investment restrictions might have more impact, but
would risk significant collateral damage to American investors.
● Any U.S. restrictions on investment in China should be multilateral, better informed,
and part of a broader strategy to maintain the technological advantage of the United
States and its democratic allies. Investment restrictions may have a role to play, if
well targeted and coordinated with allies. However, shoring up U.S. advantages in
human capital and other domains would probably have a greater impact.

The technological competition between the United States and China is dynamic and
hard to score; any U.S. advantages cannot be taken for granted
Any appraisal of China’s technological competitiveness should begin by acknowledging that
we have incomplete, uncertain information about Chinese science and technology. In recent
years, China has moved surprisingly fast in domains from genomic editing to military
aviation.2 The Chinese government has also invested heavily in monitoring, acquiring, and
adapting scientific and technological advances in the United States and other countries. The
United States has made no similar effort, and as a result, we lack insight into many aspects
of China’s technological enterprise.3 Our understanding of China’s defense-related
technological development is especially limited. The Chinese government is notoriously
opaque about military matters, and any relevant information published in the open tends to
be in Chinese-language outlets that often go untranslated.
This uncertainty notwithstanding, experts believe that the United States and its allies
currently enjoy an advantage in many technologies relevant to defense and national security.4

2 Jon Cohen and Nirja Desai, “With its CRISPR revolution, China becomes a world leader in genome editing,”
Science, August 2, 2019, https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2019/08/its-crispr-revolution-china-becomes-world-
leader-genome-editing; Liu Zhen, “China military’s landmark J-20 stealth fighter started a decade of
modernisation,” South China Morning Post, January 31, 2021,
https://www.scmp.com/news/china/military/article/3119615/china-militarys-landmark-j-20-stealth-fighter-
started-decade.
3 William Hannas and Huey-Meei Chang, China’s STI Operations: Monitoring Foreign Science and Technology Through
Open Sources (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, January 2021),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/chinas-sti-operations/.
4 See, e.g., the USCC testimony of Jeffrey Ding (June 7, 2019) (discussing artificial intelligence); Andrea Gilli and
Mauro Gilli, “Why China Has Not Caught Up Yet: Military-Technological Superiority and the Limits of Imitation,
Reverse Engineering, and Cyber Espionage,” International Security, vol. 43, no. 3, p. 141,
https://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/full/10.1162/isec_a_00337.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
This advantage is greatest, and probably most durable, in areas where implicit “know-how”
and accumulated human capital are most important, and in areas where incumbency confers
a large advantage (for example, through the existence of natural monopolies), making it hard
for Chinese entrants to catch up.5 Examples include high-end semiconductors,
semiconductor manufacturing equipment, and turbofan engines.6 The U.S. advantage over
China in “breakthrough” fundamental research is also widely acknowledged in both nations,
though its strategic relevance is debated.7 Areas of probable Chinese advantage, or at least
rough parity, include facial recognition and materials science.8
However, this type of scorekeeping leaves out key dimensions of the technological
competition between China and the United States. In fact, even if China’s technology trailed
America’s across the board, America still might not have a significant military or geopolitical
advantage.
First, emerging technologies evolve quickly and unpredictably. National leads in any
particular technology may evaporate, or be made irrelevant. For instance, Chinese
companies’ cutting-edge facial recognition systems use deep learning techniques that
emerged into widespread use only a few years ago.9 In this dynamic environment, China will
have opportunities to “leapfrog” to the cutting edge in many sectors, and it intends to seize
them.10 Continued U.S. leadership will depend on our ability to cultivate a robust innovation
ecosystem that stays one step ahead.
Second, the key technologies of our era involve complex combinations of many different
inputs. Rarely, if ever, does a single nation or firm control all of these inputs. This means
even America’s greatest technological advantages are rooted in interactions with many other
countries, China prominent among them. Today, American pharmaceutical companies use
Chinese-manufactured ingredients, Silicon Valley’s tech giants open labs in China and around
the world to access the talented researchers they need, and U.S. semiconductor firms
depend on revenue from Chinese markets to fund costly research into cutting-edge computer
chips. These exchanges provide the United States important benefits, but they also create

5 See generally Andrea Gilli and Mauro Gilli, “Why China Has Not Caught Up Yet: Military-Technological Superiority
and the Limits of Imitation, Reverse Engineering, and Cyber Espionage,” International Security, vol. 43, no. 3, p.
141, https://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/full/10.1162/isec_a_00337.
6 See id. at 182-84; Saif M. Khan, The Semiconductor Supply Chain: Assessing National Competitiveness (Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, January 2021), https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/the-semiconductor-
supply-chain/.
7 See William Hannas and Huey-Meei Chang, China’s Access to Foreign AI Technology: An Assessment (Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, September 2019), 7-8, https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/chinas-access-
to-foreign-ai-technology/.
8 See, e.g., Lauren Dudley, “China’s Ubiquitous Facial Recognition Tech Sparks Privacy Backlash,” The Diplomat,
March 7, 2020, https://thediplomat.com/2020/03/chinas-ubiquitous-facial-recognition-tech-sparks-privacy-
backlash/; Sarah O’Meara, “Materials science is helping to transform China into a high-tech economy,” Nature,
March 20, 2019, https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-00885-5.
9 See generally Dave Gershgorn, “The data that transformed AI research—and possibly the world,” Quartz, July 26,
2017, https://qz.com/1034972/the-data-that-changed-the-direction-of-ai-research-and-possibly-the-world/.
10 Lauren Dudley, “China's Quest for Self-Reliance in the Fourteenth Five-Year Plan,” CFR Net Politics, March 8,
2021, https://www.cfr.org/blog/chinas-quest-self-reliance-fourteenth-five-year-plan.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
vulnerabilities and potential chokepoints. America may have a technological advantage in the
sense that its medicines, software, and computer chips are currently better than their
Chinese competitors, but in an interdependent world, the geopolitical impact of this
advantage may be limited. Chinese policymakers understand this, and have encouraged and
manipulated interdependence in key domains in order to build their leverage.
Third, many, if not most, of today’s emerging and strategic technologies must be adapted
from commercial to defense use, adding another tricky dimension to the question of
technological advantage. Former Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter put it bluntly: “all
technology of consequence for protecting our people, and all technology of any consequence
at all, [once] came from the United States and came from within the walls of government.
Those days are irrevocably lost. . . . [now] I’ve got to go outside the Pentagon no matter
what.”11 America may boast the world’s most innovative technologies, but if the government
and military can’t effectively acquire, adapt and deploy them, the national defense won’t
benefit. For its part, though some aspects of its “military-civil fusion” efforts are easily
exaggerated, China has shown signs of being able to rapidly field new defense platforms and
commandeer its nominally private sector for state purposes.12 If it can generalize and extend
these capabilities, and nurture other connections between the defense sector and market-
oriented innovators, China could benefit enormously.
In short, America may currently lead China in many technologies, but these leads are not
necessarily durable or consequential. America’s geopolitical advantage will turn not only on
the sophistication of our technologies, but also on the continuing vibrance of our broader
innovation system, the nature and extent of our technological interdependence with China
and other nations, and our ability to move commercial technologies into the public sector.
Many types of businesses, with varying relationships to the government, are fueling
China’s technological development
China’s technology sector is diverse. Traditional state-owned enterprises (SOEs), the leaders
in earlier phases of China’s industrialization, play a less significant role than they once did.
They still have a large footprint in China’s broader economy, and remain dominant in some
sectors, including sectors directly related to China’s military, such as aircraft and nuclear
science. But in many other emerging technologies, the commercial sector has taken the lead.
Academic researchers, market experts, and technologists agree that SOEs tend to be less
active at the cutting edge - though there are exceptions, and state-owned firms continue to

11 Eric Johnson, “Former Defense Secretary Ash Carter Says AI Should Never Have the “True Autonomy” to Kill,”
Vox, May 13, 2019, https://www.vox.com/recode/2019/5/13/18617081/secretary-defense- ash-carter-ai-lethal-
kill-ethics-harvard-facebook-kara-swisher-decode-podcast.
12 See, e.g., William Greenwalt and Dan Patt, Competing in Time: Ensuring Capability Advantage and Mission Success
through Adaptable Resource Allocation (Hudson Institute, February 25, 2021), 36,
https://www.hudson.org/research/16717-competing-in-time-ensuring-capability-advantage-and-mission-success-
through-adaptable-resource-allocation; Zach Dorfman, “Tech Giants Are Giving China a Vital Edge in Espionage,”
Foreign Policy, December 23, 2020, https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/12/23/china-tech-giants-process-stolen-data-
spy-agencies/. On military-civil fusion, see Elsa B. Kania and Lorand Laskai, Myths and Realities of China’s Military-
Civil Fusion Strategy (Center for a New American Security, January 28, 2021),
https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/myths-and-realities-of-chinas-military-civil-fusion-strategy.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
provide the underlying infrastructure, such as energy and telecommunications, on which
emerging technologies depend.13
Instead, a panoply of market-oriented firms is pushing Chinese technology ahead. China’s AI
sector illustrates the range of players involved:
● Large, diversified public tech companies, such as the “BAT” firms (Baidu, Alibaba,
Tencent), which have massive AI operations alongside activity in other sectors, from
gaming to warehousing.
● Large, tech- and AI-focused public companies specializing in different aspects of the
AI ecosystem. Examples: iFlyTek (AI applications), Cambricon (AI hardware).
● Large public companies in other industries, many of which are launching AI
subsidiaries and lines of business in order to diversify or to support other activities.
Examples: Ping An Insurance, Hikvision, Guangzhou Automobile Industry Group. Some
state-owned enterprises fit this description. Examples: State Grid, China Telecom.
● Large privately held companies, in many cases much larger than their publicly traded
counterparts. Examples: Huawei, SenseTime, Megvii.
● Startups and small- and mid-size privately held companies active across a range of
AI input and application areas.
It is important not to confuse the limited role of SOEs with the absence of the state itself. In
China’s “state capitalist” economy, innovative enterprises from small startups to the largest
tech giants are entangled with the government in myriad ways. They may be founded within
public universities and research centers; receive equity investment from state-backed
investors; participate in industry alliances and standards organizations formed by the
government; borrow money on favorable terms from state banks; work with government
agencies to acquire technology and attract business partners from abroad; benefit from
regulations restricting their foreign competitors; incorporate the Communist Party into their
corporate governance; modify products to suit the government’s preferences; serve the state
as a customer, or even be commandeered for public purposes; and so on. In short, though it
formally owns and controls less of the market in emerging technologies such as AI, the
Chinese state is still pervasive in these sectors.
That is not to say, however, that innovative companies all march in lockstep with the
government, or that Party bureaucrats are micromanaging any particular company’s

13 See, e.g., “Who can become the ‘new SOEs’ of this new digital infrastructure?” [数字新基建，谁能成为「新国企」？
], Taihe Industry Observer [钛禾产业观察], April 15, 2020,
https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/vDuDYcmAGrQQqzZykOnlxQ?fbclid=IwAR08sUDOIFr3rPJ6WZoepZC4dVRpdbAeaDKuk
-Md-iheRK0kJRDFbe8W9Pk (translated in Jeffrey Ding, “ChinAI #91: Introducing Taihe (China's mini Defense One?)
- Let's Read it Together,” ChinAI Newsletter, April 27, 2020, https://chinai.substack.com/p/chinai-91-introducing-
taihe-chinas); Kevin Zheng Zhou, “State Ownership and Firm Innovation in China: An Integrated View of Institutional
and Efficiency Logics,” Administrative Science Quarterly, vol. 62, no.2, p. 375 (October 10, 2016),
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0001839216674457.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
activities on a regular basis. The boundary between the Chinese state and private business is
often illusory, but still, Chinese entrepreneurs and businesspeople have their own agendas.
Like their counterparts anywhere else, they are focused on profit, don’t always welcome
government involvement, and sometimes may be able to fend it off.14 More fundamentally,
the Chinese technology sector is too vast, complex, and dynamic for the government to fully
control - even a government with the reach of the Chinese Communist Party. Rather, a give
and take exists, and the extent of alignment with the Chinese state varies meaningfully in
different settings and from company to company, in each case according to that company’s
specific activities and circumstances.
China’s technology innovators need capital, and China’s government intervenes heavily
in capital allocation
Emerging technologies need capital to develop, and finance is a central aspect of China’s
technological ecosystem. It is especially important in a few parts of this ecosystem. Early-
stage businesses need access to risk-tolerant capital - typically venture capital - to establish
themselves before they can “go to market” and begin earning revenue from customers. And
among more mature companies, some need much more capital than others. For example,
semiconductor factories cost tens of billions of dollars; a single high-end lithography
machine, used to draw nano-scale circuits into computer chips, sells for about $170
million.15 Electric vehicles are another capital-intensive sector; China’s EV industry has
received infusions of cash from the government as it develops.16 Even technologies thought of
as less costly to develop, such as software, may demand lots of capital at the cutting edge.
No factories are needed to build machine learning models, but the most advanced models
can require millions of dollars’ worth of energy and computing time to develop.17
In the past, China’s government might have addressed these needs by distributing resources
directly to companies, or operating the companies as extensions of the state. These practices
continue today to some extent. However, China’s leaders have begun to move beyond the
traditional and inefficient mechanisms of the command economy. Increasingly, their aim is to
use market mechanisms to mediate between the state’s high-level technological priorities
and the industries and firms that can actually enact them.18 China’s state-owned financial

14 See, e.g., Sun Yu, “Jack Ma’s Ant defies pressure from Beijing to share more customer data,” Financial Times,
March 1, 2021, https://www.ft.com/content/1651bc67-4112-4ce5-bf7a-d4ad7039e7c7.
15 CSET calculation based on data in ASML’s Q4 2020 Financial Report, available at
https://www.asml.com/en/investors/financial-results/q4-2020.
16 See Daniel Ren, “Xpeng’s US$1.98 billion credit line from state-owned banks suggests China is throwing weight
behind leading electric vehicle firms,” South China Morning Post, January 12, 2021,
https://www.scmp.com/business/companies/article/3117462/xpengs-us198-billion-credit-line-state-owned-banks-
suggests.
17 Or Sharir et al., The Cost of Training NLP Models: A Concise Overview (April 2020),
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2004.08900.pdf; “The cost of training machines is becoming a problem,” The Economist,
June 13, 2020, https://www.economist.com/technology-quarterly/2020/06/11/the-cost-of-training-machines-is-
becoming-a-problem.
18 See, e.g., pp. 18-19 of the Government Work Report from this year’s “Two Sessions”: “We will fully leverage the
decisive role of the market in allocating resources and give better play to the role of government, to ensure better
alignment between an efficient market and a well-functioning government. We will continue to expand market

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
institutions, its increasingly mature domestic capital markets, and the bevy of domestic and
foreign investors eager for high-return technology investments provide enabling infrastructure
for this strategy.
Chinese authorities at the central, provincial, and local levels use many tools to guide capital
to strategic industries. Individually, some of them would not be out of place in other
countries. Together, though, they are an unusually broad and pervasive toolkit for allocating
capital. Among the more important tools:
● State banks provide below-market loans and trade financing to favored technology
companies.
● Government leaders designate particular industries and firms as nationally strategic,
which signals that these industries and firms are likely to enjoy government support
(financial, regulatory or otherwise), encouraging others to invest in them.
● SOEs, state investment funds, and public-private “guidance funds,” discussed in detail
below, make equity investments in a wide range of firms, from small startups to tech
giants.
● Government-sponsored industry alliances, incubators, and technology parks help
connect promising startups to state and nonstate investors.
It’s also worth noting that Chinese government agencies are major buyers in industries such
as surveillance, enterprise software, and “smart city” technology. This isn’t an intervention in
the capital markets per se, but it does provide a financial bulwark for these industries.
China’s tech companies rely on government-provided and government-“guided” capital to
varying degrees. Companies seeking to break into especially capital-intensive sectors, such
as the semiconductor and EV firms discussed above, may struggle to raise enough money
from private investors, leaving the government to fill the gap - in some cases, to the tune of
billions of dollars.19 Meanwhile, startups seeking to commercialize unproven technologies
often face a financial “valley of death”: they need money to scale up production, but don’t yet
have paying customers. The government is well suited to provide “patient capital” to sustain
these companies. On the other hand, industries with lower capital needs and ready markets
may have easier access to private capital (or less need for it in the first place) and tend to
rely less on public support. Examples include consumer finance, social media, business
services, and advertising.
China’s government’s overt role in that country’s capital markets has provoked extreme,
often contradictory reactions abroad. Some observers take its ambitious strategy documents

access, pilot a comprehensive reform on the market-based allocation of production factors, and ensure equal
protection for the property rights of various market entities in accordance with the law.” (available at
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1lpKBavUfkZsvmQcnLDdd4yepq7nvbWqp/view)
19 See generally Measuring distortions in international markets: The semiconductor value chain (Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development, December 12, 2019), https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/trade/measuring-
distortions-in-international-markets_8fe4491d-en.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
at something close to face value, warning that China’s purposeful “state capitalism” will out-
innovate and outcompete the messy, decentralized American way. Others are incredulous,
pointing to widespread corruption and bloat in the Chinese system and a string of high-profile
failures, such as the recent, spectacular implosion of a semiconductor manufacturer backed
by the Wuhan city government.20
In reality, it’s too early to know whether China’s current approach, and the capital allocation
strategies it involves, can build a sustainable, comprehensive innovation ecosystem. Clearly,
the individual companies receiving financial support from, or at the behest of, the state enjoy
an advantage over their unsubsidized competitors at home or abroad. And the Chinese
government’s ability and willingness to direct capital can drive domestic progress in specific,
selected sectors. Still, the distortions and inefficiencies this strategy introduces could
undermine China’s broader technological development in the long term. A closer look at
guidance funds, one of the Chinese government’s main tools for allocating capital, illustrates
these dynamics.
Government guidance funds exemplify the potential strengths, weaknesses, and
uncertainties of China’s approach21
Guidance funds are public-private investment vehicles that aim to both produce financial
returns and further the state’s industrial policy goals. Sponsored by central, provincial, and
local authorities, they generally focus on strategic and emerging sectors, such as artificial
intelligence. As of the first quarter of 2020, Chinese officials had set up 1,741 guidance
funds, with a cumulative registered target size of 11 trillion RMB (1.55 trillion USD) and
about 4.76 trillion RMB (672 billion USD) in actual funds raised.22
Each guidance fund’s governmental sponsor typically contributes 20 to 30 percent of the
fund’s capital, then seeks to raise the rest from so-called “social capital” investors, which
may include SOEs, corporations, and state and non-state financial institutions. To entice
these social capital investors, government sponsors in guidance funds may forgo their own
interest payments, assume other investors’ losses, or provide other incentives. The
government’s sizable capital contributions also reduce other investors’ exposure and signal
the government’s commitment to relevant industries.
Guidance funds have developed in three phases. In the first phase, lasting through the early-
to mid-2010s, central and local governments set up a number of initial funds and established
a supporting legal framework. The second phase saw a boom in guidance funds between

20 See Kevin Xu, “China’s ‘Semiconductor Theranos’: HSMC,” Interconnected, March 4, 2021,
https://interconnected.blog/chinas-semiconductor-theranos-hsmc/.
21 This section of my testimony is adapted from Ngor Luong, Zachary Arnold, and Ben Murphy, Understanding
Chinese Government Guidance Funds (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, March 2021),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/understanding-chinese-government-guidance-funds/, and Ngor Luong,
Zachary Arnold, and Ben Murphy, Chinese Government Guidance Funds: A Guide for the Perplexed (Center for Security
and Emerging Technology, March 2021), https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/chinese-government-guidance-
funds/.
22 “Government Guidance Fund Trends” [政府引导基金动态], Zero2IPO [情科研 究中心], 2020,
https://m.pedata.cn/special_do/govFund/web (archived at https://perma.cc/67SK-BH7R).

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
2015 and 2018, fueled by central government policies, relatively loose regulation, new
restrictions on other types of local government spending, and trend-chasing among provincial
and local bureaucrats. In the third phase, beginning around 2018, formation and fundraising
slowed down, due in large part to broader economic headwinds in China and tighter
regulations.
Guidance funds are unquestionably helping to mobilize money and other resources for
emerging and strategic industries, and they have several potential advantages over traditional
Chinese industrial policy mechanisms:
● By bringing the profit motive into industrial policy, the guidance fund model could
reduce the inefficiency and corruption associated with subsidy schemes and other
traditional policy tools. Chinese policymakers hope that professional fund managers
and profit-oriented social capital investors will discipline the guidance funds in which
they participate, and bring in capital, information, contacts, and expert judgment
beyond what the state can provide.
● With their government backing and strategic mandate, guidance funds are also well
positioned to provide patient capital, a critical resource for emerging technologies.
● Finally, guidance funds can complement and amplify other industrial policy measures,
producing robust, holistic support for emerging and high-tech businesses. To attract
high-quality targets, many guidance fund institutions provide or coordinate other
incentives, such as state-sponsored technology parks, R&D incentives, and talent
recruitment plans. In the ideal case, this produces comprehensive ecosystems of
support, fostering local economies of scale and helping emerging and strategic
businesses take off.
However, these advantages are not always realized. Many guidance funds are poorly
conceived and implemented, and the model as a whole is often inefficient:
● Guidance funds frequently raise much less money than planned, and much of the
money they do raise is never actually invested. New funds routinely plan to raise
hundreds of millions or even billions of yuan, but struggle to raise money from both
public sponsors and social capital investors, who are wary the funds will produce
competitive returns. Funds that do raise money often fail to find targets, leaving
money idle in bank accounts.
● There are too many guidance funds. By the first half of 2019, local governments alone
had set up 1,300 guidance funds with frequently overlapping policy objectives, leading
to shortages of social capital investors, suitable investment targets, and fund
management talent. The same year, one market research firm noted that “[a] western
province has several special government guidance funds for investing in biotech and

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
pharmaceuticals, and one city in central China has nearly ten government guidance
funds for strategic emerging industries.”23
● Many guidance funds are badly managed. Guidance funds may engage in wasteful or
even illicit activities, such as facilitating unauthorized borrowing by local
governments. Sponsors often rely on inexperienced, excessively risk-averse
bureaucrats or poorly incentivized investment managers to manage them.
● Especially at the subnational level, guidance funds frequently ignore market
fundamentals, which can lead to bad investment decisions. “A biotech and
pharmaceutical industry cannot be developed in every province,” one official
complained in 2016, “but every province is blindly trying to create such an industry
through [guidance] funds. . . . It’s ‘national strategic industry’ this, ‘emerging
industry’ that. . . . Government guidance funds have entered an era of wild growth and
we must get to the root of the problem.”24
● There is some evidence that guidance funds crowd out private capital, undermining
their goal of increasing the total pool of capital available for strategic industries and
potentially making the market as a whole less efficient.
For the most part, these flaws are rooted in basic issues of institutional capacity and
contradictions in the guidance fund model—between government aims and the profit motive,
and between national visions for technological development and local economic and political
interests. These fundamental issues are present, to some extent, in all forms of state-directed
capital allocation in China, and it’s doubtful they will be overcome.
But although guidance funds may never meet their sky-high ambitions, they could still help
China push ahead in technology, especially considering the Chinese government’s apparent
willingness to tolerate some amount of waste and inefficiency in pursuit of its technological
goals. Critically, even with its problems, the guidance fund mechanism probably improves on
the deeply flawed traditional policy tools that might otherwise be used to support strategic
industries, such as direct government ownership or cash handouts to state-favored
companies. It remains to be seen whether it is improved enough to meaningfully advance
China’s ambitious technological agenda.
Foreign investors are active in China’s technology sector, but they are not central
players
In absolute terms, foreign investors have a large presence in China’s tech sector. According
to official statistics, the Chinese IT sector alone attracted over $11 billion in foreign direct

23 “Report on the Development of Chinese Government Guidance Funds 2019 (Part 1)” [2019年中国政府引导基金发
展研究报告(上篇)] at 23, Zero2IPO [情科研究中心], October 17, 2019, available for purchase at
https://research.pedaily.cn/report/pay/201910172139.shtml (archived at https://perma.cc/44UC-K7HH).
24 Fan Yuan [范媛] and Li Jingjing [李晶晶], “Government Guidance Funds Need to be Cleaned Up” [政府引导基金需
要正本清源], China Economic Times [中国经济时报], December 2, 2016,
http://lib.cet.com.cn/paper/szb_con/480397.html (archived at https://perma.cc/82RN-WAWQ).

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
investment (FDI) in 2018.25 Foreign investors buy and sell shares in China’s publicly traded
tech giants on exchanges in New York, Hong Kong, Shanghai, and Shenzhen, and invest in
privately held technology companies through venture capital and private equity transactions.
Foreign tech companies also participate directly in China’s technology marketplace. They
launch joint ventures and R&D labs, take part in Chinese industry alliances, buy stakes in
promising Chinese startups, and invest millions or even billions of dollars in their Chinese
operations.26 According to CSET analysis, the last five years saw well over 700 corporate
venture capital transactions involving Chinese startups and foreign investors, with investors in
the United States, East Asia, Great Britain, and the European Union accounting for most of
the deals. (See Figure 1 at the end of this document.) For example, Intel’s venture arm
announced investments in two Chinese semiconductor firms just last spring.27
In context, however, these activities seem somewhat less significant. $11 billion in IT-related
FDI in 2018 is nothing to scoff at, but firms in one subset of China’s IT industry, the artificial
intelligence sector, raised over $12 billion in disclosed venture capital and private equity
funding alone that same year.28 China- and Hong Kong-based companies made over five
thousand corporate venture capital investments in China since 2016, far outpacing their
peers from other countries.29 On the public markets, the “BAT” companies and U.S.-listed
firms do have significant foreign ownership. However, our informal review suggests that
foreign shareholders hold a small minority of shares in key mainland-listed firms active in AI
hardware, facial recognition, and other applications critical to the state’s technological
strategy. (See Figure 2 at the end of this document.) And many important companies, such
as Huawei and SenseTime, are not publicly traded at all.
There is also some evidence that American investors’ role in particular is diminishing over
time. The Rhodium Group reports that U.S. foreign direct investment in China’s IT sector has
declined steadily over the past several years, amidst generally flat or falling overall U.S.-

25 China Statistical Yearbook 2019, Table 11-16, available at http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/ndsj/2019/indexeh.htm.
Official FDI statistics are prone to error, but this at least gives a sense of the magnitude of FDI flows. China’s
leading sources of FDI include Singapore, Taiwan, South Korea, Japan, the United States, and Great Britain. See
PRC Ministry of Commerce, “News Release of National Assimilation of FDI From January to October 2018”
(November 22, 2018),
http://english.mofcom.gov.cn/article/statistic/foreigninvestment/201812/20181202815485.shtml.
26 See, e.g., Thilo Hanemann et al., Two-Way Street – US-China Investment Trends – 2020 Update (Rhodium Group,
May 11, 2020), https://rhg.com/research/two-way-street-us-china-investment-trends-2020-update/; Roxanne
Heston and Remco Zwetsloot, Mapping U.S. Multinationals’ Global AI R&D Activity (Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, December 2020), https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/mapping-u-s-multinationals-global-ai-rd-
activity/; Ngor Luong et al., China’s Artificial Intelligence Industry Alliance: Understanding China’s AI Strategy Through
Industry Alliances (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, forthcoming 2021).
27 “Intel Capital invests in Chinese chip companies amid tech tensions,” Reuters, May 13, 2020,
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-intel-investments-china/intel-capital-invests-in-chinese-chip-companies-amid-
tech-tensions-idUSKBN22P0GK.
28 Zachary Arnold, Ilya Rahkovsky, and Tina Huang, Tracking AI Investment: Initial Findings from the Private Markets
(Center for Security and Emerging Technology, September 2020), 20, https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-
content/uploads/CSET-Tracking-AI-Investment.pdf.
29 According to CSET’s analysis of the Crunchbase dataset; see Figure 1 for methodology.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
China FDI flows.30 U.S.-China venture capital investment has also fallen,31 and Crunchbase
data indicate a similar decline in U.S.-investor corporate venture capital transactions.32
These trends have many causes. Geopolitical developments are important, and in individual
cases may be enough on their own to unravel cross-border financial relationships. In the
aggregate, though, other factors often have a greater effect on foreign investment in China’s
tech industries. These include:
● Shifting dynamics within specific markets and investment channels. For example,
both domestic and foreign VC investment in China contracted sharply in the past few
years amidst overvaluation concerns.33
● Broader macroeconomic trends in China and in investor nations.
● The growth and maturation of China’s domestic capital markets.
● Domestic controls on inbound investment. For example, the Chinese government
strictly limited foreign M&A activity within China until recently.34
● State-subsidized loans and equity investment displacing foreign capital.
● The COVID-19 pandemic and resulting disruptions in the global financial markets.
Whatever the causes, the fact remains that foreign money plays a secondary role in today’s
Chinese technology sector.
However, capital is not the only resource Chinese firms draw from abroad. Foreign talent and
expertise have also played a major part in China’s technological development. The flow of
these resources across borders - often in tandem with financial investment - is harder to
track than dollars, but in this domain, too, there are some indications that China is growing
less reliant on foreign inputs. The artificial intelligence sector is a case in point: Chinese
universities have developed well-regarded AI programs, Chinese firms employ world-class AI
researchers and engineers active across a range of applications, and in some AI subdomains,
such as facial recognition, Chinese firms are innovating at the cutting edge or close to it.

30 According to data from the U.S. China Investment Hub (Rhodium Group and National Committee on U.S. China
Relations, 2020), https://www.us-china-investment.org/.
31 Adam Lysenko et al., Disruption: US-China Venture Capital in a New Era of Strategic Competition (Rhodium Group,
January 13, 2020), https://rhg.com/research/disruption-us-china-venture-capital-in-a-new-era-of-strategic-
distrust/.
32 2020 saw 43 corporate venture capital transactions with U.S. investors and Chinese targets, down from 48 in
2019 and 75 in 2018. See text accompanying Figure 1 for methodology.
33 See, e.g., “Investors Escape Artificial Intelligence” [投资人逃离人工智能], 36kr, published September 26, 2019,
https://36kr.com/p/5250586; Rita Liao, “China Startup Deals Shrink as Fundraising for Investors Plummets,”
TechCrunch, July 16, 2019, https://techcrunch.com/2019/07/16/vc-pe-funding-slows-in-china/; “China’s Venture
Capital Boom May Be Turning into a Bust,” The Straits Times, July 9, 2019,
https://www.straitstimes.com/business/banking/chinas-venture-capital-boom-may-be-turning-into-a-bust.
34 See Linklaters, “A new era of liberalised inbound investment,” https://www.linklaters.com/en-
us/insights/thought-leadership/china-report/china-inbound-investment-a-new-era-of-liberalised-inbound-deal-flow.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
AI may not be entirely representative, but we see similar signs in sectors from genomics to
quantum science.35 Not every sector fits the mold, though. For instance, Chinese
semiconductor firms are still aggressively recruiting seasoned engineers and managers from
Taiwan and elsewhere.36 In semiconductor manufacturing and other industries that rely
heavily on the implicit “know-how” and experience of human workers, Chinese firms will
probably continue to rely on cross-border flows of expertise for some time - more than they
depend on foreign capital, in any event. Even in more competitive sectors, such as artificial
intelligence, China still benefits tremendously from talented, Chinese-born “sea turtles”
returning from education and work in the United States.37 Investment restrictions and other
policies that address these flows, rather than focusing solely or primarily on financial capital,
may be more likely to have an impact. I will revisit this point at the end of my testimony.
U.S. restrictions on investment in mainland-listed companies are unlikely to
meaningfully affect the state of play
A 2020 executive order, relying on authority in Section 1237 of the FY1999 National Defense
Authorization Act (PL 105-261), restricts U.S. investment in “Communist Chinese military
companies” as designated by the Department of Defense. Some of the companies designated
thus far, such as surveillance giant Hikvision and state-owned defense contractor Norinco,
are traded on exchanges in Mainland China.38
In my judgment, restricting U.S. investment in mainland-listed technology companies will
have little impact on China’s technological development. Only a small subset of China’s tech
companies are currently traded on the mainland.39 Startups, by definition, are not publicly
traded at all. The BAT companies are traded in New York or Hong Kong. And as noted above,
many of the largest and most strategically relevant Chinese tech firms remain privately held.

35 See, e.g., Philip Ball, “Physicists in China challenge Google’s ‘quantum advantage,’” Nature, December 3, 2020,
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-03434-7; Jon Cohen and Nirja Desai, “With its CRISPR revolution,
China becomes a world leader in genome editing,” Science, August 2, 2019,
https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2019/08/its-crispr-revolution-china-becomes-world-leader-genome-editing.
36 See Kensaku Ihara, “Taiwan loses 3,000 chip engineers to 'Made in China 2025,'” Nikkei Asia, December 3, 2019,
https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/China-tech/Taiwan-loses-3-000-chip-engineers-to-Made-in-China-2025; Jingyi Ge,
“South Korea Fights to Guard Its Trade Secrets From China,” Voice of America, March 3, 2021,
https://www.voanews.com/east-asia-pacific/south-korea-fights-guard-its-trade-secrets-china.
37 See generally He Huifeng, “China’s overseas graduates return in record numbers into already crowded domestic
job market,” South China Morning Post, September 21, 2020, https://www.scmp.com/economy/china-
economy/article/3102384/chinas-overseas-graduates-return-record-numbers-already.
38 See generally “Chinese Military Companies Sanctions,” Office of Foreign Assets Control,
https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/sanctions-programs-and-country-information/chinese-
military-companies-sanctions
39 This may change in the coming years, as U.S.-China tensions continue and China pressures its tech companies
to list at home, but it’s unclear how fast and how complete such a shift would be. Chinese firms still have strong
incentives to list in the United States. See Quentin Webb and Jing Yang, “Chinese Companies Head Home to Raise
Money, as Beijing’s Relations With U.S. Fray,” Wall Street Journal, Sept. 27, 2020,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/chinese-companies-head-home-to-raise-money-as-beijings-relations-with-u-s-fray-
11601199002; Jing Yang, “‘The Gold Standard’: Why Chinese Startups Still Flock to the U.S. for IPOs,” Wall Street
Journal, August 13, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-gold-standard-why-chinese-startups-still-flock-to-the-u-
s-for-ipos-11597313278.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14
Restricting U.S. investment in the mainland exchanges would not directly affect any of these
companies.
On the other hand, high-tech companies traded in Shenzhen or Shanghai, such as speech
recognition powerhouse iFlyTek, AI chip designer Cambricon, and cybersecurity specialist
Qihoo 360, would be exposed to these restrictions. Shenzhen-listed Hikvision, for example,
has been dropped from indices and exchange-traded funds since its designation by the
Department of Defense.40 But mainland shareholders own the vast majority of outstanding
shares in these companies; U.S. investors hold small stakes. (See Figure 2 at the end of this
document.) Forcing them to liquidate these stakes would not necessarily harm the
companies. More likely, investors from China or other countries would quickly fill the (small)
gap.
Finally, recall that the Chinese government has shown itself willing to invest copiously in
firms it considers strategic. In the unlikely event that U.S. investment restrictions posed a
serious, lasting threat to any such firm, the Chinese government would probably just
compensate with capital of its own.
In short, mainland-listed tech firms companies to face little risk from U.S. investment
restrictions. For American policymakers hoping to influence China’s technological
development, two responses are possible. First, broaden these restrictions to cover many
more companies - Chinese firms listed elsewhere, for example, or all privately held tech
companies with potential ties to China’s military. Second, develop well-informed, narrowly
tailored investment restrictions targeting true bad actors while focusing on levers of influence
outside the investment domain. For three reasons, I believe this second approach is sounder.
First, expanded U.S. investment restrictions would be hard to target properly. The ties
between Chinese companies and the government are often difficult to trace, and as the scope
of restrictions expands, drawing a line that can reliably separate actors and activities of
concern becomes harder. Virtually any Chinese high-tech firm could be said to have some
relationship with the state, if only by virtue of laws that give all Chinese companies a general
obligation to cooperate with the government.41 And most of the emerging technologies
central to today’s geopolitics, such as artificial intelligence, are dual-use or general-purpose
technologies that can theoretically be used for both peaceful and military uses. This
complicates the task of identifying companies worth targeting with investment restrictions,
and makes it more likely that broad restrictions will prevent legitimate transactions that pose
relatively little risk to U.S. national security.
Second, targeting too many Chinese companies or sectors - or simply giving up, and deeming
all Chinese companies presumptively off limits - could cause serious collateral damage.
American investors have good reasons to invest in Chinese tech companies. They offer strong

40 See Max Chen, “China ETFs Could Look Different as the U.S. Blacklists Military Companies,” ETF Trends,
December 8, 2020, https://www.etftrends.com/smart-beta-channel/china-etfs-could-look-different-as-u-s-
blacklists-military-companies/.
41 See Ashley Feng, “We Can’t Tell if Chinese Firms Work for the Party,” Foreign Policy, February 7, 2019,
https://foreignpolicy.com/2019/02/07/we-cant-tell-if-chinese-firms-work-for-the-party/.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
15
returns and an important opportunity to diversify portfolios; private-market investment in
Chinese companies can also help U.S. corporations unlock lucrative Chinese markets and
access Chinese talented workers. Given these benefits, it’s unsurprising that despite severe
geopolitical headwinds, American companies are still taking stakes in Chinese startups,
American financial institutions are maintaining their positions in China’s publicly traded tech
firms as the law permits, and American investment managers continue to recommend
investing in China.42 Any restrictions strong enough to significantly disrupt U.S.-China
investment flows would deny American investors the significant benefits of exposure to the
Chinese market, with unpredictable and possibly severe economic harm ensuing.
Third, expanded restrictions might not meaningfully limit the targeted firms’ and sectors’
access to capital. There is plenty of money in the world, and much of it is beyond America’s
reach; investors around the world, and in China itself, are eager to tap the Chinese tech
market. Already, there is evidence that firms in other East Asian countries and in Europe and
are not necessarily receptive to American calls to “decouple” from China.43 At a minimum,
similar dynamics would probably blunt the effect of expanded U.S. investment restrictions.
To be clear, there are good reasons for American policymakers to consider restricting
investments in China’s technology sector. Tech firms listed on the mainland exchanges are
implicated in grave human rights abuses, and intentionally or not, their technology enables
the Chinese Communist Party and its strategy for continued authoritarian rule.44 It is
reasonable to believe that American capital should not be used for these ends. We should
restrict U.S. investment, consistently and transparently, in companies that violate human
rights, but we can’t assume these policies will necessarily slow China’s technological
development.

42 See, e.g., Michael Hood et al., Understanding the opportunity in Chinese equities (J.P. Morgan Asset Management,
June 18, 2020), https://am.jpmorgan.com/ca/en/asset-management/institutional/insights/portfolio-
insights/equity/understanding-the-opportunity-in-chinese-equities/ (China “offers a range of opportunities, along
with certain risks. Our view of these opportunities is built on the belief that China will continue to deliver superior
nominal economic growth relative to other markets over our 10- to 15-year forecast period . . . . To be sure, it may
seem an inopportune time to even think about, let alone increase, your allocation to China’s equity markets, given
the steady drip of negative U.S. news dampening sentiment, the Holding Foreign Companies Accountable Act, the
Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act, the revocation of Hong Kong’s special status and the re-escalation of U.S.-China
trade tensions, to name but a few. . . . Yet the fact remains that China is in the early stages of a financial evolution
that will likely offer patient investors a significant opportunity over the next 10 to 15 years. And it is important to
remember that periods of uncertainty, like today, can offer opportunities for those willing to look through the news
and focus on earnings per share (EPS) growth, which ultimately drives investment returns.”).
43 See, e.g., PRC Ministry of Commerce, “Paid-in investment up 6.2% in 2020, hitting record high,” January 22,
2021, http://english.mofcom.gov.cn/article/newsrelease/significantnews/202101/20210103033600.shtml;
Mitsuru Obe, “Decoupling denied: Japan Inc. lays its bets on China,” Nikkei Asia, February 10, 2021,
https://asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/The-Big-Story/Decoupling-denied-Japan-Inc.-lays-its-bets-on-China.
44 See, e.g., Will Knight, “MIT Cuts Ties With a Chinese AI Firm Amid Human Rights Concerns,” Wired, April 21,
2020, https://www.wired.com/story/mit-cuts-ties-chinese-ai-firm-human-rights/; Ben Dooley, “Chinese Firms Cash
In On Xinjiang’s Growing Police State,” Agence France-Presse (June 27, 2018), https://www.afp.com/en/chinese-
firms-cash-xinjiangs-growing-police-state.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16
Any U.S. restrictions on investment in China should be multilateral, better informed,
and part of a broader strategy to maintain the technological advantage of the United
States and its democratic allies
If investment restrictions are imposed in some form, U.S. policymakers do have some ways
to make them more likely to have an impact. But in parallel, and probably more importantly,
policymakers should exploit America’s larger and more durable advantages over China in
other domains.
Any investment restrictions should be multilateral
As noted above, U.S. investors are part of a global marketplace. If new laws force Americans
to withdraw from profitable investments on the mainland, investors elsewhere will be happy
to take their place. For this reason, unilateral U.S. investment restrictions are much less
likely to alter China’s technological trajectory.
Even multilateral restrictions may not have the desired effect, though. For example, public
data suggest the mainland-listed tech companies listed in Figure 2 have few foreign investors
at all, so foreign-imposed restrictions (whether unilateral or multilateral) may not directly
affect them. Multilateral restrictions may also need to be narrowed in order to achieve
consensus with foreign partners, but a narrower set of more effective restrictions would seem
more valuable than a broader set of relatively toothless ones.
Properly targeted investment restrictions may be possible, but require better information
The FY2021 National Defense Authorization Act (PL 116-283) broadened the range of firms
potentially subject to Section 1237 investment restrictions, including by expanding the
definition of Chinese “military companies” to include “contributors” to China’s military-civil
fusion strategy.45 Within this broad remit, if U.S. policymakers could target the channels and
companies of greatest concern, investment restrictions could conceivably help contain the
Chinese government’s more troubling technological ambitions and avoid collateral damage.
But this sort of careful targeting requires a richer understanding of China’s technological
ecosystem than we currently have.
Our knowledge is especially limited with respect to private-market investments, such as
venture capital, which are not subject to securities disclosure laws. From a technology
transfer perspective, transactions involving Chinese investors and U.S. targets are usually
assumed to be riskier. That may be true in general, but Chinese startups - and, indirectly, the
domestic industries in which they participate - also benefit from U.S. investment, and not just
in the form of capital. In particular, private-market investors may also provide technical and

45 See § 1260H(c) of the FY2021 National Defense Authorization Act, available at
https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-bill/6395/text.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
17
financial expertise, connections to potential customers and collaborators, market
intelligence, and so on.46
To reliably identify when these transfers pose unacceptable risks and should be restricted,
policymakers need to know, at a minimum:
● Which U.S.-to-China transactions are taking place or being considered
● Whether the U.S. investors have unique expertise or other resources
● Whether these resources are likely to be shared with the Chinese targets as a result of
the transaction
● Whether the targets have other ways to access the same resources
● Whether the targets’ activities are directly relevant to national security or to
technological areas of particular interest to the Chinese government
● The nature, extent, and consistency of the targets’ relationship with the Chinese
authorities
● What benefit the U.S. investors stand to gain from the transactions
To my and my colleagues’ knowledge, there is no office or agency, inside or outside
government, that is currently able to provide this comprehensive view, whether in specific
sectors or more broadly. Without it, restrictions on China-bound investments could
inadvertently block innocuous deals and allow dangerous ones through. The federal
government should invest in the analytic capacity that is needed to gain this comprehensive
view - including, critically, stronger open-source intelligence capabilities related to China’s
science and technology ecosystem.47 Doing so would both improve potential restrictions on
U.S. investment in China and bolster other efforts to meet China’s technological challenge in
the decades to come.
Focus on American advantages in other domains
Capital, particularly American capital, is not currently a limiting factor in China’s technology
industry. I expect restrictions on US-China capital flows will be useful primarily to the extent
they indirectly capture other, more critical resources flowing alongside the money, such as
talent and expertise. Focusing more directly on these critical resources could yield better
results.
For instance, America’s ability to attract the world’s top scientists, engineers, and
entrepreneurs is a unique asset - one that fueled our economic, scientific, and military

46 See, e.g., Samir Kaji et al., Inside the Minds of Corporate Venture Capitalists (CBInsights, December 10, 2015),
https://www.cbinsights.com/research/inside-corporate-vc-minds/.
47 See William Hannas and Huey-Meei Chang, China’s STI Operations: Monitoring Foreign Science and Technology
Through Open Sources (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, January 2021),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/chinas-sti-operations/.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18
supremacy throughout the twentieth century. Today, Xi Jinping has described talent as “the
first resource” in his country’s quest for technological independence, and China is
aggressively working to attract talented foreigners and Chinese expatriates, with mixed
results.48 In my judgment, consolidating the U.S. talent recruitment advantage over China -
by investing in research and development, strengthening our higher education system, and
fixing outdated and restrictive immigration laws - would do more for America’s national
security than restricting outbound investment.
Talent is the most obvious place to start, but the United States has other assets that are
worth protecting. These include robust alliances with technologically sophisticated peer
nations; dominant positions in certain “chokepoint” technologies fundamental to a wide
range of capabilities, especially when allies’ capabilities are taken into account; a diminished
but enduring “soft power” advantage; and a market-driven economic system in which
innovators and entrepreneurs can thrive.49 If America wants to remain a contender in the
global competition for technological leadership, it must protect and build on these strengths.

48 Remco Zwetsloot and Dahlia Peterson, “The US-China Tech Wars: China’s Immigration Disadvantage,” The
Diplomat, December 31, 2019, https://thediplomat.com/2019/12/the-us-china-tech-wars-chinas-immigration-
disadvantage/.
49 See generally Andrew Imbrie et al., Agile Alliances: How the United States and Its Allies Can Deliver a Democratic Way
of AI (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, February 2020), https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/agile-
alliances/; Saif M. Khan, The Semiconductor Supply Chain: Assessing National Competitiveness (Center for Security
and Emerging Technology, January 2021), https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/the-semiconductor-supply-
chain/.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
19
Figure 1: Corporate venture capital investments involving foreign investors and
Chinese targets, 2016-2020
Investor country Number of investments
United States 256
Singapore 112
Taiwan 79
Japan 66
Great Britain 62
South Korea 40
Germany 39
France 18
Portugal 18
Switzerland 15
Netherlands 10
Other/unknown 65
Total 780

Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase data extracted March 2021. Corporate venture
investors are defined as investors that either a) are publicly traded, b) have more than five
thousand employees or c) are subsidiaries of such organizations. Hong Kong-based investors
are counted as domestic. For further details, see Rebecca Kagan et al., Corporate Investors in
Top U.S. AI Startups (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, February 2021),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/corporate-investors-in-top-u-s-ai-startups/.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20
Figure 2: Largest foreign shareholders in high-profile, mainland-traded Chinese
technology firms
Company Application area Exchange Largest non-Chinese
shareholder
Percentage of
outstanding shares
owned
iFlyTek Speech
recognition
Shenzhen The Vanguard Group 0.22%
Qihoo 360 Cybersecurity Shanghai BlackRock
Institutional Trust
Company
0.15%
Hikvision Surveillance Shenzhen Capital Group Global
Investors
0.5%
Sugon Supercomputing Shanghai Dimensional Fund
Advisors, L.P.
0.15%
SMIC Semiconductors Shanghai,
Hong Kong
The Vanguard Group 0.84%

Source: Refinitiv data as of March 9, 2021. Pursuant to Executive Order 13959, U.S.
investors are not currently allowed to purchase shares in Hikvision, Sugon, and SMIC, but
have until late 2021 to divest from existing positions.
