
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
AUTHORS
Wm. C. Hannas
Huey-Meei Chang
China’s STI
Operations
MONITORING FOREIGN
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
THROUGH OPEN SOURCES
JANUARY 2021
科科
技技
情情
报报

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
2
Established in January 201 9, the Center for Security and
Emerging Technology (CSET) at Georgetown’s Walsh
School of Foreign Service is a research organization fo-
cused on studying the security impacts of emerging tech-
nologies, supporting academic work in security and tech-
nology studies, and delivering nonpartisan analysis to the
policy community. CSET aims to prepare a generation of
policymakers, analysts, and diplomats to address the chal-
lenges and opportunities of emerging technologies. CSET
focuses on the effects of progress in artificial intelligence,
advanced computing, and biotechnology.
CSET.GEORGETOWN.EDU | CSET@GEORGETOWN.EDU

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
China’s STI Operations
JANUARY 2021
AUTHORS
Wm. C. Hannas
Huey-Meei Chang
MONITORING FOREIGN
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
THROUGH OPEN SOURCES

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
PRINT AND ELECTRONIC DISTRIBUTION RIGHTS
© 2021 by the Center for Security and Emergin g Technology.
This work is licen sed under a Creativ e Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 International License .
To view a copy of thi s license, visit:
https://creativecommo ns.org/licenses/by -nc/4.0/.
Cover illustration: "S&T Intelligence" in Chinese.
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20200049

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
i
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
INTRODUCTION
1| WHAT IS OPEN SOURCE STI?
A. OSINT VERSUS THE OTHER INTS
B. SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY INTELLIGENCE
2 | CHINA’S STI POSTURE
C. EARLY DEVELOPMENT OF STI IN CHINA
D. STRUCTURE AND LAYOUT OF CHINESE STI
3 | MAIN ORGANIZATIONS
E. INSTITUTE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL INFORMATION OF
CHINA (ISTIC)
F. MILITARY SCIENCE INFORMATION RESEARCH CENTER (MSIRC)
4 | CHINESE STI IN THEORY AND PRACTICE
G. CHINESE WRITERS ON "QINGBAO" AND STI
H. CHINA AND THE PROFESSIONALIZATION OF STI
RECOMMENDATIONS
ENDNOTES
III
V
1
9
19
29
41
45
Contents

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
iv

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
iii
he United States is no longer the hegemon in worldwide research
and development (R&D) and is vulnerable to technical surprise.
This country’s fragmentary, secrets-based monitoring of foreign sci-
ence and technology will not protect it in an era of rapid global devel-
opment. Can open source intelligence lead the way?
• China and the United States hold opposing views of “open
source” and its role in the intelligence process. In the United States,
Open Source Intelligence (OSINT) “enables” classified reporting,
while in China it is the “INT” of first resort.
• The contrast extends to “science and technology intelligence,”
which has a lower priority in the U.S. system, whereas China and
its top leaders personally lavish great attention on STI and rely
on it for national decisions.
• Chinese monitoring through open sources of foreign science and
technology (S&T) is based on statutes dating to 1 958. The system
supported China’s development of nuclear and other strategic
weapons, and its paramount role persists today.
• While centrally directed, China’s STI apparatus is distributed and
functions at all levels in separate but interlocking organizations.
Some 100,000 S&T intelligence workers—open source collectors,
analysts, and field operatives—make up its ranks.
• Accessible Chinese documents provide ample evidence of the
system’s design and operations. An astonishing amount of thought
goes into its makeup and daily execution, with a premium on met-
rics and “customer” interaction.
Executive Summary
T

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
iv
• Chinese authorities do not naturally distinguish “intelligence” from “infor-
mation.” A byproduct of the language, the two ideas are a fused concept
expressed by one word: qingbao. This feature may account for different
attitudes toward the role of open source in the intelligence process.
• More than a dozen journals support China’s STI enterprise, as do social
organizations at the national and local levels. The apparatus is staffed by
experts in all relevant disciplines, attesting to its thorough professionaliza-
tion.
• The roles of the Chinese system and its much smaller U.S. counterpart
differ: China tracks—and transfers—foreign S&T. An effective American
STI program must monitor these transfers for an accurate picture of China’s
S&T profile, which in balance narrows the difference in workloads.
• We recommend creating a “National S&T Analysis Center” within the
U.S. government to address its vulnerability to technical surprise. China’s
success at STI is evidence that a viable monitoring system can be built and
offers examples of how to do so.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
v
Introduction
or six decades, China has operated a state-of-the-art science and
technology intelligence (STI) network to speed national development
and give the country a leg up on global science and technology
(S&T) competition. The system is staffed by some 100,000 trained “STI
workers” at all levels and is based on open sources. No other country has
anything remotely comparable.
Our interest in China’s STI system began with a study of its role in
technology transfer,1 but the mechanism itself—its philosophy, design, and
functioning—draws our attention, inasmuch as an understanding of Chi-
nese STI could help guide U.S. efforts to monitor emerging technologies.2
Are there lessons here for the United States?
This study begins with an overview of “open source intelligence”
(OSINT) and “science and technology intelligence” in the abstract and as
understood in the United States. We then examine the growth of China’s
STI system, its structure, operation, and conceptual foundations. A final
section explores factors contributing to its professionalization.
The paper concludes with recommendations for an open source-based
STI program within the U.S. government, but outside the U.S. intelligence
community, to secure for the United States a similar ability to identify, track,
and learn from emerging technologies. U.S. dominance of global science
is an anachronism; we must acknowledge that reality and adapt.
The authors thank CSET’s Tarun Chhabra for nominating the topic and,
with Dewey Murdick and Anna Puglisi, helping craft the study’s recom-
mendations. Thanks are also due to Sue Gordon and James Mulvenon for
serving as external readers, and CSET’s Igor Mikolic-Torreira for oversight.
F

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
vi
We acknowledge with gratitude the support of Anastasya Lloyd-Damnjanovic
and Alexander Bowe of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commis-
sion, CSET’s Remco Zwetsloot and Emily Weinstein for comments on the draft, and
Maura McCarthy, Shelton Fitch, and Lynne Weil for editorial guidance.
WM. C. HANNAS
HUEY-MEEI CHANG

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
1
pen source intelligence and science and technology intelligence
are realized differently in the United States and China, with China
putting greater value on both. The two fields are examined here
from the U.S. perspective as preamble to a full treatment of China’s system,
which has features that the United States may wish to emulate.
A. OSINT VERSUS THE OTHER INTS
In the United States, the phrase “open source intelligence” and its acro-
nym OSINT depict not what open source is but what it is not. Conceptu-
ally, they beg the question: “open” in opposition to what? Operationally,
the field is an adjunct to its classified counterparts. Definitions typically
turn on this distinction:
• “In the intelligence community, the term ‘open’ refers to overt,
publicly available sources (as opposed to covert or clandestine
sources).”3
• “Open Source involves no information that is: classified at its
origin; is subject to proprietary constraints (other than copyright); is
the product of sensitive contacts with U.S. or foreign persons; or is
acquired through clandestine or covert means.”4
• “The main qualifiers to open-source information are that it does
not require any type of clandestine collection techniques to obtain
it and that it must be obtained through means that entirely meet
the copyright and commercial requirements of the vendors where
applicable.”5
This reverse characterization of “open source intelligence,” a reflection
of its status in the U.S. intelligence community (USIC), is also evidenced
What is open
source STI?
1
O

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
2
in the term’s etymology. While the emergence of “OSINT” as a term of reference
cannot be dated precisely,6 its use postdates acronyms used for other “INTs” and
was created by analogy with these recognized disciplines.
HUMINT human intelligence (typically clandestinely acquired)
COMINT communications intelligence (radio intercepts, etc.)
ELINT electronic intelligence (radar signatures, satellite telemetry, etc.)
SIGINT signals intelligence (cover term for COMINT and ELINT)
GEOINT geospatial intelligence (satellite imagery)
MASINT measurement and signature intelligence7
As recently as 2010, a former director of the Open Source Center (now Open
Source Enterprise, the U.S. government’s flagship OSINT operation8) discouraged
use of the term “OSINT” partly for aesthetic reasons—the term does not roll off
one’s tongue—but chiefly out of concern the acronym might be perceived as an at-
tempt to assert its value equivalence in a hierarchy where open source is regarded
as a poor cousin to “real” (classified) intelligence by those funding it.9
One can define “open source” positively, citing venues and acquisition meth-
ods, although the USIC’s bias to interpret OSINT in a restricted, secrets-based
framework remains.10 Open source includes mass and digital media, parts of the
internet, social media, public government data, professional journals, academic
theses, conference proceedings, think tank studies, commercial data and databas-
es, and even patents and technical reports.11 Acquisition focuses on permissions: its
availability to public audiences in general, by request, or through subscription.12
In reality, the “openness” of open source is compromised by practices such as:
• covert assets reporting information from press accounts or radio broadcasts
inaccessible to their (non-linguist) case officers;
• circuitous acquisition of open information to avoid betraying interests, leav-
ing a trail, or to circumvent restrictions, for example, on open-but-protected
“grey” literature;
• satellite photos purchased or obtained freely online to supplement classified
overhead imagery;
• use of open sources to nominate targets for clandestine and technical col-
lection or to validate classified reporting;
• proactive disclosure of open source intelligence to affect policy goals, com-
municate sensitive information to allies by proxy, or provide them plausible
deniability.13

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
3
The second element of the phrase—“intelligence”—is less problematic and is
typically viewed as a category of “information” distinguished by its military or political
value. It is information that addresses an “intelligence requirement.” That is, something
is “intelligence” if it responds to the informational needs of an intelligence agency.
While the use of openly available materials to inform military and political
decisions has existed for centuries, and within the U.S. intelligence community since
at least 1 942, its acceptance by the USIC as an intelligence pursuit is strained.
Moreover, its value is not fully embraced—at the institutional or analyst levels—by
those using it, who tend to regard open source as a supplement to the intelligence
disciplines they are chartered to exploit.14 As Florian Schaurer and Jan Storger point
out in their study of open source intelligence:
 “(1) Intelligence agencies seek an informational advantage through covertly
dealing with secrets. Relying on open information and its respective copyright
restrictions runs counter to that idea. (2) In most cases it is more difficult, risky
and expensive to apply clandestine methods in order to acquire secret sourc-
es, thus giving the impression that those sources must be of higher value than
open sources, confusing the method with the product or mistaking secrecy for
knowledge.”15
The public history of OSINT within the Central Intelligence Agency, its parent
organization, supports this characterization. The passage of the National Security
Act of 1 947 put the Foreign Broadcast Information Service—the major U.S. OSINT
provider under various names since 1 94116—under the CIA’s auspices. Essentially,
CIA leadership could not determine where FBIS fit in its organizational hierarchy
and assigned the Directorate of Science and Technology to manage it.17 The mis-
match between monitoring foreign media (FBIS’s forte) and creating, adapting,
developing, and operating technical collection systems18 for clandestine operations
(the DST’s raison d'être) was apparent from the beginning and resulted in a lack of
vigorous “top cover” for open source at the directorate level.
The DST’s take on open source was expressed, for example, in 1 995, when its
deputy director proposed massive reductions in FBIS’s mission and workforce to free
up funding for new offices better aligned with the DST’s mission.19 Open source’s
subsidiary role in the USIC was further evidenced in a description of the open
source “mission” by Eliot Jardines, Assistant Deputy Director of National Intelligence
for Open Source, in 2006, namely that it is:
"… to enable all intelligence disciplines to provide timely, relevant and val-
ue-added insight to consumers via the National Open Source Enterprise.”
(Our emphasis added.) 20

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
4
Meanwhile, statements of open source’s value as an intelligence provider in its
own right are conspicuously absent. More recently, the establishment of “mission
centers” within the CIA in 201 5 ensured that whatever autonomy OSINT providers
had over their products and tradecraft would serve the hosting agency’s parochial
goals.21
Taking these caveats and institutional priorities into account,* we summarize the
intelligence community’s and, by extension, the USG’s attitude toward open source
as follows:
“Open source” is the information that remains after other intelligence dis-
ciplines define the landscape and stake their proprietary claims. Its value to the
U.S. intelligence community lies chiefly in its ability to support classified reporting.
This philosophy contrasts sharply with China’s OSINT thinking and practices,
which place open source collection and analysis at the forefront of the country’s
intelligence effort.
B. SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY INTELLIGENCE
STI is not a collection methodology like SIGINT (e.g., intercepting radio signals to
reconstruct an adversary’s order-of-battle), OSINT (e.g., comparing current and
former speeches to divine leadership intent), or other INTs. Rather “STI” refers to
an intelligence target or goal serviced by multiple collection venues.
A 201 3 U.S. Senate commission on intelligence defined it this way:
“STI is the systematic study and analysis of foreign capabilities in basic and
applied research and applied engineering. STI products are used to warn of
foreign technical developments and capabilities and to guide the develop-
ment of future capabilities, which are often provided through R&D.” 22
Note this definition is not limited to military technology23 but also covers civil-
ian technologies that affect a country’s economic competitiveness, including those
that lead to military threats (“dual-use” technology). A second definition, from the
National Defense Intelligence College (now the National Intelligence University),
also looks beyond military technology at the bigger picture, stating that STI aims to:
“address threats to national security arising from globalization of science and tech-
nology; identify disruptive consequences of adversarial technology adaptations;
and provide a framework for effective collection and warning.”24
*Confidential disclosure agreements limit our ability to address some particulars.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
5
The justification for pursuing STI—if any were needed—is outlined in a National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine review of NDI’s graduate pro-
gram for aspiring government STI analysts, which states:
“As the world becomes more technologically advanced, the need for intel-
ligence officers and analysts skilled in science and technology intelligence
(STI) increases …. (There are reasons) why the United States needs analysts
and intelligence officers with STI skills:
• The increased speed of science and technology breakthroughs;
• The globalization of science and technology (S&T);
• The convergence of various S&T disciplines (computer science, biology,
physics, neuroscience, nanotechnology, chemistry);
• The impact of commercial technology and its speed of dissemination;
and
• The increased capabilities of potential adversaries, including both non-
state and state actors and the willingness of these parties to share with
or sell to one another.”25
A list of duties in a job announcement for the Office of the Director of National
Intelligence’s (ODNI) Deputy National Intelligence Officer for Science and Technol-
ogy sheds more light on the nature of STI. They include:
• Provide expert assessments on collection and analysis regarding global
science and technology issues.
• Lead the IC's production and coordination of strategic analysis … on issues
of importance to United States interests in global science and technology
with particular focus on advanced asymmetric and military S&T threats.
• Develop and sustain a professional network with IC analysts, analytic man-
agers, and collection managers on advanced asymmetric and military S&T
threats and S&T community management and outreach issues.
• Establish and foster liaison relationships with academia, the business com-
munity, and other non-government subject matter experts to ensure the IC
has a comprehensive understanding of advanced asymmetric and military
S&T threats.26
Lacking in most such accounts are two key insights captured in the U.S. commis-
sion’s 201 3 review meant to put the enterprise on a practical footing, namely that

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
6
STI should be understood more broadly, with “aspects of counterintelligence and
open-source intelligence used to provide a comprehensive picture of global scientif-
ic and technological advancements.”27
The first of these insights—the need to treat counterintelligence as part of S&T
threat awareness and mitigation—applies to China especially, whose technology
depends heavily on foreign access and whose own collection posture reflects this
dependency.28 The commission’s findings cited the U.S. government’s less-than-stel-
lar record addressing the issue of technology transfer:
“Finding 1: The Commission found a limited effort by the IC to discern and
exploit the strategic R&D—especially non-military R&D—intentions and
capabilities of our adversaries, and to counter our adversaries‘ theft or pur -
chase of U.S. technology.” 29
The second insight highlighted in the commission’s report is the need for OSINT
to contribute more substantially to the national STI effort:
“Finding 2: The Commission found that while the traditional ways and means
of collecting and analyzing intelligence remain useful and necessary, emerg-
ing and future threats cannot be addressed without Enhanced Integrated
Intelligence capabilities that enable shared, discoverable data for analysis
and shared, discoverable information for decisionmakers.”
These “enhanced” capabilities are defined as “collection and analysis process-
es enabled by automated collection, analysis, integration, and discovery of relevant
intelligence data and information from classified and open sources.”30
The commission’s recommendations, made in 201 3, coincide point for point with
China’s STI operation that its chief architects described some three decades ago.31
Both establish key roles for OSINT in the STI process, the difference being that while
the USIC has at times entertained the idea that OSINT has a major place in STI
production, in China open sources have long been its mainstay. The preference for
secrets-based sourcing in the U.S. intelligence community extends even to topic se-
lection, the assumption being if it is secret, it must be important. Or put another way,
if it’s not secret, why should the IC do it?
A final statement by the commission speaks to the role STI should play in U.S. in-
telligence, namely, a key initiative resourced on a par, at least, with counter-narcot-
ics, counter-terrorism, and country-specific military/economic assessments, given
S&T’s potential to shape national strength and define military readiness:

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
7
“Failure to properly resource and use our own R&D to appraise, exploit, and
counter the scientific and technical developments of our adversaries—includ-
ing both state and non-state actors— may have more immediate and cata-
strophic consequences than failure in any other field of intelligence.” 32
The commission’s need to argue for STI demonstrates its relative neglect in the
post-Cold War era,* when novel threats and short-term political concerns absorb
most IC resources. STI is de-prioritized relative to other requirements not only within
today’s U.S. intelligence establishment, it is largely neglected within that part of the
USIC responsible for OSINT, where a concentrated effort on STI is most needed
and most likely to be effective.
In the United States, STI has the same standing within the USIC’s open source
community that OSINT has in the broader intelligence community, namely, last at
the budgetary trough.
This neglect is troubling given STI’s importance to national security and the need
to monitor—ideally, forecast—technological threats from foreign adversaries.† Nota-
bly, these U.S. priorities are the inverse of China’s, as characterized in Table 1 and
described in the remainder of this paper.
*The U.S. intelligence community’s STI work against the Soviet target was an effective undertaking for
which it can be justly proud. Its success was owed both to a shared view of the existential threat and
to the USIC’s classified mandate aligning with the types of materials available to inspect. The paucity
of open STI sources from the pre-1 99 1 Soviet bloc hardly compares with today’s circumstances,
where openly available S&T information carries most of the potential intelligence.
† The authors acknowledge pockets of STI excellence within the USIC and Department of Defense—
dedicated professionals with whom we had the pleasure of working. That said, adequate resources to
service the classified record, not to mention the larger challenges of open source, are not provided.
 enabler of other INTs second or third tier priority
top intelligence priorityINT of ﬁrst resort33
OSINT STI
UNITED STATES
CHINA
TABLE 1
China vs. U.S. intelligence priorities

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
18

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
9
hina’s government has highly valued open source intelligence
since the nation’s founding and continues to depend on it as the
primary source of information on foreign scientific developments.
These sections describe the growth and structure of STI in China, which
is light-years ahead of the world in this area. Understanding their ap-
proach offers insights into how the United States could proceed.
C. EARLY DEVELOPMENT OF STI IN CHINA
China’s commitment to STI dates from the country’s first “Long-Term S&T
Plan” issued in August 1 956.34 According to multiple sources, 35 Chinese
Premier Zhou Enlai (周恩来) in January of that year was shown an ear-
ly draft of the plan, which lacked a mechanism to monitor foreign S&T
developments. He reacted with a martial metaphor:
“Doing science is like fighting a war. You’ve been working all these
years, and you haven’t even set up an intelligence agency. How
can you fight this war?” 36
At Zhou’s insistence, the following Article 57 was added to the plan:
“The foundation of our country's scientific and technological in-
formation work is very weak. The main task of intelligence work is
to quickly establish institutions, train experts in intelligence work,
comprehensively and on a timely basis collect, research and report
on the development and new achievements of science and technol-
ogy at home and abroad, especially in advanced scientific coun-
China’s STI posture2
C

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
10
tries, so that national scientific work can understand these developments and
achievements promptly.* The specific method is to prepare for the establish-
ment of specialized institutions, organize forces, engage in extracting papers
from scientific and technological journals around the world, and compile,
print and publish [this information] in the form of newsletters and abstracts.” 37
Subsequently, in May 1 958 China’s State Council approved a “Plan for the Devel-
opment of Science and Technology Intelligence Work” (关于开展科学技术情报工作
的方案), which named the scope and goals of Chinese STI as follows:
“The responsibility of S&T intelligence work is to report the most recent
accomplishments and trends in domestic and foreign science in all types of
important scientific and technological fields so that scientific, technological,
economic and higher education departments get timely access to the infor-
mation and materials needed to facilitate the absorption of modern scientific
and technological accomplishments, reduce time and manpower, avoid
duplication of work, and promote the development of science and technolo-
gy in China.” 38
An ideological justification for China’s STI program was thereby established. As
Wu Heng (武衡), deputy secretary of the State Council’s Science Planning Commit-
tee,39 described it: the plan “determined the tasks, management system, institutional
setting and principles of establishing a domestic science and technology intelli-
gence network.”40
While formulating the plan, China was also building an infrastructure for its
realization. In October 1 956, an “Institute of Scientific Information” under CAS
was established, later renamed the “Institute of Scientific and Technical Informa-
tion of China” (see “ISTIC,” Section E) to oversee STI work. Some months later,
a Chinese University of Science and Technology Information (中国科学技术情报
大学) was stood up—the world’s first known example—with departments of S&T
information, translation, and library science focused on foreign materials. In 1 959
it became part of the University of Science and Technology of China (中国科学技
术大学).41
In November 1 958, China’s first National STI Work Conference (全国科技
情报工作会议) was convened. Delegates produced five documents defining the
goals and methods of China’s S&T open source system, including instructions on
strengthening S&T intelligence work, a list of principles and techniques, a proposed
structure for a national STI network, “secrecy rules,” and training requirements for
intelligence workers.42
*及时, also: “in time” or, in this context, “early enough to matter.”

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
11
The conference left no doubt about the direction China would follow. STI would
be the “ears and eyes, vanguard, and staff officers” (耳目、尖兵、参谋) of the
nation.43 “Vanguard” implies substituting, where possible, STI for indigenous R&D.
Staff officers were to “engage in intelligence work that assists and supports deci-
sion-making” (从事辅助并支撑决策的情报工作).44 To serve China’s needs, STI must be
“broad, fast, precise and accurate” (广、快、精、准).45 The conference also identi-
fied “three categories and nine sub-categories” of open sources from “catalogs, ab-
stracts, indices, and reports through newsletters, translations, and research trends.46
The mandate to monitor foreign S&T was supported by instructional fora on
where to find the necessary information and what to do with it. In December 1 957 ,
China published its first STI professional journal “Science Information (or Intelli-
gence) Work” (科学情报工作).47 The periodical underwent several name changes48
on its way to becoming the present “China Science & Technology Resources Re-
view” (中国科技资源导刊). Two years later, in December 1 959 the Institute of Sci-
entific Information published “Lecture Notes on STI Work” (科技情报工作讲义) and
“China Science Abstracts” (中国科学文摘) on methods for searching periodicals. Wu
Heng noted that in little more than a year since the release of China’s STI plan in
May 1 958, some 457 “types” (种) of how-to publications were issued, along with a
host of abstracts and bulletins.49
According to Chen Zeqian (陈则谦) and Bai Xianyang (白献阳), who studied the
STI system’s evolution, the goal in this early period was to “reflect comprehensively,
accurately, and in a timely manner” the trends and developments in foreign S&T.50
This “intelligence work” was limited at first to translating foreign publications into
Chinese but developed quickly into an end-to-end system with multiple layers of
redundancy, graded by feedback loops and metrics.51
By the mid-1 960s, China’s STI system was supporting nuclear weapons re-
search, satellite development, and computing.52 Even during the Cultural Revolution
(1 966-76), when all government institutions were under attack in China,53 STI had
its defenders, including Zhou Enlai and, famously, PLA Marshall Nie Rongzhen (聂荣
臻), who urged that the system—a “national treasure” (国宝)—be strengthened.54
From about 1 980 on, STI was providing “integrated research and policy sup-
port” to key national projects, with an emphasis on solving difficult problems in
research and production.55 By 1 985, there were 41 2 major S&T intelligence insti-
tutes nationwide, including 35 attached to the State Council’s technical ministries,
33 at the provincial and municipal levels, and 344 local institutes employing more
than 25,000 people.56 Miao Qihao (缪其浩), the Shanghai ISTIC director at that
time, adds to the figure 3,000 “basic cells” in grassroots units such as companies
and labs for a total of 60,000 workers engaged fulltime by 1 985 in one or more
aspects of the STI enterprise.57

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
12
A detailed chronology of the early growth of China’s STI system is available in
ISTIC’s 2016 compendium 60 Years of Glory—The 60th Anniversary of the Found-
ing of the Institute of Science and Technical Information of China (in Chinese)58 and
in “China’s Use of Open Sources”—chapter two of the 201 3 book Chinese Industri-
al Espionage (in English).59 We highlight a few such developments here:
• 1959: The State Science and Technology Commission (SSTC), predecessor
to China’s Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), created an S&T
Intelligence Office (科技情报局) to coordinate STI nationally.
• 1963: The third “National STI Work Conference” defined the duties of STI
organizations within the State Council’s technical ministries, and provided
rules for information units at the provincial and local levels.*
• 1975: Hu Yaobang (胡耀邦), who became Party Chairman in 1 98 1, during
his brief tenure at CAS “personally inspected and guided” China’s STI work
and ordered regular reports be given to China’s leaders.60
• 1977: The SSTC released an S&T development plan with updated responsi-
bilities for the STI system.61 This plan mandated the use of advanced technol-
ogy for the acquisition and distribution of STI materials.
• 1979: An agreement brokered by Deng Xiaoping (邓小平) for S&T cooper-
ation with the United States gave China access to “four major sets” (四大套)
of USG technology compendia.62 The reports became mainstays of China
STI exploitation.63
• 1980: The fifth “National STI Work Conference” committed to linking “intel-
ligence work” closely to S&T development, and to “broadly exploit” (广辟)
novel information sources.
• 1983: Qian Xuesen (钱学森) delivered his speech "The Science and Tech-
nology of STI Work."64 Qian is remembered for founding China’s missile
program; in our view his work to put STI on a logical footing had equal
impact.
• 1984: China’s State Council and the Central Military Commission promul-
gated the "Regulations on National Defense Science and Technology Intel-
ligence Work,"65 complementing the “civilian” structure (ISTIC) laid down in
1 956.
*This predates—and validates—a suggestion by Dr. Dewey Murdick, Director of Data Science for
Georgetown University’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET), to the U.S. Senate
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs in December 201 9 for regional, semi-
autonomous units in a national STI construct.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
13
Meanwhile, we note that none of the Chinese documents we have exam-
ined—those cited here or others—suggests that OSINT plays a subsidiary role
in a broader (classified) collection program. Rather, the emphasis in China has
always been on expediting the delivery of open source S&T intelligence directly
to decisionmakers.
D. STRUCTURE AND LAYOUT OF CHINESE STI 66
China’s present STI system was laid down in 1 989, four decades after the Peo-
ple’s Republic of China was founded and some 33 years after the system was first
conceived. In January of that year, the State Science and Technology Commission
issued “Opinions on Restructuring and Strengthening the Document Work of the
National STI System” aimed at rationalizing the STI workflow and delineating
responsibilities. 67 The document defined five main national organizations:
• Institute of Scientific and Technical Information of China (中国科技情报
研究所)
The national comprehensive S&T information center primarily responsible
for collecting and storing documents on engineering technology, manage-
ment science, and high technology. This is today’s ISTIC, descendent of the
Institute of Scientific Information and the primary “civilian” component (see
Section E below).
• COSTIND S&T Intelligence Bureau (国防科委科技情报研究所)68
The national military S&T information center primarily responsible for collect-
ing and storing documents on military technology, engineering, weapons,
and equipment. It is now the Military Science Information Research Center
(军事科学信息研究中心) or MSIRC, China’s main military STI component (see
Section F below).69
• CAS National Science Library (中国科学院文献情报中心)*
The national natural sciences information center primarily responsible for
collecting and storing documents on mathematics, physics, chemistry, astron-
omy, geography, biology, cutting-edge science, and high technology. This
library, along with ISTIC itself, was later subsumed into a National Science
and Technology Library.
*Also known in English as the “CAS Documentation and Information Center.”

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
14
• China Patent Office Patent Documentation Library (中国专利局专利文
献馆)
The national patents document center for collecting and storing documents
such as patent manuals, patent announcements, and patent category
indices. Now the Patent Documentation Library (专利文献馆) and the
China Patent Information Center (中国专利信息中心), both part of the State
Intellectual Property Office (国家知识产权局).
• State Bureau of Technical Supervision Standards Information
Center (国家技术监督局标准情报中心).
The national standards document center for collecting and storing docu-
ments on international standards, regional standards, national standards,
professional standards, and corporate standards. Now the China Nation-
al Institute of Standardization, National Library of Standards (中国标准化
研究院国家标准馆).
These five organizations made up the system’s top (national) tier, according to
the SSTC schema. A second tier consisted of STI centers attached to technical min-
istries. Facilities at the provincial, municipal, and county levels formed a third tier.70
This basic structure was tweaked in June 2000, when the State Council
established a National Science and Technology Library (国家科技图书文献中心),
“a virtual S&T document information service organization”71 run by MOST, with
no holdings of its own. Its mission was to oversee member libraries, which manage
their own operations according to NSTL guidelines.72
A recent Chinese source outlines the civilian STI structure:73

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
15
The military component is missing in the diagram. Former ISTIC director He
Defang (贺德方) explains: “Collection and processing of foreign S&T documents
are mainly undertaken by the central ministries’ STI agencies, such as ISTIC and the
NSTL’s six other member units, and the seven member units of the National Defense
S&T Industry Digital Library System.”74 So there is a built-in bifurcation of civil and
military tasking. We treat these military units in Section F.
He Defang’s count of seven NSTL member units excludes the National Library
of Standards (second from right) and the Metrology Institute’s (中国计量科学研究
院) library—shown in the diagram but administratively independent. He also leaves
out the Patent Library, included in the 1 989 construct but not part of NSTL’s design
despite its vigorous exploitation of foreign patent information.75 Operationally these
distinctions are irrelevant, since NSTL has resource sharing agreements with each
of these outliers—the military, patents, and standards libraries—and with major PRC
libraries outside the STI system.76
FIGURE 1
Civilian STI structure

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
16
These exceptions aside, NSTL itself has four divisions for basic science (理),
engineering (工), agriculture (农), and medicine (医)—the four traditional Chinese
categories. They are:
• Chinese Academy of Sciences’ National Science Library (中国科学院文献情
报中心).
• National Engineering and Technology Library (国家工程技术(数字)图书馆,
NETL).
• Library of the Chinese Academy of Agriculture Science (中国农业科学院图书馆).
• Library of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (中国医学科学院图书馆).
The CAS National Science Library (NSL), also called the CAS “Document and
Information Center” (中国科学院文献情报中心), has its main library in Beijing with
branches in Shanghai,* Wuhan, Lanzhou, and Chengdu; some 1 20 document
information offices at R&D institutes throughout China; smaller collections at facto-
ries, schools and publishing houses; and some two dozen “specialized information
networks.”77 Its holdings, a mix of Chinese and foreign books, journals, academic
theses, proceedings, and reference works—print and digital—are also accessible
from more than 100 CAS institutes in cities throughout China. The system services
demand for information in natural sciences and high-technology, with holdings in
all the hard sciences. Chen Jiugeng in his 2006 study called NSL and its branches
China’s “basic science information resources system.”78
One aspect of its mission is apparent in the workings of the library’s Lanzhou
branch, notable for its proximity to China’s nuclear weapons industry. The facility
collects “special document information” and does deep studies for local institutes,
with specialties in chemistry, chemical engineering, nuclear science, applied mathe-
matics and computing. Unspecified “strategic intelligence research” (战略情报研究)
is done on demand.79
Second on the list is the National Engineering and Technology Library, the en-
gineering counterpart to CAS’s science library. Like NSTL, NETL is a virtual organi-
zation, an umbrella for the “T” and “E” components of “STEM,”† and comprising
four institutes: the China Machine Industry Information Institute (机械工业信息研究
院), China Metallurgical Information and Standardization Research Institute (冶金工
业信息标准研究院), China National Chemical Information Center (中国化工信息中心),
*The Shanghai branch is now called the Shanghai Information Center for Life Sciences (生命科学图书馆).
† Science, technology, engineering, mathematics.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
17
and those offices in ISTIC concerned with engineering. While ISTIC is treated as a
component of NETL, it is clearly first among equals (see Section E).80
Some statistics point to the magnitude of the overall operation. According to
NSTL director Peng Yiqi (彭以祺) writing in 2020:81
Each year, we order more than 1 7 ,000 printed foreign language periodi-
cals, including more than 6,000 that are unique domestically, and more than
8,000 foreign language conference proceedings and other documents. The
number of printed copies collected ranks first in China and in the forefront
of the world…. Currently, NSTL provides access to 1 27 databases, covering
more than 20,000 online foreign-language current journals, and more than
3,000 retrospective journals.
Bear in mind these figures refer to S&T literature, not generic holdings. In terms
of employees, the most recent figure we have for the system as a whole is “more
than 100,000 S&T intelligence workers” (科技情报工作人员) by the first decade of
the 2 1st century,82 up from the 60,000 figure given by ISTIC’s Miao Qihao in 1 985.
And while budget figures are elusive, we note Chen Jiugeng’s (陈久庚) claim in
2006 that the annual funding increase for STI institutes from 1 997 to 2005, when
the system was put into final form, exceeded growth of state expenditures on R&D,
absolutely and per capita.83
As these data and citations indicate, China’s STI system is library-based. The
construct sounds and is benign. While not the architecture foreign observers with
intelligence backgrounds expect, the material after all is “open source,” the prove-
nance of library scientists.*
A Chinese analyst’s reading of the June 2000 State Council memo observes that:84
• Aggregation and analysis of intelligence and information (情报信息综合分
析) became part of the STI analyst’s tasks, along with timely customer service
and an emphasis on user consultation.
• An earlier requirement for entry into the “intelligence corps” (情报队伍) to be
“good in one area” (一技之长) was no longer adequate. The modern open
source worker had to bring to the job IT skills, management savvy, and an
academic background.
*One of this paper’s authors spent several years proselytizing in the USG for an open source da-
tabase of foreign S&T. Among some 200-plus briefings to respectful but inert audiences, the author
had the pleasure once of briefing a group of IC librarians, who immediately and enthusiastically
grasped the proposition’s import and within three minutes had taken over the briefing. Little to tell
them. By the same token, the author’s most valuable colleague at the time was a Ph.D. linguist with
a post-doc M.S. in library science.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
18
• Open source workers were also asked to play a larger part in the
intelligence process, provide top leaders with information, and per-
form a direct role in policymaking (出谋划策).
China’s STI cadre are expected to join in national S&T planning. The leaders of
the Chinese Academy of Sciences require that “all major scientific and technologi-
cal plans must have STI personnel participating and serving.”85
If China’s open source STI workers ever played second string to an access-
privileged qingbao cadre, or their efforts to support China’s development were less
important than other intelligence needs, it is not evident in the materials we have
examined. Indeed, it is impossible to study this system without sensing the pride its
practitioners take in their work and its value to China.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
19
Main organizations* 3
mong China’s open source STI organizations, two stand out as
core units for civilian and military data exploitation. The Institute of
Scientific and Technical Information of China is the premier civilian
organization for gathering and disseminating foreign technical intelligence.
Its counterpart is the Military Science Information Research Center, which
services China’s defense industry. The two are examined in detail.
E. INSTITUTE OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL
INFORMATION OF CHINA (ISTIC)
ISTIC (中国科学技术信息研究所), with headquarters in Beijing and branches
throughout China, began life in 1 956 as the “Institute of Scientific Informa-
tion” under an initiative sponsored by China’s senior leaders. The institute
acquired its present English name during a reorganization in 1 958, when it
also assumed a new Chinese name: 中国科学技术情报研究所, literally “Insti-
tute of Scientific and Technical Intelligence of China,” i.e., the equivalent to
the United States’ “STI.” In 1 992, the seventh and eighth characters were
changed from 情报 (intelligence) to 信息 (information) to avoid the stigma
attached by laypersons to the former term, with no change in the English.86
Nuance aside, ISTIC’s subordination to NETL (described above) is
only nominal. A modern expression of Taoist dualism, ISTIC is treated as
both part of the National Engineering and Technology Library—along with
three other technical institutes—as shown in NSTL’s table of organization
(Section D), and paradoxically as NETL’s parent organization, as depicted
in ISTIC’s own org chart, where NETL appears in a subordinate slot as the
A
* Parts of these segments are adapted from CIE, chapter two.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
20
“Information Resource Center (NETL)” (信息资源中心 (国家工程技术图书馆))87 with
eight other ISTIC departments.88
ISTIC views itself as the national center for managing and providing S&T in-
formation services, as exercising leadership over and serving as a model for the
entire country’s STI system, and as positioned to “offer decision-making support” to
MOST and other government offices.89 ISTIC has some 850 staffers in seven func-
tional divisions and nine public-good departments (公益部门). It owns three corpo-
rations including the digital S&T document provider Wanfangdata.* Its business
areas are data research and analysis in support of government decision-making;
S&T information services; research, development, and propagation of new tech-
nologies and service platforms; fostering talent in the field of S&T information; and
media publication services.”90
More specifically, ISTIC:
“processes and reports on domestic and foreign S&T publications includ-
ing documents, translations, reference works, reports, and research; builds
domestic and foreign document databases that conform to China’s needs
and circumstances; does research and analysis on domestic and foreign S&T
sources that pertain to China’s national economic and S&T issues; reports
on domestic and foreign S&T achievements and trends; performs strategic
information services for policy making departments; provides in a planned
fashion specialized information services for the nation’s many priority science
research programs; does research on information science, policy, manage -
ment, service, methods and research; and develops international coopera-
tion and exchange in S&T information work.” 91
*Wanfangdata (万方数据, http://www.wanfangdata.com.cn/index.html) is the major domestic
competitor of Tsinghua University’s China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI). Holdings are
similar but not identical due to agreements upstream providers have with one organization or the
other. A third Chinese aggregator CQVIP (重庆维普网, http://www.cqvip.com/) is managed by
ISTIC’s Chongqing branch—now the Chongqing Southwest Information Digital Co., Ltd. (重庆西南信
息有限公司)—and also provides unique content.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
21
ISTIC offers a full range of data services, including access to the world’s major
S&T journals (via worldwide aggregators such as LexisNexis, ProQuest, Lawrence
Erlbaum Online Journals, and the ISI Derwent Innovations Index). Print media offer-
ings include “western language conference proceedings, western language periodi-
cals, foreign language S&T reports, Chinese language conference proceedings, and
a Chinese language academic theses database.”93 Among other services, ISTIC:
“obtains and delivers for registered clients original documents from its own
and outside (馆外) holdings; verifies the originality of S&T content for custom-
ers setting up research programs; appraises S&T achievements, does evalua-
tions, and applies for patents; offers document research services and advice
to central Party, government, and military leadership organizations, to state
key lab production units, and to clients at large; verifies the recorded content
and citations of papers and works publicly available through Chinese and
foreign search engines; arranges proxy searches and loans of resources in
domestic and foreign libraries and information organizations; and performs
other personalized services.” 94
As MOST, which oversees the ensemble, describes it, ISTIC is “the largest and
most authoritative professional library in the field of engineering technology in
China.”95 ISTIC, however, does more than collect and provide S&T materials to
domestic customers. It provides “fact-and-data-based decision-making support to
government agencies, research institutions, and industry.”96 It actively supports state
R&D projects through “comprehensive, policy-driven strategic research” on the lat-
est worldwide S&T achievements and trends for leading government departments.97
By the end of 201 5, ISTIC’s Information Resource Center had more than 3. 1 1 mil-
lion domestic and 500,000 foreign theses and dissertations; more than 270,000
foreign-language conference documents; 2.4 million US government S&T [AD,
etc.] reports; more than 4,300 foreign journals; 260,000 foreign search and
reference books; and had opened 22 abstracts databases and 27 full-text da-
tabases. Its digital resources reached 104 million Chinese and foreign abstracts
and 163 million citations, and the total number of digital full texts has reached
60 million.92
ISTIC’s S&T document holdings

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
22
ISTIC’s National Science and Technology Management Information System of-
fers “one-stop” (一站式) support for five types of state-level science and technology
plans, including those of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (国家自
然科学基金), National Science and Technology Major Projects (国家科技重大专项),
National Key R&D Programs (国家重点研发计划), Technical Innovation Guidance
Special Projects (技术创新引导专项), and China’s “Bases and Talent Special Proj-
ects” (基地和人才专项).98 The organization is involved in state-level S&T planning,
providing decision-making support to the Ministry of Science and Technology, and
helping form the country’s five-year plans, the "National Medium and Long-term
Science and Technology Development Plan," and a host of government-directed
special studies, such as China’s "New Generation Artificial Intelligence Develop-
ment Plan."99
ISTIC’s scope extends to “the formulation, revision and promotion of core stan-
dards related to science and technology reports,” making “policies and regulations
for science and technology reports” including the submission and review process
(presumably for grant applications and papers in domestic journals), researching
the ownership of intellectual property rights, and the “setting and declassification
of confidentiality levels” (密级设置和解降密), which suggests that ISTIC—like OSINT
operations in other nations—has “low-” and “high-side” dimensions.100
Other duties include supporting technology transfer from foreign sources to
national industries. ISTIC achieves this, in part, through its engineering center’s (工程
中心) patent database, “high-level scientific and technological talent database” (高
层次科技人才数据库), a “scientific and technological project information database”
(科技项目信息数据库)101 and, since 2008, an "Overseas High-level Talent Data-
base—Thousand Talents Plan (海外高层次人才数据库 - 千人计划).102 ISTIC provides
FIGURE 2
ISTIC headquarters at 15 Fuxing Road, Beijing

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
23
input to China’s “global science and technology talent policy” and, through its
business unit (业务部门), “conducts competitive intelligence research via tracking
and analysis of key industries and S&T fields, providing information for industrial
development and corporate decision-making.”103
ISTIC trains its cadre and staff in the skills needed for open source STI. In 1 978,
it began recruiting postgraduate students in information science. The institute offers
Masters degrees in library, information, and archive management, and collabo-
rates with Beijing University and its military counterpart to train PhDs in information
science. It also accepts post-doctoral researchers and trains professionals deployed
elsewhere in the STI system.104
FIGURE 3
State Council’s “National S&T Advancement Award”
ISTIC has sent its reports to China’s State Council, General Office of the Com-
munist Party of China, National People’s Congress, Chinese People’s Political
Consultative Conference, and to Party and state leaders.105 It has received the State
Council’s “National S&T Advancement Award” (above) around nine times and has
been commended for its work by leaders from provincial through national levels.106
It also plays a direct role in selecting and training “intelligence personnel” for
overseas postings, including “S&T counselors at embassies abroad.”107
ISTIC is more than an STI aggregator. Its work affects Chinese government pol-
icy on all levels, with reach down to state-owned and private businesses. Its ser-
vices depend wholly on open source exploitation and the skills of its open
source analysts.
F. MILITARY SCIENCE INFORMATION RESEARCH CENTER (MSIRC)
ISTIC’s open source operations are complemented on the military side by the Mil-
itary Science Information Research Center (军事科学信息研究中心), an appendage
of the PLA’s Academy of Military Sciences (军事科学院) since 201 7 , and successor
to the long-serving China Defense Science and Technology Information Center
(中国国防科技信息中心, CDSTIC). The evolution of CDSTIC and the system that

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
24
revolves around it is as convoluted as its civilian counterpart, a function of its age,
number of units involved, and the attention China has given it.
CDSTIC grew out of the Commission on Science and Technology Industry for
National Defense’s (国防科工委, COSTIND) S&T Intelligence Bureau (科技情报研
究所) established in March 1 959, which was a culmination of developments that
began in early 1 956.108 It is unclear when the “STI Bureau” formally became the
“China Defense Science and Technology Information Center” and knowledgeable
insiders use the two names interchangeably.* Over its six decades of service the
Center underwent seven major adjustments109 and is best known in its “CDSTIC”
iteration, a practice we follow here.
CDSTIC’s role is analogous to ISTIC’s in two ways: it (1) services the defense
establishment’s needs for open source intelligence on military S&T worldwide, and
(2) is a hub for an expanded network of STI facilities. The identities of these other
facilities were named in a 1 984 State Council directive that defined China’s “nation-
al defense S&T intelligence system” as follows:
“COSTIND, each defense industry ministry (including the Ministry of Elec-
tronics Industry, the China State Shipbuilding Corporation); the PLA’s General
Staff Department and General Logistics Department; related departments
from each branch of the military services; organizations responsible for S&T
intelligence work within the national defense S&T industry offices of each
province, autonomous region, and municipality directly under the central
government; national defense S&T intelligence professional working units at
each level; local national defense S&T intelligence service centers; and the
defense S&T intelligence network.” 11 0
Their duties as outlined in the directive are to collect and make available foreign
and domestic S&T materials, manage the systems’ intelligence reports, organize
S&T intelligence exchanges, perform analysis and provide intelligence needed for
policymaking, research, and production.111
*Multiple sources date “CDSTIC’s” emergence from March 1 4, 1 959, i.e., the founding date of its
progenitor, although Huo and Wang, and various state documents, referred to it by its older name
as late as 1 99 1. Similarly, the U.S. Open Source Enterprise, so named as of 201 5, traces its legacy
to the founding of FBIS in 1 941. Its staff regarded FBIS, OSE, and its intermediate organization, the
“Open Source Center” (2005-201 5), as synonyms and continued to use the old labels months and
even years later, orally and in some cases on written products.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
25
CDSTIC’s role as the “main unit” in the network was defined as follows:
“COSTIND’s S&T Intelligence Bureau is the integrated center for national
defense S&T intelligence. Each of the national defense industry departments’
S&T intelligence bureaus is an S&T intelligence center within the system. The
S&T intelligence offices directly subordinate to related departments and bu-
reaus in the General Staff Dept., General Logistics Dept., and each branch of
military service should gradually develop into S&T intelligence centers within
the system.”112 (Our italics.)
That is, the new structure under CDSTIC’s tutelage as defined in 1 984 was mostly
aspirational. Huo and Wang noted in 1 99 1 that actual implementation did not begin
until 1 986 and only later spread to “each respective intelligence organization.”113
Qian Xuesen (钱学森), scientist, former U.S. defense contractor, prominent
returnee, and revered founder of China’s strategic missile program, played
an early and decisive role in the evolution of China’s STI system that is little
known outside China. His contributions as the “mentor and leader of China’s
S&T information (信息) industry, especially the national defense S&T informa-
tion industry” were acknowledged by CDSTIC Director Yan Wei (闫巍) on the
anniversary of his 100th birthday.114 Qian’s achievements include early recog-
nition of the potential impact of AI on intelligence (in both senses of the term).
His thinking on STI is discussed in Section G on the theoretical foundations of
China’s open source operations.
Qian Xuesen, early STI pioneer
In December 2003, some two decades after the State Council’s edict and three
years after the creation of the seven-unit NSTL on the civilian side (see Section E), a
National Defense S&T Industry Digital Library System (国防科技工业数字图书馆系统)
was formally organized under CDSTIC’s purview.115 Like NSTL, it had seven members:
• China Nuclear S&T Information and Economic Research (中国核科技信息与
经济研究院)
• China Aerospace Engineering Consulting Center (中国航天工程咨询中心)

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
26
• China Aviation Industry Development Research Center (中国航空工业发展研
究中心)
• China Shipbuilding Industry Research Institute (中国船舶工业综合技术经济研
究院)
• China Ship Information Center (中国船舶信息中心)
• Northern S&T Information Research Center (北方科技信息研究所)
• MIIT, Institute of Electronic STI (信息产业部电子科学技术情报研究所)
The list does not include some national-level organizations named in the 1 984
State Council STI directive or other units doing related work that are known to exist,
for example, the Beijing Document Center (北京文献服务处) founded in 1 978 and
a key provider of foreign military S&T information;11 6 COSTIND’s China Engineer-
ing and Technology Information Network (中国工程技术信息网, CETIN), an online
repository of foreign military equipment and specifications;11 7 the Military Library of
the Chinese Academy of Military Sciences (中国人民解放军军事科学院, 军事图书资
料馆) operating under various names since 1 958; and its affiliated China National
Digital Library Military Science Branch Library (中国国家数字图书馆军事科学院分馆).
In 2005, China’s Central Military Commission issued “Regulations on the Chinese
People’s Liberation Army General Armaments Department S&T Information Work,”
which set guidelines for the military services’ STI units beyond those laid down in
2003 and the State Council directive.118
FIGURE 4
CDSTIC office and data buildings at 26 Fucheng Road, Beijing

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
27
Focusing on CDSTIC itself, Chinese accounts of its accomplishments are almost
hagiographic. A typical example posted to the PLA’s China Military Network (中国
军网) in 2016, the year before it re-emerged as MSIRC noted:
“Nuclear bombs, ballistic missiles, and earth satellites (两弹一星),* the Shen-
zhou spacecraft ... Behind our country's many world-renowned high-tech
achievements there is the same organization—the China National Defense
Science and Technology Information Center. The center is hailed as an ‘inno-
vation brain trust’ by researchers.” 11 9
The same article summarized CDSTIC’s three “secrets” of success, namely that:
• The center “collaborates with many large domestic S&T documentation
centers, and carries out document sharing, resource exchange, personnel
exchanges and training.” (CDSTIC, like ISTIC, is first among equals.)
• It focuses on breakthroughs in key technologies such as “network informa-
tion source discovery” and “knowledge graph construction,” effectively
enhancing core scientific research capabilities. (Data science is used to
good effect.)
• The system houses millions of paper documents, “some ten thousand hours
of audio-visual materials, and more than ten million electronic documents
for use by scientific research personnel.” (Collection, not only analysis, is
valued.)
CDSTIC, like its civilian counterpart, has conferred graduate degrees in related
disciplines since 1 986 and sponsors “post-doctoral research stations” in military
STI.12 0 Six decades of experience have taught China that open source intel-
ligence is not picked gratis from an open source tree but depends on the
quality of its OSINT professionals (see Section H).
On September 29, 201 7 , CDSTIC was officially reborn as the Military Science
Information Research Center under a reorganized Academy of Military Sciences.
An “Introduction to the Center” states that the organization, successor to CDSTIC
and other military STI units, is mainly responsible for building and servicing infor-
mation resources, “dynamic tracking and analysis,” strategic intelligence research,
*A canonical reference to China’s development of three classes of weapons. The two dan (弹)
are commonly misconstrued as “atomic and hydrogen bombs” (原子弹、氢弹). The second dan
actually is part of the word for “ballistic missile” (导弹). See http://discovery.cctv.com/special/
C1 9607/2007 101 8/104899.shtml.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
28
policy research, and “big data intelligence technology” in the field of worldwide
military technology and armaments.121
The announcement—preface to a hiring advertisement for technicians and other
professionals—noted that the “center’s real-time (实时) interconnected data analysis
environment provides the scientific means to support the Central Military Commis-
sion’s decision-making and consultation requirements.”12 2
Key takeaways here are (1) the center relies on open sources to follow
foreign defense S&T projects on a continuing basis (动态跟踪, “dynamic
tracking”)123 and (2) is able to impart this information directly to deci-
sion-makers. The next sections examine the concepts that underpin China’s
STI system.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
29
Chinese STI in theory
and practice
4
hina’s use of open source as the basis of its S&T intelligence pro-
gram has its psychological roots in the Chinese language, whose
term “qingbao” encompasses simultaneously both “information”
and “intelligence.” This conceptual overlap paves the way for acceptance
of open source as a fully-fledged intelligence discipline. China’s embrace
of OSINT and its role in STI gave rise to a network of social organizations
and journals that support professionalization.
G. CHINESE WRITERS ON ” QINGBAO” AND STI
A key to understanding Chinese STI is the fact that “information” and “in-
telligence” are not distinguished by many Chinese speakers and are used
interchangeably by “STI workers” (科技情报工作人员). Huo and Wang
wrote in 1 99 1:
“Unanimity has yet to be reached in different quarters as to the
semantic difference between intelligence and information. If, during
the historical stage characterized by intelligence activities, we
certainly could mix up information and intelligence; and if, during
the historical stage characterized by intelligence work, we still could
get away with mixing up information and intelligence; then, in the
historical stage characterized by intelligence as a science and a
technology, we certainly must clearly differentiate information and
intelligence, both from a theoretical standpoint and from the stand-
point of practical experience.” 124
C

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
30
Here is a more recent (201 7) testimonial:
“Information science is a concept with Chinese characteristics. In Chinese char-
acters, qingbao [情报] has two meanings: one refers to information [信息], the
corresponding word in English is ‘information;’ the other refers to our spying
and military intelligence, and the corresponding word in English is ‘intelli-
gence.’ Qingbao science in my country also has two meanings: ‘information
science;’ and ‘intelligence services’ .”12 5
The first rigorous attempts to separate the two concepts were Qian Xuesen’s
seminal paper “The Science and Technology of STI Work”12 6 in 1 983 and his 1 984
speech to a National Symposium on Thinking Science. 12 8 Unlike many of his
countrymen, Qian, a returned overseas scholar, treated “intelligence” as unique:
as knowledge extracted (“activated”) from information to solve particular prob-
lems. In his own comprehensive epistemology, “information science” (信息学) is
one branch of a “theory of knowledge” (认知论)—the other being “noetics” (思维
学, the “study of thought).* “Intelligence science” (情报学) occupies a subordinate
level in the schema—it is a subset of information science, and the two have entirely
different referents.
This distinction is relevant and—in context—revolutionary, inasmuch as Chi-
nese thought bundles the two concepts under a single lexical item qingbao (情报,
literally “a report on the circumstances”). Qian’s need to separate “information”
from “intelligence” speaks to this cultural difference, which we believe has genuine
ramifications. While it is risky to assert that languages differentially affect cognition,†
the merger of these two concepts in a single lemma is consistent with observable
Chinese attitudes toward “intelligence.” Like “information,” it is not something nefar-
ious to be hidden, stolen, or embarrassed by, but a normal and reasonable goal.
Indeed, as intimated earlier in this study, the SSTC’s formal decision in 1 992 to
rename China’s open source “intelligence” (情报) organizations “information”
(信息) organizations—a decision that has still not filtered down to some grassroots
bodies—was done out of concern with foreign perceptions of China’s intelligence
mission, not by intrinsic distrust of “intelligence” on the part of its mainland Chinese
users.12 8 The tendency in some other countries to think of STI in terms of secrets had
to be learned.
*Made up of “enlightenment” (灵感思维), “image cognition” (形象思维), and “abstract thinking” (抽象
思维), i.e., direct apprehension, pictorial/iconic thought, and symbolic thought.
† The Whorf-Sapir hypothesis. This once “discredited” theory is enjoying a rebirth. Its weaker
version—that the structure of language influences (but does not determine) thought—is hard to refute
but equally hard to prove.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
31
China’s tendency to rely more than its non-Asian counterparts on open source
(or not to classify it out of existence, which is the same thing) may also, in part, have
roots in the psycholinguistics of the language: it is all “intelligence” and thus equally
able to serve the needs of the nation.
Huo and Wang, who acknowledge Qian’s mentorship, also call for an end to
the “ambiguity” of the earlier stages of China’s STI development in favor of an open
source intelligence discipline.
“People are gradually coming to appreciate the need to make a conceptu-
al distinction between intelligence and information, reflecting the fact that
the social function of intelligence is now undergoing a transformation, that
intelligence science is maturing with each passing day, and that development
of the intelligence cause is just now undergoing a transition from the stage
characterized by intelligence work to the stage characterized by intelligence
as a science and a technology.” 12 9
The two authors go on to define classes of “information” based on where and
how it is used, following theoretical work by Claude Shannon, founder of informa-
tion theory,13 0 and expand the distinctions into an eight--point list of characteristics
“needed for macro-management of national defense technology.” Table 2 is a
direct translation, offered as a demonstration of the extent to which China was en-
meshed in the relationship between OSINT and policymaking three decades ago,
while the United States was schooling its open source officers on the need to sup-
port “all-source analysts” with translations of foreign press articles.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
32
Huo and Wang lay the groundwork for open source as the “first stage” of the
intelligence process, a viewpoint opposite to that taken in the United States.
“As we know, collection is the first of the three links in intelligence work .…
In view of the fact that "intelligence" and "information" are different in their
natures, attributes and functions, then information, not intelligence, should be
the target of collection work, even though the ultimate goal of intelligence
work is to obtain intelligence. The work should be information collection, not
intelligence collection.” 131 (Our italics.)
They then drive a stake into the notion that open source is an adjunct to (classi-
fied) intelligence: “(F)or various reasons related to perceptions and policies, people
are ever wanting to obtain intelligence directly, and moreover are sometimes suc-
cessful at doing it. However, this course of action is really very inefficient.”132
INFORMATION CHARACTERISTIC CATEGORY OF POLICYMAKING
TACTICAL STRATEGIC
TIME
EXPECTATION
SOURCE
CONTENT
ORGANIZATION
COMPRESSION
RATE OF PRODUCTION
ACCURACY
historical
predictable
internal
specialized
highly organized
detailed
high
high accuracy
predictive
unpredictable
external
synthesized
diffuse
summarized
low
fairly high accuracy
TABLE 2
Policymaking and categories of information

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
33
The authors, part of CDSTIC’s top cadre, propose a collection taxonomy based on
media type, the level of processing, technical nature of the content, its field of applica-
tion, transmission means, user demands, time constraints, level of expectation, whether
the sources are “internal” or “external,” specialized or synthesized, organized or
diffuse, the level of compression, accuracy, and its probability of existing.133
Sources are categorized by how they are obtained, each type described in terms
of its own search theory. Source evaluation is done through an indexing scheme
based on reliability, suitability, timeliness, availability, cost, and ease of decoding.
Formulas are proposed to quantify these evaluations.134 Everything gets tagged and
binned. The efficiency of collection is assessed then by “numerical probability values,”
such as “the probability of collecting the needed information within the period of time
stipulated by the consumer, and the mathematical expectation of the amount of the
needed information that will be collected within the stipulated time period.”135
An entire chapter (6) is given to explaining transmission channels—to whom
and where do you send the information—e.g., serial, centralized, ring, bilateral, and
mutual, each having its own advantages or drawbacks. The authors also discuss other
characteristics such as time, capacity, susceptibility to interference, and security.
TRADITIONAL MODERN
ASSESSMENT
SOURCING
STORAGE
METHODS
SKILLS
EXPENDITURES
Build complete collections;
wait for consumers to come.COLLECTION
Gauge quality on basis of amount
collected.
Written (published) materials only.
Databanks.
Routine work, dependent on
collector’s preferences.
Collector knows a foreign language
“and can type.”
Spend ﬁrst, plan later; neglect
development and management.
Target real needs; actively contact
consumers.
Is the material scientiﬁc, targeted,
prompt and useful?
All media types, broadly deﬁned.
Databases.
A scientiﬁc endeavor that is
demand driven.
Contingent of professionals with
distributed skills.
Plan ﬁrst, spend later; value efﬁciency
and management.
TABLE 3
Huo and Wang on the old and new STI136

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
34
These are the system’s visible traces, available to researchers who read Chi-
nese; we have no window into the private deliberations of China’s STI workers and
leaders. By contrast, our grasp of U.S.—and to some extent allied—STI operations is
based on first-hand experience over decades. Yet we struggle to identify any-
thing comparable to the minute disquisitions China affords this enterprise.
The odd occasional article in CIA’s Studies in Intelligence137 on OSINT—usually an
historical vignette—cannot begin to compare.
H. CHINA AND THE PROFESSIONALIZATION OF STI
How does the Chinese STI system play out in practice? It is one thing to create
agencies and networks, quite another thing to ensure they are staffed with qualified
personnel and that these staffers* have opportunities for discourse relevant to their
professions, socially and through publishing. While neither of these venues is avail-
able to their U.S. counterparts,† open dialog and a sense of inclusion are part of the
Chinese system and play major roles in its success.
The STI system’s professionalization is also evident in its hiring practices. What
types of people fill China’s STI ranks? A list of job vacancies issued by MSIRC in
201 9 shows the breadth of talent. Vacancies per slot range from one to three. Only
the first 10 of 26 line entries are shown.
*We have not observed references to the use of contractors in the Chinese STI system.
† The work is classified by default, cannot be discussed in open fora, and “outside” publishing on
work-related topics is almost nil.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
35
Other vacancies are for digital processing and database construction; digital li-
brary application technology development and maintenance; intelligence research;
electronics research, system demonstration and evaluation; computer network se-
curity; software and network engineering; database construction and maintenance;
translation and management of foreign language library materials; more “compre-
hensive research on national defense technology;” and file management.
Another job announcement issued by the same organization in 2020 lists skill
categories sought, underscoring the quality of China’s STI cadre:
TABLE 4
2019 AMS/MSIRC military-civilian recruitment form138
JOB
CATEGORY
comprehensive research
on national defense tech
big data knowledge
mining research
academic journal editor
computer network and
equipment management
multimedia, animation,
ﬁlm and TV production
website programming and
network DB management
data analysis
project management
Masters
or above
Ph.D.
undergrad
or above
full-time
undergrad
science rsch
science rsch
science rsch
engineer
engineer
librarian
science rsch
engineer
engineer
POSITION TITLE TYPE OF WORK EDUCATION
librarian
research intern
assistant researcher
research intern
assistant engineer
assistant engineer
assistant librarian
research intern
assistant engineer
chemical engineering and
technology, engineering
software development Masters
or aboveassistant engineer computer science and technology,
software engineering
library ﬁle managementlibrarian
PROFESSION
Masters
or above
Masters
or above
Masters
or above
Masters
or above
Masters
or above
design, translation
postgraduate: drama and ﬁlm
studies, design
computer science and technology
computer science and technology
control science and engineering,
computer S&T
management science and
engineering
management science and
engineering
computer science and technology,
software engineering

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
36
Another measure of a mature discipline, and a key element in its development,
is the number of journals that grow up around it. Here are some samples—print and
digital periodicals, all peer-reviewed—that promote open source S&T intelligence
in China. Titles and metadata from recent papers are included to demonstrate the
nature and sophistication of the discourse.
1. 情报学报 (Journal of the China Society for Scientific and Technical Infor-
mation). Since 1 982, sponsored by the Chinese Society for Science and
Technology Information (中国科学技术情报学会) and ISTIC, Beijing. Has
published 2,883 articles.1 40
• Dai Guoqiang (戴国强), “推进竞跑阶段的创新情报研究 (Intelligence Studies
for Innovation in the New Era),” 201 9: 38 (8).
2. 中国科技资源导刊 (China Science & Technology Resources Review). Since
1 957 , sponsored by ISTIC and Nanjing University. Originally Science Intelli-
gence Work (科学情报工作). Has published 4,009 documents.141
• Hu Yingjun et al. (胡寅骏等), “利用人工智能技术挖掘高层次创新人才 ——以专
利数据为例 (Mining High-level Innovation Talent with Artificial Intelligence
Technology —A Case Study of Patent Data ),” 2020: 52(3).
Civilian staff sought in 2020 mainly are in big data mining, data
analysis, intelligence research, software development, information
construction, and journal editing.
MANAGEMENT
SCIENCE
ENGINEERING
journalism and communicationsLITERATURE
information science, management science and engineering, administrative
management
mathematics, computational mathematics, applied mathematics, statistics,
probability statistics, applied statistics, probability theory, mathematical statistics
computer software and theory, computer technology, computer application
technology, communication and information systems, computer systems
structure, cyberspace security, information security, signal and information
processing, software engineering, optical engineering, electronic science and
technology, biomedical engineering
Double degree students with both a science and engineering background and
a literary background are preferred.
TABLE 5
2020 AMS/MSIRC recruitment announcement139

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
37
3. 情报工程 (Technology Intelligence Engineering). Since 201 5, sponsored by
the Chinese Society for Science and Technology Information and ISTIC,
Beijing.142
• Qian Hong et al. (钱虹等), “基于SCI论文的无人机领域技术发展态势分析
(Analysis of Development of Technological Situation of UAVs Based on SCI
Database),” 2020: 6 (4).
4. 情报理论与实践 (Information Studies: Theory & Application). Since 1 964,
formerly Ordnance Intelligence Work (兵工情报工作), sponsored by the Chi-
na National Defense Science and Technology Information Society (中国国防
科学技术信息学会) and the 2 10th Research Institute of China North Industries
Group (中国兵器工业集团第二一〇研究所). Published 7 ,502 articles.14 3
• Zhou Jingyan et al. (周京艳等), “混合战争背景下科技情报工作的战略定位 (The
Strategic Orientation of S&T Intelligence Work under the Hybrid War),”
2020: 43 (10).
5. 情报杂志 (Journal of Intelligence). Since 1 982, sponsored by Shaanxi In-
stitute of Science and Technology Information (陕西省科学技术情报研究院),
Shaanxi. Published 1 3,043 articles.14 4
• Ma Shuhui et al. (马曙辉等), “基于美国解密发明信息的国防专利转移效果特征
研究(Research on the Transfer Effect Characteristics of National Defense Pat-
ents Based on American Decryption Invention Information),” 2020: 39 (9).
6. 现代情报 (Journal of Modern Information). Since 1 980, formerly Information
Knowledge (情报知识), sponsored by the Jilin Institute of STI (吉林省科学技
术情报研究院) and the Chinese Society for Science and Technology, Jilin.
Published 1 4,95 1 articles.14 5
• Wu Lin et al. (吴林等), “大数据时代安全情报人才培养的思考 (Reflections on the
Cultivation of Security Intelligence Talent in the Era of Big Data),” 2020: 40
(10).
7. 情报资料工作 (Information and Documentation Services). Since 1 980,
sponsored by Renmin University of China (中国人民大学) and the Chinese
Society of Social Sciences and Information (中国社会科学情报学会), Beijing.
Published 4,727 articles.14 6
• Li Lin (栗琳), “情报机构视域下情报、智库与战略决策关系透析 (Analysis of the
Relationship between Intelligence, Think Tanks and Strategic Decisions from
the Perspective of Intelligence Organizations),” 2020: 41 (5).

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
38
8. 科技情报研究 (Scientific Information Research). Founded in 201 9, sponsored
by the Hunan Institute of Science and Technology Information (湖南省科学技
术情报研究院), Hunan.147
• Miao Qihao (缪其浩), “组织决策中的情报与循证决策中的证据 (Qingbao in
Organizational Decision-making and Evidence in Evidence-based Policy),”
2020: 2 (3).
9. 图书情报工作 (Library and Information Service). Since 1 980, sponsored by
the CAS National Science Library (中国科学院文献情报中心), Beijing.14 8
• Yu Houqiang et al. (余厚强等), “人工智能领域科研团队识别与领军团队提取
(Identification and Extraction of Research Teams in the Artificial Intelligence
Field),” 2020: 64 (20).
*Three of the ten have switched to “S&T information” (信息), while the remaining seven continue to
use “S&T intelligence” (情报) in their names.
FIGURE 5
Selected Chinese periodicals covering open source S&T intelligence
These journals are a small sample of the inventory. Each of China’s 3 1 provinc-
es, special municipalities, and autonomous regions is host to one or more journals,
including the present authors’ two personal favorites.149 A recent Chinese bibliomet-
ric study of these provincial STI journals concludes that “provincial STI institutions
are the backbone and supporting force of China’s scientific and technological
intelligence industry.”15 0 The study named ten provincial STI organizations, whose
journal content ranked in a top 20 list of frequently cited articles.151 They included STI
“institutes” (研究所) or “academies” (研究院) in Beijing, Guangdong, Hebei, Hubei,
Jiangsu, Jiangxi, Shaanxi, Shanxi, Shanghai, and Sichuan.*
Information on STI operations is also shared through the National Science and
Technology Library system—the civilian S&T OSINT authority—which operates 40
“service stations” (服务站) throughout China and another 30 local management

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
39
platforms (管理平台) for universities152 linked to the center by a broadband network
meant to bridge a “digital divide” between the “information wealthy” and “informa-
tion poor.”15 3
China also supports its open source cadre with professional groups, so-called
mass organizations (群众组织) that translate requirements from the leadership to
workers and communicate upward input from these grassroots elements. Chief
among them are the China Society for Science and Technology Information (中国科
学技术情报学会) on the civilian side, and its defense counterpart, the China National
Defense Science and Technology Information Society (中国国防科学技术信息学会).
The former was founded in 1 964. Its activities include academic exchanges on
STI theory and practice, disseminating STI knowledge and technology, commis-
sioned research and project development, liaison between central and local STI in-
stitutions, academic publication and member recognition, and serving as a “home”
(家) for STI workers.154
The China National Defense Science and Technology Information Society was
established in 1 988 for the same purposes. According to information posted on the
China Military Network (中国军网), the organization’s goal is to “unite the broad
masses of national defense STI workers,” conduct training, cultivate talent, and
“promote the development of national defense STI.”15 5
At the risk of dwelling on a theme that by now should be well-established,
we know of nothing comparable to these professional organizations out-
side China. Although SCIP15 6 comes to mind, its focus is business intelligence, it is
international in scope, and has no S&T monitoring mission. Efforts by SCIP’s leaders
some years ago to cast China’s STI program, and the broader network within which
it operates, as a run-of-the-mill business competitive intelligence (BCI) enterprise,
gained no traction within the USIC.157

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
40

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
41
Recommendations
f we were invited to manage—all things being equal—the United
States’ open source intelligence system or China’s, we would choose
the latter without hesitation. Since that option is not on the table, we
propose the creation of an open source STI organization, provisionally
called the “National S&T Analysis Center” (NSTAC), within the U.S. gov-
ernment, designed without dependencies on prior art, structure, budgets, or
assumptions, but with cues from the Chinese model.
A minimum layout would consist of a hub in the Washington Metropoli-
tan Area staffed with 350 full-time employees and four regional outstations
(Atlanta, Boston, Houston, Silicon Valley) with staffs of 25-30 each, includ-
ing administrators, linguists, analysts, data scientists, subject matter experts,
IT personnel, and support staff, at an estimated cost of $1 25M-1 50M per
annum plus facilities. Other important considerations are:
• During startup, the targeted staffing numbers should be ap-
proached in increments over three years. Year 1 = hub only; Year 2
= hub + two outstations; Year 3 = hub + four outstations.
• Significant investment in the licensing, creation, and aggregation
of relevant scientific and technical information is essential for the
effective operation of NSTAC.
• NSTAC collaboration with allied/friendly foreign STI organizations
and with civil society actors should be encouraged, potentially
through public-private partnerships.
• No more than 5-10 percent of NSTAC personnel should have IC
clearances (TS/SCI) to avoid mission creep and absorption by IC
elements.
I

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
42
• That said, measures are needed to protect the security of information gen-
erated, used, and shared by NSTAC. We recommend all employees have
Secret-level clearances.*
NSTAC should support U.S. counterintelligence agencies with open source
analysis programs that highlight and vigorously pursue illegal and extralegal tech-
nology transfers, as per the U.S. Senate commission’s 201 3 recommendation. This is
needed especially for China, where grey zone transfers account for much of its S&T
profile.
The proposed body, like those in China, should have a role in technology
policymaking and programmatic planning at the national level. Contextual insight
provided by NSTAC should be available at the federal as well as state and local
levels. Furthermore, relevant discoveries should be made publicly available, where
consistent with national security, while others can be shared within public-private
partnerships.
The IC should interact with NSTAC but not define its priorities or methods, to
avoid co-option and the “secrecy trap” that accords priority to classified programs.
The IC may retain its marquee OSINT enterprises: there is a legitimate need for
open source to “enable” classified intelligence, although that is hardly the whole of
it or even its most important part. Locating NSTAC outside the IC also eliminates the
“U.S. Persons” issue that prohibits collecting and holding information on U.S. com-
panies and individuals, which given the global nature of S&T would make tracking
developments nearly impossible.
These recommendations apply to STI only. We are agnostic about an overall
OSINT solution, other than to insist NSTAC be fenced off from it entirely, given the
inclination of open source managers to appropriate STI budgets for projects direct-
ed at “current intelligence.”
This proposal is consistent with that of the U.S. House of Representatives Per-
manent Select Committee on Intelligence, stated in its September 29, 2020 study
“The China Deep Dive: A Report on the Intelligence Community’s Capabilities and
Competencies with Respect to the People’s Republic of China.” In particular:
“(U) The Committee’s central finding of this report is that the United States’
intelligence community has not sufficiently adapted to a changing geopolitical
and technological environment increasingly shaped by a rising China and the
growing importance of interlocking non-military transnational threats, such as
*This recommendation follows the Chinese model, which pairs its collecting, cataloguing, and
disseminating of open source information with adequate security to protect the sensitive nature
of its work.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
43
global health, economic security, and climate change. Absent a significant
realignment of resources, the U.S. government and intelligence commu-
nity will fail to achieve the outcomes required to enable continued U.S.
competition with China on the global stage for decades to come, and to
protect the U.S. health and security.” (emphasis in the original)15 8
As analysts who have tracked China’s borrowing of ideas for decades, we find
it ironic that the model for our proposal is China’s own pioneering intelligence work.
One might object that comparisons with China are unrealistic because the two
countries’ goals differ. It is true that China’s STI mission does not match that of the
United States. China tracks and transfers foreign technology whereas the U.S. goal,
in principle, is to monitor security threats. Hence, China’s needs are greater. But a
thousand times greater?*It is obvious one side is failing.
Moreover, since Chinese S&T leverages foreign invention,15 9 a U.S. STI program,
beyond keeping an eye on China’s indigenous innovations, must employ mecha-
nisms to gather relevant data and perform in-depth analysis to track these accesses
across the entire spectrum of actors and actions. It is likely that this analysis will
uncover legal, illegal, and extralegal attempts at transfers, which could be referred
to the appropriate local or federal agencies for investigation under their authorities.
In other words, China’s unique mission requires a tailored response, as noted by the
201 3 U.S. Senate commission (Section B).
A second objection is more fundamental. U.S. national decisionmakers and
Americans in general coast on the assumption that the United States and its allies
are so far ahead of China in science and technology that a U.S. monitoring system
would provide little more than an aperture into our own past. That is, we can skip
the scrutiny because the gap is so wide. Regrettably, while this thesis may have been
plausible decades ago, the United States is no longer the global S&T hegemon.†
Whereas U.S. R&D in 1 960 was more than two-thirds of global R&D, today it is less
than one-third.160
China’s work in artificial intelligence161 and biotechnology,162 to cite just two
areas, suggests any “gap” between U.S. and Chinese performance is transient. Past
successes can no longer safely guide the United States through an era of accelerat-
*Authors’ observation of the maximum number of USG persons and contractors who attend IC-wide
China S&T conferences, i.e., fewer than 100 focused American analysts, compared to 100,000
Chinese “STI workers.”
† An exception is fundamental research, where China agrees that the United States maintains an
enviable lead. Ironically, it is the one area of science the USG has been reluctant to protect (see
Hannas and Chang, “China’s ‘New Generation’ AI-Brain Project,” National Defense University Press
/ PRISM (forthcoming).

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
44
ed S&T development, in which security is as likely to be defined by “products” as by
“weapons.” Given the globalization of scientific innovation and the central role of
technology in U.S. prosperity, effective policy requires timely monitoring of world-
wide S&T developments. We consider this point indisputable.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
45
Endnotes
1. Hannas, Mulvenon and Puglisi, Chinese Industrial Espionage, 201 3, chapter 2 “China’s Use of Open
Sources.”
2. Critiqued most recently by U.S. Representative Adam Schiff, “The U.S. Intelligence Community Is Not
Prepared for the China Threat,” Foreign Affairs, September 30, 2020.
3. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-source_intelligence.
4. OSS Notices, 2.9 (30 November 1 994) cited in Robert D. Steele, “Open Source Intelligence: What Is It?,”
archived on 28 March 201 8. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-source_intelligence.
5. Mark M. Lowenthal, “Open-Source Intelligence: New Myths, New Realities,” in Roger Z. George and
Robert D. Kline, Intelligence and the National Security Strategist, Rowen and Littlefield (Lanham, MD),
2006, p. 273.
6. “There is no specific date on when the term OSINT was first proposed.” (Nihad Hassan, “An Introduction to
Open Source Intelligence (OSINT) Gathering,” August 1 2, 201 8, https://www.secjuice.com/introduction-
to-open-source-intelligence-osint/) “The US military first coined the term OSINT in the late 1 980s, arguing
that a reform of intelligence was necessary to cope with the dynamic nature of informational requirements,
especially at the tactical level on the battlefield.” (Florian Schaurer and Jan Storger, “The Evolution of Open
Source Intelligence (OSINT),” The Intelligencer: Journal of U.S. Intelligence Studies, 1 9.3, 201 3.)
7. See Federation of American Scientists’ definition (https://fas.org/irp/program/masint.htm).
8. https://www.cia.gov/news-information/featured-story-archive/2010-featured-story-archive/open-
source-intelligence.html.
9. Authors’ personal recollection.
10. In the last two years the USIC has bifurcated the open source domain into two elements: OSINT, which
requires official Title 50 authorities for collection, analysis, and operations; and the phrase “Publicly
Available Information (PAI)” which does not require those authorities. We thank Dr. James Mulvenon for
pointing this out.
11 . https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-source_intelligence. and https://www.cia.gov/news-information/
featured-story-archive/2010-featured-story-archive/open-source-intelligence.html.
1 2. https://www.recordedfuture.com/open-source-intelligence-definition/.
13 . “Open source materials can protect sources and methods. Sometimes an intelligence judgment that is
actually informed with sensitive, classified information can be defended on the basis of open-source
reporting. This can prove useful when policy-makers need to explain policy decisions or communicate with
foreign officials without compromising classified sources.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-source_
intelligence.
1 4. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-source_intelligence. By 1 942, William J. Donovan’s Office of
Strategic Services (OSS), precursor to the CIA, had a Research and Analysis Branch of some 900 scholars
across multiple disciplines analyzing newspapers, library holdings, and other openly available sources for
information on the Axis Powers of intelligence value. (https://www.cia.gov/news-information/featured-
story-archive/2010-featured-story-archive/oss-research-and-analysis.html).
15. Florian Schaurer and Jan Storger, “The Evolution of Open Source Intelligence (OSINT),” The Intelligencer:
Journal of U.S. Intelligence Studies, 1 9.3, 201 3.)
16. https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/books-and-
monographs/foreign-broadcast-information-service/.
17. Oral history conveyed to author circa 2005.
1 8. https://www.cia.gov/offices-of-cia/science-technology.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
46
19. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruth_A._David.
20. Eliot A. Jardines, National Open Source Enterprise,” April 2006. https://web.archive.
org/web/20070928 1 50640/http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/b/b4/
NationalOpenSourceEnterprise.pdf.
21. https://www.cia.gov/news-information/press-releases-statements/201 5-press-releases-statements/cia-
achieves-key-milestone-in-agency-wide-modernization-initiative.html.
22. “Report of the National Commission for the Review of the Research and Development Programs of the
United States Intelligence Community (unclassified version),” 201 3. https://www.intelligence.senate.gov/
sites/default/files/commission_report.pdf.
23. For example, “STI examines foreign developments in basic and applied sciences and technologies with
warfare potential, particularly enhancements to weapon systems.” https://warontherocks.com/201 8/04/
an-inflection-point-for-scientific-and-technical-intelligence/.
24. Studds, Susan, et al., “National Defense Intelligence College – School of S&T Intelligence.” Presentation to
the committee, May 1 3, 201 1.
25. National Research Council, Review of the National Defense Intelligence College’s Master’s Degree in
Science and Technology Intelligence, The National Academies Press, Washington DC, 201 1. https://doi.
org/10. 1 7226/1 3260.
26. 1 3637 - Deputy National Intelligence Officer, Science and Technology, Joint Duty Number:ODNI-1 8-
0406U. https://www.dni.gov/icjointduty/vacancies/odni-1 8-0406u.htm.
27. “Report of the National Commission for the Review of the Research and Development Programs of the
United States Intelligence Community (unclassified version),” 201 3. Our emphasis.
28. Hannas, Mulvenon, Puglisi, Chinese Industrial Espionage (CIE), Routledge (New York and London), 201 3;
Hannas and Chang, “China’s Access to Foreign AI Technology—an Assessment,” Georgetown University,
Center for Security and Emerging Technology, September 201 9; Hannas and Tatlow, eds., China’s Quest for
Foreign Technology: Beyond Espionage, Routledge, 2020.
29. “Report of the National Commission for the Review of the Research and Development Programs of the
United States Intelligence Community (unclassified version),” 201 3. Our emphasis.
30. “Report of the National Commission for the Review of the Research and Development Programs of the
United States Intelligence Community (unclassified version),” 201 3. Our emphasis.
31. Huo, Zhongwen (霍忠文) and Wang Zongxiao (王宗孝), 国防科技情报源及获取技术 (Sources and Methods
of Obtaining National Defense Science and Technology Intelligence), Beijing, Kexue Jishu Wenxuan
Publishing Company, 1 99 1.
32. “Report of the National Commission for the Review of the Research and Development Programs of the
United States Intelligence Community (unclassified version),” 201 3.
33. Hannas et al, CIE, chapter 2 “China’s Use of Open Sources.”
34. “1 956-1 967年科学技术发展远景规划纲要 (Outline of the Long-term Plan for the Development of Science and
Technology from 1 956 to 1 967), State Council,” August 1 956. Ratified in December 1 956.
35. For example: “甲子辉煌—中国科学技术信息研究所成立60周年纪念 (60 Years of Glory—The 60th Anniversary
of the Founding of the Institute of Science and Technical Information of China) ,” 中国科学技术信息研究所
(ISTIC), Beijing, 2016, p. 3. (Hereafter 60 Years of Glory); Wu Heng (武衡), “周恩来对我国科学技术事业的关
怀和指导 (Zhou Enlai’s Care and Guidance to China’s Science and Technology Enterprise),” People‘s Daily
Online, January 4, 2006. http://cpc.people.com.cn/GB/69 1 1 2/75843/75872/5 165752.html; and Liu
Zhaodong (刘昭东) “回顾、感言与期盼 (Looking back, impressions and expectations),” China S&T Daily (科技
日报 ), October 1 5, 2016. http://digitalpaper.stdaily.com/http_www.kjrb.com/kjrb/html/2016-10/1 5/
content_35 1 389.htm?div=-1.
36. There are two (similar) versions of Zhou’s directive circulating: “你们工作这么几年，连个情报机构都没有建立，
你们的仗是怎么打的?” cited by Liu Zhaodong (刘昭东) “回顾、感言与期盼 (Looking back, impressions and
expectations),” China S&T Daily (科技日报 ), October 1 5, 2016, and “搞科研像打仗，你们搞了这么多年科
研，连个情报机构都没有建立，你们的仗是怎么打的?” cited in 60 Years of Glory, p. 3.
37. “1 956-1 967年科学技术发展远景规划纲要” (Outline of the Long-term Plan for the Development of Science and
Technology from 1 956 to 1 967), State Council, August 1 956. https://zh.wikisource.org/wiki/1 956-1 967
年科学技术发展远景规划纲要.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
47
38. Cited in Lai Maosheng (赖茂生), “新环境、新范式、新方法、新能力—新时代情报学发展的思考 (New
Environment, New Paradigm, New Means, and New Capabilities: Reflections on the Development of
Information Science in the New Era),” 情报理论与实践 (Information Studies: Theory & Application), 201 7:40
(1 2), pp. 1-5.
39. Wu was CAS vice secretary from 1 954 to 1 957. https://baike.baidu.com/item/武衡. Wu also presided
over the first National STI Work Conference in 1 958 as Deputy Secretary-General of the State Council
Science Planning Committee (第一次全国科技情报工作会议由国务院科学规划委员会副秘书长武衡主持), as cited
in 60 Years of Glory, p. 9.
40. Wu Heng (武衡), “周恩来对我国科学技术事业的关怀和指导 (Zhou Enlai’s Care and Guidance to China’s
Science and Technology Enterprise),” People‘s Daily Online, January 4, 2006.
41. Guan Jialin (关家麟) and Zhang Chao (张超), “我国科技信息事业发展的回顾与展望 (Review and Outlook for
Scientific and Technological Information Undertaking of China),” 情报科学(Information Science), 2007:25
(1), pp. 1-7.
42. 60 Years of Glory, pp. 9-10.
43. Chen Chao (陈超), “科技情报近六十年政策层面的发展回顾 (Looking back at the development of STI policy
for the past 60 years),” January 2 1, 201 9. From Chen’s address to the Shanghai Library Association in 201 8.
https://www.sohu.com/a/29046 1007_6937 47.
44. Xiao Yong (肖勇), “中国科技情报 (科技信息) 事业与中国情报学的学科定位所在(I)--中国科技情报 (科技信息) 事
业 (S&T Intelligence (S&T Information) in China and Its Position within Chinese Intelligence (Information)
Science),” 图书情报工作 (Library and Information Service), 2009: 53 (1 8), pp. 52-55.
45. Zeng Jianxun (曾建勋), “基于国家科技管理平台的科技情报事业发展思考 (Reflections on the Development of the
STI Industry Based on the National Science and Technology Management Platform),” 情报学报 (Journal of
the China Society for Scientific and Technical Information), March 201 9: 38 (3), pp. 227-238.
46. Zeng Jianxun, Reflections on the Development of the STI Industry Based on the National Science and
Technology Management Platform.
47. We discuss the choice between “intelligence” and “information” as translations for the Chinese 情报
(qingbao) later in Section G.
48. 科技情报工作 (S&T Intelligence Work) and later 中国信息导报 (China Information Review).
49. Wu Heng (武衡), “周恩来对我国科学技术事业的关怀和指导 (Zhou Enlai’s Care and Guidance to China’s
Science and Technology Enterprise),” People‘s Daily Online, January 4, 2006.
50. Chen Zeqian (陈则谦) and Bai Xianyang (白献阳), “我国科技信息事业发展的轨迹 (The Locus of Development
for China’s S&T Information Enterprise),” 现代情报 (Journal of Modern Information), December 2007: 1 2.
pp. 1 1-1 5.
51. Hannas, William, James Mulvenon and Anna Puglisi, Chinese Industrial Espionage, Routledge, 201 3.
52. Guan and Zhang , “Review and Outlook for Scientific and Technological Information Undertaking of
China” and Chen and Bai, “The Locus of Development for China’s S&T Information Enterprise.”
53. Zhou Xiaoying (周晓英), et al., “中国科技情报事业发展历程与发展规律研究 (Research on the Development
Process and Law of Scientific and Technical Information Career in China,” 科技情报研究 (Scientific
Information Research), 201 9: 1(10), pp. 1 3-28.
54. 60 Years of Glory, p. 55, and Guan and Zhang, “Review and Outlook for Scientific and Technological
Information Undertaking of China,” 2007:25 (1), pp. 1-7.
55. Chen and Bai, “The Locus of Development for China’s S&T Information Enterprise.”
56. Chen Jiugeng (陈久庚), “我国科技信息服务系统的实力 (Actual Strength of S&T Information Service System in
China),” 中国信息导报 (China Information Review), 2006: 10, pp. 1 7-22.
57. Miao Qihao, “Technological and Industrial Intelligence in China: Development, Transition and
Perspectives.” In Prescott and Gibbons, eds., Global Perspectives on Competitive Intelligence, Alexandria,
VA: Society of Competitive Intelligence Professionals, 1 993.p. 49-53.
58. Op. cit.
59. Hannas, William, James Mulvenon and Anna Puglisi, Chinese Industrial Espionage, Routledge, 201 3.
60. 60 Years of Glory, p. 57 , and Guan and Zhang, “Review and Outlook for Scientific and Technological
Information Undertaking of China,” 2007:25 (1), pp. 1-7.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology48
61. “1 978-1 985年全国科学技术发展规划 (Regulations on National S&T Development 1 978-1 985).” State
Science and Technology Commission, 1 977.
62. The Publication Board (PB) of the Department of Commerce, the Armed Services Technical Information
Agency (AD) ASTIA Documents, NASA, and Department of Energy (DOE) reports. China’s exploitation of
the AD reports is discussed in CIE pp. 27-32.
63. 60 Years of Glory, p. 93-94.
64. 科技情报工作的科学技术. July 2, 1 983.
65. 国防科技情报工作条例. July 30, 1 984.
66. Adapted from CIE, chapter 2, with updates.
67. 关于调整和加强全国科技情报系统文献工作的意见, State Science and Technology Commission (国家科委),
January 1 989. Also, “国家科委关于调整和加强全国科技情报系统文献工作的意见,” 图书情报工作 (Library and
Information Service), 1 989: 33(3), pp. 42-44. Chinese terms are provided as per the original.
68. COSTIND expands to “Commission on Science and Technology Industry for National Defense.” COSTIND
became the State Administration for Science and Technology Industry for National Defense (SASTIND, 国家
国防科技工业局) in 2008.
69. China Defense Science and Technology Information Center (CDSTIC, 中国国防科技信息中心) until 201 7.
70. “Opinions on Restructuring and Strengthening National S&T Information System Document Work.” A more
recent taxonomy adds a fourth tier made up of some 3,600 “enterprise units” (企事业单位) at local levels
(http://www.baiven.com/baike/224/283 1 80.html).
71. www.nstl.gov.cn.
72. Liansheng Meng and Yan Quan Liu, “The Present and Future of China's National Science and Technology
Library: A New Paradigm of Sci-tech Information Resource Sharing,” New Library World, 2005: 106
(7/8), pp. 343-35 1.
73. Zhang Xuefu (张学福), “An Introduction of National Science and Technology Library of China (NSTL), June
2, 201 7. Zhang is a NSTL board member. The schematic agrees with our independent reconstruction of the
network in 201 3 (CIE, p. 34).
7 4. He Defang (贺德方), “我国科技情报行业发展方向的探讨 (Discussion on the Development Direction of STI
Industry in China),” 情报学报 (Journal of the China Society for Scientific and Technical Information), 2008:
27 (4), pp. 483-489.
75. CIE, pp. 41-42.
76. He Defang, “Discussion of the Development of STI Industry in China,” pages 483-489. See also and Zheng
Yanning (郑彦宁) and Song Zhenfeng (宋振峰), “我国科技情报行业现状与发展对策分析 (Present Condition
of China’s S&T Information Field and Analysis of Development Countermeasures),” 情报学报 (Journal of
the China Society for Scientific and Technical Information), 2008: 26 (5), pp. 790-795. Zheng and Song
acknowledge what most analysts of the Chinese system take for granted, namely, that information sources
are purchased once (if at all) and shared universally: “These member units follow the principle of ‘unified
procurement, standardized processing, joint internet access, and resource sharing.” (这些成员单位按照“统一
采购、规范加工、联合上网、 资源共享”的原则).
77. Hannas, CIE, pp. 35-36 and Chen, “Actual Strength of S&T Information Service System in China,” China
Information Review, October 2006.
78. Chen, “Actual Strength of S&T Information Service System in China,” China Information Review, 2006: 10,
pp. 1 7-22.
79. www.las.ac.cn.
80. The two organizations—NETL and ISTIC—typically are referenced together, or are treated as one and the
same. See 60 Years of Glory , pp. 273, 359.
81. Peng Yiqi,“隆重纪念国家科技图书文献中心成立二十周年 (Grand Commemoration of the 20th Anniversary of
NSTL’s Establishment),” 数字图书馆论坛 (Digital Library Forum), 2020: 7 , pp. 1-2.
82. Zeng Jianxun (曾建勋), “基于国家科技管理平台的科技情报事业发展思考 (Reflection on the Development of the
Scientific and Technical Information Industry Based on the National Science and Technology Management
Platform),” 情报学报 (Journal of the China Society for Scientific and Technical Information), 201 9: 38 (3),
pp. 227-238.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology 49
83. Chen Jiugeng, “Actual Strength of S&T Information Service System in China,” China Information Review,
2006: 10, pp. 1 7-22.
84. Xia Chengyu (夏承禹), “科技情报部门领导在新形势下的新角色 (A New Role for Leaders of S&T Information
Departments under the New Circumstances),” 科技进步与对策 (Science & Technology Progress and Policy),
2001: 1, pp. 104-105.
85. Wu Yishan (武夷山), “关于我国科技情报工作的几点思考 (Some Thoughts of China’s STI Work),” 中国科技资源
导刊 (China Science & Technology Resources Review), 2009: 41 (6), pp. 73-76.
86. Chen Jiugeng (陈久庚), “关于情报和信息 (On Intelligence and Information),” 情报杂志 (Journal of Intelligence),
2000: 1 9 (1). The concern was with overseas Chinese perceptions of ISTIC’s mission.
87. https://www.istic.ac.cn/isticcms/html/1/1 5 1/1 55/index.html. The NETL, a virtual organization, functions
through ISTIC’s Information Resource Center . ISTIC affirms the IRC “is responsible for the construction
and operation of the National Engineering and Technology Library.” https://www.istic.ac.cn/isticcms/
html/1/1 5 1/1 55/347.html.
88. The arrangement is not as far-fetched as it seems. Until 2005, the director of the U.S. Central Intelligence
Agency was dual-hatted as the “Director of Central Intelligence” (DCI), that is, the manager both of CIA and
the intelligence community (IC) of which CIA is a part. Similarly, ISTIC’s director is dual-hatted as the director of
NETL (国家工程技术图书馆设馆长一名，由中国科学技术信息研究所所长担任). 60 Years of Glory, p. 270.
89. https://www.istic.ac.cn/isticcms/html/1/1 5 1/1 52/409.html.
90. www.istic.ac.cn.
91. CIE, p. 37.
92. http://digitalpaper.stdaily.com/http_www.kjrb.com/kjrb/html/2016-10/1 5/content_35 1 387.htm?div=0,
https://www.istic.ac.cn/isticcms/html/1/1 5 1/1 55/347.html, accessed September 2020.
93. CIE, p. 37.
94. CIE, p.37.
95. http://www.most.gov.cn/zzjg/zzjgzs/zzjgsyzxs/.
96. http://www.itxww.com/html/english/istic_e2.htm. Accessed July 2020. Also 60 Years of Glory , pp. 326,
418 .
97. CIE, p. 38.
98. https://www.istic.ac.cn/isticcms/html/1/1 85/364/index.html.
99. https://www.istic.ac.cn/isticcms/html/1/357/359/index.html.
100. https://www.istic.ac.cn/isticcms/html/1/1 5 1/1 55/345.html.
101. https://www.istic.ac.cn/isticcms/html/1/1 5 1/1 55/346.html.
102. 60 Years of Glory, pp. 322, 373.
103. https://www.istic.ac.cn/isticcms/html/1/1 5 1/1 55/345.html.
104. https://www.istic.ac.cn/isticcms/html/1/1 5 1/1 55/353.html.
105. https://www.istic.ac.cn/isticcms/html/1/1 5 1/1 54/index.html.
106. http://www.safea.gov.cn/kjbgz/2016 10/t2016 1024_1 2832 1.htm.
107. Speech by Chen Chao (陈超), director of the Shanghai Institute of STI’s (上海科学技术情报研究所)
affiliated library, at the Shanghai Library Association 201 8 annual meeting (https://www.sohu.
com/a/29046 1007_6937 47).
108. Chen Dazhi (陈达植), “我国国防科技情报工作的回顾与展望 (Retrospect and Prospect of China’s National
Defense S&T Intelligence Work),” in 中国信息导报 (China Information Review), November 1 996, pp. 8-9.
109. http://mil.news.sina.com.cn/2004-03-1 8/1 1 301 88 1 43.html.
1 10. 国防科学技术情报工作条例 (Regulations on National Defense Science and Technology Information Work),
PRC State Council, July 1 984, Article 5.
111 . 国防科学技术情报工作条例 (Regulations on National Defense Science and Technology Information Work),
PRC State Council, July 1 984, Article 9.
1 1 2. 国防科学技术情报工作条例 (Regulations on National Defense Science and Technology Information Work),
PRC State Council, July 1 984, Article 8.
113 . Huo and Wang, Sources and Methods of Obtaining National Defense Science and Technology
Intelligence, 19 91.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology50
1 1 4. “钱学森国防科技情报信息系统建设研讨会举行 (Seminar Held on Qian Xuesen Construction of a National
Defense STI Information System ),” http://finance.china.com.cn/roll/201 1 1 2 1 5/426559.shtml, December
15 , 2 0 11 .
115 . http://www.gov.cn/gzdt/2007-05/29/content_629609.htm.
1 16. CIE, p. 40.
11 7 . CIE, pp. 40-41.
1 1 8. 中 国人民解放军装备科技信息工作条例 http://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2005-08/08/content_2 1 283.htm.
11 9 . “揭秘高科技成果背后的‘创新智囊’：中国国防科技信息中心 (Demystifying the ‘Innovation Brain Trust’ behind
High-tech Achievements: CDSTIC),” http://www.8 1.cn/jwgz/2016-03/23/content_6972538.htm.
1 20. http://www.yanzhaowang.com.cn/zhaosheng/gfkjxx/2065 1.html.
121. http://bj.offcn.com/html/2020/02/22 1 55 1.html.
1 22. http://bj.offcn.com/html/2020/02/22 1 55 1.html.
12 3 . “Tracking” (跟踪) has been a major goal of China’s STI enterprise since its inception in 1 956 on both
the civilian and military sides. See Zeng Jianxun (曾建勋), “基于国家科技管理平台的科技情报事业发展思考
(Reflection on the Development of the Scientific and Technical Information Industry Based on the National
Science and Technology Management Platform),” 情报学报 (Journal of the China Society for Scientific and
Technical Information), 201 9: 38 (3), pp. 227-238.
1 24. Huo and Wang, Sources and Methods, 1 99 1, chapter 1. References are to the English translation, done
some years ago by the present authors, whose online version lacks pagination. (https://fas.org/irp/
world/china/docs/sources.html).
12 5 . Li Gang (李剛), “从情报研究到智库研究 (From Intelligence Research to Think Tank Research),” 图书馆论坛
(Library Tribune), 201 7: 37 (9), pp. 50-54.
1 26. Qian Xuesen (钱学森), “科技情报工作的科学技术 (The Science and Technology of STI Work),” 国防科技情报工作
(National Defense S&T Intelligence Work), July 1 983, pp. 3-1 2.
127. Liu Zhihui (刘植惠), “情报学基础理论讲座第七讲钱学森同志关于情报学的新见解 (Lecture on Basic Theory of
Information Science, Lecture 7: Comrade Qian Xuesen's New Views on Information Science),” 情报理论与实
践 (Information Studies: Theory & Application), 1 988: (4), pp. 42-44.
1 28. Chen Jiugeng (陈久庚), “关于情报和信息 (On Intelligence and Information),” 情报杂志 (Journal of Intelligence)
January 2000, pp. 4-6 and 60 Years of Glory , p. 1 10.
12 9. Huo and Wang, Sources and Methods, 1 99 1, chapter 1.
1 30. Claude Shannon, “A Mathematical Theory of Communication,” Bell System Technical Journal, 1 948.
131. Huo and Wang, Sources and Methods, 1 99 1, chapter 1.
1 32. Huo and Wang, Sources and Methods, 1 99 1, chapter 1.
133 . Huo and Wang, Sources and Methods, 1 99 1, chapter 3.
1 34. Huo and Wang, Sources and Methods, 1 99 1, chapter 4.
135 . Huo and Wang, Sources and Methods, 1 99 1, chapter 1.
1 36. https://fas.org/irp/world/china/docs/sources_chap1.html.
137. https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/csi-studies/index.html.
1 38. “ 2019军队文职人员招聘军事科学院军事科学信息研究中心职位表” posted to China’s Military-Civilian Personnel
Recruitment Network (军队文职人员招聘网), http://jzg.huatu.com/jdwz/zwk/bj/bm25.html.
13 9. 2020中国人民解放军军事科学院军事科学信息研究中心招聘. http://bj.offcn.com/html/2020/02/22 1 55 1.
html.
1 40. https://baike.baidu.com/item/情报学报.
141. https://baike.baidu.com/item/中国科技资源导刊.
1 42. http://tie.istic.ac.cn/qbgc/ch/first_menu.aspx?parent_id=201 50323095003001.
1 43. https://baike.baidu.com/item/情报理论与实践.
1 44. https://baike.baidu.com/item/情报杂志.
1 45. https://baike.baidu.com/item/现代情报.
1 46. https://baike.baidu.com/item/情报资料工作.
147. http://www.yuez.net/qikan/xinxikeji/95 16.html.
1 48. http://www.las.cas.cn/xscbw/tsqbgz/.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
149. 科技管理研究 (Science and Technology Management Research) and 科技进步与对策 (Science and
Technology Progress and Policy) both out of Guangdong.
1 50. 省级科技情报机构是我国科技情报行业的中坚力量和支撑力量. Liu Mingzhu (刘明珠), “基于期刊论文的我国省
级科技情报机构科研现状分析 (Analysis on Research Status of Provincial S&T Intelligence Agencies in China
Based on Journal Articles),” Nanjing University M.A. thesis, 201 9.
151. Liu Mingzhu, Analysis on Research Status of Provincial S&T Intelligence Agencies in China Based on Journal
Articles, 201 9.
1 52. Peng Yiqi (彭以祺), “传承发展续写辉煌——隆重纪念国家科技图书文献中心成立二十周年 (Inheritance
and Development Continue to Write Brilliant--Grand Commemoration of the 20th Anniversary of the
Establishment of the National Science and Technology Library),” 数字图书馆论坛 (Digital Library Forum),
2020: 7 , pp. 1-2.
1 53. Xiaomu Xu and Ling Leng, “Narrowing the Gap of the Digital Divide: How NSTL Contributes,” 16th IFLA
ILDS Conference 201 9: Beyond the Paywall, Praha (CZ), October 9, 201 9. Xu and Leng are both at CAS
National Science Library in Beijing. (https://repozitar.techlib.cz/record/1 378/files/idr-1 378_1_paper.
pdf).
1 54. https://baike.baidu.com/item/中国科学技术情报学会.
1 55. Yuan Youxiong (袁有雄) and Zhang Xiaoqi (张晓祺), “中国国防科学技术信息学会第五次会员代表大会召开 (Fifth
Member Representative Conference of the China National Defense Science and Technology Information
Society Held),” February 26, 201 4 (http://www.mod.gov.cn/academy/201 4-02/26/content_4492855.
htm).
1 56. “Strategic and Competitive Intelligence Professionals”, formerly the “Society of Competitive Intelligence
Professionals” (https://www.scip.org/).
157. Authors’ personal recollection.
1 58. https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/hpsci_china_deep_dive_redacted_summary_9.29.20.pdf.
1 59. The IP Commission Report, The Theft of American Intellectual Property: Reassessments of the Challenge
and United States Policy, February 201 9. Wm. C. Hannas, James Mulvenon, and Anna B. Puglisi, Chinese
Industrial Espionage (London and New York: Routledge, 201 3). Michael Brown and Pavneet Singh,
“China’s Technology Transfer Strategy” (Washington, DC: Defense Innovation Unit Experimental, February
201 7). Office of the United States Trade Representative, “Section 301 Report into China’s Acts, Policies, and
Practices Related to Technology Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation,” March 27 , 201 8. U.S.-
China Economic and Security Review Commission, “201 9 Annual Report to Congress,” November 201 9.
Anastasya Lloyd-Damnjanovic and Alexander Bowe, “Overseas Chinese Students and Scholars in China’s
Drive for Innovation,” U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, October 7 , 2020.
160. Congressional Research Service, “The Global Research and Development Landscape and Implications for
the Department of Defense,” updated November 8, 201 8 (https://fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/R45403.pdf).
161. Wm. C. Hannas and Huey-Meei Chang, “China AI-Brain Research,” Georgetown University, Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, September 2020.
162. Gryphon Scientific, “China’s Biotechnology Development: The Role of U.S. and Other Foreign
Engagement,” A report prepared for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, February
1 4, 201 9 (https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Research/US-China%20Biotech%20Report.pdf)
and Editorial Staff, “The Next Biotech Superpower,” Nature Biotechnology 37 , 1 243 (201 9) (https://www.
nature.com/articles/s41 587-01 9-03 16-7#citeas).
Center for Security and Emerging Technology 51

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
CSET.GEORGETOWN.EDU | CSET@GEORGETOWN.EDU
