
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Issue Br ief
Oct ober 202 4
F ueling China ’s
Inno v ation
The Chinese A cadem y of
Sciences and Its R ole in
t he PR C’s S&T Ecosyst em
Aut hor s
Cole McF aul
Hanna Dohmen
Sam Br esnic k
Emil y S. W einst ein

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 1

1
Executive Summary
The Chinese Academy of Sciences is one of the most important scientific research
organizations not only in China but also globally. Through its network of research
institutes, universities, companies, and think tanks, CAS is a core component of China’s
science and technology innovation ecosystem. This brief first traces the organization’s
historical significance in China’s S&T development, outlining key reforms that continue
to shape the institution today. It then details CAS’s core functions in advancing S&T
research, fostering commercialization of critical and emerging technologies, and
contributing to S&T policymaking. Using scholarly literature, we provide insights into
CAS’s research output in the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) fields as well as in certain critical and emerging technologies, including
artificial intelligence (AI).
Our key takeaways are as follows:
Research
• CAS is the top producer of STEM research globally, both in terms of total
number of papers and number of highly cited papers.
• CAS is a hub of top-tier S&T researchers and plays an important role in training
the next generation of experts. In 2022, CAS ranked second globally among
institutions by number of top-cited researchers, trailing only Harvard University.
• CAS’s 115 research institutes work on a diverse range of S&T subjects. CAS
institutes publish most frequently in the field of industrial technology, which
accounted for 35 percent of their published papers in 2021.
• CAS institutes also advance research in critical and emerging technologies, such
as AI. The majority of AI-related research published by CAS is conducted by a
narrow subset of institutes. The Institute of Automation, the Shenyang Institute
of Automation, and the Institute of Computing Technology are top producers of
AI-related research within CAS.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2

2
Commercialization
• CAS fosters technology transfer from research organizations to industry through
various commercialization mechanisms, including making investments via asset
management companies and venture capital firms, licensing proprietary
research, and offering contract research services.
• CAS provides research, financing, and personnel to support the founding and
development of technology companies.
• Notable companies founded with CAS support include AI company iFLYTEK, PC
manufacturer Lenovo, supercomputer company Sugon, AI chip developer
Cambricon, and CPU designer Loongson.
Policymaking
• CAS plays a key role in the development and implementation of China’s S&T
policies. CAS has contributed to major S&T policy initiatives such as the
founding of the National Natural Science Foundation of China and to S&T
development projects such as the 863 Program and the 973 Program.
• CAS academicians are among the most important individuals in China’s S&T
ecosystem. They influence resource allocation to S&T projects and often serve in
important policymaking roles.
In sum, CAS is a global leader in STEM fields and a pillar of China’s S&T
development ecosystem. It has facilitated the rise of globally competitive
technology companies and continues to influence China’s S&T policy. At the same
time, CAS’s expansive set of responsibilities as a research organization, a
commercial entity, and a bureaucratic actor complicate its mission. Understanding
the tensions that may exist among these functions is important, as Beijing continues
to commit extensive resources to CAS. The organization’s success—or lack
thereof—will affect Beijing’s own ability to effectively achieve its S&T development
ambitions.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3

3
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ 1
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................... 4
Methodology ............................................................................................................................................ 5
History, Development, and Reform ................................................................................................... 7
The Early Days: Defense S&T and Building on the Soviet Model ................................... 7
Reform and Revitalization ............................................................................................................ 8
Examining CAS’s Core Functions: Research, Commercialization, and Policymaking..... 10
Advancing S&T Research .......................................................................................................... 10
CAS Research on the Global Stage ............................................................................... 13
CAS Institutes ....................................................................................................................... 17
Fostering Commercialization of Critical Technologies ..................................................... 22
Case Study: iFLYTEK ................................................................................................... 23
Case Study: Lenovo ..................................................................................................... 24
Advising S&T Policymaking ...................................................................................................... 25
Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................. 27
Appendix A: Additional Figures ...................................................................................................... 29
Appendix B: List of CAS Institutes ................................................................................................. 33
Authors .................................................................................................................................................... 40
Acknowledgments............................................................................................................................... 40
Endnotes…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………42

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4

4
Introduction
The Chinese Academy of Sciences (中国科学院) is a key actor in China’s science and
technology ecosystem. Directly managed by the State Council, CAS plays a critical role
in advancing Beijing’s S&T ambitions and is deeply involved in shaping and
implementing national policies.1 As technological innovation is a core aspect of the
intensifying competition between the United States and China, it is imperative that U.S.
policymakers understand CAS’s contributions to China’s S&T development.
In this brief, we seek to advance a better understanding of CAS, which is one of the
largest and most prolific research bodies in the world and home to many top science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) researchers.2 CAS oversees
hundreds of subsidiary organizations, including 115 research units,* three universities,
numerous companies, and several think tanks. Comprising an expansive network of
researchers, students, and policymakers, CAS directly contributes to both the design
and implementation of Chinese S&T policies.
This brief proceeds as follows. First, we describe CAS’s history and trace successive
reforms to the institution, highlighting its role in China’s rise as a major S&T power. We
then detail CAS’s core functions in China’s S&T ecosystem: advancing research,
promoting the commercialization of key technologies, and contributing to
policymaking. We conclude with an examination of CAS’s central position in China’s
S&T ecosystem and its implications for U.S. policymakers.

* Throughout this piece, we refer to CAS’s research units (研究单位) as CAS institutes.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5

5
Methodology
Our analysis draws on a variety of publicly available sources, including Chinese
government policy documents, annual reports of publicly listed companies, and an
array of other primary and secondary sources. Our analysis of CAS’s research output
relies on two distinct data sources to present trends in CAS’s English- and Chinese-
language STEM research.
First, we draw from CSET’s merged corpus of scholarly literature published between
2010 and 2023, which includes journal articles, also referred to in this brief as papers,
from Clarivate’s Web of Science, Semantic Scholar, the Lens, OpenAlex, arXiv, and
Papers With Code. CSET’s merged corpus primarily consists of English-language
journal articles. We use CSET’s fields of study methodology to classify papers by
field.3 We focus on CAS’s STEM research because one of the organization’s core
responsibilities is advancing China’s S&T development and self-reliance.* We define
STEM publications as papers in the fields of biology, physics, geology, mathematics,
chemistry, computer science, engineering, environmental science, and materials
science.
Second, we leverage data from the China National Knowledge Infrastructure, which is
largely composed of Chinese-language papers, to analyze CAS’s STEM publications
within China’s domestic research ecosystem. For this report, we draw on CNKI papers
published between 2010 and 2021.† For CNKI papers, we define STEM publications as
those in the fields of industrial technology, astronomy and geoscience, agricultural
sciences, mathematical sciences and chemistry, environmental science, life sciences,
aviation and aerospace, and transportation.‡ Finally, we use the CNKI dataset to
classify AI-related publications in order to better understand CAS’s contributions to
China’s AI development ecosystem.4
By analyzing both CSET’s merged corpus and CNKI, we are able to conduct a more
comprehensive analysis of CAS’s research output. Using the merged corpus, we assess
CAS’s research output alongside that of other global research institutions. CNKI, on the
other hand, includes more detailed paper publication information for each subsidiary

* We are also particularly interested in CAS’s contributions to AI-related research and development,
given its strategic importance to Beijing and relevance in U.S.-China tech competition.
† We are unable to analyze CNKI publication data in 2022 and 2023 due to incomplete data.
‡ CNKI employs the Chinese Library Classification system, which categorizes publications by subject
field. Every paper in CNKI receives a CLC code that corresponds to a specific field of study. The CLC
fields of study are not the same as those used in CSET’s merged corpus.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6

6
organization within CAS, which allows us to analyze the publications of specific
entities, such as its 115 research institutes.
That said, our methodological approach has some limitations. First, our dataset of CAS
research is not exhaustive. Within both CSET’s merged corpus and CNKI, CAS research
is often attributed to the organization’s subsidiaries, rather than to CAS itself. As a
result, querying the datasets for publications strictly attributed to CAS would miss a
significant portion of CAS-affiliated research. To address this issue, we use two
approaches. First, CSET’s entity resolution methodology helps to match subsidiaries to
their parent organizations in the merged corpus dataset. Second, we use CNKI-
provided organizational information to carefully identify all the publications of each
CAS institute, which is not possible using the merged corpus data. This methodology
enables a more comprehensive assessment of CAS’s research. At the same time, our
methodology does not capture all publications of every CAS subsidiary organization.
For example, our analysis of the CAS institutes’ publications does not account for some
CAS-authored research papers published by other CAS subsidiary organizations, such
as universities and laboratories.
Second, we use several proxies for evaluating research quality, such as highly cited
research publications, top-cited research publications, and number of top-cited
researchers.* Although imperfect, these metrics allow us to compare measures of high-
impact research and researchers for CAS with those of other international research
institutions. Importantly, these metrics do not provide insight into the production of
highly cited research relative to size, research expenditures, or other relevant factors
that may contribute to the output of research institutions. While important to consider,
these cross-institutional analyses are largely outside the scope of this report.

* We define highly cited papers as papers in at least the 90th percentile of citations in their field in a
given year, top-cited papers as papers in the 99th percentile of citations in their field in a given year, and
top-cited researchers as in the 99th percentile of individual researchers most frequently cited in their
field and year.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7

7
History, Development, and Reform
Established in November 1949, CAS has played an instrumental role in laying the
foundation for China’s modern S&T ecosystem. Tracing CAS’s history of development
and reform is essential to understanding its position in Chinese S&T development
today.
The Early Days: Defense S&T and Building on the Soviet Model
In the 1950s, the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union strongly influenced CAS’s
development.5 Collaboration with the Soviet Union helped propel China’s strategic
weapons development programs. In February 1953, for example, a delegation of
Chinese scientists led by the director of the Institute of Physics of CAS traveled to the
Soviet Union to discuss atomic research collaboration.6 In 1957, CAS and the Soviet
Academy of Sciences signed joint agreements to construct nuclear reactors in
Chongqing, Xi’an, Beijing, and Shenyang.7
CAS played a critical role in China’s strategic weapons and space technologies
development throughout the 1950s and 1960s. At the instruction of Premier Zhou
Enlai (周恩来), CAS made significant contributions to China’s “Nuclear Bombs, Ballistic
Missiles, and Earth Satellites” (两弹一星) program, which led to the development of the
country’s nuclear and space capabilities.8
Another example of CAS’s success in supporting Chinese military modernization
occurred in March 1965, when the Chinese Communist Party tasked CAS with
developing a guidance computer for long-range missiles, called Project 156.9 The
consortium of six CAS institutes working on the project formed the Xi’an
Microelectronics Technology Institute (also known as the 771 Institute; 西安微电子技术
研究所) in 1975, which developed into an important supplier of computing and
microelectronics products to the People’s Liberation Army.10 Notably, ZTE (中兴通讯股
份有限公司), one of the largest telecommunications companies in the world, was spun
out of the Xi’an Microelectronics Technology Institute in the early 1980s.11

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8

8
Reform and Revitalization
In the 1970s and 1980s, CAS suffered from an aging workforce, insufficient research
facilities, and outdated research agendas, all of which hampered its ability to advance
indigenous innovation and other S&T development priorities.12 During the 1980s,
national reforms decreased government funding for research institutions and
incentivized the organization to become more responsive to market competition. These
reforms discouraged CAS entities from undertaking large-scale research projects with
uncertain commercial outcomes and ultimately led to the underfunding of CAS’s basic
research activities.13
In the late 1990s, responding to Beijing’s calls to strengthen China’s national research
capabilities, CAS initiated a series of efforts to expand its role in China’s innovation
ecosystem.14 The most significant of these efforts was the Knowledge Innovation
Program (中国科学院知识创新工程), a set of initiatives and reforms intended to address
fundamental issues within CAS and develop it into one of the world’s top scientific
research institutions.15
The KIP reduced the number of CAS institutes by converting some into commercial
entities and reorganized others to address overlapping research missions.16 The KIP
included several initiatives to bolster CAS’s research workforce, such as expanding
training for graduate students, introducing stringent evaluation requirements for
researchers, and leveraging national-level initiatives like the Hundred Talents Program
(百人计划) to recruit top scientists from abroad.17 Later, the KIP encouraged
collaborations between CAS and provincial and city governments to support local
innovation, leading to the creation of seven new institutes.18 By the end of the 12-year
program, CAS reemerged as a hub of basic research and S&T development in China.19
In 2011, CAS unveiled a new initiative called Innovation 2020 (创新 2020), which
aimed to continue the work of the KIP and further strengthen China’s S&T ecosystem.
Innovation 2020 focused on improving international collaborations, including through
deepening scientific partnerships with developed nations and promoting cooperation
with developing countries.20 As part of the KIP, CAS played an active role in China’s
Belt and Road Initiative. For example, between 2013 and 2019, it provided around 268
million USD in funding for BRI S&T projects and initiated collaborative research with
over 40 institutions from 14 BRI partner countries.21
CAS’s 13th Five-Year Plan (2016–2020) placed greater emphasis on converting basic
research into commercial technologies that can help drive economic growth.22 During
this period, CAS established joint research and development (R&D) centers with major

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9

9
industry players, set up business incubators for startups, improved patenting processes
and standards, and further promoted collaboration with local governments. It also
reformed its performance assessment system—which directly affects resource
allocations—to place a greater emphasis on conducting impactful, high-quality
research, replacing its previous focus on using quantitative metrics to evaluate
impact.23
Since the 1950s, CAS has been a key driver of S&T development in China. Successive
reforms over the past four decades have led to CAS’s modernization and have better
aligned incentive structures to advance domestic S&T innovation. These reforms have
also promoted CAS’s integration into the international scientific landscape. In the
following section, we build on this context to outline CAS’s contemporary
contributions to China’s S&T ecosystem.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10

10
Examining CAS’s Core Functions: Research, Commercialization, and
Policymaking
In this section, we examine CAS’s three main functions: advancing research in critical
fields, fostering the commercialization and adoption of key technologies, and aiding in
the development and implementation of China’s S&T policy initiatives. In the first
section on CAS’s role in driving research, we detail the organization’s size, funding, and
research output in the context of other leading global research institutions. We also
include analysis of the CAS institutes’ research activities by field of study to better
understand CAS’s research output in the context of China’s STEM ecosystem, paying
special attention to the institutes’ AI-related publications. The second section
describes CAS’s role in fostering the commercialization of key technologies and
highlights several key case studies of successful CAS spin-off companies. The third
section describes CAS’s role in shaping Chinese S&T policy.
Advancing S&T Research
One of CAS’s primary responsibilities is to advance China’s S&T research capabilities in
order to strengthen the national innovation ecosystem, boost technological self-
reliance, and help China become a global leader in STEM research.24 CAS oversees
115 institutes, which advance research across a wide range of critical fields. CAS also
directly manages two universities, the University of Science and Technology of China
(USTC) and the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS), and co-
administers ShanghaiTech University with the Shanghai Municipal People’s
Government.25 Additionally, CAS is an important actor in China’s State Key Laboratory
system, which is composed of hundreds of research facilities tasked with conducting
cutting-edge research and fostering cooperation among universities, research
institutes, and companies.26 CAS oversees 83 (roughly 30 percent) of China’s
government-managed SKLs, many of which are co-located with CAS institutes and
universities.27 Finally, CAS sponsors 267 academic journals, some of which are
published by Springer and Oxford Academic.28
Taken together, these universities, research institutes, and SKLs form a network of
research entities that work in concert to advance scientific progress and bolster China’s
STEM workforce. CAS universities, for example, work with CAS institutes and CAS
SKLs to provide students with opportunities to contribute to research projects. Some
scientists at CAS institutes and SKLs serve as part-time department leaders at CAS
universities or otherwise contribute to CAS’s talent training system.29 According to
CAS, it employs around 71,000 individuals, almost 62,000 of whom are professional
researchers. Around 79,000 graduate students study at CAS and its universities.30

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 11

11

CAS is an important hub for basic research in China. CAS-affiliated researchers
account for 40 percent of all principal investigators overseeing scientific research
funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC; 国家自然科学基金
委员会).31 As of May 2016, CAS oversaw 80 percent of China’s large-scale science
facilities, including the China Spallation Neutron Source in Dongguan, which supports
research on physics and materials science, among other fields, and the Experimental
Advanced Superconducting Tokamak in Hefei, which facilitates research on nuclear
fusion technology.32
Figure 1 shows CAS’s basic R&D expenditures between 2012 and 2023, collected
from CAS’s annual budget reports. CAS’s basic R&D expenditures have nearly
quadrupled since 2012 and have grown markedly in the last few years, increasing from
36 billion RMB (5.6 billion USD) in 2021 to 62.8 billion RMB (8.9 billion USD) in
2023.33

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 12

12
Figure 1. CAS Basic R&D Expenditure and Percent of China’s Total Basic R&D
Expenditure, 2012-2023

Source: CAS Budget (2012–2023), National Bureau of Statistics.34
Figure 1 underscores CAS’s consequential role in China’s basic research ecosystem. As
shown above, CAS’s basic R&D expenditures accounted for 28 percent of all such
spending in China in 2023. While this proportion has declined from its 2014 peak, CAS
remains a key actor in China’s basic research landscape.
At the same time, these figures should be understood within the broader context of
China’s R&D environment, which continues to favor expenditures on later-stage
projects over basic research. Moreover, China’s proportional spending on basic R&D
continues to trail that of other leading S&T countries. According to a 2018 U.S.
National Science Foundation study, for example, China’s basic R&D expenditure
accounted for just 5 percent of total R&D spending, the lowest of any surveyed
country.35 In the United States, basic R&D spending accounted for 16 percent of all
R&D expenditures in 2018.36
In short, CAS is a major player in China’s R&D efforts, driving S&T advancements
through its vast network of institutes, universities, and SKLs. The organization also
contributes to the training of China’s next generation of scientists, oversees major basic

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 13

13
research projects, and manages large-scale scientific facilities. To provide further
insight into CAS’s research contributions, we examine its research output in STEM
fields in the following section.
CAS Research on the Global Stage
CAS is the world’s top producer of STEM research in terms of volume of papers
produced, ahead of the French National Centre for Scientific Research and the
University of California system (see Figure A1 in Appendix A), according to our
analysis of CSET’s merged corpus data. Since 2012, CAS has also topped the annual
Nature Index, which ranks the top five hundred global research institutions based on
counts of papers published in top international natural science and health science
journals.37 In 2023, UCAS and USTC—the two universities managed by CAS—ranked
fifth and seventh on the Nature Index, respectively.38
Even when only accounting for highly cited STEM papers, CAS tops all other global
research institutions.* We focus on highly cited papers, as previous bibliometric
research has found that citations can be an indicator, albeit an imperfect one, of
relatively high-impact research.39 As previous research has shown, Chinese
researchers are strongly incentivized to write and publish frequently.40 This dynamic
has led to a proliferation of low-quality papers published, sometimes by so-called
paper mills that eschew rigorous reviews in favor of charging authors fees in order to
publish papers.41 Yet, as shown in Figure 2, CAS researchers are producing an
increasing number of highly cited papers relative to other global research institutions.

* We define highly cited papers as papers in at least the 90th percentile of citations in their field in a
given year.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 14

14
Figure 2. Top Research Institutions by Highly Cited STEM Publications, 2010–2022

Source: CSET Merged Corpus.
Note: See Figure A2 in Appendix A for the top 15 global research organizations for counts of both total
and highly cited STEM papers.
Between 2010 and 2022, CAS’s highly cited STEM research output more than
doubled, its growth outpacing other leading global hubs of STEM research. Highly
cited STEM papers from the University of California system and Harvard University
increased only modestly over the same period, and yearly publications of highly cited
papers from the other four institutions shown in Figure 2 have declined since 2020,
likely due in part to the COVID-19 pandemic. In contrast, the number of CAS’s highly
cited STEM research publications has not declined nearly as much. Accounting only for
top-cited STEM papers, our research shows that CAS passed the University of
California system, the largest university system in the United States, in 2018.* Figure
A3 in Appendix A shows the growth in top-cited STEM papers over time among the
leading five producers of top-cited research in the world.

* We define top-cited papers as papers in the 99th percentile of citations in their field in a given year.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 15

15
Not only is CAS a leading global research institution in terms of highly cited and top-
cited STEM research, but individual CAS researchers are often among the leaders in
their fields. Since 2014, Clarivate has published an annual list of top-cited researchers,
which tracks the affiliations of individuals that rank within the top 1 percent of the
most frequently cited researchers in their field and year.42 Clarivate’s list of top-cited
researchers includes both STEM and non-STEM fields. As Figure 3 shows, the number
of top-cited researchers affiliated with CAS has increased dramatically over the past
decade, growing from 39 in 2014 to 211 in 2023, trailing only the number of those at
Harvard University.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 16

16
Figure 3. Highly Cited Researchers by Institution, 2014–2023

Source: Clarivate.43
Note: In earlier years, highly cited researchers were not aggregated for the University of California
system (aggregated after 2018), the National Institutes of Health (aggregated after 2018), and the Max
Planck Society (aggregated after 2015).
To be sure, readers should be judicious when drawing conclusions from the above
figures, as the featured institutions are not immediately comparable without additional
context. Among other differences, the size of these institutions varies, both in terms of
research expenditures and number of researchers. Harvard University and Stanford
University, for example, both spent around 1.3 billion USD on R&D in 2022, compared
to CAS’s more than 15 billion USD.44 As of 2019, Harvard reported 7,579 R&D

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 17

17
personnel, much smaller than the 56,000 reported by CAS.45 On the other hand, in
both total operating budget and number of faculty and staff, CAS is smaller than the
University of California system.46 In short, while our data allows us to assess measures
of STEM research output, we do not offer analysis of leading research institutions’
publications relative to other important factors, including R&D expenditures and
number of R&D personnel.
Still, the data presented above suggests CAS is publishing not only more STEM
research papers but also a growing share of the world’s most highly cited research.
Over the last decade, the number of highly cited CAS publications and researchers has
increased substantially, representing a rise in impactful research. CAS institutes have
played an especially important role in fostering CAS’s growth in high-quality research.
We further detail the function and research output of the CAS institutes below.
CAS Institutes
CAS institutes are tasked with leading China’s basic and applied research to solve
major strategic and technological challenges, boost China’s S&T self-reliance efforts,
and make China’s S&T ecosystem more internationally competitive.47 The 115 CAS
institutes are spread across 25 provinces and municipalities, with 35 in Beijing, 15 in
Shanghai, and seven in both Jiangsu and Guangdong (see Appendix B for a complete
list of CAS institutes). Below, we turn our attention to the role CAS institutes play in
advancing STEM research within China’s S&T ecosystem and provide some
quantitative measures of their research output. We pay particular attention to the
institutes’ research output in critical and emerging technology fields, including in AI, to
better understand CAS’s efforts to advance China’s capabilities in technologies
deemed strategically important by Beijing.
While each institute is responsible for its own research and administration, CAS
headquarters oversees the CAS institute system. CAS appoints each institute’s
leadership, authorizes research strategies, allocates resources, and assesses research
output quality and performance. All CAS institutes are expected to adhere to the “One-
Three-Five” guideline, which instructs them to have one R&D direction, to make three
major breakthroughs within five to 10 years, and to establish five key line-of-research
priorities every five years.48 As a result of this organizational structure, each CAS
institute specializes in specific scientific areas.
In addition to their role in advancing S&T research, CAS institutes help develop China’s
S&T workforce by providing graduate students with training and hands-on research
opportunities. For example, UCAS offers a “two-stage” (两段式) program, which

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 18

18
allows graduate students to first take courses at the university and then complete
degree-related scientific research at one of the CAS institutes.49 Moreover, some
faculty hold joint appointments at a CAS university and a CAS institute, helping to
bring additional scientific expertise from practicing scientists directly into the
classroom.50 Several CAS institutes offer graduate degree programs, sometimes in
partnership with neighboring universities.51 These mechanisms provide graduate
students enrolled at CAS universities with valuable research experience and access to
scientific research facilities.
Below, we draw on CNKI data to assess the 115 CAS institutes’ publications by field
of study. Each scientific paper in CSET’s repository of CNKI data includes information
about the authors and their organizational affiliations. Some CAS-affiliated authors
may list their affiliation to a certain CAS institute but not to CAS itself. By assessing
the publications attributed to CAS institutes, we are able to capture a more
comprehensive sample of CAS-affiliated research within China’s S&T research
ecosystem.
In Figure 4, we present the STEM papers of the CAS institutes alongside those of the
top fifteen research organizations that appear in CSET’s CNKI dataset. Taken together,
CAS institutes are the most prolific producers of STEM research in China,
demonstrating the importance of CAS-affiliated research organizations in China’s S&T
ecosystem. Although the research institutions in Figure 4 are not directly comparable,
as they each vary in size and structure, it is nonetheless noteworthy that the CAS
institutes produced more than three times as many STEM publications as the next
leading Chinese research institution. The CAS institutes accounted for 178,318 papers
published between 2010 and 2021, over 125,000 more than Tongji University, the
second largest producer of STEM research in China. UCAS—the largest of the three
CAS-managed universities—ranked third.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 19

19
Figure 4. STEM Paper Publications by Top Publishers in China, 2010–2021

Source: CNKI.
The research output of the CAS institutes encompasses a wide range of disciplines.
Reflecting CAS’s focus on research in critical and emerging technology fields, CAS
institutes published most often in the industrial technology field, which encompasses
technologies related to autonomy, information and communication technologies,
chemical engineering, and more. Industrial technology accounted for 35 percent of
CAS institute papers in 2021, followed by astronomy and geoscience, environmental
science, and agricultural sciences. See Figure A4 in Appendix A for CAS institute
papers over time by field. Figure 5 shows CAS industrial technology papers by
subfield. CAS institutes published most frequently in the subfield of automation and
computer technology, which includes AI-related research, followed by radio electronics
and telecommunications technology and chemical engineering.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 20

20
Figure 5. CAS Institutes Industrial Technology Papers by Subfield, 2010–2021

Source: CNKI.
CAS is especially important to China’s AI research. According to China’s New
Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology Industry Development Report 2022,
published by the Chinese Institute of New Generation Artificial Intelligence
Development Strategies, CAS is a key node within China’s AI innovation network and
an important source of basic research for China’s top AI companies.52 Our analysis of
the research output of the CAS institutes further supports CAS’s role in China’s AI
ecosystem. Between 2010 and 2021, the CAS institutes published 23,431 AI-related
papers in STEM fields, more than twice as many as Wuhan University, the second
leading Chinese institution in AI-related publications. See Figure A5 in Appendix A for
the top ten publishers of AI-related publications in China.
Some CAS institutes are focused on advancing AI research. The Institute of
Automation (自动化研究所), the Shenyang Institute of Automation (沈阳自动化研究所),
and the Institute of Computing Technology (计算技术研究所) are among the top
producers of AI-related research within CAS. Over half of all papers published by
these institutes were AI-related, as shown in Figure 6.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 21

21
Figure 6. CAS Institutes by Percentage of AI-Related Papers, 2010–2021

Source: CNKI.
Note: This figure only includes CAS institutes that published at least one hundred AI-related papers
between 2010 and 2021.
Notably, a small number of CAS institutes conducted the majority of CAS’s total
published AI-related research. Eight of them accounted for half of all AI-related papers
published by CAS institutes between 2010 and 2021. This degree of specialization
likely reflects their adherence to the “One-Three-Five” guideline, which encourages
CAS institutes to deepen their expertise in more specialized research fields.
As shown above, CAS is a hub for top-tier S&T talent and a leader in STEM research,
both on the global stage and within China’s domestic innovation ecosystem. But CAS
is not only a research institution. In the following section, we highlight CAS’s efforts to
commercialize research in key technology areas.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 22

22
Fostering Commercialization of Critical Technologies
A top priority for Beijing, commercializing S&T research is another of CAS’s core
functions. The CAS 13th Five-Year Plan stipulates that the organization incubate five
thousand “‘popular entrepreneurship and mass innovation’ enterprises, strengthen and
expand a batch of globally competitive innovative enterprises and ‘hidden champion’
(隐形冠军) enterprises, and provide the ‘four technology’ services (technology
development, technology ownership transfer, technology consulting, and technology
services) for no less than 20,000 enterprises.”53 Moreover, in recent years CAS has
implemented policies urging universities and research institutes to allow academics to
work part-time at companies and has added technology transfer metrics to the
research institution evaluation system.54 These efforts suggest that CAS is redoubling
its efforts to be a bridge between basic and applied research initiatives, as well as to
promote technology diffusion and adoption.
CAS has various commercialization mechanisms at its disposal to encourage
technology transfer from research institutions to industry. These include offering
contract research services, licensing proprietary technology, launching new companies
out of CAS institutes, providing industry access to CAS research facilities, and
providing financing for companies through investment mechanisms.55
Chinese Academy of Sciences Holding Co., Ltd. (中国科学院控股有限公司), for instance,
is CAS’s primary investment arm. Established in 2002, CASH invests in five key
sectors: new materials, energy, and environmental protection; technology services and
financial technology; publishing and media; high-end equipment; and information
technology.56 CAS also operates a venture capital investment arm—CAS Investment
Management Co., Ltd. (中国科技产业投资管理有限公司)—which primarily makes early-
stage investments in areas such as biotechnology, medical technology, AI, battery
technology, semiconductors, and aerospace.57
USTC, one of the universities CAS manages, also funds a state-owned asset
management company called USTC Holdings Company Limited (中科大资产经营有限
责任公司), which is responsible for the commercialization of scientific research and
management of university assets. According to its website, USTC Holdings owns
stakes in more than 20 companies, including iFLYTEK.58

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 23

23
Commercialization: CAS University Spin-Off
Case Study: iFLYTEK
In 1999, a group of USTC students founded iFLYTEK —an AI company known for
voice-recognition technology —using a prototype of speech synthesis technology
first created at a lab at USTC. 59 Since the company’s founding, iFLYTEK and USTC
have maintained close research, workforce, and financial ties. For example, iFLYTEK
and USTC jointly built the National Engineering Research Center of Speech and
Language Information Processing (语音及语言信息处理国家工程研究中心 ), and in
2021 together participated in the Open Automatic Speech Recognition Challenge
organized by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology. 60 The two
entities also maintain workforce - and education -development programs through
on-campus training mechanisms and encouraging iFLYTEK employees to serve as
part-time doctoral advis ers. 61 USTC Holdings is iFLYTEK’s fourth largest
shareholder, and the chairman and founder of iFLYTEK holds professorial and
supervisory positions at USTC and is the chairperson of CAS’s Artificial Intelligence
Industry-University-Research Innovation Alliance (中科院人工智能产学研创新联
盟).62 Notably, iFLYTEK is listed on the U.S. Commerce Department’s Bureau of
Industry and Security’s (BIS) Entity List for its role in enabling the surveillance of
Uyghurs in Xinjiang.63
Some CAS institutes also manage their own investment companies. For example, the
Institute of Computing Technology—which is on the BIS Entity List “for acquiring and
attempting to acquire U.S.-origin items in support of China’s military modernization”—
operates Beijing Zhongke Suanyuan Asset Management Co., Ltd. (北京中科算源资产管
理有限公司), a wholly owned asset management company focused on computing
technology investments.64 According to its website, the company has helped the
Institute of Computing Technology launch a number of China’s computing and
microelectronics companies, including supercomputing manufacturer Sugon (曙光信息
产业股份有限公司), AI chip developer Cambricon (中科寒武纪科技股份有限公司), and
CPU designer Loongson (龙芯中科技术股份有限公司), all of which are on the BIS Entity
List.65 Connections to CAS institutes afford these spin-off companies access to
technical expertise, scientific facilities, increased resources, and other intangible
benefits. In turn, successful spin-off companies often invest in and support other
promising companies.66

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 24

24
Commercialization: CAS Institute Spin-Off
Case Study: Lenovo
In 1984, the CAS Institute of Computing Technology provided seed funding to 11
institute researchers to found the New Technology Development Company (中国科
学院计算所新技术发展公司 ). In 1988, NTD Co. was reorganized into Legend
Computer Group Co., which later rebranded to Lenovo Group (联想集 团), or Lenovo
in 2003.67 The company’s first product was an extension card, which is a hardware
component that enhances a computer’s functionality. This innovation allowed the
company to secure financial backing, partner with firms to establish a manufacturing
joint venture, and expand into Hong Kong.68 In 1994, Legend Holdings, owner of the
company, transferred 65 percent of its shares to CAS. 69 CAS’s backing helped the
company expand its operations, enter international markets, and eventually go
public.70 By 2004, Lenovo had become the world’s third -largest PC company. 71
Today, Lenovo is one of the world’s largest consumer electronics manufacturers .72
Legend Holdings maintains a 31 percent stake in Lenovo Group; in turn, CAS
maintains a 29 percent share of Legend Holdings.73

The case studies of iFLYTEK and Lenovo help reveal CAS’s role in fostering the
commercialization of critical technologies. CAS promotes the development of
technology companies by providing financial support and personnel to help found
them. Once established, these companies often maintain strong connections with CAS
through joint research projects, financial ties, and talent development programs. Still,
while these examples provide important insights into how CAS has contributed to
China’s technology commercialization, more work is needed to better understand
CAS’s overall contributions to facilitating tech transfer in China.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 25

25
Advising S&T Policymaking
Beyond advancing S&T research and facilitating technological commercialization, CAS
is a powerful player in China’s S&T policymaking process and has a long history of
shaping some of the country’s most important scientific initiatives. For example, CAS
recommendations resulted in the creation of the 863 Program (also known as the
National High-Tech Development Plan), which fueled progress in supercomputing and
aerospace technologies.74 A CAS proposal also led to the development of the 973
Program, which was a key source of funding for basic research in important S&T fields
until it was folded into China’s National Key R&D Program in 2016.75 In addition to
being a powerful stakeholder in China’s S&T bureaucracy, CAS influences the Chinese
S&T policymaking process through its academicians (院士) and think tanks.
CAS academicians are among the most influential individuals in China’s S&T
ecosystem. They affect the allocation of resources to various research and commercial
units, manage significant budgets, and in recent years have featured prominently in
China’s foremost political offices.76 For instance, Yin Hejun (阴和俊), an academician
who was previously the vice president of CAS, currently leads the Ministry of Science
and Technology.77 A total of 20 CAS academicians are currently in the 205-member
20th Central Committee, up from 18 in the 19th Central Committee (2017–2022) and
eight in the 18th Central Committee (2012–2017).78 CAS academicians do not need to
hold official government positions to shape S&T policy. For instance, recommendations
authored by CAS academicians resulted in the founding of the NSFC and the Chinese
Academy of Engineering, both major players in China’s S&T ecosystem today.79
Academicians also lead the research conducted by major science and technology think
tanks such as the Academic Divisions of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASAD; 中
国科学院学部) and the Institutes of Science and Development (CASISD; 中国科学院科
技战略咨询研究院).80 Established in 1955, CASAD advises the State Council and other
government agencies on the formation and coordination of S&T policy and is intended
to increase communication between researchers and policymakers.81 Starting in 2019,
for instance, CASAD conducted joint research with the NSFC to study future
development paths of various emerging technologies and scientific fields of research
critical to China’s development.82 The Research on the Development Strategy of
Chinese Disciplines and Frontier Fields (中国学科及前沿领域发展战略研究) project
brought together over three thousand scientists, including four hundred of the roughly
eight hundred total CAS academicians, resulting in the publication of 38 books, each of
which outlines a development strategy for a scientific discipline or frontier technology
field.83

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 26

26
CASISD, founded in 2016, emerged out of a Chinese government initiative to form
twenty-five “New Think Tanks with Chinese Characteristics” (中国特色新型智库) and a
directive from Xi Jinping for CAS to create a “first-class” S&T think tank.84 It is intended
to improve China’s assessment and policymaking capabilities.85 CASISD uses its ties to
CAS to assess progress in China’s S&T ecosystem and makes S&T policy
recommendations for both CAS and China generally.86 According to the CAS 13th
Five-Year Plan, CASISD is also tasked with promoting international scientific
exchanges.87

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 27

27
Conclusion
The top global producer of STEM papers and home to many of the world’s leading
researchers, CAS is one of the most important S&T institutions in the world and plays a
pivotal role in advancing China’s S&T development. Our analysis of CAS’s research
output underscores the institution’s key position in China’s STEM ecosystem. CAS also
fosters the commercialization and adoption of important technologies. Moreover, CAS
actors, including academicians and think tanks, often help shape Chinese S&T policy.
To be sure, CAS has made progress in achieving the organizational goals set out in
various policy documents.88 CAS is a leading producer of impactful research and is the
world’s largest producer of highly cited and top-cited STEM publications. Successful
tech companies have emerged from CAS research and investments, contributing to
China’s competitiveness in critical and emerging technologies. National S&T policies
are often developed with input from CAS policymakers and academicians.
At the same time, CAS continues to face various challenges. While the organization
has rapidly climbed global research rankings in recent years, only a handful of
researchers from CAS have been awarded the world’s most prestigious scientific
awards.89 No CAS scientist has ever received the Turing Award or Nobel Prize, for
example. In addition, ongoing reforms to China’s S&T bureaucracy, first announced in
March 2023, could affect CAS’s core functions and responsibilities. Intended to
centralize and streamline S&T decision-making authorities under the newly announced
Central Science and Technology Commission, these reforms will likely impact CAS’s
role in shaping national S&T policy.90
Furthermore, CAS’s core functions—advancing research, commercializing technologies,
and shaping S&T policy—may be in tension with one another. As a basic research
organization, CAS is incentivized to meet or exceed its research goals. As a commercial
entity, CAS must promote the growth of its spin-off enterprises and prioritize applied
research projects that might lead to greater revenues for the organization. As an
influential policymaking actor, CAS’s leaders are incentivized to increase the
organization’s relative political power and influence within China’s S&T bureaucracy. If
CAS over-prioritizes its commercial activities, CAS scientists might invest less time in
basic research in favor of projects that can be more easily commercialized. On the other
hand, if CAS over-invests in developing its basic R&D programs at the expense of its
commercial endeavors, it may negatively affect CAS’s business interests, which are an
essential source of revenue for the organization. CAS is tasked with shaping Chinese
S&T policies, but it is also invested in protecting its own organizational interests, and
therefore it may advocate against policies that threaten to weaken its position in

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 28

28
China’s S&T ecosystem, even if those policies might better advance the country’s S&T
development.
The tensions among CAS’s core functions described above could pose challenges to
the organization’s ability to simultaneously advance all three functions. Moreover,
CAS’s success in certain metrics—such as research output and number of top-cited
researchers—relative to other leading STEM research institutions does not necessarily
suggest that China’s model of S&T development is more effective than that of other
countries. As shown in this report, Beijing has committed extensive resources to CAS
to push forward its S&T development goals. Consequently, CAS’s success, or lack
thereof, will affect Beijing’s ability to achieve its own strategic objectives.
Despite these challenges, CAS’s importance to Beijing’s S&T ambitions underscores
the need for U.S. policymakers to better understand the organization. While this report
does not offer an exhaustive account of CAS’s activities, it provides an important
foundation for understanding CAS, which will remain a key driver of China’s S&T
development for the foreseeable future.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 29

29
Appendix A: Additional Figures
Figure A1. Annual STEM Publications, Top Publishing Organizations, 2010–2022

Source: CSET Merged Corpus.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 30

30

Figure A2. Top Publishing Organizations, Total and Highly Cited STEM Papers, 2010–
2022

Source: CSET Merged Corpus.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 31

31
Figure A3. Top Publishing Organizations by Top-Cited STEM Papers, 2010–2022

Source: CSET Merged Corpus.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 32

32
Figure A4. CAS Institutes’ Paper Publications by Fields of Study, 2010–2021

Source: CNKI.
Figure A5. AI-Related Papers by Top Publishers in China, STEM Papers, 2010–2021

Source: CNKI.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 33

33
Appendix B: List of CAS Institutes
Name (Chinese) Name (English) Location
U.S.
Government
Restriction91
数学与系统科学研
究院
Academy of Mathematics and
Systems Science Beijing None
物理研究所 Institute of Physics Beijing Entity List92
理论物理研究所 Institute of Theoretical Physics Beijing None
高能物理研究所 Institute of High Energy Physics Beijing None
力学研究所 Institute of Mechanics Beijing None
声学研究所 Institute of Acoustics Beijing None
理化技术研究所
Technical Institute of Physics and
Chemistry Beijing None
化学研究所 Institute of Chemistry Beijing None
国家纳米科学中心
National Center for Nanoscience and
Technology Beijing None
生态环境研究中心
Research Center for Eco-
Environmental Sciences Beijing None
过程工程研究所 Institute of Process Engineering Beijing None
地理科学与资源研
究所
Institute of Geographic Sciences and
Natural Resources Research Beijing None
国家天文台 National Astronomical Observatories Beijing None
云南天文台 Yunnan Observatories93 Kunming None
南京天文光学技术
研究所
Nanjing Institute of Astronomical
Optics & Technology94 Nanjing Entity List95
新疆天文台 Xinjiang Astronomical Observatory96 Urumqi None
长春人造卫星观测
站 Changchun Observatory97 Changchun None

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 34

34
地质与地球物理研
究所 (地球科学研
究院）
Institute of Geology and Geophysics
(Innovation Academy for Earth
Science) Beijing None
青藏高原研究所 Institute of Tibetan Plateau Research Lhasa None
古脊椎动物与古人
类研究所
Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology
and Paleoanthropology Beijing None
大气物理研究所 Institute of Atmospheric Physics Beijing None
植物研究所 Institute of Botany Beijing None
动物研究所 Institute of Zoology Beijing None
心理研究所 Institute of Psychology Beijing None
微生物研究所 Institute of Microbiology Beijing None
生物物理研究所 Institute of Biophysics Beijing None
遗传与发育生物学
研究所
Institute of Genetics and
Developmental Biology (IGDB)98 Shijiazhuang None
农业资源研究中心
Center for Agricultural Resources
Research, (IGDB)99 Shijiazhuang None
北京基因组研究所
(国家生物信息中
心)
Beijing Institute of Genomics (China
National Center for Bioinformation) Beijing None
计算技术研究所 Institute of Computing Technology Beijing Entity List100
软件研究所 Institute of Software Beijing None
半导体研究所 Institute of Semiconductors Beijing None
微电子研究所 Institute of Microelectronics101 Guangzhou None
空天信息创新研究
院
Aerospace Information Research
Institute Beijing None
自动化研究所 Institute of Automation Beijing None
电工研究所 Institute of Electrical Engineering Beijing None
工程热物理研究所
Institute of Engineering
Thermophysics Beijing None

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 35

35
国家空间科学中心 National Space Science Center Beijing None
自然科学史研究所
Institute for the History of Natural
Sciences Beijing None
科技战略咨询研究
院
Institutes of Science and
Development Beijing None
信息工程研究所 Institute of Information Engineering Beijing None
数据与通信保护研
究教育中心
Data Assurance & Communications
Security Center102 Beijing None
空间应用工程与技
术中心
Technology and Engineering Center
for Space Utilization Beijing None
天津工业生物技术
研究所
Tianjin Institute of Industrial
Biotechnology Tianjin None
大连化学物理研究
所 Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics Dalian None
金属研究所 Institute of Metal Research Shenyang None
沈阳应用生态研究
所 Institute of Applied Ecology Shenyang None
沈阳自动化研究所 Shenyang Institute of Automation Shenyang Entity List103
海洋研究所 Institute of Oceanology Qingdao None
青岛生物能源与过
程研究所
Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and
Bioprocess Technology Qingdao None
烟台海岸带研究所
Yantai Institute of Coastal Zone
Research Yantai None
长春光学精密机械
与物理研究所
Changchun Institute of Optics, Fine
Mechanics, and Physics Changchun None
长春应用化学研究
所
Changchun Institute of Applied
Chemistry Changchun None
东北地理与农业生
态研究所
Northeast Institute of Geography and
Agroecology Changchun None
农业技术中心 Center for Agricultural Technology104 Changchun None

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 36

36
上海微系统与信息
技术研究所
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem
and Information Technology Shanghai Entity List105
上海技术物理研究
所
Shanghai Institute of Technical
Physics Shanghai None
上海光学精密机械
研究所
Shanghai Institute of Optics and Fine
Mechanics Shanghai None
上海硅酸盐研究所 Shanghai Institute of Ceramics Shanghai None
上海有机化学研究
所
Shanghai Institute of Organic
Chemistry Shanghai None
上海应用物理研究
所 Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics Shanghai
Unverified
List106
上海天文台 Shanghai Astronomical Observatory Shanghai None
分子细胞科学卓越
创新中心 (生物化
学与细胞生物学研
究所)
Center for Excellence in Molecular
Cell Science (Shanghai Institute of
Biochemistry and Cell Biology) Shanghai None
脑科学与智能技术
卓越创新中心 (神
经科学研究所)
Center for Excellence in Brain Science
and Intelligence Technology (Institute
of Neuroscience) Shanghai None
分子植物科学卓越
创新中心 (植物生
理生态研究所)
Center for Excellence in Molecular
Plant Sciences (Institute of Plant
Physiology and Ecology) Shanghai None
上海营养与健康研
究所
Shanghai Institute of Nutrition and
Health Shanghai None
上海药物研究所 Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica Shanghai None
上海免疫与感染研
究所
Shanghai Institute of Immunity and
Infection Shanghai None
上海高等研究院
Shanghai Advanced Research
Institute Shanghai None

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 37

37
微小卫星创新研究
院
Innovation Academy for
Microsatellites Shanghai None
福建物质结构研究
所 (海西研究院)
Fujian Institute of Research on the
Structure of Matter (Haixi Institutes) Fuzhou None
宁波材料技术与工
程研究所
Ningbo Institute of Materials
Technology & Engineering Ningbo None
城市环境研究所 Institute of Urban Environment Xiamen None
杭州医学研究所 Hangzhou Institute of Medicine Hangzhou None
南京地质古生物研
究所
Nanjing Institute of Geology and
Palaeontology Nanjing None
南京土壤研究所 Institute of Soil Science Nanjing None
南京地理与湖泊研
究所
Nanjing Institute of Geography &
Limnology Nanjing None
紫金山天文台 Purple Mountain Observatory Nanjing None
苏州纳米技术与纳
米仿生研究所
Suzhou Institute of Nano-tech and
Nano-bionics Suzhou None
苏州生物医学工程
技术研究所
Suzhou Institute of Biomedical
Engineering and Technology Suzhou None
赣江创新研究院 Ganjiang Innovation Academy Ganzhou None
合肥物质科学研究
院 Hefei Institutes of Physical Science Hefei None
武汉岩土力学研究
所 Institute of Rock and Soil Mechanics Wuhan None
精密测量科学与技
术创新研究院
Innovation Academy for Precision
Measurement Science and
Technology Wuhan None
武汉病毒研究所
(生物安全大科学
研究中心)
Wuhan Institute of Virology (Center
for Biosafety Mega-science) Wuhan None
水生生物研究所 Institute of Hydrobiology Wuhan None

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 38

38
武汉植物园 Wuhan Botanical Garden Wuhan None
南海海洋研究所
South China Sea Institute of
Oceanology Guangzhou None
华南植物园 South China Botanical Garden Guangzhou None
广州能源研究所
Guangzhou Institute of Energy
Conversion Guangzhou None
广州地球化学研究
所 Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry Guangzhou None
长沙矿产资源勘查
中心
Changsha Center for Mineral
Resource Exploration107 Changsha None
广州生物医药与健
康研究院
Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine
and Health Guangzhou None
深圳先进技术研究
院
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced
Technology Shenzhen None
亚热带农业生态研
究所 Institute of Subtropical Agriculture Changsha None
深海科学与工程研
究所
Institute of Deep-Sea Science and
Engineering Wuhan None
成都生物研究所 Chengdu Institute of Biology Chengdu None
成都山地灾害与环
境研究所
Institute of Mountain Hazards and
Environment Chengdu None
光电技术研究所 Institute of Optics and Electronics Chengdu None
重庆绿色智能技术
研究院
Chongqing Institute of Green and
Intelligent Technology Chongqing None
昆明动物研究所 Kunming Institute of Zoology Kunming None
昆明植物研究所 Kunming Institute of Botany Kunming None
西双版纳热带植物
园
Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical
Garden
Xishuangban
na None
广州地球化学研究
所 Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry Guangzhou None

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 39

39
西安光学精密机械
研究所
Xi’an Institute of Optics and Precision
Mechanics Xi’an None
国家授时中心 National Time Service Center Xi’an None
地球环境研究所 Institute of Earth Environment Xi’an None
山西煤炭化学研究
所 Institute of Coal Chemistry Taiyuan None
近代物理研究所 Institute of Modern Physics Lanzhou None
兰州化学物理研究
所 Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics Lanzhou None
西北生态环境资源
研究院
Northwest Institute of Eco-
environment and Resources Lanzhou None
青海盐湖研究所 Qinghai Institute of Salt Lakes Xining None
西北高原生物研究
所 (三江源国家公
园研究院)
Northwest Institute of Plateau
Biology (Institute of Sanjiangyuan
National Park) Xining None
新疆理化技术研究
所
Xinjiang Technical Institute of Physics
and Chemistry Urumqi None
新疆生态与地理研
究所
Xinjiang Institute of Ecology and
Geography Urumqi None
Source: Chinese Academy of Sciences.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 40

40
Authors
Cole McFaul is a research analyst at CSET and a nonresident fellow at the Atlantic
Council’s Global China Hub.
Hanna Dohmen is a research analyst at CSET, a nonresident fellow at the Atlantic
Council’s Global China Hub, and consults for Covington & Burling LLP on
semiconductor policy issues.
Sam Bresnick is a research fellow at CSET.
Emily Weinstein contributed to this report while she was a research fellow at CSET.
She is currently detailed to the U.S. Department of Commerce under an
Intergovernmental Personnel Act agreement. Her contributions to this report were
completed prior to her service in the Commerce Department. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the U.S.
government.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Emmy Probasco, Margarita Konaev, Catherine Aiken,
Daniel Chou, Ben Murphy, and Ngor Luong for their feedback and assistance. The
authors are also grateful for the reviews and suggestions they received from John
Chen, Cong Cao, Dakota Cary, Bill Hannas, and Huey-Meei Chang. They also thank
Shelton Fitch and Liz Dana for editorial support, and Jason Ly for help with graphic
design.

This report was updated on October 25, 2024, to clarify the relationship between CAS,
Legend Holdings, and Lenovo.

© 2024 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20220055

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Endnotes

1 The State Council (国务院), also known as the Central People’s Government of the People’s Republic
of China, is the top executive organ of the Chinese government. See: William Hannas, James Mulvenon,
and Anna Puglisi, Chinese Industrial Espionage: Technology Acquisition and Military Modernisation
(New York: Routledge, 2013).

2 “2023 Tables: Institutions,” Nature Index, www.nature.com/nature-index/annual-
tables/2023/institution/all/all/global.

3 For more, see: Autumn Toney and James Dunham, “Multi-label Classification of Scientific Research
Documents Across Domains and Languages,” Association for Computational Linguistics Proceedings of
the Third Workshop on Scholarly Document Processing (October 2022): 105–114.

4 For more on how we classify AI-related research, see: Daniel Chou, “Counting AI Research” (CSET, July
2022), https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-Counting-AI-Research.pdf.

5 Hannas, Mulvenon, and Puglisi, Chinese Industrial Espionage.

6 Paul H. B. Godwin, “Strategic Forces,” in Development of the Chinese Armed Forces (Montgomery, AL:
Air University Press, 1988), https://irp.fas.org/dia/product/prc_ch-11.htm.

7 Godwin, “Strategic Forces.”

8 Liu Yanqiong, “Chinese Academy of Sciences and the ‘Two Bombs and One Satellite’ Project,”
Proceedings of the Chinese Academy of Sciences 34, no. 9 (2019): 1003–1013. The Chinese term here,
两弹一星, literally means “two bombs and one satellite.” It refers to China’s Mao Zedong–era
accomplishments of building its own nuclear bombs (原子弹), ballistic missiles (导弹), and earth
satellites (卫星). The “two bombs” (两弹) part is often misconstrued as “atomic and hydrogen bombs.”
See William Hannas and Huey-Meei Chang, “China’s STI Operations: Monitoring Foreign Science and
Technology Through Open Sources” (CSET, January 2021), 27,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/chinas-sti-operations.

9 “Computer 156 [156 计算机],” CCF China Computer Historical Memory, 2018, https://perma.cc/2Y3Q-
VWQ3.

10 The six institutes were the Institute of Computing Technology, Institute of Electronics, Institute of
Physics, Northeast Institute of Physics, Northwest Institute of Computing Technology, and Institute of
Applied Chemistry. Today, as part of the China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation (CASC),
the Xi’an Microelectronics Technology Institute remains a key People’s Liberation Army supplier and
manages two military-standard integrated circuit foundries. CASC is a state-owned defense and
aerospace conglomerate. For more, see Eric Lee and Seamus Boyle, “Chinese Nuclear Missile Guidance
Systems: Spotlight on the Xian Institute of Microelectronics Technology” (Project 2049 Institute,
September 18, 2020), https://project2049.net/2020/09/18/chinese-nuclear-missile-guidance-systems-
spotlight-on-the-xian-institute-of-microelectronics-technology/.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 42

11 Xi’an Microelectronics Technology Institute still holds 34 percent ownership of ZTE, and financial
filings show that ZTE maintains close ties to the institute. The institute is the second largest shareholder
of ZTE. The company and institute are also tied through shared personnel. The institute in 2022
nominated three of the nine directors on the company’s board, and the current chairman and executive
director of ZTE previously held numerous leadership positions at the institute, including deputy head of
from 2015 to 2019. In August 2022, the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and
Security (BIS) added Xi’an Microelectronics Technology Institute to the Entity List “for acquiring and
attempting to acquire US-origin items in support of China’s military modernization efforts.” Lee and
Boyle, “Chinese Nuclear Missile Guidance Systems”; “2022 Annual Report” (ZTE Corporation, March
2023), https://perma.cc/7ZN8-X42W; BIS, “Additions of Entities to the Entity List,” Federal Register 87
FR 51876 (August 24, 2022), www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/08/24/2022-18268/additions-
of-entities-to-the-entity-list.

12 Richard P. Suttmeier, Cong Cao, and Denis Fred Simon, “China’s Innovation Challenge and the
Remaking of the Chinese Academy of Sciences,” Innovations: Technology, Governance, Globalization 1,
no. 3 (Summer 2006): 78–97, https://doi.org/10.1162/itgg.2006.1.3.78.

13 Suttmeier, Cao, and Simon, “China’s Innovation Challenge.”

14 Suttmeier, Cao, and Simon, “China’s Innovation Challenge.”

15 Richard P. Suttmeier, Cong Cao, and Denis Fred Simon, “‘Knowledge Innovation’ and the Chinese
Academy of Sciences,” Science 312, no. 5770 (April 7, 2006): 58–59.

16 Suttmeier, Cao, and Simon, “Knowledge Innovation.” For example, in 2001, the Institute of Genetics
and Developmental Biology was formed by merging the Institute of Genetics and the Institute of
Developmental Biology. In 2003, the Beijing Genomics Institute—now BGI Group—was separated from
the Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology and established as a CAS research institute.
“Institute Overview” [研究所概况], Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, accessed May 9,
2024, https://perma.cc/PMC3-SPX6.

17 Suttmeier, Cao, and Simon, “Knowledge Innovation”; Federal Bureau of Investigation Strategic
Partnership Unit, Chinese Talent Programs, Counterintelligence Strategic Partnership Intelligence Note
(Washington, DC: FBI, September 2015), https://info.publicintelligence.net/FBI-
ChineseTalentPrograms.pdf.

18 The seven new institutes established were the Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health,
Institute of Urban Environment (in Xiamen), Yantai Institute of Coastal Zone Research, Suzhou Institute
of Nano-tech and Nano-bionics, Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess Technology, Ningbo
Institute of Materials Technology & Engineering, and the Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology.
Micah Springut, Stephen Schlaikjer, and David Chen, China’s Program for Science and Technology
Modernization: Implications for American Competitiveness (Washington, DC: U.S.-China Economic and
Security Review Commission, April 20, 2011),
www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Research/USCC_REPORT_China%27s_Program_forScience_and_Tech
nology_Modernization.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 43

19 Springut, Schlaikjer, and Chen, China’s Program for Science and Technology Modernization.

20 Jane Qiu, “China Sets 2020 Vision for Science,” Science 470, no. 15 (February 1, 2011),
https://doi.org/10.1038/470015a.

21 Yuehui Wu, “Chinese Academy of Sciences Contributes to Belt and Road Construction through
Science Cooperation,” People’s Daily, April 23, 2019, https://perma.cc/7LYW-J93M.

22 CAS, “Outline of the Chinese Academy of Sciences 13th Five-Year Development Plan” [中国科学院‘十
三五’发展规划纲要], trans. CSET (CSET, October 20, 2022),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/outline-of-the-chinese-academy-of-sciences-13th-five-year-
development-plan/.

23 Jane Qiu, “Chinese Academy of Sciences Has Big Plans for Nation’s Research,” Nature, March 24,
2011, www.nature.com/articles/news.2011.180.

24 CAS, “Chinese Academy of Sciences 2022 Budget” [中国科学院 2022 年部门预算], trans. CSET (CSET,
June 30, 2022), https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/chinese-academy-of-sciences-2022-budget/.

25 USTC (中国科学技术大学) was founded in 1958 to support China’s “Nuclear Bombs, Ballistic Missiles,
and Earth Satellites” program. USTC houses 32 colleges focusing on cutting-edge science and
technology, medicine, and humanities subjects. USTC also has five research institutes: the Suzhou
Institute for Advanced Research, the Shanghai Institute for Advanced Studies, Beijing Research Institute,
the Institute of Advanced Technology, and the International Institute of Finance. On May 9, 2024, USTC
was added to the BIS’s Entity List for acquiring and attempting to acquire U.S.-origin items in support of
advancing China’s quantum technology capabilities and for being involved in advancing China’s nuclear
program development.

UCAS (中国科学院大学)—as it is known today—was established in 2012, but the school has existed
since 1978. Formerly known as the Graduate School of the University of Science and Technology of
China, it was the first graduate school in China. Since 2014, however, UCAS has enrolled both
undergraduate and graduate students.

ShanghaiTech University (上海科技大学) was founded in 2013 as a collaboration between the Shanghai
Municipal People’s Government and CAS. The university consists of five schools and three research
institutes. ShanghaiTech claims to be an internationally focused university that aims to cultivate
innovative scientists, investors, and entrepreneurs. The majority of classes are taught in both Chinese
and English, and the university heavily emphasizes study abroad opportunities at prestigious
universities, including Harvard University, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Yale
University. According to its website, 14 percent of faculty are foreign nationals and almost 25 percent of
its graduates pursue postgraduate programs overseas.

“School Profile” [学校简介], USTC, January 2024, https://perma.cc/E643-UF2N; BIS, “Additions of
Entities to the Entity List,” Federal Register 89 FR 41886 (May 09, 2024),
www.federalregister.gov/public-inspection/2024-10485/additions-of-entities-to-the-entity-list; “School

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 44

Profile” [学校简介], UCAS, accessed April 10, 2024, https://perma.cc/P8BX-Q6ZV; “School Profile” [学校
简介], ShanghaiTech University, accessed April 10, 2024, https://perma.cc/QVD4-FJTL.

26 Emily Weinstein, Channing Lee, Ryan Fedasiuk, and Anna Puglisi, “China’s State Key Laboratory
System: A View into China’s Innovation System” (CSET, June 2022), https://doi.org/10.51593/20210019.

27 Weinstein et al., “China’s State Key Laboratory System.”

28 “About Us,” CAS, accessed May 9, 2024, https://perma.cc/D3MV-GLFX; “Publications,” CAS, accessed
May 9, 2024, https://perma.cc/3K5Q-2DKD; “Machine Intelligence Research,” Springer Link, accessed
May 9, 2024, https://link.springer.com/journal/11633; “Journal of Plant Ecology,” Oxford University
Press, accessed May 9, 2024, https://academic.oup.com/jpe.

29 For example, as of 2020, USTC had signed cooperation agreements with 39 CAS institutes and more
than 30 CAS academicians and institute directors serve as part-time department leaders at the
university. See “Introduction to ‘All of CAS Helps Run the School and Its Departments Are Combined
with CAS Institutes’” [‘全院办校、所系结合’简介], USTC, August 2020, https://archive.ph/xYYBd.

30 “Introduction to the Chinese Academy of Sciences” [中国科学院简介], CAS, August 2022,
https://perma.cc/UJ86-KP9Q; “Who We Are,” CAS, accessed April 10, 2024, https://perma.cc/CQV5-
NZK6.

31 The NSFC is a government-run body that oversees and audits Chinese scientific research funds,
principally those that support basic research. CAS, “About Us”; “Overview” [概况], NSFC, accessed
August 19, 2024, https://perma.cc/LGG9-QD2T.

32 CAS, “The Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),” International Research Collaboration Information
Platform, May 27, 2016, https://perma.cc/3RSV-K9U6; David Cyranoski, “China Fires Up Next-
Generation Neutron-Science Facility,” Nature 551, no. 284 (November 16, 2017),
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature.2017.22976; “Another World Record for China’s EAST Tokamak,”
Nuclear Engineering International, April 18, 2023, www.neimagazine.com/news/newsanother-world-
record-for-chinas-east-tokamak-10768385; Institute of Plasma Physics, “Experimental Advanced
Superconducting Tokamak (EAST),” CAS Large Research Infrastructures User Service Platform, accessed
April 16, 2024, https://perma.cc/55SU-NANM.

33 USD conversions used average exchange rates for years 2021 and 2023. Currency exchange rates
retrieved from “Chinese Yuan to US Dollar Spot Exchange Rates for 2021,” Exchange Rates UK,
accessed April 10, 2024, www.exchangerates.org.uk/CNY-USD-spot-exchange-rates-history-
2021.html; “Chinese Yuan to US Dollar Spot Exchange Rates for 2023,” Exchange Rates UK, accessed
April 10, 2024, www.exchangerates.org.uk/CNY-USD-spot-exchange-rates-history-2023.html.

34 Figure 1 was created using data collected from the CAS budgets, which are published annually, and
national basic R&D expenditure data published by the National Bureau of Statistics of China. Chinese
organizations refer to the Frascati Manual of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development to define basic R&D activities. National Bureau of Statistics of China, “Notice on Issuing
the ‘Standards for the Statistics of Research and Experimental Development (R&D) Investment (Trial)’”

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 45

[国家统计局关于印发《研究与试验发展（R&D）投入统计规范（试行）》的通知], National Bureau of
Statistics, no. 47 (April 19, 2019), https://perma.cc/9J4S-Q76H.

35 As of 2023, according to the National Bureau of Statistics of China, Chinese basic R&D expenditure
had risen to 6.6 percent of total R&D spending. “Cross-National Comparisons of R&D Performance,” in
Science & Engineering Indicators 2018 (Washington, DC: National Science Board, January 2018),
www.nsf.gov/statistics/2018/nsb20181/report/sections/research-and-development-u-s-trends-and-
international-comparisons/cross-national-comparisons-of-r-d-performance.

36 “U.S. R&D Expenditures,” in National Patterns of R&D Resources 2021–2022 (Arlington, VA: National
Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, January 2024), https://ncses.nsf.gov/data-
collections/national-patterns/2021-2022#data. Both the United States and China use OECD’s
definitions for basic R&D activities. “Wan Donghua, the Main Responsible Person of the Department of
Social, Science, Culture and Health Statistics of the National Bureau of Statistics, Answers Reporters’
Questions Regarding the Release of the ‘Standards for Statistics on Research and Experimental
Development (R&D) Input (Trial)’” [国家统计局社科文司主要负责人万东华就发布《研究与试验发展
（R&D）投入统计规范（试行）》答记者问], Xinjiang Survey Corps of the National Bureau of Statistics,
May 20, 2019, https://perma.cc/BB24-9384; OECD, “Concepts and Definitions for Identifying R&D,” in
Frascati Manual 2015: Guidelines for Collecting and Reporting Data on Research and Experimental
Development (Paris: OECD Publishing, October 8, 2015), 47–70,
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264239012-4-en.

37 Nature Index, “2023 Tables: Institutions.”

38 Nature Index, “2023 Tables: Institutions.”

39 See, for example, Dag W. Aksnes, Liv Langfeldt, and Paul Wouters, “Citations, Citation Indicators, and
Research Quality: An Overview of Basic Concepts and Theories,” Sage Open 9, no. 1 (2019),
https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244019829575.

40 Ken Hyland, “Enter the Dragon: China and Global Academic Publishing,” Learned Publishing 36, no. 3
(May 18, 2023), https://doi.org/10.1002/leap.1545.

41 Hyland, “Enter the Dragon.”

42 “Highly Cited Researchers 2023,” Clarivate, accessed April 10, 2024, https://clarivate.com/highly-
cited-researchers/.

43 Clarivate, “Highly Cited Researchers 2023.”

44 Anderson, “U.S. R&D Increased by $72 Billion in 2021 to $789 Billion”; “Chinese Academy of Sciences
2022 Department Budget” [中国科学院 2022 年部门预算] (Beijing: CAS), https://perma.cc/UFQ5-KWJP.

45 National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, “Harvard U: Headcount of R&D Personnel:
2022–16,” National Science Foundation, accessed August 19, 2024,
https://ncsesdata.nsf.gov/profiles/site?method=report&tin=U1300001&id=h4.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 46

46 University of California, “The University of California at a Glance,” March 2024,
https://ucop.edu/institutional-research-academic-planning/_files/uc-facts-at-a-glance.pdf.

47 CAS, “Outline of the Chinese Academy of Sciences 13th Five-Year Development Plan.”

48 Fang Xu and Xiaoxuan Li, “The Changing Role of Metrics in Research Institute Evaluations Undertaken
by the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),” Palgrave Communications, no. 2 (October 25, 2016),
https://doi.org/10.1057/palcomms.2016.78.

49 “Yang Chunli” [杨春莉], UCAS, accessed June 18, 2024, https://perma.cc/K4XL-9GYU .

50 “Introduction to University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS),” UCAS, accessed June 18, 2024,
https://perma.cc/2SZY-CGGN.

51 See, for example, Institute of Automation, “Admission Brochure for the Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, to Recruit Master’s Degree Students in 2024” [中国科学院自动化研究所
2024 年招收攻读硕士学位研究生招生简章], CAS, September 22, 2023, https://perma.cc/YE2N-R9CW.

52 Liu Gang et al., China’s New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology Industry Development
Report 2022 [中国新一代人工智能科技产业发展报告 2022] (Chinese Institute of New Generation
Artificial Intelligence Development Strategies [中国新一代人工智能发展战略研究院], June 24, 2022),
https://perma.cc/3259-XU3J.

53 CAS, “Outline of the Chinese Academy of Sciences 13th Five-Year Development Plan.” “Hidden
Champion” (隐形冠军) enterprises prioritize R&D and focus on developing cutting-edge products in niche
markets. Source: https://perma.cc/T4MH-4CN2.

54 Cong Cao and Richard P. Suttmeier, “Challenges of S&T System Reform in China,” Science 355, no.
6329 (April 10, 2017): 1019–2021, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aal2515; “Notice of the State
Council on Issuing and Implementing Certain Provisions of the ‘Law of the People’s Republic of China on
Promoting the Transformation of Scientific and Technological Achievements’” [国务院关于印发实施《中
华人民共和国促进科技成果转化法》若干规定的通知], State Council, no. 16 (March 2, 2016),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/state-council-notice-on-the-publication-of-certain-regulations-
on-implementing-the-law-of-the-peoples-republic-of-china-on-promoting-the-conversion-of-scientific-
and-technological-achievements/.

55 Suttmeier, Cao, and Simon, “‘Knowledge Innovation”; “Notice of the Chinese Academy of Sciences on
the Issuance of the ‘Measures for the Openness and Sharing of Large-Scale Scientific Research
Instruments of the Chinese Academy of Sciences’” [中国科学院关于印发《中国科学院大型科研仪器开放
共享管理办法》的通知], CAS, March 25, 2022, https://perma.cc/J2GC-MQZS; State Council, “Opinions of
the State Council on the Opening of Major National Scientific Research Infrastructure and Large-Scale
Scientific Research Instruments to the Public” [国务院关于国家重大科研基础设施和大型科研仪器向社会
开放的意见], Science and Technology Innovation and Development Center, December 31, 2014,
https://perma.cc/TUW2-85XR; 科技部, 发展改革委, and 财政部, “Notice of the Development and Reform
Commission of the Ministry of Science and Technology and the Ministry of Finance on the Issuance of

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 47

the ‘Measures for the Openness and Sharing of National Major Scientific Research Infrastructure and
Large Scientific Research Instruments” [科技部 发展改革委 财政部关于印发《国家重大科研基础设施和大
型科研仪器开放共享管理办法》的通知], 中国科学院条件保障与财务局, September 20, 2017, 国科发基
〔2017〕289 号 edition, https://perma.cc/S87C-C88W.

56 “Corporate Bond Annual Report (2022)” [公司债券年度报告 (2022 年)] (Chinese Academy of Sciences
Holdings Co., Ltd., April 2023), https://perma.cc/EG53-K8WD.

57 “Who Are We?” [我们是谁?], CAS Investment Management Co., Ltd, accessed April 16, 2024,
https://perma.cc/3MV3-SQ2B.

58 “Company Introduction” [公司简介], USTC Holdings Company Limited, accessed April 15, 2024,
https://perma.cc/R32R-GVEM.

59 “We Are Very Proud That iFLYTEK Originated from the University of Science and Technology of
China” [我们很自豪，讯飞源于中科大!], National Engineering Research Center of Speech and Language
Information Processing, February 28, 2022, https://perma.cc/3L6X-2XQT.

60 “2021 Annual Report” (iFLYTEK Co., Ltd., 2021), https://perma.cc/RD9E-PEQT.

61 National Engineering Research Center of Speech and Language Information Processing, “We Are Very
Proud.”

62 iFLYTEK, “2021 Annual Report.”

63 BIS, “Additions of Entities to the Entity List,” Federal Register 87 FR 51876 (October 9, 2019),
www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/08/24/2022-18268/additions-of-entities-to-the-entity-list.

64 BIS, “Additions and Revisions to the Entity List and Conforming Removal from the Unverified List,”
Federal Register 87 FR 77505 (December 16, 2022),
www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/12/19/2022-27151/additions-and-revisions-to-the-entity-
list-and-conforming-removal-from-the-unverified-list.

65 “Business Incubation” [企业孵化], Institute of Computing Technology, accessed April 15, 2024,
https://perma.cc/UZS4-VCL7.

66 For example, Lenovo Venture Capital was a seed investor in chip designer Jeejio (中科物栖) in 2018
and Sugon is a 50 percent shareholder in data intelligence firm Golaxy (中科天玑). “Jeejio” [中科物栖],
36Krypton Venture Capital Platform, accessed April 16, 2024, https://perma.cc/7928-EWLM; “Golaxy”
[中科天玑], 36Krypton Venture Capital Platform, accessed April 16, 2024, https://perma.cc/QYL3-EKQP.

67 “History” [历史沿革], Institute of Computing Technology, accessed April 15, 2024,
https://perma.cc/3MSH-86F4; “Development Path” [发展历程], Legend Holdings, accessed June 18,
2024, https://perma.cc/GT56-KXRD.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 48

68 Nathaniel Ahrens and Yu Zhou, “China’s Competitiveness: Myths, Realities, and Lessons for the United
States and Japan—Case Study: Lenovo” (Center Strategic & International Studies, January 2013),
https://www.csis.org/programs/japan-chair/japan-chair-archives/chinas-competitiveness-myths-
realities-and-lessons-united.

69 While we have not found unambiguous documentation regarding the origins of Legend Holdings, we
do know that in 1994 Legend Holdings was the owner of the company producing “Legend” branded
computers and in that year transferred 65 percent of its own shares to CAS. Ahrens and Zhou, “China’s
Competitiveness.”

70Ahrens and Zhou, “China’s Competitiveness”; Institute of Computing Technology, “History” [历史沿革].

71 Ahrens and Zhou, “China’s Competitiveness.”

72 “Lenovo - Statistics and Facts,” Statista, accessed October 24, 2024, https://perma.cc/YWL2-FLAR.

73 “2023 Annual Report,” (Legend Holdings), https://perma.cc/3UVU-6RBE; “Lenovo Group Limited
2023/24 Annual Report,” (Lenovo Group), https://perma.cc/T9LS-493G.

74 Xiaoxuan Li, Kejia Yang, and Xiaoxi Xiao, “Scientific Advice in China: The Changing Role of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences,” Nature, July 12, 2016, www.nature.com/articles/palcomms201645; CAS, “About
Us”; “About CASAD,” Academic Divisions of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, accessed April 15, 2024,
https://archive.ph/8Ze5l.

75 CAS, “About Us.”

76 Jane Qiu, “Chinese Academies Promise Cleaner Elections,” Nature, August 10, 2011,
www.nature.com/articles/476139a; Hao Xin, “The True Cost of Becoming an Academician in China?,”
Science, September 17, 2013, www.science.org/content/article/true-cost-becoming-academician-china.

77 “Yin Hejun” [阴和俊], Ministry of Science and Technology, accessed April 15, 2024,
https://perma.cc/P3AQ-UXUT; Jiang Chenglong, “Yin Hejun Appointed as Minister of Science and
Technology,” China Daily, October 24, 2023, https://perma.cc/UP3C-A2SG.

78 CSET analysis of the Central Committee; Xinhua, “List of Members of 20th CPC Central Committee,”
State Council Information Office, October 22, 2022, https://perma.cc/XSV2-3LTU.

79 The Chinese Academy of Engineering, often referred to with CAS as the “two academies,” is a parallel
organization to CAS focused on engineering sciences. Although smaller than CAS, CAE’s structure and
functions are similar, except focused in engineering sciences. “About Us,” CAE, accessed June 17, 2024,
https://en.cae.cn/cae/html/en/col2014/column_2014_1.html.

80 The CASAD claims it is comparable to the U.S. National Academy of Sciences. CASAD, “About
CASAD.”

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 49

81 Alex Stone, “China’s Model of Science: Rationale, Players, Issues” (China Aerospace Studies Institute,
2022), www.airuniversity.af.edu/Portals/10/CASI/documents/Research/Infrastructure/2022-02-
07%20Model%20of%20Science.pdf.

82 “An Overview of China’s 2035 Development Strategy for Academic Disciplines and Frontier Fields”
[中国学科及前沿领域 2035 发展战略总论] (NSFC and CAS, March 2023), https://perma.cc/T9L8-C3KS.

83 “‘2035 Development Strategy Series of Chinese Disciplines and Frontier Fields’ Published” [“中国学科
及前沿领域 2035 发展战略丛书”出版] (CASAD, May, 26, 2023, https://perma.cc/753W-4VDV; “An
Overview of China’s 2035 Development Strategy.”

84 “National High-End Think Tank Construction Pilot Project” [国家高端智库建设试点], China
Development Institute, accessed April 15, 2024, https://perma.cc/JA9N-NUXU; “Review and Research
on the First Anniversary of the National High-End Think Tank Construction Pilot Work” [国家高端智库建
设试点工作一周年回顾与研究], Chinese Communist Party News Network, People’s Daily, December 1,
2016, https://perma.cc/K3JS-HRJY.

85 China Development Institute, “National High-End Think Tank Construction Pilot Project.”

86 Science and Technology Daily, “The First Phase of the ‘Take the Lead Initiative’ Plan Has Yielded
Fruitful Results” [【科技日报】“率先行动”计划第一阶段硕果累累], CAS, accessed April 15, 2024,
https://archive.ph/VcXb9; “Introduction to the Institute of Science and Technology Strategy Consulting,
Chinese Academy of Sciences” [中国科学院科技战略咨询研究院简介], Institutes of Science and
Development, accessed April 15, 2024, https://perma.cc/9EBR-VMJT.

87 CAS, “Outline of the Chinese Academy of Sciences 13th Five-Year Development Plan.”

88 Every five years, CAS publishes a development plan that sets the organization’s goals for the period.
See, for example, CAS, “Outline of the Chinese Academy of Sciences 13th Five-Year Development Plan.”

89 Lokman Meho identified one hundred of the world’s most prestigious scientific awards. Just 11 of the
3,445 awards in Meho’s dataset featured a researcher with a CAS affiliation. Lokman I. Meho, “Highly
Prestigious International Academic Awards and Their Impact on University Rankings,” Quantitative
Science Studies 1, no. 2 (2020): 824–848, https://doi.org/10.1162/qss_a_00045. Data accessible from:
Lokman I. Meho, “Highly Prestigious International Academic Awards and Their Impact on University
Rankings (Article and Supporting Data),” American University in Beirut, February 12, 2020,
https://scholarworks.aub.edu.lb/handle/10938/21535.

90 Barry Naughton, Tai Ming Cheung, Siwen Xiao, Yaosheng Xu, and Yujing Yang, “Reorganization of
China’s Science and Technology System” (UC Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation, July 2023),
https://ucigcc.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/Naughton-et-al-Working-Paper-Reorg-v1-8.22.23.pdf.

91 We used the International Trade Administration’s Consolidated Screening List to determine whether a
CAS institute faces U.S. government restrictions. This tool checks against BIS’s Denied Persons List,
Unverified List, Entity List, and Military End User List; the Department of State Bureau of International
Security and Nonproliferation’s Nonproliferation Sanctions; the Department of State Directorate of

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 50

Defense Trade Controls’ Arms Export Control Act Debarred List; and the Department of Treasury Office
of Foreign Assets Control’s Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) List, Foreign Sanctions Evaders List,
Sectoral Sanctions Identification List, Correspondent Account or Payable-Through Account Sanctions
List, Non-SDN Menu-Based Sanctions List, Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies,
and Palestinian Legislative Council List.

92 The Institute of Physics was added to the Entity List on May 9, 2024, for acquiring and attempting to
acquire U.S.-origin items in support of advancing China’s quantum technology capabilities. BIS,
“Additions of Entities to the Entity List,” Federal Register 89 FR 41886 (May 9, 2024),
www.federalregister.gov/public-inspection/2024-10485/additions-of-entities-to-the-entity-list.

93 The Yunnan Observatories are affiliates of the Beijing-based National Astronomical Observatories (国
家天文台), but they are located in Kunming, Yunnan. “Introduction” [单位简介], National Astronomical
Observatories, accessed May 9, 2024, https://archive.ph/JEOpB.

94 The Nanjing Institute of Astronomical Optics and Technology is an affiliate of the Beijing-based
National Astronomical Observatories (国家天文台), but it is located in Nanjing, Jiangsu. National
Astronomical Observatories, “Introduction” [单位简介].

95 The Nanjing Institute of Astronomical Optics & Technology was added to the Entity List on September
27, 2023, for procuring U.S.-origin items in likely furtherance of Chinese military research. BIS, “Addition
of Entities and Revision to Existing Entities on the Entity List; Removal of Existing Entity from the Military
End User List,” Federal Register 88 FR 66271 (September 27, 2023),
www.federalregister.gov/documents/2023/09/27/2023-21080/addition-of-entities-and-revision-to-
existing-entities-on-the-entity-list-removal-of-existing-entity.

96 The Xinjiang Astronomical Observatory is an affiliate of the Beijing-based National Astronomical
Observatories (国家天文台), but it is located in Urumqi, Xinjiang. National Astronomical Observatories,
“Introduction” [单位简介].

97 The Changchun Observatory (literally, “Changchun Artificial Satellite Observation Station”) is an
affiliate of the Beijing-based National Astronomical Observatories (国家天文台), but it is located in
Changchun, Jilin. National Astronomical Observatories, “Introduction” [单位简介].

98 The Beijing Genomics Institute—now BGI Group—was part of the Institute of Genetics and
Developmental Biology until 2003, when it was separated into a separate institute. Institute of Genetics
and Developmental Biology, “Institute Overview” [研究所概况].

99 The Center for Agriculture Resources Research is nominally a component of the Beijing-based CAS
Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology (遗传与发育生物学研究所), but it is located in a
different city (Shijiazhuang, Hebei) and is legally a separate entity. “Introduction to the Center” [中心简
介], Center for Agricultural Resources Research, accessed May 7, 2024, https://perma.cc/LR9C-LKVW.

100 The Institute of Computing Technology was added to the Entity List on December 16, 2022, for
acquiring and attempting to acquire U.S.-origin items in support of China’s military modernization. BIS
identifies this entity as a major AI-chip R&D, manufacturing, and sales entity. They also identify this

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 51

entity for being, or having close ties to, government organizations that support the Chinese military and
the defense industry. BIS, “Additions and Revisions to the Entity List and Conforming Removal from the
Unverified List,” Federal Register 87 FR 77505 (December 16, 2022),
www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/12/19/2022-27151/additions-and-revisions-to-the-entity-
list-and-conforming-removal-from-the-unverified-list.

101 The predecessor of the Institute of Microelectronics was the CAS 109 Factory (中科院 109 工厂). In
1958, it established China’s first transistor production factory. In 1965, the CAS 109 Factory built the
109B computer, which contributed to the development of the hydrogen bomb. In 1986, the CAS 109
Factory merged with the Institute of Semiconductors and the Institute of Computing Technology to form
the Institute of Microelectronics. Liu “Chinese Academy of Sciences and the ‘Two Bombs and One
Satellite’ Project”; “Institute Overview” [研究所概况], Institute of Microelectronics, accessed May 9, 2024,
https://perma.cc/9A52-7EX8.

102 The Data Assurance & Communications Security Center is one part of the State Key Laboratory of
Information Security (信息安全国家重点实验室). Both the DCS Center and its parent laboratory are
components of the CAS Institute of Information Engineering (中国科学院信息工程研究所). “Introduction
to the DCS Center” [DCS 中心介绍], Data Assurance & Communications Security Center, accessed May
7, 2024, https://perma.cc/JV6V-LGD6.

103 The Shenyang Institute of Automation was added to the Entity List on June 8, 2022, for acquiring
and/or attempting to acquire U.S.-origin items in support of military applications, contrary to the national
security or foreign policy interests of the United States. BIS, “Addition of Entities, Revision and
Correction of Entries, and Removal of Entities from the Entity List,” Federal Register 87 FR 38920 (June
28, 2022), www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/06/30/2022-14069/addition-of-entities-revision-
and-correction-of-entries-and-removal-of-entities-from-the-entity-list.

104 The Center for Agricultural Technology is a component of the CAS Northeast Institute of Geography
and Agroecology (中国科学院东北地理与农业生态研究所). “Homepage” [首页], Center for Agricultural
Technology, accessed May 7, 2024, https://perma.cc/NGA6-XWMK.

105 The Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology was added to the Entity List on
May 9, 2024, for acquiring and attempting to acquire U.S.-origin items in support of advancing China’s
quantum technology capabilities. BIS, “Additions of Entities to the Entity List,” Federal Register 89 FR
41886 (May 9, 2024), www.federalregister.gov/public-inspection/2024-10485/additions-of-entities-to-
the-entity-list.

106 The Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics was added to the Unverified List on April 11, 2019,
because BIS was unable to verify their bona fides through an end-use check. BIS, “Revisions to the
Unverified List (UVL),” Federal Register 84 FR 14608 (April 11, 2019),
www.federalregister.gov/documents/2019/04/11/2019-07211/revisions-to-the-unverified-list-uvl.

107 The Changsha Center for Mineral Resource Exploration is a component of the CAS Guangzhou
Institute of Geochemistry (广州地球化学研究所). “Changsha Center for Mineral Resource Exploration” [长
沙矿产资源中心], Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry, accessed May 9, 2024, https://perma.cc/ABD8-
JMF5.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 52
