FEBRUARY 2024
The French Model  
for Cooperative  
Semiconductor Research
Lessons from CEA-Leti
Sujai Shivakumar, Charles Wessner, and Thomas Howell
L
eading advanced economies are showing a remarkable level of interest in securing the future 
of their semiconductor industries, driven by a growing appreciation of the sector's economic 
and strategic importance as well as a sharp realization of the strategic vulnerabilities inherent 
in its global supply chain. Several countries have announced new policies and programs to support the 
industry and the research that underpins it. Many of these involve substantial financial support in the 
form of direct subsidies and generous tax incentives. While there is a strong national and regional flavor 
to these efforts, there is also a growing realization that the success of national programs may well hinge 
on international cooperation, especially in research and training. Indeed, the companies themselves—
however competitive in the marketplace—are often the first to emphasize the need for cooperation, 
especially in pre-competitive research.
Importance of Cooperative Research Organizations
Recognition of this reality has focused attention on the importance of the cooperative research 
organizations that bring together companies, university researchers, and their own highly trained staff 
to develop the technologies necessary to continue the semiconductor industry's unparalleled growth. 
The U.S. CHIPS and Science Act, the European Chips Act, and the Rapidus consortium in Japan 
all seek to strengthen and grow the role of these key research organizations. Leading centers include 
the Interuniversity Microelectronics Centre (IMEC) in Flanders, Belgium; SUNY Polytechnic Institute 
and its College of Nanoscale Science and Engineering (CNSE) in New York; and the Alternative Energies 
and Atomic Energy Commission's (CEA) "Leti" lab in Grenoble, France. Each of these institutions plays

The French Model for Cooperative Semiconductor Research  |  2
a unique and valuable role in the international network of research and cooperation that underpins the 
global semiconductor industry. 
Due to the central role of these institutions, it is important to understand their operations, organization, 
sources and scale of funding, and operational approach (i.e., membership and procedures), as well 
as the unique assets that each brings to the advancement of an industry that has transformed the 
world. Understanding these organizations' operations and roles in the global semiconductor network 
offers important lessons for the establishment of the National Semiconductor Technology Center 
(NSTC) called for in the CHIPS Act. With that goal in mind, this article reviews the Grenoble-based 
microelectronics research center known as CEA-Leti.
The Role of CEA-Leti
CEA-Leti is one of the world's leading nonprofit semiconductor research organizations, serving an 
intermediary role between basic research and industry applications. Other such organizations in 
Europe are Belgium's IMEC, Finland's VTT Technical Research Centre, Germany's Fraunhofer Society, 
and Spain's Tecnalia. CEA-Leti is part of a larger government organization, the French Alternative 
Energies and Atomic Energy Commission (CEA). Jean-René Lèqueypes, the deputy director of 
CEA-Leti, says of his organization that "we are an applied research laboratory, making the link with 
fundamental research. We collaborate closely with the fundamental research division within CEA, as 
well as with other research institutes outside of CEA, to explore novel paths for research. We take pure 
research and transfer it to industry in good condition." 
CEA-Leti represents a French "innovative model combining a strong link to academia with an equally 
strong collaboration with industrial partners." The most powerful expression of this approach is 
Minatec, CEA-Leti's innovation campus in Grenoble, "where education, research and industry are 
meeting in a single location for enhancing the innovation through cross-fertilization of various micro- 
and nanotechnology fields and where CEA-LETI plays a key role in applied research."
CEA-Leti's single-minded focus on applied research reflects an extraordinary decades-long effort by 
French policymakers to restructure a sclerotic innovation system to restore their country's role as a 
global innovation powerhouse. This substantial effort is one that some view as demanding "far-reaching 
socio-cultural change, as seen in England at the time of the Industrial Revolution and Japan in the Meiji 
era." Whether France will ultimately succeed is unclear, but there has been sufficient progress that some 
observers suggest the country may be emerging as an innovation model for Europe—and potentially 
even the world.
CEA-Leti's single-minded focus on applied research reflects 
an extraordinary decades-long effort by French policymakers 
to restructure a sclerotic innovation system to restore their 
country's role as a global innovation powerhouse.

Sujai Shivakumar, Charles Wessner, and Thomas Howell  |  3
France's Overhaul of Its Innovation System
While France has long exemplified the European paradox of tending to be strong in basic research and 
weak in applied research, CEA-Leti is widely acknowledged to be a superb applied research organization 
and thus a powerful demonstration of how France is making progress in changing that dynamic. Current 
French innovation strategy, which has been implemented in phases beginning in the early 1980s, 
emphasizes the need to bridge a long-standing and deeply embedded gap between the national research 
base and industry. The effort involves nothing less than changing the country's innovation culture, a 
decades-long challenge faced not only by France but also by leading science research countries such as the 
United Kingdom and Canada. France has had to overcome several obstacles: 
  ▪ A focus on basic research: The post–World War II French research base was dominated by 
the government's Paris-based National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS), the largest basic 
research organization in Europe. CNRS scientists traditionally accounted for an impressive array 
of Nobel prizes but were often relatively uninterested in applied research and technology 
development.
  ▪ A dearth of technical skills: The French education system was not producing enough qualified 
graduates with the skills needed by French industry and the national research base. Most of 
the best students at the grandes écoles, the elite universities that trained the country's leaders, 
showed little interest in doing scientific research or pursuing doctorates in the sciences. As a 
1986 report by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) found, 
"Although French society has always attached a great deal of importance to education. . . , this 
investment in education has for a very long time neglected the technical side, resulting in a 
marked deficiency in the technical culture of all sections of the population."
  ▪ The crowding out of small innovators: During the so-called Trente Glorieuses (30 "glorious" 
years of economic expansion between 1945 and 1975), certain national champion enterprises 
absorbed most of the public funds supporting applied research. These grandes programmes—
large-scale government research and development (R&D) projects—led to major and lasting 
technological successes for some favored sectors such as highspeed rail, atomic energy, and, 
later, telecommunications and aviation but starved small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 
and "other sectors of even the most basic support for technology innovation." In particular, the 
"lack of collaboration between start-ups and industrial groups in France . . . [has been] fatal 
for the quality of the French entrepreneurial ecosystem . . . [with the result that] the number of 
start-ups that have become 'number one' in their market is small."
  ▪ Programmatic redundancy: Successive French innovation policies tended to create new 
programs alongside existing ones. Instead of weeding out or consolidating unsuccessful 
programs, the approach was "often to create a new measure with more or less the same 
objectives but with a larger budget and/or a larger coverage," frequently leading to overlapping 
roles and duplication of efforts.
Recognizing these problems, President François Mitterrand initiated serious reform of French 
innovation policy. Beginning in 1982, he oversaw the enactment of legislation establishing a special 
fund to promote innovation (emphasizing SMEs), introducing R&D tax credits, and incentivizing 
collaboration between public research organizations and industry. As the junior minister for industry

The French Model for Cooperative Semiconductor Research  |  4
and foreign trade in the early 1990s, Dominique Strauss-Kahn made numerous visits to Silicon Valley, 
meeting and brainstorming with U.S. high-tech executives. Indicative of a radical rethinking of the 
French approach to innovation, in 1992 Strauss-Kahn asked:
Of what use is innovation if we do not have the techniques to industrialize and commercialize 
the products that result from this innovation? It is unthinkable for an advanced industrial 
society, such as France, to content itself with simply being a research center. We need 
to master the technologies that allow us to produce the advanced products which we 
conceptualize and design.
Many subsequent French innovation policy measures are grounded in this line of thought:
  ▪ Legislation: In a major step forward, in 1999 France enacted the Innovation and Research 
Act, which emphasized the creation of new firms that would transfer research results from 
public research organizations to French industry. Among other provisions, the law authorized 
government researchers to take part in innovative start-ups for six years without losing their 
civil service status, in effect incentivizing them to launch their own businesses.
  ▪ Decentralization: In 1992, the French government began moving 140 government research 
teams from Paris to 43 towns in the provinces, with the expectation that 4,500 researchers, 
engineers, and technicians would relocate to these areas by the end of the 1990s. Local 
governments were expected to support this effort by mobilizing regional scientific communities 
within the context of regional economic development plans.
  ▪ Tax incentives: The Research Tax Credit (CIR) established under Mitterrand was modified in 
phases between 2004 and 2008, eventually underpinning the "most attractive R&D tax regime 
in Europe." According to a 2021 study by Ernst and Young, over 77 percent of French start-ups 
benefited from the CIR that year, which significantly helped cover their R&D outlays.
  ▪ SME funding: In 2005, consolidating several public organizations, France created the Oséo 
Group, an industrial and commercial institution facilitating funding for innovative SMEs 
on favorable terms. Oséo, which is supported in part by the European Investment Bank, 
emphasizes funding ventures in the start-up, innovation, development, and buy-out phases.
  ▪ Clusters: In 2005, France established a program promoting pôles de compétitivité 
("competitiveness clusters"), public-private partnerships centered on specific geographic 
locations where companies and research organizations engage jointly in innovative projects. The 
government initially designated 67 clusters nationwide (possibly too many) and allocated 1.5 
billion euros to support them in the years 2006–08 and another tranche of 1.5 billion euros for 
2009–11. Designated clusters continue to receive government financial support through Oséo 
and the National Research Agency (ANR). Businesses belonging to clusters enjoy tax exemptions 
on R&D outlays and reduced social security contributions on behalf of R&D staff.
  ▪ Carnot Institutes: Starting in 2006, France began designating certain public applied research 
organizations as "Carnot Institutes," which represented not only a recognition of excellence 
but also qualification for "government funds correlated to the amount of revenue which each 
institute derives from contract research for French industry." This incentive-based system has

Sujai Shivakumar, Charles Wessner, and Thomas Howell  |  5
seen considerable success, perhaps because it has a mechanism to remove underperforming 
universities from the system.
  ▪ Continuity: Throughout the frequent modifications to French innovation policy, numerous 
changes in administrations, and the financial travails of certain French chip firms in a rapidly 
evolving global market, government support for the microelectronics sector has remained 
unwavering. Such policy continuity is also observable in other jurisdictions that have fostered 
competitive chip industries—examples include Japan's sustained support of its semiconductor 
industry during the Liberal Democratic Party's 38 years of uninterrupted governance post–
World War II; Taiwan's strong support of its chip industry under both the Kuomintang 
and the Democratic Progressive Party; and New York state's decades-long promotion of 
the semiconductor regimes under a succession of Democratic and Republican governors. 
Sustained government support enables long-term planning, training, and investment, as well 
as commitment by individuals to an industry in which jobs are unlikely to be destabilized by 
changes in government.
The Cradle of French Microelectronics
The Electronics and Information Technology Laboratory (Leti) was created by the French government 
in 1967 within the CEA. Its original mission was to provide the French nuclear program with knowledge 
of automation, but by the early 1980s it had "long since departed from that basic area and . . . [was] one 
of the most important chip laboratories in France."
CREATING NEW SEMICONDUCTOR COMPANIES
Soon after its creation, CEA-Leti began to focus on creating new semiconductor companies, some of 
which have become Europe's most globally competitive chip firms. Start-ups have been facilitated by a 
financial arm of the CEA, which invests an average of 500,000 euros in each new venture to encourage 
further private sector investment. Initial progress was slow, but by 2022 CEA-Leti had supported more 
than 70 new companies. The laboratory continues to collaborate with and support many of them, to 
remarkable effect:
  ▪ STMicroelectronics, Europe's largest semiconductor manufacturing and design firm, was 
"largely derived from Leti, where, after having manufactured a very first CMOS transistor in 
1968, a subsidiary was created to industrialize the process, Efcis, which would give birth to 
SGS-Thomson, which became STMicro." In 1990, CEA-Leti transferred silicon-on-insulator 
technology to Thomson-CSF, and to SGS-Thomson (one of STMicro's corporate 
predecessors) it transferred the process technology for 16-bit erasable programmable 
read-only memory (EPROM) chips and a production line for 1.2-micron analog CMOS devices 
for telecommunications applications. CEA-Leti supports and sometimes creates SMEs in 
the Grenoble cluster, while its partner STMicro outsources the development of designs and 
components to the cluster's SMEs. Not all the firms have succeeded at scale, but today STMicro is 
regarded as one of Europe's most innovative firms, specializing in the production of analog chips 
and low-power sensors. 
  ▪ Another example is Soitec, created in 1992 by four CEA-Leti researchers to use Smart-Cut™ 
technology to produce silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafers on an industrial scale. Since 2018, 
CEA-Leti has collaborated with Soitec on the Substrate Innovation Center (headed by a former

The French Model for Cooperative Semiconductor Research  |  6
CEA-Leti director) to develop silicon carbide semiconductors, which are expected to play a 
key role in electric vehicles. Today, Soitec boasts that it is "one of the crown jewels of France's 
industrial sector." It has over 2,000 employees and two wafer production facilities, one in 
France and one in Singapore. 
  ▪ Similarly, Sofradir was spun off from CEA-Leti in 1986 to exploit technology developed by the 
lab for infrared detectors. The company has continued to work with CEA-Leti, generating 55 
patents as of 2016. Today, it is "the world's second-leading vendor of cooled infrared detectors 
for aerospace, defense, and industrial applications" and is "expanding its business to cover all 
technologies on semiconductor materials for infrared detection."
At present, CEA-Leti is accelerating its start-up activities. According to Director Sébastien Dauvé, "Our 
objective revolves around three to five creations per year, compared to two or three until now." Over 
time, Leti has an even more ambitious challenge to create deep tech start-ups based on disruptive 
technologies and backed by close long-term support to accelerate their technological development.
ENSURING LONG-TERM POLICY SUPPORT
French measures promoting innovation since 1982 have materially contributed to CEA-Leti's 
evolution and success. Pursuant to the government's creation of competitiveness clusters in 2005, the 
Minalogic digital electronics cluster, of which CEA-Leti was a founding member, was established in the 
Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region. The cluster now has around 500 members, including 440 companies, 
and has benefited from a vast array of local, regional, national, and EU government programs. For 
example, CEA-Leti has been designated a Carnot Institute since the very inception of the program in 
2006 and "proudly carries the Carnot label of scientific excellence and professionalism." As of 2014, 
CEA-Leti and the National Office for Aerospace Study and Research (ONERA) between them accounted 
for about 40 percent of total Carnot funding, and other CEA-Leti spinoff start-ups have benefited 
substantially from the CIR R&D tax credit.
CEA-Leti was founded on the premise that it would derive "one industrial franc for one franc of 
subsidy." Over time, that ratio has evolved, with external research contracts now accounting for 
about 80 percent of its annual revenues ($332.5 million in 2022). According to former CEA-Leti CEO 
Marie-Noëlle Semeria, "These are research contracts with industrialists and collaborative contracts at 
the national or European level. We only have 20 percent of recurring resources allocated by the State, 
which is very low for a research institute, but which allows us to explore and continue to take risks." 
While private sector investment is important—and validating—public support nonetheless remains 
vital. CEA-Leti receives public funding from over a dozen national, regional, and EU government 
organizations, including the European Commission, the French National Research Agency, the City of 
Grenoble, and the French Ministry of the Economy, Industry, and Digital Technology.
GROWING THE CEA-LETI COMPLEX: UNPARALLELED INFRASTRUCTURE
A major factor in CEA-Leti's growth is its ability to offer partners extraordinary R&D infrastructure. 
It has an on-site research staff of over 2,000 specialists in microelectronics disciplines, with half 
working on semiconductor processes such as deposition, etching, planarization, photolithography, 
and bonding and advanced materials and half working on architecture and applications. The facility 
itself boasts 11,000 square meters (118,400 square feet) of ISO-certified 9001 cleanroom space, which 
it aims to expand by 2,700 square meters (29,060 square feet) over the next few years. Importantly,

Sujai Shivakumar, Charles Wessner, and Thomas Howell  |  7
it operates experimental production facilities for numerous microelectronics applications, including 
200- and 300-millimeter CMOS lines, 200-millimeter microelectronics machine (MEMS) lines, a 
300-millimeter photonics platform, and a 300-millimeter 3D integration line. CEA-Leti also operates 
a nanocharacterization platform that examines materials properties for microelectronics applications 
and can draw upon cutting-edge equipment operated by Grenoble's European Synchrotron Radiation 
Facility (ESRF) and Institut Laue–Lanvin (ILL). Together, this represents an extraordinary collection of 
innovative research facilities.
RESEARCH ACTIVITIES
CEA-Leti's "lab-to-fab" approach entails deriving knowledge from basic research and shepherding 
it through various phases so it can ultimately be transferred to industrial partners. Progress has 
been remarkable. Recent research achievements include the development of a brain-computer 
interface, which enables thought-controlled walking in the wake of spinal cord injuries; a new chip 
architecture inspired by human synapses; and technology supporting sixth-generation (6G) wireless 
communications.1
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
In what is possibly its most significant best practice, there is no single model for intellectual property 
(IP) management at CEA-Leti, with contractual arrangements tailored to the specifics of each project. 
In general, however, CEA-Leti retains ownership of the IP it develops, licensing this IP to its industrial 
partners. Reflecting these contributions, CEA-Leti currently holds over 4,000 patents.2 This enables Leti 
to provide its partners with the knowledge required to advance their innovation projects, relying on a 
well-managed and continually enhanced intellectual property portfolio.
CREATING THE MINATEC INNOVATION CAMPUS
The Minatec innovation campus embodies French policymakers' long-sought objective of fusing 
research, education, and industrial innovation. Minatec is the brainchild of CEA-Leti's then-director, 
Jean Therme, who in 1999 conceived of a research complex in Grenoble that would combine public and 
private technological resources and know-how with academic programs in engineering to foster applied 
research partnerships in microelectronics and nanotechnology in a single location. Concerned that the 
deactivation of nuclear facilities in Grenoble would lead to local economic decline, Therme became a 
tireless advocate of a regional transition to microelectronics-based research. He secured institutional 
commitments and raised an initial sum of 150 million euros from multiple local authorities 
(including the Department of Isère, the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region, and the City of Grenoble, which 
offered CEA-Leti an unoccupied piece of land downtown upon which to build).
Therme, who was dedicated to convening industry and academia to foster applied research, insisted on 
spending no more than two days per week in Paris, the epicenter of French basic science research. To 
ensure that representatives of different disciplines mingled with and engaged each other, the Minatec 
site featured only one canteen on site, and coffee machines were only located in communal areas.3
1   CSIS roundtable with CEA-Leti, September 25, 2023.
2   Ibid.
3   Peggy Hollinger, "Grenoble's Magnetic Force," Financial Times, June 24, 2005 (archived).

The French Model for Cooperative Semiconductor Research  |  8
After several years of preparation, Minatec was launched in 2006 as a collaboration between CEA-Leti 
and the Grenoble Institute of Technology. It included a physical research center where industry 
partners could collaborate with technology transfer experts, basic research labs such as the Federation 
of Microelectronic and Nanotechnologies, and engineering schools. Today, the Minatec campus 
convenes 3,000 researchers, 600 technology transfer professionals, and 1,200 students.
FOCUSING ON LEGACY CHIPS
Reflecting the realities of global competition and European strengths, CEA-Leti emphasizes research 
designed to improve the energy efficiency of legacy, or foundational, chips needed by many European 
users, rather than seeking to compete with Taiwan and Korea in continuous node shrinkage or the 
pursuit of cutting-edge 2-nanometer manufacturing. CEA-Leti is encouraging EU-level policies that 
address the needs of Europe's leading automotive and telecommunications firms "by focusing on 
sensors, power electronics, and 5G telecom chips at less advanced nodes." As Director Sebastién Dauvé 
said in 2022: 
Our position is to create value around electronics by mastering the basic technologies 
of microengraving at the level of silicon, sensors, radio frequency components or power 
electronics. Today, we are moving more toward so-called "more than Moore" functions, 
with varied applications for embedded intelligence in automobiles, health, industry, or the 
Internet of Things.
CEA-Leti has over 350 industrial partners, among them leading international chipmaking firms based 
in "like-minded countries."4 It has collaborated with many U.S. companies, including Qualcomm, IBM, 
Intel, Texas Instruments, Freescale (now part of NXP Semiconductors), and HP, in addition to other 
collaborations with like-minded countries.
FOSTERING COLLABORATIONS
Progress continues on promising new collaborative initiatives: 
  ▪ FD-SOI: In 2022, CEA-Leti, Soitec, STMicro, and GlobalFoundries launched a joint effort to 
develop fully depleted silicon-on-insulator (FD-SOI) semiconductors. FD-SOI technology is 
regarded as an alternative to fin field-effect transistor (FinFET) technology for applications with 
strong cost, reliability, integration, or consumption constraints—such as artificial intelligence (AI) 
at the edge, the internet of things, automobiles, and high-frequency processors.
  ▪ A new fab: Concurrently, GlobalFoundries and STMicro announced plans in 2022 to build 
a 300-millimeter semiconductor plant in Crolles, about 13 miles from Grenoble, to develop 
FD-SOI technology, augmenting STMicro's existing 200- and 300-millimeter fabs at the site. 
This investment totals an estimated 7.5 billion euros, 2.9 billion of which was committed by the 
government of France.
  ▪ EV chips: In 2022, CEA-Leti entered into a partnership with Valeo, a French multinational 
maker of automotive components, to develop power electronics modules for applications in 
electronic vehicles (EVs).
4   CSIS roundtable with CEA-Leti, September 25, 2023.

Sujai Shivakumar, Charles Wessner, and Thomas Howell  |  9
  ▪ Cutting-edge process technologies : CEA-Leti is engaged in numerous process-technology 
collaborations with Intel, which is planning massive investments in chip production in 
Europe. These include a project to develop a die-to-wafer self-assembly process and 
a project aimed at placing atomically thin transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) on 
300-millimeter wafers to create nanosheet transistors. Additionally, in December 2023, 
CEA-Leti unveiled a new joint lab with Applied Materials to focus on materials engineering 
research for a variety of specialty applications.
  ▪ Reducing energy consumption: The Leti 2030 program seeks to massively reduce the 
energy consumption of electronics by up to 1,000 times over the next decade. The organization 
forecasts that information and communication technologies, which today account for 14 percent 
of global electricity consumption, could account for only 4 percent by 2030.
ONGOING COOPERATION WITH THE UNITED STATES 
Although CEA-Leti's presence in the United States has historically been limited, it collaborates in 
semiconductor research projects with several leading U.S. institutions:
  ▪ Caltech: CEA-Leti and the California Institute of Technology have jointly developed 
components for nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS)—tiny devices like sensors, actuators 
(devices that cause machines to operate), and micromirror arrays that convert physical 
quantities such as speed, pressure, and direction into an electrical signal. In 2014, the partners 
transferred this technology to Apix Analytics, a Grenoble-based start-up that currently has 25 
industrial partners in the United States, Europe, and Asia.
  ▪ Stanford: CEA-Leti and Stanford University have been collaborating on chip technology since 
2016. In 2019, their research team unveiled a prototype for a "computer-on-a-chip," including 
processing circuits, memory storage, and power supply for applications such as monitoring 
crop moisture: "Equipped with machine learning algorithms, the chip could make on-the-spot 
decisions such as when to water. And with wireless technology it could send and receive data 
over the internet." 
  ▪ MIT: The Massachusetts Institute of Technology has been collaborating with CEA-Leti since 
2012 on the development of technologies such as chips that facilitate rapid tests for antibiotics, 
chips that mimic the working of the human brain, and semiconductor nanowires for solar cells, 
LEDs, and other applications from start-ups such as Travera.
  ▪ CNSE: CEA-Leti and the Albany-based College of Nanoscale Science and Engineering (CNSE) 
have been collaborating for 10 years with STMicro and IBM. Together, they have developed 
14-nanometer FD-SOI transistors that use strain engineering (the process of tuning a material's 
properties by altering its mechanical or structural attributes). They have also used advanced 
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to trace the evolution of polymer strains during the 
integration of stacked gate-all-around (GAA) nanosheet transistors.5 
CEA-Leti states frankly that it is looking to deepen research collaborations with the United States, 
a "like-minded country," particularly with respect to lab-to-fab platforms and coordination on R&D 
5   Ibid.

The French Model for Cooperative Semiconductor Research  |  10
areas. Of particular shared interest are developing "chiplet" technology (the combination of advanced 
packaging and heterogeneous integration), applying advanced materials beyond CMOS, and matrix 
vector multiplication (MVM) operations for in-memory computing.6
Grenoble's High-Tech Cluster
The fact that a French version of Silicon Valley was emerging in Grenoble was evident by the early 
1980s, when Dutch observers noted, "The essence of a real Silicon Valley lies in a large collection 
of small, rapidly growing, independent companies which constantly branch off into new ones. In 
Europe, only Grenoble comes anywhere near this kind of activity." When the French government 
launched its competitiveness cluster in 2005, Grenoble already enjoyed the government's "unofficial 
blessing" for cluster designation. Indeed, some have argued that "it was the city's pioneering efforts at 
uniting research, industry and education in the fields of micro and nanotechnology that inspired the 
government to launch the [cluster] campaign."
Even as the government was considering candidates for cluster designation, Philips, Freescale (later 
NXP Semiconductors), and STMicro were "investing $3bn in a new research facility, Crolles 2, to 
develop high-performance technologies for advanced semiconductor chips"—an alliance that worked 
hand-in-hand with CEA-Leti. Between 1992 and 2007, around $4.8 billion was invested in Grenoble's 
microelectronics and nanotechnology sectors. In part, this reflected the city's "strong tradition of 
public/private research partnerships"; by the time the region was designated a competitiveness cluster 
in 2005, approximately 70 percent of the 200 patents filed by CEA-Leti each year were the result 
of industrial partnerships. The educational and training infrastructure supporting microelectronics 
activities in Grenoble were extraordinary even by global standards. As Freescale's advanced technology 
director, Andreas Wild, said in 2005, "We came because we were attracted by the competence in the 
area. . . . We studied 20 different sites before choosing Grenoble."
Today, Grenoble hosts the largest concentration of engineers in France and supports more than 25,000 
research jobs, over 10,000 of which are in the private sector; the city also has the highest number 
of patents per capita in France at 8.5 per 10,000 inhabitants. Over 60,000 students attend its 10 
engineering schools, including the elite Joseph Fourier University and Grenoble Institute of Technology. 
World-class high-tech companies have had a major presence in the area, including HP, Xerox, IBM, 
Orange, and STMicro. The density of the cluster facilitates collaboration, as do CEA-Leti's exceptional 
facilities: "CEA-Leti works with companies spread across the three valleys around Grenoble. One valley 
is a hotbed for microelectronics [the Grésivaudan Valley, where the city of Crolles is located], another is 
home to innovation in imagery systems, and the third valley is dedicated to display technologies." 
Lessons from the CEA-Leti Model
CEA-Leti provides a powerful example of how to combine French statist traditions with strong 
connections to the private sector. The institution works closely with large companies, small companies, 
and start-ups. It draws on top-tier researchers, helping bring their skills and training to bear on both 
industrial challenges and societal problems. Its research facilities, university, and practical training 
6   Ibid.

Sujai Shivakumar, Charles Wessner, and Thomas Howell  |  11
meet the needs of a cooperative research institution that is focused on both current industry needs and 
promising technologies. 
In short, Leti's outstanding research facilities offer a major attraction, one that companies cannot 
provide themselves and that enables otherwise impossible technical advances. 
Outstanding research facilities offer a major attraction, one that 
companies cannot provide themselves and that enables otherwise 
impossible technical advances. 
From a public policy perspective, the continuity in the French approach has been essential. Successive 
governments have created an institution that attracts substantial resources for research, enabling it to 
create new and evolving programs while providing significant incentives for greater university-industry 
cooperation to address both commercial opportunities and social needs. This sizeable and sustained 
funding has proven to be a powerful engine for the cluster. Its exceptional research and educational 
facilities are complemented by a proven track record of successful international cooperation—which 
has, in turn, generated the trust to expand cooperation with new and growing programs in the United 
States and Europe.  ■
Sujai Shivakumar is director and senior fellow of the Renewing American Innovation at the Center for Strategic 
and International Studies (CSIS) in Washington, D.C. Charles Wessner is a senior adviser (non-resident) with 
the CSIS Renewing American Innovation. Thomas Howell is an international trade attorney specializing in the 
semiconductor industry and a consultant with the CSIS Renewing American Innovation.
This report is made possible by general support to CSIS. No direct sponsorship contributed to this report.
This report is produced by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), a 
private, tax-exempt institution focusing on international public policy issues. Its research is 
nonpartisan and nonproprietary. CSIS does not take specific policy positions. Accordingly, all 
views, positions, and conclusions expressed in this publication should be understood to be 
solely those of the author(s).
© 2024 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
