
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Issue Br ief
Mar c h 202 4
Bibliome tr ic
Anal ysis of China ’s
N on- Ther apeutic
Br ain-Com put er
Int er f ace R esear c h
Alt er nat e P at hs t o Cognitiv e
Augment ation and Contr ol
Aut hor s
W illiam C. Hannas, Hue y -Meei Chang,
Rishik a Chauhan, Daniel H. Chou,
John O’Callaghan, Max Riesenhuber ,
V ikr am V enk atr am, and Jennif er W ang

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2

Executive Summary
“Brain-computer (or brain-machine) interfaces” are a class of technology that allows
direct communication between biological brains and computational resources, without
the intervention of speech, tactile input, or the use of other sensory organs. Linkage is
achieved through wires or wirelessly to contact points placed on the skull or inside the
skull cavity. These interfaces—"BCIs”—have been used mainly to treat cognitive and
neurological impairments.
With improvements in related technologies, however, it is now feasible to extend BCIs
to the general population, potentially leading to a synthesis between the two types of
intelligence—human and machine. This facilitated “merger” of natural and artificial
cognition opens a path to a range of applications that could provide strategic
advantages to early adopters—a prospect that has not been lost on China.
The present study reviews Chinese papers and patents for evidence of research
consistent with the aspirations of Chinese scientists—captured in prior CSET studies—
to build toward this state of BCI-enabled cognitive enhancement. A bibliometric
analysis of several hundreds of Chinese documents indicates China embraces this goal
and has realistic pathways to achieve it. China’s research in non-invasive and invasive
BCI is at the world-class level thanks to indigenous work across the spectrum of
related disciplines and China’s ability to benchmark foreign designs.
Although collaboration with foreign and, especially, U.S. experts accounts for part of
China’s success, the analysis shows that global input to Chinese BCI programs
accounts for a small and diminishing volume of the research, as evidenced in co-
authorship patterns.
The study begins with an account of its assumptions and methods, followed by details
on the institutions and people that our analysis indicates are most likely to achieve
breakthroughs in non-therapeutic BCI in China. Medical uses of brain-computer
interfaces, while not part of the study’s focus, are cited where needed since they
underpin much of China’s BCI research.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3

Readers short on time can skip the preliminary sections and go directly to “Expert
Assessments” for an overview of the paper’s substantive findings, which are: Chinese
scientists are researching with measured success a variety of BCI technologies and
applications, with an emphasis on signal processing, new materials, and detecting
cognitive and emotional states. These efforts are comparable in sophistication to those
in the United States and the United Kingdom and position China to achieve a sought-
after merger of human and machine intelligence.
This study is a joint effort by analysts at Georgetown University’s Center for Security
and Emerging Technology and King’s College London’s Department of War Studies. It
is based wholly on Chinese open sources and benefits from insights provided by
neuroscience experts. The paper recommends an open-source monitoring program be
established to track China’s development of BCIs in the interest of national security
and safety.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4

Table of Contents
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................................... 2
Introduction .............................................................................................................................................. 5
Sources and Methods ........................................................................................................................... 7
China’s BCI Institutions....................................................................................................................... 10
China’s BCI Scientists ......................................................................................................................... 16
China’s BCI Companies ....................................................................................................................... 23
Content Analysis .................................................................................................................................. 27
Global Dependencies .......................................................................................................................... 35
Recommendations ............................................................................................................................... 39
Authors .................................................................................................................................................... 41
Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................................ 42
Endnotes ................................................................................................................................................. 43

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5

Introduction
Prior research by CSET analysts highlighted China’s efforts to “merge” human and
machine intelligence by leveraging advances in artificial intelligence.1 This goal,
announced in China’s 2017 “New Generation AI Development Plan,”2 is understood in
China metaphorically as human-machine interdependence, but also literally, in the
sense of building AI that replicates features of human cognition, so that as AI improves,
the distinction between the two types of intelligence disappears. There are (at least)
three paths to this latter goal and China is pursuing each of them.3
• Chinese scientists are modeling the structural and functional neural pathways
responsible for cognition, efforts that are “brain-inspired (类脑)” in a strict
sense.4
• China is also pursuing “traditional” and generative machine learning (ML) aimed
at eliciting human-like performance through training on large corpora, the goal
being artificial general intelligence (AGI) that mimics or exceeds human
cognitive ability.5
• Finally, China is leveraging brain-computer interfaces (BCI), originally developed
in therapeutics, to augment human cognition and human-machine teaming by
linking brains directly to computational resources.6
This last path to advanced intelligence is the topic of the present study. While the
theoretical outcome of all three approaches—acknowledged by Chinese scientists—
are forms of synthetic intelligence, or augmented general intelligence, brain-computer
interfaces may also support hybrid intelligence, in which human intentionality drives an
increasingly capable synthesis.
BCIs are direct communication paths between biological brains and external devices,
typically computers, designed originally for use in treating pathology such as paralysis
following a stroke or locked-in syndrome in advanced amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,
also commonly known as ALS.7 Although the technology has been under development
since the 1970s, recent advances in materials, placement strategies (based on
understanding the neural bases of cognitive function), signal processing techniques

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6

and machine learning (ML) have improved their functionality, opening the way to non-
therapeutic uses, such as cognitive enhancement and control. BCIs can potentially:
• Enable high-bandwidth connections that exceed conventional interfaces.
• Access private information (such as a person’s cognitive and emotional states).
• Directly stimulate neuronal targets and thereby achieve cognitive and
physiological states not otherwise possible (e.g., emotion control and alertness).
Other applications range from gaming through decision-making, as well as attention
monitoring, mood detection and modification, communications, weapons management,
robot control, and ultimately exobrains (“twin brains”)8 and digital immortality.9
Hence, BCIs are “dual-use” technologies whose therapeutic origin masks their potential
for applications that can confer strategic advantages on states adapting them for
scientific research, productivity gains, power projection and political control.10 These
practical applications may be realized well before BCI’s arrival as a catalyst for AGI,
adding urgency to the need to track their development. There are also ethical
challenges to BCI’s use that demand attention, ranging from medical risk to privacy and
autonomy usurpation at the most basic level.
Earlier CSET work identified through internet research Chinese BCI programs based on
non-invasive technology (electrodes placed on the scalp, e.g., using
electroencephalography, also known as EEG), where China has an established record
and new efforts based on invasive techniques (inside the cranium).11 The present study
looks deeper into China’s BCI enterprise with a particular focus on cognitive
augmentation, irrespective of placement strategy.12 Its goals are to evaluate Chinese
claims cited in the earlier CSET papers about the course of BCI development there and
provide a methodology to track it.
The study begins by describing its sources and methods. Details on China’s advanced
BCI infrastructure—derived from the metadata associated with patents and peer-
reviewed papers—are provided in sections on Chinese institutes, scientists, companies
and “global dependencies.” The study also assesses the content of these papers and
patents. Observations from these data inform a final set of recommendations.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7

Sources and Methods
The following source types were used in the study:
• BCI conferences in China and abroad
• China academic departments, laboratory websites
• China company websites, press releases
• Chinese and English-language academic journal articles
• Google and Baidu search strings
• Patents databases
• PRC ministry sites and state labs
• Subscribed database feeds (U.S. and UK)
• Technical books by Chinese publishers
Data collection began by defining two complementary approaches: (1) keyword
searches on the internet (for web-based information), on proprietary data holdings (for
patents and academic studies), and (2) incubators—some 20 organizations and 50
persons known from prior research13 to be involved in the targeted activity, whose
work and biographic data are publicly accessible.
Keyword choices straddled the gap between too broad and too narrow. Internet
searches on “BCI,” or “脑机接口 / brain-computer interface,” yielded millions of results,
even when paired with “中国 / China.” Narrower exotic terms such as “神经元逐步替换 /
gradual neuron replacement” and “心灵上传/ mind uploading” gave manageable
numbers but bypassed useful data. The upshot was a search strategy that combined
generic with focused terms,14 for example, “脑机接口 (BCI)” plus “信息高速公路 (high-
speed information highway),” to discover relevant web-based information.
The search for Chinese academic papers began with a query of the CSET Merged
Corpus of scholarly literature, including Clarivate’s Web of Science, Microsoft Academic
Graph, China National Knowledge Infrastructure, arXiv and Papers With Code, using
the terms "脑机接口 / brain-computer interface" for the years 2020-2022.15 Some
1,562 China-affiliated papers16 in English and Chinese were retrieved and reviewed as
candidates for a basic corpus.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8

Underlying the selection task was the matter of scoping the target itself. “BCI research
aimed at cognitive augmentation” or “cognitive enhancement beyond natural ability,”17
while clear enough conceptually,18 belie the fact that technology leading to this
“human-plus” state has its origins in therapeutic uses—applications meant to reverse
pathology. Removing medical uses entirely from the search, accordingly, suppresses
the knowledge needed to project future states.19
Also, this paper intentionally avoids military applications, which are beyond its scope,
as the topic is scrutinized by specialists and military uses can be inferred from general
improvements in BCI’s function and design. 20 Defense needs, however, can be drivers
for BCI breakthroughs, so some attention (e.g., drone control) had to be paid to this
area as well.
Given these considerations, the decision was made to judge a paper’s relevance by
relying on guidelines internalized by this study’s subject matter experts, namely,
“whether a paper shows current or potential use of BCI for cognitive enhancement
beyond restoring lost functionality.” To add rigor, the study’s two subject-matter
experts (SMEs) were asked to make these judgments independently. Papers on which
both SMEs agreed (106 of the original 1,562 titles) and another 35 papers gathered
independently were chosen as a baseline for finding additional papers using the co-
author relationships this first batch provided.21 Some 473 more papers were identified,
reduced to 370 after SME review, bringing the count to 511 papers.22
The surviving corpus of 370 “new” papers was expanded by leveraging their metadata
and bibliographies. Some 47 of these papers that one or both SMEs rated “high” in
relevance were used to generate additional papers by searching for co-authors and
cited references. Another 214 from the second run rated by both SMEs as “on topic”
(but not “high”) were also examined for new (co)author publications. Some 109 papers
judged by one SME only as relevant were retained but not further exploited. This third-
phase process yielded 244 more papers, reduced to 173 after review, for a sub-total of
684 vetted studies.
A fourth and final run examined the 30 most prominent Chinese authors in the
expanded corpus for Chinese language studies missed in prior searches, yielding 25

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9

more papers for a total of 709. The corpus was returned to the SMEs for a global
reexamination of their relevance using insights gleaned from each vetting process,
which eliminated 46 papers, and for characterization of their content. The final count
stood at 663 on-topic studies.
Besides China-affiliated academic papers, the present study examined BCI-related
patents assigned to China.23 A search was conducted on the CSET unified patents
dataset using the same BCI bilingual keywords used in the scholarly literature search.24
Query fields included patent title, abstract and description in both English and Chinese.
We considered a “China patent” to be a patent with at least one assignee or one
inventor claiming a China affiliation.
Some 346 patent records were obtained and subjected to review for topic relevance.
The 114 surviving records were returned to the SMEs for characterization by the same
criteria used for the academic papers. The result was a body of 777 records of persons
and organizations doing research judged to be consistent with the goal of BCI-
augmented cognition. These data inform the following sections on scientists,
organizations, and this study’s analytic observations.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10

China’s BCI Institutions
There were 280 unique institutional affiliations claimed by the first authors of 663 BCI
papers, reduced to 129 affiliations by grouping subordinate units under their parent
organizations.25 The 15 most prominent are given in Table A:
Table A. First-Author Affiliations of Selected Chinese BCI Academic Papers
Affiliated Institution Academic Papers
Tianjin University 95
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 55
Tsinghua University 52
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS) 33
Fudan University 29
South China Normal University 29
Hangzhou Dianzi University 27
Kunming University of Science and Technology 26
Beijing Institute of Technology 25
National University of Defense Technology (NUDT) 24
Hebei University of Technology 23
South China University of Technology 22
CAS Institute of Automation 19
Zhejiang University 18
East China University of Science and Technology 14

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 11

Here are the same 15 institutions plus two others geolocated to show their
distribution.26
Figure 1: China’s top BCI research institutions (by paper count)

Source: Table A above.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 12

Patents were assigned to 26 unique institutions, eight of which had three or more
patents as follows:
Table B. Top China BCI Patenting Institutions
Institute Patents
South China University of Technology 26
Chinese Academy of Sciences 17
Tsinghua University 15
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 10
Zhejiang University 7
Tianjin University 6
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4
Shandong University 3
The small number of patents (114) relative to academic papers (663) precludes direct
statistical comparison. Notably there were no outliers—patent assignees were present
in the full corpus of BCI papers without exception. Some additional observations:
• “Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)” patent assignees are indeterminable from
the data. A dozen second-tier units within CAS are cited in the academic studies,
the most prominent being its Institute of Automation (自动化所). The CAS
University, another high-scorer in the papers tally, may also figure into the
balance.

• Wuhan’s Huazhong University of Science and Technology (10 patents) scored
modestly (6 papers) in the survey of first-author affiliations. That number rises
to 18 papers in the full corpus, only one of whose authors claims a second
affiliation. This is unusual, as most authors register multiple affiliations beyond
their primary one. The other prominent BCI facility whose authors cite no
secondary affiliations is Changsha’s National University of Defense Technology.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 13

• South China University of Technology’s strong patents showing, absolutely and
relative to its papers (12th of 15 institutions), is explained by its association with
Guangdong’s Pazhou Lab (琶洲实验室), which appears 43 times in the full
studies corpus, split between researchers at South China University of
Technology and South China Normal University.27
The following organizations, listed with a few of their highlights, are among the top
performing Chinese BCI institutes based on published papers and noteworthy
research.
• CAS Institute of Automation (中科院自动化所) besides its AI portfolio, also does
BCI research. The institute’s work on coding and decoding visual neural
information is key to China’s BCI development. A 2021 report, “BAAI AI
Frontiers,” listed among CASIA’s achievements a robotic system that can
“accurately implant flexible electrodes into the cerebral cortex of animals,”
facilitating China’s broader use of invasive BCIs.28

• Fudan University’s (复旦大学) Institute of Brain-inspired Circuits and Systems (类
脑芯片与片上智能系统研究院) in 2021 announced China’s first wireless BCI
circuit for sending information between a chip and nerve cells. Team leader Ye
Dawei (叶大蔚)29 claims it “outperforms foreign versions on many levels” at half
the cost.30 The device is currently installed on the skulls of freely moving mice.

• Haihe Laboratory for Brain-Computer Interaction and Human-Computer
Integration (脑机交互与人机共融海河实验室) was established in March 2023
under Tianjin University’s leadership. The lab is a focal point for a consortium of
national institutions and some 60 top scientists led by academician Gu Xiaosong
(顾晓松) from the university’s School of Medicine.31 It aims to solve technical
problems delaying BCI’s wider adoption.32

• Hangzhou Dianzi University (杭州电子大学) hosts both a “Key Laboratory of
Brain-Machine Collaborative Intelligence (脑机协同智能重点实验室) and an
International Joint Research Center for Brain-Machine Collaborative Intelligence

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 14

(脑机协同智能技术国际联合研究中心). The latter is sponsored by the Ministry of
Science and Technology and is joined by “renowned experts” from Germany,
Italy, Japan, Russia, and the United States.33

• Nankai University’s (南开大学) College of Artificial Intelligence, another Tianjin
facility, while not a high-scorer in the tally (five papers totally), merits inclusion
here based on its early development of “interventional” BCI—a minimally
invasive technique that puts electrodes in contact with motor cortex by entering
the cranium through the jugular vein. Duan Feng (段峰) led the research with
support from the People's Liberation Army (PLA) 301 Hospital.34

• Shanghai Jiao Tong University’s (上海交通大学) Ruijin Hospital BCI and
Neuromodulation Center (瑞金医院脑机接口及神经调控中心) was founded in
2020 with the goal of using BCI to address depression and other
neuropsychological illnesses, (i.e., BCI’s “affective” applications.)35 It aims to
“implant chips into patients’ brains via a minimally invasive surgery” followed by
electrical stimulation based on AI analysis.36

• South China University of Technology’s (华南理工大学) Center for BCI and Brain
Information Processing (脑机接口与脑信息处理中心) was established in 2007. It
hosts multiple BCI “platforms” (平台) with a wide range of equipment,
supported by alliances with hospitals and “overseas institutions.” The center is
partnering with the Chinese IT company iFlytek on BCI development.37

• Tianjin University (天津大学) is at the forefront of China’s BCI development. In
2019, the university unveiled its “Brain Talker” (脑语者) processing chip, which is
able to separate signals from noise efficiently. The chip will “replace traditional
computer devices used in BCI.”38 A faster chip is under development.39 The
university was using a 100-target “very large instruction set” matrix in 2019 and
a matrix with 200+ squares in 2023.40

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 15

• Tsinghua University’s (清华大学) BCI Lab (脑机接口研究组), established in 2004,
studies the application of BCI to cognitive skill assessment for use in “human-
machine collaboration.”41 Tsinghua is pushing the frontier on high-throughput,
EEG-based interfaces. It was the first in China to implement non-invasive BCI
technology based on steady-state visually-evoked potential (SSVEP).42

• Zhejiang University (浙江大学) was first in China to do invasive BCI research and
was implanting electrodes in primates by 2012.43 Its Double Brain Center (双脑
中心)44 dates from 2018; its School of Brain Science and Brain Medicine (脑科学
与脑医学学院) set up in 2019 hosts a National Key Laboratory of Brain-
computer Intelligence (脑机智能全国重点实验室).45 By 2021, the university’s BCI
and Intelligence Integration Team were building hybrid invasive/non-invasive
BCI systems.46
Finally, it is worth noting that eight of 10 BCI organizations singled out in an earlier
CSET study on Chinese AGI precursor research based on “internet sources judged to be
reliable” are replicated in this SME-vetted inventory.47

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 16

China’s BCI Scientists
Some 1,901 non-unique China-affiliated author names were captured from the 663
BCI papers, by the following rules: include up to three China-based authors per
paper,48 including first author, second author if work was shared equally, corresponding
author (if specified), and/or the last author (typically the senior person).49 Removing
duplicates left 993 unique authors. Here are the most prominent (author’s name
appears on the bylines of eight or more papers):
Table C. Most Frequent (Co)Authors of Selected China BCI Studies
Authors Papers Institutions
MING Dong (明东) 62 Tianjin University, Tianjin
LU Baoliang50 (吕宝粮) 40 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai
XU Minpeng (许敏鹏) 34 Tianjin University, Tianjin
GAO Xiaorong (高小榕) 33 Tsinghua University, Beijing
PAN Jiahui (潘家辉) 28 South China Normal University,
Guangzhou
KANG Xiaoyang (康晓洋) 24 Fudan University, Shanghai
FU Yunfa (伏云发) 17 Kunming University of Science and
Technology, Kunming
HE Huiguang (何晖光) 17 CAS Institute of Automation, Beijing
JUNG Tzyy-Ping (钟子平) 17 Tianjin University, Tianjin51
LI Yuanqing (李远清) 17 South China University of Technology,
Guangzhou
CHEN Xiaogang (陈小刚) 14 CAMS and Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing
LIU Jingquan (刘景全) 14 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 17

CHEN Xun (陈勋) 13 University of Science and Technology of
China, Hefei
JIN Jing (金晶) 13 East China Univ. of Science and
Technology, Shanghai
KONG Wanzeng (孔万增) 12 Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou
LI Xiaojian (李骁健) 12 Shenzhen Institute of Advanced
Technology, Shenzhen
QIU Shuang (邱爽) 12 CAS Institute of Automation, Beijing
HU Dewen (胡德文) 10 National University of Defense
Technology, Changsha
WANG Yiwen (王怡雯) 10 Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology, HK
CAI Xinxia (蔡新霞) 9 State Key Lab of Transducer
Technology, CAS, Beijing
JI Bowen (吉博文) 9 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai
WANG Xingyu (王行愚) 9 East China Univ. of Science and
Technology, Shanghai
WU Dongrui (伍冬睿) 9 Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan
ZHOU Zongtan (周宗潭) 9 National University of Defense
Technology, Changsha
PENG Yong (彭勇) 8 Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou
These data comport well with information on recipients of the 2023 Huanao Award (华
瑙奖) for BCI research. The award is jointly conferred by the Haihe Laboratory for
Brain-Computer Interaction and Human-Computer Integration (see above) and Tianjin’s
National Key Laboratory of Advanced Medical Materials and Devices (先进医用材料与
医疗器械全国重点实验室).52

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 18

Table D. Huanao Scholar Award Recipients and Prominent BCI Paper Authors
Huanao Scholar Awardees CSET-Selected papers
Lifetime Achievement Award
GAO Shangkai (高上凯) 1
WANG Mingshi (王明时) 0
Outstanding Scholar Award
GAO Xiaorong (高小榕) 33
HU Dewen (胡德文) 10
LI Yuanqing (李远清) 17
YAO Dezhong (尧德中) 3
ZHAO Guoguang (赵国光) 0
Distinguished Young Scholar Award
CHEN Xun (陈勋) 13
CHENG Longlong (程龙龙) 0
JIN Jing (金晶) 13
LI Xiaojian (李骁健) 12
WANG Yijun (王毅军) 7
WANG Yiwen (王怡雯) 10
WU Dongrui (伍冬睿) 9
WU Xia (邬霞) 4
XU Minpeng (许敏鹏) 34
YIN Erwei (印二威) 4

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 19

That is, 13 of the 15 working BCI scientists recognized with a Huanao Award authored
papers selected as significant by two U.S. neuroscientists using independent criteria.
One outlier, Zhao Guoguang, was awarded for “clinical applications” of BCIs, which is
outside the present study’s scope.53 The other, Cheng Longlong, achieved prominence
for building a “brain talker chip” (see above), worn externally and designed to replace
traditional computer devices.54 Both Zhao and Cheng appear as authors in the
collected corpus but not in positions of prominence.
Authorship distribution for these papers reflects a familiar pattern, wherein scientists
leading the execution of the research claim first- and second-author status, while those
guiding the research appear toward the end of the byline. The 663 papers studied had
501 unique first authors, 10 of whom had five or more papers in 2020-2023.55 By
contrast, there were 238 unique “final” authors, fewer than half the number of unique
first authors, 20 of whom made six or more appearances.56 Pan Jiahui (潘家辉)
excepted, all the most prominent authors in this study fall into one group or the other,
that is, hands-on researchers presumably doing novel science versus more senior
persons making administrative decisions.
There is value in capturing details on both types, top first authors and those who
register highest overall. The following scientists are drawn proportionately from the
two groups:57
Prominent Chinese BCI Scientists
CHEN Xiaogang (陈小刚) is an associate researcher at the Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College (中国医学科学院北京协和医学院) in Tianjin.
His PhD is from Tsinghua in biomedical engineering and his research areas are
neuromodulation, BCI and intelligent robots, with publications in multiple sub-
disciplines. He belongs to several industry associations, has won global robotics
competitions, and has three personal patents.58
CHEN Xun (陈勋) earned a PhD from the University of British Columbia in 2014 and is
a full professor at Hefei’s University of Science and Technology of China, where his
work on BCIs, signal processing and image analysis won him high awards and entry to

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 20

national-level “key” projects.59 He is also director of a “Joint Laboratory for Brain and
AI” (脑机智能实验室) with Zepp Health Corporation (华米科技)60 engaging in invasive
and non-invasive BCI development.61
GAO Xiaorong (高小榕) received a doctorate from Tsinghua’s Biomedical Engineering
Department in 1992 and continues there as a professor today. Gao is recognized
worldwide and credited with founding BCI research in China, in particular SSVEP
technology.62 His long-term research focuses on practical and theoretical analysis of
EEG data for clinical applications and as a path toward understanding brain function.
His publications number over 100, many highly cited.63
HU Dewen (胡德文) earned an MS degree from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 1986,
joined the People’s Liberation Army in June of that year, and was a visiting scholar at
the UK’s University of Sheffield in 1995-1996. Hu’s PhD is from the National University
of Defense Technology (1999),64 where he researches brain, cognitive science, and
control science. He received multiple Chinese “talent” awards and is author of more
than 300 papers.65
JIN Jing (金晶) received a PhD from Shanghai’s East China University of S&T in 2010,
where he serves as professor and chair of its Automation Department.66 Jin is one of
China’s most widely connected BCI researchers, serving on the boards of numerous
top-ranked BCI journals and in industry organizations. His research focuses on human-
machine hybrid intelligence, signal processing and the development of exoskeleton
robots.67
KANG Xiaoyang (康晓洋) earned a doctorate from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in
2016, then did postdoc research at the Laboratory for Soft Bioelectronic Interfaces,
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne. In 2018 he joined Fudan University’s
faculty where he studies biomedical microelectronic devices, neural engineering, and
brain-computer interaction. Kang’s research on soft implantable neural interfaces has
been funded by municipal and state-level bodies.68
LI Xiaojian (李骁健) received a PhD from CAS’s Institute of Biophysics in 2010, did
postdoc work at the Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University under Joe Tsien

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 21

(钱卓) in 2010-2013,69 and was a research associate at Illinois’ Northwestern
University until taking his present post at CAS’s Shenzhen Institute of Advanced
Technology in 2018.70 Li founded We-Linking Medical (see below), where he develops
optically controlled interfaces.71
LI Yuanqing (李远清) earned a PhD from South China University of Technology in 1997
and stayed on as faculty, with stints at Japan’s RIKEN Brain Science Institute (2002-
2004) and Singapore’s Information and Communication Institute (2004-2008), where
he researched brain signal analysis. His Center for BCI and Brain Information
Processing (脑机接口与脑信息处理中心) collaborates with iFlytek on “brain-computer
collaborative hybrid intelligence.”72
LU Baoliang (吕宝粮) is a professor at Shanghai Jiao Tong University, director of its
Center for Brain-like Computing and Machine Intelligence (仿脑计算与机器智能研究中
心) and head of the affiliated Center for Brain-Machine Interface and Neuromodulation
(脑机接口及神经调控中心) and Ruijin-MiHoYo Lab. He earned a PhD at Kyoto University
in 1994, remaining in Japan until 2002 at RIKEN in Nagoya. Lu specializes in affective
BCI and emotion recognition.73
MING Dong (明东), a Tianjin University PhD (2004), is now vice president of the
university, professor in its School of Precision Instrument and Optoelectronics
Engineering and head of the Tianjin Brain Science and Brain-inspired Research Center
(脑科学与类脑研究中心). Ming holds the record for number of papers selected for this
study as does the university itself. His research interests range from neural stimulation
and interfaces to neural sensing and imaging.74
PAN Jiahui (潘家辉) earned a PhD at South China University of Technology in 2014
under Li Yuanqing in pattern recognition and intelligent systems.75 He is now vice dean
of South China Normal University’s School of Software and director of the affiliated
Brain-Computer Interaction and Hybrid Intelligence Research Center (脑机交互与混合
智能研究中心), founded in 2019.76 Pan’s research is on BCIs, brain signal processing
and pattern recognition.77

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 22

PENG Yong (彭勇) is a professor at Hangzhou Dianzi University and deputy director of
its Institute of Cognitive and Intelligent Computing (认知与智能计算研究所).78 He was
awarded a PhD from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2015 after two years studying in
the University of Michigan’s Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science. Peng researches machine learning, pattern recognition, and EEG-based BCI.79
WANG Yiwen (王怡雯) did pre-doctoral work at Hefei’s University of Science and
Technology of China. In 2008 she earned a PhD from the University of Florida under
Professor Jose C. Principe,80 and was with Zhejiang University before joining the Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology’s faculty in 2017. Wang’s work in
computational neuroscience and neural decoding for BCI has won her top spots on
IEEE committees and on the boards of leading IEEE journals.81
WU Dongrui (伍冬睿) received a PhD in electrical engineering from USC, Los Angeles
in 2009 and is now a professor with Huazhong University of Science and Technology in
Wuhan researching BCI, affective computing and computational intelligence.82 Wu’s
BCI and Machine Learning Laboratory (脑机接口与机器学习实验室) within the
university’s School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation is funded by state and local
governments and by Huawei, Alibaba, Baidu, and Ant Group.83
XU Minpeng (许敏鹏) earned a PhD from Tianjin University in 2015 and is now vice
dean of its Academy of Medical Engineering and Translational Medicine, where he
researches BCI. Xu holds positions of importance in numerous industry associations
and has received significant national-level funding since 2017. He was at UC San
Diego’s Institute for Neural Computation from 2014 to 2015.84 In 2022, Xu directed
China’s first open-source BCI platform “MetaBCI.”85

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 23

China’s BCI Companies
According to a Chinese ministry report, in 2023 there were more than 100 BCI
companies in China, up from around half that number two years prior.86 A survey of the
Chinese BCI industry in the technology news journal 36Kr noted that “outside of the
medical scene, BCI companies have their sights on the brain science research market,
mainly domestic brain science and brain-like research, neuroscience, language and
cognitive function, psychology research and other laboratories, and on providing
scientific research tools and services.”87
The following ten Chinese BCI companies and one industry association surfaced while
doing Internet searches on scientists and institutions for this study, or as the secondary
affiliations of authors who contributed to the corpus of papers. Within this sample are
companies whose business models address both the therapeutic and cognitive
facilitation aspects of BCI.
Neuracle (博睿康)
Neuracle was established in 2011 by a team from Tsinghua University’s Neural
Engineering Laboratory (神经工程实验室) and continues to benefit from the association.
The company specializes in the research, development, and production of non-invasive
and minimally invasive (微创脑机接口) BCIs. Its main customers include several of the
universities highlighted above.88 The company’s wireless EEG acquisition system and
transcranial electrical stimulation products are used in biomedicine, psychology,
cognitive science, neuroscience, and neuromodulation.89
NeuraMatrix (宁矩科技)
NeuraMatrix is another company incubated by Tsinghua University. Stood up in 2019, it
builds active implantable systems interfacing with the human body and artificial
devices. Whereas China has decades of experience with non-invasive BCI systems,
NeuraMatrix was China’s first company to build an implantable device. Unlike other
Chinese BCI projects whose goal is to alleviate disability, NeuraMatrix openly states its
aim to augment the cognitive power of people in general “by effectively merging

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 24

human and artificial intelligence.” Its products include electrode materials, a neural
interface chip, and “infinite multi-point interface equipment.” 90
Zhiran Medical (智冉医疗)
Zhiran was founded in Beijing in 2022, with composite experience dating back a
decade. The company offers “precise diagnosis and treatment of neurological
diseases.”91 It was created by Fang Ying (方英)—a researcher at China’s National
Center for Nanoscience and Technology (国家纳米科学中心) and former Harvard
student92—and by current CEO Song Qi (宋麒), a University of Iowa PhD recipient, who
worked at GE’s Global R&D Center in New York.93 Their team researches neural tassel
electrodes (神经流苏电极) and ultra-flexible micro-electrode arrays.94
Xinzhida Neurotechnology (芯智达神经技术)
Also located in Beijing, Xinzhida Neurotechnology was founded in March 2023 under
Luo Minmin’s (罗敏敏). management. Luo is co-director of the Chinese Institute for
Brain Research (北京脑科学与类脑研究中心), which studies brain-inspired AI and BCI.95
The firm appears to be a brokerage operation, whose main business is “technology
transfer, promotion and exchange.” 96 Xinzhida leads the Intelligent Brain-Computer
System Enhancement Program (智能脑机系统增强计划) stood up in April 2023 to
integrate Beijing area BCI resources and “build the world's leading brain-computer
interface equipment.”97
Stairmed (阶梯医疗)
Founded in August 2021 in Shanghai, Stairmed builds implantable BCIs aimed at
human body function restoration and function enhancement (机能增强). The company
produces “ultra-flexible micro-nano electrodes (超柔性微纳电极) yielding a “spatial
sampling density” of 1024 channels/cubic mm.98 Stairmed was founded by Zhao
Zhengtuo (赵郑拓), a researcher at CAS’s Center for Excellence in Brain Science and
Intelligence Technology (脑科学与智能技术卓越创新中心) and by Li Xue (李雪), also at
CEBSIT and head of its Multimodal Neural Interface Research Group. Zhao’s PhD is
from the University of Texas at Austin. Li earned his PhD at Rice University.99

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 25

Tianqiao and Chrissy Chen Institute (陈天桥雒芊芊研究院)
Founded at Caltech in 2016 by online gaming pioneer Chen Tianqiao (陈天桥) and his
spouse Chrissy Luo (雒芊芊), the institute established in 2020 and 2021 two “Frontier
Labs” (前沿实验室) for brain research, one at Huashan Hospital (华山医院) in Shanghai
headed by neuroscientist Gerwin Schalk,100 the other at the Shanghai Mental Health
Center (上海精神卫生中心), whose vision statement reads: “To enrich people’s lives
with brain- and mind-related technology.” The institute intends to extend the
development of its invasive BCI products beyond therapeutics to cognitive
augmentation.101
NeuroXess (脑虎科技)
NeuroXess, also in Shanghai, produces invasive BCI products102 aimed at “twinning” (孪
生) human and artificial intelligence.103 Its “flexible BCI system” benchmarks the U.S.
company Neuralink’s products and was inspired by work that its founder Tao Hu (陶虎)
did at Tufts University.104 Tao, who is also at CAS’s Shanghai Institute of Microsystem
and Information Technology (上海微系统与信息技术研究所), aims at cognitive
augmentation and a merger with AI. Along the way, BCI will support “emotional
regulation and cognitive assessment.”105 Tao predicts the “digitization of humans”
through BCI.106
Neuracom (衷华脑机)
Neuracom was founded by Huang Li (黄立) in 2021. The company offers “a one-stop
implantable brain-computer interface system” claimed to be on a par with the world’s
best.107 Neuracom is part of Wuhan’s China Optics Valley Brain Science Industrial Base
(中国光谷脑科学产业基地) in the city’s East Lake High-tech Development Zone (东湖高
新区), which is host to Huazhong University of Science and Technology’s Brain
Institute, CAS’s Institute of Automation, and other leading organizations, whose
collective goal is to build “the first brain-computer interaction industrialization project
in Central China.”108

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 26

BrainCo (强脑科技)
BrainCo, with branches in Hangzhou, Shenzhen, and Boston, was founded in 2015 by
Han Bicheng (韩璧丞) and a team of fellow Chinese students at the Harvard Innovation
Lab. Besides Harvard, BrainCo’s website lists MIT, Yale University, Boston University,
and other foreign entities as collaborators.109 Its products, based on non-invasive
technology, include a bionic hand, an “intelligent” prosthetic leg, neurofeedback sleep
aids and an attention-monitoring headband that debuted in a Zhejiang elementary
school. BrainCo claims to have funding in excess of USD 200 million and U.S. FDA
approval for its products.110
We-Linking (微灵医疗)
We-Linking was established in April 2019 in Shenzhen with branches in Beijing,
Suzhou, and Maryland and is credited as being a “full-suite” producer of invasive BCI
products.111 Its founder, Li Xiaojian (李骁健) is affiliated with CAS’s Shenzhen Institutes
of Advanced Technology (深圳先进技术研究院) and, like many of the entrepreneurs
listed here, trained and worked extensively in the United States.112 In November 2023,
the company and its CAS affiliate established a Brain-Computer Intelligent Integration
Technology Joint Laboratory (脑机智能融合技术联合实验室) for implantable BCI.113
Brain-Computer Interface Industry Alliance (脑机接口产业联盟)
This BCI industrial alliance—China’s first—was formed in February 2023 under
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology auspices with support from Tsinghua
and other major institutions.114 It is led by Yu Xiaohui (余晓晖), head of the China
Academy of Information and Communications Technology (中国信息通信研究院).115 Its
secretary-general Li Wenyu (李文宇) stated in May 2023 that Chinese researchers
have experimented on humans and other primates using implantable and
interventional (介入式) technology.116 As of November 2023, some 151 BCI-related
organizations had joined.117

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 27

Content Analysis
Besides collecting metadata on China’s BCI infrastructure, the present study also
analyzed the content of papers and patents to assess the research itself.
Based on an initial review of a subset of the literature, this study’s two subject-matter
experts built a taxonomy that was used to classify each paper/patent. One focus of the
taxonomy was experimental technique. Primary distinctions were “recording” for brain
signal read-out or “stimulation” for signal input, and whether the data were obtained
using invasive means (“brain implant”) or not. Given the preponderance of approaches
using EEG, “EEG” was used as a separate category for studies using EEG. Since EEG
always involves recording, no separate “recording” label was used for these studies.
Recording and stimulation techniques that used methods other than EEG or brain
implants, such as fNIRS (functional near-infrared spectroscopy),118 fMRI (functional
magnetic resonance imaging),119 or ultrasound, but also studies supplementing neural
signals with non-neural signals (such as eye movements), were labeled as “other.”
Studies that did not focus on a specific application, but rather on the data science
of extracting predictive features from neural signals for a variety of applications were
labeled “algorithm development.”

A second focus of the taxonomy was on the application area. We used “hardware
engineering” for papers/patents on developing new hardware, such as novel material
science, new micro-electrodes, and experimental platforms. “Autonomous robot
control” included driving-related applications such as detecting braking signals, as well
as wheelchair and exoskeleton control, along with control of small robots or unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs).
“Emotion detection” labeled papers/patents on extracting information about users’
emotional states. “Cognitive state monitoring” was used as a label for studies/patents
that focused on extracting information about non-emotional cognitive states such as
focused attention, cognitive load, or error processing. The latter category also included
a few studies on epilepsy monitoring.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 28

“Communication” included papers/patents focused on allowing the user to
communicate without voluntary muscle movement. This included applications to
decode inner (i.e., imagined) speech and applications such as P300 spellers120 and
studies using SSVEP (steady state visually evoked potential)121 to allow users to select
particular items from streams of information. It also included motor imagery or the
ideation of moving muscles, if the focus was on using the signals to allow users to
communicate.
“Fatigue detection” included studying signals indicating users’ fatigue or vigilance.
Studies on the ethical aspects of using BCI were labeled “ethics.” Lastly, we used
“review/editorial” to label studies that reviewed the field but did not provide primary
data.
Figures 2 and 3 depict, respectively, the numbers of papers and patents associated
with these 14 categories.
Figure 2. Chinese BCI Studies—Topical Characterization

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 29

Figure 3. Chinese BCI Patents—Topical Characterization

Not surprisingly, given the relative simplicity of collecting brain data using EEG, there
was a preponderance of studies using that technique. In comparison, since most
invasive BCI require a skilled neurosurgeon and have complex ethical implications,
there were many fewer papers using brain implants.
The large number of studies with a “communication” label was due to many studies
using EEG for P300/SSVEP-type applications. The relatively large number of studies
focusing on emotion detection was remarkable, in particular relative to the general BCI
literature (i.e., not just limited to that including Chinese authors).
The large number of papers on improving decoding of EEG signals is striking. This
confirms the known issue of interpretability of EEG signals, poor signal quality, and the
determination of the labs to overcome these challenges with state-of-the-art machine
learning techniques.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 30

Expert Assessments
The following evaluations of China’s BCI capabilities are provided by this study’s two
subject-matter experts, Drs. Wang and Riesenhuber, based on materials they
examined here and their knowledge of global trends.
Dr. Jennifer Wang, neurotech SME for R&D programs
China’s BCI community has focused on EEG—a non-invasive interface to advance brain
read-out technology that is low-cost, low-risk, as well as easy to operate and scale.
However, recording signals from outside the brain is like listening to a concert through
walls; interpreting scalp electrical signals has historically been challenging due to its
diffuse and noisy nature. The desire to overcome this challenge is reflected in the large
volume of data science studies reported here that leverage state-of-the-art machine
learning techniques to improve feature analysis of brain signals, which can be used for
controlling devices or revealing mental states. The massive effort to improve EEG
signal analysis is remarkable and may have resulted in successes such as a “world-
first” claim by Xinhua in May 2023, where a Nankai University laboratory demonstrated
robotic arm control through an EEG BCI interface in a macaque monkey.122 In this
invasive (interventional) study, the electrodes are implanted inside a brain blood vessel
for recording. Many obstacles remain for invasive BCI devices to be safe for humans.
The analysis of publications presented here suggests that in addition to clinical
rehabilitation, there’s a strong push towards understanding brain read-out for a
multitude of practical uses in the general population. These applications are mainly
targeted at improving life quality and providing next-level biofeedback. Applications
for autonomous driving include driver intent-triggered assistive braking and driver
fatigue detection; using brain signals to control wheelchairs, computer games or smart
home functions. Being a leading manufacturer of uncrewed autonomous vehicles
(UAVs), China also seeks to find more sophisticated UAV/swarm control algorithms
using BCIs to surpass existing computer algorithms. Developing brain-controlled
Chinese character input has a notable number of studies in our review. This offers
patients with motor deficits a way of communication and an additional method for

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 31

healthy people to interact with their electronic devices. The input rate (characters per
minute) remains low for practical use in the general population.
Optimizing learning and deriving higher intelligence is another theme observed in
recent publications. EEG-based BCI monitors have been tested in Chinese schools as
trial biofeedback devices designed to measure concentration before being halted after
media backlash. Emotional detection algorithms may have similar uses for monitoring
mood and building emotionally-informed digital assistants/companions to increase
work productivity and provide emotional comfort for an aging population. Several
studies tested if brain data from multiple people performing the same task, or a
mixture of human and machine intelligence, could more efficiently solve complex
problems.
Overall, the literature review reflected China’s investment in using non-invasive BCIs to
develop ready-to-use devices to facilitate direct interaction of user intent (brain
signals) with the world. For this emerging field, we found nine ethical editorial articles
discussing issues associated with BCI use, including user privacy and informed
consent.
Dr. Max Riesenhuber, Georgetown University, Department of Neuroscience
When surveying the literature on BCI, it is helpful to distinguish between “non-
invasive” and “invasive” approaches. The former are mostly based on scalp
electroencephalography (EEG) or other techniques (such as functional near-infrared
spectroscopy, fNIRS) that do not require surgical implantation of neural recording
and/or stimulation equipment. These techniques, while usually providing a relatively
coarse picture of neural activity, have the critical advantage of ease of application. In
contrast, “invasive” devices are placed inside the cranium, providing much improved
signal quality and the ability to record from and stimulate precisely defined neuronal
targets, at the expense of requiring surgical implantation.
These differences give rise to different application profiles for invasive and non-
invasive techniques. While conventional EEG BCI techniques (such as P300 or SSVEP)
could only extract a few bits or maybe tens of bits per minute of information from the

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 32

EEG signal,123 newer analysis techniques based on advanced machine learning have
increased the information rate obtainable from EEG-based BCI by an order of
magnitude or more.124 There are a large number of papers by Chinese scientists
describing related efforts to improve the amount of information that can be extracted
from the brain using non-invasive techniques. These data rates are already sufficient
for a major application area apparent from the literature survey, that of using BCI, in
particular non-invasive BCI, to extract private information from healthy individuals’
brains, such as cognitive states (attention, vigilance, fatigue, deception) or
mood/emotional states. In those cases, BCI systems can provide information that would
otherwise not be readily accessible.
Correspondingly, many of the more interesting applications of BCI in healthy
individuals focus on cognitive state detection, such as monitoring of cognitive load,
level of attention, vigilance, or fatigue—which can be important, for instance, for
monitoring pilots or drivers. In addition, there were a surprisingly large number of
papers on emotion processing, such as detecting the emotional states of participants
(which could be as simple as positive/neutral/negative, or aiming for a more fine-
grained classification). Part of the reason for the substantial number of studies on this
area could be that emotion detection is a “sweet spot” for BCI in healthy individuals:
information on the emotional/cognitive state of an individual is of interest for a variety
of applications and can be read out using cheap and non-invasive EEG.
In contrast, the use of non-invasive BCI in healthy individuals to control vehicles such
as UAVs (and even UAV “swarms”) reported in the Chinese literature can be considered
gimmicks at this point, as the data rates and system performances are much lower than
what can be obtained via conventional manual control.125
As is evident from the Chinese literature, the capabilities of EEG-based BCI systems
will likely improve in the near future due to refined algorithms (permitting higher
performance, faster training, and/or inter-subject transfer) and electrode technology
(for higher signal quality, easier setup and longer recording durations) and the inclusion
of complementary, non-neural sources of information such as eye movements, galvanic

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 33

skin responses, visual information (analyzed by conventional ML techniques, e.g., for
emotion detection by facial expressions), or speech signals.
There will also likely be a wider range of applications for EEG-based BCI systems,
driven by the simplicity of EEG acquisition and its low cost. The patent survey revealed
patents in a range of novel areas, including piano training, meditation training,
measuring personality traits and carsickness prevention, to name just a few (on a side
note, several patents on adversarial attacks on EEG-based BCI systems stood out as
well).
In contrast to the limits of non-invasive techniques, invasive techniques have the
advantage of vastly increased bandwidth, in other words, the ability to extract orders
of magnitude more information about the brain’s neural activity than possible with
surface-based techniques such as EEG or fNIRS, as well as much higher specificity,
which is particularly important for neuro-stimulation applications. Considering these
advantages, it is not surprising that a second major focus of the surveyed Chinese
research appears to be on reducing the complexity and invasiveness of direct neural
recordings.
For instance, in the U.S., novel “neuropixel” electrodes allow the simultaneous
recording from more than a thousand channels.126 The Chinese literature describes the
development of similar systems. A large number of surveyed research papers describe
the development by Chinese teams of flexible electrodes and thin-film devices that
better conform to the (soft, moving) brain and allow longer and more consistent
recordings, of new electrode materials, miniaturized high-capacity recording chips,
wireless transmission circuits, automated implantation devices and novel, fully
implanted systems, with recording as well as stimulation capability (the latter either
via conventional electric stimulation or by optical means, to be used in optogenetic
applications).
The comprehensiveness and multi-level approach of this Chinese research,
encompassing all stages from electrode materials over implantation devices to signal
transmission, make it highly likely that within the near future, there will be the
capability for minimally-invasive high-bandwidth neural recording and stimulation,

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 34

which will dramatically increase the potential of BCI applications, due to data rates
that are either higher than obtainable via conventional means (such as manual
responses) and/or the ability to read out and even modulate cognitive states (including
emotional states).

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 35

Global Dependencies
We understand “global dependency” as the reliance of states on each other’s
knowledge or skills to develop and enhance their research. Each state has its own
unique learning and teaching practices, supporting infrastructures, as well as ethics
and laws that regulate research and affect its progress. Hence, political borders can
confine research, and collaborating with foreign partners may help combat state-
centric deficiencies.
While China has indigenous expertise in BCI, it is important to examine if and how
China has gained from foreign collaborations. According to metadata in the 663 China-
authored papers gathered for the present study, China’s top collaborators in BCI
research are U.S. and UK universities. China also worked with institutions in 19 other
countries.127 Figure 4 depicts the top 12 foreign collaborators with China on BCI-
related publications. Not shown are collaborations with South Korea and Ethiopia (two
publications each), and with Switzerland, Greece, Denmark, India, Finland, Slovenia,
and Spain (one each).
Figure 4. China Collaborates Most Often with the United States for BCI Research
(2020-2023)
Country Number of China-Collaborated Papers (within Selected BCI Corpus)

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 36

U.S.-based scientists were the most frequent foreign collaborators with Chinese
scientists, contributing to 50 BCI-related papers relevant to our search. These
publications were affiliated with 21 different U.S.-based institutions and 32 China-
based institutions. Notably, four of the 50 U.S. collaborations were with “Seven Sons”
universities in China: two papers were affiliated with the Beijing Institute of
Technology, one with the Nanjing University of Science and Technology, and one with
the Northwestern Polytechnical University. The “Seven Sons of National Defense” (国
防七子) are Chinese universities that train talent and work on technical projects of
interest to the People’s Liberation Army (PLA).128 They are not administered directly by
the PLA, and students tend to be civilians, but researchers at these universities do
collaborate extensively with the PLA on basic and applied research.129
Northwestern Polytechnical University, for example, produces the most employees at
China’s largest defense company, the Aviation Industry Corporation of China, and has a
scholarship program specifically for students looking to work there.130 Beijing Institute
of Technology is a top feeder for many defense companies in China and has a strong
relationship with China North Industries Corporation (which is on the U.S. Department
of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security Entity List), having signed strategic
cooperation agreements with the company.131
Outside of the Seven Sons, other Chinese universities that collaborated with U.S.
institutions had ties to China’s defense industry. Shanghai Jiao Tong University has
helped the PLA do cyber operations and openly operates joint research facilities with
the PLA.132 Zhejiang University and Huazhong University of Science and Technology
are affiliated with Zhejiang Lab, which does AI research and has the NUDT on its
oversight board.133

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 37

In all, some 21 U.S. institutions collaborated with Chinese organizations to publish BCI
research. Here are the most prominent (number of papers):
Box 1: Major U.S. Institutions Collaborating with China on BCI

The following are the major Chinese BCI institutions collaborating with a U.S.
institution:
Box 2: Major Chinese institutions collaborating with the U.S. on BCI

As indicated in Figure 4, there is a significant difference between the number of joint
papers published by China’s first and second most frequent collaborators. The United
Kingdom had the second-most publications in collaboration with China-based
institutions, with 21. The third most-frequent collaborator with China on relevant BCI
research was Russia, with 20 publications, although this appears to be an anomaly.134
University of California San Diego (16)
University of Washington (6)
Lehigh University (4)
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (3)
Stanford University (3)

Tianjin University (14)
Shanghai Jiao Tong University (9)
Tsinghua University (5)
East China University of Science and Technology (4)
University of Electronic Science and Technology (4)
Fudan University (3)
Beijing Institute of Technology (3)

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 38

Figure 5. China-Only BCI Research Output vs. Foreign Collaborative Research Output

As Figure 5 shows, China published significantly more China-only research than
collaborative research with foreign institutions between 2020 and 2023 in this topic
area.135 China’s individual output on BCI was 110 in 2020, while the same year its co-
authored foreign collaborations stood at 25 (around 19% of total research). This ratio
declined slightly but steadily through subsequent years.
Overall, the majority of relevant BCI-related papers in China were published without
foreign institutional collaborations: around 84% were published solely by Chinese
institutions. These findings could imply that China’s BCI research does not depend on
direct collaborations with researchers outside China to be productive, and China’s overt
reliance on foreign partnerships in this area is decreasing.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 39

Recommendations
Brain-computer interfaces began as therapeutic devices to treat pathology and will
continue to fill that role into the future. We find these developments encouraging and
strongly support the medical lines of BCI research—in China or anywhere. Alleviating
human suffering is science at its best.
The same technology that can help restore neurological function, however, can
enhance the cognitive capabilities of the general population across a range of
applications that are only now being explored, which casts the enterprise in a more
controversial light. The opportunities and risks of improved human-computer
integration through BCI are apparent to China as well, as evidenced in the citations
adduced in this study, in the papers we reviewed, and in Chinese sources that date
back a decade or more.136
More recently, Chinese appreciation of the link between BCIs and cognitive
enhancement was expressed at China’s “First National Brain-computer Interface
Conference” (全国首届脑机接口大会) on July 3, 2023, where Gao Xiaorong—the
Tsinghua professor who figured prominently in this study—opined that BCI will be the
venue for interacting with superintelligence137—a mega-development that, if feasible
at all, would surely intensify the global debate between “boomers” and “doomers,” i.e.,
those enamored and fearful of AI progress.
Finally, cognitive enhancement as a goal of Chinese BCI research was stated
unambiguously in Chinese Communist Party “Guidelines” released in February 2024,
underscoring the present study’s main thesis.138
• The "Guidelines" also clearly define five research types: non-invasive restorative
brain-computer interface research, invasive restorative brain-computer interface
research, interventional brain-computer interface research, augmentative brain-
computer interface research, and animal brain-computer interface research.
• The "Guidelines" clarify that augmentative brain-computer interface refers to
brain-computer interface technology that enhances the perception, cognition,
and motor abilities of users with normal body functions.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 40

These aspirations offer clues about China’s trajectory but are inadequate measures of
progress. The present study tested the credibility of such statements by reviewing
China BCI papers and patents. We found China’s non-invasive BCI research to be
comparable with that of other scientifically advanced nations and to be working to
overcome obstacles to greater fidelity, throughput, and wider use. China’s invasive BCI
research, while historically behind its non-invasive efforts, has picked up the pace and
is approaching global standards of sophistication.139 That is, published Chinese BCI
research is consistent with the stated goals of its vocal scientific community.
A second purpose of this study, beyond examining China’s BCI enterprise, is to help
manage the challenge it poses to competing nations by assembling in one place a
record of the scientists and organizations that make up its infrastructure. As with
earlier CSET studies,140 the aim is always to ingest the data into a watchboard to
monitor Chinese S&T development for security, safety, and ethical issues, and to
engage China on opportunities for mutual benefit.
China’s BCI research, beyond medical uses, poses three types of risk: (1) medium-term
challenges from enhanced productivity and warfighting capability that emerge from
tighter integration between humans and computers; (2) BCI’s role over the longer term
in facilitating a synthesis of human and machine intelligence that could snowball into a
form of general intelligence; and (3) ethical and privacy concerns arising from China’s
use and export of BCI devices. These risks are amplified by the likelihood that Chinese
institutions researching brain-computer technology, and the scientists affiliated with
them, are under more pressure than their foreign counterparts to align their research
with the expectations of their government sponsors.141
The suite of risks posed by the merger of human and artificial intelligence should be
monitored by a global consortium drawing on resources from government and the
private sector to provide U.S. policymakers timely and continuous updates on China’s—
and other nations’—progress in these strategic technologies.142
In the interim, we repeat here a standing offer to support any serious non-commercial
U.S., UK, or other allied effort to create this needed capability.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 41

Authors
Huey-Meei Chang is CSET’s senior China S&T specialist, co-editor of Chinese Power
and Artificial Intelligence: Perspectives and Challenges (New York and London:
Routledge, 2023), and co-author of several papers on China's technology acquisition
and development.
Rishika Chauhan is a post-doctoral researcher at the Centre for Science and Security
Studies within the Department of War Studies at King’s College London. Her research
focuses on international security with an emphasis on non-Western and Chinese
perspectives.
Daniel H. Chou is a data scientist at CSET. He has collected, enhanced, and analyzed
data for multiple studies on China AI and technology transfer while supporting
government and private sector projects.
William C. Hannas is CSET’s lead analyst and formerly the Central Intelligence
Agency’s senior expert for China open-source analysis. He is currently focused on U.S.-
China technology competition, community outreach, and data exploitation
methodologies.
John O’Callaghan is a visiting senior research fellow at the Centre for Science and
Security Studies within the Department of War Studies at King’s College London. He is
focused on research security and the opportunities and threats of emerging technology
for national security.
Max Riesenhuber, PhD, is professor of neuroscience at Georgetown University and co-
director of Georgetown's Center for Neuroengineering. His research focuses on
understanding brain function and how these insights can be translated to augmented
cognition applications.
Vikram Venkatram is a research analyst at CSET, where he focuses on emerging issues
in biotechnology. His prior work has addressed biosecurity and biohazard response,
dual-use neuroscience and technology, and global surveillance and policy.
Jennifer Wang, PhD, is a systems and engineering technical advisory (SETA) contractor
for government R&D programs in neurotechnology and AI. She has been a co-author
on past CSET publications related to BCI.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 42

Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Professor Margaret E. Kosal of Georgia Tech, John Chen of
Peraton Labs, and Dr. Timothy R. Heath of the RAND Corporation for serving as
outside reviewers. The authors are also grateful to L.J. Eads of Parallax Advanced
Research for technical consultations, and to CSET’s Dr. Igor Mikolic-Torreira, Emelia
Probasco, Matthew Mahoney, Owen Daniels, Shelton Fitch, Ben Murphy, and Jahnavi
Mukul for their generous support during the review and publication process.

© 2024 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20220053

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 43

Endnotes

1 Wm. C. Hannas, Huey-Meei Chang, Daniel H. Chou and Brian Fleeger, “China’s Advanced AI Research:
Monitoring China’s Paths to ‘General’ Artificial Intelligence,” (CSET, July 2022)
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/chinas-advanced-ai-research/.
2 PRC State Council, “New Generation AI Development Plan” (国务院关于印发《新一代人工智能发展规划
》的通知) , PRC State Council, July 20, 2017, translated by Graham Webster, Rogier Creemers, Paul
Triolo, and Elsa Kania, https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/full-
translation-chinas-new-generation-artificial-intelligence-development-plan-2017/.
3 Hannas, Chang, Chou, and Fleeger, “China’s Advanced AI Research.”
4 Wm. C. Hannas, Huey-Meei Chang, Catherine Aiken and Daniel Chou, “China AI-Brain Research,”
(CSET, September 2020), https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/china-ai-brain-research/.
5 Wm. C. Hannas, Huey-Meei Chang, Max Riesenhuber, Daniel H. Chou, “China’s Cognitive AI Research:
Emulating Human Cognition on the Way to General Purpose AI,” (CSET, July 2023),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/chinas-cognitive-ai-research/.
6 Hannas, Chang, Aiken, and Chou, “China AI-Brain Research.”
7 Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (formerly “Lou Gehrig’s Disease”), i.e., a progressive degenerative
disease of nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord.
8 E.g., Zhejiang University’s “Double Brain Center” (双脑中心), founded in 2018.
9 Research program of the Tianqiao and Chrissy Chen Institute (陈天桥雒芊芊研究院), founded in 2016 at
Caltech with branches in Shanghai.
10 Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, “Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs).” Issue Area #1:
Competition with China (draft—not for distribution), May 11, 2022; Anika Binnendijk, Timothy Marler,
Elizabeth M. Bartels, “Brain-Computer Interfaces: U.S. Military Applications and Implications, An Initial
Assessment,” RAND Corporation, August 2020.
11 Hannas, Chang, Chou, and Fleeger, “China’s Advanced AI Research.”
12 Qian Ma, et al., “Directly wireless communication of human minds via non-invasive brain-computer-
metasurface platform,” Springer Open, February 11, 2022,
https://elight.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s43593-022-00019-x.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 44

13 Hannas, Chang, Chou, and Fleeger, “China’s Advanced AI Research.”
14 See Hannas, Chang, Chou, and Fleeger, “China’s Advanced AI Research” for an appendix of bilingual
keywords related to cognitive enhancement.
15 2020 was the cut-off date for BCI data cited in the previous study by Hannas, Chang, Chou and
Fleeger, July 2022. Papers published in 2023 were sourced externally, chiefly through Georgetown
University’s library.
16 A "China" paper is defined as a paper where one or more authors claim affiliation with a China-based
organization.
17 Patrick A. Cutter, “The Shape of Things to Come: The Military Benefits of the Brain-Computer Interface
in 2040,” M.A. thesis submitted to the Air Command and Staff College, Air University, April 2015.
18 “The goal of Augmented Cognition research is to create revolutionary human-computer interactions
that capitalize on recent advances in the fields of neuroscience, cognitive science and computer science.”
Dylan D. Schmorrow and Leah M. Reeves, eds., Foundations of Augmented Cognition, Springer, 2007,
XII.
19 D.P. Williams, M. Couillard and Samantha Dugelay, “On Human Perception and Automatic Target
Recognition: Strategies for Human-Computer Cooperation.” 22nd International Conference on Pattern
Recognition: NATO Science and Technology Organization, (2014): 4695.
20 Elsa B. Kania, “Minds at War: China’s Pursuit of Military Advantage through Cognitive Science and
Biotechnology,” PRISM 8.3, January 2020. Margaret Kosal and Joy Putney, “Neurotechnology and
international security: Predicting commercial and military adoption of brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) in
the United States and China,” Politics and the Life Sciences, 2022.
21 The batch was made up of foundational papers identified in the authors’ prior peer-reviewed studies
(Hannas, Chang, Aiken, and Chou, “China AI-Brain Research;” Hannas, Chang, Chou, and Fleeger,
“China’s Advanced AI Research”). “Key authors” included 48 identified in the authors’ prior research and
another 28, who (co)authored two or more titles in the starting list of 141. New selections were limited
to studies published between 2020 and 2023.
22 I.e., 103 or 21.8 percent of the 473 candidate papers were (independently) rejected by both SMEs as
“off-topic” during the second run that used “on-topic” papers as its starting point, compared to 93.2
percent rejected during the first run that was based solely on keyword choices.
23 Prior studies on Chinese AI by this paper’s authors were based entirely on Chinese academic papers
and Internet research. Patents were not addressed at the time due to a lack of resources.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 45

24 The CSET unified patents dataset includes information on more than 82 million patents worldwide
merged from multiple patent data sources, specifically the Lens, 1790 Analytics and EPO’s PATSTAT.
25 Second authors who “shared equally” in the work usually claimed the same primary affiliation as the
first author.
26 Tianjin’s Nankai University and Haihe Laboratory, while not prominent in the published studies count,
have other features that merit their inclusion in the narrative below, hence they are depicted on the map
as well.
27 The Pazhou Lab or “Guangdong Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy Laboratory” (人工智能与数
字经济广东省实验室), was established by the provincial government in 2020 and is “committed to
advancing the fundamental research of AI.” Its appearance in this survey of Chinese BCI institutes
underscores the link between AI and BCI, https://www.pazhoulab.com/. See Hannas, Chang, Chou, and
Fleeger, “China’s Advanced AI Research.”
28 “2021-2022 BAAI AI Frontiers” (2021-2022 年度智源人工智能前沿报告), (BAAI, December 2021),
106, http://www.ncsti.gov.cn/kjdt/kjrd/202112/P020211231640762390337.pdf.
29 Ye Dawei is now at Huazhong University of Science and Technology in Wuhan,
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/author/37086347850.
30 Xu Wei, “China’s First Wireless Brain-Computer Interface Chip for Animals Goes on Display in
Shanghai,” Yicai, April 19, 2021, https://www.yicaiglobal.com/news/china-first-wireless-brain-computer-
interface-chip-for-animals-goes-on-display-in-shanghai.
31 “Zhang Gong Inaugurated the Haihe Laboratory of Brain-Computer Interaction and Human-Computer
Integration” (张工为脑机交互与人机共融海河实验室揭牌), Tianjin Daily (天津日报), March 29, 2023,
http://tj.news.cn/gov/tjld/zhanggong/2023-03/29/c_1129474456.htm; “Brain-Computer Interaction and
Human-Computer Integration Haihe Laboratory Unveiled” (脑机交互与人机共融海河实验室揭牌), Tianjin
Daily (天津日报), March 29, 2023, https://www.tj.gov.cn/sy/tjxw/202303/t20230329_6152971.html. Gu
Xiaosong is with the Chinese Academy of Engineering (CAE). Ming Dong (see below) is the laboratory’s
executive director, http://mctu.tju.edu.cn/info/1193/1324.htm.
32 Literally “chokehold” (卡脖子) or “chokepoint” problems. This usually refers to technologies important
to China but which China has not fully mastered. Computer chips and aerospace engines are examples.
33 For information on the Hangzhou center and laboratory, see: https://bmci.hdu.edu.cn/7484/list.htm;
https://computer.hdu.edu.cn/2018/0523/c6756a139129/page.htm.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 46

34 Qiao Renming (乔仁铭) and Chen Bin (陈彬), “The world's first non-human primate interventional
brain-computer interface test was successful” (全球首例非人灵长类动物介入式脑机接口试验成功), China
Science Daily (中国科学报), May 6, 2023, https://news.sciencenet.cn/htmlnews/2023/5/500018.shtm.
35 Li Dong (李东), Han Kangni (韩康妮), and Huang Xin (黄辛), “Ruijin Hospital establishes brain-
computer interface and neuromodulation center” (瑞金医院成立脑机接口及神经调控中心), China Science
Daily (中国科学报), December 12, 2020, https://news.sciencenet.cn/htmlnews/2020/12/450072.shtm.
36 Josh Ye, “Shanghai hospital clears ethical reviews for chip brain implant treatment for depressed
patients,” South China Morning Post, 15 December 2020, https://www.scmp.com/tech/science-
research/article/3114029/shanghai-hospital-clears-ethical-reviews-chip-brain-implant.
37 For information on South China University of Technology, see:
http://www2.scut.edu.cn/bci/18562/list.htm; and
https://www2.scut.edu.cn/bci/2018/0910/c18576a284387/page.htm.
38 Liu Qian (刘茜), Chen Jianqiang (陈建强), Zhao Hui (赵晖), “Brain Talker: The Era of Brain Science Is
Coming” (脑语者：脑科学时代正在走来), Guangming Daily (光明日报), January 18, 2020,
https://news.sciencenet.cn/htmlnews/2020/1/434964.shtm; Liang Yu, ed., “China Unveils Brain-
computer Interface Chip,” Xinhua, May 18, 2019, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2019-
05/18/c_138069590.htm.
39 Li Xuanmin and Qi Xijia, “China develops self-made brain-computer interface chip, curbing tech
‘bottleneck’ amid U.S. tensions,” Global Times, April 27, 2021,
https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202104/1222236.shtml.
40 “216 keys! The world's largest instruction set high-speed non-invasive brain-computer interface
system is released in Tianjin” (216 键！全球最大指令集高速非侵入式脑机接口系统在天津发布), Tencent
Net (腾讯网), May 20, 2023, https://new.qq.com/rain/a/20230520A02H6D00?no-redirect=1. The Chinese
term 指令集 / “instruction set” refers to computer instructions that respond to a user’s fixation on a
“targeted” square in a matrix of 216 (18 x 12) squares. Each square has a letter, number, syllable, or
keyboard command assigned to it.
41 For information on Tsinghua’s BCI Lab, see: Hannas, Chang, Chou, and Fleeger, “China’s Advanced AI
Research.”
42 See: Artificial Intelligence Industry Alliance (中国人工智能产业发展联盟), “White paper on the
application of brain-computer interface technology in the medical and health field” (脑机接口技术在医疗
健康领域应用白皮书), July 2021, 43; Dan Zhang, Huaying Song, Rui Xu, Wenjing Zhou, Zhipei Ling, Bo
Hong, “Toward a Minimally Invasive Brain-computer Interface,” NeuroImage 71 (2013): 30-41.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 47

43 “2023 ‘Science Innovation China’ Brain-Computer Interface Industry-Academic Integration Seminar
Concluded Successfully” (2023 ‘科创中国’ 脑机接口产学融合研讨会圆满落幕), Tencent Net (腾讯网),
October 9, 2023, https://new.qq.com/rain/a/20231009A09KAT00; “Zhejiang University Double Brain
Center Brain Computer PI Recruitment” (浙江大学双脑中心脑机PI 招聘), January 21, 2023,
http://www.bbmi.zju.edu.cn/2021/0316/c43507a2268034/page.htm.
44 Formally known as the “Ministry of Education (MOE) Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and
Brain-Machine Integration” (教育部脑与脑机融合前沿科学中心).
45 Introduction to Zhejiang University’s School of Brain Science and Brain Medicine:
http://www.neuroscience.zju.edu.cn/2020/0506/c45491a2092569/page.htm.
46 “Introduction to the scientific research team of the School of Computer Science” (计算机学院科研团队
情况介绍表),
http://www.cs.zju.edu.cn/_upload/article/files/d4/45/e46a2ca6469693738d84d1fffc3f/cbe13c0b-0942-
45cb-b043-164256b0e7c8.pdf.
47 Hannas, Chang, Chou, and Fleeger, “China’s Advanced AI Research.”
48 Papers had as few as one author and as many as a dozen or more, with three authors being the mean.
49 Authors with non-China primary affiliations were captured in different columns of the spreadsheet.
50 Lu Baoliang’s surname “吕” is properly spelled “Lv” in China’s pinyin romanization but appears as “Lu”
in most (but not all) publications.
51 Jung is also affiliated with the Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience, University of California
San Diego, CA, USA.
52 “The first China Brain-computer Interface ‘Huanao Award’ was announced!” (首届中国脑-机接口“华瑙
奖”重磅揭晓!), BrainNews, July 5, 2023, https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/oEvx2wHcgBFekhKWrrlSNA.
53 A review of Zhao’s published work supports this judgment. See:
https://www.researchgate.net/scientific-contributions/Guoguang-Zhao-2216516722.
54 The chip was developed jointly by Tianjin University and the China Electronics Corp. (中国电子信息产
业集团), https://www.sohu.com/a/315191613_99992021.
55 CHEN Xiaogang (陈小刚), JI Bowen (吉博文), JIN Jing (金晶), LI Jingcong (李景聪), LI Mengfan (李梦凡),
LI Rui (李锐), PAN Jiahui (潘家辉), PENG Yong (彭勇), WANG Kun (王坤) and XU Minpeng (许敏鹏).

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 48

56 CAI Xinxia (蔡新霞), CHEN Xun (陈勋), DUAN Feng (段峰), FU Yunfa (伏云发), GAO Xiaorong (高小榕),
HE Huiguang (何晖光), HU Dewen (胡德文), KANG Xiaoyang (康晓洋), KONG Wanzeng (孔万增), LI
Luming (李路明), LI Xiaojian (李骁健), LI Yuanqing (李远清), LIU Jingquan (刘景全), LU Baoliang (吕宝粮),
MING Dong (明东), PAN Gang (潘纲), PAN Jiahui (潘家辉), WANG Xingyu (王行愚), WANG Yiwen (王怡
雯), ZHOU Zongtan (周宗潭).
57 Based on relative standing among first authors, authors overall and the Huanao Award.
58 See Chen Xiaogang’s CV:
https://www.bme.org.cn/rcdw/fyjy/9cf34f2e235b4953a764f0c7e9574f32.htm;
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/author/37085431062.
59 See Chen Xun’s CV: https://eeis.ustc.edu.cn/2020/0720/c2648a439187/page.htm.
60 A NYSE-listed Chinese firm established in 2013 manufacturing smart wearable technology. Prior to
2021, the company’s English name was Huami Corporation, https://www.zepp.com/press-release/huami-
corporation-announces-name-change-to-zepp-health.
61 “Zepp Health and the Advanced Research Institute of the University of Science and Technology of
China jointly build the ‘Brain-Computer Intelligence Joint Laboratory’,” (华米科技与中科大先研院共建‘脑
机智能联合实验室’), http://news.ustc.edu.cn/info/1056/70794.htm.
62 “The first China Brain-computer Interface ‘Huanao Award’ was announced!” (首届中国脑-机接口“华瑙
奖”重磅揭晓!), BrainNews, July 5, 2023, https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/oEvx2wHcgBFekhKWrrlSNA.
63 “Three professors from Tsinghua-IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Science were selected into the
2021 ‘China's Highly Cited Researchers’ list” (清华-IDG/麦戈文脑科学研究院三位教授入选2021 “中国高
被引学者” 榜单), April 14, 2022, http://mcgovern.life.tsinghua.edu.cn/ch/infoshow-2395.html.
64 Hu Dewen joins PLA: https://www.nudt.edu.cn/xy/xyfc/b11c6b247d5b40499f6bf62895d326b6.htm;
Hu Dewen’s biography: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/author/37271079500.
65 “Professor Hu Dewen from the National University of Defense Technology gave an academic report on
‘Pattern Recognition of Brain Information’” (国防科技大学胡德文教授做“大脑信息的模式识别”的学术报告),
July 26, 2020, https://www.scholat.com/teamwork/showPostMessage.html?id=8209.
66 See Jin Jing’s brief biography: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/author/37965693000.
67 For further details on Jin Jing see: https://cise.ecust.edu.cn/2021/0315/c12977a123830/page.htm.
68 https://faet.fudan.edu.cn/e4/55/c23898a255061/page.htm.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 49

69 He Liping (贺梨萍), “Li Xiaojian from Shenzhen Advanced Institute: China is not lagging behind in the
global competition for brain-computer interfaces” (深圳先进院李骁健：脑机接口全球竞赛，中国不落后),
The Paper (澎湃新闻) September 7, 2021, https://m.thepaper.cn/newsDetail_forward_14376847. Joe
Tsien’s career at U.S. institutions, the circumstances surrounding his nickname “father of smart rats,” and
his convoluted and controversial relationship with U.S. authorities is detailed in Daniel Golden and Jeff
Kao, “A Visionary without a Country,” Propublica, January 20, 2022, https://www.propublica.org/article/a-
visionary-without-a-country.
70 See Li Xiaojian’s brief biography at:
http://bcbdi.siat.ac.cn/index.php/member/showMember/nid/13.shtml.
71 “Another major breakthrough in brain-computer interfaces! Shenzhen Institute of Advanced
Technology: Li Xiaojian and team release latest results in the Nature sub-journal” (脑机接口又一重大突破
！深圳先进院李骁健及合作团队在Nature 子刊发布最新成果), sourced from: Shenzhen Economic Daily
(深圳商报), September 18, 2022,
https://www.toutiao.com/article/7144668280785994240/?&source=m_redirect.
72 https://www2.scut.edu.cn/bci/18571/list.htm. Li Yuanqing is also vice-director of the Pazhou Lab (琶洲
实验室) and founder of the Guangdong BCI/AI company South China Brain Control Guangdong
Intelligent Technology (华南脑控（广东）智能科技有限公司), run jointly with the South China University
of Technology and iFlytek, http://www.ihnnk.com/?s=About.
73 See Lu’s CV at: https://bcmi.sjtu.edu.cn/home/blu/. Lu founded “Emotion Helper” (零唯一思) in 2021, a
company aimed at improving people’s emotional health, i.e., “affective BCI,”
https://www.emotionhelper.com/.
74 For more information on Ming Dong, see: https://faculty.tju.edu.cn/MingDong1/en/index.htm;
http://mctu.tju.edu.cn/info/1193/1324.htm.
75 https://www.scholat.com/panjiahui.
76 The center’s (中心) name appears in some sources as a “research group” (小组).
77 http://ss.scnu.edu.cn/a/20190602/1801.html.
78 “Introduction to the institutes” (研究所介绍): https://computer.hdu.edu.cn/6750/list.htm.
79 See Peng Yong’s bio at: https://sunseaiu.github.io/; https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/author/37086153359.
For dates of overseas study, see also: https://bcmi.sjtu.edu.cn/~pengyong/%E5%BD%AD%E5%8B%87-
%E7%AE%80%E5%8E%86word.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 50

80 Jose C. Principe is Distinguished Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of
Florida with expertise in signal processing and BCI. https://www.ece.ufl.edu/people/faculty/jose-c-
principe/.
81 See Yiwen Wang’s biographical information at: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/author/37337396900;
https://seng.hkust.edu.hk/about/people/faculty/yiwen-wang.
82 See Dongrui Wu’s biographical information at: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/author/37693329600.
83 For information on Wu’s BCI lab, see: https://lab.bciml.cn/.
84 See Xu’s biographical information at:
http://amt.tju.edu.cn/portal/teachers/getperson/id/32/sId/2/bId/2.html and
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/author/37850640000.
85 Chu Daye, “Chinese companies ramp up for emerging BCI technology, ready for larger market,” Global
Times, November 28, 2022, https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202211/1280640.shtml.
86 “Brain-computer Interface Technology Development and Application Research Report (2023)” (脑机接
口技术发展与应用研究报告 (2023)), China Academy of Information and Communications Technology and
Brain-computer Interface Industry Alliance (中国信息通信研究院脑机接口产业联盟), December 26, 2023,
4, https://perma.cc/GJ5Q-D5FR; “Analysis of the Ten-billion Dollar Market for Brain Science” (脑科学百亿
市场解析), DeepTech (深科技), April 25, 2021, https://www.sohu.com/a/462880163_354973.
87 Hai Ruojing (海若镜), “Brain-computer interface is very close to curing depression and paralysis, but is
far from digital immortality” (脑机接口，离治抑郁、瘫痪很近，离数字永生很远), 36Kr New Trend,
October 11, 2023, https://www.36kr.com/p/2468019557816456.
88 “An inventory of Chinese BCI companies most worthy of cooperating with in 2023” (2023 中国最具商
业合作价值的脑机接口领域企业盘点), Sohu.com, June 1, 2023,
https://www.sohu.com/a/681171075_121203063.
89 Hai Ruojing, “Brain-computer interface is very close to curing depression and paralysis, but is far from
digital immortality.”
90 NeuraMatrix’s two founders are Bai Shuo (白硕, CAS) and Zhang Milin (张沕琳, Tsinghua). They “have
been conducting related academic research at the University of Pennsylvania and the Max-Planck
Institute in Germany since 2010.” See “Brain-computer interface platform company “NeuraMatrix”
completed RMB 100 million in Series A financing” (脑机接口平台公司宁矩科技‘(NeuraMatrix)’完成亿元人
民币 A 轮融资), November 22, 2021, https://www.36kr.com/p/1491487908933765;
http://www.neuramatrix.com.cn/.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 51

91 For details, see: https://www.zhipin.com/web/common/security-
check.html?seed=1aDuhcMF3ReI%2FKyNnmMbmiStL86K4DPH10nd1tPYVN0%3D&name=3c433761
&ts=1710441353752&callbackUrl=%2Fgongsi%2F53d6544bec8142521XB43du4FVE%7E.html&srcR
eferer=.
92 Fang’s CV:
http://www.cebsit.ac.cn/sourcedb_cebsit_cas/zw/rck/Members/202007/t20200723_5642966.html;
http://sourcedb.nanoctr.cas.cn/yw/rc/200906/t20090602_252658.html.
93 Qiao Yanwei (乔燕薇), “Song Qi, the former CEO of Keya Medical, becomes the CEO of the new
company Zhiran Medical; ‘invasive brain-computer interface’ becomes the next direction.” (原科亚医疗
CEO 宋麒出任新公司智冉医疗CEO, ‘侵入式脑机接口’ 成为下一站方向), Leiphone.com (雷锋网), April 19,
2023
94 Hai Ruojing, “Brain-computer interface is very close to curing depression and paralysis, but is far from
digital immortality.”
95 https://baike.baidu.com/item/北京脑科学与类脑研究中心/22450631.
96 For details on company, see: https://www.fy35.com/company/14974327.html.
97 “Intelligent Brain-Computer System Enhancement Program officially launched” (‘智能脑机系统增强计
划’ 正式启动), ZGC Group (中关村发展集团), April 14, 2023,
https://zgcgroup.com.cn/zgcadmin/home/content/index.html?id=3176&cate=15.
98 Company details are at: https://www.stairmed.com/.
99 For Zhao’s and Li’s CVs, see: http://www.cebsit.cas.cn/yjz/zzt/ry/;
http://www.cebsit.cas.cn/yjz/qnyjy/lx/ry/.
100 Qian Tongxin (钱童心), “Chen Tianqiao invested another 1 billion Yuan to support AI brain science and
three brain-computer interface clinical implants have been completed” (陈天桥再投10 亿元支持AI 脑科
学，脑机接口临床已完成3 项植入), Yicai.com (第一财经), July 6, 2023,
https://m.yicai.com/news/101800756.html. The full name of the Huashan facility is Frontier Laboratory of
Applied Neurotechnology (应用神经技术前沿实验室).
101 For more information, see: https://www.cheninstitute.org/.
102 Company information is at: en.neuroxess.com. In an earlier CSET study (“China’s Advanced AI
Research”), the authors erroneously reported NeurXess co-founder 彭雷(PENG Lei) as 彭蕾 (PENG Lei).

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 52

Both were at Alibaba. The homophonous given name “Lei” is distinguished in Chinese by the “grass”
radical (艹) on the second character.
103 “NeuroXess completed RMB 97 million angel and Pre-A rounds of financing. All-star investors and
consultants attended the grand opening ceremony” (脑虎完成9700 万天使及 Pre-A 轮融资 全明星投资
人、顾问天团参加盛大开业仪式), January 11, 2022,
https://www.neuroxess.com/nx/news/213?env=product&lang=zh&post_id=213&type=post.
104 “NeuroXess ‘emerged’ to fully support Chinese brain science” (脑虎科技‘横空出世,’ 全程支持中国脑科
学), Huanqiu.com (环球网), January 14, 2022, https://quality.huanqiu.com/article/46OnnMH7FwG; see
details on silk electrodes at: https://en.neuroxess.com/nx/product/slik-trode; Ni Sijie (倪思洁), “Tao Hu: 80
top publications in 10 years, convinced Chen Tianqiao in 1 hour” (陶虎: 10 年 80 篇顶刊, 1 小时说服陈天
桥), China Science Daily (中国科学报), May 14, 2022,
https://news.sciencenet.cn/htmlnews/2022/5/479024.shtm.
105 “The Year of the Tiger welcomes an exciting new player in brain science: the story of the creation of
NeuroXess” (虎年前迎来脑科学新锐：脑虎科技的创生故事), 芯语, January 11, 2022, https://www.eet-
china.com/mp/a103651.html.
106 Commonly called “mind uploading.” “陶虎: ‘数字生命’ 或可通过脑机接口技术来实现” (Tao Hu: ‘Digital
life’ may be realized through brain-computer interface technology), Sina.com, March 1, 2023,
https://finance.sina.com.cn/tech/roll/2023-03-01/doc-imyiipqz4671119.shtml.
107http://www.neuracom.com.cn/; Li Xinyu (李昕宇), “Wuhan company self-developed ‘implantable brain-
computer interface system,’ the world's first ‘bi-directional reading and writing’ of brain electrical
signals” (武汉企业自研‘植入式脑机接口系统’ 全球首创大脑电信号‘双向读写’), Changjiang Daily (长江日
报), https://finance.sina.com.cn/tech/internet/2023-08-31/doc-imzizvhm9930737.shtm.
108 “Central China's first brain science industrial base unveiled” (华中首个脑科学产业基地揭牌), Hubei
Provincial Department of Science and Technology (湖北省科技厅), September 22, 2022,
https://www.most.gov.cn/dfkj/hub/zxdt/202209/t20220922_182518.html. For more on Wuhan’s
development as an A(G)I center, see Hannas, Chang, Chou, and Fleeger, “China’s Advanced AI
Research,” 42-45.
109 BrainCo’s website is at: https://www.brainco.cn/.
110 “Brain-Machine Interface Firm BrainCo’s Brain Robotics Hand Obtains FDA Certification,” Pandaily,
November 8, 2022, https://pandaily.com/brain-machine-interface-firm-braincos-brainrobotics-hand-
obtains-fda-certification/.
111 “An inventory of Chinese BCI companies most worthy of cooperating with in 2023.”

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 53

112 Li Xiaojian’s post-doctoral work included three years at the Medical College of Georgia and five years
as assistant professor at Northwestern University,
http://bcbdi.siat.ac.cn/index.php/member/showMember/nid/13.shtm.
113 “Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology establishes "Brain-Computer Intelligence Fusion
Technology" joint laboratory,” (深圳先进院成立 ‘脑机智能融合技术’ 联合实验室), November 10, 2023,
https://www.siat.ac.cn/cyjl2016/202311/t20231110_6930885.html.
114 “Major alliance founded, 9 units including Tsinghua University elected to board” (重磅联盟成立, 清华
大学等 9 单位当选为副理事长单位), Sohu.com, February 11, 2023,
https://www.sohu.com/a/639556571_773043.
115 “Inaugural meeting of Brain-Computer Interface Industry Alliance successfully held in Beijing” (脑机接
口产业联盟成立大会在京成功召开), Sohu.com, February 9, 2023,
https://www.sohu.com/a/638787609_121181007.
116 Xie Longfei (谢龙飞), “China's brain-computer interface research achieved serial results, experiments
on humans and primates carried out” (中国脑机接口研究取得系列成果 目前已开展人体和灵长类动物实
验), ChinaNews.com (中国新闻网), May 18, 2023, https://www.jwview.com/jingwei/html/m/05-
18/541283.shtml.
117 “Brain-Computer Interface Technology and Application Seminar and Brain-Computer Interface
Industry Alliance Member Symposium successfully held” (脑机接口技术与应用研讨会暨脑机接口产业联
盟会员座谈会成功举办), Xi’an Jiaotong University News, November 15, 2023,
https://news.xjtu.edu.cn/info/1002/203365.htm.
118 fNIRS is a non-invasive optical imaging technique that measures hemoglobin concentrations in the
brain.
119 fMRI is a brain imaging technique that measures small changes in blood flow to infer neural activity in
an area.
120 “P300” is an event-related potential (measured voltage change) that occurs approximately 300
milliseconds after a behaviorally salient stimulus. The “speller” is a device used to spell words (or select
items from arbitrary lists) with brain waves.
121 SSVEPs are brain signals that respond to visual stimulation at the same frequency or a harmonic,
allowing the selection of items presented on a screen that oscillate at varying frequencies.
122 “China completes world’s first interventional BCI experiment on non-human primates,” Xinhua, May 6,
2023, https://english.news.cn/20230506/e49f8dcb3f504e81a8ce2058cba38f1e/c.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 54

123 For comparison, the information rate of human speech (spoken, non-BCI) is 39 bits per second.
Christophe Coupé, Yoon Mi Oh, Dan Dediu, Francois Pellegrino, “Different languages, similar encoding
efficiency: Comparable information rates across the human communicative niche.” Sciences Advances, 5,
no. 9 (2019).
124 See, for instance, Sebastian Nagel and Martin Spüler, (2019), “World’s fastest brain-computer
interface: Combining EEG2Code with deep learning,” PLoS ONE, September 6, 2019.
125 Of course, the calculus changes when considering clinical populations, such as paralyzed or “locked-
in” individuals, for whom, e.g., BCI-enabled wheelchair control or communication via the use of BCI
spellers have the potential to dramatically improve their quality of life. Yet, these applications were
beyond the scope of this report and its focus on non-therapeutic BCI.
126 See Paulk et al. for a description of recordings with an earlier version of the system permitting the
simultaneous recording of hundreds of neurons. Angelique C. Paulk, Yoav Kfir, Arjun R. Khanna, Martina
L. Mustroph, et al., “Large-scale neural recordings with single neuron resolution using Neuropixels
probes in human cortex,” Nature Neuroscience, 25 (2022): 252–263.
127 Note: We used a whole-number country contribution methodology to count the collaborators. If one
publication had authorship from two different countries, that publication was counted equivalently as
one publication for each of those countries.
128 Daniel H. Chou, “Revisiting China’s Security Forces’ AI Research Output,” (CSET, June 2022),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/article/revisiting-chinas-security-forces-ai-research-output/.
129 Daniel H. Chou, “Revisiting China’s Security Forces’ AI Research Output.”
130 Ryan Fedasiuk and Emily S. Weinstein, “Universities and the Chinese Defense Technology
Workforce,” (CSET, December 2020), https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/universities-and-the-
chinese-defense-technology-workforce/.
131 Ryan Fedasiuk and Emily S. Weinstein, “Universities and the Chinese Defense Technology
Workforce.”
132 Dakota Cary, “Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission on
‘China’s Cyber Capabilities: Warfare, Espionage and Implications for the United States,’” (CSET, February
2022), https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/dakota-carys-testimony-before-the-u-s-china-economic-
and-security-commission/.
133 Dakota Cary, “Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission on
‘China’s Cyber Capabilities: Warfare, Espionage and Implications for the United States’.”

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 55

134 Russia’s score is unrepresentative; a single author–Andrzej Cichocki–was responsible for all 20
collaborations. Cichocki’s multiple affiliations also skewed the Polish and Japanese distributions.
135 Data for the year 2023 takes into account only part of that year.
136 Hannas, Chang, Wang, Aiken, and Chou, “China AI-Brain Research;” Hannas, Chang, Chou and
Fleeger, “China’s Advanced AI Research.”
137 “The most important rein for holding this superintelligence in check.” (牵制这种超级智能最重要的缰
绳). Yang Yuehan (杨月涵), “Is there an ‘iPhone moment’ for brain-computer interfaces?” (脑机接口有没有
‘iPhone 时刻’), Beijing Business Today (北京商报), July 5, 2023,
http://finance.china.com.cn/industry/20230705/6005433.shtml.
138 Artificial Intelligence Ethics Subcommittee of the National Science and Technology Ethics Commission
(国家科技伦理委员会人工智能伦理分委员会), “‘Ethics Guidelines for Brain-Computer Interface Research’
Released” (“脑机接口研究伦理指引”发布), MOST (科技部), February 2, 2024, translated by CSET,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/china-bci-ethics/, our emphasis.
139 A study by Zhou Jie (周洁), Wang Chunjia (王淳佳) and Zhang Qian (张倩), all with the Intellectual
Property and Innovative Development Center of the China Academy of Information and Communications
Technology, (中国信息通信研究院知识产权与创新发展中心), claims China surpassed the United States in
2015 in the number of applied patents for invasive BCI electrode technology and has been widening the
gap ever since. “Development trend analysis of implantable brain-computer interface electrode
technology from patent perspective” (专利视角下植入式脑机接口电极技术发展趋势分析), Information and
Communications Technology and Policy (信息通信技术与政策), 49, no. 3, (2023): 61-67.
140 Hannas, Chang, Chou, and Fleeger, “China’s Advanced AI Research.”
141 John Chen, personal communication, January 2024. Most Chinese papers reviewed in this study
acknowledge support from China’s National Natural Science Foundation, National Key Research and
Development Project, National Basic Research Program of China, and sundry other government
foundations at the state, provincial and municipal levels.
142 Hannas, Chang, Chou, and Fleeger, “China’s Advanced AI Research,” 44, offers a sketch of a
minimalist open-source technology monitoring program. Broader projects are being discussed with U.S.
and UK policymakers.
