
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 1
Executive Summary
The Quadrilateral Security Dialogue, commonly known as the Quad, is a semi-formal
but strategically significant grouping of four countries— the United States, Australia,
India, and Japan. Cooperation on critical and emerging technologies is a key element of
the Quad’s agenda, and all four nations have a particular interest in strengthening
cooperation on responsible development of artificial intelligence (AI).1 Their desire to
collaborate stems not only from recognizing AI’s transformative economic, societal, and
national security potential, but also the importance of ensuring that technological
innovation is shaped by their shared democratic values and respect for human rights.2
The Quad could offer an alternative to China’s techno-authoritarian model of
technology development and use, setting the standard for a multilateral approach to
countering the malicious use of AI for surveillance, censorship, and misinformation.3
The group, however, faces non-negligible barriers to effective technology cooperation,
including different approaches to data governance, varying economic and technological
capabilities, and divergent geopolitical priorities.
This report assesses the state of AI collaboration among the Quad members, focusing
specifically on trends in joint AI-related research publications and investment flows into
AI companies over the past decade. It also evaluates the AI-related research and
investment ties between each of the Quad countries and China during this period. Our
main findings are as follows:
AI Research:
● All four Quad countries are among the top 10 AI research producers in the
world, both by number of research publications and citations. Researchers in
the Quad countries collectively generated nearly 650,000 AI-related research
papers between 2010 and 2020, more than the total authored by European
Union and Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) researchers
combined.
● Each Quad country has AI-related research strengths that could be leveraged
for joint research opportunities. Japan stands out in simulation and human-
computer interaction (HCI), India in data mining and data science, Australia in
linguistics and theoretical computer science, and the United States in machine
learning and natural language processing.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2
● While the United States collaborates extensively with Australia, India, and
Japan on AI-related research, the latter three Indo-Pacific states collaborate
little with one another. The United States is the leading research partner for
Australia, India, and Japan, and AI researchers from these three Indo-Pacific
countries collaborated with U.S. peers on at least 19 percent of their
internationally co-authored research papers. In contrast, collaboration rates
between Australian, Indian, and Japanese researchers never exceeded 4 percent
of each country’s respective internationally co-authored AI research output.
● China is the top research partner for the United States and is the second-
leading partner for the rest of the Quad members. Not only does research
cooperation between the United States and China outweigh U.S. research
collaboration with the rest of its Quad partners taken together, but Australia,
India, and Japan each have more research partnerships with China than they do
with one another.
AI Investments:
● Between 2010 and 2021, the majority of investment transactions in AI
companies located in the United States, Australia, India, and Japan included
domestic investors. The United States, however, is the largest foreign investor
in Australian, Indian, and Japanese AI companies, both in terms of the number of
investment transactions and overall transaction value.
● While the United States has robust AI investment ties with Australia, India,
and Japan, there is relatively little investment activity between the latter three
Indo-Pacific countries. Although there was more AI investment activity between
Japan and India than between India and Australia or Australia and Japan, it was
largely one-sided, with Japanese investors targeting Indian AI companies while
Indian investors seem more reluctant to pursue opportunities in Japan.
● There is far more AI investment activity between the United States and China
than the United States and each of the remaining Quad countries. While the
number of Chinese investment transactions in the U.S.-based AI companies has
declined since their peak in 2017, U.S. investments in China’s AI companies
increased in 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3
● Australia, India, and Japan each have more AI investment activity with China
than they do with one another. Similar to the trends observed in the Quad
countries’ AI research collaboration, AI investment activity between China and
each of three Indo-Pacific members of the Quad exceeds the limited investment
flows between these three countries, both in terms of the number of investment
transactions and overall transaction value.
The Quad offers a forum to build trust, identify opportunities for joint research ventures,
and gather AI entrepreneurs, investors, and strategic industry partners to increase and
diversify technology collaboration. But the prospects for its success depend largely on
building stronger ties among U.S. allies beyond their bilateral linkages to the United
States. Patterns of AI-related research collaboration and investment across the Quad
highlight that the group’s three Indo-Pacific members are less closely intertwined with
one another than they are with the United States. Moreover, each of the Quad states
has varying but fruitful AI research and investment relationships with China. To
capitalize on the Quad’s potential, fuel innovation, and decrease dependency on
Chinese technology and markets, the group needs to strengthen and expand AI
research collaboration and investment among Australia, India, and Japan.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ 1
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................... 5
AI Research across the Quad .............................................................................................................. 8
AI Research Output and Key Research Subfields ................................................................................... 9
Patterns of Research Collaboration between the Quad Countries .................................................13
Patterns of Research Collaboration between the Quad Countries and China ............................16
AI Investment Activity across the Quad ....................................................................................... 18
ǏğƛǏňğǐ΁ŵĹ΁Ưłğ΁¥Ʒñė΁ ŵƷŪƯƛňğƣ͵΁U΁UŪǏğƣƯŨğŪƯ΁0ĐŵƣǖƣƯğŨƣ ..........................................................19
AI Investment Trends across the Quad Countries ................................................................................21
ƣƣğƣƣňŪĺ΁¥Ʒñė΁ ŵƷŪƯƛňğƣ͵΁UŪǏğƣƯŨğŪƯƣ΁ňŪ΁'ŵŨğƣƯňĐ΁U΁ ŵŨƘñŪňğƣ ......................................................... 21
Assessing AI Investment Ties between the Quad Countries ......................................................................... 22
AI Investment Ties between the Quad Countries and China ............................................................26
Opportunities and Paths Forward .................................................................................................. 31
Research ..............................................................................................................................................................31
Leveraging Individual AI Research Strengths for Collaboration on Collective Challenges ................ 32
Advancing Research Collaboration on Privacy-preserving AI Techniques ............................................... 32
Investment ..........................................................................................................................................................33
Incentivizing and Growing AI Investment Activity between Australia, India, and Japan ..................... 33
Coordinating Investment Screening and Export Controls across the Quad ............................................. 34
Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................. 35
Authors .................................................................................................................................................... 37
Acknowledgments............................................................................................................................... 39
Appendix 1: Methodology ................................................................................................................. 40
Appendix 2: Additional Figures and Tables ................................................................................ 42
Endnotes ................................................................................................................................................. 47

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5
Introduction
The origins of the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue, commonly known as the Quad, trace
back to 2004, when the United States, Australia, India, and Japan came together to
coordinate a multilateral response to the Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami. The
grouping fell apart in 2008, largely due to economic pressure from China and wavering
commitment from its members. The four nations resumed the dialogue in late 2017 in
light of increasing strategic competition with China, and momentum has grown since
2019, when the group’s meetings were upgraded to the ministerial level.
Technology cooperation is a core element of the Quad agenda. The Quad Critical and
Emerging Technology Working Group, for example, was established in March 2021 to
coordinate efforts in pursuit of an “open, accessible, and secure technology
ecosystem.”4 Quad leaders met again in September 2021, issuing a joint statement of
principles for technology design, development, governance, and use, rooted in their
shared democratic values and expressed respect for human rights.5 They also
announced new efforts, including standing up technical standards contact groups on
advanced communications and AI, launching a semiconductor supply chain initiative,
and establishing fellowships for leading STEM graduate students.6 Another notable
effort is the Track 1.5 industry dialogue on Open RAN deployment and adoption for
secure, open, and transparent 5G and beyond-5G networks.7
These initiatives reflect individual state priorities for developing emerging technologies
broadly and AI more specifically as an instrument of national power, alongside a shared
desire to ensure “a free, open, inclusive, and resilient Indo-Pacific.”8 All four Quad
members have released national AI strategies in the last five years, acknowledging the
technology’s value for economic growth, societal development, and military power.9
Having recognized AI’s important role in their future prosperity and security, Quad
members appear intent on using the forum to advance their technological ambitions
through collaboration.
The efforts by the United States, Australia, India, and Japan to collaborate on AI and
other technology development through the Quad forum hold promise for several
reasons. For one, the grouping sets a flexible, overarching structure atop a strong
foundation of bilateral and multilateral diplomatic, economic, technological, and military
ties. Without a permanent secretariat, the semi-formal arrangement of ad-hoc working
groups allows for experimentation and agility in collective efforts. In one combination or
another, the four countries are also members of other international fora around AI
development, and the Quad arrangement can serve to further reinforce those linkages
and efforts.10 Although the non-binding nature of the Quad allows for some ambiguity

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6
and can pose coordination challenges, its members see the grouping as an opportunity
to use multilateral means to achieve their AI development ambitions.
Much of the Quad’s promise also stems from the fact that it brings together four
nations with unique and compatible technological strengths. Technology collaboration
generally permits partners to take advantage of one another’s relative strengths and
maximize the advantage of scale, averting duplicated efforts and developing regulatory
approaches that foster innovation.11 In the Quad context, each state could potentially
leverage its unique advantages to boost the group’s collective strength. India has a
massive tech talent pool, while Australia has a robust, high-skilled workforce and a
highly developed digital economy. Japan is a global leader in robotics, automation, and
commercialization of tech breakthroughs. The United States is investing heavily in AI
across the board— from AI workforce and education initiatives to greater resources for
research and development to bolstering domestic AI chips production. With the
amassed specialized knowledge, equipment, and resources of its members, the Quad
could serve as a natural incubator for cutting-edge innovation on a regional and global
scale.
Finally, as the four leading democracies in the Indo-Pacific, the United States, Australia,
India, and Japan see the Quad as a collective effort to curb China’s disruptive regional
behavior.12 From its development and export of surveillance technologies that facilitate
repression to its economically coercive measures to suppress competition, China’s
digital authoritarianism challenges regional democratic interests, and, in turn, fuels the
Quad states’ efforts to develop next-generation technologies in line with their national
goals and shared values. Working together, the four Quad nations can be effective in
rolling back China’s technology market dominance. For instance, the Quad's
commitment to secure an Open RAN system for 5G development created the prospect
of competition for Huawei’s telecommunications equipment monopoly by lowering
market entry barriers for other vendors.13 By articulating a shared vision for
technological and AI leadership rooted in democratic values and principles, the Quad
offers an alternative to China’s techno-authoritarian model that has made headway in
the region over the past decade.14
However, even with the advantages presented by the Quad and members’ stated
commitments to technology collaboration, the Quad states still face barriers to
achieving their shared technology cooperation agenda, including in AI. Regulatory
hurdles could slow the pace of collaboration. In particular, national data sharing laws
and regulations could hamper the group’s ability to capitalize on members’ unique
strengths. For example, in 2019, India rejected Japan’s Osaka Track, a framework to
promote data transfers in favor of expanding data localization.15 In addition, Quad

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7
members’ economic entanglements with China could slow the pace of collective action.
Despite individual and shared concerns about its increasingly assertive global and
regional behavior, in 2020, China remained the largest trading partner for the United
States, India, Australia, and Japan.16 Close economic ties to China could therefore hinder
the Quad’s technological collaboration agenda.
Against this backdrop, this report analyzes the state of AI-related collaboration
between the four Quad countries. The United States, Australia, India, and Japan differ a
great deal with respect to the size, maturity, and dynamism of their respective AI
ecosystems, as well as their science and technology sectors more broadly. Nonetheless,
all four democracies increasingly view AI as important to their national security and
prosperity and are interested in partnering to ensure AI progress is compatible with
democratic principles. This report uses two indicators of AI development and activity—
AI research publications and investment in AI companies—to evaluate the scope and
patterns in AI collaboration between the Quad countries over the past decade. We
assess data across these indicators to map out each country’s AI ecosystem, their
unique strengths and weaknesses, their relationships with one another, and, where
appropriate, their linkages to China. Finally, we outline areas of future opportunity and
possible pathways for expanding AI-related cooperation among all of the Quad’s
members.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8
AI Research across the Quad
Research related to artificial intelligence can fuel scientific and technological progress,
propel innovation, and contribute to breakthroughs in a broad range of fields, including
health care, transportation, agriculture, finance, smart cities, and national security.17
Although their individual priorities and approaches may differ, the four Quad countries
have repeatedly stressed their commitment to advancing AI research through
investment in AI education, public and private funding to universities and research
institutions engaged in work on AI, enhancements to data infrastructures, and
continued expansion of the computing resources necessary for AI development. AI
research has benefited immensely from a culture of openness, and all four Quad nations
also see research collaboration as a path to progress in AI.
Research publications are a commonly used indicator to assess organizational or
national competitiveness, highlight areas of strength, and illuminate barriers to
productivity that may be hindering broader technological progress. Many factors
influence research productivity, including the quality of academic research institutions,
access to public and commercial research funding, and the ability to attract, cultivate,
and retain talent. Additionally, broader systemic issues such as institutional culture,
bureaucracy, corruption, a country’s level of educational attainment and economic
development, and openness to scientific and technological exchanges also play an
important role.18 Although there are important differences between the AI ecosystems
of the United States, Australia, India, and Japan, a comparison of their AI research
production, areas of research focus, and patterns of research collaboration offers a
useful perspective into their individual and collective accomplishments as well as gaps
that require additional investment and attention.
This section explores the scope and nature of AI research across the four Quad
countries, their patterns of collaboration with one another as well as with China
between 2010 and 2020. Our analysis uses English-language AI publication data from
the CSET merged corpus of scholarly literature from Digital Science’s Dimensions,
Clarivate’s Web of Science, Microsoft Academic Graph, China National Knowledge
Infrastructure, arXiv, and Papers with Code.19 The publications data for this analysis of
scholarly literature was pulled from the broader corpus in October 2021.20 It is to be
expected that analyses conducted at different points in time, using different methods to
classify AI papers, and drawing on a different combination of bibliometric data sources
will yield slightly different results. Appendix 1 offers a detailed discussion of our
research methodology, including our approach to identifying and classifying research
publications related to the development and application of AI.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9
AI Research Output and Key Research Subfields
Over the last decade, scholars from the United States, Australia, India, and Japan have
authored a combined total of 642,813 AI papers, accounting for nearly 28 percent of
the global AI research output.21 When taken together as a group, the Quad countries
have published more AI papers than all of the EU and ASEAN countries combined
(532,802 papers).22
All four of the Quad countries are in the top 10 of AI research producers in the world,
based on the number of published AI papers linked to institutions and authors from
these countries. As Table 1 shows, between 2010 and 2020, the United States was the
second largest producer of AI research, accounting for 17 percent of the world’s total.
India and Japan, ranked third and fifth, respectively, each accounting for around 5
percent of the global total, while Australia placed eighth, with roughly 3 percent of the
global production of AI research.23
Table 1: Top 10 Countries by Production of AI-relevant Scholarly Papers, 2010–2020.

Source: CSET merged corpus.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10
Research volume is not necessarily indicative of research quality or impact. Yet the AI-
related research authored by scientists from the four Quad countries is also highly cited,
appearing to have had notable influence on progress in AI-related research fields, at
least as indicated by citation counts (see Table A, Appendix 2). AI research papers
published by scientists and scholars from the United States have generated upward of
10 million citations over the past decade, well over the number of citations credited to
AI papers originating from China— and this is despite the fact that Chinese researchers
have published more papers than U.S.-based researchers have over this period of time.
Australia’s AI citation counts are over 26 times higher than the country’s publication
output. Meanwhile, India and Japan are also among the top 10 countries producing the
most highly cited AI research.
In addition to overall research output and quality indicators, it is also useful to examine
the specific areas of focus AI researchers from the United States, Australia, India, and
Japan are exploring in their publications. In our dataset, we identified 289 AI-related
research subfields where authors from at least one of the Quad countries have
published at least one AI-related paper. Looking at the distribution of AI research
papers by subfield for each country provides insights, however limited, into particular
areas of research strengths, as well as helping to offset some of the challenges in
comparing countries with vast differences in research volume.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 11
Table 2: Quad Countries’ AI Research by Fields of Study, 2010–2020.
Note: This list displays the top seven AI research subfields for each of the Quad countries by volume of
production. The remaining five fields in the table can be seen as areas of strength for at least one of the
Quad countries, i.e., where their individual production is uniquely high so that it is worth highlighting
from a substantive perspective.
Source: CSET merged corpus.
As Table 2 shows, pattern recognition, machine learning, and computer vision are
among the top AI fields therein researchers from the Quad countries tend to publish,
which reflects global publication trends (see Table C, Appendix 2). Below, we look
more closely into the AI subfield-specific publication patterns of each of the Quad
countries to identify their respective AI-related research strengths.
Australia: Australia’s top AI research fields by paper count—pattern recognition,
machine learning, and computer vision—generally reflect global trends and
distributions. That said, about 9 percent of AI papers published by Australia focus on
machine learning, which is nearly double the global rate of 5 percent. It is also worth

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 12
drawing attention to Australia’s research in theoretical computer science and
linguistics, where in absolute terms, the country’s publication output outnumbers that
of Japan and India despite the fact that the latter two have a much higher AI paper
count overall.
For context, theoretical computer science focuses on the mathematical aspects of
computer science and provides us ways to investigate some deeper philosophical
questions. Linguistics involves modeling of the basic linguistic processes
(comprehension, production, and learning of language) and includes working on crucial
AI problems (perception, communication, knowledge, planning, and reasoning and
learning). Research in linguistics is closely linked to the field of natural language
processing, which is one of the major fields of AI.
India: India’s top three AI research subfields include pattern recognition, computer
vision, and machine learning. Although this distribution largely mirrors global patterns,
26 percent of India’s AI-related research pertains to pattern recognition, while globally,
that number stands at about 14 percent. Data mining is India’s fourth largest AI field,
and Indian scholars have written 6,153 papers on it in the past decade. From a
comparative standpoint, while over the past decade India and Japan have published a
relatively similar number of AI research papers overall (116,319 vs. 104,716), Indian
research production in data mining is roughly three times more than that of Japan. Data
mining or knowledge discovery in databases involves the nontrivial extraction of
implicit, previously unknown and potentially useful information from data. Given India’s
massive population and increasing internet and smartphone penetration, there are
immense opportunities for data collection. AI researchers in India are therefore well
positioned to study data systems and processes; indeed, data science is one of the
fastest growing AI-related research fields in India in the past 10 years.24
Japan: Computer vision is the most popular field of AI research in Japan, representing
15 percent of the country’s overall AI publications, and exceeding the global figure of 8
percent. Japan’s AI research also stands out in two additional fields— control theory and
human-computer interaction. Japanese paper production in each of these fields is
roughly three times that of Australia and India, respectively. Control theory pertains to
the use of feedback to influence the behavior of a system for a desired goal, while
research on human-computer interaction broadly deals with interfaces between people
and computer systems. Both fields have linkages to robotics research and development,
and the relatively high number of publications in these areas may be interlinked with
Japan’s accomplishments in robotics. Finally, although simulation research accounts
only for 4 percent of Japan’s overall AI-related publication output over the past decade,

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 13
Japanese researchers have published more papers in this field than even the United
States, making Japan a global leader in AI-related simulation research.
United States: While the United States lags behind China in overall AI-related research
output, it is far ahead of its Quad allies. The United States is a global leader in AI
subfields such as machine learning, data science, human-computer interactions, and
theoretical computer science (where it outperforms even China) and is ahead of
Australia, Japan, and India in the remainder of the AI-related subfields presented in
Table 2, except simulation where it comes second to Japan. Even when we contrast
U.S. paper counts with all of Australia, India, and Japan’s paper production taken
together, the United States still leads in several key areas including natural language
processing and linguistics.
Patterns of Research Collaboration between the Quad Countries
International research collaboration can enhance research output, quality and impact.25
Collaborations allow researchers to share resources, costs, and infrastructure, cultivate
ideas and skills, and work together to address regional, transnational or global
problems. Recent studies indicate that the percentage of worldwide science and
engineering articles produced with international collaboration has increased from 18
percent to 23 percent from 2010 to 2020.26 That said, countries demonstrate different
rates of international research collaboration depending on factors such as national
science and technology policies, higher education infrastructure, and others.27
The Quad countries differ significantly in their propensity for international collaboration
in AI-related research, as proxied by internationally co-authored publication counts.
Over the past decade, 69 percent of all AI research papers published by Australian
researchers were co-authored with at least one non-Australian author. That figure
stands at 48 percent for the United States and at 30 percent for Japan. India has the
lowest international collaboration rate among the Quad nations, with only 20 percent of
all of its AI research papers co-authored with counterparts from outside of the country.
All four countries have seen their share of internationally co-authored AI-related papers
increase significantly over this period of time, mirroring global trends.28
When looking at the top research partners for each of the Quad countries, it is
immediately evident that AI researchers from Australia, India, and Japan most often
collaborate with their counterparts from the United States.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 14
Figure 1: Quad Countries and Their Top 10 AI Research Partners, 2010–2020.

Source: CSET merged corpus.
As Figure 1 shows, 22 percent of all of India’s international AI co-authorships are with
the United States, such that Indian AI scholars collaborate at least four times more with
U.S.-based AI scholars than researchers from any other country in the world. Nineteen
percent of Australia’s and Japan’s internationally co-authored AI papers each are with
U.S.-affiliated researchers. Comparatively, the collaboration rates between AI
researchers from Australia, India, and Japan are much lower— never exceeding 4
percent of each country’s respective co-authored AI publications.
For Australia, India and Japan do not even rank in the top 10 of research partners. This
is particularly notable considering Australia’s high research collaboration rate. For India,
research collaborations with Australia account only for 3 percent of the country’s
internationally co-authored publications, whereas Japan does not make it to the top 10
of India’s research partners. Finally, when looking at Japan, research papers co-
authored with colleagues from Australia represent 3 percent of the country’s

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 15
internationally co-authored publications, while publications authored jointly with
researchers from India represent 2 percent of Japan’s international co-authorships.
There are a number of explanations for why Australia, India, and Japan have close AI-
related research ties to the United States but not to one another. Most basically,
researchers from around the world have professional and personal incentives to seek
out collaboration with colleagues from the United States. U.S. universities, research
institutions, and individual researchers enjoy a global reputation for excellence and
prestige, are often relatively well-funded, and have the advanced equipment to conduct
technologically-sophisticated research. A mixture of these considerations as well as
other historical, cultural, geographic, and strategic factors shape research collaboration
ties between the Quad countries as well.
The United States and Australia, for example, share extensive research ties across
STEM and other fields, reinforced by a shared language, cultural affinity, and close
economic and security ties. The United States and Japan also have a long standing and
robust alliance and the two countries have worked together on science and technology
research and development since the mid-1960s, with AI increasingly becoming a top
priority for cooperation.29 Research collaboration between the United States and India
has also benefited from bilateral initiatives such as the Indo-U.S. Science and
Technology Forum (IUSSTF) launched in 2000 to promote long-term scientific
collaborations. Evidence from survey research also suggests that the majority of Indian
faculty members living and working in U.S. universities in science and engineering
fields report having collaborations with researchers in India.30
On the other hand, Australia, India, and Japan have traditionally not been important
research partners for one another. While it is difficult to ascertain the specific factors
that are hindering collaboration between researchers from these three countries,
geography, language barriers, funding constraints, and bureaucratic impediments all
play a role.31
The massive research output produced by the Quad countries makes them global
leaders in AI research. Each country’s performance stands out in key AI-research
fields— Australia in theoretical computer science and linguistics, India in data mining
and data science, Japan in simulation, HCI, and control theory, and the United States in
machine learning and natural language processing, among several others. However,
there are crucial differences in the rates of international collaboration amongst the four
Quad members. While Australia, India, and Japan all have close research ties to the
United States, they tend to collaborate much less frequently with one another. As the

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 16
Quad members continue working toward greater technology cooperation, there is
certainly space to enhance AI research ties between the three Indo-Pacific nations.
Patterns of Research Collaboration between the Quad Countries and China
China is a global leader in AI research. As Table 1 shows, the country surpassed the
United States in the number of AI papers produced between 2010 and 2020 and is far
ahead of India, Japan, and Australia. China comes second only to the United States
when looking at citation counts, a common measure of research quality, and once again
significantly ahead of Australia, India, and Japan.
Previous CSET research shows that while the United States, Australia, and the
European Union have all grown more collaborative over the past 20 years, China’s level
of collaboration has remained relatively flat.32 China has a relatively low international
collaboration rate in research on science and engineering in general, as well as in AI
more specifically, where according to our data over the past decade, only about 20
percent of the country’s overall AI publications listed co-authors outside of China.33
China’s international collaboration rate in AI research is then more akin to that of India,
but lower than that of Japan (30 percent), the United States (48 percent), or Australia
(69 percent).34
Despite China’s comparatively low international collaboration rate in AI-related
research, the scale of its production still makes it a critical research partner for the
United States, Australia, Japan, and to a lesser extent, India (see Table B, Appendix 2).
U.S. AI researchers collaborate with their Chinese counterparts more than they do with
colleagues from any other country–indeed, nearly 17 percent (56,194 papers) of
America’s internationally co-authored AI papers are with Chinese counterparts.
Collaboration with Chinese scholars also account for 16 percent (7,850) of Japan’s
internationally co-authored AI papers and over 12 percent (12,169 papers) of
Australia’s internationally co-authored AI papers.
Although India has a lower international collaboration rate than its Quad allies, China is
India’s second largest collaborator after the United States, accounting for 5 percent of
India’s internationally co-authored AI papers. India and China have co-authored only
2,184 AI papers over the past decade, which is a lower output than that of research
collaborations between China and the United States, China and Australia, and China
and Japan.
As previously noted, China is the global leader in AI research publications, and even
when taking its relatively low overall international collaboration rate into account,

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 17
remains a key research partner for all of the Quad countries. It is however possible that
we will begin seeing changes in these patterns over the next several years as the Quad
nations introduce new or expand existing regulations on joint research with China.35
Some such measures are already underway— several tackling the issue of research
security more broadly while others dealing with China more specifically. The
Congressionally mandated National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence, for
instance, has urged U.S. universities to limit their collaboration with entities and
individuals affiliated with the Chinese military.36 Australia, meanwhile, has introduced
measures for increased vetting of government-funded projects undertaken at the
country’s universities.37 India has instructed its universities to not enter into academic
cooperation agreements with Chinese institutions without approval.38 Japan has
reportedly initiated a system for Japanese and foreign researchers to seek government
approval before they access dual-use research and technologies.39 While there is merit
in responsible and open AI-related research collaboration with Chinese counterparts
that fuels scientific and technological progress, the Quad nations may be reconsidering
some research partnerships involving China, particularly in areas pertinent to national
security. Such shifts present an opportunity for enhancing research collaboration
activities between Australia, India, and Japan based on their individual and
complementary research strengths.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 18
AI Investment Activity across the Quad
Investments in AI companies are growing more rapidly and becoming more global with
funding coming from every corner of the market and every part of the world.40 Both
domestic and foreign investors are increasingly seeing financial returns on their
investments in AI companies.41 Cross-border investments can be mutually beneficial to
foreign investors and target companies, allowing foreign investors to profit from the
technological innovation developed by target companies, which in turn, rely on the
funding to develop innovative products and grow commercially.42 In keeping with these
global trends, investors and AI companies from each of the Quad countries are ramping
up their funding as well as competing to attract investments.
This section proceeds in three parts. First, we offer an overview of the AI investment
ecosystem within each of the Quad countries. Second, we analyze the investment
activities between these four nations to better understand the extent to which their
respective AI ecosystems are interlinked. Finally, we assess the AI investment ties each
of the Quad countries maintains with China.
To measure investment flows between investors and AI companies located across the
United States, Australia, Japan, and India (as well as China), we rely on financial data
from Crunchbase. No financial database covers the entire investment market perfectly,
and therefore our analysis is limited only to the AI companies listed by Crunchbase and
to observations where the investor’s country of origin is available. Appendix 1 offers a
detailed discussion of our research methodology.
There are two additional limitations to keep in mind. First, the investment community is
increasingly globalized, meaning that when an AI company is able to attract funding,
such capital often comes from investors located in more than one country. As such, our
assessments of the number and the size of investment transactions coming from the
United States and targeting Japan’s AI companies, for example, are not mutually
exclusive from our estimates of how much and how frequently Chinese investors are
investing in Japanese AI companies because these investors often find themselves
involved in the same funding rounds.
Second, the amount of money coming from individual investors to target AI companies
is also difficult to assess accurately, as investors are not likely to reveal this information.
Crunchbase, like other financial data providers, only offers information on the total
amount raised (where available) by a target company in a particular investment stage
and does not disclose the contributions made by individual investors. For example, the
U.S.-based Enlitic, a healthcare sector company specializing in deep learning, raised

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 19
$25 million in a Series B round in 2019 from six investors, four of which are
headquartered in Australia, one in Japan, and another in the United States. While
Crunchbase data shows that Enlitic was able to attract $25 million from these investors
during this specific funding round, we cannot know for certain the exact amount of
money each investor invested in this company.
Despite these limitations, the discussion below offers a useful overview of AI
investment activity involving the four Quad countries as well as China between 2010
and 2021. Ultimately, the findings mirror the patterns observed throughout the analysis
of research collaboration trends, namely that while all three Indo-Pacific countries have
extensive AI investment linkages to the United States, they are currently not leveraging
the opportunities presented in one another’s AI investment market. Moreover, based on
both the frequency and value of AI-related investment transactions, all four nations, but
particularly the United States, retain close AI investment ties with China.
Overview of the Quad Countries’ AI Investment Ecosystems
The AI investment ecosystems of the Quad countries differ in size, scale, and vitality.
The United States has the world’s largest AI market with 11,772 active AI companies.
Between 2010 and 2021, U.S.-based AI companies have received 13,793 investment
transactions and raised over $525 billion. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, 2020 was
a phenomenal year for the U.S. AI market, with $77 billion raised across 1,866 deals.
With 1,900 active AI companies, India has the second largest AI market among the
Quad countries and the third largest startup ecosystem in the world.43 As Figure 2
below demonstrates, investment in India’s AI companies has grown significantly over
the past decade, and investors’ enthusiasm for the country’s tech unicorns is unlikely to
dwindle soon.44 Between 2010 and 2021, Indian AI companies raised $26.9 billion
across 990 investment transactions. Notably, however, $10.2 billion of that overall
value came from two investment transactions, when in 2020 Reliance Jio— a subsidiary
of the Indian conglomerate Reliance Industries focused on developing AI-enabled
technologies— raised $5.7 billion from Meta and $4.5 billion from Google in two
separate corporate rounds.45 Aside from this, India has an active early-stage market in
which investors finance companies frequently, but with small amounts of capital. Early-
stage financing rounds— such as pre-seed, seed, angel, and series A and B— account
for 75 percent of observed investment transactions in which Indian AI companies
participated but make up only 5 percent of observed transaction value.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 20
Figure 2: Investment Flows into Indian, Japanese, and Australian AI Companies, 2010–
2021.

Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.
Japan has the third most active AI market among the Quad countries, with 747 AI
companies. But as evident from Figure 2 above, the country’s AI investment activity is
declining. Between 2010 and 2021, Japanese AI companies received $5.5 billion across
697 investment transactions. Investment in Japanese AI companies peaked in 2019
with 145 investment transactions but began to slow down in 2020. By 2021, the
number of investment transactions fell to 63, having declined by 56 percent since the
peak period, in part due to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.46 Early-
stage financing rounds account for 51 percent of observed AI transactions but
comprise about 22 percent of the observed transaction value. Japan’s AI market sees a
relatively high number of transactions albeit with a lower value attached to each, with a
median size deal of $7.9 million.
Australia has 475 AI companies, and while its AI investment market is less active than
those of the other three Quad countries, investors are beginning to show more
enthusiasm for the country’s AI companies. As Figure 2 above shows, Australian AI
companies received the lowest amount of transaction value and investment
transactions among the Quad nations, raising $3.4 billion across 251 deals between
2010 and 2021. However, Australian AI companies appear to be attracting more

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 21
investment transactions, and the overall value of transactions is also on the rise. 2021
was a particularly successful year for Australian AI companies which attracted nearly
$2.4 billion across 49 transactions, including one notable deal where the Australian e-
commerce giant Woolworths acquired Quantium, a local AI company focused on data
analytics, for $173.2 million.
AI Investment Trends across the Quad Countries
In examining Quad AI investment trends, we first look closely at the four countries’
investments into their respective domestic AI companies and second, assess the cross-
border AI investment ties between the four nations by counting the number of
investment transactions and overall transaction value involving each dyad within the
Quad.
Assessing Quad Countries’ Investments in Domestic AI Companies
Over the past decade, domestic investors were involved in the majority of investment
transactions targeting AI companies located in each one of the Quad countries. As
Figure 3 illustrates, between 2010 and 2021, domestic investors were involved in 81
percent of Japan’s AI investments (657 investment transactions), 68 percent of U.S. AI
investments (12,191 investment transactions), 61 percent of Australia’s AI investments
(189 investment transactions), and 53 percent of India’s AI investment (735 investment
transactions).
Figure 3: Share of Domestic and Foreign AI Investment Transactions in the Quad
Countries, 2010–2021.

Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.
There are a number of reasons that investors may prefer their domestic AI markets to
foreign investment opportunities, including favorable regulations, lower costs of doing

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 22
business, greater prospects for profit, local network for information and deal sourcing,
and other incentives set by governments to retain homegrown capital for a range of
economic and strategic reasons.47 That said, a healthy, vibrant AI investment ecosystem
is one that is able to attract foreign as well as domestic capital. The next section
discusses the AI investment ties between the four Quad countries.
Assessing AI Investment Ties between the Quad Countries
Based on our data, the United States is the top foreign investor in Indian, Australian,
and Japanese AI companies. As Figure 4 shows, U.S.-based investors took part in 23
percent of the observed investment transactions in Indian AI companies (316
investment transactions/$20.5 billion), 19 percent of investments in Australian AI
companies (59 investment transactions/$869 million), and 11 percent of investments in
Japanese AI companies (91 investment transactions/$904 million).
Figure 4: Top 10 Foreign Investors in Indian, Japanese, and Australian AI Companies, by
Share of AI Investment Transactions, 2010–2021.
Note: Highlighted rows are Quad country investors.
Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 23
Australia, India, and Japan are among the top 10 investors in American AI companies.
That said, given the massive size of the U.S. AI investment market, their individual
shares of the overall investment into U.S. AI companies are relatively small, as Table 3
below illustrates.
Table 3: AI Investment Activity between the United States and Each of Its Three Quad
Partners, 2010–2021.
Note: Arrows indicate the direction of investment from the investor country to the target country.
Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.
When looking closely at the investment transactions and transaction value involving
the United States and its Quad partners, there are interesting differences between
U.S.-Japan and U.S.-India AI activity. Japan is the fifth largest investor in American AI
companies, and as Table 3 shows, Japanese investors are particularly active in the U.S.
AI investment market, having been involved in as many as 331 investment transactions
totaling $14.5 billion between 2010 and 2021. U.S. AI investment in Japan is far
smaller by comparison, with U.S.-based investors taking part in about 91 investment
transactions totaling $904 million.
The U.S.-India investment relationship, on the other hand, exhibits the opposite trends.
Indian AI companies are big recipients of funding from the United States, with U.S.
investors involved in as many as 316 transactions, totaling approximately $20.5 billion.
Indian investors, meanwhile, have taken part in 250 investment transactions which

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 24
amounted to $4.4 billion reaching U.S. AI companies. Taken together, Japanese
investors seem more enthusiastic about opportunities in the U.S. AI investment market
than American investors looking at Japan’s AI market, while Indian AI companies are
managing to attract more U.S. investment than American AI companies drawing in
capital from Indian investors.
Australia, meanwhile, is the tenth largest investor in U.S.-based AI companies, and
between 2010 and 2021, Australian investors were involved in about 1 percent of
observed transactions into U.S.-based AI companies (162 investments
transactions/$5.6 billion); U.S. investors play a relatively significant role in the nascent
Australian AI market.
Mirroring the trends highlighted in the AI research collaboration section, the investment
data also indicates that while Australia, Japan, and India individually have close AI
investment ties with the United States, they partake in little AI investment activity with
one another. Among these three Indo-Pacific countries, there is some notable AI
investment activity between Japan and India, but the relationship is largely one sided,
with Japanese investors targeting Indian AI companies much more frequently than
Indian investors pursuing opportunities in Japan (see Table 4 below). Japan is the fifth
largest investor in Indian AI companies, with investors in Japan taking part in nearly two
percent of observed Indian AI investment transactions between 2010 and 2021 (26
investment transactions). Yet in this period, only one Japanese AI company— Cinnamon
AI— raised $15 million from multiple investors, one of which was the India-based SBI’s
Fintech Business Innovations. The 2018 Japan-India Digital Partnership agreement
which set off to encourage Japanese investment in Indian startups can help explain
some of this imbalance.48

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 25
Table 4: AI Investment Activity between India and Japan, Australia and India, and Japan
and Australia, 2010–2021.

Note: Arrows indicate the direction of investment from the investor country to the target country.
Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.
Over the past decade, there has been relatively little investment activity between India
and Australia, and in fact, Crunchbase lists only one investment transaction involving
Indian investors targeting an Australian AI company. In 2020, the Indian company,
Sonata Software, acquired Australia’s GAPbusters Limited (GBW), an analytics
company developing AI capabilities. Although the value of the transaction was not
disclosed, our estimates suggest it was approximately $28 million (see Appendix 1).
According to the company, Sonata Software’s acquisition will strategically leverage
GBW’s AI technologies and strengthen its presence in Australia as well as Southeast
Asia and Europe, where GBW is prevalent.49
Although Australia is among the top 10 investors in Indian AI companies, Australian
investors have taken part in less than 1 percent of the total investments into Indian AI
companies between 2010 and 2021 (10 investment transactions/$11.9 million). In
2021, Australia announced that it will set up a consulate in India to promote investment
and innovation partnerships on emerging technologies.50 This move could indicate
Australia’s interest in boosting investment in Indian AI companies.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 26
As Table 4 illustrates, there is little bilateral AI investment between Japan and Australia.
While Japan is the fifth largest investor in Australian AI companies, transactions that
involve Japanese investors make up a little over one percent of observed investment
transactions in Australian AI companies (four investment transactions/$78.8 million). At
the same time, according to Crunchbase data, there is no observed capital flow from
Australian investors to Japanese AI companies. As previously mentioned, domestic
players dominate investment in the Japanese AI market, with foreign investors
participating only in 19 percent of the observed investment transactions. That said,
weak AI investment ties between Australia and Japan are another example of both the
currently limited AI-investment linkages between all three of the Indo-Pacific Quad
countries and the opportunities for closer alignment in the future.
AI Investment Ties between the Quad Countries and China
Between 2010 and 2011, Chinese AI companies raised nearly $114 billion dollars
across 2,480 investment transactions, making the country’s AI market larger than that
of India, Japan, and Australia yet smaller than that of the United States. The United
States is by far the largest foreign investor in Chinese AI companies, with U.S. investors
taking part in 443 investment transactions amounting to $42.7 billion between 2010
and 2021. Earlier analysis shows that the United States is also the top investor in the
three Indo-Pacific countries but invests less frequently and with smaller transaction
value in Indian, Japanese, and Australian AI companies than in Chinese AI firms.
The robust AI-related investment ties between the United States and China are not
particularly surprising given the size and vitality of the Chinese economy and its AI
ecosystem in particular, both of which offer compelling opportunities for U.S.-based
investors. There are, nonetheless, powerful diplomatic, security, and economic
incentives to strengthen technological collaboration between the United States and its
three Quad allies while reducing dependence on the Chinese market. It is therefore
notable that the AI investment relationship between the United States and China, as
proxied by both the number of transactions involving investors from these two
countries and the value of these deals, is that much stronger than the linkages between
the United States and its three Indo-Pacific Quad allies.
That said, investment flows between China and the United States, including those
related to AI, have taken a hit over the past few years.51 Figure 5 shows Chinese
investments in U.S. AI companies started to dip in 2018, then fell further and plateaued
over the next two years, followed by a slight uptick in 2021. These trends may be the
results of growing tensions, sanctions, export controls, and trade disputes between the
United States and China. Meanwhile, U.S. investments targeting Chinese AI companies

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 27
declined in 2019, dropping further in 2020, but then climbed back up and hit a record
high of 62 investment transactions in 2021. As U.S. investments in Chinese companies
begin to receive more scrutiny, this upward trajectory may not hold up.
Figure 5: AI Investment Transactions Involving the United States and China, 2010–
2021.

Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.
Japan, India, and Australia also have important AI investment ties with China, both
attracting capital from Chinese funders and investing in Chinese AI companies.
Between 2010 and 2021, AI investments involving China and Japan amounted to over
$16 billion across 23 investment transactions. Meanwhile, AI investment involving
China and India totaled $1.14 billion across 41 investment transactions. Over the same
period, AI investments involving China and Australia reached $1.2 billion with 26
investment transactions.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 28
Table 5: AI Investment Ties Involving China and Each of the Quad Countries, 2010–
2021.

Note: Arrows indicate the direction of investment from the investor country to the target country.
Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.
Table 5 offers a closer look at China’s AI investment ties with each of the four Quad
countries, providing insight into each particular dyad, as well as a comparative
perspective. Japanese investments in Chinese AI companies account for the majority of
the AI-related investment activity between the two countries, with Chinese AI
companies raising about $16 billion across 15 transactions that involved Japanese
investors, including large investment firms such as SoftBank and ORIX Group, and the
corporate investor, Toyota Motor. While China is the third largest investor in Japanese
AI companies, Chinese investment activity accounts for only 1 percent of Japan’s
observed AI investment transactions (eight investment transactions/$27 million); this
finding once again illustrates the prominent role that domestic as opposed to foreign
investors play in Japan’s AI ecosystem. As a whole, Japan’s AI investment relationship
with China seems to resemble the one with the United States— that is, Japanese
investors are taking part in high value transactions targeting both Chinese and U.S. AI
companies, while Japanese AI companies are securing relatively lower value

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 29
transactions in funding rounds that involve American and Chinese investors (see Table
D, Appendix 2).
China-Australia AI investment ties mirror some of the trends in the China-Japan
investment relationship— that is, Australia’s investments in China’s AI companies far
exceed China’s investments in Australia’s significantly smaller AI ecosystem. Although
Australia is the eighth largest investor in Chinese AI companies, Australian investors
took part in 16 investment transactions that made up only half a percent of China’s
observed AI investment transactions. Chinese investors, meanwhile, were involved in
only 10 investment transactions targeting Australian AI companies. But because the
Australian AI market is relatively small, these investments made China the fourth
largest investor in the country’s AI companies, with slightly over a 3 percent share of
Australia’s observed AI investment transactions. Looking at the total transaction value
in our data, the $999 million raised by Chinese AI companies in funding rounds
involving Australian investors is nearly five times larger than the $201 million raised by
Australian AI companies during funding rounds in which Chinese investors participated.
China-India AI investment ties, on the other hand, appear substantively different from
China’s relationship with Japanese and Australian AI markets, in that the Chinese
investments in Indian AI companies account for the bulk of the investment activity
between the two countries. Indian AI companies attracted 33 investment transactions
that involved Chinese investors, making China the fourth largest investor in India’s AI
market. India, on the other hand, is only the eleventh largest investor in China’s AI
market, with Indian investors participating in eight investment transactions over the
past decade. Indian AI companies raised $874 million in deals that involved Chinese
investors, which is three times more than the $269 million that Chinese AI companies
received during funding rounds in which Indian investors took part. Here, it is also
worth noting that India’s AI investment relationship with China is similar to the one
with the United States, as Indian AI companies seem to be attracting a great deal of
investment from American and Chinese investors, while Indian investors are less active
in U.S. and Chinese AI markets (see Table D, Appendix 2).
As noted earlier, AI related investment activity among Australia, India, and Japan is
relatively limited. This section further demonstrates that each of the three Indo-Pacific
countries is closely interlinked with China, much more so than with their Quad allies,
excluding the United States. These AI-related investment linkages are part of a broader
set of economic and technological entanglements that bind China with the Quad
countries. These linkages are predictable and sensible given the size of the Chinese
economy and the myriad opportunities investors see in the Chinese AI market. That
said, the governments of the United States, Australia, India, and Japan have all

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 30
acknowledged that Chinese investment also presents the risk of technology transfer
and intellectual property theft.52 Chinese venture capital investments in particular have
been targeting industries with clear strategic significance and national security
applications, such as AI, autonomous vehicles, virtual reality, robotics, and blockchain
technology, raising concerns that cutting edge technologies developed in these
countries can be used to strengthen China’s military capabilities.53 Another shared
concern is China’s use of AI and related technologies for surveillance and repression,
both domestically and increasingly abroad.54 Yet while the Quad countries have
repeatedly voiced their commitment to ensuring that the development and use of AI is
aligned with democratic principles and values, the close AI investment ties between the
four Quad nations and China could complicate if not undermine the group’s agenda in
this space.
Ultimately, the data on trends in AI investment activity between the four Quad nations
as well as their investment relationships with China highlight a complex reality where
financial and economic transactions continue to operate on a largely separate plane
than diplomatic initiatives and national security concerns. The implementation of the
Quad agenda on technology cooperation, including on AI, will likely require policy
change both at the individual state level and through multilateral coordination. While
there are no easy solutions, an important step forward is to recognize this stark
difference between the extensive AI investment ties each of the Quad countries has
with China and the limited investment flows between Australia, India, and Japan. As
the next section illustrates, these gaps in both AI-related research and AI investment
nonetheless offer a number of opportunities for the Quad nations to capitalize on their
respective strengths and coordinate policies to tackle shared problems related to
emerging technologies.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 31
Opportunities and Paths Forward
In its February 2022 Indo-Pacific strategy, the White House places an emphasis not
only on strengthening U.S. alliances in the region, but on “encouraging our allies and
partners to strengthen their ties with one another.”55 As a key regional grouping, the
Quad has a powerful potential to advance cooperation on critical and emerging
technologies, including AI. Right now, however, the ties that bind Australia, India, and
Japan to each other are weaker than those that connect these three countries to the
United States. Moreover, all four Quad members, to a varied extent, are interlinked with
China’s vast AI ecosystem–whether through joint research endeavors or through
financial investment.
Delivering on the Quad’s goal to advance technology cooperation will require
deepening and expanding existing collaboration efforts as well as forging new
pathways where few exist. For example, policy reports from Australia’s National
Security College’s “Quad Tech Network” provide useful ideas for a Quad battery
partnership, a techno-diplomacy strategy for telecommunications security in the Indo-
Pacific region, and biotechnology research and standards collaboration.56 While we
refrain from proposing policy recommendations on the basis of findings related to only
two dimensions of a multifaceted regional partnership, we offer the following list of
potential opportunities that policymakers and other relevant stakeholders across the
four countries should consider to expand cooperation.
Research
Expanding bilateral and multilateral AI-related research between the Quad countries,
and particularly among Australia, India, and Japan, can strengthen the broader
technology cooperation agenda. Government stakeholders, universities, research
institutions, and private sector partners can facilitate AI-related research collaboration
between Australia, India, and Japan in a variety of ways, including grants for joint
research projects, scholarships and fellowships for visiting researchers and academic
exchanges, competitions and prizes for jointly developed prototypes and solutions,
conferences, workshops, and many more. Aligning incentives and creating
opportunities for joint projects requires public and private funding, dedicated
leadership, effective coordination, as well as time. Below, we therefore propose
exploring opportunities for joint AI research that can help the Quad nations tackle
urgent and shared challenges, as well as increasing collaboration in AI research areas
where differences in data governance and regulatory approaches present fewer
barriers to multinational cooperation.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 32
Leveraging Individual AI Research Strengths for Collaboration on Collective
Challenges
One way to increase research collaboration is to leverage areas of individual excellence
for joint projects that tackle collective challenges the four Quad nations face. Climate
change is one such collective challenge and a priority area for the Quad as all four
nations are increasingly vulnerable to natural disasters such as hurricanes, earthquakes,
and tsunamis. Focusing research collaboration on AI techniques that can improve the
prediction, response, and mitigation of natural disasters— either at the Quad level or
bilaterally, to strengthen research ties between Australia, India, and Japan— is a
potentially promising path forward.
Some such efforts are already underway on a bilateral basis. For example, a recent
U.S.-Japan research exchange on AI included disaster prediction, resilience, and
recovery as one of its key focus areas.57 This bilateral research exchange model can be
replicated to promote similarly focused research partnerships between Japan and
Australia, and Japan and India. As previously noted, Japan is a global leader in AI-
related simulation research. Since the 2011 Great East Japan earthquake and tsunami,
Japanese researchers have made significant progress in using AI-enabled modeling and
simulation to improve real-time tsunami inundation forecasting methods to better
estimate the regional impact of tsunamis and enhance disaster response. This
technology can be applied to forecast other hydrological and coastal hazards, such as
storm surges, and the information from the damage forecast can inform decision-
making both prior to and in the aftermath of the event, to facilitate evacuation, relief,
and recovery efforts.58 Both Australia and India could benefit from pursuing a research
partnership with Japan to explore the applications of these technologies to their
respective environmental concerns and disaster management systems.
Advancing Research Collaboration on Privacy-preserving AI Techniques
Different approaches to data governance and privacy concerns are a serious obstacle to
international collaboration in AI-related research and technology development, given
the high reliance of AI/ML methods on large scale datasets. There are, however,
techniques in data analysis that allow multiple parties to perform operations on non-
sensitive datasets without sharing or storing personally identifiable information.59
These techniques, known as privacy-preserving machine learning (PPML), could make
“new uses of AI possible without triggering privacy concerns…and/or reduce
cybersecurity risks by protecting individual data while preserving its usefulness.”60

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 33
A focus on PPML offers a path forward to increasing AI-related research collaboration
between the United States, Australia, India, and Japan. For instance, it may be possible
to establish a working group on PPML as part of the ongoing Quad efforts on Critical
and Emerging Technologies cooperation. A similar effort is already underway as part of
the EU-U.S. Technology and Trade Council, which has defined AI technologies
designed to enhance privacy protections as a priority area for its next meeting, and can
serve to inform parallel or future initiatives between the Quad nations. Bilateral
collaboration is another option, such as recent efforts spearheaded by the Indo-U.S.
Science and Technology Forum—a bilateral organization jointly funded by the United
States and India—which has been discussing federated learning PPML techniques as a
series of roundtables focused on trustworthy AI under its U.S.-India Artificial
Intelligence Initiative.61 The recently announced U.S.-UK prize on privacy-enhancing
technologies is another model for bilateral research and development cooperation the
Quad countries could also explore.62 Adding research collaboration in PPML to the
agenda of other multinational bodies that include most or all of the Quad countries,
such as the OECD or GPAI that already articulated their commitments to international
cooperation on AI that is transparent, trustworthy, and responsible, is another option.
A focus on PPML could also reduce barriers to more extensive AI-related defense
research collaboration between all four or a subset of the Quad countries. The Joint
Artificial Intelligence Center’s Partnership for Defense, which includes representatives
from the U.S., Australian and Japanese militaries, could be a viable forum for advancing
collaboration on PPML.
Investment
There are important differences between the AI ecosystems of the Quad countries in
terms of the size, scale, and vitality, all of which impact their respective ability to attract
foreign investment. That said, increasing AI investment activities between the four
nations could help advance their individual AI development and commercialization
goals, strengthen the Quad as a regional body, and reduce dependence on Chinese
technology, capital, and markets. Below we highlight a number of initiatives already
working toward these goals and offer several additional considerations.
Incentivizing and Growing AI Investment Activity between Australia, India, and
Japan
While Australia, India, and Japan each have close AI investment linkages to the United
States, there is relatively little AI investment activity between these three countries. To
change this, the three countries will likely need to introduce reforms that attract foreign

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 34
capital and reduce barriers to foreign investment in their respective technology sectors.
There is also a need for more targeted efforts that specifically incentivize investors from
these three countries to invest in each other’s AI companies. Some efforts are already
underway.
Japan’s External Trade Organization (JETRO)—a government-affiliated organization
that promotes mutual trade and investment between Japan and the rest of the world—
has made progress in attracting foreign investors. In 2019, JETRO supported 943
foreign companies in expanding to Japan and attracted 36.2 percent of the overall
investment from the Indo-Pacific region.63 JETRO has been working with India’s
National Association of Software and Services Companies (NASSCOM) and other
government and industry partners to facilitate contact between Indian startups and
Japanese venture capitalists, companies, and other investors, and has seen some
success in maturing Indian startups and bringing them to Japan’s market.64 Meanwhile,
as part of its AI Action Plan, the Australian government has launched the Early Stage
Venture Capital Limited Partnerships (ESVCLP) and Venture Capital Limited
Partnerships (VCLP) initiatives to incentivize foreign investors to participate in
Australia’s AI market through tax concessions.65
It is too early to judge the success of these and other similar initiatives, but they
demonstrate steps in the right direction.
Coordinating Investment Screening and Export Controls across the Quad
As discussed earlier, not only do AI investment linkages between the United States and
China exceed U.S. AI investments with each of the other Quad countries, but Australia,
India, and Japan each have stronger investment ties with China than they do with one
another. China’s state-led industrial policies aim to leverage technology obtained from
foreign firms to strengthen the country’s competitive advantage in emerging and critical
technologies such as AI, and through its military-civil fusion strategy, to apply these
technological advancements to gain an edge in the military-technological competition,
especially over the United States and its allies. Although the four Quad countries have
their own approaches to protecting domestic innovation and countering the transfer of
dual-use and sensitive technologies, multilateral cooperation on export controls,
investment screening mechanisms, and other technology-transfer policies can
significantly increase the effectiveness of these measures.
Part of the challenge is that the existing four multilateral export control regimes are ill-
prepared to tackle some of the issues laid out in this report, such as China’s use of
commercial technologies including AI to violate human rights, as well as its military-civil

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 35
fusion strategy that blurs the lines between the civilian and defense sectors, making it
nearly impossible to determine the potential military end use of any given technology.66
As such, some have called for the creation of a new fifth multilateral export control
regime to facilitate information sharing, resource sharing, and coordination across like-
minded allies and partners, and help close the gaps in individual nations’ domestic
export control systems, which often reflect the limitations exhibited by the previously
mentioned existing multilateral regimes. Some efforts along this line of thinking are
already underway; in December 2021, for example, the United States, Australia,
Denmark, and Norway signed a joint statement, pledging to employ export control tools
to prevent “the proliferation of software and other technologies used to enable serious
human rights abuses.”67 The United States and Australia may consider incorporating
India and Japan (as well as other like-minded nations) into this effort.
Beyond export controls, each of the Quad countries also has its own foreign investment
screening mechanisms, some of which are meant to protect domestic innovation and
competitiveness or prevent potentially hostile actors from investing in sectors of
relevance to national security (see Table E, Appendix 2).68 Over the past several years,
each of the Quad countries has implemented changes to long-standing domestic
authorities to better address evolving national security risks. But additional information
sharing between likeminded countries such as the members of the Quad can make
these efforts more effective and help nations learn from one another’s experience
dealing with investments that may be contrary to national interests without
compromising the economic growth and innovation fueled by open foreign investment.
One possible model for expanding cooperation in this space is the U.S.-EU Trade and
Technology Council’s investment screening working group.69
While foreign investment screening mechanisms are fairly well defined, the idea of an
outbound investment screening regime is a relatively novel concept. Currently, Japan is
the only Quad country that has some industry-specific outbound investment
restrictions in place.70 The topic has been a subject of debate in the United States since
discussions surrounding the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act
(FIRRMA) in 2017–2018; that said, as of May 2022, no concrete mechanisms have
been adopted.71
Whether the path forward is through an outbound investment screening regime or
alternative policy or regulatory measures, the AI-related investment linkages to China
present a conundrum for the Quad countries and can be at odds with their stated
consensus that “technology should not be misused or abused for malicious activities
such as authoritarian surveillance and oppression.”72 Indeed, there have been incidents
where investors and companies from the Quad countries have been linked to Chinese

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 36
companies that work with or supply the Chinese military or those complicit in human
rights abuses.73 For example, Qualcomm was an early investor in SenseTime, one of
China’s top facial recognition firms that in October 2019 was added to the U.S.
Commerce Department’s Entity List for enabling high-technology surveillance, mass
arbitrary detention, and other human rights abuses in Xinjiang.74
The Quad countries will need to work together to mitigate some of the risks posed by
their technology investment ties to China, including through exploring opportunities for
multilateral coordination on export controls and investment screening mechanisms;
initial engagements can focus on improving the understanding of their respective
systems, identifying individual and shared risks and threats, and sharing best practices
focused on dual-use and sensitive technologies.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 37
Conclusion
The United States, Australia, India, and Japan are committed to fostering an open,
accessible, and secure technology ecosystem, shaped by their shared democratic
values and respect for human rights. While not a formal alliance, the Quad could
become an important forum for cooperation on responsible development and use of AI,
serving as a bulwark to China’s use and export of digital authoritarianism in the region.
To be successful, however, the Quad will have to navigate complex and often
conflicting diplomatic, economic, and national security imperatives, divergent
geopolitical priorities, and unique approaches to data governance, all the while
reconciling a set of very different economic and technological capabilities.
This report assesses trends in AI-related research collaboration and investment flows
into AI companies across the Quad to better understand the state of technology
cooperation between these four nations, as well as their respective linkages to China
along these same two dimensions. Our findings indicate that while over the past
decade, Australia, India, and Japan have all deepened and expanded their AI-focused
research partnerships and investment ties with the United States, these three Indo-
Pacific countries have collaborated far less with one another. Despite recent tensions,
China remains an important research partner for the United States, Australia, Japan,
and to a lesser extent, India. And although Quad countries are well aware of the
evolving threats related to certain foreign investments and have voiced concerns about
China’s malicious use of AI, all four nations have varied but significant investment ties
to China’s robust AI ecosystem.
For the Quad to reach its full potential in technology cooperation, Australia, India, and
Japan will have to work together to strengthen their research partnerships and expand
their commercial contacts with one another, beyond the bilateral relationships each of
these countries already has with the United States. Doing so could bolster the Quad’s
status as a hub for technology innovation as well as reduce dependence on China’s
technology and markets.
Creating opportunities and securing funding for international AI-related research
projects can be challenging. But initiatives that capitalize on areas of individual research
excellence to tackle common challenges have real promise— for example, leveraging AI
for disaster prediction to strengthen climate change resilience and mitigation efforts in
the Indo-Pacific region. Privacy-preserving machine learning is another area that fits
well for collaborative research, allowing researchers from different institutions and
countries to work together on AI without concerns about sharing sensitive data.
Increasing AI-related investment activity across the Quad, and in particular between

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 38
Australia, India, and Japan, will require targeted reforms to attract capital and reduce
barriers to foreign investment in each other’s technology sectors. Concurrently, the
Quad nations should also coordinate more closely on export controls and investment
screening measures to better protect their sensitive and dual-use technologies.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 39
Authors
Husanjot Chahal and Ngor Luong are research analysts at CSET, where Sara Abdulla is
a data research analyst and Margarita Konaev is the deputy director of analysis and a
research fellow.
Acknowledgments
For their feedback, insights, and editorial support, we thank Igor Mikolic-Torreira,
Dewey Murdick, Catherine Aiken, Emily Weinstein, Rebecca Gelles, Owen Daniels,
Melissa Deng, Corey Cooper, Alex Friedland, Lynne Weil, and Dale Brauner. The
authors are also grateful for the thoughtful reviews provided by Trisha Ray of the
Observer Research Foundation and Martin Chorzempa of the Peterson Institute.
© 2022 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/ 20210049

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 40
Appendix 1: Methodology
Research: Our analysis uses publication data from CSET’s merged corpus of scholarly
literature which includes Digital Science’s Dimensions, Clarivate Analytics’ Web of
Science, Microsoft Academic Graph, China National Knowledge Infrastructure, arXiv,
and Papers with Code. To restrict our focus on research publications related to the
development and application of AI, we applied the same classification method used in
previous CSET publications.75 Instead of developing keyword-based queries or explicit
criteria for AI-relevant research, this method infers a functional definition from papers in
the arXiv.org repository, training a model to predict the categories that authors and
editors assign to the site’s papers. Applying it to our broader corpus, we identified as
AI-relevant the papers that would be likely to receive an AI-relevant categorization if
uploaded to arXiv.org.76 We pulled the dataset in October 2021; in order to avoid gaps
in 2021 data, we only examined data through 2020. Papers are grouped by country
based on authors’ institutional (universities, companies, government, etc.) affiliation.
While papers are not double-counted within a country, if a paper has authors from
different countries, that paper is counted once for each unique country represented in
its authors. Therefore, all papers linked with one country should not be seen as
exclusive for that country alone.
AI related papers are classified into fields of study based on field score classifications
inspired by MAG level 1 categories. MAG provides multiple topic scores for papers
indicating their association with various fields. Each paper is counted only in one
category based on the highest field score. When a paper lacks MAG classification but is
closely linked to the “citation networks” of other papers, we impute its MAG field based
on closely related papers. Papers where MAG fields are missing or cannot get imputed
get assigned to an “unclassified” category.
Investment: Our analysis on equity investment includes private equity and venture
capital investment as well as mergers and acquisition (M&A) deals to identify all
relevant investment transactions between the Quad countries (as well as China, where
appropriate) over the past decade (2010–2021). In this paper, M&A refers to
investment transactions with 100 percent of the target company’s equity sold, while
private-market investments include venture capital and private equity funding rounds.
To identify AI companies, we ran a regular expression-based search query against
business descriptions of the target companies.77 Given that the company business
description provided by Crunchbase appears limited in some cases, we supplement the
AI company identification using the keyword-based method with Crunchbase AI tag. AI

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 41
companies in our analysis include companies that CSET or Crunchbase has identified as
AI companies.
To account for transactions that only involve transfer of equity, we excluded
transactions where the investment target is classified in Crunchbase as “debt
financing,” “equity crowdfunding,” “grant,” “non-equity assistance,” “post IPO debt,”
and “product crowdfunding.”78 To analyze cross-country investment flows, we
assigned the country location of target companies and investors by identifying their
headquarters. Where people investors were identified, we located their primary
company affiliation and assigned their country of origin based on the affiliated
company’s headquarters. Where the investor's country of origin was not available, we
excluded the related investment transaction. The missing data that we dropped
accounts for five percent of the total transactions we analyzed. We performed a
systematic review by spot-checking 10 percent of the missing data of each country in
our analysis. The data is missing at random and does not impact the representativeness
of the data included in our analysis.
Finally, we filled in transaction value gaps with estimated value. Financial data
providers like Crunchbase only provide information on the total value that companies in
a funding round raised where such information is disclosed. We produced the
estimated totals using a multistage estimation process where we assigned each round
the median amount for funding rounds of the same investment stage, target country,
and year.79 In addition, Crunchbase does not disclose the contributions made by
individual investors, given that investors are unlikely to reveal this information. It is
difficult to accurately assess the exact amount of money investors provided a company
during a funding round, and our analysis does not necessarily call for this information.
In this paper, we’re interested in looking at the presence of investors from investor
countries in target countries of interest. Therefore, we believe that the discussion of
investment transactions and value in which investors participated is a reasonable first
step to identifying cross-country investment flows.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 42
Appendix 2: Additional Figures and Tables
This appendix presents additional charts and tables of relevance to this topic.
Table A: Top 10 Countries by Citations on AI-relevant Scholarly Papers, 2010–2020.
Source: CSET merged corpus.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 43
Table B: Top 10 Countries by AI Research Collaborations with China, 2010–2020.

Source: CSET merged corpus.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 44
Table C: Global AI Research by Fields of Study, 2010–2020.
Note: This list displays all AI research subfields as displayed for the Quad countries in Table 2, only
ranked based on global AI paper production. The first nine fields in the list are also the top nine AI
research subfields globally by volume of production. Theoretical computer science and data science rank
fourteenth and fifteenth, and simulation ranks nineteenth in the world.
Source: CSET merged corpus.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 45
Table D: AI Investment Activity between the United States and Each of Its Three Quad
Partners and AI Investment Activity between China-Japan, China-India, and China-
Australia, 2010–2021.
Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 46
Table E: Overview of Foreign Investment Screening Policies across the Quad Countries.
Country Authority Purview
United
States
Committee on
Foreign Investment
in the United States
(CFIUS)
“Authorized to review transactions involving foreign
investment in the U.S. (and certain real estate transactions by
foreign persons) to determine the effect of such transactions
on U.S. national security.”
Japan Foreign Exchange
and Foreign Trade
Act (FOREX Act)
“Enable proper expansion of foreign transactions and the
maintenance of peace and security in Japan . . . through the
minimum necessary control or coordination of foreign
transactions . . . to ensure the equilibrium of the international
balance of trade and stability of currency as well as to
contribute to the sound development of the Japanese
economy.”
Australia Foreign
Acquisitions and
Takeovers Act of
1975 (FATA)
“Empowers the Treasurer to examine proposals by foreign
persons to acquire, increase a substantial shareholding in, or
acquire a controlling interest in the assets of an Australian
corporation (or in Australian urban land) in instances deemed
to be contrary to national interest.”
India Foreign Exchange
Management Act
(FEMA) of 1999
“Consolidates and amends the law relating to foreign
exchange by requiring all Indian persons (including Indian
companies) looking to receive (or already have) foreign
investment to comply with entry route norms, sectoral caps,
investment limits, and pricing guidelines, as applicable. For
instance, includes government approval for all investments by
an entity of a country sharing land border with India.”
Source: Various.80

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 47
Endnotes

1 The White House Briefing Room, “Joint Statement from the Quad Leaders” (Washington, DC: The
White House, September 24, 2021), https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/09/24/joint-statement-from-quad-leaders/.
2 The White House Briefing Room, “Quad Principles on Technology Design, Development, Governance,
and Use” (Washington, DC: The White House, September 24, 2021),
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/09/24/quad-principles-on-
technology-design-development-governance-and-use/; The White House Briefing Room, “Remarks by
President Biden, Prime Minister Morrison, Prime Minister Modi, and Prime Minister Suga at Quad Leaders
Summit” (Washington, DC: The White House, September 24, 2021),
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2021/09/24/remarks-by-president-
biden-prime-minister-morrison-prime-minister-modi-and-prime-minister-suga-at-quad-leaders-
summit/.
3 Martijn Rasser, “Networked: Techno-Democratic Statecraft for Australia and the Quad” (Center for a
New American Security, January 19, 2021), https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/networked-
techno-democratic-statecraft-for-australia-and-the-quad; The White House Briefing Room, “Quad
Principles on Technology Design, Development, Governance, and Use.”
4 The White House Briefing Room, “Fact Sheet: Quad Leaders’ Summit” (Washington, DC: The White
House, September 24, 2021), https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/09/24/fact-sheet-quad-leaders-summit/.
5 Although the four countries share a democratic system of governance and exp ress respect for human
and civil rights, observers have raised concerns about democratic backsliding, discrimination, inequality,
and other societal, economic, and political challenges each country continues to face.
6 The White House Briefing Room, “Fact Sheet: Quad Leaders’ Summit.”
7 The White House Briefing Room, “Fact Sheet: Quad Leaders’ Summit.”
8 The White House Briefing Room, “Fact Sheet: Quad Leaders’ Summit.”
9 For instance, in 2018, the Indian government released the “National Strategy for Art ificial Intelligence
discussion paper #AIForAll,” which identified priority sectors for nurturing the country’s AI ecosystem.
The Japanese government first formulated its AI Technology Strategy in March 2017 to focus on
incorporating data and AI in related industries, expanding public use of AI across industries, and creating
an ecosystem connecting various industries. In 2019, Japan announced a new AI strategy. The Australian
government launched an AI Roadmap in 2019, setting aside $22.2 million over four years to strengthen
the country’s AI capabilities, and an “AI Action Plan” to build the AI-enabled economy and lead in
developing and adopting trusted, secure, and responsible AI. The United States has incorporated AI in a
broad range of high-level plans. With the passage of the National AI Initiative Act of 2020, which

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 48

provides a framework for coordination of AI R&D across the federal government, and the formation of
the National AI Research Resource Taskforce, the U.S. government is increasingly promoting AI
innovation and treating it as central to U.S. economic prosperity and national security.
10 All four of the Quad countries are founding members of Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence
(GPAI), an international initiative founded in 2020 to guide the responsible development and use of AI in
line with human rights values and economic growth. In 2020, Japan and India proposed a cybersecurity
pact to promote cooperation in research and development in AI and 5G among others. Similarly, in 2021
Australia and India created the Australia-India Cyber and Critical Technology Partnership, a grant
program that enhances cooperation between the two countries in critical and emerging technologies,
such as AI, IoT, quantum computing, synthetic biology, blockchain, big data, and 5G/6G. See: Innovation,
Science and Economic Development Canada, Joint Statement from founding members of the Global
Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (Ottawa: Government of Canada, June 15, 2020),
https://www.canada.ca/en/innovation-science-economic-development/news/2020/06/joint-statement-
from-founding-members-of-the-global-partnership-on-artificial-intelligence.html; Rezaul H Laskar,
“India, Japan finalise key cyber-security deal to boost cooperation on 5G, AI,” Hindustan Times, October
7, 2020, https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/india-japan-finalise-key-cyber-security-deal-to-
boost-cooperation-on-5g-ai/story-WCMa9En3NFPkQMWClGNFJI.html; Ministry of External Affairs,
13th India-Japan Foreign Ministers’ Strategic Dialogue (New Delhi: Government of India, October 7,
2020), https://www.mea.gov.in/press-
releases.htm?dtl/33100/13th_IndiaJapan_Foreign_Ministers_Strategic_Dialogue ; Australian High
Commission New Delhi, Australian-India Cyber and Critical Technology Partnership: Grant Round 2
(Canberra: Australian Government), https://india.highcommission.gov.au/ndli/AICCTP.html.
11 Cameron F. Kerry, Joshua P. Meltzer, Andrea Renda, Alex C. Engler, and Rosanna Fanni,
“Strengthening International Cooperation on AI” (Brookings Institution, October 2021), 2,
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/Strengthening-International-Cooperation-
AI_Oct21.pdf.
12 Joe Biden, Narendra Modi, Scott Morrison and Yoshihide Suga, “Our four nations are committed to a
free, open, secure and prosperous Indo-Pacific region,” The Washington Post, March 13, 2021,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2021/03/13/biden-modi-morrison-suga-quad-nations-indo-
pacific/.
13 Melanie Hart and Jordan Link, “There Is a Solution to the Huawei Challenge” (Center for American
Progress, October 14, 2020),
https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/security/reports/2020/10/14/491476/solution -huawei-
challenge/.
14 Biden, Modi, Morrison and Suga, “Our four nations are committed to a free, open, secure and
prosperous Indo-Pacific region.”
15 “G20 summit: India does not sign Osaka declaration on cross-border data flow,” Scroll.in, June 19,
2019, https://scroll.in/latest/928811/g20-summit-india-does-not-sign-osaka-declaration-on-cross-
border-data-flow; Some observers point out that India rejected DFFT on economic and development

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 49

grounds. Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Commerce & Industry (New Delhi: Government of India,
September 22, 2020), https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetailm.aspx?PRID=1657874.
16 U.S.-China trade totaled $659.5 billion in 2020. Karen M. Sutter, “U.S.-China Trade Relations,”
Congressional Research Service, March 2, 2022, https://sgp.fas.org/crs/row/IF11284.pdf; India-China
trade totaled $77.7 billion in 2020. “China regains slot as India's top trade partner despite tensions,”
BBC, February 23, 2021, https://www.bbc.com/news/business-56164154; Australia-China two-way
trade totaled $245 billion in 2020, accounting for over one-fifth of Australia’s international trade. See
Sutter, “U.S.-China Trade Relations;” Japan-China two-way trade stood at $305 billion in 2020. Authors’
calculation based on, “Japan exports rebound in Dec. from pandemic, 1st rise in 25 months,” Kyodo
News, January 21, 2021, https://english.kyodonews.net/news/2021/01/ee92c5bc42bb-update1-japans-
2020-exports-fall-11-largest-drop-in-11-yrs-due-to-pandemic.html?phrase=268%20&words=.
17 Matthew Daniels, Autumn Toney, Melissa Flagg and Charles Yang, “Machine Intelligence for Scientific
Discovery and Engineering Invention” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, Ma y 2021),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/machine-intelligence-for-scientific-discovery-and-engineering-
invention/; Daniel S. Hoadley and Kelley M. Sayler, “Artificial Intelligence and National Security,”
Congressional Research Service, November 10, 2020, https://sgp.fas.org/crs/natsec/R45178.pdf; Daniel
Zhang et al., “The AI Index 2019 Annual Report'' (Stanford Institute for Human-Centered AI, March
2022), https://aiindex.stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/2022-AI-Index-Report_Master.pdf;
Xiaomon Mou, “Artificial Intelligence: Investment Trends and Selected Industry Uses,” EMCompass, no.
71 (September 2019), International Finance Corporation, September 2019,
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32652.

18 Karen White, Publications Output: U.S. Trends and International Comparisons (Alexandria, VA:
National Science Foundation | National Science Board, October 28, 2021),
https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20214/international-collaboration-and-citations; Kimkong Heng, M.
Obaidul Hamid, and Asaduzzaman Khan, “Factors influencing academics’ research engagement and
productivity: A developing countries perspective,” Issues in Educational Research 30, no. 3 (2020): 965-
987, https://www.iier.org.au/iier30/heng.pdf.
19 All China National Knowledge Infrastructure content is furnished for use in the United States by East
View Information Services, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
20 We acknowledge that the focus on English-language publication data may overlook AI-related
publications released in the native languages of non-English speaking countries such as India, Japan, and
China.
21 We calculated the total number of AI papers from Quad countries by summing up all papers with at
least one author who listed an affiliation with an institution located in the United States, Australia, India ,
or Japan. In assessing the Quad’s overall AI publications output, we did not double-count papers that had
multiple co-authors from several Quad countries–for instance, a paper co-authored by a Japanese scholar
and an Indian scholar would count only once toward the overall Quad paper output count. To get th e
share of the Quad’s global AI research output, we divided the Quad’s paper count by the total number of
AI papers produced globally.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 50

22 The sum of AI research papers produced over the past decade by the 27 EU countries is 451,842, and
for the 10 ASEAN countries is 94,942. The combined value reflects the number of papers with at least
one author with an affiliation to an institution located in a country member of either the EU or ASEAN.
23 We calculated “shares” by dividing the number of AI papers with at least one author who has listed an
affiliation to an institution in a given country over the total number of AI papers produced globally
between 2010 and 2020.
24 Indian AI research in the field of data science has grown over 2,000 percent in the past 10 years, albeit
initial numbers of publications in this field were relatively low.
25 White, Publications Output: U.S. Trends and International Comparisons.
26 White, Publications Output: U.S. Trends and International Comparisons.
27 Melissa Flagg, Autumn Toney, and Paul Harris, “Research Security, Collaboration, and the Changing
Map of Global R&D” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, June 2021),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-Research-Security-Collaboration-and-the-
Changing-Map-of-Global-RD.pdf.
28 Flagg, Toney, and Harris, “Research Security, Collaboration, and the Changing Map of Global R&D.”
29 James L. Schoff, Douglas E. Rake, and Joshua Levy, “A High-Tech Alliance: Challenges and
Opportunities for U.S.-Japan Science and Technology Collaboration” (Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace, July 2021), https://carnegieendowment.org/files/Schoff_etall%20U.S.-
Japan_final.pdf.
30 Meghna Sabharwal and Roli Varma, “Transnational Research Collaboration: Expatriate Indian Faculty
in the United States Connecting with Peers in India,” East Asian Science, Technology, and Society: An
International Journal 9 (2015): 275-293, DOI 10.1215/18752160-3141241.
31 Kirstin R. W. Matthews, Erin Yang, Steven W. Lewis, Brandon R. Vaidyanathan , and Monica Gorman,
“International scientific collaborative activities and barriers to them in eight societies,” Accountability in
Research 27, no. 8 (2020): 477-495, DOI: 10.1080/08989621.2020.1774373.
32 Flagg, Toney, and Harris, “Research Security, Collaboration, and the Ch anging Map of Global R&D,” 2.
33 White, Publications Output: U.S. Trends and International Comparisons.
34 International collaboration rates are dependent on a country’s overall number of AI papers which in
turn is influenced by definitions of AI, bibliometric data sources, and other methodological decisions that
sometimes vary across different research articles. For an alternative estimation method, see Na Liu, Philip
Shapira, and Xiaoxu Yue, “Tracking developments in artificial intelligence research: constructing and

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 51

applying a new search strategy,” Scientometrics 126 (2021): 3153–3192, doi.org/10.1007/s11192-021-
03868-4.
35 Jane Lanhee Lee and Daphne Psaledakis, “U.S. doubles down on protecting university research from
China,” Reuters, February 28, 2021, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-china-universities/u-s-
doubles-down-on-protecting-university-research-from-china-idUSKCN2AT0WB; Tomohiro Osaki,
“Japan boosts checks on Chinese students amid fears of campus spying,” The Japan Times, October 15,
2020, https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2020/10/15/national/crime-legal/japan-chinese-students-
campus-espionage/; Sanjay Kumar, “Indian government tightens rules on academic collaboration with
China,” Science, October 17, 2019, https://www.science.org/content/article/indian-government-tightens-
rules-academic-collaboration-china; Dyani Lewis, “Australia is cracking down on foreign interference in
research. Is the system working? Nature, August 10, 2020, https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-
020-02188-6.
36 National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence, Final Report (Washington, DC: NSCAI, March
2021), https://www.nscai.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Full-Report-Digital-1.pdf; Lee and
Psaledakis, “U.S. doubles down on protecting university research from China.”
37 Kristy Needham, “Australia’s science agency ramps up security on foreign partnerships,” Reuters,
March 19, 2021, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-australia-security-foreign-interferen/australias-
science-agency-ramps-up-security-on-foreign-partnerships-idUSKBN2BB0NB.
38 Sudhi Ranjan Sen, “India slaps new curbs on visas, universities to stem China influence,” Bloomberg,
August 21, 2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-08-21/india-slaps-new-curbs-on-
visas-schools-to-stem-china-influence.
39 Suvendrini Kakuchi and Yojana Sharma, “Research security tightened with China threat in mind,”
University World News, June 16, 2021,
https://www.universityworldnews.com/post.php?story=20210616090608803.
40 Kathleen Walch, “Is Venture Capital Investment In AI Excessive?” Forbes, January 5, 2020,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/cognitiveworld/2020/01/05/is-venture-capital-investment-for-ai-
companies-getting-out-of-control/?sh=317fccd07e05.
41 Jeff Loucks, Susanne Hupfer, David Jarvis, and Timothy Murphy, “Future in the balance? How countries
are pursuing an AI advantage,” Deloitte, May 1, 2019,
https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/focus/cognitive-technologies/ai-investment-by-country.html.
42 Ufuk Akcigit, Sina T. Ates, Josh Lerner, Richard R. Townsend, and Yulia Zhestkova, “F encing Off Silicon
Valley: Cross-Border Venture Capital and Technology Spillovers,” National Bureau of Economic
Research, no. 27828 (September 2020, revised April 2021),
https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w27828/w27828.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 52

43 John Sarkar, “India becomes third largest startup ecosystem in the world,” The Times of India,
September 3, 2021, https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/india-becomes-third-
largest-startup-ecosystem-in-the-world/articleshow/85871428.cms.
44 “Indian startups next only to Chinese counterparts in APAC with US$16.9bn VC funding during
January-July 2021, reveals GlobalData,” GlobalData, August 20, 2021,
https://www.globaldata.com/indian-startups-next-chinese-counterparts-apac-us16-9bn-vc-funding-
january-july-2021-reveals-globaldata/; Manish Singh, “Investors race to win early-stage startup deals in
India,” TechCrunch, June 2, 2021, https://techcrunch.com/2021/06/02/investors-race-to-win-early-
stage-startup-deals-in-india/.
45 Itika Sharma Punit, “Facebook invests $5.7 billion in India’s largest telecom operator Reliance Jio,”
Quartz India, April 21, 2020, https://qz.com/india/1842729/facebook-invests-5-7-billion-in-mukesh-
ambanis-reliance-jio/; Deepthi Nair, “Jio Platforms invests $15m for 25% stake in Silicon Valley -based AI
start-up,” The National, February 5, 2022,
https://www.thenationalnews.com/business/technology/2022/02/05/jio-platforms-invests-15m-for-25-
stake-in-silicon-valley-based-ai-start-
up/#:~:text=Google%20said%20it%20would%20invest,to%20the%20statement%20from%20Jio .
46 “Analysis of Japan’s private equity market and recommendations for Japanese companies – 2021”
(PWC, September, 2021), https://www.pwc.com/jp/en/knowledge/thoughtleadership/assets/pdf/private-
equity-market.pdf.
47 Wendy A. Bradley, Gilles Duruflé, Thomas F. Hellmann, and Karen E. Wilson, “Cross-Border Venture
Capital Investments: What Is the Role of Public Policy?” Journal of Risk and Financial Management 12,
no. 3 (2019): 112, https://www.mdpi.com/1911-8074/12/3/112/htm; Joshua Aizenman and Jake Kendall,
The Internationalization of Venture Capital and Private Equity, Working Paper 14344, National Bureau of
Economic Research, September 2008,
https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w14344/w14344.pdf.
48 Embassy of India, India-Japan Digital Partnership (IJDP) (Tokyo: Embassy of India, March 8, 2022),
https://www.indembassy-tokyo.gov.in/eoityo_pages/MTIx.
49 “Sonata Software makes the strategic acquisition of GBW, a leading global p layer in the exciting
Customer Experience (CX) Space,” Sonata Software, March 4, 2020, https://www.sonata-
software.com/newsroom/press-release/sonata-software-makes-strategic-acquisition-gbw-leading.
50 Rezaul H Laskar, “Australia announces new consulate and centre to boost tech ties with India,” The
Hindustan Times, November 17, 2021, https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/bengaluru-
news/australia-announces-new-consulate-and-centre-to-boost-tech-ties-with-india-
101637146419012.html.
51 Thilo Hanemann, Daniel H. Rosen, Mark Witzke, Steve Bennion, and Emma Smith, “Two -Way Street –
US-China Investment Trends – 2021 Update” (Rhodium Group, May 19, 2021),
https://rhg.com/research/twowaystreet-2021/.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 53

52 Sean O’Connor, How Chinese Companies Facilitate Technology Transfer from the United States (U.S.-
China Economic and Security Review Commission, May 6, 2019), 6,
https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Research/How%20Chinese%20Companies%20Facilitate%20Te
ch%20Transfer%20from%20the%20US.pdf; John Kehoe, Michael Bleby, Hannah Wootton, Nick
Lenaghan, and Andrew Tillett, “Treasurer blacklists China investments,” Financial Review, January 12,
2021, https://www.afr.com/politics/federal/treasurer-imposes-informal-ban-on-china-investments-
20210112-p56thm; Harsh V. Pant, “India Cracks Down on Chinese Investment as Mood Turns Against
Beijing,” Foreign Policy, April 28, 2020, https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/04/28/india-china-fdi-
restrictions-coronavirus/; Ben Dooley and Makiko Inoue, “Japan Is Paying Firms to Make Things at Home.
But China’s Pull Is Still Strong,” The New York Times, September 26, 2020,
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/26/business/japan-onshoring.html.
53 O’Connor, “How Chinese Companies Facilitate Technology Transfer from the United States”; Greg Ip,
“Venture Capital Becomes a Tech Battleground Between China, U.S.,” The Wall Street Journal, January
26, 2022, https://www.wsj.com/articles/venture-capital-becomes-a-tech-battleground-between-china-
u-s-11643202001.
54 The White House Briefing Room, “Quad Principles on Technology Design, Development, Governance,
and Use.”
55 Indo-Pacific Strategy of the United States (Washington, DC: The White House, February 2022),
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/U.S.-Indo-Pacific-Strategy.pdf.
56 National Security College, “Quad Tech Network,” Australian National University,
https://nsc.crawford.anu.edu.au/department-news/18328/quad-tech-network.
57 Scott W. Harold, Greg Brunelle, Ritika Chaturvedi, Jeffrey W. Hornung, Shunichi Koshimura, Osonde A.
Osoba, and Chizuru Sugu, “United States–Japan Research Exchange on Artificial Intelligence:
Proceedings from a Pair of Conferences on the Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Work, Health, and Data
Privacy and on Disaster Prediction, Resilience, and Recovery” (RAND Corporation, 2020),
https://www.rand.org/pubs/conf_proceedings/CFA521-1.html.
58 Harold et al., “United States–Japan Research Exchange on Artificial Intelligence,” 59.
59 Some PPML techniques include federated learning (decentralized holding of datasets), homomorphic
encryption (allowing users to perform computation on encrypted data without decrypting it), and secure
multi-party computation (performing object and facial recognition on a smartphone instead of processing
this data in the cloud).
60 Helen Toner and Roxanne Heston, “Have Your Data and Use it Too: A Federal Initiative for Protecting
Privacy while Advancing AI” (Day One Project, January 23, 2020),
https://www.dayoneproject.org/ideas/have-your-data-and-use-it-too-a-federal-initiative-for-protecting-
privacy-while-advancing-ai.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 54

61 Indo-U.S. Science and Technology Forum, “USIAI Activities,” U.S.-India Artificial Intelligence (USIAI)
Initiative, https://usiai.iusstf.org/usiai-activities.
62 The White House Briefing Room, “White House Announces Launch of the International Grand
Challenges on Democracy-Affirming Technologies for the Summit for Democracy” (Washington, DC: The
White House, December 8, 2021), https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2021/12/08/white-
house-announces-launch-of-the-international-grand-challenges-on-democracy-affirming-technologies-
for-the-summit-for-democracy/.
63 Japan External Trade Organization, “Chapter 4 JETRO’s Efforts to Promote Investment in Japan,” Japan
Export Trade Research Organization, 2020,
https://www.jetro.go.jp/en/invest/investment_environment/ijre/report2020/ch4.html .
64 Neha Alawadhi, “Nasscom, Japan join hands to match startups and tech firms with VCs,“ Business
Standard, February 11, 2020, https://www.business-standard.com/article/economy-policy/nasscom-
japan-join-hands-to-match-startups-and-tech-firms-with-vcs-120012901797_1.html.
65 Australian Government, Australia’s AI Action Plan (Australian Government, June 2021), 13,
https://www.industry.gov.au/sites/default/files/June%202021/document/australias -ai-action-plan.pdf.
66 Emily Weinstein, “Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission on
‘U.S. Investment in China’s Capital Markets and Military-Industrial Complex’,” U.S.-China Economic and
Security Review Commission, March 19, 2021, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2021-
03/Emily_Weinstein_Testimony.pdf; Kevin Wolf and Emily S. Weinstein, “COCOM’s Daughter: A New
Multilateral Export Control Regime Is Needed To Address Contemporary National Security and Human
Rights Issues,” WorldECR, May 2022, article available upon request.
67 The White House Briefing Room, “Joint Statement on the Export Controls and Human Rights Initiative”
(Washington, DC: The White House, December 10, 2021), https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2021/12/10/joint-statement-on-the-export-controls-and-human-rights-
initiative/.
68 It is worth noting that India’s foreign investment regime focuses specifically on transactions made by
investors from bordering countries, including China. For more information, see: Ministry of Commerce &
Industry, Review of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) policy for curbing opportunistic
takeovers/acquisitions of Indian companies due to the current COVID -19 pandemic (New Delhi: DPIIT,
2020), https://dpiit.gov.in/sites/default/files/pn3_2020.pdf.
69 The White House Briefing Room, “Fact Sheet: U.S.-EU Trade and Technology Council Establishes
Economic and Technology Policies and Initiatives,” (Washington, DC: The White House, May 16, 2022),
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/05/16/fact-sheet-u-s-eu-trade-
and-technology-council-establishes-economic-and-technology-policies-initiatives/
70 According to Rhodium Group, outbound investment by Japanese residents in fisheries or firms involved
in the manufacture of weapons, narcotics, and leather goods requires prior government notification. For
more information, see: Thilo Hanemann, Mark Witzke, Charlie Vest, Lauren Dudley, and Ryan
Featherston, “An Outbound Investment Screening Regime for the United States?” U.S.-China Investment

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 55

Project, Rhodium Group, January 2022, https://rhg.com/wp-
content/uploads/2022/01/RHG_TWS_2022_US-Outbound-Investment.pdf.
71 Hanemann et al., “An Outbound Investment Screening Regime for the United States?” Rhodium
Group.; Sarah Bauerle-Danzman, “Is the US going to screen outbound investment?” Atlantic Council,
January 10, 2022, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/econographics/is-the-us-going-to-screen-
outbound-investment/.
72 The White House Briefing Room, “Quad Principles on Technology Design, Development, Governance,
and Use”
73 On U.S. venture capital and linkages to Chinese military companies, see Ryan Fedasiuk, Jennifer Melot,
and Ben Murphy, “Harnessed Lightning: How the Chinese Military is Adopting Artificial Intelligence,”
(Center for Security and Emerging Technology), October 2021, https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-
content/uploads/CSET-Harnessed-Lightning.pdf.
74 “Qualcomm invests in Chinese AI facial recognition startup SenseTime,” Reuters, November 14, 2017,
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-sensetime-fundraising-qualcomm/qualcomm-invests-in-chinese-ai-
facial-recognition-startup-sensetime-idUSKBN1DF0HE.
75 James Dunham, Jennifer Melot, and Dewey Murdick, “Identifying the Development and Application of
Artificial Intelligence in Scientific Text,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002:07143 (2020),
https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.07143; Margarita Konaev and James Dunham, “Russian AI Research 2010-
2018” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, October 2020),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/russian-ai-research-2010-2018/.
76 Dunham, Melot, and Murdick, “Identifying the Development and Application of Artificial Intelligence i n
Scientific Text.”
77 For more details on the methodology, see Zachary Arnold, Ilya Rahkovsky and Tina Huang, “Tracking
AI Investment: Initial Findings from the Private Markets” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology,
September 2020), https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/tracking-ai-investment/.
78 Replication data and code are available at https://github.com/georgetown-cset/Quad_AI.
79 For more details on the methodology, see Arnold, Rahkovsky, and Huang, “Tracking AI Investment.”
80 “The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States,” U.S. Department of Treasury,
https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/international/the-committee-on-foreign-investment-in-the-
united-states-cfius; and “Foreign Exchange and Foreign Trade Act of Japan,” Ministry of Finance of Japan
rehosted by Steptoe & Johnson LLP, https://www.steptoe.com/images/content/2/4/v1/2444/4066.pdf;
“Overview of the Foreign Acquisitions and Takeovers Act of 1975,” Australian Government Foreign
Investment Review Board, November 2015, https://firb.gov.au/sites/firb.gov.au/files/2015/11/FIRB-
Annual-Report-2009-10_Chapter_3.pdf; “COVID-19 crisis inspires global tightening of Foreign
Investment Screening,” Norton Rose Fulbright, https://www.nortonrosefulbright.com/-
/media/files/nrf/nrfweb/knowledge-pdfs/global-rules-on-foreign-direct-investment/global-rules-on-

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 56

foreign-direct-investment---india.pdf; and “The Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999,” Legislative
Department of India, https://legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/A1999-42_0.pdf.
