
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
P olicy Br ief
August 2023
U nderst anding
t he Global
Gain-of-F unction
R esear c h Landscape
Aut hor s
Car oline Sc huerger
S t ephanie Bat alis
K at her ine Quinn
R onnie Kinoshit a
Ow en J. Daniels
Anna Puglisi

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 1

Executive Summary
Gain-of-function (GOF) and loss-of-function (LOF) research are two valuable
methodologies that allow scientists to study pathogens. These interconnected
research approaches alter pathogens’ genomes to add or subtract functionality,
allowing scientists to examine and better understand how pathogens function and
develop new vaccines and therapies.
Despite its widely recognized value for science, gain-of-function research has attracted
attention and concern from U.S. policymakers due to what some see as inherent risks
in this methodology, particularly following the outbreak and debated origins of the
COVID-19 pandemic. The risk that gain-of-function research could inadvertently
contribute to pandemics or widespread illness has sparked discussion about new
regulations. LOF research results in weakened pathogens—and thus does not impart
the same risks as GOF research—and is rarely mentioned in policy debates in the same
way as GOF research.
In this report, we map the gain- and loss-of-function global research landscape using a
quantitative approach that combines machine learning with subject-matter expert
review. We identify about 7,000 PubMed research papers related to our criteria for
GOF and LOF research, published between 2000 and mid-2022. Our research shows
that GOF and LOF research are intertwined; they are conducted using the same
experimental procedures and thus would both be impacted by any future regulations.
As such, throughout this report, the two types of research are often discussed in
tandem. Our aim is to help policymakers understand the research landscape in order to
more effectively mitigate risks without impacting beneficial GOF and LOF research.
Our key findings include:
1. Gain- and loss-of-function research is ongoing, global, and collaborative with
U.S.-affiliated researchers contributing to approximately half of identified
publications between 2000 and mid-2022.
2. Gain- and loss-of-function research frequently co-occur in the same study.
That said, LOF research appears in more publications than GOF research.
3. Gain- and loss-of-function research is conducted over a range of different
experimental methodologies, pathogens, and applications.
• Methodologies: GOF and LOF research does not require cutting-edge
gene-editing technologies; 21 percent of all publications we identified for
this report use serial passaging instead of other more technically

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2

sophisticated techniques such as CRISPR. The use of serial passage is
more frequent in GOF publications than LOF publications.
• Pathogens: GOF and LOF research involves pathogens that span the four
biosafety levels (BSLs), with nearly all research being conducted on
pathogens that are categorized as BSL-2, BSL-2+, or BSL-3.
• Applications: a range of research topics involve GOF and LOF research.
For example, approximately 24 percent of the identified publications were
related to vaccine development and the most-studied pathogens are
those that cause high global health burdens.
Based on our analysis, we assess that GOF and LOF research will be difficult to
regulate because:
1. Gain- and loss-of-function research are widely used in public health
applications. Regulations will need to target the types of research that cause
the most risk without impeding disease research or therapy development.
2. Gain- and loss-of-function research are intertwined. Regulations that restrict
GOF research will also restrict less risky LOF research, potentially delaying
public health developments without achieving the desired safety enhancements.
3. Researchers cannot always predict whether an experiment will cause a
pathogen to become more or less virulent. Experiments that were not
anticipated to be GOF research may not be prevented by proactive regulatory
requirements.
4. Gain-of-function research can be conducted without access to gene editing
technologies. Regulating gene editing technologies, including CRISPR or DNA
synthesis, would not affect the approximately 21 percent of experiments that
were conducted using serial passaging.
5. Risk varies among GOF studies, and should not be uniformly regulated. The
risk level of GOF and LOF research changes based on experimental factors
including the pathogen’s biosafety level, methodology, and the animal model(s)
used. Regulations will need to target the types of research that cause the most
risk rather than impose a one-size-fits-all regulatory policy that does not
account for these vital differences.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3

Table of Contents
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................................... 1
Introduction .............................................................................................................................................. 4
Structure of Report ............................................................................................................................ 5
Background and Context ..................................................................................................................... 6
What is Gain-of-Function and Loss-of-Function Research? ................................................ 6
Why Do Researchers Genetically Alter Pathogens? .............................................................. 7
How do Researchers Conduct Gain- and Loss-of-Function Research? ........................... 8
Policy Landscape: Current Guidelines and Regulations .......................................................... 10
Methodology .......................................................................................................................................... 12
Results ..................................................................................................................................................... 13
Scope and Scale of Gain- and Loss-of-Function Research ................................................ 13
Gain- versus Loss-of-Function Research ................................................................................. 16
Gain- and Loss-of-Function Research in Public Health ...................................................... 17
Gain- and Loss-of-Function Research Methodologies ........................................................ 21
Types of Pathogens Used in Gain- and Loss-of-Function Research ............................... 25
Regulatory Considerations: Why it Will be Difficult to Regulate Gain-of-Function
Research ................................................................................................................................................. 27
Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................. 29
Authors .................................................................................................................................................... 30
Acknowledgments ............................................................................................................................... 30
Appendix A: Gain-of-Function Research Policies, Regulations, and Guidelines ............. 31
Appendix B: Text Classification Methodology ............................................................................ 33
Appendix C: Survey Methodology .................................................................................................. 36
Survey Deployment and Characteristics .................................................................................. 36
Survey Analysis ................................................................................................................................ 36
Survey Findings ................................................................................................................................ 37
Endnotes ................................................................................................................................................. 40

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4

Introduction
Altering a pathogen’s genome is an established way to study gene function, including
how a pathogen’s genetic code impacts its ability to cause infection. Experiments that
result in pathogens with additional functionality are categorized as gain-of-function
(GOF) research, while genetic changes that result in weakened pathogens are
categorized as loss-of-function (LOF) research.
GOF and LOF research is not new. In the late 1800s, Louis Pasteur created the first
vaccines for chicken cholera, anthrax, and rabies using LOF experiments.1 Since then,
both GOF and LOF research have led to landmark scientific breakthroughs in vaccine
development, genetic research, and gene therapy. Today, scientists continue to rely on
these methods to augment our understanding of disease transmission and the
relationships between genes and physical traits, among other uses.
A subset of GOF and LOF research involves high-risk, highly virulent pathogens that
are capable of spreading widely among humans. This research can be scientifically
valuable for understanding how to fight and prevent diseases and to study new,
virulent pathogens. The COVID-19 pandemic and the associated theory that it
originated from GOF research at the Wuhan Institute of Virology in China has sparked
renewed policymaker interest and debate about the risks and benefits of this kind of
research. In the United States, on a federal level, Congress has considered reducing
National Institutes of Health (NIH) funding for GOF pandemic preparedness research
while at the state level, Florida has banned GOF research.2
In March 2023, the National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity (NSABB)
published a new proposed oversight framework to assess, regulate, and mitigate risks
from potential pandemic pathogens. The proposed framework led to debate among
scientists about the scope and scale of future regulations with some believing GOF
research should be halted altogether and others arguing for more effective regulation
to enable safe research with potentially significant societal benefits.3
Given the ongoing debate and the benefits and risks involved in GOF research, CSET
researchers aimed to map the landscape, including the scale and scope, of both GOF
and LOF published research. While LOF research results in weakened pathogens—and
thus does not impart the same risks as GOF research—CSET researchers chose to
characterize both GOF and LOF research because they are conducted using the same
experimental procedures and thus could both be impacted by future regulations.
Policymakers seeking to regulate GOF methodologies need to first understand this

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5

landscape in order to more effectively regulate this research without preventing
beneficial gain- and loss-of-function research. They must also understand what
constitutes cutting-edge of research, where regulatory gaps may exist, and how
restricting certain types of high-risk GOF research would impact a wide range of
experimental methodologies that are used in all types of biological scientific research.
Structure of Report
In the remainder of this Policy Brief, we provide background on gain- and loss- of
function research and why and how researchers conduct this kind of work; describe the
current policies and regulations governing this kind of research; describe our
methodology and results in greater detail; and conclude with policy considerations and
recommendations for U.S. policymakers interested in regulating this kind of research,

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6

Background and Context
What is Gain-of-Function and Loss-of-Function Research?
Definitions for GOF and LOF research vary widely, but, at its core, this research
changes an organism’s genome to add or subtract biological functions. While scientists
can manipulate any organism’s genome via GOF or LOF techniques, this report focuses
on pathogens, organisms that can cause disease. Experiments that increase a
pathogen’s ability to cause disease—through increased virulence, pathogenicity, or
transmissibility—are classified collectively as gain-of-function research. In contrast,
experiments that decrease a pathogen’s ability to cause disease are classified as loss-
of-function research. These two outcomes are interconnected; GOF and LOF research
use the same methods, equipment, and techniques. Moreover, in many cases,
researchers may not be able to predict whether an experiment will make a pathogen
more or less able to cause disease.
In this report, we used the definition provided by the NSABB to inform our working
definition of GOF or LOF research as any study that altered any of the following
pathogen characteristics:4
1. Pathogen production, replication, or growth rates,
2. Survival rate or symptom severity in infected cells or organisms,
3. Transmission (for example altering the route or rate of spread, or modifying
pathogens to infect new cells, tissues, or animals),
4. Susceptibility to immune mechanisms; or,
5. Resistance to drugs, vaccines, therapeutics, or diagnostics.
A subset of GOF and LOF research involves high-risk pathogens that are capable of
spreading widely among humans. This subset has garnered increased attention from
news media, lawmakers, and other officials, particularly following the outbreak of the
COVID-19 pandemic, for the potential societal risks stemming from such research.
Gain-of-function research on certain pathogens may also be called dual-use research
of concern (DURC), gain-of-function research of concern (GOFROC), or enhanced
potential pandemic pathogen (ePPP) research. As we discuss below, existing
regulations applicable to GOF/LOF research generally target one of these three.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7

Why Do Researchers Genetically Alter Pathogens?
Researchers conduct GOF and LOF research to learn how pathogens function and to
develop new therapeutic treatments and preventative measures. Modifying pathogens
can help researchers understand the relationship between specific genes and physical
traits, develop altered pathogens with therapeutic benefits, and determine which
mutations are likely to make a pathogen more dangerous in order to prioritize public
health efforts. For example, researchers may conduct GOF or LOF research to:
● Learn what a gene does. A researcher may determine that deleting a specific
gene causes a particular virus to replicate more slowly. This loss-of-function
experiment would indicate that the deleted gene is important for viral
Box 1. Definitions of DURC, GOFROC, and ePPP
● Dual-Use Research of Concern (DURC): “a subset of dual use research
defined as life sciences research that, based on current understanding, can be
reasonably anticipated to provide knowledge, information, products, or
technologies that could be directly misapplied to pose a significant threat
with broad potential consequences to public health and safety, agricultural
crops and other plants, animals, the environment, materiel, or national
security.” From the United States Government Policy for Oversight of Life
Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern.5
● Gain-Of-Function Research Of Concern (GOFROC): “research that could
generate a pathogen that is: 1) highly transmissible and likely capable of wide
and uncontrollable spread in human populations; and 2) highly virulent and
likely to cause significant morbidity and/or mortality in humans." From the
National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity’s Recommendations for The
Evaluation and Oversight of Proposed Gain-Of-Function Research (2016).6
● Enhanced Potential Pandemic Pathogen (ePPP): “a PPP [potential pandemic
pathogen] resulting from the enhancement of the transmissibility and/or
virulence of a pathogen. Enhanced PPPs do not include naturally occurring
pathogens that are circulating in or have been recovered from nature,
regardless of their pandemic potential.” Defined by The NIH’s Framework for
Guiding Funding Decisions about Proposed Research Involving Enhanced
Potential Pandemic Pathogens.7

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8

replication and may be a good therapeutic target. For example, the discovery
that a specific viral protein is important for influenza A infection led to the
development of the drug peramivir.8
● Study a pathogen in a model organism. A researcher, who has developed a
new antiviral drug, may want to collect more data in living organisms before
testing the drug in humans. The researcher may decide to mutate the virus so
that it can infect mice in a GOF experiment. Mouse-adapted H1N1 is frequently
used to study influenza antivirals in mice.9
● Develop a new vaccine strain. A pharmaceutical company may develop a
weakened strain of a specific virus to use as a vaccine. Researchers in this
situation would conduct loss-of-function studies to create a virus strain that
causes mild or no symptoms, but protects against future infection—also called a
live attenuated vaccine. This is how chickenpox vaccines were developed.10
How do Researchers Conduct Gain- and Loss-of-Function Research?
Researchers can genetically alter pathogens using a variety of methods, each of which
requires different resources, materials, techniques, and skills. The following are several
of the most common techniques that can be used for both GOF and LOF experiments:
● Serial passaging involves deliberately passing a particular pathogen through a
series of cells, tissues, or animals one after the other, using the pathogen from
one round of infection to start the next. Sequentially infecting organisms in this
way results in an evolved pathogen with new characteristics, similar to what
happens when a pathogen spreads naturally among a population.11 Researchers
can select pathogens that have characteristics of interest during each round of
infection; for example, researchers can isolate antibiotic-resistant bacteria by
selecting the bacteria that are able to survive in antibiotic-treated mice.
● Reverse genetics (also called virus rescue) is a technique that lets researchers
engineer new viruses by designing nucleic acids (DNA or RNA) in the laboratory
that encode the instructions for a virus. Researchers then introduce this newly
designed genome, or viral “blueprint,” into cells, where cellular machinery reads
the blueprint and constructs the desired virus.
● Adding, modifying, or removing genes from existing pathogens can alter a
pathogen's characteristics. For example, researchers can add a new specific

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9

gene to an existing bacterial strain by introducing a plasmid—a circular segment
of DNA that carries the desired gene sequence—to living bacteria.12 Researchers
can also mutate individual genes, either to generate a modified version of the
gene or to deactivate a gene by disrupting its genetic code.
● Pathogen recombination is a technique in which two pathogen strains are
combined to create a third that consists of a mixture of genes from the two
pathogen parents.13 Researchers can generate new gene combinations by
mixing two pathogen strains in the same environment, for instance, by co-
infecting host cells or animals with two pathogen strains. For example, two
bacterial strains can pass DNA to each other in a process called genetic transfer,
while two viral strains can exchange genes if they both infect the same cell.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10

Policy Landscape: Current Guidelines and Regulations
Despite its widely recognized value for public health and scientific progress, GOF
research has attracted attention and concern from scientists, politicians, and
policymakers due to what some see as inherent risks. The possibility of starting a
pandemic or causing widespread illness, either deliberately or inadvertently due to
accidental release of an enhanced pathogen, has drawn media coverage and sparked
debate, particularly given claims that GOF research may have created the SARS-CoV-
2 virus that triggered the COVID-19 pandemic.14 Such concerns, however, predate
COVID-19. For instance, in 2011-2012, studies related to H5N1 avian influenza virus
transmissibility and other unrelated biosecurity incidents triggered debate and
attracted public scrutiny that led the Obama administration to temporarily pause
federal funding for GOF research experiments on influenza, severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS), and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) viruses in October
2014.15 During this pause, an evaluation by the National Science Advisory Board for
Biosecurity (NSABB) informed the new framework, “Recommendations For The
Evaluation And Oversight Of Proposed Gain-Of-Function Research and P3CO,” which
was implemented to guide federal funding decisions when the moratorium was lifted
in 2017.16 Subsequent policy guidance from the U.S. government has attempted to
further address safety concerns through methods such as enacting review and
reporting processes for GOF and LOF research. Most recently, in 2022, the NSABB
was charged by the U.S. government to evaluate the existing regulations; the final
report’s findings and recommendations have been sent to the Department of Health
and Human Services to inform potential new policy guidelines.17 For a full overview of
existing regulations, see Appendix A.
Meanwhile, members of the scientific community have repeatedly pointed out that the
politically charged spotlight on GOF has made it difficult to rationally discuss the risks
and benefits of such research. For example, in January 2023, over 150 experts signed
onto a commentary published by the American Society for Microbiology, calling for a
more nuanced, evidence-based discourse.18 Overall, the scientific community has
expressed a range of opinions about how and whether gain-of-function research on
potential pandemic pathogens should be regulated. Some researchers are concerned
that proposed regulations are too far-reaching and will cause a “chilling effect” that
inhibits scientific progress. Others argue that GOF research on potential pandemic
pathogens does not provide adequate benefit to justify the risk and should be
stopped.19

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 11

In between these two viewpoints are those who recognize that GOF studies are
essential for public health and basic science, and should be allowed to continue but
only with additional clarity, risk mitigation, oversight, and an expansion or overhaul of
flawed existing regulations.20 Indeed, there are a number of problems with the current
policies and guidelines that regulate GOF research. For one, these various policies do
not clearly or consistently define what constitutes GOF research, or which subsets or
aspects of GOF research are considered risky.21 Some of these regulations also hinge
on being able to predict the results of an experiment before it is conducted, or in other
words, knowing in advance that a particular modification of a pathogen will increase
(rather than decrease) its ability to cause disease, which is something scientists are
often unable to do. Another challenge is that current policies, other than the list-based
Select Agents Program, only apply to federally-funded research and have no bearing
on the research conducted in the private sector. Therefore, regardless of whether
additional regulations are enacted, the current, ambiguous policies already make it
difficult for researchers to know whether or how their work is affected, limited, or
entirely prohibited.

Box 2. Attitudes Within the Scientific Community
Given the sensitivity and charged nature of debate around GOF research, CSET
researchers conducted a survey to gauge how practicing scientists engage with the
topic. Surveyed experts shared their experiences on the impact that this contested
discourse has had on their work, citing uninformed regulators, polarized
bureaucracy, and inadequate communication of scientific information as constricting
mechanisms for their work. Given the survey responses, we believe that researchers
might be hesitant to become public advocates or educators of GOF research for fear
of losing access to research resources, like funding and public support. The full
survey and results are in Appendix C.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 12

Methodology
To better understand the GOF and LOF research landscape, CSET used a quantitative
approach that combines a machine learning classifier with subject-matter expert
review. Our primary data source was PubMed/MEDLINE, a publicly available database
of about 37 million English-language biomedical citations and abstracts provided by
the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).22
Subject-matter experts first identified publications that fit our criteria of GOF and LOF
research to train a machine learning classifier. This definition was informed by prior
guidelines developed by the National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity
(NSABB).23 As previously noted, we defined GOF and LOF research as experimental
work that increases or decreases pathogenic function with any of five changes: altered
virulence, pathogenicity, transmissibility, infectivity, or host range.
We then applied machine-learning methods to surface approximately 7,000
publications that are likely to contain our definition of GOF or LOF research, published
between 2000 and mid-2022. The subject-matter experts then further analyzed a
representative sample of 488 of these publications to determine the proportion of
gain- vs. loss-of-function research and additional relevant characteristics including
pathogen type, experimental method, vaccine relevance, and animal use. (Appendix B
provides more details on methodology.)
Our methodology has a number of limitations. Our classifier surfaced GOF and LOF
research from a corpus of English-language publications that does not represent all of
the possible experiments that could be occurring globally. This excludes studies from
researchers that don’t publish their findings in peer-reviewed journals or studies
published in a language other than English. For example, industry researchers may not
publish their findings in order to protect intellectual property. This analysis is intended
as a starting point to understand the GOF and LOF research landscape, while
recognizing that it cannot exhaustively describe every experiment that is conducted.
The following discussion highlights the findings from our analysis.*

* This analysis captures GOF and LOF research on all pathogens, not just those defined as “high risk” or
potential pandemic pathogens (PPP).

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 13

Results
Scope and Scale of Gain- and Loss-of-Function Research
GOF and LOF research is ongoing, global, and collaborative, with U.S.-affiliated
researchers contributing to approximately half of identified publications. We estimate
that there are about 7,000 papers published between 2000 and 2022 that meet our
GOF and LOF pathogen research criteria on PubMed (Figure 1). Researchers from U.S.-
based institutions contributed to about 53 percent of these publications, while
researchers from Chinese institutions authored about 21 percent of the GOF and LOF
research papers in our dataset.
Figure 1: U.S.-affiliated Researchers Contributed to More than Half of Gain- and Loss-
of-Function English-language Research Publications between 2000-2022

Source: CSET classifier on PubMed data between 2000-mid 2022.
Note: Percentages sum to more than 100 percent because many publications are collaborations
between authors in different countries; these publications are counted for each country with a
contributing author. Shaded portions of each bar show the 95 percent confidence interval based on
subject matter expert annotation of representative samples of papers identified by the classifier . For
methodological details, see Appendix B.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 14

GOF and LOF research is highly collaborative, as about 67 percent of identified
publications involved a collaboration between researchers at multiple institutions
(Figure 2a, next page), with collaborations between authors from at least two U.S.
institutions being the most common type (Figure 2b, next page). U.S.-international
collaborations occur most frequently between U.S. and Chinese institutions (Figure
2b).

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 15

Figure 2: The Majority of Gain- and Loss-of-Function Research was Conducted
Collaboratively Across Multiple Institutions

Source: CSET classifier on PubMed data between 2000-mid 2022.
Note: Shaded portions of each bar show the 95 percent confidence interval based on subject matter
expert annotation of representative samples of papers identified by the classifier .

Source: CSET classifier on PubMed data between 2000-mid 2022. Shaded portions of each bar show
the 95 percent confidence interval based on subject matter expert annotation of representative samples
of papers identified by the classifier.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 16

Gain- versus Loss-of-Function Research
Gain- and loss-of-function research are interconnected and often conducted in the
same study. We estimate that approximately one-third (29 percent) of the 7,000
identified publications in PubMed include both GOF and LOF research. Meanwhile,
there are nearly twice as many studies that result in LOF as there are publications that
result in GOF (Figure 3). As such, while the public debate is largely focused on GOF,
our data indicates that GOF and LOF research are intertwined and that are many more
studies focused on LOF research than GOF research.
Figure 3: Distribution of Gain- vs. Loss-of-Function Research

Source: CSET classifier on PubMed data between 2000-mid 2022. Shaded portions of each bar show
the 95 percent confidence interval based on subject matter expert annotation of representative samples
of papers identified by the classifier.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 17

Gain- and Loss-of-Function Research in Public Health
Gain- and loss-of-function research is conducted to better understand how pathogens
cause disease and to develop therapies for pathogens with a high global health
burden. Accordingly, the pathogens that we encountered most frequently in
publications identified for this study are viruses within families that infect a sizeable
fraction of the world’s population or cause livestock loss, such as orthomyxoviridae
(influenza), herpesviridae (herpes simplex virus), flaviviridae (yellow and dengue fever),
and coronaviridae (SARS, MERS, COVID-19). We estimate that nearly one-third of
GOF and LOF studies in our dataset are conducted on bacteria, which could reflect
efforts to combat health concerns posed by antimicrobial resistance (Figure 4).27
Box 3. Examples of Gain- and Loss-of-Function Studies
Below are examples of each type of research found during the SME review of
selected publications:
● Loss-of-function: Researchers deleted genes from African swine fever virus
to develop a weakened version of the virus; this attenuated virus fully
protected pigs from lethal African swine fever infection when used as a
vaccine.24
● Gain-of-function: Researchers infected mice with the bacteria Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, that normally does not naturally infect mice, to investigate how
the bacteria interacts with a host in an animal system.25
● Gain- and loss-of-function: Scientists changed the sequence of different
strains of the fungus Aspergillus fumigatus to determine what causes the
fungus to become resistant to antifungal therapies. Some of the mutations
caused new fungus strains to not grow at all in mice, while other new strains
grew faster in mice than the original fungus stain.26

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 18

Figure 4: Gain- and Loss-of-Function Research, Categorized by Pathogen Type

Source: CSET classifier on PubMed data between 2000-mid 2022. Percentages sum to more than 100
because some publications use more than one pathogen. Percentages of virus breakdown sum to 99
percent rather than 100 percent of the viruses represented, due to rounding. Shaded portions of each
bar show the 95 percent confidence interval based on subject matter expert annotation of
representative samples of papers identified by the classifier.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 19

In addition to studying diseases, researchers conduct GOF and LOF research to
develop new preventative medical countermeasures like vaccines. An estimated 24
percent of all identified publications in our dataset are directly involved in research or
development of vaccines (Figure 5a). We further find that LOF research is more closely
related to vaccine development than GOF research; approximately 35 percent of the
publications that result in LOF alone are related to vaccine development, compared to
15 percent of publications that result in both LOF and GOF and 13 percent of
publications that result in only GOF (Figure 5b). We only identified publications as
“vaccine-related” if they were explicitly developing or testing a vaccine; there are
additional foundational research publications that could contribute to vaccine
development but may be missed by our specific criteria.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 20

Figure 5: Gain- and Loss-of-Function Publications Related to Vaccine Development

Source: CSET classifier on PubMed data 2000-mid 2022. In Figure 5(a), shaded portions of each bar
show the 95 percent confidence interval based on subject matter expert annotation of representative
samples of papers identified by the classifier.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 21

Gain- and Loss-of-Function Research Methodologies
Gain- and loss-of-function studies serve a range of research applications, from basic
research in the laboratory to experiments that use animals to test how pathogens
function in living organisms. Basic research studies build foundational knowledge,
while animal models translate these results to more complex living organisms.
GOF and LOF research are conducted in both basic laboratory settings and in animal
studies. Mice, the most commonly-used animal model in research, are used in an
estimated 49 percent of GOF and LOF publications (Figure 6). 28 Chickens are the next
most-common animal model (about 8 percent), which reflects the frequency of studies
on avian flu or studies that use chicken eggs to develop vaccines. We estimate that
pigs, non-human primates, rabbits, and ferrets are each used in less than 5 percent of
identified publications. About 29 percent of publications do not include research on
animal models.
The type of animal model used can increase the risks associated with GOF research.
The more biologically similar an animal model is to humans, the greater the likelihood
that the research will translate to humans but also the greater the risk of unintended
animal-to-human transmission. Non-human primates and pigs are often used to study
human diseases because they are physiologically and genetically similar to people.29
However, this similarity also means that the pigs, nonhuman primates, and humans
can be infected by similar pathogens, increasing the risk that these studies may
accidentally infect human researchers and handlers.
About 4 percent of the identified GOF and LOF publications involved experiments that
infect pigs while approximately 3 percent involved experiments that infect nonhuman
primates (Figure 6). Ferret research is frequently cited in policy discussions after two
high-profile studies modified H5N1 influenza to spread between ferrets due to the
similarities between human and ferret lungs.30 However, we found that only 2 percent
of identified publications relate to research that infects ferrets.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 22

Figure 6: Gain- and Loss-of-Function Research, Classified by Use of Animals

Source: CSET classifier on PubMed data between 2000-mid 2022. Percentages sum to more than 100
because some research is conducted on more than one animal species. Shaded portions of each bar
show the 95 percent confidence interval based on subject matter expert annotation of representative
samples of papers identified by the classifier.
While much of the attention has focused on sophisticated gene editing technologies
such as CRISPR, it is important to understand that the highest-risk GOF research can
be conducted even without access to advanced gene-editing technologies because
researchers can use other methods including serial passaging to alter pathogen
genomes. Serial passage sequentially infects cells, tissues, or animals with a pathogen
over time, and can result in an evolved pathogen with new characteristics under
suitable scientific conditions.31 The method requires basic laboratory equipment and
does not rely on more advanced and expensive methods such as CRISPR, DNA
synthesis, or genetic engineering. We found that 21 percent of all identified
publications used serial passaging (Figure 7a). Serial passaging frequently resulted in
GOF genome alterations; 42 percent of identified publications that include only GOF

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 23

were conducted using serial passage, compared to 22 percent of publications that
result in both GOF and LOF and 10 percent of publications that result in only LOF,
respectively (Figure 7b). It is also worth noting that when serial passaging is conducted
in animals, the likelihood of animal-to-human transmission, and thus, risk, may
increase.
Figure 7: Gain- and Loss-of-Function Research, Categorized by Use of Serial Passaging

Source: CSET classifier on PubMed data between 2000-mid 2022. Shaded portions of each bar show
the 95 percent confidence interval based on subject matter expert annotation of representative samples
of papers identified by the classifier.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 24

Box 4. Examples of Serial Passage
Serial passaging is a common technique to genetically manipulate pathogens. Some
illustrative examples of its use include:
● Loss-of-function: Researchers serial-passaged a strain of Porcine Epidemic
Diarrhea Virus, resulting in a virus that induced milder symptoms and
exhibited decreased viral shedding in pigs. This new strain is a potential
attenuated vaccine candidate, which could help alleviate livestock losses due
to the virus’s high mortality rate.32
● Gain-of-function: Researchers investigated how a common antiviral drug
inhibits herpes simplex virus by serial-passaging the virus in cells until it was
resistant to the antiviral, to better understand why treatments sometimes
fail.33
● Gain- and loss-of-function: Researchers serial-passaged dengue virus in
mosquito and mammalian cells to understand how the virus evolved to be
able to infect both mosquitoes and humans. Some of the newly-evolved
viruses gained the ability to replicate more efficiently, while other viruses
replicated less efficiently; the researchers compared the gene sequences of
the differently evolved viruses to understand how dengue virus adapts to new
hosts.34

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 25

Types of Pathogens Used in Gain- and Loss-of-Function Research
GOF and LOF research varies in risk level depending on the pathogen that is being
manipulated. The CDC stratifies a variety of pathogens into biosafety containment
levels (BSLs) 1-4, which represent recommended best practices for safe research
based on a protocol-based risk assessment.* We mapped the recommended biosafety
levels to the publications based on the pathogen(s) used in each of the 488
publications we inspected manually during our research process. Some papers
explored pathogens not assigned a biosafety level by the CDC, which we labeled as
"unknown." Note that the CDC biosafety levels are recommended, and that we were
unable to confirm whether the research covered in these papers was conducted in the
appropriate biosafety level laboratories. Almost all of the publications for which we
were able to assign a biosafety level (460 out of 488 manually inspected publications)
were performed on pathogens that are categorized at BSL-2 (58 percent), BSL-2+ (10
percent), or BSL-3 (25 percent) (Figure 8). Very few publications involved pathogens
that are categorized as BSL-1 (1 percent) or BSL-4 (<1 percent).

* Center for Disease Prevention and Control Biosafety Level Definitions:
Biosafety Level 1 (BSL-1): appropriate for defined and characterized strains of viable biological agents
that are not known to cause disease in immunocompetent adult humans.
Biosafety Level 2 (BSL-2): appropriate for handling moderate-risk agents that cause human disease of
varying severity by ingestion or through percutaneous or mucous membrane exposure.
Biosafety Level 3 (BSL-3): appropriate for agents with a known potential for aerosol transmission, for
agents that may cause serious and potentially lethal infections, of indigenous or exotic origin.
Biosafety Level 4 (BSL-4): appropriate for exotic agents that pose a high individual risk of life-
threatening disease by infectious aerosols and for which no treatment is available.
“Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories 6th Edition.” Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/labs/pdf/CDC-BiosafetyMicrobiologicalBiomedicalLaboratories-2020-
P.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 26

Figure 8: Gain- and Loss-of-Function Research, Classified by CDC-recommended
Pathogen Biosafety Level.

Source: CSET classifier on PubMed data between 2000-mid 2022.
Note: Percentages sum to more than 100 percent due to rounding. Shaded portions of each bar show
the 95 percent confidence interval based on subject matter expert annotation of representative samples
of papers identified by the classifier.
In summary, we find that gain- and loss-of-function studies are conducted globally,
with applications ranging from public health research to vaccine development. These
studies vary widely, and it’s important to understand that attributes from the type of
pathogen used to the research methodology employed can convey different levels of
risk. The varied and sometimes interconnected nature of the research ecosystem
means that policymakers, particularly potential regulators, must carefully consider the
unique benefits and risks of certain types of GOF and LOF research and how restricting
one type might affect another.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 27

Regulatory Considerations: Why it Will be Difficult to Regulate Gain-of-
Function Research
Our findings highlight the complexities of regulating GOF and LOF research. Based on
our analysis, we identified different facets of GOF and LOF research that should be
considered when designing or modifying rules, recommendations, and regulations:
1. GOF and LOF research are widely used in public health applications.
● Approximately 25 percent of GOF and LOF studies are involved in vaccine
research and development, and the most frequently studied pathogens are
those that cause widespread disease.
● Researchers frequently modify pathogens in order to understand how diseases
function or to develop vaccines and medical countermeasures. Regulations will
need to target the types of research that cause the most risk without impeding
disease research or therapy development.
2. Gain- and loss-of-function research are intertwined.
● Approximately 30 percent of the studies in our dataset resulted in both GOF
and LOF.
● LOF research does not create enhanced pathogens, and is frequently conducted
to develop vaccines and therapies. Regulations that restrict GOF research based
on methods, techniques, or resources used in the course of research may also
restrict LOF research because the two use the same methods, techniques, and
resources. This may delay public health developments without necessarily
achieving the desired safety enhancements.
3. Researchers cannot always predict whether an experiment will cause a pathogen
to become more or less virulent.
● In addition to GOF and LOF being intertwined, we encountered several studies
in which researchers determined what a gene does by deleting the gene and
measuring the impact on the pathogen’s function. The goal of this experiment is
to investigate cause and effect, and thus the output is not always anticipated.
● Scientists do not have complete knowledge of gene function or biological
pathways, which prevents them from being able to accurately predict the

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 28

results of every experiment. Experiments that were not anticipated to be GOF
research may not be prevented by proactive regulatory requirements.
4. Gain-of-function research can be conducted without access to advanced gene
editing technologies.
● Over 20 percent of GOF or LOF research we identified for this study was
conducted without access to gene editing technologies. For instance, 21 percent
of the studies used more basic techniques like serial passage, albeit the use of
this technique is more frequent in GOF research than LOF research.
● Researchers have a variety of experimental methods to conduct GOF research,
some of which require only basic laboratory equipment. Regulating gene editing
technologies, including CRISPR or DNA synthesis, would not prevent all GOF
experiments.
5. Risk varies among GOF and LOF studies, and such studies should not be
uniformly regulated.
● GOF and LOF publications spanned the full extent of biosafety levels, animal
usage, and experimental methods, indicating a range of different risk factors.
● The risk level of GOF and LOF research changes based on experimental factors.
For example, some pathogens, like common lab strains of Escherichia coli, are
relatively benign while others can cause severe or fatal disease. Similarly, using
research animals that are biologically similar to humans may increase the risk of
a modified pathogen accidentally transferring to humans.
Whether or not U.S. policymakers decide to pursue regulations on GOF research,
international coordination, transparency, and trust-building between scientific, public,
and policy communities will be necessary to build a comprehensive strategy for
scientific research governance.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 29

Conclusion
CSET’s examination of about 7,000 gain- and loss-of-function research publications,
drawing on a database of roughly 37 million biomedical citations and abstracts,
indicates that the nature of this research is global, ongoing, collaborative and diverse.
While the riskier methods involving gain of function are overrepresented in today’s
policy discussions, our research shows that it is not as prevalent across the larger
research ecosystem examined. This brief aims to help policymakers ground the current
discussion and debate in the context of the scale, scope and complexity of this
research. It also maps the policy and academic landscapes to help policymakers weigh
how best to regulate this research and address regulatory gaps.
Gain- and loss-of-function research methods are complex and nuanced and any
regulations of these methods need to be as well. Ultimately, different gain-of-function
research approaches contain different levels of risks that are important to understand
in order to create effective regulations. For example, some cutting-edge research may
rely more heavily on advanced gene editing technologies or animal studies, but these
tools are unnecessary for other basic gain- or loss-of-function research. Painting these
methods with a broad brush could inadvertently impede scientific progress. As such,
one-size-fits all policies aimed at mitigating dangers from one approach could limit
other, less-risky research, and overly broad regulations could ultimately limit the
scientific community’s ability to prepare for future disease outbreaks. Effective policies
will need to clearly define the subset of research that poses the greatest risk in order
to develop targeted regulations. This brief will hopefully help policymakers address
this important topic, armed with knowledge and factual insights.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 30

Authors
Caroline Schuerger and Steph Batalis are biotechnology research fellows, Katherine
Quinn is a data scientist, Ronnie Kinoshita is a survey research analyst, Owen J. Daniels
is the Andrew W. Marshall Fellow, and Anna Puglisi is a senior fellow at CSET.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank James Dunham for their data work. For their feedback
and assistance, the authors would like to thank Catherine Aiken, Vikram Venkatram,
Margarita Konaev, and Igor Mikolic-Torreira. The authors are especially grateful to
Michael Imperiale, Christine Parthemore, and Gigi Kwik Gronvall for their
comprehensive reviews. Finally, we thank Matt Mahoney for his fact-checking and
Tessa Baker for their editorial support.

© 2023 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/###

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 31

Appendix A: Gain-of-Function Research Policies, Regulations, and
Guidelines
We provide examples of policies or guidelines that encompass aspects of GOF and
LOF research below.
Federal Select Agent Program (FSAP) (Reviewed regularly)35
Joint program between the CDC and USDA that oversees the possession, use, and
transfer of select agents and toxins that “have the potential to pose a severe threat to
public health and safety.” The policy only applies to a specific list of agents and toxins,
so pathogens that are not on the list at that time are not subject to regulation (the list
is updated several times a year).

U.S. Policy for Institutional Oversight of Life Sciences Dual Use Research of
Concern (DURC) (Effective 2015)36
An institutional oversight requirement for a list of 15 agents and seven types of
experiments that are considered “high risk”. The policy only applies to a specific list of
agents and toxins, so pathogens that are not on the list at that time are not subject to
regulation. The policy requires each federal institution to create their own guidelines
for regulating DURC-related research funding.

Framework for Guiding Funding Decisions about Proposed Research Involving
Enhanced Potential Pandemic Pathogens (2017)37
A review process for NIH-funded studies on “enhanced potential pandemic pathogens”
(ePPPs), defined as an enhancement to a pathogen that is:
1. Likely highly transmissible and likely capable of wide and uncontrollable spread
in human populations; and
2. Likely highly virulent and likely to cause significant morbidity and/or mortality in
humans.
PPPs themselves are defined as pathogens that are likely “highly transmissible” and
“highly virulent;” the term “highly” is subjective and the requirement to report if a study
has “reasonable anticipation” of a risk is unclear. The Framework is guided by the
proposed Recommendations for the Evaluation and Oversight of Proposed Gain-of-
Function Research (2016) by the National Science Advisory Board on Biosecurity. 38

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 32

NIH Guidelines for Research Involving Recombinant or Synthetic Nucleic Acid
Molecules (2019)39
NIH guidance, as a condition of receiving funding from the NIH, for laboratory safety
and containment practices. The guidelines pertain to research that was developed with
NIH funding or conducted at institutions that receive NIH funding on studies that use
recombinant or synthetic nucleic acid molecules.

Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories (BMBL) Guidelines (Most
recent revision, 2020)40
NIH/CDC laboratory guidance that recommends biosafety and biocontainment
procedures to safely conduct research on different pathogens by categorizing
pathogens by biosafety levels.

Proposed Biosecurity Oversight Framework for the Future of Science (2023)41
2023 updated guidance from the National Science Advisory Board on Biosecurity that
evaluates the effectiveness of U.S. policies governing ePPP and DURC research and
provides updated recommendations to increase research transparency, expand the
pathogens that are subject to review, and further define the roles of research
institutions in self-reporting ePPP research. If implemented, the framework would also
remove exemptions for vaccine development and pathogen surveillance.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 33

Appendix B: Text Classification Methodology
We applied machine learning methods to develop a classifier that identified the
numerous gain- and loss-of-function research and publications available in PubMed.
This methodology was chosen because identifying thousands of relevant articles from
millions of publications was not a feasible task for manual inspection, and
unfortunately there was no reliable way of using the associated Medical Subject
Headings (MeSH terms) to simply select gain- or loss-of-function research.
Development of our text-based classifier consisted of several stages. The first was to
identify a corpus of candidate research papers, while balancing the benefits of a large
dataset with the need to eliminate irrelevant papers. We selected the following criteria
from the PubMed metadata to isolate articles of potential interest:
1. An article needed to be published no earlier than 2000;
2. The publication type for an article should be associated with grant-supported
research, such as “Journal Article”, and not be labeled as “Review”, “News” or
contain any other non-experimental designation;
3. The MeSH tags for an article should include “Animals” or any of the 221 specific
animal and taxonomic categories of animals;
4. The MeSH tags of an article should also include any of the possible 556 viruses,
777 infections, or 115 pathogens terms;
5. The article could not be missing a title or abstract.
As a result of our criteria, 159,227 candidate publications in PubMed were identified as
the basis for our corpus.
Based on a literature review of over 300 papers of relevant work, we then developed
stringent criteria for gain- or loss-of-function research, along with criteria for specifying
non-gain- or loss-of-function research. Seminal papers included Imai et al. 2012 and
Herfst et al. 2012,42 which reported gain of function in the lab-modified H5N1 flu virus
among ferrets in the form of new modes of transmission. Documents from the National
Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity (NSABB) defined parameters for risk-benefit
analysis,43 provided an annotated bibliography of gain-of-function research and
alternatives including loss-of-function,44 and recommendations for evaluation and
oversight.45 These works allowed us to adopt a narrow but well-specified working

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 34

definition for gain- and loss-of-function as experimental research that seeks to either
increase or decrease pathogenic function. We slightly modified the definition set forth
by NSABB to define gain- or loss-of-function research as any study that:
1. Enhanced (or decreased) pathogen production as a result of changes in the
replication cycle or growth.
2. Enhanced (or decreased) survival rate or symptom severity in appropriate cells
or animal models.
3. Enhanced (or decreased) transmission (e.g., for example altering the route or
rate of spread, or modifying pathogens to infect new cells, tissues, or animals).
4. Evasion of (or reduced ability to evade) existing natural or induced immunity.
5. Change in resistance to drugs or evasion of other medical countermeasures such
as vaccines, therapeutics, diagnostics.
The collection of criteria for identification of relevant research lend itself to the use of
weak supervision with a large language model.46 We made use of the Snorkel Flow
platform at this stage. Here, we defined a set of heuristics for relevant documents that
were encoded as 201 labeling functions. For example, text including the term
“recombinant” has a high likelihood of describing gain-of-function research, whereas a
phrase such as “human trial” would suggest non-gain-of-function research. These
functions, when aggregated for each publication in our corpus, generated a set of weak
labels on over 900,000 documents, where each of these documents was weakly
labeled as either gain-of-function or non-gain-of-function. The collection of labeled
documents served as the training data for our discriminative classification model, a
deep neural network.
We first evaluated the performance of our classifier by having a stratified random
sample of 200 documents manually annotated by CSET domain experts. Based on this
evaluation, we estimate the recall of our model to be 0.80. In addition, each annotator
independently analyzed the same 50 documents to evaluate inter-annotator
agreement and ensure the robustness of the annotation process.* We conducted a
second round of evaluation using a second stratified random sample of 1,000

* Inter-annotator agreement was quite high with Krippendorff’s ɑ = .85.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 35

documents, which were again manually annotated by CSET domain experts. From this
second evaluation, we estimated the precision of our model to be 0.58.
With the collection of relevant research publications identified by our classifier, CSET
domain experts annotated the second round sampled research papers to further
disentangle gain-of-function research, loss-of-function research, or both; characterize
research to identify: pathogen types and families; use of animals, including non-human
primates; research methodologies such as serial passaging and genetic engineering;
the biosafety level of the pathogen under research; and finally to analyze author
affiliations to characterize work conducted at a single institution or collaboratively
across multiple institutions, and find country associations.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 36

Appendix C: Survey Methodology
We designed a survey fielded in fall 2022 to ask researchers with expertise in
biotechnology how they define and perceive gain-of-function research via email
distribution. Our survey sought to garner insight on what experts deem to be GOF
research, including identifying GOF research experiments and perspectives on its
purposes.
Survey Deployment and Characteristics
We define our population of interest as individuals who authored a GOF-relevant in
PubMed and a targeted group of researchers and industry professionals who have
been identified by the CSET research team as performing GOF research or have
expertise in a field related to gain-of-function research. As this population is fairly
small, we supplemented our sample of academic researchers performing gain-of-
function research with targeted outreach and a snowball sample of U.S. professionals
who work in fields that may include policy, biosafety/bioethicists professionals. In total,
we received 14 responses (9 complete and 5 partial) for a response rate of 4.05
percent.* The median response time was 10 minutes. We asked questions about:
1. individuals' definitions of GOF research for a variety of audiences,
2. merits and risks of performing GOF research; and,
3. comments on existing definitions of GOF research.
Survey Analysis
Two members of the research team extracted themes from survey open-responses
through focused coding and constant comparison methods to analyze these responses.
We documented ideas, questions, and comments, and created a list of themes. After
initial familiarization with the responses, the same two members of the research team
independently engaged in open coding to extract and determine individual themes
using thematic analysis. We developed a codebook on the basis of agreement of two
members of the research team. We do not report agreement metrics as both
researchers coded all responses and resolved any discrepancies. Our extracted themes
mapped onto survey topics and included the categories in Table 1.

* The response rate for this survey aligns with similar survey response rates.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 37

Table 1: Survey Coding Categories
GOF research implications
public health applications
scientific end means
societal implications
scientific communication
processes and methodologies
GOF research definitions
miscellaneous inflammatory statements
safety concerns
Source: CSET survey analysis
Survey Findings
Generally, respondents agreed upon the following descriptors to characterize GOF
research: alterations to the genome of an organism that may or may not result in
enhanced functionality. They also typically scoped GOF research to work on viruses as
well as gaining characteristics of transmissibility, virulence, and pathogenicity.
Several respondents gave examples of GOF research, “A great example is making a
plant more drought tolerant through genetic modification. On the virus and bacteria
side of things, there is the potential to understand how they fundamentally do certain
things such as invade cells or avoid the immune system.” When we asked respondents
to note strengths and weaknesses in an existing definition of GOF research as
proposed by the National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity, many respondents
expressed that this definition was limited to what they consider GOF research and that
this definition has had a negative impact on research regulation. One respondent
stated, “While I think that GOF should be defined as noted on the previous page,
common usage is not always the same, and the NIH has also changed its definition
somewhat. Uniformity and clarity would be very helpful.” When we solicited

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 38

definitions of GOF research, we anticipated that respondents would provide different
definitions or language for different audiences, however, many respondents noted,
sometimes explicitly, that they would describe this type of research using the same
language to all audiences, “I would use the same definition” or “Please see my former
answer. It applies to all audiences.”
To the question about longer terms implications of GOF research, respondents
mentioned topics such as advancing science, as well as societal, policy, and public
health implications. When discussing the potential merits of GOF research, many
respondents noted advancing scientific progress: “We can learn how biological
systems work, with the potential benefit that we can improve human, animal, or plant
health.” Comments on advancing science ranged from general statements such as “the
benefits of gain-of-function research is to understand the function of specific genes
and assess whether genes are essential, necessary but not sufficient cell survival, or
not necessary for cell survival” to specific scientific advancements in a specific subfield
of biology such as, “identifying mutations that make a gene work better; where
mapping and studying these changes will identify critical control sites in genes.” Many
respondents noted public health implications, including “gain-of-function research…is
especially important for understanding how viruses evolve to evade the defense of the
immune system. It is also so important for studying how and why bacterial pathogens
develop antibiotic resistance. This work will directly inform the development of specific
treatments for such superbugs.” One respondent noted directly a potential merit of
GOFR is the “ability to design new therapeutics and medical countermeasures.”
We extracted issues of scientific communication from respondents' comments. Many
respondents noted the term GOF research was not created by the scientists
performing this type of research. This has led to increasing frustration with
communicating to decision-makers and the general public about regulation on GOF
research, noting that “people who opine on these GOF topics are not qualified to
understand how blurry these categories are in practice.” One respondent explicitly
mentioned the impact of scientific communication surrounding GOF research, “…forever
in biosecurity contexts the more general concept of gain-of-function is linked to
research with pathogens that result in new or enhanced functions.” A few respondents
mentioned the difficulty of dealing with the ambiguity of performing GOF research,
“the problem with the term is that as it wasn't created by scientists, it doesn't
adequately describe what scientists might be doing and is super vague.”

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 39

The full text of the survey can be found at https://github.com/georgetown-cset/gain-
of-function-survey/tree/main.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 40

Endnotes

1 Caroline Barranco. “The First Live Attenuated Vaccines.” Nature Research, September 28, 2020.
https://www.nature.com/articles/d42859-020-00008-5
2 Florida Bill CS/CS/HB 1387: Department of Health. 2023.
https://www.flsenate.gov/Session/Bill/2023/1387/BillText/er/PDF .; “Governor Ron DeSantis Signs the
Strongest Legislation in the Nation for Medical Freedom.” Flgov.com. May 11, 2023.
https://flgov.com/2023/05/11/governor-ron-desantis-signs-the-strongest-legislation-in-the-nation-for-
medical-freedom/.
3 National Science Advisory Board on Biosecurity. “Proposed Biosecurity Oversight Framework for the
Future of Science.” March 2023. https://osp.od.nih.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/NSABB-Final-
Report-Proposed-Biosecurity-Oversight-Framework-for-the-Future-of-Science.pdf.; Esvelt, Kevin M.
2021. “Manipulating Viruses and Risking Pandemics Is Too Dangerous. It’s Time to Stop.” Washington
Post, October 7, 2021. https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2021/10/07/manipulating -viruses-
risking-pandemics-is-too-dangerous-its-time-stop/.; Gregory D. Koblentz, and Rocco Casagrande. 2023.
“Opinion.” The New York Times, February 20, 2023.
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/20/opinion/biology-is-dangerously-outpacing-policy.html.
4National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity. “Framework for Conducting Risk and Benefit
Assessments of Gain-Of-Function Research,” May 2015. https://osp.od.nih.gov/wp-
content/uploads/NSABB_Framework_for_Risk_and_Benefit_Assessments_of_GOF_Research -
APPROVED.pdf.
5 The United States Government, United States Government Policy for Institutional Oversight of Life
Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern, September 25, 2015,
https://www.phe.gov/s3/dualuse/Documents/durc-policy.pdf
6 National Science Advisory Board on Biosecurity. “Recommendations for the Evaluation and Oversight
of Proposed Gain-Of-Function Research.” May 2016. https://osp.od.nih.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2016/06/NSABB_Final_Report_Recommendations_Evaluation_Oversight_Proposed_G
ain_of_Function_Research.pdf.
7 National Institutes of Health. “Framework for Guiding Funding Decisions about Proposed Research
Involving Enhanced Potential Pandemic Pathogens.” 2017.
https://www.phe.gov/s3/dualuse/Documents/P3CO.pdf
8 Malak M Alame, Elie Massaad, and Hassan Zaraket. 2016. “Peramivir: A Novel Intravenous
Neuraminidase Inhibitor for Treatment of Acute Influenza Infections.” Frontiers in Microbiology 7: 450.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4815007/.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 41

9 Smee, Donald F., and Dale L. Barnard. “Methods for Evaluation of Antiviral Efficacy Against Influenza
Virus Infections in Animal Models.” In Antiviral Methods and Protocols, edited by Edwin Yunhao Gong,
407–25. Methods in Molecular Biology. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 2013.
https://link.springer.com/protocol/10.1007/978-1-62703-484-5_31#Bib00311.
10 “Safety Information for Chickenpox (Varicella) Vaccines | Vaccine Safety | CDC,” December 22, 2022.
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/vaccines/varicella-vaccine.html; Takahashi, Michiaki, Terumasa
Otsuka, Yoshiomi Okuno, Yoshizo Asano, Takehiko Yazaki, and Shin Isomura. “LIVE VACCINE USED TO
PREVENT THE SPREAD OF VARICELLA IN CHILDREN IN HOSPITAL.” The Lancet 304, no. 7892
(November 30, 1974): 1288–90. https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-
6736(74)90144-5/fulltext.
11 Hyung Jun Woo, and Jaques Reifman. “Quantitative Modeling of Virus Evolutionary Dynamics and
Adaptation in Serial Passages Using Empirically Inferred Fitness Landscapes.” Journal of Virology 88, no.
2 (January 2014): 1039–50. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3911671/.
12 Chen, Inês, and David Dubnau. “DNA Uptake during Bacterial Transformation.” Nature Reviews
Microbiology 2, no. 3 (March 2004): 241–49. https://www.nature.com/articles/nrmicro844
13 Hyung Jun Fleischmann, W. Robert. “Viral Genetics.” In Medical Microbiology, edited by Samuel Baron,
4th ed. Galveston (TX): University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, 1996.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK8439/.
14 Todd Kuiken. “Oversight of Gain of Function Research with Pathogens: Issues for Congress.”
Congressional Research Service, May 26, 2022. https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R47114.
15 Todd Kuiken. “Global Pandemics: Gain-of-Function Research of Concern.” Congressional Research
Service, November 21, 2022. https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF12021.
16 Sara Reardon. “US Government Lifts Ban on Risky Pathogen Research.” Nature 553, no. 7686
(December 19, 2017): 11–11. doi:https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-017-08837-7.
17 National Science Advisory Board on Biosecurity. “Proposed Biosecurity Oversight Framework for the
Future of Science.” January 2023. https://osp.od.nih.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/DRAFT-NSABB-
WG-Report.pdf.
18 Felicia Goodrum, Anice C. Lowen, Seema Lakdawala, James Alwine, Arturo Ca sadevall, Michael J.
Imperiale, Walter Atwood, et al. “Virology under the Microscope—a Call for Rational Discourse.” MBio
14, no. 1 (January 26, 2023): https://journals.asm.org/doi/10.1128/mbio.00188-23.
19 Washington Post. “Opinion | Manipulating Viruses and Risking Pandemics Is Too Dangerous. It’s Time
to Stop.,” October 6, 2021. https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2021/10/07/manipulating-
viruses-risking-pandemics-is-too-dangerous-its-time-stop/.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 42

20 Gregory D. Koblentz, and Rocco Casagrande. “Opinion | Biology Is Dangerously Outpacing Policy. ”
The New York Times, February 20, 2023, sec. Opinion.
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/20/opinion/biology-is-dangerously-outpacing-policy.html.
21 Kelsey Lane Warmbrod, Michael G Montague, and Gigi Kwik Gronvall. “COVID‐19 and the Gain of
Function Debates.” EMBO Reports 22, no. 10 (October 5, 2021):
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8490979/.
22 National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), U.S. National Library of Medicine, publications
between 2000- mid 2022, accessed 2022. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
23 National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity. “Framework for Conducting Risk and Benefit
Assessments of Gain-Of-Function Research,” May 2015. https://osp.od.nih.gov/wp-
content/uploads/NSABB_Framework_for_Risk_and_Benefit_Assessments_of_GOF_Research -
APPROVED.pdf.
24 Weiye Chen, Dongming Zhao, Xijun He, Renqiang Liu, Zilong Wang, Xianfeng Zhang, Fang Li, et al. “A
Seven-Gene-Deleted African Swine Fever Virus Is Safe and Effective as a Live Attenuated Vaccine in
Pigs.” Science China. Life Sciences 63, no. 5 (May 2020): 623–34. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11427-020-
1657-9.
25 Markus Allewelt, Fadie T. Coleman, Martha Grout, Gregory P. Priebe, and Ge rald B. Pier. “Acquisition
of Expression of the Pseudomonas Aeruginosa ExoU Cytotoxin Leads to Increased Bacterial Virulence in
a Murine Model of Acute Pneumonia and Systemic Spread.” Infection and Immunity 68, no. 7 (July 2000):
3998–4004. https://journals.asm.org/doi/10.1128/IAI.68.7.3998-4004.2000.
26 S. Krishnan Natesan, Wenjuan Wu, J. L. Cutright, and P. H. Chandrasekar. “In Vitro -in Vivo Correlation
of Voriconazole Resistance Due to G448S Mutation (Cyp51A Gene) in Aspergillus Fumigatus.”
Diagnostic Microbiology and Infectious Disease 74, no. 3 (November 2012): 272 –77.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2012.06.030.
27 “Antimicrobial (Drug) Resistance | NIH: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.”
Accessed April 15, 2023. https://www.niaid.nih.gov/research/antimicrobial-resistance.
28 S.Hickman, J. Johnson, T. H. Vemulapalli, J. R. Crisler, and R. Shepherd. “Chapter 7 - Commonly Used
Animal Models.” In Principles of Animal Research for Graduate and Undergraduate Students, edited by
Mark A. Suckow and Kay L. Stewart, 117–75. Boston: Academic Press, 2017.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128021514000074?via%3Dihub .
29 François Meurens, Artur Summerfield, Hans Nauwynck, Linda Saif, and Volker Gerdts. “The Pig: A
Model for Human Infectious Diseases.” Trends in Microbiology 20, no. 1 (January 2012): 50 –57.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22153753/; Estes, Jacob D., Scott W. Wong, and Jason M. Brenchley.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 43

“Nonhuman Primate Models of Human Viral Infections.” Nature Reviews. Immunology 18, no. 6 (June
2018): 390–404. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5970954/.
30 Sander Herfst, Eefje J. A. Schrauwen, Martin Linster, Salin Chutinimitkul, Emmie de Wit, Vincent J.
Munster, Erin M. Sorrell, et al. 2012. “Airborne Transmission of Influenza A/H5N1 Virus between
Ferrets.” Science (New York, N.Y.) 336 (6088): 1534–41. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1213362.;
Masaki Imai, Tokiko Watanabe, Masato Hatta, Subash C. Das, Makoto Ozawa, Kyoko Shinya, Gongxun
Zhong, et al. 2012. “Experimental Adaptation of an Influenza H5 HA Confers Respiratory Droplet
Transmission to a Reassortant H5 HA/H1N1 Virus in Ferrets.” Nature 486 (7403): 420–28.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10831.
31 Hyung Jun Woo, and Jaques Reifman. “Quantitative Modeling of Virus Evolutionary Dynamics and
Adaptation in Serial Passages Using Empirically Inferred Fitness Landscapes.” Journal of Virology 88, no.
2 (January 2014): 1039–50. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3911671/
32 Yen-Chen Chang, Chi-Fei Kao, Chia-Yu Chang, Chian-Ren Jeng, Pei-Shiue Tsai, Victor Fei Pang, Hue-
Ying Chiou, Ju-Yi Peng, Ivan-Chen Cheng, and Hui-Wen Chang. “Evaluation and Comparison of the
Pathogenicity and Host Immune Responses Induced by a G2b Taiwan Porcine Epidemic Diarrhea Virus
(Strain Pintung 52) and Its Highly Cell-Culture Passaged Strain in Conventional 5-Week-Old Pigs.”
Viruses 9, no. 5 (May 19, 2017): 121. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5454433/.
33 Darrell R. Thomsen, Nancee L. Oien, Todd A. Hopkins, Mary L. Knechtel, Roger J. Brideau, Michael W.
Wathen, and Fred L. Homa. “Amino Acid Changes within Conserved Region III of the Herpes Simplex
Virus and Human Cytomegalovirus DNA Polymerases Confer Resistance to 4 -Oxo-Dihydroquinolines, a
Novel Class of Herpesvirus Antiviral Agents.” Journal of Virology 77, no. 3 (February 2003): 1868 –76.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12525621/.
34 Sergio M. Villordo, Claudia V. Filomatori, Irma Sánchez-Vargas, Carol D. Blair, and Andrea V.
Gamarnik. “Dengue Virus RNA Structure Specialization Facilitates Host Adaptation.” PLoS Pathogens
11, no. 1 (January 30, 2015): e1004604. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4311971/.
35 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the U.S. Department of Agriculture. “Select Agents
and Toxins | Federal Select Agent Program,” September 10, 2020.
https://www.selectagents.gov/sat/index.htm.
36 The United States Government, United States Government Policy for Institutional Oversight of Life
Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern, September 25, 2015,
https://www.phe.gov/s3/dualuse/Documents/durc-policy.pdf.
37 National Institutes of Health. “Framework for Guiding Funding Decisions about Proposed Research
Involving Enhanced Potential Pandemic Pathogens.” 2017.
https://www.phe.gov/s3/dualuse/Documents/P3CO.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 44

38 National Science Advisory Board on Biosecurity. “Recommendations for the Evaluation and Over sight
of Proposed Gain-Of-Function Research.” May 2016. https://osp.od.nih.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2016/06/NSABB_Final_Report_Recommendations_Evaluation_Oversight_Proposed_G
ain_of_Function_Research.pdf.
39 National Institutes of Health.“NIH Guidelines For Research Involving Recombinant Or Synthetic
Nucleic Acid Molecules (NIH Guidelines)”. 2019. https://osp.od.nih.gov/wp-
content/uploads/NIH_Guidelines.pdf.
40 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories
6th Edition.” 2020. https://www.cdc.gov/labs/pdf/CDC-BiosafetyMicrobiologicalBiomedicalLaboratories-
2020-P.pdf.
41 National Science Advisory Board on Biosecurity. 2023. “Proposed Biosecurity Oversight Frame work
for the Future of Science.” January 2023. https://osp.od.nih.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/DRAFT-
NSABB-WG-Report.pdf.
42 Masaki Imai, Tokiko Watanabe, Masato Hatta, Subash C. Das, Makoto Ozawa, Kyoko Shinya, Gongxun
Zhong, et al. “Experimental Adaptation of an Influenza H5 HA Confers Respiratory Droplet Transmission
to a Reassortant H5 HA/H1N1 Virus in Ferrets.” Nature 486, no. 7403 (May 2, 2012): 420–28.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22722205/.; Sander Herfst, Eefje J. A. Schrauwen, Martin Linster, Salin
Chutinimitkul, Emmie de Wit, Vincent J. Munster, Erin M. Sorrell, et al. “Airborne Transmission of
Influenza A/H5N1 Virus Between Ferrets.” Science 336, no. 6088 (June 22, 2012): 1534 –41.
https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.1213362.
43 National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity, “Framework for Conducting Risk and Benefit
Assessments of Gain-of-Function Research: Recommendations of the National Science Advisory Board
for Biosecurity.”
44 Corey Meyer. “Risk & Benefit Analysis of Gain of Function Research.” Prepared by Gryphon Scientific,
January 4, 2016. http://gryphonsci.wpengine.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/BA-Supplemental-
Landscape-of-GoF-and-Alt-GoF-Research.pdf. (See Supplemental Material: Landscape of GoF and Alt-
GoF Research)
45 National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity, “Recommendations for the Evaluation and Oversight
of Proposed Gain-Of-Function Research.”
46 Alexander Ratner, Stephen H. Bach, Henry Ehrenberg, Jason Fries, Sen Wu, and Christopher Ré.
“Snorkel: Rapid Training Data Creation with Weak Supervision.” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment
11, no. 3 (November 2017): 269–82. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.14778/3157794.3157797.
