JUNE 2021
U.S. Competitiveness 
Where Do We Stand? What Do We Do Now?  
By Richard Elkus Jr. 
G
ordon Moore, a former co-founder of both Fairchild Semiconductor and Intel, famously predicted 
in 1965 that the number of transistors in an integrated circuit could be doubled every 18 months 
to two years, thereby increasing computational power of the device exponentially. At the same 
time, the relative cost of that computing power could be halved. Moore’s Law turned out to be amazingly 
accurate. The implications were astounding. Those products and markets affected by this exponential 
increase in computational power tied to the development of integrated circuits (semiconductors) produced 
technological advances that heretofore could not have been imagined. As a result, the products and 
markets influenced by this increased ability to process information expanded exponentially.
But there was a downside. The investment in monetary and human capital required to achieve the 
results of Moore’s Law goes up exponentially as well. These costs were to be borne by the exponential 
growth in new products designed to replace existing products and markets. But if a nation is not able, 
for whatever reason, to maintain and grow its required technological infrastructure, and therefore is 
not able to participate in these new growth markets, the cost to try and catch up later quickly becomes 
overwhelming to its economy. As such, Moore’s Law (which became a guiding factor in the investment in 
the semiconductor industry) tied a nation’s investment history to its future.
Once a nation begins to lose the infrastructure that supports its strategic technological development, 
its future and the independence of its people are in jeopardy. Most countries are not able to support 
the investment in human capital and monetary resources needed to sustain sufficient technological 
infrastructure if it is financed solely from its own resources. Hence strategic alliances to ensure the 
technological future of nations become essential to maintain economic viability as well as political 
stability and security.
Without dependable strategic alliances or the internal capability and resources necessary to maintain 
integrated technological advancement commensurate with the competition, most nations will fail to 
maintain and finally lose their future competitiveness and independence. This set of circumstances is 
a major problem for the United States today. The foundation of the U.S. technological base, which is

U.S. Competitiveness: Where Do We Stand? What Do We Do Now?  |  2
necessary for it to meet its goals and objectives of leadership among nations and its desire to maintain 
itself as a vital strategic partner to its allies, is being threatened from within. The United States, the beacon 
of democracy, is in trouble. Though the United States possesses a wealth of ideas and creativity, it is 
rapidly losing the technological infrastructure necessary for competitive leadership. If this trajectory is not 
changed soon, the cost in human capital and monetary investment may become more than its population, 
and therefore its political system, can bear. The U.S. political system, based in part on its economic 
growth and stability, which has been the source of the United States’ rise to prominence, may become 
permanently damaged. 
Assuming computing capacity has doubled every 18 months to two years as predicted by Moore’s Law, 
computational power today is approximately 2 billion times what it was when the integrated circuit 
was invented. (Moreover, in the coming years, more advanced computational software, and hardware, 
applicable to quantum computing, may cut the projected rate of doubling computing power in half.) As 
a result, technological advancements have dramatically improved products and services across the total 
spectrum of society. The technological possibilities of today could not have been imagined five years ago, 
let alone 60 years ago. Today’s products and services have completely altered the political, economic, 
and military landscape of the world. But the capital investment needed to establish the technological 
infrastructure necessary to maintain Moore’s Law has also gone up exponentially—capital investment in 
technological infrastructure that cost millions of dollars 60 years ago costs many billions today.
At one time, the United States dominated key products and markets the world over. 
After World War II and into the 1950s and 60s the United States dominated most key strategic products 
and markets, including integrated phone systems, telephones, computers, consumer electronic products 
in general, mass-produced automobiles, ships, and aircraft. The best laboratories that fostered the 
technological advances inherent in these products and associated services, such as Bell Laboratories 
within AT&T and Sarnoff Laboratories within RCA, resided in the United States. Bell Labs contributed 
groundbreaking technological inventions, including data networking, the transistor, cellular telephone 
technology, laser technology, and digital signal processing. Sarnoff Laboratories provided the United 
States with monochrome compatible electronic color television, liquid crystal displays, and thin film 
technologies applicable to television camera technologies and later the development of semiconductors. 
More importantly, as production of products emanating from these inventions became more sophisticated, 
and automated, the manufacturing of the components, as well as the end products, was largely dominated 
by U.S. companies. These manufacturing entities included machine shops, sheet metal shops, and product 
assembly operations, all closely integrated with the manufacturer of the product.
As the technological sophistication of these products and markets increased, they became more and more 
dependent upon the collection, processing, and distribution of information. As a result, the ability to store 
and process information became an area of concentration for all business activity. Information that was 
stored on film, records, tape, punch cards, and other electromechanical devices was being developed and 
produced to support and advance the state of the art of all products.  Many companies benefited from the 
advancement of information storage and processing, including General Electric (GE), IBM, RCA, Motorola, 
Zenith, Sylvania, Kodak, Ampex, AT&T (Western Electric), Ford, Chrysler, General Motors, and a myriad of 
other companies.
Starting in the late 1940s, from Bell Laboratories at AT&T, and then followed up from Intel, and Texas 
Instruments in the late 1950s came the development of the transistor and the integrated circuit. 
Immediately, because of the semiconductor’s ability to facilitate the processing of information, the

Richard Elkus Jr.  |  3
potential performance and sophistication of all products increased in terms of form, fit, and function. 
Moreover, in various ways, they could all be interconnected, as information was now transferable from one 
product to another.
Then, the United States began to lose its competitive position. 
As technology was advancing, the United States, feeling impervious to competition from other nations 
and coupled with the quarterly reporting of financial results, adopted a short-term planning matrix: Stars, 
Cash Cows, and Dogs. Simply stated, you invest in the stars, you milk the cash cows, and you sell off the 
dogs. Quarterly profits and revenue growth became the name of the game. Other nations, particularly 
in Asia (and initially in Japan) saw a way to join in the technological growth of the economic system. 
Concentrating less on short-term profits, they offered to put up the capital and take over production of 
subassemblies and other low-cost, low-margin products that were part of this infrastructure but of low 
profitability to the U.S. industry. One of the key industries they concentrated on was consumer electronics.
As performance improved and the cost of these consumer products and subassemblies from Asia 
(principally Japan) fell, demand for Asian production grew. This led to increasing sophistication in high-
volume manufacturing for parts and assemblies in Asia. As manufacturing expertise and automation 
increased, the cost of establishing a new manufacturing facility also started to grow exponentially, making 
reentry into those manufacturing areas by U.S. companies less desirable or simply too costly. 
But there was another cost to the loss of these Asian manufactured products oriented toward consumer 
electronics. Consumer products rapidly became the largest user of semiconductor devices of any products 
produced at that time. As such, in accordance with Moore’s Law, the market for semiconductors in Asia began 
to support significant Asian investment in the semiconductor industry that enabled them to manufacture 
subassemblies and products that began to exceed the sophistication and performance of U.S. manufacturers.
With advances in information processing, the parts, assemblies, and end-use products became highly 
integrated. For example, the television set, the tape deck, the tape cartridge, and power supply of a video 
cassette recorder (VCR) morphed into a cell phone that became millions of times more powerful, at a 
fraction of the cost, with technological versatility that could not be duplicated by the VCR. As these 
new, highly integrated products grew in popularity and as they became integrated and more versatile, 
Asian competition began to dominate not only the manufacturing of key subassemblies for U.S. end-use 
products, but they also began to compete in the end-use market directly. As Asian manufacturers began 
to control the design and manufacturing of subassemblies, they saw the obvious benefit of integrating 
those subassemblies into the design of the end-use product, enabled largely by using semiconductors. 
The result was almost immediate. These subassembly manufacturers began to take over U.S. markets 
for end use-products as well. Major markets affected included automobiles, VCRs, telephones, cameras, 
televisions, radios, the display industry, and consumer electronics in general. These products, as they grew 
in sophistication, began to become integrated functionally because of the adoption of semiconductors. The 
Japanese automobile industry widely adopted integrated circuits years before the U.S. automobile industry 
and as a result were producing car entertainment systems, automatic wipers, electronic locks, and other 
controls well before they were available in U.S. vehicles.
The result has been catastrophic for the U.S. industry as it lost much of its manufacturing expertise. RCA, 
one of the largest consumer electronic manufactures in the world, was bought by GE and subsequently 
sold to foreign corporations or liquidated. Motorola, once a major U.S. consumer electronics company 
and semiconductor manufacturer, who first invented the cell phone, is a fraction of its former size. After

U.S. Competitiveness: Where Do We Stand? What Do We Do Now?  |  4
its troubled business was split up, the bulk of its consumer electronics operations was sold to Lenovo 
in China, and its semiconductor business was ultimately bought by NXP in Europe. Zenith is gone, and 
its fundamental technology developed for High-Definition Television was sold to LG Corporation in 
South Korea. Sylvania is gone. Kodak, who first invented the digital camera, but decided to stay with 
Kodachrome film because of its huge profitability, went bankrupt. Ampex, who invented video recording, 
went bankrupt. AT&T has been broken up and is a fraction of its original size and reach. Western Electric, 
one of the world’s largest manufacturers of phones and phone systems, is gone. IBM, which dominated the 
PC business that paved the way for Microsoft and the computer business in general, and at one time was 
dominant in semiconductors, nearly went bankrupt. IBM sold its PC business to Lenovo in China, and as 
of today, has had basically no growth for the last 25 years. Bell Labs is gone. Sarnoff Labs is gone. GE, once 
the most valuable U.S manufacturing corporation, is a shadow of its former self.  Apple, like many other 
U.S. manufacturers of consumer electronic devices, purchases a major portion of their integrated circuits 
from the Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC) and assemblies from Foxconn in Taiwan, 
China, and elsewhere in Asia.
As a result of the loss of these domestic manufacturing relationships and therefore general demand 
for U.S. semiconductor products, coupled with the huge capital investments required to remain a 
fabricator of advanced semiconductor devices, U.S. dominance of the fabrication of integrated circuits 
(semiconductors)—devices at the core of today’s technological advancements—is a fraction of its original 
size. The United States once represented over half the market—today, it fabricates less than 12 percent.
For all practical purposes, the United States no longer manufactures displays (which depend on their 
functionality from the use of semiconductors). Beyond just entertainment, displays are fundamental to the 
analysis and utilization of information. 
Japan became formidable in automotive production as it introduced fully automated plants. Ultimately, General 
Motors, after spending 90 billion dollars trying to replicate the automation of Japan’s automobile factories and 
then having to face the financial crisis of 2007-2008, went bankrupt. Chrysler was bought by Fiat.  
And there is one more very important point. As competitive technological infrastructure, originally 
dominated by the U.S. industry, shifted to Japan, and then to other Asian nations, most of it never came 
back to the United States. With some exceptions, the United States has continued to lose portions of its 
technological infrastructure and therefore has had to outsource more and more of those strategic products 
to foreign companies.
As individual products and then markets become integrated, largely with the advancement of information 
processing, so do the businesses that control them. Look at Amazon. It started distributing books over the 
internet; then it took on other products, then it took on the retailing and distribution of almost all other 
products. But that required fast and reliable distribution. This required the development of a major airfreight 
business as well as significant investment in ground transportation. These businesses in turn supported 
and were supported by the internal development of cloud computing, large and sustained development of 
information processing capabilities including payment systems, and international distribution. 
This same broad capability is available to other nations (consider China’s Alibaba) that have a similar 
broad technological infrastructure (and in the case of China, a population four times larger than the 
United States). But an Amazon-like company in a country such as China will have a potentially significant 
advantage. It will represent a nation that is able to develop and manufacture a significant number of the 
products that are bought and sold by these integrated distribution companies, thus broadening its control

Richard Elkus Jr.  |  5
over the supply chain. Control of both manufacturing and distribution of a massive array of products and 
services in this manner could lead a company such as Alibaba to become a competitive juggernaut. 
And there is another factor to consider. The integration of these products and markets as information 
processing becomes more sophisticated gives companies (friendly and unfriendly) the ability to connect 
their systems with others, whether that connection is wanted or not. In other words, advancements in 
technological infrastructure will enable individuals, companies, and nations to influence others (both as 
partners and enemies) in ways never considered before.
What’s the answer?
There is no simple way to control the advancement of technology and the effects it has on society. But one 
thing is certain: if a nation such as the United States does not understand the problem and therefore comes 
up with solutions that do not address the fundamental issues associated with a declining technological 
infrastructure, its future is going to be bleak at best. The technological infrastructure of the United States 
must be competitively equal if not superior to all other nations. And the United States certainly should 
avoid dependence on a supply chain that may be controlled by a potentially unfriendly competitor.
Right now, Taiwan is a flashpoint between the United States and China. That territory controls, at very 
advanced levels, technological infrastructure that is fundamental to the competitiveness of the United 
States and China. As this paper is being written, both nations want to limit the industrial base of Taiwan 
from providing the other nation with a significant competitive advantage: whether it be political, 
economic, or military. The danger is that if either nation thinks the other’s aggressive actions will give 
the aggressor a major technological advantage, there will be a strong motivation to limit or eliminate that 
advantage. This could cause a miscalculation by either party in their desire to keep the playing field level. 
And that could lead to a military conflict.
Today, an interruption in the relationship between China and Taiwan would prove to be more difficult and 
strategically significant for China than a break in relations between Taiwan and the United States would 
be for the United States. Of course, a loss of access to Taiwan’s technological infrastructure could still 
pose a major problem for the United States. Taiwan provides vital semiconductor products and assemblies 
for manufacturers of cell phones and a myriad of other consumer electronics no longer produced in the 
United States. Taiwan is a very large manufacturer of PCs, televisions, consumer electronics in general, and 
other communication equipment. Without Taiwan, Apple, AMD, Qualcomm, Invidia, Texas Instruments, 
and HP would be in trouble, as would Intel, to an extent, with implications for their respective customers. 
TSMC, a bulwark of the Taiwanese economy and the largest foundry for semiconductors in the world, 
currently has the most advanced fabrication process. So, losing Taiwan and its key manufacturers would 
be a very severe blow to the U.S. industry. If Taiwan were, for whatever reason, unable to supply products 
to both the United States and China, China would suffer the most. China is behind the United States 
in semiconductor technology, software technology, and the production of advanced semiconductor 
manufacturing equipment. On the other hand, as China’s technological infrastructure advances, especially 
based on its current relationship with Taiwan, China will become less and less dependent on direct support 
from Taiwan (one of China’s principal objectives). In time, China will have less need for companies such 
as TSMC as it transfers, builds, or in some way controls a similar technological infrastructure on the 
mainland. This change will not favor the United States. Under this scenario, Taiwan will become more 
important to the United States than to China, providing China with significant additional leverage over a 
major piece of U.S. technological infrastructure.

U.S. Competitiveness: Where Do We Stand? What Do We Do Now?  |  6
The United States does have a significant competitive lead in software today. But software does not exist 
in a vacuum. Semiconductors, computers, displays, phones, and other communications hardware are 
essential if software is to have value. The United States also leads in the manufacturing of semiconductor 
fabrication equipment. This gives the United States an edge as an enabler in the construction of 
semiconductor fabrication facilities. But it is difficult to control the utilization of that equipment when it is 
used to produce semiconductors manufactured by others in foreign fabrication facilities that may be more 
advanced than U.S. ones. All things considered, the United States must be able to deliver technologically 
competitive products and services without the fear of a major disruption in its supply chain.
Recapitalizing the U.S. industrial base and getting back into the businesses that have been lost is very 
important and ultimately essential. But the time it will take, and the amount of capital that will be required 
to rebuild that technological infrastructure may not overcome the damage that will occur if the supply chain 
that the United States depends on today is interrupted or broken. To replace, by itself, the technological 
infrastructure that the United States has lost will cost hundreds of billions of dollars, require the re-creation 
of a massive and highly trained labor force, and invite huge execution risks. At the same time, computational 
capability is doubling every two years, as is the technological infrastructure of the competition.
The United States needs to immediately fortify and diversify its supply chain that supports the strategic 
technological infrastructure it has lost. The expansion and diversification of its current supply chain 
must include nations truly allied with the United States and reasonably free from potential impediments 
that could significantly damage the alliance. It must also be able to provide the United States with 
strategic end-use products and components produced by manufacturers that have the research capability 
to keep their technological infrastructure current. Those manufacturers must possess the production 
capacity to meet the demands of the United States. The main purpose of this strategy of supply chain 
diversification is to enable the United States to rapidly reduce its dependence on Taiwan.
The United States needs to tap into, where possible, a resource base that already exists and which can 
provide immediate results. It is essential that the United States keeps in mind the precepts of Moore’s 
Law. In two years, computing power may be twice as powerful as today. Moreover, a single state-of-the-art 
semiconductor fabrication facility can cost as much as $30 billion. And this does not include the research 
investment necessary to build it or keep it current. (A research capability of this magnitude depends upon 
trained and available human resources that may or may not be available in time.) 
There are two nations in Asia that can be very helpful in this situation: South Korea and Japan. Both depend 
upon the United States as a strategic partner and understand the competitive problem that each of the 
three nations faces. The United States needs to seek out and develop partnerships with other nations that 
possess a technological infrastructure that offers the United States the opportunity to reduce its dependence 
on Taiwan in a relatively short period of time. Much of the technological infrastructure, including the 
manufacture of semiconductors (principally in South Korea), exists in South Korea and Japan and is 
competitive in today’s market. Both South Korea and Japan have technological resources and production 
that can replicate what the United States has lost in its technological infrastructure. A strategic alliance with 
these two countries can offer an alternative supply chain that reduces U.S. dependence on Taiwan.
By developing these partnerships for strategic reasons rather than a simple economic rationale, the United 
States can reduce Taiwan’s significance as a flashpoint with China without forcing or opening the door to a 
major confrontation.
This should buy the United States time to reinforce its strategic industrial base. The goal of reestablishing 
U.S. technological infrastructure is essential to the maintenance of its competitiveness as well as its ability

Richard Elkus Jr.  |  7
to innovate and commercialize state-of-the-art products and markets. This level of competitiveness is as 
important for U.S. allies as it is to itself.
There are many tax changes, funding incentives, and laws that can encourage U.S. reinvestment in the 
United States. The short-term concept of stars, cash cows, and dogs must end. But all of this takes time, 
requires very large financial and human resource investments, and carries significant execution risk. 
Therefore, the United States must diversify, expand, and fortify its strategic supply chain by supporting 
alternative foreign procurement pathways and alliances now.
But beware: Both Japan and South Korea have been expanding their trade and investments with China 
for some time. This obviously has increased the leverage that China has over these countries. Hence it 
is of vital importance that the recommended trade negotiations be part of a well-thought-out series of 
discussions that include both the respective governments involved as well as related corporate leadership. 
These negotiations should be a part of a strategic plan designed to further the political as well as economic 
goals and objectives of the United States, Japan, and South Korea, with the expressed purpose of reducing 
dependence on Taiwan as well as strengthening the competitive position of the alliance.  
Richard Elkus Jr. is an international councillor with the Center for Strategic and International Studies in 
Washington, D.C and a founder and former director of KLA-Tencor.
This report is made possible by general support to CSIS. No direct sponsorship contributed to this report. 
This report is produced by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), a private, tax-
exempt institution focusing on international public policy issues. Its research is nonpartisan and 
nonpropiretary. CSIS does not take specifc policy positions. Accordingly, all views, positions, and 
conclusions expressed in this publication should be understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2021 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
