
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Issue Br ief
Oct ober 2022
Banned in D.C.
Ex amining Go v er nment
Appr oac hes t o F or eign
T ec hnology Thr eats
Aut hor s
Jac k Cor r igan
Sergio F ont anez
Mic hael Kr atsios

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

1
Executive Summary
For nearly a decade, U.S. national security leaders have warned that information and
communications technology and services (ICTS) produced by Huawei, ZTE, and other
Chinese companies may serve as conduits for government espionage and other
nefarious activities. In response, policymakers have sought to purge this untrustworthy
technology from U.S. supply chains.
Over the last five years, the federal government has enacted a series of measures
regulating the purchase of foreign ICTS on the grounds of national security, including:
• Section 889 of the 2019 National Defense Authorization Act, which prohibited
federal agencies from using equipment and services from five Chinese tech
companies and working with contractors that use covered equipment.
• Title 2 of the SECURE Technology Act, which created a federal council to
analyze supply chain security threats and recommended orders to remove or
exclude certain technologies from federal networks.
• The ICTS rule, which allows the U.S. Department of Commerce to block public
and private procurement and use of certain foreign ICTS.
• The Secure and Trusted Communications Networks Act, which permitted the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to restrict the purchase of certain
ICTS using federal funds.
These measures aimed to provide federal policymakers with the authorities to identify
and remove untrustworthy ICTS from critical federal networks and—where possible
and appropriate—from critical networks owned and operated by state, local, and
private sector entities. However, these authorities are still relatively new, and it
remains to be seen whether they will be effectively scoped and implemented.
Defending U.S. networks against untrustworthy foreign ICTS also requires buy-in from
state and local policymakers, but to date, they have largely not revised their
procurement laws to address those threats. Only five states—Florida, Georgia,
Louisiana, Texas, and Vermont—have enacted measures to limit the procurement of
foreign ICTS on national security grounds, and some of these existing policies contain
loopholes that would allow untrustworthy technology to slip into government
networks. All the while, public officials have continued integrating untrustworthy
technologies into schools, hospitals, prisons, public transit systems, and government
offices around the country. Our analysis of public government procurement records
provided by GovSpend found that at least 1,681 state and local entities purchased

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

2
equipment and services prohibited at the federal level under Section 889 between
2015 and 2021.
Keeping untrustworthy foreign technology out of government networks requires a
more harmonized effort across all levels of government. Given its resources and
intelligence capabilities, the federal government must spearhead this effort. Under the
SECURE Technology Act, government leaders can tailor federal procurement
prohibitions for different environments and applications. By providing the Commerce
Department with the funds and staff to implement the ICTS rule—through a sanctions-
based model—they can work to keep untrustworthy technology out of state, local, and
critical private networks. Using these two authorities, policymakers can maintain
effective procurement prohibitions that will remain current with the changing threat
landscape. FCC regulators can further protect U.S. networks by blocking authorizations
of untrustworthy technology.
Given their resource constraints and limited mandate, state and local governments
should not be expected to independently grapple with the national security
implications of foreign ICTS. However, by adhering to federal rules on foreign ICTS
procurement, state and local governments can protect their digital infrastructure and
keep procurement practices up to date without constant regulatory, administrative, or
legislative interventions. This may entail following mandatory ICTS rule restrictions or,
if the rule is not implemented effectively, enacting policies that prevent the use of ICTS
prohibited by federal agencies. Federal policymakers can further enable state and local
governments to address foreign technology threats by creating a master list of foreign
ICTS covered by procurement prohibitions, strengthening existing information sharing
channels, and increasing funding for rip and replace programs.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

3
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ 1
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................... 4
Defining Foreign Technology Threats .............................................................................................. 7
Challenges of Procurement Prohibitions......................................................................................... 9
Federal Policies..................................................................................................................................... 11
Section 889........................................................................................................................................ 11
Title 2 of the SECURE Technology Act .................................................................................... 13
The ICTS Rule ................................................................................................................................... 14
FCC Measures ................................................................................................................................... 15
Summary of Federal Policies ....................................................................................................... 16
State Policies ......................................................................................................................................... 18
Who’s Buying What? ..................................................................................................................... 19
State Procurement Prohibitions .................................................................................................. 24
Louisiana ........................................................................................................................................ 26
Texas ............................................................................................................................................... 26
Georgia ........................................................................................................................................... 27
Vermont.......................................................................................................................................... 27
Florida ............................................................................................................................................. 28
Summary of State Policies ............................................................................................................ 29
Policy Recommendations .................................................................................................................. 31
Effectively Implement the ICTS Rule ........................................................................................ 31
 Block FCC Equipment Authorizations for Covered Entities ............................................... 33
Align State and Local Procurement Policies with Federal Guidance.............................. 33
Create and Share a Master List of Untrustworthy Foreign ICTS ...................................... 34
Support Rip and Replace Programs .......................................................................................... 35
Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................. 37
Authors .................................................................................................................................................... 39
Acknowledgments............................................................................................................................... 39
Appendix A. Data Tables .................................................................................................................. 40
Appendix B. GovSpend Data Background and Methodology ............................................... 43
Endnotes ................................................................................................................................................. 44

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

4
Introduction
On the morning of December 1, 2018, Meng Wanzhou stepped off a plane at
Vancouver International Airport. She expected a short layover before catching a flight
to Mexico City, but before making the transfer, Meng was intercepted by Canadian
border security officers. After hours of questioning, she was officially apprehended
under a U.S. warrant. Meng, the chief financial officer of the Chinese
telecommunications giant Huawei Technologies, would spend the next 33 months
under house arrest facing extradition to the United States.1 Though she was ostensibly
arrested on charges of financial fraud, the incident came in the midst of the U.S.
government’s intensifying pressure on Huawei, whose CEO and founder Ren Zhengfei
also happened to be Meng’s father.
For years, policymakers had expressed concerns that, given the Chinese government’s
broad control over commercial entities, Chinese technology companies could pose
significant national security risks. In 2012, the U.S. House of Representatives
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence warned that industry giants like Huawei
and ZTE provided Chinese intelligence apparatus “a wealth of opportunities . . . to
insert malicious hardware or software implants into critical telecommunications
components and systems.”2 This apprehension was reinforced in subsequent years as
the Chinese government enacted a series of measures to strengthen the ties between
the private sector and the state. The efforts culminated in the 2017 National
Intelligence Law, which mandated that “any organization or citizen shall support,
assist, and cooperate with state intelligence work according to law.”3
By the time of Meng’s arrest, fears about the security threats posed by Chinese ICTS
had reached a fever pitch. In late 2017, Congress barred the U.S. Department of
Defense (DOD) from using information and communications technology and services
(ICTS) provided by Huawei and ZTE in certain critical systems, including those involved
in missile defense and nuclear command and control.4 FBI Director Christopher Wray
warned lawmakers in 2018 that Huawei and ZTE provided the Chinese Communist
Party (CCP) with “the capacity to exert pressure or control over our
telecommunications infrastructure . . . the capacity to maliciously modify or steal
information, and . . . the capacity to conduct industrial espionage.”5 Soon after, the DOD
pulled Huawei and ZTE mobile phones and modems from stores on military bases, and
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) issued a proposal to cut off funding to
domestic telecom providers that use equipment and services from companies that
“pos[e] a national security threat,” citing Huawei and ZTE.6

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

5
These measures signaled a growing awareness among U.S. leaders that foreign
governments could weaponize the global technology supply chain, and China’s central
position in that network offered the CCP a dangerous amount of leverage.7 At the time,
Huawei was the world’s top provider of telecommunications equipment and second
largest smartphone producer.8 The global surveillance industry was—and still is—
dominated by a pair of Chinese firms, Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Technology and
Dahua Technology.9 Chinese companies also held major positions in the markets for
drones, mobile radios, and other technologies.
For U.S. national security leaders, the broad reach of these firms—and their integration
into the networks of the United States and its allies—presented major national security
and economic threats. If the CCP wanted to use the Chinese tech industry as a conduit
for espionage and other nefarious activities, it could potentially gain access to all these
global networks. Even if firms were not weaponized in this way, their growing market
power threatens the global dominance of competitors in the United States and U.S.-
allied countries. Some Chinese firms, like Huawei, commanded markets with no viable
U.S. competitors in the first place. China’s efforts to increase its global economic
competitiveness were paying off, and U.S. leaders feared the country could fall behind
in 5G, artificial intelligence, and other emerging industries.
In light of these threats, U.S. policymakers sought to purge the supply chain of
equipment from certain foreign technology companies. Doing so required the creation
of a new regulatory regime. While the government had systems for regulating the
export of goods and services as well as foreign investment in the United States, there
was no mechanism for controlling inbound goods and services.
In the subsequent years, policymakers implemented a series of measures to prevent
compromised technology from entering U.S. networks, including:
• Section 889 of the 2019 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA), which
prohibited federal agencies from using equipment and services from five
Chinese tech companies and working with contractors that use covered
equipment.10
• Title 2 of the SECURE Technology Act, which created a federal council to
analyze supply chain security threats and recommended orders to remove or
exclude certain technologies from federal networks.11
• The ICTS rule, which gave the U.S. Department of Commerce broad authority to
review and block purchases of certain equipment and services across the public
and private sector.12

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

6
• The Secure and Trusted Communications Networks Act, which prohibited FCC
funds from being used to buy certain foreign ICTS and created a program to
fund the replacement of those technologies.13
Collectively, these measures are intended to form a shield that protects the United
States against the threats posed by covered ICTS.* While these policies overlap and
intersect in different cases, each serves a distinct purpose, enabling national security
leaders to tailor procurement prohibitions to meet the needs of different types of
organizations.
However, the federal government cannot unilaterally defend U.S. networks against
foreign technology threats. A wide variety of public services and critical infrastructure
systems are managed by state and local governments, and thus far, these entities have
generally not revised their procurement laws to address those threats.† Only a handful
of states have restricted purchases of foreign technologies that pose security threats.
Generally, these existing measures are poorly targeted, and some contain loopholes
that would allow covered ICTS to slip into government networks. Procurement records
show that in recent years thousands of state and local entities have deployed covered
ICTS in schools, hospitals, prisons, public transit systems, and government offices
around the country. If the ultimate goal is to keep untrustworthy foreign technology
out of U.S. networks (particularly those associated with government agencies and
critical infrastructure), a more harmonized and comprehensive framework is needed
across every level of government, with federal policymakers leading the way.
In this brief, we begin with a discussion of the potential threats posed by foreign
technology and the challenges of removing covered ICTS from government supply
chains. We then survey the landscape of federal and state regulations around foreign
technology procurement, as well as the extent to which covered ICTS has made its
way into state and local government networks. We conclude with five
recommendations for constructing a more cohesive framework for defending U.S.
networks against foreign technology threats.

* Throughout this paper, the phrase “covered ICTS” refers to technology products and services from
foreign companies that federal agencies and other U.S. entities are restricted from buying.

† Many critical infrastructure systems are also owned and operated by private entities, and keeping
untrustworthy foreign ICTS out of these systems is also critical to national security. Today, federal
agencies work closely with these operators to manage supply chain risks. For more, see: “Critical
Infrastructure Sectors,” U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, accessed October 2022,
https://www.cisa.gov/critical-infrastructure-sectors.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

7
Defining Foreign Technology Threats
Understanding the specific risks posed by foreign ICTS is critical to effectively
assessing government responses to those threats. For the purposes of this brief, we
can think of these threats as falling into three broad categories: backdoors, human
vulnerabilities, and economic risks.
To date, most proponents of foreign ICTS procurement bans have justified their
position on the grounds that covered technologies could contain secret backdoors, or
vulnerabilities that are deliberately baked into the technologies. These hidden bugs
can be exploited by adversaries to spy, disrupt, or conduct other nefarious activities on
users’ networks. In recent years, U.S. policymakers emphasized the threat of potential
backdoors to garner support for their crackdown on Chinese technology companies like
Huawei. Under China’s national security regulations, they argued, the CCP could order
private firms to embed backdoors in their products, turning them into conduits for
government espionage. As such, federal agencies needed to eliminate these
technologies from their supply chains.
Evidence suggests that the CCP has indeed exploited Chinese ICTS to conduct
surveillance abroad. Huawei equipment was implicated in a years-long espionage
operation that involved Chinese spies exfiltrating data from the African Union
headquarters, as well as efforts to restrict access to internet content in dozens of
countries.14 FBI investigators also found that Huawei equipment installed near U.S.
military bases could be used to disrupt or intercept critical DOD communications, and
security researchers have also uncovered vulnerabilities in ICTS manufactured by
Huawei, Hikvision, and other foreign companies.15 However, it is unclear whether those
vulnerabilities represent backdoors installed at the government's behest or run-of-the-
mill software bugs that bad actors have exploited. No technology is perfectly secure,
and Chinese hackers have repeatedly proven their ability to compromise government
networks using existing vulnerabilities.16 These more conventional breaches are in
many cases easier to orchestrate than supply chain attacks involving backdoors, and
they carry fewer potential economic costs as well.*
Still, foreign technologies can pose other hazards, such as human vulnerabilities. Most
hardware and software must be serviced over the course of its life cycle, and the
technicians who perform replacements, upgrades, and other maintenance may find

* The global backlash that firms would face if they were discovered building backdoors into products
might disincentivize them—and their national governments—from pursuing this path.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

8
themselves in positions with broad access to users’ networks. Should those individuals
be compromised by a foreign adversary, they could potentially install malware,
exfiltrate data, or conduct other nefarious activities on their behalf. Without the proper
safeguards in place, any organization that uses foreign ICTS is exposed to these
operational security risks.
In the international context, foreign technologies can also pose economic risks.
Countries benefit both economically and geopolitically when their domestic companies
become more globally competitive. The Chinese government has long viewed
economic security as a critical component of national security, using industrial policy
and other mechanisms to position domestic companies at key nodes in the global
supply chain.17 As Chinese companies gain market share, the United States and its
allies may find themselves relying on their biggest geopolitical competitor for access to
key technologies.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

9
Challenges of Procurement Prohibitions
Purging a particular product from any supply chain is a difficult feat. The global
technology market is vast, complex, and opaque, which makes it exceedingly difficult
for governments to understand the provenance of the products they purchase.
The modern ICTS supply chain spans tens of thousands of companies scattered across
the globe, and the links between these firms are not always clear. Equipment
manufactured by one firm may contain components sourced from many different
suppliers, and it might be sold under the brand name of yet another company.
For instance, cameras manufactured by Dahua Technology, the Chinese surveillance
company, are sold under the Dahua brand and also under the names of subsidiaries
like Canada-based Lorex. Dahua also serves as the “original equipment manufacturer”
for dozens of other vendors, selling them products that are then repackaged and sold
under the purchaser’s brand.
These types of arrangements—which are common across the tech industry—make it
difficult for governments, private companies, and other consumers to determine
exactly whose equipment and services they are buying.18 Furthermore, much of the
technology that ends up on government networks is purchased through third-party
vendors and integrators, adding yet another layer of complexity to the supply chain.
Some distributors have continued doing business with Chinese companies that federal
leaders have identified as national security risks, which makes weeding their products
out of government supply chains harder still.19
Even if they understand their supply chains, government agencies face other
challenges when attempting to purge covered ICTS from their networks.
One major obstacle is that procurement bans can increase the cost of acquiring
equipment. Chinese ICTS is generally cheaper than equivalent products from non-
Chinese companies, making it an appealing option for cash-strapped government
agencies.20 A basic Hikvision dome camera retails for about $90, while similar cameras
made by firms in Canada, Japan, and South Korea sell for more than double the price.21
Therefore, prohibiting the use of this cheaper Chinese equipment and forcing
government agencies to buy costlier but trustworthy alternatives drives up IT
expenses. Costs are even higher if agencies are required to rip and replace the covered
ICTS that already resides in their networks.22

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

10
These challenges are compounded by the lack of public information on the threats
posed by foreign technology. Though national security leaders frequently discuss the
general risks posed by equipment from Huawei and other companies, they rarely offer
details on specific vulnerabilities or breaches attributed to particular products.* Given
this lack of clarity, state and local policymakers may hesitate to devote energy,
resources, and political capital to removing untrustworthy tech.
Many government entities also lack the in-house technical expertise and procedures to
understand and address such threats in the first place, and those that do may prioritize
addressing immediate threats like ransomware over the more abstract risks posed by
foreign ICTS.23 We will discuss in a later section how government agencies that lack
this expertise are more likely to make procurement decisions based primarily on cost
rather than security.
Lastly, depending on their structure, procurement bans can disincentivize vendors from
doing business with government agencies. For instance, Section 889 prohibits federal
agencies from awarding contracts to contractors that use covered ICTS even if that
equipment is not involved in performing the contract. Thus, the measure effectively
acts as a procurement prohibition for both federal agencies and federal contractors.
Given the costs of following this regulation, companies that do not already sell to the
federal government may be unwilling or unable to do so.
Despite these challenges, it is critical that governments at all levels work to eliminate
untrustworthy technologies from their supply chains. In the following sections, we will
discuss the steps that the federal government has taken to secure the ICTS supply
chain, the landscape of state-level procurement bans, and the extent to which state
and local governments have introduced untrustworthy ICTS into their networks.

* Backdoors have indeed been uncovered in products manufactured by Huawei, ZTE, Hikvision, and other
companies, but it remains unclear whether those vulnerabilities were exploited by the Chinese
government, at least publicly. For more, see: “Hikvision Backdoor Exploit,” IPVM, September 3, 2017,
https://ipvm.com/reports/hik-exploit; Bojan Pancevski, “U.S. Officials Say Huawei Can Covertly Access
Telecom Networks,” The Wall Street Journal, February 12, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-
officials-say-huawei-can-covertly-access-telecom-networks-11581452256; Michael Lee, “Backdoor
Found in ZTE Android Phone, ZDN.net, May 14, 2012, https://www.zdnet.com/article/backdoor-found-
in-zte-android-phones/.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

11
Federal Policies
In recent years, the federal government has attempted to build a legal bulwark to keep
untrustworthy foreign technology out of U.S. supply chains. This section examines four
major policies and programs within this new regulatory regime. The first is Section 889
of the 2019 NDAA, which prohibits federal agencies from using equipment and
services provided by five Chinese tech companies and working with contractors that
used covered equipment. The second is Title 2 of the SECURE Technology Act, which
created a federal council to analyze supply chain security threats and recommend the
removal or exclusion of certain technologies. The third is the ICTS rule, which allows
the Commerce Department to review and block purchases of certain equipment and
services across the public and private sector.24 The fourth is the Secure and Trusted
Communications Networks Act, which prohibited FCC funds from being used to buy
certain foreign ICTS. This section also briefly touches on other recent efforts by the
FCC to block untrustworthy foreign technology from entering the U.S. market.
Section 889
Section 889 of the 2019 NDAA is the first and most well-known regulation targeting
foreign ICTS on the grounds of national security. Enacted in August 2018, the law bars
federal agencies from procuring or otherwise using equipment and services provided
by five named Chinese companies: Huawei, ZTE, Hikvision, Dahua, and Hytera. Section
889 also forbids federal agencies from working with contractors that use ICTS from
those five firms and prohibits them from allocating grants or loans for the purchase of
such equipment.*
While the statute’s scope is relatively limited, its potential impact is enormous. The
federal government purchases more than $100 billion worth of information technology
from thousands of companies every year.25 Disentangling even a single company from
that expansive supply chain—not to mention five—is a considerable feat, especially
when those companies dominate their respective niches of the tech sector.26

* The 2018 NDAA included a similar provision (Section 1634) prohibiting federal agencies from
purchasing or otherwise using products or services provided by Kaspersky Lab, a Russian cybersecurity
firm. For more information, see: National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018, Pub. L. No.
115-91, 131 Stat. 1283 (2017).

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

12
However, despite its ambitious goals, Section 889 contains some major flaws. One
shortcoming is that the law does not apply retroactively. Agencies are thus allowed to
continue using covered ICTS that they purchased before the law went into effect,
which may undermine the security of their networks.27 Another issue is the measure’s
rigidity. While policymakers authorized national security leaders to add new entities to
the ban, they did not create any mechanism for taking entities off the list. This
effectively means that barring an act of Congress, covered organizations are
permanently excluded from the federal market, regardless of changes in the threat
landscape.28
Perhaps more importantly, however, the federal government may lack the capacity to
ensure contractors are following Section 889. Currently, contractors are responsible
for self-certifying that their products and internal networks do not contain covered
ICTS. 29 As with other federal acquisition regulations, contractors that violate Section
889 may face penalties, debarment, or prosecution. However, given the complexity of
global supply chains and the scope of the measure, even contractors acting in good
faith might unknowingly break the rule by including covered ICTS in their products or
using it in their own systems. Additionally, inspecting the IT infrastructure—equipment,
services, and components—of every contractor that does business with the federal
government would require a staggering level of resources, making it difficult for
agencies to conduct effective oversight.
Indeed, implementing Section 889 has already proven to be a challenge. Some
contractors have, for instance, required extra time to sever ties with covered Chinese
tech companies.30 There have also been instances when covered ICTS has found its
way onto federal networks. Multiple federal departments and agencies, including the
U.S. Army, U.S. Air Force, and the Drug Enforcement Administration, have purchased
technologies covered by Section 889 after the law went into effect.31 In some cases,
the purchases were reportedly made through the GSA Advantage portal, an
ecommerce platform where agencies can buy products that have been vetted by the
General Services Administration. These violations of Section 889 came to light through
investigations by journalists and industry watchers, not public disclosures by the
federal government.
Even without these flaws, Section 889 alone would not be an optimal framework for
addressing foreign technology threats. Different federal agencies have different risk
tolerances. Certain foreign ICTS might be deemed unsafe for all government use, but
others might be considered dangerous for some use cases but safe for others. The one-
size-fits-all approach of Section 889 cannot accommodate these nuances. The federal

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

13
government needs a more customizable and dynamic strategy to address foreign
technology threats.
Title 2 of the SECURE Technology Act
The SECURE Technology Act, passed in December 2018, laid the groundwork for a
more nuanced and nimble approach.32
Title 2 of the law permitted federal agencies to withhold contracts from vendors that
present supply chain security risks.33 Agencies are required to explain the reasoning
behind their decisions and give the providers in question an opportunity to respond,
removing any ambiguity about the threats a product poses and fending off potential
legal challenges. Armed with this authority, agencies have the freedom to make
procurement decisions based on their own levels of risk tolerance.
The law also established an interagency body to act as a clearinghouse for information
on untrustworthy ICTS and coordinate efforts to eliminate them from government
networks. This organization, called the Federal Acquisition Security Council (FASC),
has two primary duties.34 The first is to gather and share information related to supply
chain security risks with federal agencies and other organizations across the public and
private sectors.* This may include information from a variety of sources, including the
risk assessments and other intelligence that agencies have used to justify procurement
prohibitions.
The council’s second responsibility is to evaluate the risks posed by particular
technologies and recommend actions to address them. Those recommendations may
come in the form of exclusion orders (bans on future procurements of specific ICTS or
from specific manufacturers) or removal orders (directives to purge networks of specific
existing ICTS). Like individual agencies, the FASC must explain the reasoning behind
its recommendations and give the providers in question an opportunity to respond.35
Those recommendations are then reviewed by the director of national intelligence and
secretaries of defense and homeland security, who then decide whether to issue
binding removal or exclusion orders to federal agencies.36 These orders would build off
the existing Section 889 regime and give the government more flexibility to target
specific applications of foreign ICTS rather than relying on blanket bans.

* The ICT Supply Chain Risk Management Task Force, housed within the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), is responsible for running information sharing efforts on behalf of
the FASC.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

14
With its authorities finalized in August 2021 and policymakers still revising its
procedures behind the scene, the FASC is just getting off the ground. In the years
ahead, the council has the potential to play a central role in addressing foreign
technology threats at the federal level. It can ensure that threats to intelligence are
quickly shared across the government and broader national security community, and
when necessary, push for government-wide action to eliminate untrustworthy ICTS. As
we will discuss in a later section, it may also have a role to play in helping state and
local governments restrict their use of untrustworthy foreign ICTS.
The ICTS Rule
Similar to the FASC, the ICTS rule gives the federal government—specifically the
Commerce Department—the ability to restrict the purchase and use of ICTS provided
by untrustworthy foreign entities. However, the authorities granted under the ICTS rule
extend not just to federal agencies but to every entity under U.S. jurisdiction.
The rule, which traces its roots to an executive order signed in May 2019, grants the
Commerce Department the authority to review ICTS transactions involving entities
linked to “foreign adversar[ies]” and block any transaction that it deems as a national
security threat.37 The Biden administration is still working out the specifics of the
measure, but an interim version published in January 2021 suggests the rule could
have an expansive scope. As it stands, the department will have jurisdiction over all
transactions between U.S. persons (individuals, businesses, governments, etc.) and
foreign entities that involve six types of ICTS: critical infrastructure, networking
systems, widely-used personal data hosting systems, widely-used digital applications,
widely-used surveillance and monitoring systems, or emerging technology (e.g.,
artificial intelligence, quantum computing, autonomous systems).
Under the rule, the Commerce Department can block or unwind any transactions that
involve a “foreign adversary” and “pose an undue or unacceptable risk” to national
security. As of this writing, the measure explicitly names China, Cuba, Iran, North
Korea, Russia, and Venezuela as foreign adversaries.
The ICTS rule represents a major expansion of the federal government’s jurisdiction
over the private sector. Federal agencies already have the ability to intervene in foreign
business activities through sanctions, export controls, and investment screenings, but
these authorities generally do not cover U.S. purchases of foreign products and

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

15
services.* Additionally, the scale and scope of these authorities are relatively limited.
The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, which reviews foreign
investments in U.S. companies for national security threats, processed an average of
152 cases each year between 2008 and 2020.38 By contrast, under the ICTS rule, the
Commerce Department would be expected to review potentially thousands—if not
tens of thousands—of transactions each day.39
The sheer magnitude of the ICTS rule creates challenges for both the department that
enforces it and the businesses that fall under its purview. Performing oversight at this
scale will require substantial resources. The Bureau of Industry and Security, the
agency within the Commerce Department responsible for enforcing the ICTS rule,
currently has 16 positions and about $4.7 million devoted to the program.40 BIS asked
lawmakers for an additional 114 positions and $36.2 million in its 2023 budget
request, but it is still unclear whether the department will get sufficient support from
Congress.
For the private sector, the rule also introduces new uncertainties into the messy
process of ICTS procurement. Keeping pace with rapid technological change is already
a challenge for businesses, and under the rule, they risk having IT projects stalled or
blocked altogether by federal regulators. The Commerce Department is currently
exploring a licensing framework that would let businesses have transactions pre-
approved, but the details of that process have not yet been finalized. Later in this brief,
we discuss how implementing a sanctions-based framework, rather than relying on
licenses, would maximize the rule's effectiveness and minimize the costs of
compliance.
FCC Measures
The FCC also has a handful of policy levers at its disposal to keep untrustworthy
foreign ICTS out of U.S. networks.

* Though it is not their primary goal, many of the sanctions administered by the U.S. Department of the
Treasury effectively function as procurement prohibitions. When a person or organization is classified as
a “specially designated national” (SDN), all U.S. persons—individuals, companies, governments—are
forbidden from conducting business with them, which includes purchasing their products. The SDN list
currently includes 155 Chinese entities, but none of the Section 889 firms.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

16
Under the 2020 Secure and Trusted Communications Networks Act, the FCC is
required to maintain a list of vendors that “pose an unacceptable risk to the national
security of the United States, and recipients of FCC funds are forbidden from
purchasing ICTS provided by those firms.”41 As of this writing, the commission’s
“covered list” includes nine Chinese firms—the five Section 889 companies, China
Mobile International USA, China Telecom Americas Corp., Pacific Networks Corp, and
China Unicom (Americas) Operations Ltd.—as well as the Russian cybersecurity firm
Kaspersky Lab.42 Hundreds of public and private entities receive subsidies from the
commission each year. Barring those organizations from purchasing compromised ICTS
could go a long way to securing the country’s communications infrastructure.
The law also required the FCC to create a program to assist small service providers in
replacing covered ICTS that already reside in their networks.43 In 2020, Congress
allocated about $1.9 billion to the Secure and Trusted Communications Networks
Reimbursement Program, which would initially focus on “ripping and replacing”
equipment from Huawei and ZTE. However, the effort has proven to be far more
expensive, with the first wave of applicants asking for more than $5.6 billion in
reimbursements.44 It remains unclear whether the program will receive additional
funds from Congress or be expanded to cover replacements of ICTS from other
covered companies.45 As we will discuss in a later section, increasing federal support
for similar rip and replace programs will be crucial for eliminating potentially
untrustworthy technologies from government supply chains.
FCC commissioners are also currently considering using the agency’s equipment
authorization process to curtail the use of certain foreign technologies.46 Under current
laws, almost all products capable of emitting a radio signal—cell phones, Bluetooth
devices, telecommunications equipment, etc.—must receive FCC authorization before
they can be sold in the United States. In June 2021, the commission requested public
comments on a proposal to prohibit future authorizations of ICTS produced by
companies on the FCC covered list.47 The fate of the rule remains to be seen—as of this
writing, commissioners have yet to put the measure to a vote. Should it be approved,
the commission would effectively make it illegal to import, sell, and use most (if not
all) new products manufactured by Huawei, ZTE, Hikvision, and the seven other
covered companies within U.S. borders.
Summary of Federal Policies
Over the last five years, federal policymakers have steadily laid the groundwork for an
effective defense against foreign technology threats. The SECURE Technology Act

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

17
created an ecosystem for sharing information on untrustworthy ICTS, empowered
agencies to issue tailored procurement prohibitions, and established a process for
scaling those prohibitions across the government when necessary. The ICTS rule
enabled federal policymakers to lead nationwide crack downs on foreign technology
threats. The FCC’s covered list added an additional level of security to the U.S.
telecommunications grid, and the commission’s rip and replace program helps
organizations plug the existing vulnerabilities in their networks. Despite its flaws,
Section 889 set a precedent for pursuing government-wide procurement prohibitions.
The landscape of federal procurement prohibitions is complex, with policies and
programs overlapping and intersecting. However, each serves a distinct purpose,
enabling national security leaders to tailor procurement prohibitions to meet the needs
of different types of organizations. To be sure, these authorities are still relatively new,
and it is critical that each measure is properly scoped and implemented. Policymakers
have the authority to crack down on foreign technology threats, and now they must
wield that power effectively. We offer recommendations for strengthening federal
supply chain security efforts later in the report.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

18
State Policies
The federal government cannot unilaterally purge U.S. networks of compromised
foreign technology. A wide variety of public services and critical infrastructure systems
are managed by state and local governments, so efforts to defend against foreign
technology threats must also have their buy-in.
However, state and local governments have generally not revised their procurement
policies to address the issue of foreign technology threats. In recent years, nearly
1,700 public entities have purchased ICTS covered under Section 889, introducing
potential vulnerabilities into the networks of public schools, universities, hospitals,
prisons, public transit systems, and government offices nationwide. Just five states—
Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Texas, and Vermont—have adopted measures to restrict
the purchase of untrustworthy ICTS on national security grounds, and these
regulations are generally not structured to deal with foreign technology threats
effectively. We outline the strengths and weaknesses of each later in this section.
State and local governments must take foreign technology threats seriously even if
they do not face the same risks as federal agencies like DOD. Foreign hackers have
already shown an interest in targeting non-federal entities. At least six state
governments had their networks breached by a state-sponsored Chinese hacking
group between May 2021 and February 2022, and countless local government entities
fell victim to Chinese hackers during the Microsoft Exchange Server data breach in
early 2021.48 Should the Chinese government or other competitors exploit foreign
ICTS in a similar fashion, thousands of state and local governments may find
themselves exposed to potentially devastating breaches. Even if governments are not
targeted directly, the ICTS they deploy might be used to compromise nearby critical
infrastructure—a recent FBI investigation revealed that Huawei equipment deployed
near military bases could be used to capture or disrupt communications regarding the
U.S. nuclear arsenal.49
Given these risks, removing untrustworthy foreign ICTS from state and local networks
is a national security imperative. In recent years, however, many agencies have
continued introducing untrustworthy technologies into their networks. In this section,
we explore the extent to which state and local governments are buying ICTS
prohibited at the federal level under Section 889 and discuss the strengths and

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

19
weaknesses of existing state-level regulations on foreign ICTS procurement.* We
conclude with a discussion of the roles federal, state, and local policymakers should
play in developing a cohesive approach to ICTS supply chain risks.
Who’s Buying What?
Between 2015 and 2021, at least 1,681 state and local governments purchased
equipment and services tied to the five companies named in Section 889. Every state
except Vermont had at least one state or local government entity procure ICTS
covered under Section 889 (there were also no purchases in Washington, D.C.).
Collectively, these entities conducted nearly 5,700 transactions involving a wide range
of covered equipment including but not limited to smartphones, surveillance cameras,
temperature scanners, handheld radios, and networking equipment.50 Figures 1 and 2
show the total number and value of government transactions that involved equipment
from Huawei, ZTE, Hikvision, Dahua, and Hytera in each state. Our analysis relies on
data provided by GovSpend, a company that tracks federal, state, and local
government procurement.

* We do not attempt to analyze the landscape of procurement prohibitions at the local level due to the
sheer number of local government entities that exist across the United States. A cursory review found a
single locality—the city of Suffolk, Virginia—that has restricted the purchase of Chinese technology on
the grounds of national security. For more, see: City of Suffolk, Addendum #1: Exterior Dome PTZ
Cameras (Suffolk, VA; Purchasing Division, 2018),
http://apps.suffolkva.us/bids/files/2217_Addendum_1_-_PTZ_Cameras.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

20
Figure 1. Number of State and Local Government Transactions Involving Covered ICTS
by State, 2015-2021 (Including D.C.)

Source: CSET analysis of GovSpend data (see Appendix A for more details).
Figure 2. Value of State and Local Government Transactions Involving Covered ICTS
by State, 2015-2021 (Including D.C.)

Source: CSET analysis of GovSpend data.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

21
The total value of these purchases was approximately $45.2 million. While the scale
of transactions may seem small in terms of monetary value, it is significant in terms of
potential risk. Each piece of covered equipment represents a potential entry point into
users’ networks, regardless of its cost. The fact that untrustworthy technology was
integrated into the networks of nearly 1,700 state and local government entities is far
more relevant to national security than the total transaction value. If exploited
properly, even small, inexpensive components can undermine the security of the
broader government systems they connect to, allowing hackers to leapfrog from one
system to another.
Our findings should be interpreted as a partial glimpse into state and local government
purchasing behavior rather than a comprehensive review. Procurement records were
scraped from unstandardized public documents, which can sometimes omit or
misrepresent details on equipment or services. Furthermore, GovSpend does not
collect data on every state and local government entity in the United States, meaning
some purchases may be excluded from our analysis (see Appendix B for more
information on our methodology).
Procurement patterns among individual government entities were highly stratified.
About 87 percent (1,463) of the public entities in our dataset conducted five or fewer
transactions involving covered ICTS, and about half (858) had a single recorded
purchase. On the other end of the spectrum, there were 37 organizations that
conducted 20 or more transactions involving covered ICTS, and nine that made 50 or
more purchases. These nine buyers—all but one of which are involved in public
education—accounted for more than one-third of all recorded transactions.
While a wide variety of public entities have purchased covered ICTS, including transit
authorities, utilities departments, judicial systems, and state and local government
agencies, the technologies appear to be especially popular within public education
systems. Public school districts, colleges, and universities collectively conducted 4,283
transactions for covered ICTS, about three-quarters of all the purchases recorded in
our dataset (see Table 1). Of the 56 organizations that spent more than $100,000 on
untrustworthy Chinese technology, 50 were involved in public education.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

22
Table 1. Number of State and Local Governments Buying Covered ICTS by
Organization Type, 2015-2021 (Including D.C.)

Organization Type Entities
Total
Transactions
Total
Spending
Public School 938 3,693 $20,346,606
Local Government 482 1,171 $6,448,427
State University/College 161 590 $17,205,618
State Government 49 124 $591,138
Public Utility 23 52 $372,191
Public Hospital 10 19 $43,810
Public Transit 10 15 $89,050
Judiciary 8 16 $57,277
Total 1,681 5,680 $45,154,118
Source: CSET analysis of GovSpend data.
There are a few reasons why public schools, colleges, and universities comprise such a
large share of the transactions in our dataset. First and foremost, they make up an
outsized portion of the overall market. Universities and school districts typically
operate more facilities than other public entities, and each school and campus building
requires its own networking infrastructure and surveillance system.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

23
Additionally, procurement officials at educational institutions may have less security
expertise than those at other government agencies, and are thus more likely to award
contracts based primarily on cost. Such decisions will favor Chinese ICTS due to its
relative affordability.51 This lack of internal security expertise may also lead public
schools to be less discrete when disclosing procurement information. Revealing details
about the equipment on a network clues bad actors in on the system’s vulnerabilities
and compromises its security. As such, government agencies with more security
expertise may withhold more information on their ICTS purchases when filling out
public documents, which would make them less likely to appear in the GovSpend
dataset.
Most of the recorded transactions involved small batches of smartphones, radios,
cameras, and other one-off items. Among the most popular products were Hikvision
dome and bullet cameras, Hikvision network video recorders, Dahua fisheye cameras,
Hytera portable two-way radios (particularly the PD502 model), and Huawei routers
and networking equipment. Also among the most popular products were ZTE’s mobile
Wi-Fi hotspots, Speed smartphones, and SPro smart projectors. However, many of the
highest spending organizations appear to have invested in more systematic,
enterprise-wide deployments of covered ICTS. The single largest buyer in our dataset,
a mid-size public university in Michigan, invested some $15.1 million in Huawei LTE
networking equipment (nodes, transceivers, base stations, and power systems) and
related support services between 2015 and 2021. Similarly, a pair of public school
districts in northeast Arkansas each spent more than $1 million on Hikvision
surveillance systems, and a charter school district in a major Texas city spent more
than $550,000 on Hytera two-way radios.
Procurement records show state and local governments continued buying covered
Chinese ICTS after the federal government raised concerns about the security of the
equipment. However, the number of transactions has fallen since the passage of
Section 889 in August 2018, as shown in Figure 3. In the vast majority of these
transactions, public entities did not award contracts directly to the Chinese
manufacturers, but rather to third-party distributors of their technology. These
“middle-man” vendors can mask the origin of their products, which creates major
challenges for organizations aiming to keep certain equipment and services off their
networks. As we will discuss in the following section, these third-party transactions
would still be considered legal under many of the existing state-level regulations on
Chinese ICTS, which prohibit transactions with specific vendors rather than
procurement of specific technologies.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

24
Figure 3. Annual State and Local Government Transactions Involving Covered ICTS,
2015-2021 (Including D.C.)

Source: CSET analysis of GovSpend data.
State Procurement Prohibitions
Few states have amended their procurement policies to weed out untrustworthy
foreign ICTS from their supply chains. Our review of state-level regulations found that
only five states—Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Texas, and Vermont—had enacted
measures to limit the procurement of foreign ICTS on the grounds of national security
(see Table 2).52
Each of the five states that have passed procurement prohibitions took a slightly
different approach, some of which are more effective than others. Some measures
forbid states from doing business directly with foreign vendors while others focus on
the specific technologies they produce. The scope of the prohibitions also vary widely:
for instance, the Louisiana measure targets only the five Chinese companies included
in Section 889 while Texas bars all Chinese, Russian, North Korean, and Iranian
companies from being awarded certain state contracts.
In this section, we provide a brief overview of the strengths and weaknesses of each
state’s approach to addressing foreign technology threats, and in the following section,
we offer recommendations for building a more cohesive, nationwide approach to
removing untrustworthy foreign ICTS from U.S. supply chains.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

25
Table 2. Foreign ICTS Procurement Prohibitions by State (Including D.C.)
State Action
Taken State Action
Taken State Action
Taken
Alabama n/a Kentucky n/a North Dakota n/a
Alaska n/a Louisiana Laws
(2020-21) Ohio n/a
Arizona n/a Maine n/a Oklahoma n/a
Arkansas n/a Maryland n/a Oregon n/a
California n/a Massachusetts n/a Pennsylvania n/a
Colorado n/a Michigan n/a Rhode Island n/a
Connecticut n/a Minnesota n/a South Carolina n/a
Delaware n/a Mississippi n/a South Dakota n/a
District of
Columbia n/a Missouri n/a Tennessee n/a
Florida Exec. Action
(2022) Montana n/a Texas Law
(2021)
Georgia Law
(2022) Nebraska n/a Utah n/a
Hawaii n/a Nevada n/a Vermont Exec. Action
(2019)
Idaho n/a New
Hampshire n/a Virginia n/a
Illinois n/a New Jersey n/a Washington n/a
Indiana n/a New Mexico n/a West Virginia n/a
Iowa n/a New York n/a Wisconsin n/a
Kansas n/a North Carolina n/a Wyoming n/a
Source: CSET analysis of GovSpend data.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

26
Louisiana
The state that has most closely mirrored the federal government’s approach to covered
ICTS is Louisiana. In 2020 and 2021, Louisiana policymakers passed a pair of laws that
banned all state government agencies and publicly funded schools, universities, and
other educational institutions from buying ICTS covered under Section 889.53
There are both benefits and drawbacks to Louisiana’s approach to foreign technology
threats. By aligning its procurement practices to federal regulations, the Louisiana
government can automatically heed the guidance of national security leaders without
going through the process of amending rules every time a problematic vendor is
identified. However, tying the fate of the state to the federal policymaking process is
only beneficial if that process is effective. If Section 889 proves to be too limited in
scope, or if policymakers are too slow to update the list as new threats emerge, then
Louisiana may find itself vulnerable.
Texas
Texas took a different approach to addressing foreign technology threats, focusing
specifically on critical infrastructure and expanding the scope of covered countries. In
June 2021, the state enacted the Lone Star Infrastructure Protection Act (SB-2116),
which restricted state agencies from awarding “critical infrastructure” contracts to
companies linked to China, Russia, Iran, or North Korea.* Furthermore, the measure
forbade private companies from entering into agreements with these companies if the
partnership would grant them remote or direct access to critical infrastructure.
Though this expanded scope may appear to make SB-2116 more effective, the law
also contains a major loophole. By focusing specifically on companies—and not the
equipment and services they produce—the law leaves the door open for compromised
ICTS to enter government networks through third-party distributors. Purchasing a
Hikvision surveillance camera directly from Hikvision would be illegal, but purchasing
the exact same camera from a local vendor would not. If the goal of a procurement ban

* Specifically, the company cannot be headquartered in, or controlled by the government or citizens of,
any of the listed countries. Additionally, the law classifies communications infrastructure systems,
cybersecurity systems, electric grids, hazardous waste treatment systems, and water treatment facilities
as critical infrastructure: Lone Star Protection Act, Texas S.B. 2116, 87th Legislature (2021).

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

27
is to keep compromised equipment and services out of government networks, it must
target the product, not the seller.
Georgia
Georgia’s Senate Bill 346, signed into law in May 2022, prohibits any company
“owned or operated” by the Chinese government from applying for state contracts.54
Companies are required to certify they are not owned by the CCP when submitting
contract proposals, and those that lie about their affiliation face a $250,000 minimum
fine.
Like its Texas counterpart, SB-346 focuses on ICTS vendors rather than explicitly
targeting the equipment and services they produce, which creates a loophole through
which third-party vendors can legally sell compromised ICTS to the state government.
Furthermore, the measure does not specify which companies are subject to the ban,
which may make it difficult to enforce. Some may interpret the law as applying only to
Chinese state-owned enterprises while others might argue that a much longer list of
Chinese companies are “owned or operated” by the state.55
In July 2022, the American Legislative Exchange Council, a conservative nonprofit that
facilitates collaboration between state legislators and private sector representatives,
published a “model policy” based on the Georgia law.* This draft legislation contains
the same loopholes as SB-346, and state laws modeled on this text will be ineffective.
Vermont
In Vermont, government leaders opted for executive action over legislation to address
foreign technology threats. In February 2019, Vermont’s chief information officer

* “An Act to Prohibit State Contracts With Chinese Government-Owned or Affiliated Technology
Manufacturers,” American Legislative Exchange Council, accessed October 2022, https://alec.org/model-
policy/an-act-to-prohibit-state-contracts-with-chinese-government-owned-or-affiliated-technology-
manufacturers/. ALEC describes itself as dedicated to the principles of limited government, free markets,
and federalism. Between 2010 and 2018, more than six hundred state and federal laws were passed
based on the organization’s model policies. For more, see: “About ALEC,” American Legislative
Exchange Council, accessed September 2022, https://alec.org/about/; Yvonne Wingett Sanchez and Rob
O’Dell, “What is ALEC? ‘The most effective organization’ for conservatives, says Newt Gingrich,” USA
TODAY, April 3, 2019, https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/investigations/2019/04/03/alec-
american-legislative-exchange-council-model-bills-republican-conservative-devos-
gingrich/3162357002/.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

28
issued a directive prohibiting state agencies from purchasing equipment and services
produced by the five companies listed in Section 889 as well as the Russian
cybersecurity firm Kaspersky Lab.56 Like Section 889, the measure forbids the state
from working with vendors that use those systems. However, unlike Section 889, it
also required agencies to review their IT infrastructure for covered ICTS and begin
phasing out those products within 90 days.
Vermont’s approach to foreign technology threats is relatively effective. The directive
addresses both past and future procurements of covered ICTS, and targets specific
technologies rather than companies that manufacture them.
Still, the strategy is not without shortcomings. While enacting procurement bans
through executive action is faster than through legislation, this approach also means
the regulations are easier for future governors to overturn. Furthermore, the state’s
directive did not set aside funds to rip and replace covered ICTS within government
networks. One of the major appeals of Chinese ICTS is its low cost. Agencies will likely
need additional funding in order to replace this equipment with more expensive
alternatives. The directive also lists the specific companies covered by the ban instead
of referencing any particular federal regulation, meaning the measure will not
automatically update as the threat landscape changes.
Florida
Florida’s Executive Order 22-216, signed by Governor Ron DeSantis in September
2022, is the broadest of the five state-level procurement prohibitions. The order seeks
to bar state agencies from buying or using any ICTS that is prohibited or restricted at
the federal level, and also from buying or using ICTS that poses “an undue or
unacceptable risk to the safety and security of Florida.”57 Furthermore, the order aims
to prevent state agencies from purchasing or using ICTS provided by entities “owned,
controlled by, or domiciled in a foreign country of concern as much as feasibly
possible.” Currently, seven countries are included in that list: China, Russia, Iran, North
Korea, Cuba, Venezuela, and Syria.58
Like its counterparts in Louisiana and Vermont, the Florida prohibition focuses on
specific ICTS and not specific vendors, avoiding the loophole that would allow
agencies to buy untrustworthy technology from third-party vendors. It is also directly
linked to federal prohibitions, meaning the procurement policies will automatically
update as the threat landscape changes. Requiring states to limit their use of ICTS
sourced from countries of concern “as much as feasibly possible” is also preferable to

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

29
blanket bans. Cutting out all ICTS from China, for example, would be prohibitively
expensive, if not impossible.
The order also grants the state’s Department of Management Services the authority to
identify and ban untrustworthy ICTS based on “relevant materials . . . from any
government agency, cybersecurity firm, or expert.” It is critical for state agencies to
consider all available information when making procurement decisions, but this broad
definition of acceptable documentation may be mistakenly interpreted to mean that
evidence from a single firm or expert could be used to justify a prohibition.
Procurement prohibitions must be based on a thorough review of evidence from
multiple sources to ensure that only legitimately unsafe ICTS gets banned. As they
implement the executive order, Florida officials should make sure they create a robust
review process that ensures the department uses its new authorities effectively and
judiciously.
Summary of State Policies
Overall, state-level approaches to foreign technology threats have left much to be
desired. Few states have enacted measures aimed at removing untrustworthy foreign
ICTS from government supply chains, and the effectiveness of those regulations varies
widely.
Given the complexity of the global ICTS supply chain, procurement prohibitions will
only be effective if they target specific technologies from specific manufacturers rather
than specific sellers. Three states—Florida, Louisiana, and Vermont—have taken this
approach. Measures that target vendors, such as those in Georgia and Texas, may
create a false sense of security without addressing the risks posed by foreign ICTS. As
shown in the GovSpend data, the vast majority of covered ICTS is purchased through
third-party distributors rather than with the manufacturers themselves. These
transactions would be considered legal under the Georgia and Texas laws. Georgia’s
SB-346 is also unclear about the companies that fall under its scope, making it difficult
to enforce and increasing the likelihood of litigation. The fact that Georgia’s law is
being held up as a model for other states to follow raises serious concerns about
future state-level efforts.
While they correctly target technologies rather than vendors, the measures enacted in
Louisiana and Vermont are not scoped in a way to effectively deal with foreign
technology threats. These policies, which are rooted in Section 889, are likely too

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

30
narrow and would need to be updated regularly to accommodate changes in the threat
landscape.
In general, we find that state and local governments would benefit from aligning their
procurement practices with those of the federal government rather than creating their
own definitions of untrustworthy ICTS. Federal policymakers have already constructed
a robust process for determining whether certain products and services pose national
security threats, and it would behoove state and local agencies to piggyback off this
federal guidance. In the following section, we discuss how these policymakers can
build federal prohibitions into their own procurement processes.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

31
Policy Recommendations
While every level of government must play a role in addressing foreign technology
threats, federal policymakers should be responsible for spearheading these efforts.
With its resources and intelligence capabilities, the U.S. government is in the best
position to identify vulnerable ICTS and develop strategies to eliminate them from
nationwide supply chains, and recent measures give it the proper authorities to do so.
Under Title 2 of the SECURE Technology Act, federal agencies can purge
untrustworthy technology from their supply chains and policymakers can scale those
prohibitions across the government as they see fit. The ICTS rule—if implemented
properly—allows the Commerce Department to extend prohibitions to the broader U.S.
market as well.
However, defending the United States against the threats posed by foreign technology
will require state and local officials to align their procurement decisions with federal
guidance. This means complying with the Commerce Department’s mandatory orders
and proactively piggybacking off of federal procurement prohibitions when necessary.
In this section, we offer recommendations on how the federal government can
strengthen its approach to procurement prohibitions and enable government entities to
address the risks associated with foreign ICTS. We also discuss how state and local
government officials can align their procurement policies with federal guidance to
create a more cohesive, nationwide strategy for addressing foreign technology threats.
Effectively Implement the ICTS Rule
The ICTS rule has the potential to significantly strengthen the federal government’s
ability to crackdown on foreign technology threats across the broader U.S. market, but
only if the Commerce Department implements the authority effectively. This requires
leaders to allocate enough funding and staff to implement the rule, create the proper
information sharing channels, and develop a regulatory approach that maximizes the
measure’s impact while minimizing its economic and organizational costs.
The Commerce Department’s recent budget requests indicate that the BIS is charged
with implementing the ICTS rule.59 The agency, which today primarily manages and
enforces the government’s export control regime, seems like a natural fit for this new
authority. Under its current remit, BIS staffers have gained a deep understanding of the
national security implications of technology and experience working with industry,
both of which will be critical for implementing the ICTS rule.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

32
The department’s 2023 budget submission requested an additional 114 positions and
$36.2 million to support BIS implementation of the ICTS rule. As it stands, the agency
has 16 positions and about $4.7 million devoted to the program.60 It remains to be
seen whether Congress will meet the agency’s request and whether that level of
funding will prove sufficient for enforcing the ICTS rule. BIS is already widely
considered to be under-resourced, and given the broad scope of its new authorities, it
will likely require a significant increase in both staffing and funding. Implementing the
ICTS rule effectively will also require BIS to increase coordination and information
sharing with other federal agencies, like the DOD, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA), and the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration.
The agency’s funding and staffing needs will depend on how exactly the ICTS rule is
implemented. Commerce has committed to using a voluntary licensing framework that
allows businesses to have their purchases of foreign ICTS preapproved by the
department.61 This system would allow businesses to buy new technologies without
having to worry that regulators will block or roll back the transaction, but it would also
force the department to review a potentially enormous number of transactions.62
According to internal estimates, up to 4.5 million U.S. entities import foreign
technologies covered by the rule—if each of those entities applied for just one license
every year, the department would be responsible for processing upwards of 87,000
licenses per week.63 The rule is unlikely to be effective if regulators are constantly
drowning under a flood of applications.
Some experts have argued that a more productive approach would be to adopt a
sanctions-based framework to foreign ICTS imports instead of relying on voluntary
licensing.64 Under such a framework, regulators would work with the national security
community to determine which entities qualify as “foreign adversaries” and which of
their products and services present potential security risks. Once those products are
added to the department’s covered list, all U.S. persons would be prohibited from
purchasing them. This framework, which echoes Section 889 and existing sanctions
frameworks, would be far less taxing for both the department and industry than
obtaining approvals on a case-by-case basis. We find this approach to be the most
effective path forward.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

33
Block FCC Equipment Authorizations for Covered Entities
Through its equipment authorization process, the FCC can directly control what ICTS
can be legally sold in the United States. Commissioners should use this authority to
keep untrustworthy foreign technologies from entering the U.S. market.
Under a 2021 law, commissioners are required to vote on whether to prohibit new
authorizations of equipment manufactured by entities on the FCC covered list.65 By
approving this order, the commission can effectively stop all U.S. entities—both public
and private—from buying most of the technology manufactured by Huawei, ZTE,
Hikvision, and seven other foreign companies deemed to pose national security risks.
The measure may not apply retroactively, meaning ICTS that is already authorized
would still be legal to sell.66 Still, banning new authorizations would mark an inflection
point in the fight against foreign technology threats. Existing deployments of covered
ICTS will eventually need to be phased out, and the order would ensure they are
replaced with more trustworthy alternatives. Such a measure would create a baseline
level of security upon which future procurement prohibitions from the FASC,
Commerce Department, and other organizations.
Align State and Local Procurement Policies with Federal Guidance
State and local policymakers should not be expected to independently analyze and
address the threats posed by foreign technology, but it would behoove them to align
their own procurement practices with the rules set by the federal government.
This will not necessarily require new regulations. State and local governments are
already subject to the orders issued under the Commerce Department’s ICTS authority.
Complying with the rules will automatically improve the security of state and local
networks.
However, if the Commerce Department does not implement the ICTS rule effectively,
state and local governments may benefit from taking additional policy actions. The
Commerce Department may not prohibit all of the ICTS banned at the federal level
(based on FASC recommendations, for example), or it may fail to effectively implement
the rule altogether. In these cases, state and local governments would still be legally
allowed to buy untrustworthy foreign ICTS.
Should the ICTS framework fail to fully address foreign technology threats, state and
local policymakers should enact policies to prevent their governments from buying
ICTS covered by federal procurement bans. Doing so would allow state and local

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

34
governments to stay up to date on the latest threat intelligence without expending any
of their already limited resources on the necessary research and intelligence.
Piggybacking off of federal guidance would ensure regulations are scoped properly
and focused on the appropriate threats.67
Section 1(B) of Florida’s Executive Order 22-216, which bars state agencies from using
ICTS “any federal agency has prohibited . . . because of national security concerns,”
could serve as a model for other jurisdictions. However, state and local policymakers
should avoid creating their own definitions of “covered ICTS.” As discussed in the
previous section, these definitions often miss the mark, casting too wide of a net or
targeting the wrong vendors or products. Furthermore, the costs of maintaining and
complying with 50-plus different standards would be exorbitant for both government
agencies and their contractors, while the potential benefits are minimal at best.
To be sure, federal procurement prohibitions may themselves be mistargeted or out of
date in some cases. But unifying every level of government around a defined set of
untrustworthy technologies will likely be more effective than creating a patchwork of
procurement prohibitions across jurisdictions.
Create and Share a Master List of Untrustworthy Foreign ICTS
Beyond subsidizing rip and replace efforts, federal policymakers can make it easier for
state and local governments—as well as other public and private organizations—to
secure their networks by publishing a list of untrustworthy foreign ICTS.
Today, there is no single, publicly available “master list” when it comes to
untrustworthy foreign ICTS. Section 889 and the FCC’s covered list both explicitly
name companies that pose security risks, but each includes different entities. To date,
neither the FASC nor Commerce Department has issued a list of prohibited vendors.
This lack of consistent, up-to-date information makes it difficult for public- and private-
sector procurement officers to ensure they steer clear of untrustworthy foreign ICTS.
This “master” covered list might include information on specific equipment and
services, the companies that produce them, and, when appropriate, the risks they pose.
It should also disclose that entities can and cannot buy the designated ICTS and what

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

35
federal authority each prohibition was issued under (e.g. the SECURE Technology
Act).*
Using this list, state and local procurement officers would easily identify the ICTS they
are explicitly barred from using (under Commerce orders) plus other foreign
technologies that federal policymakers have determined to pose national security risks.
Measures that link state and local procurement practices to federal prohibitions—in the
vein of the Florida executive order—could refer explicitly to this list.
Federal policymakers must also help state and local governments put this list to use.
Agencies like CISA already work closely with state and local governments on
cybersecurity and supply chain security issues.68 They should continue building those
relationships and information sharing networks, using them to help agencies interpret
federal directives and understand their exposure to untrustworthy ICTS. By bringing
state and local entities into the fold, federal policymakers can lay the foundation for a
more harmonized, nationwide approach to addressing foreign technology threats.
Not every state and local agency will have the bandwidth or expertise to utilize this
information, so it is also critical that federal agencies work with them to determine
what intelligence and information sharing channels are most useful. It would not be
possible to perfectly target outreach to every state and local entity, but understanding
the challenges that different agencies face when addressing foreign technology
threats will ultimately strengthen the information sharing ecosystem.
Support Rip and Replace Programs
Federal policymakers can also enable state and local governments to address foreign
technology threats by increasing support for rip and replace efforts like those
pioneered at the FCC. Replacing compromised ICTS with more trustworthy
alternatives can be a costly process in terms of both money and personnel. Public
entities generally operate on tight budgets, and it is unlikely that they will muster the
funds and political will to replace functional ICTS with more costly equipment.
Furthermore, few public entities have the in-house expertise to lead a successful rip
and replace effort.69 The cybersecurity offices within these organizations are typically
underfunded and understaffed (if they exist at all), and those that do have resources on
hand will presumably prioritize more immediate security matters, such as combating

* The Treasury Department’s "Sanctions List Search” application could serve as a model for this public-
facing list. See: “Sanctions Search List,” Office of Foreign Assets Control, accessed October 2022,
https://sanctionssearch.ofac.treas.gov/.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

36
ransomware, over the more abstract risks posed by foreign ICTS. 70 As such, we should
not expect state and local governments to proactively rip and replace covered ICTS
without federal support.
While federal agencies have offered some support to offset these costs, the funds are
meager compared to the scope of the problem. For instance, the FCC’s Secure and
Trusted Communications Networks Reimbursement Program (SCRP), which provides
funds to rip and replace equipment from Huawei and ZTE, was initially allocated some
$1.9 billion. In the first round of applications, the commission received $5.6 billion in
requests.71 It is worth noting that to date, the SCRP does not cover replacements of
ICTS from Hikvision, Dahua, Hytera, or the other companies included on the
commission’s covered list.72 Should this equipment be included in the program, the
reimbursement requests will be much higher. By increasing funding and expanding the
scope of programs like the SCRP, the federal government can assist state and local
policymakers to bolster their networks against Chinese technology threats.
If this funding cannot be made available immediately, federal policymakers should also
support broader efforts to identify untrustworthy ICTS in existing government
networks and supply chains. Today, many organizations, particularly state and local
governments, do not fully understand their exposure to foreign technology threats.
While mapping out potential points of failure does not fully mitigate their risks, such
exercises will increase visibility into where problems might arise and help
organizations more effectively triage their vulnerabilities.
To be sure, rip and replace programs are not a magic bullet for securing government
networks. Every piece of equipment contains vulnerabilities, and the products and
services that replace covered foreign ICTS may contain their own bugs and backdoors.
Policymakers must therefore think critically about the costs and benefits of rip and
replace programs before funding them. Different types of ICTS present different risks,
and certain settings (e.g., power stations) require more security than others (e.g.,
university quads). Replacing every piece of untrustworthy tech currently installed on
U.S. networks is not feasible, so resources must be allocated to the areas where they
will have the greatest impact.73 Rip and replace programs also divert resources away
from other government services—such as education and infrastructure—and
policymakers should consider the trade-offs of these reallocations.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

37
Conclusion
Defending against foreign technology threats requires coordinated action from
policymakers at every level of government, with the federal government leading the
way. With its resources and intelligence capabilities, the U.S. government is in the best
position to identify vulnerable ICTS and develop strategies to eliminate them from
nationwide supply chains, and recent measures give it the proper authorities to do so.
State and local governments should align their own procurement practices with those
federal guidelines. If a particular foreign technology is deemed too risky for federal
agencies, state and local entities probably should avoid purchasing it as well.
Today, the U.S. approach to foreign technology threats falls far short of that ideal.
Federal policies to keep untrustworthy ICTS out of government networks are not
enforced effectively, and leaders are not fully utilizing their authority to monitor and
mitigate supply chain threats. Only a handful of state governments have attempted to
regulate the procurement of foreign technologies, and many of the measures that have
been enacted fail to address the risks at hand. Local governments have been slow to
act on foreign technology threats as well. All the while, state and local agencies have
continued integrating untrustworthy technologies into schools, hospitals, prisons,
public transit systems, and government offices around the country.
Federal policymakers must lead the effort to build a unified defense against foreign
technology threats. Under the SECURE Technology Act, government leaders can tailor
federal procurement prohibitions for different environments and applications. By
providing the Commerce Department with the funds and staff to implement the ICTS
rule—through a sanctions-based model—they can ensure untrustworthy technology
stays out of public and private networks. Using these two authorities, policymakers can
maintain effective procurement prohibitions that are current with the changing threat
landscape. The FCC can also keep untrustworthy foreign ICTS from entering U.S.
markets by blocking equipment authorizations for entities on its covered list.
Given their resource constraints and limited mandate, state and local governments
should not be expected to independently grapple with the national security
implications of foreign ICTS. However, they still have a responsibility to keep their own
networks secure. By adhering to federal rules on foreign ICTS procurement, state and
local governments can protect their digital infrastructure and keep procurement
practices up to date with the latest intelligence. This may entail following mandatory
ICTS rule restrictions or, if the rule is not implemented effectively, enacting policies
that prevent the use of ICTS prohibited by federal agencies. Federal policymakers can

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

38
further enable state and local governments to address foreign technology threats by
creating a master list of foreign ICTS covered by procurement prohibitions,
strengthening existing information sharing channels, and increasing funding for rip and
replace programs.
Federal policymakers now possess the authorities necessary to identify and purge
untrustworthy foreign ICTS from critical U.S. networks. As they scope and implement
these authorities, they should build on existing relationships with state and local
officials in a shared effort to secure the country’s supply chains, shore up its networks,
and create space for trustworthy technology companies to innovate and grow.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

39
Authors
Jack Corrigan is a research analyst at CSET. Sergio Fontanez is an associate at Holland
& Knight. Michael Kratsios is the managing director at Scale AI, and he previously
served as the fourth chief technology officer of the United States at the White House,
as well as acting under secretary of defense for research and engineering.
Acknowledgments
For feedback and assistance, we would like to thank Catherine Aiken, Chris
Chamberlain, Amy Chao, Cynthia Cook, Shelton Fitch, Conor Healy, Emily Kilcrease,
Bob Kolasky, Igor Mikolic-Torreira, Nazak Nikakhtar, Dahlia Peterson, Greg Watson,
Emily Weinstein, and Kevin Wolf.

© 2022 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20220007

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

40
Appendix A. Data Tables
Table 3. State and Local Government Transactions Involving Covered ICTS, 2015-
2021 (Including D.C.)
 Transactions Transactions
State Value Number State Value Number
Alabama $4,303 2 Montana $118,328 46
Alaska $81 1 Nebraska $71,073 17
Arizona $146,009 19 Nevada $109,030 27
Arkansas $2,094,807 27 New Hampshire $44,090 17
California $4,801,905 462 New Jersey $842,951 228
Colorado $201,972 31 New Mexico $213,908 44
Connecticut $73,149 33 New York $969,540 239
Delaware $5,134 2 North Carolina $1,052,904 224
District of
Columbia $0 0 North Dakota $9,724 1
Florida $1,930,919 460 Ohio $750,607 251
Georgia $835,911 166 Oklahoma $363,691 51
Hawaii $27,812 7 Oregon $96,365 38

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

41
Idaho $122,796 37 Pennsylvania $872,245 247
Illinois $767,994 211 Rhode Island $19,263 18
Indiana $101,782 78 South Carolina $29,179 12
Iowa $71,581 35 South Dakota $25,838 15
Kansas $36,206 26 Tennessee $404,552 66
Kentucky $61,281 21 Texas $6,471,374 886
Louisiana $477,297 151 Utah $322,644 21
Maine $80,919 29 Vermont $0 0
Maryland $163,264 48 Virginia $655,171 104
Massachusetts $536,828 166 Washington $1,258,139 372
Michigan $15,543,580 235 West Virginia $23,375 11
Minnesota $554,016 68 Wisconsin

$1,056,221 196
Mississippi $90,826 34 Wyoming $4,629 1
Missouri $638,902 199
Source: CSET analysis of GovSpend data.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

42

Table 4. Annual State and Local Government Transactions Involving Covered ICTS
(Including D.C.)
 Transactions
Year Value Number
2021 $2,181,054 632
2020 $6,005,978 626
2019 $5,043,153 1,029
2018 $8,696,271 1,139
2017 $13,505,983 956
2016 $6,989,146 788
2015 $2,732,533 510
Source: CSET analysis of GovSpend data.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

43
Appendix B. GovSpend Data Background and Methodology
Our analysis relies on data provided by GovSpend, a company that tracks federal,
state, and local government procurement. To create our dataset, we first pulled all
procurement records containing the words “Huawei,” “ZTE,” “Hikvision,” “Dahua,” and
“Hytera” from the GovSpend database. This search returned 10,028 total transaction
line items.
The authors then conducted a manual review of this data and removed line items that
fell outside the scope of the analysis or lacked complete data on dates, buyers, or
products. Line items were considered out of scope if they 1) occurred before 2015 or
after 2021; 2) were not conducted by a state or local government entity; or 3) involved
products or services that did not qualify as covered ICTS. This review resulted in the
removal of 2,170 line items from our dataset. The vast majority (84 percent) of
excluded transactions involved products or services that did not qualify as covered
ICTS (e.g., camera mounts and brackets, battery packs, chargers, repair services, phone
cases).
The remaining 7,868 purchase line items were then grouped using unique pairings of
buyers and purchase-order numbers, resulting in 5,680 distinct purchase orders.
Finally, the authors reviewed the organizational category of each state and local
government entity within the dataset and changed the assignments for 20 entities that
appeared to be miscategorized (e.g., an entity with “City School District” in its name
was reclassified from “local government” to “public school”).

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

44
Endnotes

1 Gordon Corera, “Meng Wanzhou: The PowerPoint that sparked an international row,” BBC.com,
September 24, 2021, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-54270739.
2 Mike Rogers and Dutch Ruppersberger, “Investigative Report on the U.S. National Security Issues
Posed by Chinese Telecommunications Companies Huawei and ZTE,” (U.S. House of Representatives,
October 8, 2012), 3, https://republicans-intelligence.house.gov/sites/intelligence.house.gov/files/
documents/huawei-zte%20investigative%20report%20(final).pdf#page=11.
3 Murray Scot Tanner, “Beijing’s New National Intelligence Law: From Defense to Offense,” Lawfare, July
20, 2017, https://www.lawfareblog.com/beijings-new-national-intelligence-law-defense-offense.
4 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018, Pub. L. No. 115-91, 131 Stat. 1283 (2017);
By this time, other federal agencies had already taken steps to limit their use of certain Chinese
technologies. In 2006, the U.S. Department of State stopped using computers manufactured by Lenovo
on classified networks, citing the company’s ties to the Chinese government. The Central Intelligence
Agency and other Five Eyes intelligence agencies also allegedly banned Lenovo computers around the
same time due to concerns about Chinese spying. For more, see: Grant Gross, “U.S. State Department to
Limit Use of Lenovo PCs,” ComputerWorld, May 19, 2006,
https://www.computerworld.com/article/2545522/u-s--state-department-to-limit-use-of-lenovo-
pcs.html; Adi Robertson, “Lenovo reportedly banned by MI6, CIA, and other spy agencies over fear of
Chinese hacking (update),” The Verge, July 30, 2013,
https://www.theverge.com/2013/7/30/4570780/lenovo-reportedly-banned-by-mi6-cia-over-chinese-
hacking-fears. The DOD is prohibited from procuring certain munitions and other products and services
from organizations designated as “Communist Chinese military companies” (CCMCs). This prohibition
was first implemented under the 2006 NDAA and updated in 2012 and 2017, and the list of covered
companies was first published by DOD in 2020. The CCMC list was retired in 2021 and replaced by the
U.S. Department of the Treasury’s “Chinese military-industrial complex companies” (CMIC) list. Given
these changes, it is unclear whether the DOD’s original procurement prohibition still applies. For more
information, see: Prohibition on acquisition of certain items from Communist Chinese Military Companies
48 CFR § 225.770 (2022); “DOD Releases List of Additional Companies, in Accordance with Section
1237 of FY99 NDAA,” U.S. Department of Defense, January 14, 2021,
https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/2472464/dod-releases-list-of-additional-
companies-in-accordance-with-section-1237-of-fy/; “Chinese Military Company Sanctions,” U.S.
Department of the Treasury, June 3, 2021, https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-
sanctions/faqs/topic/5671.
5 Christopher Wray, “Open Hearing on Worldwide Threats,” Testimony to the Senate Select Committee
on Intelligence, 115th Congress, February 13, 2018,
https://www.intelligence.senate.gov/hearings/open-hearing-worldwide-threats-0#.
6 “Pentagon stops selling Huawei, ZTE phones in its bases, cites security,” Reuters, May 2, 2018,
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-china-huawei-tech-idUKKBN1I326H; “Fact Sheet: Protecting

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

45

Against National Security Threats to the Communications Supply Chain Through FCC Programs,” 33
FCC Rcd 4058 (2018).
7 As noted by Adam Segal, over the last decade, policymakers in both the United States and China have
begun to question whether the vulnerabilities created by interdependence in ICTS supply chains
outweighed the “vulnerabilities to panopticon and choke-point threats.” For more on this, see: Adam
Segal, “Huawei, 5G, and Weaponized Interdependence,” in The Uses and Abuses of Weaponized
Interdependence, ed. Daniel W. Drezner, Henry Farrell, and Abraham L. Newman, (Washington DC,
Brookings Institution Press, March 2021) pg. 154.
8 Stefan Pongratz, “Key Takeaways – Worldwide Telecom Equipment Market 2018” Dell’Oro Group,
March 4, 2019, https://www.delloro.com/telecom-equipment-market-2018-2/; Jeb Su, “Huawei Fortifies
#2 Spot in Global Smartphone Market, Beating Apple Again,” Forbes, November 2, 2018,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/jeanbaptiste/2018/11/02/huawei-fortifies-2-spot-in-global-smartphone-
market-beating-apple-again/?sh=541020fd1305.
9 “The 2019 A&S Top 50 Security Companies has been published and Optex ranks 24,” Optex.co,
January 24, 2020, https://www.optex.co.jp/e/news/2020/0124.html.
10 Prohibition on Certain Telecommunications and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment, Pub. L. No.
115-232, 132 Stat. 1917 (2018).
11 Federal Acquisition Supply Chain Security Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115-390, 132 Stat. 5178 (2018).
12 Executive Order No. 13873, 84 FR 22689 (2019).
13 Secure and Trusted Communications Networks Act of 2019, Pub. L. No. 115-390, 132 Stat. 5178
(2018).
14 Salem Solomon, “After Allegations of Spying, African Union Renews Huawei Alliance,” Voice of
America News, June 6, 2019, https://www.voanews.com/a/after-allegations-of-spying-african-union-
renews-huawei-alliance/4947968.html; Samuel Woodhams, “China’s Surveillance State: A Global
Project,” Top10VPN, August 3, 2021, https://www.top10vpn.com/research/huawei-china-surveillance-
state/. The U.S. National Security Agency also reportedly has a history of pushing for backdoors in
cryptography tools. For more, see: Kim Zetter, “How a Crypto ‘Backdoor’ Pitted the Tech World Against
the NSA,” Wired, September 24, 2013, https://www.wired.com/2013/09/nsa-backdoor/.

15 Katie Bo Lillis, “CNN Exclusive: FBI investigation determined Chinese-made Huawei equipment could
disrupt U.S. nuclear arsenal communications,” CNN, July 25, 2022,
https://www.cnn.com/2022/07/23/politics/fbi-investigation-huawei-china-defense-department-
communications-nuclear/index.html; “Hikvision Backdoor Exploit,” IPVM, September 3, 2017,
https://ipvm.com/reports/hik-exploit; Bojan Pancevski, “U.S. Officials Say Huawei Can Covertly Access
Telecom Networks,” The Wall Street Journal, February 12, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-
officials-say-huawei-can-covertly-access-telecom-networks-11581452256.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

46

16 Ellen Nakashima and Aaron Schaffer, “Chinese hackers compromise dozens of government agencies,
defense contractors,” The Washington Post, April 21, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-
security/chinese-hackers-compromise-defense-contractors-agencies/2021/04/20/10772f9e-a207-
11eb-a7ee-949c574a09ac_story.html; Corin Faife, “China backed hackers breached government
networks in at least six US states, per new report,” The Verge, March 8, 2022,
https://www.theverge.com/2022/3/8/22966517/china-hack-government-networks-apt41-usaherd.
17 Kim Sutter, “Made in China 2025” Industrial Policies: Issues for Congress (Washington, DC,
Congressional Research Service, 2020), https://sgp.fas.org/crs/row/IF10964.pdf.
18 In most cases, OEM relationships are not intended to deceive customers or mask the provenance of a
particular product, but rather to create market synergies. For example, most of the personal computers
sold by Dell use chips produced by Intel, graphics cards produced by NVIDIA, and software (Windows)
produced by Microsoft. In this case, Intel, NVIDIA, and Microsoft are all OEMs.
19 “Hikvision USA Declares ‘HERETOSTAY,’ With ADI,” IPVM, April 21, 2022,
https://ipvm.com/reports/hik-usa-stay.
20 The CCP has long used subsidies, export financing, and other measures to drive down the cost of
Chinese technologies, making them more competitive in the global market. This financial support was
critical to Huawei’s rise as a global telecommunications giant. For more, see: Rubin et al., “The Huawei
Moment.” For a discussion of the impact of Chinese government subsidies in the semiconductor industry,
see: Stephen Ezell, “Moore’s Law Under Attack: The Impact of China’s Policies on Global Semiconductor
Innovation” (Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, 2021),
https://itif.org/publications/2021/02/18/moores-law-under-attack-impact-chinas-policies-global-
semiconductor/.
21 We compared the Hikvision DS-2CE56D7T-AITZ ($90) to Hanwha HCD-6070R ($190), March
Networks 35835-101 ($290), and the Panasonic WV-U2132L ($431) on Amazon.com as of August
2022. “Equivalent” cameras were selected using the BestMatch tool developed by IPVM, a surveillance
industry observer.
22 Joseph Marks, “Amid a surge in ransomware attacks, cities are taking some of the biggest hits,” The
Washington Post, September 3, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/amid-a-surge-in-
ransomware-attacks-cities-are-takingsome-ofthe-biggest-hits/2021/09/02/9bd5d654-0a84-11ec-
aea1-42a8138f132a_story.html.
23 Richard Forno, “Local Governments Are Attractive Targets for Hackers and Are Ill-Prepared,”
Governing.com, March 29, 2022, https://www.governing.com/now/local-governments-are-attractive-
targets-for-hackers-and-are-ill-prepared.
24 Prohibition on Certain Telecommunications and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment, Pub. L. No.
115-232, 132 Stat. 1917 (2018); Executive Order No. 13873, 84 FR 22689 (2019).

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

47

25 Information Technology: Digital Service Programs Need to Consistently Coordinate on Developing
Guidance for Agencies (Washington, DC; Government Accountability Office, 2021),
https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-22-104492.pdf#page=6.
26 “Key Takeaways – Worldwide Telecom Equipment Market 2018” Dell’Oro Group, March 4, 2019,
https://www.delloro.com/telecom-equipment-market-2018-2/; Jeb Su, “Huawei Fortifies #2 Spot in
Global Smartphone Market, Beating Apple Again,” Forbes, November 2, 2018,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/jeanbaptiste/2018/11/02/huawei-fortifies-2-spot-in-global-smartphone-
market-beating-apple-again/?sh=541020fd1305; “The 2019 A&S Top 50 Security Companies has been
published and Optex ranks 24,” Optex.co, January 24, 2020,
https://www.optex.co.jp/e/news/2020/0124.html.
27 Brandi Vincent, “Security Firm Says Huawei, ZTE Devices Still Run on Government Networks,”
Nextgov, May 30, 2019, https://www.nextgov.com/cybersecurity/2019/05/security-firm-says-huawei-
zte-devices-still-run-government-networks/157370/; Sheridan Prasso, “China Tech’s Grip Persists in US
Long After Orders to Rip It Out,” Bloomberg, May 11, 2022,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-05-11/us-ban-on-china-tech-failed-to-stop-use-of-
hauwei-zte-hardware; Asa Fitch, “U.S. Government Still Uses Suspect Chinese Cameras,” The Wall
Street Journal, October 19, 2019, https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-government-still-uses-suspect-
chinese-cameras-11571486400.
28 At the time the law was passed, lawmakers provided few details on why certain companies were
covered by the regulation and others were not. U.S. officials had long painted Huawei and ZTE as
security threats, but Hikvision, Dahua, and Hytera had generally not faced the same level of criticism.
29 Representation Regarding Certain Telecommunications and Video Surveillance Services or
Equipment, 48 CFR § 52.204-24; Sam Biddle, “U.S. Military Bought Cameras In Violation of America’s
Own China Sanctions,” The Intercept, July 20, 2021, https://theintercept.com/2021/07/20/video-
surveillance-cameras-us-military-china-sanctions/; Federal Acquisition Regulation; Federal Acquisition
Circular 2020-08; Introduction, 85 FR 42664 (2020).
30 Section 889 originally gave contractors until August 13, 2020 to remove covered ICTS from their
networks, but the DOD and U.S. Agency for International Development have been allowed to continue
working with vendors that use covered equipment through September 30, 2022. The DOD waiver
specifically applied to vendors providing “low risk” items such as food, transportation, and medical care.
For more, see: Director of National Intelligence, Department of Defense Request for Waiver of Section
889 of Fiscal Year 2019 National Defense Authorization Act, John Ratcliffe,
https://thecgp.org/images/Memo-20-00823_DoD-Request-for-Section-889-Waiver-2.pdf; For more on
the USAID waiver, see: USAID Industry Liason, Information on USAID’s Section 889
Telecommunications Waiver, https://federalnewsnetwork.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/including-
USAID.pdf.
31 Zack Whittaker, “US government agencies bought Chinese surveillance tech despite federal ban,”
TechCrunch, December 1, 2021, https://techcrunch.com/2021/12/01/federal-lorex-surveillance-ban/.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

48

32 Federal Acquisition Supply Chain Security Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115-390, 132 Stat. 5178 (2018).
33 The provision defines “supply chain risk” as “the risk that any person may sabotage, maliciously
introduce unwanted function, extract data, or otherwise manipulate the design, integrity, manufacturing,
production, distribution, installation, operation, maintenance, disposition, or retirement of covered
articles so as to surveil, deny, disrupt, or otherwise manipulate the function, use, or operation of the
covered articles or information stored or transmitted on the covered articles.” For more, see: Authorities
related to mitigating supply chain risks in the procurement of covered articles, 41, U.S. Code § 4713
(2022).

34 The FASC was also tasked with developing supply chain risk management standards alongside the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and assisting federal agencies and other public
and private organizations in adopting those standards.
35 At the time of the FASC’s creation, the government was engaged in a protracted legal battle with the
Russian cybersecurity firm Kaspersky Lab over a Department of Homeland Security (DHS) order banning
the company’s products from federal networks. Kaspersky alleged that DHS violated the company’s
constitutional rights by issuing a ban before giving it a chance to defend itself, among other things. The
FASC process avoids this issue, requiring policymakers to justify their actions against particular vendors
and giving companies the chance to respond. For more information on the Kaspersky ban, see: Joseph
Marks, “DHS, Kaspersky Resume Court Battle Over Government Ban,” Nextgov, February 6, 2018,
https://www.nextgov.com/cybersecurity/2018/02/dhs-kaspersky-resume-court-battle-over-
government-ban/145774/; Aaron Boyd, “U.S. Finalizes Rule Banning Kaspersky Products From
Government Contracts,” Nextgov, September 9, 2021,
https://www.nextgov.com/cybersecurity/2019/09/us-finalizes-rule-banning-kaspersky-products-
government-contracts/159742/. For more on the FASC’s recent actions, see: “Federal Acquisition
Regulation (FAR); FAR Case 2020-011, Implementation of FASC Exclusion Orders,” Office of
Information and Regulatory Affairs, Spring 2022,
https://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/eAgendaViewRule?pubId=202204&RIN=9000-AO13.
36 The Director of National Intelligence is authorized to issue orders to the intelligence community, the
Secretary of Defense is authorized to issue orders to the Department of Defense, and the Secretary of
Homeland Security is authorized to issue orders to civilian agencies: Federal Acquisition Security
Council, “Federal Acquisition Security Council Rule,” Federal Register 86, no. 163 (August 26, 2021):
47581-47593, https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2021-08-26/pdf/2021-17532.pdf.
37 Executive Order 13873 defines transaction as “any acquisition, importation, transfer, installation,
dealing in, or use of any information and communications technology or service.” For more, see: Securing
the Information and Communications Technology and Services Supply Chain, 86 FR 4909 (2021).
38 CFIUS Summary Data 2008-2020, (Washington, DC; Department of the Treasury),
https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/206/CFIUS-Summary-Data-2008-2020.pdf#page=2.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

49

39 Securing the Information and Communications Technology and Services Supply Chain: Regulatory
Impact Analysis & Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis, (Washington, DC; Department of Commerce,
2021), https://www.regulations.gov/document/DOC-2019-0005-0074. In March 2021, the Commerce
Department subpoenaed multiple Chinese companies as part of an effort to investigate whether the
firms “meet the criteria set forth in” the ICTS rule.
40 The Department of Commerce Budget in Brief: Fiscal Year 2023, (Washington, DC: Department of
Commerce, 2022), https://www.commerce.gov/sites/default/files/2022-03/Commerce-FY2023-BIB-
Introduction.pdf#page=74.
41 Secure and Trusted Communications Networks Act of 2019, Pub. L. No. 116-124, 134 Stat. 158
(2020).
42 “List of Equipment and Services Covered by Section 2 of The Secure Networks Act,” U.S. Federal
Communications Commission, September 20, 2022, https://www.fcc.gov/supplychain/coveredlist. The
law specifically calls on commissioners to update the list to reflect determinations made by the FASC
and Commerce Department.
43 Funding would be made available to providers with fewer than 2 million customers.
44 Igor Bonifacic, “US carriers ask the FCC for $5.6 billion to replace Huawei and ZTE Equipment,”
Engadget, February 6, 2022, https://www.engadget.com/fcc-huawei-zte-rip-replace-funding-
211116669.html.
45 The House Energy and Commerce Committee approved a bill to cover the funding shortfall. See:
Christopher Cole, “House Panel Advances ‘Rip and Replace’ Shortfall Fix,” Law360, June 15, 2022,
https://www.law360.com/articles/1502739/house-panel-advances-rip-and-replace-shortfall-fix.
46 Margaret Harding McGill, Bethany Allen-Ebrahimiam, and Jonathan Swan, “FCC poised to ban all U.S.
sales of new Huawei and ZTE equipment,” Axios, October 13, 2022,
https://www.axios.com/2022/10/13/fcc-ban-huawei-zte-equipment.
47 The notice of proposed rulemaking also suggested commissioners are considering revoking existing
authorizations of covered ICTS. For more, see: U.S. Federal Communications Commission, “FCC
Proposes Ban on Equipment Authorizations for Devices Deemed to Pose a Threat to National Security,”
U.S. Federal Communications Commission, June 17, 2021, https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/DOC-
373363A1.pdf.
48 Rufus Brown, Van Ta, Douglas Bienstock, Geoff Ackerman, John Wolfram, “Does This Look Infected?
A Summary of APT41 Targeting U.S. State Governments,” Mandiant, March 8, 2022,
https://www.mandiant.com/resources/apt41-us-state-governments; Andy Greenberg, “Chinese Hacking
Spree Hit an ‘Astronomical’ Number of Victims,” Wired, March 5, 2021,
https://www.wired.com/story/china-microsoft-exchange-server-hack-victims/.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

50

49 Katie Bo Lillis, “CNN Exclusive: FBI investigation determined Chinese-made Huawei equipment could
distrupt U.S. nuclear arsenal communications,” CNN, July 25, 2022,
https://www.cnn.com/2022/07/23/politics/fbi-investigation-huawei-china-defense-department-
communications-nuclear/index.html.
50 These figures are based on the total retail value of the equipment and services purchased. They do
not account for any discounts or reimbursements the procuring organization may have received, and
exclude purchases of corporate subsidiaries, such as Lorex.
51 The CCP has long used subsidies, export financing, and other measures to drive down the cost of
Chinese technologies, making them more competitive in the global market. This financial support was
critical to Huawei’s rise as a global telecommunications giant.
52 The New York and Florida state legislatures also proposed bills aimed at combating Chinese
technology threats, but in both cases these measures died in committee. The New York bill, known as
SB-7584, would have implemented the same three prohibitions as Section 889: barring state agencies
from purchasing ICTS from Huawei, ZTE, Hikvision, Dahua, and Hytera; forbidding state agencies from
working with vendors that use covered ICTS; and preventing government funds from being used to
purchase this equipment. For more, see: New York S07584, 2020 Legislative Session (2020). The
Florida bill, known as SB-810, would have barred state agencies and local government entities from
purchasing any product in which more than 25 percent of the components were produced in China, as
well as all procurements from Facebook, Twitter, Alphabet, Apple, and Amazon. For more, see:
Prohibited Governmental Transactions Involving Certain Companies and Products, Florida S.B. 810
S07584, 2021 Legislative Session (2021).
53 Procurement of telecommunications or video surveillance equipment or services by agencies or certain
educational entities, La. Stat. tit. 38 § 2237.1 (2021).
54 Department of Administrative Services; companies owned or operated by China to bid on or submit a
proposal for a state contract; prohibit, Georgia S.B. 346, 2021-2022 Regular Session (2022); Georgia
also enacted an identical law prohibiting companies owned and operated by the Russian and
Belorussian governments from applying for state contracts. The measure, S.B. 562, was signed into law
the same day as S.B. 346.
55 Dozens of Chinese state-owned enterprises are already included on the Bureau of Industry and
Security’s Entity List, which generally prohibits U.S. individuals, companies, and government entities
from exporting to them.
56 Agency of Digital Services, Cybersecurity Standard Update 19-01, John Quinn,
https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/5744806/ADS-Cybersecurity-Directive-19-01.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

51

57 According to the order, these threat determinations can be based on documentation from “any
government agency, cybersecurity firm, or expert.” See: Office of the Governor, Executive Order Number
22-216: Strengthening Florida Cybersecurity Against Foreign Adversaries, Ron DeSantis,
https://www.flgov.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/Executive-Order-22-216.pdf.
58 Foreign gifts and contracts, Fla. Stat. § 286.101 (2022).
59 Bureau of Industry and Security, Fiscal Year 2022 President’s Budget Submission (Washington, DC;
U.S. Department of Commerce, 2021), https://www.commerce.gov/sites/default/files/2021-
06/fy2022_bis_congressional_budget_justification.pdf; The Department of Commerce Budget in Brief:
Fiscal Year 2023, (Washington, DC: Department of Commerce, 2022),
https://www.commerce.gov/sites/default/files/2022-03/Commerce-FY2023-BIB-
Introduction.pdf#page=74.
60 Ibid.
61 Emily Kilcrease, “Using a Sanctions Framework to Fix the ICTS Executive Order,” Lawfare, December
17, 2021, https://www.lawfareblog.com/using-sanctions-framework-fix-icts-executive-order.
62 Ibid.
63 Securing the Information and Communications Technology and Services Supply Chain: Regulatory
Impact Analysis & Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis, (Washington, DC; Department of Commerce,
2021), https://www.regulations.gov/document/DOC-2019-0005-0074.
64 Kilcrease, “Using a Sanctions Framework to Fix the ICTS Executive Order.”
65 Secure Equipment Act of 2021, Pub. L. No. 117-55, 135 Stat. 423 (2021).

66 Margaret Harding McGill, Bethany Allen-Ebrahimiam, and Jonathan Swan, “FCC poised to ban all U.S.
sales of new Huawei and ZTE equipment,” Axios, October 13, 2022,
https://www.axios.com/2022/10/13/fcc-ban-huawei-zte-equipment.

67 In a recent brief, the National Governors Association called on state policymakers to change
procurement rules and other risk management policies to defend against foreign technology threats in
the energy infrastructure sector. For more, see: Issue Brief: States’ Role in Foreign Threats in U.S. Energy
Critical Infrastructure Sectors, (Washington, DC; National Governors Association, 2022),
https://www.nga.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/NGA-Foreign-Influence-Energy-
Infrastructure_Jan2022.pdf.

68 Benjamin Freed, “CISA director offers governors advice on talking about cyber,” StateScoop, January
31, 2022, https://statescoop.com/cisa-jen-easterly-national-governors-association/;

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology |

52

69 Mol Doak, “What is the State of Ransomware Threats for State and Local Agencies?” StateTech,
March 1, 2022, https://statetechmagazine.com/article/2022/03/what-state-ransomware-threats-state-
and-local-agencies.
70 Joseph Marks, “A 2020 ransomware attack is still harming Baltimore teachers,” The Washington Post,
April 18, 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2022/04/18/2020-ransomware-attack-is-
still-harming-baltimore-teachers/; Lily Hay Newman, “The Ransomware that Hobbled Atlanta Will
Strike Again,” Wired, March 30, 2018, https://www.wired.com/story/atlanta-ransomware-samsam-will-
strike-again/.

71 Secure and Trusted Communications Networks Reimbursement Program: Frequently Asked
Questions (Washington, DC; Congressional Research Service, 2022),
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IN/IN11663.
72 “List of Equipment and Services Covered by Section 2 of The Secure Networks Act,” U.S. Federal
Communications Commission, September 20, 2022, https://www.fcc.gov/supplychain/coveredlist.
73 Tate Ryan-Mosley, “The world is moving closer to a new cold war fought with authoritarian tech,” MIT
Technology Review, September 22, 2022,
https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/09/22/1059823/cold-war-authoritarian-tech-china-iran-sco/.
