
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 1
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................................... 2
Introduction .............................................................................................................................................. 8
Beijing’s Drive for Sequencing Capacity: The Race from Genotype to Phenotype .......... 11
The BGI-China Success Story: China’s Hybrid Economy and the Power of National
Champions.............................................................................................................................................. 15
Piecing Together BGI’s Corporate Structure: China’s Hybrid Companies...................... 18
Overlapping Leadership Blurs the Lines Between BGI and MGI and the State ........... 21
State Provides BGI and MGI Funding ........................................................................................ 22
Government Guidance Funds Are Directly Invested in Both BGI and MGI .................... 26
How Companies Grow: Characteristics of MGI and BGI’s Market Growth .................... 35
China’s Hybrid Economy and Implications for the U.S. ............................................................ 41
Competitive Tools Available to the United States and Allies ................................................. 44
Preparing to Compete in the Genomic Future ........................................................................ 46
Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................. 49
Authors .................................................................................................................................................... 50
Acknowledgments ............................................................................................................................... 50
Appendix 1: Detailed Ownership Analysis ................................................................................... 51
Appendix 2: Key Areas of Biotechnology ..................................................................................... 92
Bioinformatics ................................................................................................................................... 92
Synthetic biology .............................................................................................................................. 92
Gain of function research ............................................................................................................... 92
Agricultural biotechnology ............................................................................................................ 93
Data privacy, data security, and population surveillance ..................................................... 93
Appendix 3: China’s Policies That Support Genomics and Biotechnology ........................ 94
Endnotes ................................................................................................................................................. 97

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2
Executive Summary
Biology has the potential to offer solutions to the biggest challenges facing society in
the 21st century, from the global climate crisis to food insecurity to new materials that
will transform industries and manufacturing at scale. How nations pursue the power to
engineer with living systems will reshape our ways of life, including whether our
strategies reflect and reinforce—or contradict—the values of democratic societies. The
United States and its allies must be positioned to harness these developments, ensure
that applications reflect our values, and protect against misuse. If an authoritarian
nation dominates the genomics space—and the industry that supports it—that nation
will control the development of next-generation medical technologies, research
standards and norms, and future genomics applications. This will have economic,
ethical, and security implications for the U.S. and other liberal democratic states.
However, in the changing nature of global competition, what will be even more
important than any one technology or any one field is how open market economies
ensure a level playing field for their companies and researchers. Using BGI Group* as a
case study, we dive into the complex world of China’s hybrid economic system that
blurs private and public, civilian and military to meet the goals of the State. This system
creates market distortions and undermines the global norms of science by leveraging
researchers as well as academic and commercial entities to further national priorities,
rather than open, mutually beneficial collaborations or fair commercial competition that
fosters innovation and is free from market-distorting subsidies and restrictions.
Through its policies and programs, China uses the power of the State to not only
advantage its own companies but to disadvantage others, with the goal of dominating
these industries of the future.
BGI Group is the “pointy end of the spear” for Beijing’s industrial policy for
biotechnology. China’s policies to develop its Strategic Emerging Industries—including
biotechnology—were first issued in 2013 and re-issued in 2020; they provide a
blueprint for its goals of dominating key sectors through interconnectedness and
central planning. These plans focus on first securing the domestic China market, as a

* Throughout this piece we will refer to “BGI” to include the mix of subsidiaries, affiliates, branches and
holding companies that make up BGI Group. We will identify individually listed companies when what
we present references that particular entity, such as BGI Genomics and MGI Tech. We will explain this
complex corporate structure later in the paper.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3
first step on the path to building global champions. Using a playbook that reaped
success in the development of Huawei and 5G, China uses R&D subsidies, process
reforms, export financing, diplomatic support, and procurement rules for a guaranteed
market in China that pushes out foreign competition and creates an unfair playing field.
Observing the growth of BGI Genomics and MGI Tech is watching China’s industrial
policies unfold in real time. BGI Group has grown into an international competitor,
taking on the same role in the biotech space as Huawei has in telecommunications. BGI
Genomics and MGI Tech have financed their growth in ways that are not typical for
growth-stage public or private companies of their scale, and point to direct involvement
of the state in funding their growth. Moreover, their publicly disclosed capital markets
activity seems at odds with the rapid expansion of market share, the scope of
international activities, and the number of affiliates both companies maintain.
The Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Industry and Information Technology’s 2021
“Buy China” policy, or Order 551: Guidance of Government Procurement of Imported
Products, outlined new rules for procurement of “315 local products, including 178
medical items.”1 MGI Tech products such as sequencing, PCR, mass spectrometers, and
sample preparation instruments and devices are all included in the list. MGI Tech has
openly stated that it sees this “trend of domestic substitution” as an opportunity to
increase its market share.2 These policies directly impact the ability of foreign firms like
Illumina and Thermo Fisher Scientific to maintain market share in China. Moreover,
China’s evolving regulatory environment—and resultant state support to companies like
BGI Group—is expected to enhance the companies’ ability to grow domestically.
To better understand these corporations, as well as their global reach, accumulation of
genomic data worldwide, and support from the Chinese government, we assembled
information from financial data, public disclosures, and databases. We assess that at a
minimum, we have uncovered an unusual structure that is inconsistent with the norms
of most global companies and demonstrates BGI Genomics, MGI Tech, and Complete
Genomics’ (a major subsidiary of MGI Tech based in the United States) ties to the
Chinese government. We have uncovered a lack of transparency with nested LLC
structures, among not only BGI Group but also its investor base, that obfuscate how the
company is funded and conducts operations. Additionally, we found that other Western
sources such as PitchBook, Refinitiv, and Crunchbase did not have the same
comprehensive coverage of Chinese companies as our primary data sources—
highlighting the lack of transparency in China’s commercial ecosystem and the difficulty
in conducting due diligence.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4
With China’s recent moves to further restrict the flow of information in its economy and
to tighten regulations and surveillance over foreign companies and investors in the
People’s Republic of China (PRC), we anticipate that it will become increasingly difficult
to understand the real nature of China’s companies like BGI Group.
As evidenced by numerous financial abnormalities we identified within BGI Genomics
and MGI Tech, the BGI Group entities exemplify Chinese companies that are publicly
listed on international stock exchanges but do not conform to global market norms. Key
findings include:
A majority of the shareholders having direct or indirect ties to the Chinese Communist
Party (CCP).
• BGI Group’s shareholder base is majority-controlled by corporate insiders and
state-affiliated entities. Approximately 59% of the company’s shares float on the
stock exchange, while the remaining 41% are privately held. Over half of the
private shareholders are government-affiliated, and an additional several are
insiders. Meanwhile, via the publicly traded shares, state-linked shareholders
and shareholders affiliated with BGI Group together control 57% of the
company. Effectively no power or influence can be wielded by those dozens of
shareholders who together split the remaining 2% of the public shares.

• Approximately 77% of MGI Tech’s shares float publicly—that is, are traded on
the public markets—while 23% remain privately held. Looking at the publicly
floated shares, the vast majority of those shares—69% of all MGI Tech shares—
are held by either state-affiliated or BGI Group-affiliated entities. Looking at the
privately held shares, 75% of those shareholders are government-affiliated.
Direct investment into both BGI and MGI by multiple Chinese government guidance
funds.
• BGI Genomics and MGI Tech (and, as a result, their U.S. subsidiary Complete
Genomics) are supported by China’s practice of channeling capital to select
companies through government guidance funds (政府引导基金). Guidance funds
are public-private investment funds that aim to both produce financial returns
and further the state’s industrial policy goals, including China’s pursuit of
leadership in strategic and emerging technologies.3 BGI and MGI rely primarily
on the state as the primary source to fund their operations and global expansion.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5
• Beyond the involvement of government guidance funds, both BGI Genomics and
MGI Tech raise funding directly from other state-owned enterprises as a primary
means to fund their operations and global expansion.
BGI Genomics has also undertaken a number of capital markets activities that are
unusual in global markets outside of China.
• These activities include pledging shares, accepting guarantees from executive
officers, and engaging in unusual related-party transactions that make it look
unlike a regular public company. Beijing has historically used economic and
financial tools like these to support its national champions.
Overlapping current and former leadership roles blur the lines between BGI and MGI
and the State.
• Several key executives simultaneously hold leadership positions in multiple parts
of the organization, as well as government-related positions in State Key Labs or
Government Guidance Funds—this is similar to the leadership movements of
State Owned Enterprises (SOE) where individuals move between the SOE,
research enterprises such as State Key Labs, Universities and Chinese Academy
of Sciences, as well as positions in Chinese ministries and government offices.
For example, Wang Jian (汪建) is the chairman of MGI (深圳华大智造科技股份有限公
司) and, through Zhizao Holdings (智造控股) and Huazhan Venture Capital (华瞻创
投), owns 52% of its stocks. He is also the co-founder and chairman of the board
of directors of BGI Group, and according to 2022 MGI prospectus is chairman of
both Shenzhen Huada Gene Technology Co Ltd. (深圳华大基因科技有限公司) and
BGI Genomics (深圳华大基因股份有限公司).4
Despite the importance of genomics and initial investments into the Human Genome
Project, the U.S. still lacks a comprehensive national strategy for the bioeconomy. China
will gain an advantage in technology competition if we don’t acknowledge and address
those areas where national security and market forces diverge. The early stages of
development for these new knowledge-based industries—such as biotechnology—will
be most critical for government support and policies. These “first-mover” advantages
may prove to be so critical that those nations that fail to make similar investments and
commitments may have difficulty catching up. This gives centrally funded programs
targeting specific new technologies an advantage. An erosion in leadership could
constrain Washington’s policy options such as the United States’ ability to set global

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6
technology norms, regulations, and standards, as well as harness and control access to
technologies for military purposes.5
Our analysis of BGI highlights the depth and breadth of China’s use of a hybrid
economic model that necessitates new kinds of actions if the U.S. and like-minded
countries are going to compete in technology development, and will require new
approaches to level the playing field. Steps the U.S. (as well as its allies) can take
include:
• Secure U.S. genomics data. Protect U.S. citizens’ genomic data so that it cannot
be exploited by foreign entities, without overcompensating such that innovation
is stifled. For example, developing sequencing capabilities that support both
research and clinical settings; setting regulations on foreign-funded, supported,
and controlled entities’ access to U.S. genomic data; and creating platforms
where U.S. researchers and clinicians can share data securely.

• Foster U.S. companies (and companies in allied countries) so they can compete
with entities that are state-supported. The CCP’s policies have created an
ecosystem in which Chinese companies are not neutral actors* nor fair
competitors.

• Reconfigure anti-monopoly and other laws to reflect the nature of global
competition and incorporate the impact that state-supported companies have on
U.S. companies’ ability to compete.

• Treat the research base as critical infrastructure. The U.S. should not be
dependent on China for our current medicines, future medicine, or tools of
discovery. This will require rethinking the supply chain, investments in
biomanufacturing, and talent development.

• Support translating R&D into useful applications. Harnessing the acquisition
process, the U.S. government can support not just precision medicine but the
multiple areas this technology will touch. Too often the U.S. funds basic research

* By neutral actors, we mean that they function in the same way companies, researchers, and universities
function in open liberal democracies. This is not the case due to China’s policies and laws.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7
but then does not provide an avenue for the discoveries to either be
commercialized or used as a public good.

• Think the unthinkable.6 These technologies can be used in ways we would
consider unethical. Understanding the depth and breadth of research globally
and discussing ways to regulate—as well as develop countermeasures—with
allies and like-minded countries will ensure we are better prepared for misuse.
Policy solutions will need to look beyond traditional trade remedies such as export
controls and tariffs because, in the early stages of these new technologies, there are
not-yet-produced tradeable goods. Traditional trade remedies such as tariffs and trade
sanctions probably will be ineffective at correcting all of the imbalances in
biotechnology, which relies on know-how and expertise, as well as the accumulation of
genomic data. They will also have limited impact on China’s major national initiatives
because China views this as a key part of its future and U.S.–China competition. The
ultimate lesson from past successes, 5G development, and Operation Warp Speed is
that the U.S. government and like-minded allies have tools that can be used to foster
the development of emerging technologies, and that they should not be afraid to take a
proactive approach to foster the building blocks of future discovery and the national
innovation base.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8
Introduction
Emerging technologies are increasingly at the center of global competition, providing
the foundational research and development that underpins future industries and drives
economic growth. Key among them will be developments in biotechnology* that will
touch on almost every aspect of society including creating new capabilities for
medicine, agriculture, energy, materials, and the environment. While these technologies
present extraordinary opportunities, they also have the potential to introduce new
threats, such as synthetic pathogens, catastrophic laboratory accidents, and ethical
dilemmas surrounding human enhancement, the use of non-human primates, and the
modification of human embryos.
China, recognizing the promise of this field, has made growing its biotechnology
capabilities a national priority, stating that it wants to transform China from a biotech
power (生物技术大国) to a biotech superpower (生物技术强国)7—allowing it to benefit
across multiple sectors. Leading in different aspects of the bioeconomy—including the
tools and technical infrastructure needed for discovery—would enable Beijing to
dominate the many fields that will be enabled by advances in biotechnology, including
understanding what genes do. This would allow China to both control the development
of next-generation applications and create dependencies worldwide.
Similar to what happened with Huawei and 5G,† China has put in place a multi-decade
effort to support this goal, which includes nationally guided efforts aimed at advancing
basic and applied R&D; strengthening research institutes, laboratories, and test
facilities; promoting civil-military integration of science and technology (S&T) research;
improving manufacturing expertise and capabilities; and developing human capital. This
supports both economic goals as well as traditional national security goals, including
advanced surveillance and biological weapons (BW) development. In particular, China
has supported sequencing capacity and collection of genomic data,‡ as well as fostering

* We recognize biotechnology is a broad field, but for the purposes of this paper we use it to refer to the
ability to use biology for medicine and agriculture, as well as future applications made possible by
unlocking the secrets of the genome. We also include the technical infrastructure and tools that will
enable these discoveries.
† By referencing China’s “5G experience,” we mean how China grew to dominate the 5G market through
government support. Please see: https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/the-huawei-moment/.
‡ Appendix 2 provides an overview of these policies.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9
a constellation of companies that make up its national champions. This blueprint—
which worked successfully with fostering Huawei and China’s development of 5G—
enabled China to drive technical standards, become the supplier of choice worldwide
due to support from the Chinese government, and dominate in this foundational
technology. The tools China used include R&D subsidies, process reforms, export
financing, diplomatic support, and procurement rules for a guaranteed market in
China—pushing out foreign competition because of an unfair market access
environment.
Evolving from a Chinese Academy of Sciences research institute to a global player in
genomics and sequencing tools, BGI Group*—which includes a mix of holding
companies, BGI Genomics, MGI Tech, and their associated subsidiaries, affiliates,
associates, and branches—has become China’s biotech national champion, running its

* Throughout this piece we will refer to “BGI” to include the mix of subsidiaries, affiliates, branches, and
holding companies. We will identify individually listed companies when what we present references that
particular entity, such as BGI Genomics and MGI Tech.
Box 1. What Do We Mean by Global Norms?
Open liberal democracies share well-established norms to protect research and
commercial relationships. These include the following:
• Integrity and trust guide researchers’ and institutions’ behavior.
• Transparency (especially with regard to methods, data used, collaborators,
and sources of funding) enables constructive review and scrutiny by peers
and society.
• Research collaborations allow the rapid sharing of knowledge while
protecting the rights of inventors and researchers.
These norms allow researchers to trust their colleagues; behave ethically; protect
the subjects that are researched; know who they are collaborating or working with;
and share the benefits of the research and data.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10
national gene bank, orchestrating bio-prospecting* globally through China’s Belt and
Road Initiative and Huoyan labs,† and becoming the collaborator of choice for many due
to its lower costs enabled by government support.
What follows is a close look at some of the drivers of the new technological race to
understand what genes do, the race from “genotype to phenotype,” and why this is
increasingly important to U.S. national security. However, in the changing nature of
global competition, what will be even more important than any one technology or any
one field is how open market economies ensure a level playing field for their companies
and researchers. Using BGI as a case study, we dive into the complex world of China’s
hybrid economic system that blurs private and public, civilian and military to meet the
goals of the state. This system creates market distortions and undermines the global
norms of science by leveraging researchers and academic and commercial entities to
further the goals of the state, rather than open collaborations that benefit both parties,
or fair commercial competition free from market-distorting subsidies and restrictions.
Through its policies and programs, China uses the power of the state to not only
advantage its own companies, but to disadvantage others with the goal of dominating
these industries of the future.
However, unlike what the U.S. faced with China’s 5G champion Huawei, there are
proactive steps the U.S. and other open liberal democracies can take to ensure that the
research and tools of discovery reflect democratic values and are not controlled by a
strategic competitor. It will require a holistic approach that recognizes those areas
where national security and the market diverge. It will also require a clear vision and
committed government funding support that prioritizes long-term national security and
national economic security over short-term cost savings, cheap goods, and corporate
profits for companies operating in the biotech and medical fields. It will require the U.S.
government to take a more active role in supporting and protecting U.S. and allied
countries’ biotech companies, as it has done in other sectors such as aerospace and
chips development. A strategy that fosters the best of biology innovation and provides
support so that our companies can compete in what has become an unequal playing

* By bioprospecting, we mean collecting the genomic data of plants, animals, pathogens , and humans
worldwide.
† Labs in BGI’s affiliated virus detection laboratory built during the COVID-19 pandemic to support
disease detection, prevention, and control.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 11
field will have implications far wider than biology itself, and can provide our own
blueprint for fair and balanced technology competition in the future.
Beijing’s Drive for Sequencing Capacity: The Race from Genotype to
Phenotype
Understanding what genes do—so that society can harness that knowledge to
understand human and organism traits, discover the causes of diseases, and harness
this knowledge for a wide range of applications—will drive competition in
biotechnology. If an authoritarian nation dominates the genomics space—and the
industry that supports it—that nation will control the development of next-generation
medical technologies, research standards and norms, and future genomics applications.
This will have economic, ethical, and security implications for the U.S. and other liberal
democratic states.
DNA sequencing—or the general laboratory technique for determining the exact
sequence of nucleotides, or bases, in a DNA molecule—allow scientists to begin to
understand which gene or group of genes are responsible for which physical
characteristics.8 Sequencing capacity and development of new sequencing and analysis
tools are essential to understanding the genome and driving discovery and impact
almost every aspect of biology. This ecosystem consists of companies that produce the
instruments and equipment required for gene sequencing, as well as the supporting
reagents and consumables for these processes; institutions providing sequencing
services, such as services for basic research and for clinical and medical genetic testing;
and various end users of gene sequencing technology and genetic testing, such as
medical institutions, research institutes, pharmaceutical companies, and academic
users, as well as government and military institutions.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 12
China has made developing sequencing capacity a national priority12 and has supported
the development of companies and research institutions that are beginning to dominate
each part of the ecosystem. The first part of the sequencing ecosystem is made up of
the companies that make the tools of discovery: gene sequencing equipment.
Technological advancement in sequencing equipment has driven the rapid growth in
sequencing speed and the corresponding rapid reduction in the cost to sequence
genomes, enabling the creation of new diagnostics, new research on different functions
of the genome, and new therapeutics. The largest companies/players in this space
include global market leaders Illumina and Thermo Fisher Scientific. In addition, MGI
Tech Co.—and its U.S. subsidiary, Complete Genomics—are recent competitors with
Illumina and Thermo Fisher in next-generation sequencing. This segment of the market
is currently dominated by U.S. and U.K. companies—with the exception of MGI Tech

* Studies done of the bioeconomy include the 2020 National Academies of Sciences’ “Safeguarding the
Bioeconomy” report.
Box 2. The Bioeconomy—Driver of Future Industry
Developments in the biosciences will touch almost every aspect of society, and
impact economic development. While there is no one estimate of all the pieces of
the bioeconomy,* examples of its impact include the Human Genome Project (HGP),
which officially ran from 1990 until 2003; it was a multinational effort to sequence
the human genome and facilitated the emergence of the modern genetic
sequencing and genomics industry. From 1988 until 2010, the U.S. government
invested approximately $12.8 billion in the HGP and related genomics research,
generating $796 billion in economic activity. In 2010, the genomics industry—
which was created in large part by the initial R&D investment by the U.S.
government—directly supported more than 51,000 jobs, indirectly supported more
than 310,000 jobs, and added $67 billion to the U.S. economy.9 The recent
executive order on biomanufacturing10 is focused on yet another key area of
growth. The ability to harness biology for multiple applications will have a
tremendous impact on GDP. According to a Congressional Research Service
report,11 the estimated direct economic impact of bio-based products, services, and
processes to the economy will be $4 trillion per year globally over the next 10 years.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 13
and its U.S. subsidiary, Complete Genomics, that will begin selling sequencing
technology into the U.S. market.
Gene sequencing services make up the second part of the ecosystem. These are
companies that purchase sequencing equipment and consumables and use them to
perform sequencing and genetic testing for their own research or for clients such as
medical institutions or research institutes. Because genomic data is massive in scale
and sequencing is complex, industrial players are incentivized to purchase large-scale
equipment with higher throughput. (Less costly, smaller equipment that is simpler and
easier to operate, with flexible throughput, is used in clinical settings.) This part of the
ecosystem is increasingly dominated by Chinese players, including BGI Genomics,
Novogene, Biomarker Technologies (BMKGENE), Genetron Health, Berry Genomics,
AmoyDx, New Horizon Health, and DaAn Gene—creating a dependency where global
researchers rely on gene sequencing from Chinese entities.13 When the rest of the
world’s research institutions rely on Chinese companies for sequencing, it gives
Chinese entities—and the Chinese government—access to not only worldwide
genomic data, but also the world’s biotech research ideas, putting the foundation of
global biotech research at risk of IP theft, exploitation, and manipulation.14
Finally, end users of gene sequencing technology and genetic testing, such as medical
institutions, research institutes, pharmaceutical companies, and academic users, as well
as government and military institutions, make up the last part of the ecosystem. These
applications include research on infectious disease, metagenomics, and reproductive
genetics, as well as tumor diagnosis and the development of targeted therapeutics.15

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 14
Figure 1: Gene Sequencing Ecosystem

Source: CSET analysis.16

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 15
The BGI-China Success Story: China’s Hybrid Economy and the Power of
National Champions17
Despite the importance of genomics and initial investments into the Human Genome
Project, the U.S. still lacks a comprehensive national strategy for the bioeconomy. At
the same time, China has made biotechnology—and genomics in particular—a national
priority. A combination of long-term planning, government assistance, and subsidies
that enable the BGI Group to provide services and equipment below market cost has
allowed it to become the global leader it is today. Beijing’s ability and willingness to use
its domestic market, strategic planning, and global reach to foster BGI’s growth
provides it a large advantage over its competitors, who exist in the market and are
subject to traditional market forces. In many ways, BGI is the “pointy end of the spear”
for Beijing’s industrial policy for biotechnology.
BGI—formerly the Beijing Genomics Institute—evolved from part of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences to participate in the Human Genome Project in 1999, to become
the hybrid company it is today. Funding from the China Development Bank in 2010
allowed BGI to purchase 128 Illumina DNA sequencers, setting BGI up as one of the
largest DNA sequencing facilities in the world.18 Later, when it went public on the
Shenzhen Stock Exchange, BGI received over $30 million in subsidies from Chinese
state funds—and this is only the amount disclosed publicly.19
BGI works closely with the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and China’s agencies and
ministries, bringing Beijing’s biotech ambitions to reality. It runs China’s National
GeneBank DataBase (CNGBdb), which was approved in 2011 by China’s National
Development and Reform Commission, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology, and Ministry of Health and Family Planning, further blurring its
connections to the CCP. This partnership leverages the sequencing capability of BGI to
form a biorepository hosting tens of millions of samples for humans, plants, animals,
and microorganisms, banking DNA to “support science and technology development.”20

BGI leverages its ties to the government to develop products for the global market. For
example, the development of the prenatal NIFTY* test was initially funded by the Key
Laboratory Project in Shenzhen, with scientists from BGI, hospitals, and universities

* NIFTY is a noninvasive prenatal test designed to provide similar information to amniocentesis.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 16
contributing to the project.21 In this study, participants were recruited from the local
hospitals in Shenzhen. The funding support as well as a sourced participant pool
allowed BGI to test and develop NIFTY. In addition to providing the service of prenatal
screening, BGI also uses data from the NIFTY tests to publish in high-impact journals,
both bolstering Chinese science and driving innovation through access to this unique
data source that is not shared with other researchers.22
BGI has been involved in more controversial activities for the Chinese government as
well, such as the collection of genomic data from China’s ethnic minorities in Xinjiang.23
In Xinjiang, BGI has collected over 18 million people’s genetic data on behalf of the
state, under the auspices of anti-terrorism campaigns or promises of health care.24 In
question is the lack of consent as well as the state’s use of this information for
surveillance. Additionally, BGI researchers have subsequently used the collected
information in studies focused on determining facial features of different groups based
on their genomic data. Several of these published studies have been retracted by the
journals due to ethical concerns surrounding the collection and use of the DNA.25

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 17
Figure 2: BGI's Evolution

Source: CSET Analysis and press reports26

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 18
Piecing Together BGI’s Corporate Structure: China’s Hybrid Companies
Given BGI Group’s structure and global reach, its accumulation of genomic data
worldwide, and its support from the Chinese government, we set out to better
understand its corporate structure, as well as the depth and breadth of its activities.
BGI Group is a massive international entity, and mapping the corporate family involved
assembling information from several sources. BGI Genomics is publicly traded on the
Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SHE: 300676), and therefore provides public disclosures.
An analysis of BGI Genomics’ annual and semi-annual reports (年半年度报告 and 年年度报
告) from 2019 through 2022 provided an initial subsidiary, branch, associate, and
affiliate list. We also analyzed the 2022 Prospectus of MGI Tech (深圳华大智造科技股份有
限公司), a major affiliate of BGI Genomics, which went public on the Shanghai Stock
Exchange on September 9, 2022 (SHA: 688114) for additional subsidiaries, associates,
and affiliates. These five documents served as the starting point for our analysis. As a
way to most accurately portray the complex and overlapping nature of BGI Group, BGI
Genomics, MGI Tech, and their holding companies, we rely on the taxonomy and
lexicon taken from these reports.
We obtained these documents from CNINFO, an investment firm in Shenzhen, China.
We complemented our primary sources with corporate press releases, searching the
Refinitiv (now LSEG) database of corporate entities, and Baidu searches (the primary
Chinese search engine). Together, these sources provided us with information about
BGI Genomics and MGI Tech, such as the nature of their corporate relationships, their
subsidiaries, affiliates and associated companies, and their stockholders and holdings.
Altogether, we extracted 445 corporations, research institutions, branches, and banks
related to the BGI corporate family.* We also utilized data available via PitchBook and
S&P Capital IQ databases to examine the public and private shareholder base of BGI
Genomics and MGI Tech and the ultimate beneficial ownership of shareholders.
However, because we relied on disclosure documents for two publicly traded
companies within a much larger, privately held corporate family, we have variable levels

* We want to note that we analyzed a total of five disclosure documents capturing corporate information
from 2019–2022, with our most recent document being BGI Genomics’ 2022 annual report (published in
2023), and therefore we may not have included information from entities that severed relationships with
BGI or MGI prior to 2019, that were included in previous discloses but dropped in later ones, or that
engaged in activities with BGI or MGI during fiscal year 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 19
of information for the various entities identified in our analysis. For example, the main
holding company for BGI Genomics is privately held, and therefore does not have
widely available disclosed documents. As a result, other entities within the larger BGI
corporate family are only identified if they directly relate to BGI Genomics (such as
through joint ventures or holdings). Similar limitations exist for the MGI Tech branch of
the corporate family. In addition, we did not verify the validity of the claims in the
disclosure documents, nor did we ensure that the list of entities we found is exhaustive.
However, given the complexity of these corporations, we assess that we have at a
minimum uncovered an unusual structure that is inconsistent with the norms of most
global companies and demonstrate BGI Genomics, MGI Tech, and Complete Genomics’
(a major subsidiary of MGI Tech based in the United States) ties to the Chinese
government.
We cross-checked other databases when possible, and an interesting point to note is
that we found that other sources such as Refinitiv and Crunchbase did not have the
same comprehensive coverage of Chinese companies as our primary data sources.
Given China’s recent moves to further restrict the flow of information in its economy
and to tighten regulations and surveillance over foreign companies and investors in the
PRC, we anticipate that it will become increasingly difficult to understand the real
nature of companies like BGI. We have uncovered a lack of transparency even prior to
these changes, with nested LLC structures among not only BGI affiliates but also its
investor base, that obfuscate how the company is funded and conducts operations.
For this analysis we categorized the relationships among companies—taken from the
documents discussed above—as follows:
Primary companies: One of the four main, “controlling” companies in this network:
• Shenzhen BGI Technology Co., Ltd. (深圳华大基因科技有限公司), the parent holding
company of BGI Genomics, referred to in this report as “BGI Group”
• BGI Genomics Co., Ltd. (深圳华大基因股份有限公司), referred to in this report as
“BGI Genomics”
• Shenzhen Huada Intelligent Manufacturing Holdings Co., Ltd. (深圳华大智造控股有
限公司), the parent holding company of MGI Tech
• MGI Tech Co., Ltd. (深圳华大智造科技股份有限公司), referred to in this report as
"MGI Tech" (note that MGI Tech changed its name from 深圳华大智造科技有限公司)

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 20
Subsidiary (of BGI or MGI): An entity with more than 50% equity owned (directly or
indirectly) by one of BGI Genomics or MGI Tech. These include entities such as the
following:
• Complete Genomics
• Wuhan Huada Zhizao Bioengineering Co., Ltd. (“Wuhan Biology”)
• BGI Genomics Canada Ltd.
Affiliate (of BGI and/or MGI): An entity owned in part by BGI Genomics and/or MGI
Tech.
• Wuhan Guao Gene Technology Co., Ltd. (“Guao Gene”)
• Suzhou Synbio Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (“Suzhou Synbio”)
• Kunshan MGI Yunying Medical Technology Co., Ltd. (“Kunshan Yunying”)
Associate (of BGI and/or MGI): An entity controlled by one of BGI’s or MGI’s senior
executives.
• Shenzhen BGI Technology Innovation Center Co., Ltd.
• BGI Luoyang Agricultural Innovation Center
• CITIC Industrial Investment Fund Management Co., Ltd.
Branch (of MGI): One of the eight regional branches of MGI.
Other: An entity with some other relationship to either MGI or BGI. This includes the
following kinds of organizations:
• Exchanges in which BGI- or MGI-related companies are traded, including:
o Shanghai Greenwoods Jingqi Investment Center (Limited Partnership)

• Banks and investment firms with major holdings in BGI or MGI, such as:
o Bank of China Co., Ltd.—China Merchants State Certificate Biomedical
Index Hualing Securities Investment Fund

• Companies identified in prospectuses but lacking a clear explanation of
relationships. Below are some examples:
o Beijing Rongzhi Lian Technology Co., Ltd.
o Shaanxi Hua Darre Technology Co., Ltd.
o Shenzhen Huada Clinical Examination Center

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 21
Figure 3: BGI’s Structure

Source: CSET analysis.
Overlapping Leadership Blurs the Lines Between BGI and MGI and the State
Further complicating the corporate structure of BGI Group, BGI Genomics and MGI
Tech, several key executives simultaneously hold leadership positions in multiple parts
of the organization, in each organization, as well as government-related positions in

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 22
State Key Labs or Government Guidance Funds or actual government positions. This is
similar to the leadership movements of State Owned Enterprises (SOE) where
individuals move between the SOE, research enterprises such as State Key Labs,
Universities and Chinese Academy of Sciences, as well as positions in Chinese
ministries and government offices. For example, Wang Jian (汪建) is the chairman of
MGI (深圳华大智造科技股份有限公司) and, through Zhizao Holdings (智造控股) and Huazhan
Venture Capital (华瞻创投), owns 52% of its stocks. He is also the cofounder and
chairman of the board of directors of BGI Group, and according to 2022 MGI
prospectus, chairman of both Shenzhen Huada Gene (深圳华大基因科技有限公司) and BGI
Genomics (深圳华大基因股份有限公司).27 Other examples include:
• Xu Xun, executive director of BGI Group, chief scientist of BGI Group, director of
BGI-Research, director of the International Planning & Development Center,
director of the Key Provincial Laboratory of High Throughput Genome
Sequencing and Gene Editing (a state organization), former CEO of BGI
Americas and executive director of China National GeneBank DataBase, a
government organization.

• Mei Yonghong, director and executive vice president of BGI Group, previously
held multiple positions in the government including as deputy director of the
Ministry of Science and Technology and mayor of Jining, Shandong Province
before joining BGI in 2015.28

• Mu Feng, CEO of MGI, previously served as the rotating CEO of the BGI Group in
2017.

• Lu Jun, currently serves as executive director, chief operating officer, and director
of the China Regional Planning and Development Center of BGI Group. Before
joining BGI, he served as secretary of the Suzhou Municipal Party Committee
and party secretary of the Communist Youth League in Jiangsu Province.
State Provides BGI and MGI Funding
In addition to examining the corporate structure of BGI, we also examined its corporate
funding. Using the same documents and sources described above, we examined
funding sources, shareholder base, and market share trends to gain a better
understanding of both BGI and MGI’s rapid growth, how they compare to their
competitors in the market, whether their revenue and global reach are aligned, and who

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 23
financially supports their developments. We examined the public shareholding of both
companies, which are dominated by executives of both companies and affiliates on the
one hand, and China’s government-linked and state-owned entities on the other. As
evidenced by numerous financial abnormalities, which will be highlighted later in this
paper, the BGI Group—which includes BGI Genomics and MGI Tech—exemplified
Chinese companies that are publicly listed on international stock exchanges but do not
conform to global market norms. The evolving regulatory environment—and resultant
state support—is expected to enhance the companies’ ability to grow domestically.
What our examination found was a collection of patterns that indicated the degree of
control and influence that the CCP and the Chinese state have over BGI Group,
including BGI Genomics, MGI Tech and the associated subsidiaries, affiliates, and
associates via various mechanisms; a collection of financial behaviors that are
uncommon among for-profit companies operating under market pressures; and various
forms of guarantees and financing that are also irregular and provide clear advantages
to the BGI Group when competing with other companies, both domestic and
international. These include:
• A majority of the shareholders having direct or indirect ties the CCP.
• Direct investment into both BGI Genomics and MGI Tech by multiple Chinese
government guidance funds.
• BGI and MGI relying primarily on the state as the primary source to fund their
operations and global expansion.
While any one of these may occur in some form in any company anywhere in the world,
the totality of these collectively is not normal in free market societies and indicates the
high degree of coupling that exists between the CCP, the Chinese state, and the
BGI/MGI constellation of companies. Below we explain each of these in turn.
Shareholder base: A majority of MGI and BGI’s shareholders have direct or indirect ties
to the CCP.
MGI Tech Shareholders
Approximately 77% of MGI Tech’s shares float publicly—that is, are traded on the
public markets—while 23% remain privately held. Of the 16 publicly identified current
private shareholders, 75% are government-affiliated, including funds managed by

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 24
CITIC Group, a state-owned enterprise (SOE); Shanghai International Group Assets
Management (a subsidiary of state-owned Shanghai International Group); and others
(see Appendix 1). China State Development and Investment Corporation (SDIC), the
largest state-owned investment holding company in China, holds shares in both MGI
and BGI.
Among the MGI’s public shareholders, of those shareholders owning 0.05% of the
company or greater, 76% (22 entities) are directly state-backed or have state links.* Of
the four non-state-affiliated shareholders (note there are an additional three
shareholders whose ultimate affiliation could not be determined), one is chairman and
cofounder Wang Jian, who holds 46.8% of the common stock outstanding and
represents the largest shareholder in the company. The second largest single
shareholder is CPE Investment, which is the private equity arm of CITIC Securities, an
affiliate of state-owned investment company CITIC Group. In total, eight entities
controlled by CITIC are invested in MGI, representing 6.6% of the public shareholding
and an additional undisclosed portion of the private shareholding.
While ownership of shares in a company does not necessarily translate to control
(which is typically determined primarily by the company’s formal governance structure),
a company’s shareholder base is still an important barometer of its sources of capital
and may additionally indicate sources of direct or indirect influence.
The lack of transparency associated with the Chinese state’s true level of involvement
in each investor complicates assessing state links among BGI and MGI shareholders.
For instance, one of MGI’s larger single shareholders, Hubei Science and Technology
Investment Group Co. (2.4% stake), is a state-owned holding group engaged in
industrial investment, development, and construction that is based in Wuhan and was
founded in 2005 with the specific aim of promoting economic development in the
province.29 Here, the state link is unambiguous. In comparison, shareholder Huatai Zijin
Investment Co. (1.6% stake) is an affiliate of Huatai Securities, one of the country’s
largest securities brokerages. Huatai Securities itself is now publicly traded. However, it
remains at least partially controlled by the government of Jiangsu province, where the
company was founded in 1991, via a collective 29.3% stake held by various entities
controlled by the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of

* For an additional three public shareholders, we were unable to determine the ultimate ownership of the
entity (state-linked vs. private/other).

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 25
Jiangsu Provincial Government (see Figure 4 below). (Indeed, four of Huatai Securities’
top five shareholders are affiliated with the Jiangsu provincial government).30 This
example illustrates the difficulty in untangling the extent and manner in which the CCP
is directly or indirectly influencing, funding, and directing the activities of MGI and BGI.
Figure 4: Illustrative Ownership Example, MGI Tech Co.

Source: CSET analysis; S&P Capital IQ database as of January 25, 2024.
BGI Genomics Shareholders
BGI’s shareholder base looks similar, and is majority controlled by corporate insiders
and state-affiliated entities. Approximately 59% of the company’s shares float on the
stock exchange, while the remaining 41% are privately held. Of the 41 private
shareholders, 22 are government-affiliated (54%), while three are entities affiliated
with or related to BGI Group (7%). Likewise, via the publicly traded shares, state-linked
shareholders and shareholders affiliated with BGI Group together control another 57%
of the company. Specifically, for the public shares, of the 27 investors holding more that
0.05% of the company, 11 are state-affiliated (10% of total shareholding), while an
additional seven are affiliated entities or insiders (48%). Effectively no power or

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 26
influence can be wielded by those dozens of shareholders who together split the
remaining 2% of the public shares.
Government Guidance Funds Are Directly Invested in Both BGI and MGI
BGI, MGI, and as a result, Complete Genomics, are supported by China’s practice of
channeling capital to select companies through the use of government guidance funds
[政府引导基金]. Guidance funds are public-private investment funds that aim to both
produce financial returns and further the state’s industrial policy goals, including
China’s pursuit of leadership in strategic and emerging technologies.31 Unlike subsidies
funded through grants or low-cost loans, guidance funds represent direct equity
subsidies to industry. With their government backing and strategic mandate, guidance
funds offer longer-term “patient capital,” a critical resource for emerging technologies—
like those in biotech—with lengthy R&D cycles.32 In this way, state investment remains
a major driver of venture capital and other innovation-oriented investment in China, and
the state determines “where innovation takes place.”33
Guidance funds have a government sponsor who serves as an “anchor investor,”
typically putting up 20 to 30 percent of the fund’s capital; the remainder of capital will
be raised from what China calls “social capital” investors such as SOEs, corporations,
and financial institutions.34 The government sponsor creates an entity or recruits an
existing firm to serve as the fund manager. The fund managers may be traditional
private equity or venture capital investors managing other non-guidance fund capital
simultaneously, or they may be state-controlled entities. According to Zero2IPO
Research, there were a total of 2,107 guidance funds established in China as of the end
of 2022, with RMB6.51 trillion ($920 billion) raised.35 This is greater than the entire
GDP of Turkey in 2022 (approx. $905 billion).36 This enormous scope reveals the vast
resources the CCP is directing toward industrial policy in its ambition to surpass the
United States in advanced technology.37
Examples of guidance funds that are shareholders in BGI and MGI include:
MGI Tech
• China Grand Prosperity Investment (CGP) operates as a fund-of-funds manager,
under which auspices it manages dozens of government guidance funds in
Beijing, Shanghai, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Hunan, and Chongqing across more than
400 funds.38

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 27

• SDIC Unity Capital is a government guidance fund and parent fund management
platform of China’s State Development and Investment Corporation (SDIC),
which is the largest state-owned investment holding company in the country
and is under direct control of the central government.39

• Hubei Science and Technology Investment Group (discussed above) sells large
amounts of their corporate bonds to various guidance funds.40 So while this
entity is not a guidance fund (though it is a state-owned conglomerate and
development agency), it channels guidance fund capital to investee companies.
The group raises capital through the sale of bonds and dispenses that capital to
companies, with the goal of promoting development in Hubei province.
Additionally, MGI as recently as mid-2023 had other government guidance funds in
its private shareholder base, all of whom have recently exited their positions,
perhaps ahead of anticipated increase in U.S. government scrutiny about MGI’s ties
to the Chinese government. These include the below:
• Shenzhen CoStone Asset Management Co. (sometimes translated as
Cornerstone Asset Management) is a private shareholder of MGI. CoStone
manages or co-manages multiple guidance funds on behalf of the government of
Shenzhen, including the Xiangjiang Fund, a RMB 20 billion ($2.8 billion)
provincial government guidance fund, and the Shenzhen New Energy
Automobile Industry Fund, a RMB 2 billion ($280 million) fund they co-manage
with Shenzhen Investment Holdings.41 42 43 One of CoStone’s major LPs
(investors) is Shenzhen Capital Group, a state-owned entity that administers the
guidance funds for the government of Shenzhen. Relatedly, Shenzhen Capital
Group is a direct shareholder in BGI.

• GTJA Innovation Investment Co., Ltd., otherwise known as Guotai Junan
Innovation Investment, was established in 2009 and is a wholly-owned private
equity investment management subsidiary of Guotai Junan Securities, a partially
state-owned enterprise. Guotai Junan Innovation Investment focuses on
emerging technology, biomedicine, green development, and similar industries.44
It serves as a fund manager for multiple guidance funds and openly cooperates
with guidance funds. It manages over RMB 70 billion ($9.8 billion), and has over
100 direct investment projects.45

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 28
• Green Pine Capital Partners, based in Shenzhen, is an investment firm that
provides fund management services and private equity and venture capital
investments. It has over $2.2 billion in assets under management. Its LPs
(investors) include multiple guidance funds and government economic
development agencies, including Shenzhen Futian Guiding Fund, Longyou
County Industrial Fund Management, and Nanjing Industrial Development
Fund.46 As well, state-owned enterprises China Merchants Group and Shenzhen
Capital Group (discussed below) are Green Pine’s largest LPs, having made 37
and 47 total capital commitments, respectively, to the firm over its lifetime. 47
BGI Genomics
• Shenzhen Capital Group Co., Ltd (SCGC; 深圳市创新投资集团有限公司) is a state-
owned venture capital company based in Shenzhen, China.* It is affiliated with
the Shenzhen Government and its investments cover industries supported by
national policies. SCGC invests in high-tech SMEs and high-potential SMEs from
emerging industries such as Information Technology, Internet,
Biotech/Healthcare, New Energy/Clean Technology, New Materials, Advanced
Manufacture, and Consumer Goods/Modern Services. SCGC also established
Hotland Innovation Asset Management Co., Ltd., China’s first mutual fund
management company owned by a VC firm, which is also an investor in BGI.48

• Great Wall Fund Management (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd. (前海长城基金管理（深圳）有限
公司), also known as Qianhai Great Wall Fund or Qianhai Great Wall Fund
Management (Shenzhen) Co., is an investment entity that manages guidance
funds on behalf of the government of Shenzhen. Limited partners include Futian
Guidance Fund, Shenzhen Capital Group Co., Ltd. (see above), Shenzhen Futian
Guide Fund Investment Co., Ltd., and Shenzhen Government Investment
Guidance Fund.49

* Shenzhen Capital Group operates as a government policy fund, a type of government -backed fund that
conducts direct investments to support a particular policy initiative. It also manages various guidance
funds on behalf of the government of Shenzhen. While it is difficult to identify which pool of capital
Shenzhen Capital Group utilized to invest in BGI, what is clear is that the investment funds are directly
state-linked.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 29
• Share Capital (分享投资) was founded in 2007 and is headquartered in Shenzhen;
it is ultimately backed by China Life Insurance and the government of Jiangsu
Province.* 50 It has investments in over 200 enterprises and manages more than
RMB 8 billion in assets (over $1.1 billion).51 Investors in its individual funds
include national and local governments, top universities, fund-of-funds (FOFs),
listed companies, and established entrepreneurs. Share Capital manages
guidance funds on behalf of the government of Shenzhen.52

• SDIC Chuangyi Industry Fund Management manages multiple individual
guidance funds on behalf of the State Development and Investment Corporation
(SDIC). Assets managed total RMB 37.7 billion ($5.3 billion).53 † As of the end of
2021, the SDIC managed ten national industrial guidance funds totaling RMB
158.7 billion ($22.4 billion).54 Among others, these guidance funds include the
Poverty-stricken Area Industrial Development Fund, which is managed by SDIC
Chuangyi Industry Fund Management, which is a private shareholder in BGI.
Beyond the involvement of government guidance funds, both BGI Genomics and MGI
Tech raise funding directly from other state-owned enterprises as the primary means to
fund their operations and global expansion. BGI and MGI need to obtain cash to fund
R&D, build out new offices, expand internationally, meet payroll, conduct marketing,
and execute other business activities. Neither company has generated meaningful
positive free cash flow in any of the last four years that they could use to fund their
growth, and neither carries significant debt (see discussion below). As a result, BGI and
MGI’s only funding option is to raise equity (i.e., sell shares). MGI went public in 2022,
raising RMB 3.6 billion (approx. $520 million) capital via its IPO.55 As discussed, our
analysis demonstrates that 76% of the largest public shareholders (entities who have

* Share Capital’s primary backer is Oriza FoFs Investment Management, which in turn is a subsid iary of
Suzhou Oriza Holdings Co., Ltd., which is directly backed by China Life Insurance Company Limited
(SEHK:2628) (an SOE) and Jiangsu Guoxin Investment Group Limited (backed by State -owned Assets
Supervision and Administration Commission of Jiangsu Provincial Government).
† Guidance funds managed by SDIC Chuangyi Industry Fund Management include across Poverty -
stricken Areas Industry Development Fund, Central SOEs Industrial Investment Fund for Poverty -stricken
Area, Datong Industrial Energy Development Fund for Poverty-stricken Areas, Ankang Science and
Technology Industry Development Fund for Poverty-stricken Areas, and Chuangyi Shengtun New
Energy Industry Investment Fund.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 30
provided cash to the company in return for equity) of MGI are state-owned or state-
affiliated (see Appendix 1).*
BGI, which has been public since 2017, more recently accepted approximately $310
million in capital from China Merchants Securities, Huatai Securities, SDIC Chuangyi
Industry Fund Management, Tianjin Liren Investment Management, the Central
Enterprise Poverty Area Industry Investment Fund—all state-owned entities—via a
private investment in public equity (PIPE) in 2020.
Additional Indicators of Government Ties
BGI Genomics has undertaken a number of capital markets activities that are unusual in
global markets outside of China, including pledging shares, accepting guarantees from
executive officers, and engaging in unusual, related-party transactions that make it look
unlike a regular public company. Beijing has used economic and financial tools like
these to support its national champions for decades.56
Share Pledging: BGI and MGI pledge shares to raise capital at a level similar to China’s
SOEs. Typically, companies borrow money against real things that they can use as
collateral, such as buildings, equipment, or inventory. When a company partakes in
“share pledging,” they use company shares as collateral to issue debt, which is very
risky because, by definition, share value fluctuates. A lender can force the company to
sell those shares—which could strongly signal to other investors that the company is in
trouble.57 As a result, Western companies rarely do this. In 2022, BGI pledged a total of
45.16 million shares, on top of any share pledges already outstanding, to China
Construction Bank, China Merchants Bank, Industrial Bank Co., Bank of Shanghai,
Export-Import Bank of China, and Huaxia Bank, all state-affiliated. At the end of fiscal
year 2022, 79,187,600 shares of the company were pledged, representing 51% of the
number of shares held by the controlling shareholder (BGI Group and parties acting in
concert) and 19% of the total share capital of the company.58
Though share pledging is usually viewed a last-resort mechanism to raise capital, it
remains popular among controlling shareholders of publicly listed Chinese firms, with
an average of 38% of shares pledged by controlling shareholders of publicly listed,
non-state-owned firms (versus 8% on average among public SOEs).59 Guo et. al. find

* Largest public shareholder defined as shareholders owning 0.05% or more of the company

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 31
that “share pledging by controlling shareholders is significantly higher for publicly listed
non-SOEs than for publicly listed SOEs [in China]. This difference is smaller for publicly
listed non-SOEs with at least one minority shareholder that is an SOE or government
agency,” like BGI, “suggesting that such government connections allow controlling
shareholders of publicly listed non-SOEs to gain better access to cheap financing
channels and hence a lower demand for more costly share pledging.” The takeaway is
that share pledging itself, while not unusual in the Chinese context, remains costly, and
BGI’s pledges of less than 20% of its outstanding shares represents a level of share
pledging somewhere between a typical private firm and an SOE—indicative of how one
should conceptualize BGI overall.
Related party guarantees: BGI Genomics’ executives provide loans to the company.
According to the financial statements we analyzed, in December 2019, BGI Genomics
accepted a guarantee of RMB 100 million (approx. $13.8 million) from company
Chairman Wang Jian; the guarantee expires in December 2024. A guarantee is a
promise made by one party (in this case, Wang Jian) to another party (BGI) to cover its
debt in case the borrower (BGI) defaults on an obligation such as a loan. A guarantee
might have economic benefits to the borrower; for example, by increasing the amount
they can borrow, or allowing them access to more favorable borrowing terms such as a
better interest rate. Guarantees between related parties (for example, between a
company and its subsidiary) are commonly used.60 However, it is unusual that an
individual would provide a guarantee for a large company. Typically, a public company
would have other means of raising capital besides relying on guarantees from its
executive officers. This type of guarantee is likely better explained by political signals or
connections that drove the chairman’s guarantee—another feature of China’s
interconnected economic system.
Related party accounts receivables: BGI, through its non-collection of receivables, is
funding the activities of its subsidiaries. BGI’s 2019 Annual Report shows RMB 330.2
million ($45.6 million) of related party receivables, indicating this money is owed to BGI
by a subsidiary or affiliate. The company provides for approximately 5% of the total
related party receivables as “bad debts,” meaning it views these receivables as no
longer collectible because the customer is unable to fulfill their obligation to pay. The
implication is that BGI is effectively indirectly funding or subsidizing at least a portion of
its affiliates’ operations through related party transactions for which it never expects to
be repaid. For a company that itself is still in growth mode, and not yet substantially
profitable, these transactions raise questions around where the capital is coming from
to fund subsidies to dozens of subsidiaries.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 32
MGI has received equipment donations from a nonprofit founded by their shareholders.
In 2019, BGI received a RMB 1.11 million ($153,243) equipment donation from
Shenzhen Mammoth Public Welfare Foundation, a nonprofit foundation founded by
Vanke Group, the country’s largest residential real estate developer, and Songhe
Venture Capital, also known as Green Pine Venture Capital or Green Pine Capital.61
Green Pine Capital is a previous private shareholder in MGI, and also is backed by China
Merchants Group, a state-owned entity; Shenzhen Capital Group, a venture firm
controlled by the government of Shenzhen; as well as other state-backed economic
development agencies and funds.62 While not a large transaction in absolute terms, this
donation serves to illustrate the complicated interlinkages between BGI, MGI, and the
various state entities that directly and indirectly support it financially and otherwise.
Challenge to U.S. Companies: Expansion of Market Share and Growth of BGI and MGI
MGI and BGI have financed their growth in ways that are not typical for a growth-stage
public or private company of this scale. Moreover, their capital markets activity that is
publicly disclosed seems at odds with the rapid expansion of market share, the scope of
international activities, and the number of affiliates both companies maintain.
Both MGI Tech and BGI Genomics have expanded their market share at rapid rates
despite their smaller scale (as measured by revenues and market cap) versus global
competitors, following a similar pattern to China’s other national champions that are
supported by China’s central government policies. Expanding market share is typically
driven by more spending (on advertising, marketing, sales personnel, etc.).63 MGI’s
SG&A margin—or the percent of revenues spent on Sales and Administrative
Functions—steadily rose from 21% in 2021 to 39% in the twelve months ending
September 30, 2023.64 This is one reason why tracing the sources of MGI and BGI’s
capital is important. The companies’ funding, sourced in large part from the Chinese
state, and the resultant spending of those funds is driving dramatic changes in market
share—and thus influence—in China and globally.
The company with the dominant market share in any given market is the company likely
to enjoy the highest profits in that market65, and without anti-trust policies to hold it
back, MGI is well on its way to becoming that player. In the five years from 2017 to
2022, MGI captured 5% global market share in the gene sequencing market (from 0%),
according to Haitong Securities (see Figure 4). The company’s revenue was 100%
PRC-based in 2017, versus just 46% derived from China in 2021 (latest available; see
Figure 5). Domestically, the company has also expanded its market share, growing from

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 33
a 13% share in 2020 to a 39% share of the PRC market in 2022, according to China
Galaxy Securities, an investment bank and equity research provider (see Fig. 7).66 This
explosive growth in domestic market share is at least partially attributable to the recent
surge of government support for domestic enterprises in critical industries, and the
resulting challenges faced by foreign firms like Illumina and Thermo Fisher Scientific to
maintain market share in China. The Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology’s 2021 “Buy China” policy, or Order 551: Guidance of
Government Procurement of Imported Products, outlined new rules for procurement of
“315 local products, including 178 medical items.”67 MGI products such as sequencing,
PCR, mass spectrometers, and sample preparation instruments and devices are all
included in the list, and MGI has openly stated that it sees this “trend of domestic
substitution” as an opportunity to increase its market share.68

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 34
Figure 5: MGI’s 2022 Global Market Share Was Approximately 5.2%

Source: Haitong Securities analysis, based on MGI 2022 Annual Report. Kehan Meng, “首次覆盖：NGS 行
业寡头上游、生态圈长坡厚雪,”Haitong Securities International, June 20, 2023.
Figure 6: MGI Revenue Breakdown by Region, 2017 versus 2021

Source: Jialin Zhang and John Nie, “MGI Tech: A rising competitor in global genome sequencing market,”
Global Markets Research, January 6, 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 35
Figure 7: MGI Revenue PRC Market Share, 2020–2022

Source: Haitong Securities analysis, based on MGI prospectus and annual reports, and company investor
presentation at 2023 JP Morgan conference. Kehan Meng, “首次覆盖：NGS 行业寡头上游、生态圈长坡厚
雪,”Haitong Securities International, June 20, 2023.
What follows is a more in-depth discussion of these points.
How Companies Grow: Characteristics of MGI and BGI’s Market Growth
A company can generate cash to fund growth (e.g., invest in R&D, develop new
products, hire additional personnel, run sales and marketing campaigns, buy new
equipment, build new facilities, etc.) via one of three avenues: (i) debt financing
(borrowing money with interest that must be repaid at a later date); (ii) equity financing
(selling shares or a stake in the company); or (iii) using cash from operations (i.e., using

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 36
any excess cash the company has left over from sales, after covering all of their
operating expenses, interest expenses, and taxes). A core principle of corporate finance
holds that debt financing is cheaper than equity financing because lenders’ expected
returns are typically lower than those of equity shareholders. Therefore, the interest a
company pays on a $100 loan is typically lower than the cut of the company’s profits
owed to a shareholder who invested $100. The more profitable a company is, or will be
in the future, the more costly it is to give up equity (i.e., sell a stake in the company),
because presumably that share of the company will be worth (much) more in the future.
Therefore, it is more economical for a company to simply raise debt and pay interest.69
The optimum capital structure for a firm is one that produces the lowest weighted
average cost of capital (WACC), i.e., minimizes the firm’s cost of financing (see Figure
8). This optimal point usually occurs between 20–50% debt in a firm’s capital
structure.70 The only economic reason a company would not take on debt to raise
capital is if they can’t: it’s too early (they are a start-up) or too late (they are in distress),
though there might be other strategic reasons not to.
Figure 8: Illustrative Cost of Capital Curve

Source: BVA Group, “Optimizing Capital Structure and the Level of Debt Assumption,” April 11, 2016
(https://www.bvagroup.com/publications/2016/04/11/optimizing-capital-structure-and-the-level-of-
debt-assumption).

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 37
Company disclosures show both MGI and BGI carry effectively no debt, implying they
fund day-to-day operations and any growth from elsewhere. Other sources of capital
could include equity financing or cash from operations. As of this writing, MGI held $57
million of debt while BGI held $40 million, which are negligible quanta relative to the
size of both companies and which imply very low leverage ratios for both.* On a net
basis, neither company carries debt at all—as of Q3 2023, BGI holds $776 million of
cash on its balance sheet, and MGI $722 million, meaning that the companies’ net
leverage is actually negative (i.e., they hold more cash than debt).71 This is quite
unusual—typically a maturing company would carry reasonable leverage to fund
operations and growth, as debt is a more economically attractive means of funding
growth than equity. It is possible that both companies have lower levels of debt
because they are not highly profitable and might struggle to service the debt; however,
in contradiction to this argument, MGI itself as recently as 2019 held $344 million of
debt, while BGI held $187 million of debt in 2020.†
The average market debt-to-equity ratio for publicly traded biotechnology firms
globally, according to financial scholar Prof. Aswath Damodaran at New York
University, is 16%, implying that if they were to conform to global averages, BGI would
carry approximately $226 million of net debt and MGI approximately $206 million of
net debt, based on book equity values of $1.38 billion and $1.26 billion, respectively.72
Using a WACC analysis to calculate the optimal capital structure for each firm yields
similar conclusions (see Figures 8 and 9). The analysis implies MGI would optimally
have a debt ratio of 10–30% ($140 million to $541 million of net debt) while BGI would
optimally operate between 20–30% ($345 million to $592 million of net debt).‡

*Debt figures include capital leases.
†Both of these figures represent the highest leverage levels on either company during the years in which
public financials are available.
‡Debt ratio is defined as net debt divided by total enterprise value. Enterprise value is calculated as equity
value plus debt minus cash.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 38
Figure 9: MGI Tech Co. Illustrative Optimal Capital Structure (values in millions USD, unless otherwise stated)
Debt
Ratio D/E Beta*
Risk-
Free
Rate
Market
Risk
Premium
Cost of
Equity†73 74
Interest
Rate on
Debt
Tax
Rate
Cost
of
Debt
(after
tax) WACC75
Firm
Value (G)

(106.2%) (0.5x) 0.58 2.685% 8.000% 5.79% 2.99% 25.0% 2.2% 9.6% 612.1
Current
capital
structure
0.0% 0.0x 0.95 2.685% 8.000% 7.74% 2.99% 25.0% 2.2% 7.7% 1,262.0
10.0% 0.1x 1.03 2.685% 8.000% 8.16% 2.99% 25.0% 2.2% 7.6% 1,402.0 Implied
optimal
capital
structure
20.0% 0.2x 1.13 2.685% 8.000% 8.69% 2.99% 25.0% 2.2% 7.4% 1,577.2
30.0% 0.4x 1.26 2.685% 8.000% 9.37% 3.99% 25.0% 3.0% 7.5% 1,802.8
40.0% 0.7x 1.43 2.685% 8.000% 10.27% 4.99% 25.0% 3.7% 7.7% 2,103.0
50.0% 1.0x 1.67 2.685% 8.000% 11.54% 5.99% 25.0% 4.5% 8.0% 2,523.8
60.0% 1.5x 2.02 2.685% 8.000% 13.43% 7.99% 25.0% 6.0% 9.0% 3,154.6
70.0% 2.3x 2.62 2.685% 8.000% 16.59% 9.99% 25.0% 7.5% 10.2% 4,206.2
80.0% 4.0x 3.81 2.685% 8.000% 22.91% 11.99% 25.0% 9.0% 11.8% 6,307.5
90.0% 9.0x 7.35 2.685% 8.000% 41.77% 13.99% 25.0% 10.5% 13.6% 12,582.7
Source: CSET analysis.

* Beta is measure of the volatility—or systematic risk—of a security compared to the market as a whole.
† Cost of equity is calculated using the CAPM method.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 39
Figure 10: BGI Genomics Illustrative Optimal Capital Structure (Values in millions USD, unless otherwise stated)
Debt
Ratio D/E Beta
Risk-
Free
Rate
Market
Risk
Premium
Cost of
Equity
Interest
Rate on
Debt
Tax
Rate
Cost of
Debt
(after
tax) WACC
Firm
Value
(G)

(108.6%) (0.5x) 0.50 2.685% 8.000% 5.34% 2.55% 25.0% 1.9% 9.1% 663.2
Current
capital
structure
0.0% 0.0x 0.82 2.685% 8.000% 7.04% 2.55% 25.0% 1.9% 7.0% 1,383.2
10.0% 0.1x 0.89 2.685% 8.000% 7.41% 2.55% 25.0% 1.9% 6.9% 1,536.8
20.0% 0.2x 0.97 2.685% 8.000% 7.86% 2.55% 25.0% 1.9% 6.7% 1,728.5 Implied
optimal
capital
structure 30.0% 0.4x 1.08 2.685% 8.000% 8.44% 3.55% 25.0% 2.7% 6.7% 1,974.8
40.0% 0.7x 1.23 2.685% 8.000% 9.22% 4.55% 25.0% 3.4% 6.9% 2,304.2
50.0% 1.0x 1.43 2.685% 8.000% 10.31% 5.55% 25.0% 4.2% 7.2% 2,764.2
60.0% 1.5x 1.74 2.685% 8.000% 11.94% 7.55% 25.0% 5.7% 8.2% 3,454.2
70.0% 2.3x 2.26 2.685% 8.000% 14.67% 9.55% 25.0% 7.2% 9.4% 4,609.8
80.0% 4.0x 3.28 2.685% 8.000% 20.09% 11.55% 25.0% 8.7% 11.0% 6,903.4
90.0% 9.0x 6.38 2.685% 8.000% 36.60% 13.55% 25.0% 10.2% 12.8% 13,884.5
Source: CSET analysis.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 40
The extent of BGI and MGI’s global activities is inconsistent with other companies of
their size. BGI Genomics and MGI Tech together have achieved remarkable global reach
and operating scale that are disproportionate to their profile in the public markets. Each
operates in approximately 100 countries, versus Illumina in 155. In comparison, core
competitor Illumina has a market cap of around $23 billion as of February 2024, versus
under $7 billion for BGI and MGI combined, less than 30% of Illumina’s market cap.
According to its 2022 Annual Report, Illumina has 47 wholly-owned direct and indirect
subsidiaries, versus BGI’s 177 subsidiaries, associates, and affiliates, which represents
almost four times as many. For a roughly $3 billion company to have this number of
subsidiaries, investments, affiliates, and overseas activities is highly unusual.
Organizational complexity like this can obfuscate—purposefully or otherwise—the true
nature of interactions and relationships between ostensibly unrelated entities, making it
challenging for regulators and auditors to detect malfeasance (for example, favorable
business dealings between seemingly independent but secretly-linked entities) or this
case, the true extent of government ties. The presence of multiple interconnected
affiliates or subsidiaries is not necessarily unusual in China or elsewhere, including the
U.S.; many companies around the world use nested or siloed LLC structures to help
limit liability and risk.76 Both BGI and MGI are “mid-cap” companies, defined by having
a market cap between $2 billion and $10 billion. Of the 200 mid-cap public companies
operating in the pharmaceuticals, life sciences, and biotechnology sectors globally, the
average number of current subsidiaries is 21 as of September 2023.77 In comparison,
BGI has 80 direct subsidiaries and MGI has 44, plus eight branches.
As a way to increase transparency, the U.S. Congress passed the Corporate
Transparency Act in 2021, which created a new beneficial ownership* information
reporting requirement as part of the U.S. government’s efforts to make it harder for bad
actors to hide behind or benefit from shell companies or other opaque ownership
structures.78 The act was also designed to close loopholes in current legislation that
allows shell companies operated by the Chinese government to operate in the United
States.79 China does not require the same level of disclosure; ownership structure of
Chinese-listed companies is disclosed in annual reports by law, but qualitative
discussion of ultimate beneficial ownership is typically “boilerplate” at best.80

* Beneficial ownership information refers to identifying information about the individuals who, directly or
indirectly, (i) exercise substantial control over a reporting company or (ii) own or control at least 25
percent of the ownership interests of a reporting company.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 41
Box 3. Would CFIUS Allow the Purchase of Complete Genomics Today?

In 2013, BGI—despite its ties to Beijing—acquired Complete Genomics, a company
based in Mountain View, California. This acquisition was cleared by the federal
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS).81 In 2018, Complete
Genomics became part of MGI. Complete Genomics has a competing DNA sequencing
technology to the U.S. company Illumina. Since the acquisition, Complete Genomics
and Illumina have faced off in both U.S. and international courts over patent
infringement. In December 2021, Illumina received an injunction blocking BGI and any
affiliated companies from advertising their sequencing platforms in the U.S. However,
follow-on decisions have cleared the way for MGI Tech subsidiary Complete Genomics
to begin to sell in U.S. and foreign markets with products that are subsidized by the
Chinese government. Concurrently, China’s policies impact U.S. companies’ ability to
sell in the China market.82 The unequal playing field that this creates essentially forces
U.S. companies and researchers to compete against a nation-state that supports its
national champions.
China’s Hybrid Economy and Implications for the U.S.
Although BGI’s sequencing capacity and solid R&D base contribute to its growing
success, Chinese government industrial policies and procurements are largely
responsible for its accelerated and market-distorting growth. Chinese government
national plans and industrial policies, including the various Five-Year Plans, the National
Medium- and Long-Term Program for S&T Development (2006-2020), Strategic
Emerging Industries policies, and others, have consistently emphasized national
development in the biotechnology and genomics.83 Both BGI and MGI have benefitted
significantly under the various national plans, through access to financing, subsidies,
diplomatic support, and other forms of assistance from the Chinese government.84
Looking to the future, understanding China’s corporate structures will likely become
more difficult as the CCP continues to restrict economic data and information flows.
The CCP’s increasingly restrictive actions towards technology firms, foreign companies,
and the private sector broadly underline the “growing incompatibility” between the
CCP’s envisaged market system on the one hand and the global capital markets
“premised on open information flows and anchored in the rule of law” on the other.85
Valuations and financial information for Chinese companies—even public ones —have

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 42
long been considered unreliable; the CCP’s new regulatory changes and restrictions on
private businesses will push valuations even further from market-based principles.
Beijing further cements its control of its commercial ecosystem with these changes. The
Chairman of the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC*), Yi Huiman, in
November 2022 coined the new concept of “valuation with Chinese characteristics,”
which assigns valuation premiums to firms that align with Beijing’s political priorities.86
It is clear that this new valuation concept is designed to encourage investment in state-
owned enterprises (SOEs) and companies operating in sectors favored by the Party,
including biotech and other leading-edge tech sectors.87 88 Additionally, in December
2023, the CCP issued a detailed ideological statement in Qiushi, the party’s main
official theoretical journal, highlighting its commitment to “building a modern financial
system with Chinese characteristics” that deviates from Western financial theory and
practices.89 Chinese banks, pension funds, insurers, and other financial organizations
are expected to serve government priorities more actively—a boost for companies like
BGI.
This issue brief also highlights certain characteristics of development—described
below—that China can leverage, exploit, and support to take the lead in key emerging
technology areas. These characteristics include the need for long-term investments,
support for companies through both longer time horizons and global competition, the
merging of national priorities with commercial priorities, and a willingness to do things
that other countries will not. Sequencing—while a cornerstone of genomics research—
is not a service that the market would deliver on this scale, highlighting another area
critical to national security that the private sector, however, does not invest in because
the return on investment is too low.
Highlighting these characteristics—identified in the prior paragraph—and the tools that
the U.S. government has successfully used in the past to support technology
development can be used as a roadmap for not only strategies for the bioeconomy, but
other critical and emerging technologies.

* China Securities Regulatory Commission is the approximate equivalent of the U.S.’ SEC, and is the
regulator of the PRC’s securities industry. As of 2023, the CSRC is a government agency directly under
China’s State Council.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 43
First, sequencing is a key tool of discovery that is used by many actors. The purchase of
and subsequent use/sharing of sequencing resources benefits not only one university,
company, or research entity but spurs future development and provides access to
genomic data. BGI’s initial acquisition of 128 sequencers allowed it to become a global
player. Additional direct and indirect subsidies the Chinese government provides has
allowed it to grow into multiple different fields. The longer-time horizons necessary for
advancements in genomics and the ability to make non-market decisions provide a
long-term benefit to BGI.
Second, China uses market access to protect its global champion and disadvantage
other global players. Data on sales/revenue in China highlight how MGI has grown from
having almost none of the China market to significant growth in just five years. MGI is
currently gearing up to compete—using Complete Genomics (a subsidiary of MGI)—in
the U.S. market, often obscuring Complete Genomics ties to MGI, BGI, and the Chinese
government. However, two main asymmetries give China advantage: China has market
restrictions in place to protect its state champions, and it provides state support. This
creates a lack of reciprocity in openings to foreign companies seeking to operate in
China, forcing U.S. and foreign companies to have to explore partnerships and outright
acquisition if they want to participate in the China market. Some additional tools used
by the Chinese government to give state-favored enterprises an advantage in the
domestic market include:
• Chinese government controls the commercial ecosystem and key Chinese
commercial actors through the use of industrial policies and government
financing and preferences.

• China’s laws create an uneven playing field because they are often vague, favor
the domestic actor, and compel the sharing of data or other proprietary
information. Key examples include market certification/product review/licensing
(disclosure of corporate secrets), antitrust, corporate structure, and overlap of
corporate, party, and state entities.

• Government procurement laws also create an unequal playing field. In 2021
China’s Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology’s “Buy China” policy, or Order 551: Guidance of Government
Procurement of Imported Products, outlined new rules for procurement that
encompass MGI products.90 MGI has openly stated that it sees this “trend of
domestic substitution” as an opportunity to increase its market share.91

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 44
Third, China has shown a willingness to use genomic data and research in ways that
the West has not. This includes exploring the genomic basis of race, the goal of using
prenatal testing as a key pillar of its health policies to ensure the decrease in birth
defects in the population, and establishing a central gene bank that includes global data
that it does not share.92 This creates ethical asymmetries in research and development.
Below are some examples:
• Chinese researchers have access to the same public data as researchers in the
U.S. and other nations, plus all of the data China collects. However, Chinese law
restricts sharing of China’s genomic data, so foreign researchers don’t have
access to that data.

• China collects genomic data in ways that open democratic societies deem
unethical, including a focus on ethnic minorities. This information is added to its
already robust surveillance abilities. Researchers in the U.S. and other liberal
democracies do not have access to such data, and are normally not allowed to
research without approval by an Institutional Review Board to ensure the
research is ethical and any risk of potential harm to research subjects is
outweighed by the expected benefits that the research subjects would receive
(e.g., from a medical study).

• The ability to work on research proscribed in other countries—including the use
of non-human primates and human embryos—could lead to new breakthroughs
in understanding pathogen-host interactions, human performance modification,
and new forms of bioweapons (BW) including bio-regulators.
Competitive Tools Available to the United States and Allies
The United States, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and countries in Europe have
historically deployed a range of tools to successfully promote the development of
technologies deemed critical for economic or national security that could have cross-
applicability to biotechnology and other emerging technologies. First and foremost,
Washington has set ambitious technology development goals to marshal the efforts of
private industry toward a national priority, and used export controls and other
restrictions to prevent the transfer of technologies to strategic competitors and
adversaries alike. One example is former Operation Warp Speed—the federal effort to
speed development of a COVID-19 vaccine—which facilitated two U.S. firms’ efforts to
bring vaccines with 95 percent efficacy to market in under a year. Pfizer, despite

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 45
deciding to fund its R&D efforts itself, received a nearly $2 billion order for 100 million
doses of its vaccine in July 2020 from Washington—five months before seeking
emergency approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Similarly, Moderna
received a $2.5 billion subsidy for its efforts from the program. Other examples of
Washington’s use of its powers to promote and/or protect critical technology sectors
include:
R&D Funding: From 1990 to 2003, the U.S. government spent approximately $2.7
billion to sequence the human genome as part of the Human Genome Project.93 That
initial R&D investment laid the groundwork for U.S. private-sector DNA sequencing
firms, such as Ilumina and Thermo Fisher Scientific, to expand; by November 2020, the
leading U.S. firms were valued at approximately $323.8 billion.94
Corporate Tax Incentives: The U.S. government, through the federal R&D Tax Credit,
allows start-ups and small businesses to qualify for up to $1.25 million to offset a
portion of their annual payroll taxes.95 Industry experts have called for additional
incentives to be built into the U.S. tax code to incentivize long-term R&D investments.96
Public Procurement: The U.S. government has used the power of federal procurement
dollars to promote the development of nascent industries and help them reach
economies of scale and commercialize their products. U.S. Air Force and NASA
procurement of early integrated circuits for the Minuteman II ICBM and the Apollo
program during the 1960s drove improvements in processing power and reductions in
production costs, facilitating the industry’s commercialization.97
Talent Development: The U.S. government has supported the education of human
capital to bolster technology development efforts. As part of the Space Race, the U.S.
government implemented a series of changes to public education to emphasize science
and mathematics and hands-on laboratory experience, including through the National
Defense Education Act of 1958 and National Science Foundation investments in
teacher development.98
Tech Alliances: The U.S. government has signed collaborative agreements with like-
minded countries to govern the protection of and encourage the development of critical
technologies.99 In 2020, the U.S. and UK governments signed an agreement to
cooperate on R&D of artificial intelligence.100
Export Financing: The U.S. Export–Import Bank has long provided loans for foreign
airlines to purchase U.S. commercial aircraft, helping domestic producers compete with

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 46
the rise of Airbus during the 1970s and positioning Boeing—the largest U.S. exporter
by value—to compete with the Commercial Aircraft Corporation of China (COMAC),
once its planes enter production.101
Ethical Standards: DARPA and other government agencies require companies to
comply with certain ethical standards as a requirement to receive government funding.
Resource Sharing/Non-Financial Support: With the goal of advancing R&D and
growing domestic manufacturing ecosystems, DoD’s Manufacturing Innovation
Institutes provide companies access to costly equipment and lab resources that
otherwise would not be available to early-stage start-ups.102
Funding for Commercialization: While the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
program supports small businesses (including innovative start-ups) in conducting R&D,
certain government agencies also award much larger amounts of money aimed at
commercialization rather than research only. For example, the U.S. Air Force Strategic
Funding Increase and Tactical Funding Increase, or STRATFI/TACFI programs, with
awards up to $15 million per company, are specifically “designed to bridge the ‘Valley
of Death’ between SBIR/STTR Phase II efforts and Phase III scaling efforts,” allowing
companies to get closer to profitability.103
Preparing to Compete in the Genomic Future
Biology has the potential to offer solutions to the biggest challenges facing society in
the 21st century, from the global climate crisis to food insecurity to materials that will
transform industries and manufacturing at scale. How nations pursue the power to
engineer with living systems will reshape our ways of life, including whether our
strategies reflect and reinforce the values of democratic societies. The United States
must be positioned to harness these developments, ensure that applications reflect our
values, and protect against misuse.
Our analysis of BGI highlights the depth and breadth of China’s use of a hybrid
economic model that necessitates new kinds of actions if the U.S. and like-minded
countries are going to have a bioeconomy, and requires new approaches to level the
playing field. Steps the U.S. (as well as its allies) can take include:
• Secure genomic data: Protecting our citizen’s genomic data so that it cannot be
exploited by foreign entities, without overcompensating such that innovation is
stifled. For example, developing sequencing capabilities that support both

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 47
research and clinical settings; regulations on foreign-funded, supported, and
controlled entities access to U.S. genomic data; and creating platforms so that
U.S. researchers and clinicians can share data securely.

• Foster U.S. companies (and companies in allied countries) so they compete with
entities that are state-supported. The CCP’s policies have created an ecosystem
in which Chinese companies are not neutral actors* nor fair competitors.

• Reconfigure anti-monopoly and other laws so that they reflect the nature of
global competition and incorporate the impact that state-supported companies
have on U.S. companies’ ability to compete.
Treat the research base as critical infrastructure, with the goal that the U.S. should not
be dependent on China for our current medicines, future medicine, or tools of discovery
by investing in and supporting not only the development of but the manufacturing of
equipment necessary to conduct research. To ensure data and knowledge discovery are
not outsourced and lost to strategic competitors, democratic nations should invest
strategically in infrastructure that supports the bioeconomy, such as sequencing
capabilities, diagnostics, and associated computing infrastructure. The ability to drive
medical research, provide medicines, and ensure adequate food supplies will become
more dependent on genomic data, specifically designed computing power, and access
to animal models. If the current trajectory is not changed, an increasing proportion of
the global gene sequencing market is or will be performed by PRC entities. This
represents a precarious position for the U.S. and its allies to passively accept.
• Policymakers should undertake a detailed survey of the human capital and
supply chains needed to support biotechnology R&D. Too often, policy
recommendations and research projects are focused on a snapshot in time and
therefore fail to take account of foundational—not necessarily the most cutting-
edge—aspects of an industry. The ability to support biotechnology discovery, as
well as human and animal health, is a key part of leading in this area.

* By neutral actors, we mean that they function in the same way companies, researchers, and universities
function in open liberal democracies. This is not the case due to China’s policies and laws.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 48
• The U.S. is dependent on China for key parts of its pharmaceutical and research
supply chains. This impacts the DOD mission in very basic ways—such as lack of
access to antibiotics—to future ways, including not being able to provide lab
equipment that supports research. Chinese companies and subsidiaries of
western companies in China are often the sole providers of medicines, medical
technologies, and basic disease surveillance kits that hospitals depend on to
save lives. China could stop the export of these services and materials—as they
have for rare earth metals—and bring both the medical and research system to a
halt.
Support translating R&D into useful applications. Harnessing the acquisition process,
the U.S. government can support not just precision medicine but the multiple areas this
technology will touch. Too often the U.S. funds basic research but then does not
provide an avenue for the discoveries to either be commercialized or used as a public
good. Many of these technologies have longer timelines. For example, some bio-
products such as vaccines have lower return on investment (ROI) and companies do
not pursue them. One example of this is the mRNA vaccine technology. Initial efforts
should include providing more resources to NSF and DOE to support small businesses
and researchers in this area as a good start.
Think the unthinkable.104 These technologies can be used in ways we would consider
unethical. Understanding the depth and breadth of research globally and discussing
ways to regulate—as well as to develop countermeasures—with allies and like-minded
countries will ensure we are better prepared for its misuse. China’s researchers have
access to the same public data as researchers in the United States, plus all of the data
China collects but will not share. China also collects genomic data in ways that open
democratic societies deem unethical, which may provide them with advantages in
certain aspects of biological discovery. This ability to work on research proscribed in
other countries—including the use of non-human primates—could lead to new
breakthroughs in understanding pathogen-host interactions, human performance
modification, and new forms of biological weapons including bio-regulators.
It will be important to consider not only what is possible now, but what may become
possible in the future. As the field matures, what is not necessarily alarming now—
access to a wide range of genomic data—may provide an advantage to researchers
who have it.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 49
Conclusion
This issue brief shows that China’s all-embracing approach to dominate genomics and
future biotechnology developments—a similar blueprint to the one it took in developing
5G—plays a key role in fostering technology areas that rely on longer timelines,
multidisciplinary coalitions, or big science facilities—such as advanced computing, high-
end gene sequencing, and colonies of non-human primates. What is key to recognize is
that it isn’t that the U.S. and other like-minded countries can’t do this; it’s that the
market won’t do this because of the longer timelines, lower ROI, and the fact that the
needed infrastructure is broader than just one company or research institution will
invest in.
As Washington discusses how best to support development efforts in emerging
technologies—with proposals ranging from expanding the budgets for U.S. R&D
agencies, exploring export subsidies through the Export–Import Bank and the new
International Development Finance Corporation, and bolstering STEM education to
develop the next-generation of S&T talent—this study argues for a focus on those
technologies that are most at risk of foreign adversarial competition, and deployment of
a comprehensive strategic plan. For biotechnology, the winner is not yet determined,
but without efforts to adjust the market incentives, the United States, allies, and like-
minded nations are likely to find ourselves in a similar predicament in biotechnology as
we faced in 5G and are now, retroactively, working to address.
Solutions will need to look beyond traditional trade remedies such as export controls
and tariffs because in the early stages of these new technologies, there are not yet
produced tradeable goods. Traditional trade remedies such as tariffs and trade
sanctions probably will be ineffective at correcting all of the imbalances in
biotechnology, which relies on know-how and expertise, as well as the accumulation of
genomic data. They will also have limited impact on China’s major national initiatives
because China views this as a key part of its future and U.S.–China competition. The
ultimate lesson from past successes, 5G development, and Operation Warp Speed is
that the U.S. government and like-minded allies have tools that can be used to foster
the development of emerging technologies and that they should not be afraid to take a
proactive approach to foster the building blocks of future discovery and the national
innovation base.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 50
Authors
Anna Puglisi was formerly a senior fellow at CSET and is currently CEO and founder of
Puglisi Ventures, and Chryssa Rask is a private equity investor.

Acknowledgments
We are especially grateful to Gerard DiPippo, Dr. Scott Harold, Dr. Ryan Morhand, Dr.
Andrew Scobell, and Liza Tobin for their comprehensive review of the paper.
Additionally, we are grateful to Ben Murphy for translating key documents, to Dr.
Caroline Schuerger and Sara Abdulla for their help with initial explorations of BGI, to
Dr. Igor Mikolic-Torreira, Owen Daniels, Jahnavi Mukul, Susan Moynihan, and Alex
Friedland for their invaluable advice in improving the style, content, structure, and
scope of this issue brief. Finally, we thank Matt Mahoney for his fact-checking of the
paper.

© 2024 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20220015

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 51
Appendix 1: Detailed Ownership Analysis105
MGI Tech Co.—Current Public Shareholding
Shareholder
Ownership
%
BGI Group
Relationship?
CCP
Affiliation?
Description of Entity
and CCP Affiliation, if
applicable
Wang, Jian
(Chairman of the
Board)
46.78% Yes No Chairman of the Board
of MGI Tech Co.
CPE Investment
(Hong Kong) 2018
Limited
6.35%

Yes

Yes

Private equity arm of
CITIC Securities,
which is controlled by
CITIC Group, which is
state-owned106
Tibet Zhiyan
Venture Capital
Partnership
Enterprise (Limited
Partnership)
3.39%

No

Not
available

Ultimate ownership
unclear
Tianjin Kunpeng
Management
Consulting
Partnership
Enterprise (Limited
Partnership)
2.56%

No

Yes

Managed by/ affiliated
with Harmony Growth
Fund, a fund managed
by IDG Capital, which
is also a private
shareholder of MGI
and has state backing
107

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 52
Hubei Science
Technology
Investment Group
Co. Ltd.
2.43%

No

Yes

State-backed
economic
development agency
based in Wuhan
(Hubei provincial
capital) 108
Sharp Vantage
Limited
2.39% No Not
available
Ultimate ownership
unclear
Shanghai Growth-
FOF Co., Ltd.
1.78%

No

Yes

Also known as
Shanghai Guofang
Investment (上海国方
私募基金管理), backed
by Shanghai
International Group,
which is a government
agency 109
Huatai Zijin
Investment Co. Ltd.
1.59% No

Yes

Subsidiary of Huatai
Securities Co., Ltd., a
major Chinese
financial services
company. LPs in
HTZJ’s funds include
guidance funds and
economic
development agencies,
including Nanjing New
Industry Investment
Group, Suqian Chanfa
Venture Fund, and

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 53
Jiangsu Jincai
Investment110
Hillhouse
Investment
Management, Ltd.
1.22% No

No

Mostly Western LPs,
including university
endowments, state
and company pension
funds, etc. Started in
2005 with funding
from Yale University’s
endowment by
Chinese alumnus
Zhang Lei, the Hong
Kong-based private
equity firm is one of
the biggest
investment firms in
Asia, currently
managing over $65
billion.111
Wanjia Asset
Management Co.,
Ltd.
1.08% No

Yes Owned by Zhongtai
Securities, which is
partially state-owned,
and Shandong New
Kinetic Energy Fund
Management Co., Ltd.,
also known as
Shandong New
Growth Drivers Fund
(山东省新动能基金管
理有限公司), a
government guidance

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 54
fund in Shandong
province112
Shanghai Huasheng
Youge Equity
Investment
Management Co.,
Ltd.
1.03%

No

Yes

Subsidiary of affiliate
of China Everbright
Group, a state-owned
entity 113
China Universal
Asset Management
Company Ltd.
1.01% No

Yes

Orient Securities
(state-affiliated) holds
35%; China Eastern
Airlines (an SOE)
holds 20%; Wenhui-
Xinmin United Press
Group (Shanghai
United Media Group),
which is a state media
company, holds an
undisclosed % stake
114
China Asset
Management Co.
Ltd.
0.88% No Yes Also known as China
AMC. One of China’s
biggest fund families.
Majority owned by
CITIC Securities,
controlled by CITIC
Group, an SOE
(62.2%), as well as
Power Corporation of
Canada (13.9%),
Mackenzie

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 55
Investments (13.9%)
115
Aegon-Industrial
Fund Management
Co. Ltd.
0.80% No

Yes Subsidiary of Industrial
Securities Co., Ltd.
(SHSE:601377), which
although publicly
traded has numerous
state-owned or state-
linked investors
including the Fujian
Provincial Department
of Finance, the Fujian
Investment and
Development Group,
the Fujian Energy
Group, and Fujian
Cement, among
others116
China Merchants
Fund Management
Co.,Ltd.
0.68% No

Yes Subsidiary of China
Merchants Bank,
which though public is
part of China
Merchants Group, a
state-owned
enterprise117
Zhong Ou Fund
Management Co.,
Ltd.
0.29% No

No A.k.a. Lombarda China
Fund Management
Co., Ltd. (Lombarda
China FMC). Part-
owned by Intesa
Sanpaola S.p.A. and

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 56
Warbug Pincus
(23%)118
Invesco Great Wall
Fund Management
Co., Ltd.
0.25% No

Yes Main shareholders
include Invesco (a U.S.
investment manager)
and China Great Wall
Securities Co.,Ltd.
(SZSE:002939), which
although it trades
publicly has many
state-owned public
and private
shareholders,
including China
International Capital
Corporation, a partially
state-owned
investment
manager119
E Fund
Management Co.,
Ltd.
0.24% No

Yes One of the largest
Chinese asset
management
companies ($414
billion AUM). Owners/
investors include
Guangdong Yuecai
Investment Holdings
Co.,Ltd. - 广东粤财投
资控股有限公司
(controlled by People’s
Government of
Guangdong Province)

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 57
and Infore Group, an
industrial holding
company in
Guangdong
Province120
Kuwait Investment
Authority
0.22% No No Kuwait sovereign
wealth fund121
CITIC Securities
Company Limited,
Asset Management
Arm
0.21% Yes

Yes Asset management
arm of CITIC
Securities, which is
controlled by CITIC
Group, which is state-
owned122
Harvest Fund
Management Co.,
Ltd.
0.19% No

Yes Also known as
Harvest Wealth
Management or
Harvest Global
Investment. Jointly
owned by Deutsche
Bank Securities (30%),
China Credit Trust
(40%), and Lixin
Investment (30%).
China Credit Trust is
backed by China
Merchants, the
People’s Insurance
Company, China
National Coal Group,
and China Pingmei

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 58
Shenma Group, all-
state affiliated123
ABC-CA Fund
Management Co.,
Ltd.
0.17% No Yes Joint venture between
the Agricultural Bank
of China (ABC), Credit
Agricole, and the
Aluminum Corporation
of China Limited
(CHALCO). ABC and
CHALCO are state-
owned.124
Shanghai Shenzhi
Asset Management
Partnership
Enterprise (Limited
Partnership)
0.16% No

Not
available
Ultimate ownership
unclear125
Monetary Authority
of Macao
0.15% No Yes Central Bank of
Macau126
Lion Fund
Management Co.,
Ltd.
0.15% No Yes Owned by China
Foreign Economic and
Trade Trust Co., Ltd.
(40%), Shenzhen
Jielong Investment Co.,
Ltd. (40%), and
Daheng New Era
Technology Co., Ltd.
(20%).127 China
Foreign Economic and
Trade Trust is a

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 59
subsidiary of
Sinochem, a state-
owned enterprise,
while it is unclear
whether the other two
investors are state-
affiliated.128
National Council for
Social Security Fund
0.12% No Yes State entity that
manages the National
State Security Fund
including equity assets
from state-owned
enterprises as well as
Basic Old Age
Insurance Funds from
provincial
governments129
Huatai-Pinebridge
Fund Management
Co., Ltd.
0.10% No Yes Investors include
Huatai Securities,
which though it is
publicly traded,
remains at least
partially controlled by
the government of
Jiangsu; Huatai Zijin is
also a private
shareholder in MGI
and manages money
on behalf of guidance
funds130; Guohua
Energy Investment
Co., Ltd., an
investment firm

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 60
specializing in
investments in the
new energy and clean
technology sectors;
and a subsidiary of
China Energy
Investment
Corporation Limited,
which is in turn
controlled by the
State-owned Assets
Supervision and
Administration
Commission of the
State Council131;
Pinebridge
Investments, a
privately held
investment manager
under the ultimate
control of Pacific
Century Group, a
family office in Hong
Kong132; and Suzhou
New District Hi-Tech
Industrial Co., Ltd.,
which invests in real
estate, energy
conservation and
environmental
protection, strategic
emerging industries,
non-bank finance and
industrial investment
business, and
manages guidance
funds on behalf of

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 61
national and provincial
government entities133
Bank of China
Investment
Management Co.,
Ltd.
0.06% No Yes Bank of China
Investment
Management Co., Ltd.
(BOCIM) is a joint-
venture fund
management company
between two world-
known brands: Bank
of China Co., Ltd.
(Bank of China) and
BlackRock, Inc.
(BlackRock). Bank of
China is controlled by
Central Huijin
Investment Ltd., which
in turn is controlled by
the China Investment
Corporation (“CIC”),
one of China’s major
sovereign wealth
funds. However,
Central Huijin’s
principal shareholder
rights are exercised by
the State Council of
the People’s Republic
of China (“State
Council”). The
members of Central
Huijin’s Board of
Directors and Board of
Supervisors are
appointed by and are

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 62
accountable to the
State Council.134
ICBC Credit Suisse
Asset Management
Co., Ltd.
0.06% No Yes Joint venture between
the Industrial and
Commercial Bank of
China (ICBC), a state-
owned commercial
bank, and Credit
Suisse, a global
investment bank
headquartered in
Switzerland135
All Other Public
Shareholders
0.51% n/a n/a Remaining public
shareholders each
hold 0.05% or less of
MGI Tech Co.
(collectively ~0.50%
stake) and therefore
were not analyzed
individually
Number of Major
Shareholders
76.84% 29 Note: Count of 29
major shareholders
excludes “All Other
Public Shareholders”
Number of Major
Shareholders
Related/Affiliated
 3
Related to
BGI Group
22
Affiliated
with CCP
Note: Excludes “All
Other Public
Shareholders”

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 63
% Affiliated (no. of
major shareholders)
 10.3% 75.9% Note: Excludes “All
Other Public
Shareholders”
% Affiliated (%
stake held)
 53.3% 21.9% Note: Excludes “All
Other Public
Shareholders”

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 64
MGI Tech Co.—Current Private Shareholding
Shareholder
Ownership
%
BGI Group
Relationship?
CCP
Affiliation?
Description of Entity
and CCP Affiliation, if
applicable
Beka Asset
Management,
SGIIC, S.A.
n/a No

No

An affiliate of Beka
Finance, a diversified
financial services
company
headquartered in
Madrid136
CITIC Securities
Company Limited
(SHSE:600030)
n/a No

Yes CITIC Securities is
controlled by CITIC
Group, which is state-
owned.137
Shanghai
International Group
Assets
Management Co.,
Ltd.
n/a No

Yes

Subsidiary of Shanghai
International Group,
which is backed by the
State-owned Assets
Supervision and
Administration
Commission of
Shanghai Municipal
Government. SIG
manages state-owned
capital and purports to
“promote the rational
ﬂow of state-owned

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 65
capital by market-
oriented means”138
CITIC GoldStone
Fund Management
Co., Ltd.
n/a Yes

Yes Subsidiary/affiliate of
CITIC Securities,
controlled by CITIC
Group, which is state-
owned139
Huaxing Growth
Capital
n/a No No Fund managed by
China Renaissance, an
independent Chinese
investment bank140
China Insurance
Investment
n/a No Yes Affiliated with China
Insurance Investment
Company, Ltd. (CIIC).
Administers guidance
funds on behalf of the
government of
Shanghai and the
national government141
Thinkfund
Investment
Management Co.,
Ltd.

n/a No Yes Subsidiary of Zhongyi
Dakang Investment
Management Co.,
Ltd.142 Thinkfund
investors include
insurance companies,
bank subsidiaries,
securities companies,
central and local state-
owned enterprises, and

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 66
listed companies.143
Thinkfund invests in
medical care, elderly
care and biomedicine,
technology and
advanced
manufacturing,
infrastructure and real
estate and has
participated in at least
one guidance fund.144
Beijing CGP
Investment Co.,
Ltd.
n/a No Yes Manages dozens of
government guidance
funds in Beijing,
Shanghai, Jiangsu,
Zhejiang, Hunan and
Chongqing, and has
invested in more than
400 funds145
CITIC Securities
Investment Limited
n/a Yes Yes Subsidiary/affiliate of
CITIC Securities,
controlled by CITIC
Group, which is state-
owned146
Shanghai Dingfeng
Equity Investment
Management
Center (Limited
Partnership)
n/a No Yes Hedge fund manager
based in Shanghai that
manages government
guidance funds, among
other activities147

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 67
SDIC Unity Capital
Co., Ltd.
n/a No Yes Guidance fund of China
State Development &
Investment Corporation
(SDIC), a state-owned
investment holding
company148
Taikang Life
Insurance Co., Ltd.
n/a No Yes Taikang Life Insurance
is one of the largest life
insurers in China and
operates as a
subsidiary of Taikang
Insurance Group Inc., a
privately held group.149
Current investors in
Taikang Insurance
Group include CITIC
Group, China
Merchants Group,
China National
Instruments Import &
Export (Group)
Corporation, and
Genertec, all of which
are state-owned
enterprises, as well as
other private
shareholders.150
Shanghai Sailing
High Hope
Investment
n/a No Yes Investors are Sailing
Capital Advisors (HK)
Limited, a subsidiary of
Shanghai International
Group, which is a

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 68
Management Co.,
Ltd.
government agency151,
and Jiangsu High Hope
Venture Capital Co.,
Ltd., a subsidiary of
Jiangsu High Hope
International Group
Corporation, which is a
large provincial state-
owned enterprise152 153
Shenzhen Lingxin
Jishi Equity
Investment Fund
Management
Partnership
Enterprise (L.P.)
n/a No Not
available
Ultimate ownership
unclear
BGI Group n/a Yes Yes Corporate parent
Tibet Ti Investment
Asset Management
Co., Ltd.
n/a No Not
available
Ultimate ownership
unclear
Total Shareholders 23.16% 16
Number of
Shareholders
Related/Affiliated
 3
Related to
BGI Group
12
Affiliated
with CCP
Note one shareholder is
neither a BGI Group
affiliate nor state
affiliated

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 69
% Affiliated (no. of
shareholders)
 18.8% 75.0%
% Affiliated (%
stake held)
 n/a n/a

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 70
BGI Genomics—Current Public Shareholding
Shareholder
Ownership
%
BGI Group
Relationship?
CCP
Affiliation?
Description of Entity and
CCP Affiliation, if
applicable
Shenzhen Huada
Gene Technology
Co., Ltd.
37.25% Yes No Subsidiary/ affiliate of
BGI Group
Shenzhen
Qianhai BGI
Investment
Enterprise
(Limited
Partnership)
8.41% Yes No Subsidiary/ affiliate of
BGI Group
Wanjia Asset
Management Co.,
Ltd.
3.67% No

Yes Owned by Zhongtai
Securities, which is
partially state- owned,
and Shandong New
Growth Drivers Fund (山
东省新动能基金管理有限
公司), which is an
economic development
agency in Jinan,
Shandong Province
(backed by Shandong
Finance Investment
Group Co., Ltd., a
principal investment firm
specializing in managing

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 71
equity investment
guidance funds of the
province of Shandong,
China)154
Hwabao WP
Fund
Management Co.,
Ltd.
1.80% No Yes Joint venture between
Baowu Steel and
Warbug Pincus. One of
the earliest joint venture
fund companies in China
(launched 2003). Baowu
Steel is state- owned.155
China Merchants
Fund
Management
Company Ltd.
1.04% No Yes Subsidiary of China
Merchants Bank, which
though public is part of
China Merchants Group,
a state-owned
enterprise156
BGI Genomics
Co., Ltd., ESOP
0.98% Yes No Employee equity option
pool. Subsidiary/ affiliate
of BGI Group
E Fund
Management Co.,
Ltd.
0.79% No Yes One of the largest
Chinese asset
management companies
($414 billion AUM).
Owners/investors include
Guangdong Yuecai
Investment Holdings
Co.,Ltd. —广东粤财投资
控股有限公司 (controlled

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 72
by People’s Government
of Guangdong Province)
and Infore Group, an
industrial holding
company in Guangdong
Province157
China Southern
Asset
Management Co.,
Ltd.
0.63% No Yes Ownership includes
Huatai Securities
(41.16%)—state-
affiliated; Shenzhen
Investment Holdings
(27.44%)—state- owned;
Xiamen Intl Trust Co
(13.72%)—state- owned;
Industrial Securities Co.
(9.15%); other entities
related to the
government of Xiamen
(~9%)158
Wang, Jian
(Chairman)
0.62% Yes No BGI Group Insider
Guotai Asset
Management
Company Limited
0.56% No Yes Subsidiary of China
Jianyin Investment
Limited (中国建银投资有
限责任公司), which in
turn is a subsidiary of
Central Huijin Investment
Ltd.—中央汇金投资有限
责任公司, a subsidiary of
China Investment

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 73
Corporation, China’s
main sovereign wealth
fund159
China Universal
Asset
Management
Company Ltd.
0.51% No Yes Orient Securities (state-
affiliated) holds 35%;
China Eastern Airlines
(an SOE) holds 20%;
Wenhui-Xinmin United
Press Group (Shanghai
United Media Group),
which is a state media
company, hold an
undisclosed % stake160
GF Fund
Management Co.,
Ltd.
0.48% No Yes Subsidiary of GF
Securities, which was
spun out of China
Guangfa Bank in 1999
and now trades publicly
(SHE: 000776)161
Barclays PLC
Private Banking &
Investment
Banking
Investment
0.40% No No British multinational bank
and investment
manager162
BlackRock, Inc.
(NYSE: BLK)
0.39% No No American alternative
asset manager 163

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 74
Ye Yin (Vice
Chairman of the
Board)
0.26% Yes No BGI Group insider
Tianhong Asset
Management Co.,
Ltd.
0.26% No No Subsidiary of Ant Group
(Ant Financial holds
51%) 164
Maxwealth Fund
Management Co.,
Ltd.
0.21% No

Yes Investors are Lion Global
Investors (a member of
OCBC group— Oversea-
Chinese Banking
Corporation Limited, a
Singapore multinational
banking and financial
services corporation) and
Bank of Ningbo. The
Bank of Ningbo’s largest
shareholder is Ningbo
Development and
Investment Group, an
affiliate of Ningbo
Government (22%),
followed by OCBC Group
(20%)165
Nikko Asset
Management Co.,
Ltd.
0.16% No No Japanese asset
manager166

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 75
Dimensional
Fund Advisors LP
0.11% No No U.S.-based fund167
The Vanguard
Group, Inc.
0.10% No No American investment
manager168
China Asset
Management Co.,
Ltd.
0.09% No Yes Also known as China
AMC. One of China’s
biggest fund families.
Majority-owned by CITIC
Securities, an SOE
(62.2%), as well as
Power Corporation of
Canada (13.9%),
Mackenzie Investments
(13.9%)169
Harvest Fund
Management Co.
Ltd.
0.08% No Yes Also known as Harvest
Wealth Management;
formerly known as
Shenzhen Qiushi Huizhi
Wealth Investment
Management Co., Ltd.
Jointly owned by
Deutsche Bank Securities
(30%), China Credit Trust
(40%), and Lixin
Investment (30%). China
Credit Trust is backed by
China Merchants, the
People’s Insurance
Company, China National
Coal Group, and China

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 76
Pingmei Shenma
Group—all state
affiliated.170
Mirae Asset
Global
Investments
0.06% No No Large Korean asset
manager171
Fullgoal Fund
Management Co.,
Ltd.
0.06% No Yes Shareholders include
Bank of Montreal (BMO),
Fujian International Trust
& Investment Company,
Haitong Securities Co.,
Ltd. (SHSE:600837),
Huatai Securities Co.,
Ltd. (SHSE:601688),
Shandong International
Trust Co., Ltd.
(SEHK:1697), Shenwan
Hongyuan Group Co.,
Ltd. (SZSE:000166).
Huatai Securities, though
publicly traded, remains
at least partially
controlled by the
government of Jiangsu.
Shandong International
Trust Co. has
shareholders affiliated
with the government of
Shenzhen.172

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 77
All Other Public
Shareholders
0.53% n/a n/a Remaining public
shareholders each hold
0.05% or less of BGI
Genomics (collectively
less than 0.50% stake)
and therefore were not
analyzed individually.
Total
Shareholders
59.33% 24 Note: Count of 24
shareholders excludes
“All Other Public
Shareholders” holding
less than 0.05% stake
each
Number of
Shareholders
Related/
Affiliated
 5
Related to
BGI Group
12
Affiliated
with CCP
Note: Excludes “All Other
Public Shareholders”
% Affiliated (no.
of shareholders)
 20.8% 50.0% Note: Excludes “All Other
Public Shareholders”
% Affiliated (%
stake held)
 47.5% 9.9% Note: Excludes “All Other
Public Shareholders”

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 78
BGI Genomics—Private Shareholding
Shareholder
Ownership
%
BGI Group
Relationship?
CCP
Affiliation?
Description of Entity
and CCP Affiliation, if
applicable
Sequoia Capital
Operations LLC
n/a No No American venture
capital firm173
China Everbright
Limited (SEHK:165)
n/a No Yes Publicly listed asset
management
subsidiary of China
Everbright Group, a
state-owned
enterprise174
Shenzhen Capital
Group Co., Ltd.
n/a No Yes State-owned venture
capital company
based in Shenzhen175
SB China Venture
Capital
n/a No Yes Controlled by Oriza
FoFs Investment
Management (which
also manages Henan
Province Venture
Capital Guidance
Fund—Launched).
Oriza FoFs in turn is a
subsidiary of Suzhou
Oriza Holdings Co.,
Ltd., whose current

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 79
investors are China
Life Insurance
Company Limited
(SEHK:2628), a state-
owned enterprise, and
Jiangsu Guoxin
Investment Group
Limited, which is
controlled by State-
owned Assets
Supervision and
Administration
Commission of
Jiangsu Provincial
Government.176
Huatai Securities
Co., Ltd.
(SHSE:601688)
n/a No Yes Huatai Securities is
publicly traded, but it
remains at least
partially controlled by
the government of
Jiangsu. Other state-
owned enterprises are
also investors.177
China Life Insurance
(Group) Company
n/a No Yes China Life Insurance
Group is wholly
owned by the Ministry
of Finance of the
People’s Republic of
China, a government
institution.178

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 80
China Merchants
Securities Co., Ltd.
(SHSE:600999)
n/a No Yes Publicly traded, but
private shareholders
include PICC Life
Insurance Company
Limited (subsidiary of
the People’s Insurance
Company— state-
owned), Shenzhen
Chuyuan Investment
Development Co., Ltd.
(a subsidiary of China
Merchants Finance
Investment Holdings
Company Limited and
Shenzhen Yanqing
Investment &
Development Co.,
Ltd.), Shenzhen
Jisheng Investment
Development Co., Ltd.,
and China Merchants
Finance Investment
Holdings Company
Limited. The latter
three all roll up to
China Merchants
Group, which
ultimately is state-
owned (controlled by
State-owned Asset
Supervision and
Administration
Commission of the
State Council).179

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 81
HongShan, formerly
known as Sequoia
China Investment
Management LLP
n/a No No Subsidiary of Sequoia
Capital180
Shenzhen Co-win
Venture Capital
Investments Limited
n/a Yes No Shenzhen Co-win
Growth Fund is a
venture capital fund
managed by BGI Co-
Win, which is
associated with BGI
Group.181
China Life
Investment
Management
Company Limited
n/a No Yes Subsidiary or affiliate
of China Life
Insurance Group,
which is wholly
owned by the Ministry
of Finance of the
People’s Republic of
China, a government
institution182
Gold Stone
Investment Co., Ltd.
n/a No Yes Subsidiary/affiliate of
CITIC Securities,
controlled by CITIC
Group, which is state-
owned.183
Yunfeng Capital n/a No No Founded by Jack Ma
(founder and former
executive chairman of

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 82
Alibaba) and David Yu
(founder of Target
Media). Yu remains
chairman and largest
shareholder (47%).184
Sunbridge
Investment
Management Co.,
Ltd.
n/a No No Also known as
Shenzhen Shengqiao
Investment
Management Co., Ltd.
They state publicly
that they have “China
Ping An Trust &
Investment Co., Ltd,
Aluminum Corp. of
China Limited, and
China, Beijing State-
Owned Assets
Management Co., Ltd.
(BSAM), Huadian
Finance Co., Ltd.,” all
of which are state-
affiliated.185
Shanghai Prosperity
Fund Management
Co., Ltd.
n/a No Yes Buyout fund managed
by Shanghai Guohe
Capital, which was set
up in 2009 by
Shanghai International
Group, a state-owned
financial institution
(primary investor is
State-owned Assets
Supervision and
Administration

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 83
Commission of
Shanghai Municipal
Government)186
Kaiwu Capital n/a No Not
available
Ultimate ownership
unclear187
Shanghai Orient
Securities Capital
Investment Co., Ltd.
n/a No Yes Affiliate of Orient
Securities. Orient itself
is publicly traded, but
still 30% owned by
Shenergy Group,
which is state-owned
(State-owned Assets
Supervision and
Administration
Commission of
Shanghai Municipal
Government).188
Shenzhen Sharing
Growth Investment
Management Co.,
Ltd. a.k.a Share
Capital
n/a No Yes “Shenzhen Sharing
Growth Investment
Management is also
known as Share
Capital (分享投资).
Share Capital’s
primary backer is
Oriza FoFs Investment
Management, which in
turn is a subsidiary of
Suzhou Oriza
Holdings Co., Ltd.,
which is directly
backed by China Life

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 84
Insurance Company
Limited (SEHK:2628)
(an SOE) and Jiangsu
Guoxin Investment
Group Limited (backed
by State- owned
Assets Supervision
and Administration
Commission of
Jiangsu Provincial
Government).
Investors in Share
Capital’s individual
funds include national
and local
governments, top
universities, fund-of-
funds (FOFs), listed
companies, and
established
entrepreneurs. Share
Capital manages
guidance funds on
behalf of the
government of
Shenzhen.”189
Magic Stone
Alternative
Investments
n/a No No Also known as MSA
Capital (和玉资本).
Independent
investor190
ShengJing360.com,
Inc., Investment Arm
n/a No Yes Publicly traded after
2015 IPO; however,

===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 85
shareholders include
Share Capital (state-
affiliated, as above)191
Shanghai Orient
Securities Innovation
Investment Co., Ltd.
n/a No Yes Affiliate of Orient
Securities. Orient itself
is publicly traded, but
still 30% owned by
Shenergy Group,
which is state-owned
(State-owned Assets
Supervision and
Administration
Commission of
Shanghai Municipal
Government).192
Hotland Innovation
Asset Management
Co., Ltd.
n/a No Yes Established by
Shenzhen Capital
Group (above), which
is a state-owned
venture capital
company based in
Shenzhen193
Shenzhen Huahong
Capital Management
Co., Ltd.
n/a No Not
available
Ultimate ownership
unclear
Yixing Guangkong
Investment Co., Ltd.
n/a No Yes Subsidiary of
Everbright Investment
(Shenzhen) Limited
Company, which is a

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 86
subsidiary/affiliate of
China Everbright
Limited (SEHK:165),
an affiliate of China
Everbright Group, a
state-owned entity194
Shanghai Yunfeng
Enterprise
Management Co.,
Ltd.
n/a No Not
available
Ultimate ownership
unclear
Shenzhen Jinsheng
Capital Management
Corporation
n/a No Yes Also known as
Jinsheng Fund of
Funds (FoF), the group
manages RMB 60 Bn
on behalf of over 200
GPs. It maintains
numerous public
partnerships with
SOEs and other state-
affiliated entities.
Jinsheng FOF is also
an investor in entities
that are direct
shareholders in MGI,
BGI, or both, including
e.g., GreenPine Capital
Partners, Goldstone,
and Cowin Capital.
Finally, in terms of
government
affiliations, the
management team at
Jinsheng FOF was

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 87
appointed as an
external member of
the Investment
Committee of the
Shenzhen Qianhai
Guidance Fund, a
judge of the Beijing
Haidian District
Guidance Fund, and
the co-chairman of the
parent fund branch of
the China International
Association for the
Promotion of Science
and Technology.195
China Life Private
Equity Investment
Co., Ltd.
n/a No Yes The private equity
subsidiary of China
Life Insurance Group,
which is wholly
owned by the Ministry
of Finance of the
People’s Republic of
China, a government
institution196
Great Wall Fund
Management
(Shenzhen) Co., Ltd.
n/a No Yes Also known as
Qianhai Great Wall
Fund or Qianhai Great
Wall Fund
Management
(Shenzhen) Co.
Manages guidance
funds on behalf of the
government of

===== PDF_PAGE 89 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 88
Shenzhen. Limited
partners include
Futian Guidance Fund,
Shenzhen Capital
Group Co., Ltd.,
Shenzhen Futian
Guide Fund
Investment Co., Ltd.,
Shenzhen
Government
Investment Guidance
Fund197
Shenzhen Huada
Gene Technology
Co., Ltd.
n/a Yes No Subsidiary/affiliate of
BGI Group
Gaolin Capital
Management Co.,
Ltd.
n/a No Not
available
Ultimate ownership
unclear
SME Industrial
Investment Fund
Management Co.,
Ltd.
n/a No Yes “中小企业产业投资基
金管理有限公司”
appears to be a
guidance fund
associated with
government of
Shenzhen.198
Shenzhen Guohua
Sanxin Fund
n/a No Not
available
Subsidiary of
Shenzhen Guohua
Investment
Management, a.k.a.

===== PDF_PAGE 90 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 89
Management Co.,
Ltd.
GH Investment
Management Corp.,
Ltd. (深圳市国华投资
管理股份有限公司)199
Xi’an Fusierwan
Investment
Management Co.,
Ltd.
n/a No Not
available
Ultimate ownership
unclear
Suzhou Northern
Light Tengyuan
Venture Capital
Management Co.,
Ltd.
n/a No Not
available
Ultimate ownership
unclear
Beijing Palace Asset
Management Co.,
Ltd.
n/a No Not
available
Ultimate ownership
unclear 200
SDIC Chuangyi
Industry Fund
Management Co.,
Ltd.
n/a No Yes SDIC Chuangyi
Industry Fund
Management
manages multiple
individual guidance
funds on behalf of the
State Development
and Investment
Corporation (SDIC)201

===== PDF_PAGE 91 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 90
Fusi Capital n/a No Not
available
Ultimate ownership
unclear 202
Pingtan Free Trade
Zone Puxi Asset
Management Co.,
Ltd.
n/a No Yes Free Trade Zone
associated with the
government of Fujian
province203
Beijing Chuangling
Capital Investment
Management Co.,
Ltd.
n/a No Not
available
Ultimate ownership
unclear204
Tianjin Liren
Investment
Management
Partnership
Enterprise (Limited
Partnership)
n/a No No Private Fund business
set up by Hillhouse
Capital in 2018205
BGI Group n/a Yes No Parent company
Youshan Capital n/a No Yes Youshan Capital was
established in 2020 in
partnership with
professional
institutions such as
large state-owned
enterprises, fund-of-
funds funds, and
private listed

===== PDF_PAGE 92 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 91
companies. It invests
in advanced
manufacturing, new
energy, and medical
health. A major LP is
China National
Petroleum (CNPC), an
SOE.206
Total Shareholders 40.67% 41
Number of
Shareholders
Related/Affiliated
 3
Related to
BGI Group
22
Affiliated
with CCP

% Affiliated (no. of
shareholders)
 7.3% 53.7%
% Affiliated (% stake
held)
 n/a n/a

===== PDF_PAGE 93 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 92
Appendix 2: Key Areas of Biotechnology
Bioinformatics
Bioinformatics can be described as using computation and statistics to understand
biology, allowing scientists to better understand the function of genes and proteins,
three-dimensional shapes of proteins and nucleic acids, and the evolution of parts of
the genome. AI takes this field to the next level by enabling more efficient data
processing and analysis, expediting the translation of experimental science to real-
world applications. China has prioritized bioinformatics, fostering national champion
BGI, as well as establishing key enabling infrastructure. Bioinformatics is inherently
interdisciplinary in scope, comprised of engineering, statistical, biological, and other
subdisciplines.
Synthetic biology
Described by the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) as “a field of science that
involves redesigning organisms for useful purposes by engineering them to have new
abilities,"207 synthetic biology offers new ways to harness nucleic acids for a wide range
of applications. The use of AI to find ways to connect genotypes with phenotypes—
basically understanding what genes do and what they code for—has implications for
understanding human disease, genome manipulation, and designing life-saving
therapies, not to mention increasing the probability of lab accidents, violating ethical
boundaries, and creating new or enhancing existing biological weapons.
Gain of function research
Research that, purposefully or not, has the effect of enhancing the virulence or
transmissibility of pathogens has direct national security implications. While there are
valid reasons for concern, there are also important questions this research can answer
that help the biomedical sector prepare for future pandemics. The ability to better
understand how pathogens and their hosts interact on the molecular level, and how
proteins and other biomolecules function in the cell, will be enabled by AI, yielding
potential implications for this line of research.

===== PDF_PAGE 94 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 93
Agricultural biotechnology
Food security will likely become more of a national security issue as countries
worldwide grapple with ways to feed their citizens. Better understanding of genomic
factors that impact growth, disease resistance, and the nutritional value of plants and
livestock has the potential to impact world hunger and to become a key economic
driver. AI is already being used to manage fields for increased yields. Its use to study
plant and animal genomics will affect our ability to grow resources for livestock and
modify livestock in ways that facilitate ease of handling (e.g., hornless cows)—not to
mention replacing them with plant-based substitutes. China’s AI and biotechnology
plans and programs emphasize the use of AI to improve plants and livestock.
Data privacy, data security, and population surveillance
While not a facet of biotech research itself, as more genomic and other biological
information becomes available, our ability to store, analyze, and protect it is increasingly
important. The U.S. and like-minded countries will need to explore whether current
procedures governing data privacy are sufficient, or if there are special considerations
unique to genomic data. Key among these considerations will be how to maximize
discovery while protecting this resource vis-à-vis other countries that do not play by
the same rules for sharing and collaboration.

===== PDF_PAGE 95 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 94
Appendix 3: China’s Policies That Support Genomics and Biotechnology
What follows is an overview of some of the policies and programs China has put in
place to support this growth:
China’s National Medium and Long-Term Plan (MLP) for science and technology (S&T)
Development (2006–2020).208 This S&T blueprint lays out a development strategy that
relies on overseas returnees, foreign collaboration, and the R&D laboratories that
international companies have established in China to acquire needed skills. The MLP
focuses both on the process of science and the specific topic areas it seeks to develop.
The plan regards the development of Chinese biotechnology as “the new revolution of
the 21st century” and emphasizes the “importance of genomics, proteomics,
sequencing, and discovery of the functions of genes,” all aspects that stand to be
enhanced by contributions from AI.
Precision Medicine Initiative.209 China’s Precision Medicine Initiative (精准医疗计划),
launched in 2016, seeks to leverage the country’s sequencing capacity and access to
biomedical data to design unique and tailored therapeutics for individuals, and explore
diseases endemic to China. This effort brings together information technology and
biotech companies with Chinese government support ($9.2 billion) to design and apply
new AI-enabled tools that analyze genomic, health, environmental, and behavioral data
for insights into human health and therapeutics. It is modeled after an initiative
launched by the United States in 2015.
13th Five-Year Plan for S&T Innovation.210 The 13th Five-Year Plan (2016–2020)
introduced the relevance of AI to biotechnology, experimental design, and precision
medicine. It further emphasizes the importance of interdisciplinary research and
computing power: “Build high-throughput calculation, high-throughput experiment,
and dedicated database platforms, research and develop the four key technologies of
multi-level and cross-scale design, high-throughput preparation, high-throughput
characterization and service evaluation, and material big data, achieve the transition of
new materials R&D from the traditional ‘experience-guided experiment’ model to the
‘theoretical prediction, experimental verification’ model.”
The plan also underscores the importance of genomic data to biotechnology and
reiterates government plans for national-level genome databases:

===== PDF_PAGE 96 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 95
“Establish a national bioinformatics and sample resource database, research and
develop a number of suitable basic technologies and innovative products,
comprehensively improve the level of birth defect prevention and control technology,
safeguard the reproductive health of the reproductive age population, and improve the
quality of the birth population.”
“Accelerate breakthroughs in cutting-edge key technology in life sciences such as new
genomics technologies, synthetic biotechnology, biological big data, 3D bioprinting
technology, brain science and artificial intelligence, gene editing technology, and
structural biology.”
“Improve the originality of cutting-edge biotechnology in China, and seize a
commanding position in international biotechnology competition.”
13th Five-Year Plan for Military and Civil Fusion.211 This plan was established in 2017
and focuses on emerging technologies. It calls specifically for a cross-pollination of
military and civilian technology in areas not traditionally viewed as “national security
issues,” such as neuroscience and brain-inspired research, as well as biotechnology.
The military-civilian fusion plan states that such projects will be supported by foreign
outreach initiatives.
14th Five-Year Plan.212 China’s latest Five-Year Plan (2021–2025) continues to
emphasize interdisciplinary research and the use of AI for biological discovery and
precision medicine. The plan underscores the importance to China of merging AI and
biotechnology, as well as the need for both political and financial support: “We will
promote the integration and innovation of biotechnology and information technology,
accelerate the development of biomedicine, bioengineered breeding, biomaterials,
bioenergy, and other industries and increase the size and strength of the bio-economy.”
Strategic emerging industries.213 China has designated several fields as “strategic
emerging industries” (战略性新兴产业, SEIs) to foster a more entrepreneurial
environment and grow indigenous companies. The effort began at the top,
spearheaded in 2009 by Wen Jiabao and the State Council,1 and included preferential
tax treatment, subsidies, and government procurement initiatives. AI and biotechnology
are both considered SEIs and factor heavily into China’s efforts. In 2021, China doubled
down on its SEI policy to emphasize “key investments in strategic areas,” create
“industrial clusters,” and accelerate the pace of innovation and development in the
biotechnology industry.

===== PDF_PAGE 97 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 96
As a result of its multi-decade effort and ample investments, China is having success in
many areas and is currently creating a “biotech hub” that will support its success in the
race from genotype to phenotype.
China’s National Genomics Data Center (国家基因组科学数据中心), founded in 2019,
benefits from returned talent that have direct experience in leading U.S. universities and
the NIH. The center acts as a clearinghouse for China’s genetic data, with a genome
sequencing archive and branches with portfolios in precision medicine and agriculture.
Many of its leading scientists have trained abroad and are members of China’s various
talent programs, often while still employed by their Western universities. One of its
leading scientists was selected for the Chinese Academy of Sciences 100 Talents
Program while still working at the NIH.

===== PDF_PAGE 98 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 97
Endnotes

1 Helen Chen and Grace Wang, “Going Local: Strategic Considerations for Medtech Manufacturers in
China,” L.E.K. Consulting, L.E.K. Insight Volume XXV, Issue 24, April 4, 2023,
https://www.lek.com/insights/hea/cn/ei/going-local-strategic-considerations-medtech-manufacturers-
china.
2 Andrew P. Han, “Life Sciences Tools Firms, Observers Sound Alarm on Near -Term China Business
Outlook,” GenomeWeb, September 21, 2023, https://www.genomeweb.com/business-news/life-
sciences-tools-firms-observers-sound-alarm-near-term-china-business-outlook.
3 Ngor Luong, Zachary Arnold, and Ben Murphy, “Understanding Chinese Government Guidance Funds:
An Analysis of Chinese-Language Sources,” Center for Strategic and Emerging Technology, March 2021,
available at https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/understanding-chinese-government-guidance-
funds/
4 MGI 2022 prospectus, page 122 (document is available to researchers upon request)
5 Mazzucato, Mariana. 2018. The Entrepreneurial State. Harlow, England: Penguin Books.
6 National Academies of Sciences, E., Medicine, “Human Genome Editing: Science, Ethics, and
Governance,” (Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2017); The Hinxton Group (2015),
Statement on Genome Editing Technologies and Human Germline Genetic Modification , retrieved from
http://www.hinxtongroup.org/Hinxton2015_Statement.pdf; Araki, M., & Ishii, T. (2014), “International
Regulatory Landscape and Integration of Corrective Genome Editing into In Vitro Fertilization,”
Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology, 12, 108. Doi:10.1186/1477-7827-12-108; Hampton, T.
(2016). “Ethical and Societal Questions Loom Large as Gene Editing Moves Closer to the Clinic ,” JAMA,
315(6), 546-548. Doi:10.1001/jama.2015.19150; Ishii, T. (2017), “Germ Line Genome Editing in Clinics:
The Approaches, Objectives and Global Society,” Briefings in Functional Genomics, 16(1), 46-56.
Doi:10.1093/bfgp/elv053; Cyranoski, D., & Reardon, S. (2017), “Chinese Scientists Genetically Modify
Human Embryos,” Nature, Doi:10.1038/nature.2015.17378.
7 “State Council Notice on the Publication of the National 13th Five-Year Plan for S&T Innovation,” Center
for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET) blog, January 8, 2020,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/state-council-notice-on-the-publication-of-the-national-13th-
five-year-plan-for-st-innovation.
8 National Human Genome Research Institute, Glossary, “DNA Sequencing,” accessed February 10,
2023, https://www.genome.gov/genetics-glossary/DNA-Sequencing.
9 Simon Tripp and Martin Grueber, Economic Impact of the Human Genome Project, Battelle (2011),
https://www.battelle.org/docs/default-source/misc/battelle-2011-misc-economic-impact-human-
genome-project.pdf.
10 Executive Order on Advancing Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing Innovation for a Sustainable, Safe,
and Secure American Bioeconomy, The White House, September 2022,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2022/09/12/executive-order-on-
advancing-biotechnology-and-biomanufacturing-innovation-for-a-sustainable-safe-and-secure-
american-bioeconomy/.
11 “The Bioeconomy: A Primer,” Congressional Research Service, September 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 99 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 98

12 “Translation: State Council Notice on the Publication of the National 13th Five -Year Plan for S&T
Innovation,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET), Georgetown University, January 8,
2020, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/state-council-notice-on-the-publication-of-the-national-
13th-five-year-plan-for-st-innovation.
13 Everbright Securities International, “核心技术铸就壁垒 ，产品优势抢占基因测序市场 [Core Technology
Creates Barriers; Product Advantages Seize the Gene Exploration Market],” January 10, 2023.
14 William C. Hannas et al., Chinese Industrial Espionage: Technology Acquisition and Military
Modernization (Routledge, 2013); William C. Hannas and Didi Kirsten Tatlow, China’s Quest for Foreign
Technology: Beyond Espionage, (Routledge, 2020).
15 Zhongtai Securities, “技术驱动下测序行业持续高景气，国产龙头打造生命科学核心工具箱 [Driven by
Technology, the Sequencing Industry Continues to Boom, and Domestic Leaders Build Core Toolboxes
for Life Sciences],” January 8, 2023.
16 Analysis based on Cheng Pei, “常规业务维持增长，海外拓展有望提速 [Regular Business Maintains
Growth, and Overseas Expansion Is Expected to Accelerate],” China Galaxy Securities, April 4, 2023;
Zhongtai Securities, “技术驱动下测序行业持续高景气，国产龙头打造生命科学核心工具箱 [Driven by
Technology, the Sequencing Industry Continues to Boom, and Domestic Leaders Build Core Toolboxes
for Life Sciences],” January 8, 2023; Everbright Securities, “核心技术铸就壁垒 ，产品优势抢占基因测序市
场 [Core Technology Creates Barriers; Product Advantages Seize the Gene Exploration Market],” January
10, 2023; Conor McNamara, “Illumina Inc: $1Bn in Annual R&D Driving Innovation; Initiate at
Outperform,” RBC Capital Markets, December 6, 2022; Jialin Zhang and John Nie, “MGI Tech: A Rising
Competitor in Global Genome Sequencing Market,” Nomura Securities, January 6, 2023.
17 SkyQuest Technology Consulting Pvt Ltd., “DNA Sequencing Market to Generate Revenue of
$29.89 Billion by 2028,” GlobeNewswire, September 12, 2022,
https://www.globenewswire.com/en/news-release/2022/09/12/2514305/0/en/DNA-Sequencing-
Market-to-Generate-Revenue-of-29-89-Billion-By-2028-Demand-for-DNA-Sequencing-to-Increase-
1200-if-Per-Genome-Sequencing-Goes-Down-to-100.html; Illumina Press Release, “Illumina Introduces
Multiple Breakthrough Sequencing Innovations at Inaugural Genomics Forum,”
https://www.illumina.com/company/news-center/press-releases/press-release-
details.html?newsid=0ecd2346-d78b-4d06-be9f-27364492c2ee; and “DNA Sequencing Costs: Data,”
Genome.gov, https://www.genome.gov/about-genomics/fact-sheets/DNA-Sequencing-Costs-Data.;
“MGI Tech Launches New Ultra-High-Speed, Mid-to-Low Throughput Sequencer,” GenomeWeb,
September 27, 2022, https://www.genomeweb.com/sequencing/mgi-tech-launches-new-ultra-high-
speed-mid-low-throughput-sequencer.
18 BGI Purchases 128 Illumina HiSeq(TM) 2000 Sequencing Systems, Illumina,
https://emea.illumina.com/company/news-center/press-releases/2010/1374343.html.
19 Kirsty Needham, “Chinese State Fund Invests in Gene Firm BGI,” Reuters, February 2021,
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-genomics-state/chinese-state-fund-invests-in-gene-firm-bgi-
idUSKBN2AM0AT/.
20 Bo Wang, Fang Liu, Er Chun Zhang, et al., “The China National GeneBank—Owned by All, Completed
by All and Shared by All,” National Library of Medicine, August 20, 2019,
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31447427/.
21 Fuman Jiang, Jinghui Ren, Fang Chen, et al., “Noninvasive Fetal Trisomy (NIFTY) Test: An Advanced
Noninvasive Prenatal Diagnosis Methodology for Fetal Autosomal and Sex Chromosomal Aneuploidies,

===== PDF_PAGE 100 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 99

BMC Medical Genomics, December 2012,
https://bmcmedgenomics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1755-8794-5-57#author-information.
22 Siyang Liu, Shujia Huang, Fang Chen, et al., “Genomic Analyses from Non-invasive Prenatal Testing
Reveal Genetic Associations, Patterns of Viral Infections, and Chinese Population History , Cell Press,
October 2018, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0092867418310328 .
23 Alexandra Alper and David Shepardson, “US Adds Units of China’s BGI, Inspur to Trade Blacklist,
Reuters, March 2023, https://www.reuters.com/markets/us/us-adds-chinese-genetics-company-units-
trade-blacklist-2023-03-02/.
24 “China: Minority Region Collects DNA from Millions,” Human Rights Watch, December 2017,
https://www.hrw.org/news/2017/12/13/china-minority-region-collects-dna-millions.
25 Yi Li, Wenting Zhao, Dan Li, et al., “EDAR, LYPLAL1, PRDM16, PAX3, DKK1, TNFSF12, CACNA2D3,
and SUPT3H Gene Variants Influence Facial Morphology in a Eurasian Population,” Human Genetic, April
2019, https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00439-019-02023-7; Xiaoxi Jing, Yanan Sun, Wenting
Zhao, et al., “Predicting Adult Height from DNA Variants in a European-Asian Admixed Population,”
International Journal of Legal Medicine, April 2019, https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00414-
019-02039-8.
26 BGI Genomics, “2022 Semiannual Report; MGI Tech Co Interim Report, 27 October 2023 ; BGI
Genomics Interim Report,” October 27, 2023.
27 MGI 2022 prospectus, page 122 (document is available to researchers upon request) .
28 Monica Heger, “China National Gene Bank Opens with Investments from BGI and Government,”
September 21, 2016, https://www.genomeweb.com/sequencing/china-national-genebank-opens-
investments-bgi-government#.YfvyAPXMKWA.
29 Hubei Science and Technology Investment Group Co., Ltd., “Company Profile,” accessed November 10,
2023, http://www.hbsti.com/.
30 S&P Capital IQ, profile on Huatai Securities Co., Ltd. (SHSE:601688), accessed December 30, 2023.
31 Ngor Luong, Zachary Arnold, and Ben Murphy, “Understanding Chinese Government Guidance Funds:
An Analysis of Chinese-Language Sources,” Center for Strategic and Emerging Technology, March 2021,
available at: https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/understanding-chinesegovernment-guidance-funds/.
32 Zachary Arnold, “Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission: ‘U.S.
Investment in China’s Capital Markets and Military-Industrial Complex’,” March 19, 2021,
https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2021-03/Zachary_Arnold_Testimony.pdf.
33 Daniel H. Rosen, Nargiza Salidjanova, Rachel Lietzow, Ryan Featherston, Boyuan Chen, Josh Lipsky,
and Niels Graham, “China Pathfinder: 2022 Annual Scorecard,” The Rhodium Group and the Atlantic
Council Geoeconomics Center, October 10, 2022.
34 Tang Ziyi and Xue Xiaoli, “Four Things to Know About China’s $670 Billion Government Guidance
Funds,” Caixin Global, February 25, 2020, https://www.caixinglobal.com/2020-02-25/four-things-to-
know-about-chinas-670-billion-government-guidance-funds-101520348.html.
35 Kai Kajitani, Kuang-hui Chen and Kohei Mitsunami, “Impacts of Industrial Guidance Funds on the
Performance of Chinese Manufacturing Enterprises,” March 23, 2023,
https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/impacts-industrial-guidance-funds-performance-chinese-manufacturing-
enterprises.
36 The World Bank Data Bank, “GDP (current US$),” accessed December 10, 2023 ,
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD.
37 David Adler, “Guiding Finance: China’s Strategy for Funding Advanced Manufacturing,” American
Affairs, Volume VI, Number 2 (Summer 2022): 17–40.

===== PDF_PAGE 101 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 100

https://americanaffairsjournal.org/2022/05/guiding-finance-chinas-strategy-for-funding-advanced-
manufacturing/.
38 CGP Investment, “Hongming Prosperity Fund,” China Grand Prosperity Investment, accessed
December 1, 2023, http://www.cgpinvestment.com/index.php?m=content&c=index&a=lists&catid=316 .
39 Crunchbase, “SDIC Unity Capital profile,” accessed November 27, 2023 ,
https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/sdic-unity-capital; PitchBook, “SDIC Unity National Emerging
Industry Venture Capital Guidance Fund Overview,” accessed December 9, 2023 ,
https://pitchbook.com/profiles/fund/18434-80F#overview.
40 Hubei Science and Technology Investment Group, “湖北省科技投资集团有限公司 公司债券年度报告
（2019 年 [Hubei Science and Technology Investment Group Co., Ltd. Corporate Bond Annual Report,
2019],” p. 20-21, accessed November 30, 2023,
https://pdf.dfcfw.com/pdf/H2_AN202006051382518774_1.pdf?1647722289000.pdf .
41 Chen Xiachang, “定了！投控基石入选深圳新能源汽车产业基金管理人，助力深圳打造智能汽车创新城
[Deal! Investment Control Cornerstone Was Selected as the Manager of the Shenzhen New Energy
Automobile Industry Fund to Help Shenzhen Build a Smart Car Innovation City],” The Securities Times,
September 25, 2023, https://www.stcn.com/article/detail/990589.html.
42 Liu Quan, “基石资本公布 2018 年募资成绩单：5 只新基金+双创债，总规模逾 100 亿元 [Cornerstone
Capital Announced its 2018 Fundraising Report Card: 5 New Funds + Mass Entrepreneurship and
Innovation Bonds, with over 10 billion Yuan Raised],” PE Daily, December 17, 2018,
https://news.pedaily.cn/201812/438883.shtml.
43 Zhuo Yong, “总规模 500 亿，武汉签约了一批基金 [Wuhan Signs Up Funds over RMB 50 Billion],” The
Securities Times, November 11, 2023, https://www.stcn.com/article/detail/1025656.html.
44 Shin Junhan, “三年募资规模近 400 亿：解密国泰君安创新投资的投资逻辑 [Fund-raising Scale of Nearly
40 Billion in Three Years: Deciphering the Investment Logic of Guotai Junan Innovation Investment],”
21jingji.com, June 30, 2023,
https://www.21jingji.com/article/20230630/herald/dc89576dd3316a0c0eb8d17183dcefa9.html .
45 Guotai Junnan Innovation Investment Co., Ltd. website, accessed April 6, 2024, "About Us."
http://www.gtjaiic.com/gjct_pc/htmls/index.html.
46 Futian Guiding Fund, “Home,” accessed December 11, 2023, http://www.yindaofund.com/.
47 PitchBook, “Green Pine Capital Partners profile,” accessed December 9, 2023.
48 Shenzhen Capital Group, “Company Profile,” accessed November 27, 2023 ,
https://www.szvc.com.cn/en-about.
49 S&P Capital IQ, profile of Great Wall Fund Management (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd. - 前海长城基金管理（深
圳）有限公司, accessed November 20, 2023.
50 S&P Capital IQ, profiles of Shenzhen Sharing Growth Investment Management Co., Ltd., Oriza FoFs
Investment Management, Suzhou Oriza Holdings Co., Ltd., China Life Insurance Company, and Jiangsu
Guoxin Investment Group Limited, accessed December 1, 2023.
51 Share Capital, “About Share Capital,” accessed December 15, 2023.
https://www.sharecapital.cn/en/about-us.
52 Share Capital Newsletter, “简讯｜分享择善医疗基金获评「深圳市引导基金 2021 年度市场化子基金业
绩考评综合排名 TOP15」[Share Zeshan Medical Fund Was Rated as Top 15 Comprehensive Ranking of

===== PDF_PAGE 102 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 101

Shenzhen Guidance Funds 2021 Market-Based Sub-Fund Performance Evaluation],” June 27, 2023,
https://www.sharecapital.cn/news-1702.html.
53 State Development and Investment Corporation (SDIC), “SDIC Chuangyi Industry Fund Management
Co., Ltd.,” July 15, 2017, accessed December 15, 2023,
https://www.sdic.com.cn/en/busssystem/bussframewk/emingines/webinfo/2021/07/162791557836848
6.htm.
54 State Development and Investment Corporation (SDIC), “Better Investment, Better Future,” overview
of SDIC’s activities, investments, and organization, April 28, 2022,
https://www.sdic.com.cn/cn/rootimages/2022/04/28/1652737208767664.pdf.
55 S&P Capital IQ MGI Tech Co Profile; S&P Capital IQ BGI Genomics Profile.
56 Antonia Graceffo, “China’s National Champions: State Support Makes Chinese Companies Dominant,”
Foreign Policy Journal, May 15, 2017, https://www.foreignpolicyjournal.com/2017/05/15/chinas-
national-champions-state-support-makes-chinese-companies-dominant/.
57 Bridge Bank, “Understanding Venture Debt Funding for Life Sciences Companies,” May 15, 2023 ,
https://www.westernalliancebancorporation.com/bridge-bank/insights/understanding-venture-debt-
funding-life-sciences-companies.
58 BGI Genomics, “2022 Semiannual Report Section C: Explanation of pledges of shares by the
controlling shareholder and parties acting in concert.”
59 Kai Guo, Bin Ke, and Song Tang, “Private Firms’ Financial Constraints and Share Pledging by
Controlling Shareholders of Publicly Listed Firms: Evidence from China,” Journal of Corporate Finance,
Volume 80, June 2023, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0929119923000421 .
60 Nicholas Gillet, “New Challenges on Pricing Intragroup Financial Guarantees,” Ernst and Young, June
24, 2021, https://www.ey.com/en_lu/tax/new-challenges-on-pricing-intragroup-financial-guarantees-.
61 MGI Tech Co., “MGI Helps Build a New Model of Biological Science and Education with Guangdong
Xin’an Vocational and Technical College,” January 13, 2020, https://en.mgi-tech.com/news/126/.
62 Shenzhen Capital Group, “Company Profile,” accessed November 27, 2023 ,
https://www.szvc.com.cn/en-about; PitchBook “Green Pine Capital Profile,” accessed November 15,
2023.
63 John Philip Jones, “Ad Spending: Maintaining Market Share,” Harvard Business Review, Jan –Feb 1990,
https://hbr.org/1990/01/ad-spending-maintaining-market-share.
64 S&P Capital IQ summary of MGI financial statements.
65 Robert D. Buzzell, Bradley T. Gale, and Ralph G.M. Sultan, “Market Share —A Key to Profitability,” HBR
January–February 1975, p. 97.
66 Jialin Zhang and John Nie, “MGI Tech: A Rising Competitor in Global Genome Sequencing Market,”
Nomura Securities, January 6, 2023.
67 Helen Chen and Grace Wang, “Going Local: Strategic Considerations for Medtech Manufacturers in
China,” L.E.K. Consulting, L.E.K. Insight Volume XXV, Issue 24, April 4, 2023.
https://www.lek.com/insights/hea/cn/ei/going-local-strategic-considerations-medtech-manufacturers-
china.
68 Andrew P. Han, “Life Sciences Tools Firms, Observers Sound Alarm on Near -Term China Business
Outlook,” GenomeWeb, September 21, 2023, https://www.genomeweb.com/business-news/life-
sciences-tools-firms-observers-sound-alarm-near-term-china-business-outlook.
69 Smythe CPA, “Is Debt Cheaper than Equity?,” October 29, 2015, https://www.smythecpa.com/blog/is-
debt-cheaper-than-equity/.

===== PDF_PAGE 103 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 102

70 Richard A. Brealey, Stewart C. Myers, and Franklin Allen, Principles of Corporate Finance, Tenth Edition
(New York: McGraw Hill, 2011).
71 MGI Tech Co., Interim Report, 27 October 2023; BGI Genomics Interim Report, 27 October 2023.
72 Aswath Damodaran, “Current Data,” New York University, last updated January 5, 2023 ,
https://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/.
73 For the capital asset pricing model (CAPM), a risk-free rate of 2.685% was derived from World
Government Bonds, “China 10 Years Bond—Historical Data,” accessed December 15, 2023.
https://www.worldgovernmentbonds.com/bond-historical-data/china/10-years/
74 For the capital asset pricing model (CAPM), a market risk premium of 8.00% derived from Nomura
Securities (as of January 2023). Normura uses 9.00% for Market Risk premium for MGI. Authors reduced
this to 8.00% to account recent performance of Chinese economy.
Jialin Zhang and John Nie, “MGI Tech: A Rising Competitor in Global Genome Sequencing Market,”
Nomura Securities, January 6, 2023.
75 For WACC calculations, a 25% corporate tax rate was derived from PWC.
PWC, “China, People’s Republic of. Corporate—Taxes on Corporate Income,” June 28, 2023,
https://taxsummaries.pwc.com/peoples-republic-of-china/corporate/taxes-on-corporate-income.
76 Craig Hooper, “W International, Navy’s 1st New Sub and Carrier Module-Builder, Is Failing,” Forbes,
February 1, 2024, https://www.forbes.com/sites/craighooper/2024/02/01/w-international-navys-1st-
new-sub-and-carrier-module-builder-is-failing/?sh=4089336532af.
77 S&P Capital IQ company screening, as of September 21, 2023. Criteria included: 1) Industry
Classifications: Pharmaceuticals, Biotechnology and Life Sciences (Primary); 2) Market Capitalization
[Latest] ($USDmm, Historical rate): is between $2 billion and $10 billion.
78 Andrew James Lom and Rachael Hashmall, “The Corporate Transparency Act Is Here—Are You
Ready?,” Norton Rose Fulbright, January 2024, https://www.nortonrosefulbright.com/en-
cn/knowledge/publications/55b72cd0/the-corporate-transparency-act-is-here; U.S. Treasury, Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), “Beneficial Ownership Information Reporting,” FAQs , accessed
February 10, 2024, https://www.fincen.gov/boi-faqs#A_2.
79 Office of Congressman Zach Nunn, “Nunn Passes Bipartisan Legislation to Combat China,” Press
Release, September 21, 2023, https://nunn.house.gov/media/press-releases/nunn-passes-bipartisan-
legislation-combat-china.
80 Erik Vermeulen, Fianna Jurdant, and Austin Tyler, “Beneficial Ownership Disclosure in Asian Publicly
Listed Companies,” OECD, 2017, https://www.oecd.org/daf/ca/Beneficial-Ownership-Disclosure-in-
Asian-Publicly-Listed-Companies.pdf.
81 Andrew Pollack, “U.S. Clears DNA Firm’s Acquisition by Chinese,” The New York Times, December 31,
2012, https://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/31/health/chinese-firm-is-cleared-to-buy-american-dna-
sequencing-company.html.
82 Andrew P. Han, “Illumina to Pay $325M Under Settlement with BGI Affiliates, Ending Multifront US
Legal Battle, GenomeWeb, July 14, 2022, https://www.genomeweb.com/sequencing/illumina-pay-
325m-under-settlement-bgi-affiliates-ending-multifront-us-legal-battle.
83 The National Medium- and Long-Term Program for Science and Technology Development (2006–
2020), (2006); Roadmap of Major Technical Domains for Made in China 2025 (2015); 13th National Five -
Year Plan for the Development of Strategic Emerging Industries (2016).
84“Provisions on the Administration of Major National Science and Technology Projects (Civilian
Projects)” (国家科技重大专项（民口）管理规定), Ministry of Science and Technology, National
Development and Reform Commission, and Ministry of Finance (科技部，发改委和财政部), Document

===== PDF_PAGE 104 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 103

No. 145, 6 January 2019,
http://www.most.gov.cn/mostinfo/xinxifenlei/fgzc/gfxwj/gfxwj2017/201706/t20170627_133757.htm .
85 John Pomfret, Sam George, Matthew Johnson, and Matt Pottinger, “Capital Markets with Chinese
Characteristics: Xi’s Declaration of Lawfare,” Foundation for Defense of Democracies, September 14,
2023.
86 Yi Huiman, China Securities Regulatory Commission, Keynote Address at the 2022 Annual Conference
of the Financial Street Forum, November 21, 2022,
http://www.csrc.gov.cn/csrc/c106311/c6609543/content.shtml.
87 John Pomfret, Sam George, Matthew Johnson, and Matt Pottinger, “Capital Markets with Chinese
Characteristics: Xi’s Declaration of Lawfare,” Foundation for Defense of Democracies, September 14,
2023.
88 Yang Changcheng, Gong Fang, and Yuan Yuze, “中国特色估值体系的六大新视角 [Six New
Perspectives on the Valuations with Chinese Characteristics System],” Shanghai Securities News (China),
May 26, 2023, https://news.cnstock.com/news,yw-202305-5066675.htm.
89 Central Financial Working Committee, Office of the Central Financial Commission , “坚定不移走中国特
色金融发展之路 [Unswervingly Follow the Path of Financial Development with Chinese Characteristics],”
Qiushi, December 1, 2023, http://www.qstheory.cn/dukan/qs/2023-12/01/c_1129998578.htm.
90 Helen Chen and Grace Wang, “Going Local: Strategic Considerations for Medtech Manufacturers in
China,” L.E.K. Consulting, L.E.K. Insight Volume XXV, Issue 24, April 4, 2023,
https://www.lek.com/insights/hea/cn/ei/going-local-strategic-considerations-medtech-manufacturers-
china
91 Andrew P. Han, “Life Sciences Tools Firms, Observers Sound Alarm on Near -Term China Business
Outlook,” GenomeWeb, September 21, 2023, https://www.genomeweb.com/business-news/life-
sciences-tools-firms-observers-sound-alarm-near-term-china-business-outlook.
92 The use of forced abortions if birth defects are found is implied in this policy.
93 “Human Genome Project,” National Human Genome Research Institute,
https://www.genome.gov/human-genome-project/Completion-
FAQ#:~:text=How%20much%20did%20it%20cost,billion%20in%20FY%201991%20dollars .
94 “Company Info,” Bloomberg, accessed November 27, 2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/; “Top 10
Gene Sequencing Companies by Revenue,” Biospace, November 29, 2019,
https://www.biospace.com/article/top-10-gene-sequencing-companies-by-revenue/.
95 "The R&D Tax Credit Is Not Just for Scientists," Alliant Group, 2021,
https://www.alliantgroup.com/services/r-d-tax-credit-2/.
96 Budinger et al., “American Prosperity Project: A Nonpartisan Framework for Long -term Investment.”
(The Aspen Institute, December 2016)
97 Mazzucato, Mariana. 2018. The Entrepreneurial State. Harlow, England: Penguin Books.
98 Andrew Roush, “How the Space Race Changed American Education.” TechNotes, 2019,
https://blog.tcea.org/space-race/.
99 U.S. Department of State, “List of Umbrella Science and Technology Agreements ,” https://2009-
2017.state.gov/e/oes/rls/fs/2009/140665.htm
100 Ashley Gold, “Exclusive: U.S. and U.K. Announce AI Partnership,”
https://www.axios.com/2020/09/25/ai-partnership-us-uk.
101 “Aviation Exports” Export-Import Bank of the United States, 2020,
https://www.exim.gov/policies/aviation-exports; Carmichael, “The Interdependence of Firm and

===== PDF_PAGE 105 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 104

Government Behaviour: Boeing and Eximbank”; Hochberg, “The Ex-Im Bank Could Be Trump's Best
Weapon Against China.” Politico, May 24, 2017.
102 Department of Defense Manufacturing Technology Program website, “About the DoD Manufacturing
Innovation Institutes,” accessed January 25, 2024, https://www.dodmantech.mil/About-
Us/Manufacturing-Innovation-Institutes-MIIs/.
103 The Air Force Research Laboratory website, “AFVentures Launches 2024 STRATFI/TACFI Notice of
Opportunity,” accessed January 30, 2024, https://www.afrl.af.mil/News/Article-
Display/Article/3491081/afventures-launches-2024-stratfitacfi-notice-of-opportunity/.
104 National Academies of Sciences, E., Medicine, “Human Genome Editing: Science, Ethics, and
Governance,” (Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2017); The Hinxton Group (2015),
Statement on Genome Editing Technologies and Human Germline Genetic Modification , retrieved from
http://www.hinxtongroup.org/Hinxton2015_Statement.pdf; Araki, M., & Ishii, T. (2014), “International
Regulatory Landscape and Integration of Corrective Genome Editing into In Vitro Fertilization,”
Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology, 12, 108. doi:10.1186/1477-7827-12-108; Hampton, T.
(2016), “Ethical and Societal Questions Loom Large as Gene Editing Moves Closer to the Clinic ,” JAMA,
315(6), 546-548. doi:10.1001/jama.2015.19150; Ishii, T. (2017), “Germ Line Genome Editing in Clinics:
The Approaches, Objectives and Global Society,” Briefings in Functional Genomics, 16(1), 46-56.
doi:10.1093/bfgp/elv053; Cyranoski, D., & Reardon, S. (2017), “Chinese Scientists Genetically Modify
Human Embryos,” Nature, doi:doi:10.1038/nature.2015.17378
105 All shareholding data sourced from S&P Capital IQ as of February 3, 2024.
106 Kane Wu, “China’s CPE Reaches First-close of $3 Billion New Private Equity Fund -source,” Reuters,
April 16, 2021, https://www.reuters.com/article/citic-pe-fundraising/chinas-cpe-reaches-first-close-of-3-
billion-new-private-equity-fund-source-idINL1N2M907R/.
107 S&P Capital IQ profile on Tianjin Kunpeng Management Consulting Partnership Enterprise (Limited
Partnership); IDG Capital, “About Us,” accessed July 15, 2023, https://en.idgcapital.com/.
108 Hubei Science and Technology Investment Group, “湖北省科技投资集团有限公司 公司债券年度报告
（2019 年）[Hubei Science and Technology Investment Group Co., Ltd. Corporate Bond Annual Report,
2019],” accessed November 30, 2023.
109 S&P Capital IQ profile, Shanghai Growth FOF.
110 Huatai Zijin Investment Co. website, “About Us,” accessed October 29, 2023,
https://www.htzjtz.com.cn/htzjtz/; PitchBook profile on Huati Zijin Investment Co. S&P Capital IQ profile
on Huatai Zijin Investment Co.
111 Hillhouse Investment website, “About Us,” accessed November 19, 2023 ,
https://www.hillhouseinvestment.com/; Xue Xiaoli and Isabelle Li, “Private Equity Giant Hillhouse Sets Up
10 Billion Yuan Venture Fund,” Caixin Global, February 26, 2020, https://www.caixinglobal.com/2020-
02-26/private-equity-giant-hillhouse-sets-up-10-billion-yuan-venture-fund-101520903.html;
PitchBook profile on Hillhouse Investment Management.
112 Select Shandong, “The “Business and Investment Attraction” of Shandong Through Funds Gradually
Takes Effect,” November 14, 2019
https://www.selectshandong.com/website/article/index/id/9439/cid/754.html; Shandong New Growth
Drivers Fund Management Co., Ltd., “About Us,” accessed December 2, 2023,
https://www.sdxdn.com.cn/.
113 S&P Capital IQ profile on Shanghai Huasheng Youge Equity Investment Management .

===== PDF_PAGE 106 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 105

114 S&P Capital IQ profile on China Universal Asset Management Company Ltd. - 汇添富基金管理股份有
限公司
115 S&P Capital IQ profile of China Asset Management, accessed November 25, 2023.
116 S&P Capital IQ profiles of AEGON-Industrial Fund Management Co., Ltd. – 兴证全球基金管理有限公司
and Industrial Securities Co., Ltd. (SHSE:601377) – 兴业证券股份有限公司.
117 S&P Capital IQ profiles on China Merchants Fund Management Co., Ltd. and China Merchants Bank .
118 S&P Capital IQ profile on ZhongOu Fund Management.
119 S&P Capital IQ profile on China Great Wall Securities Co., Ltd. (SZSE:002939) – 长城证券股份有限公
司.
120 E Fund website, “E Fund at a Glance: About Us,” accessed January 1, 2023,
https://www.efunds.com.cn/en/lm/aboutus/; Infore website, “About Us: Company Profile,” accessed
January 1, 2023, https://www.infore.com/En, S&P Capital IQ profile of E Fund Management Co., Ltd.
121 Kuwait Investment Authority website, accessed December 6, 2023, https://www.kia.gov.kw/
122 CITIC Securities, “About CITIC Securities,” accessed November 30, 2023,
http://www.cs.ecitic.com/newsite/en/aboutUs/index/.
123 S&P Capital IQ profile on China Credit Trust Harvest Fund, “About Harvest: Know Jiashi: 远见者稳进
[Visionaries Make Steady Progress],” accessed October 30, 2023.
124 George Chen, “China Approves Credit Agricole fund JV: Source,” Reuters, February 28, 2008,
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-creditargicole-china-fund-idUKSHA9175420080228/, S&P Capital
IQ profile for ABC-CA Fund Management.
125 Shanghai Shenzhi Asset Management Partnership website, “Company Profile,” accessed December
22, 2023, https://www.shenzhiasset.com/.
126 Government of Macao website, “Monetary Authority of Macau,” accessed January 1, 2023 ,
https://www.gov.mo/en/entity-page/entity-359/.
127 Lion Fund Company website, “Company Overview > Equity Structure > Equity Structure Information
of Nuoan Fund Management Co., Ltd.,” accessed January 30, 2024,
https://www.lionfund.com.cn/official/aboutNoan/stock_frame?id=1080545916236075008&code=stock_
frame.
128 S&P Capital IQ profiles of Lion Fund Management and China Foreign Economy and Trade Trust Co.,
Ltd.—中国对外经济贸易信托有限公司.
129 National Council for Social Security Fund of the People’s Republic of China, “About Us,” accessed
December 16, 2023, http://www.ssf.gov.cn/portal/yw/webinfo/2021/09/1632812253754637.htm .
130 K1 Wave Trend Data, “Profile of 南京华泰瑞通投资管理有限公司 [Nanjing Huatai Ruitong Investment
Management Co., Ltd.],” K1 Wave, accessed November 14, 2023, https://k1wave.com/fundm/nan-jing-
hua-tai-rui-tong-tou-zi-guan-li-you-xian-gong-si; S&P Capital IQ profiles on Nanjing Huatai Ruitai
Equity Investment Management Center (L.P.) and Huatai Zijin, accessed November 14, 2023 ; PitchBook
profile on Huatai Zijin.
131 S&P Capital IQ profile of Guohua Energy Investment Co. and China Energy Investment Corporation
Limited.
132 S&P Capital IQ profiles of PineBridge Investments LLC, PineBridge Investments Holdings US LLC, and
Pacific Century Group Holdings Limited.

===== PDF_PAGE 107 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 106

133 S&P Capital IQ Profile of Suzhou New District Hi-Tech Industrial Co., Ltd (SHSE:600736)—苏州新区
高新技术产业股份有限公司;苏州新区高新技术产业股份有限公司 [Suzhou New Area High-tech Industry
Co., Ltd.], “关于发起设立基金及成立基金管理公司的关联交易公告 [Announcement on Related
Transactions Regarding the Initiation and Establishment of Funds and the Establishment of Fund
Management Companies],” 2011.
134 Bank of China Investment Management website, “Company Introduction,” accessed December 20,
2023, https://www.bocim.com/Channel/71984.
Central Huijin Investment Ltd. website, “Company Profile,” accessed December 20, 2023 ,
http://www.huijin-inv.cn/huijineng/About_Us/index.shtml.
135 S&P Capital IQ profile of ICBC Credit Suisse Asset Management Co., Ltd.
136 Beka Asset Management website, “Beka Finance: Investment Funds,” accessed December 1, 2023 ,
https://en.bekafinance.com/fondos-de-inversion.
137 CITIC Securities, “About CITIC Securities,” accessed November 30, 2023,
http://www.cs.ecitic.com/newsite/en/aboutUs/index/.
138 Shanghai International Group website, “About SIG,” and “State-Owned Capital Operation,” accessed
November 10, 2023, https://www.sigchina.com/en and https://www.sigchina.com/en/site/operate;
Shanghai International Asset Management (Hong Kong) Company Limited (SIAM) website, “Corporate
Information,” accessed November 11, 2023, https://www.siam.com.hk/; PitchBook profile on Shanghai
International Group; S&P Capital IQ on Shanghai International Group.
139 CITIC Securities, “About CITIC Securities,” accessed November 30, 2023,
http://www.cs.ecitic.com/newsite/en/aboutUs/index/.
140 PitchBook profile of Huaxing Growth Capital.
141 China Insurance Investment Fund, “Investment Projects,” accessed November 30, 2023; China
Insurance Investment Fund, “About Us: Fund Structure,” accessed November 30, 2023, https://www.ci-
inv.cn/html/AboutUs/Fund-Structure/.
142 S&P Capital IQ profile of Thinkfund Investment Management Co., Ltd.
143 DK Capital (aka Thinkfund) company website, “Profile,” accessed January 11, 2024 ,
https://www.dkcapital.cn/introduction.aspx.
144 Sina.com, “The country’s first government guidance fund debt-for-equity swap fund was established
in Chengdu,” September 28, 2019,
https://baike.baidu.com/reference/63149854/533aYdO6cr3_z3kATKfYzfWiMC3AP9WovrCBBLtzzqIPm
GapB4DgTZt8894x_7lkGwaFs5Ytb5lHxrnzF0tM8_UYbrlqEah7xCWqGXmAiLbv -90zktFa4NIHBfE.
145 CGP Investment, “Hongming Prosperity Fund,” China Grand Prosperity Investment, accessed
December 1, 2023, http://www.cgpinvestment.com/index.php?m=content&c=index&a=lists&catid=316 .
146 CITIC Securities, “About CITIC Securities,” accessed November 30, 2023,
http://www.cs.ecitic.com/newsite/en/aboutUs/index/.
147 Lianyungang International Pharmaceutical Innovation Industrial Park website, “Jiangsu Jinqiao Private
Equity Fund Management Co., Ltd,” December 22, 2021, http://lyglipp.com/en/servershow/21.html.
148 Crunchbase, “SDIC Unity Capital profile,” accessed November 27, 2023 ,
https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/sdic-unity-capital.
149 Terrence Wong, Jeffrey Liew, and Stella Ng, “Fitch Affirms Taikang Life’s Rating at ‘A’; Outlook
Stable,” Fitch Ratings, December 6, 2023, https://www.fitchratings.com/research/zh-cn/insurance/fitch-
affirms-taikang-life-at-ifs-a-outlook-stable-06-12-2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 108 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 107

150 S&P Capital IQ Profile of Taikang Life Insurance Co., Ltd. and Taikang Insurance Group, Inc ., China
National Instruments Import and Export (Group) Corp., company website, “Introduction,” accessed
January 10, 2024, https://www.cccme.cn/shop/cccme0005/introduction.aspx; Genertec website,
“Corporate Profile,” accessed January 10, 2024, https://www.gt.cn/en/AboutUs/CorporateProfile/.
151 S&P Capital IQ Profile on Shanghai Sailing High Hope Investment Management Co., Ltd. —上海赛领汇
鸿投资管理有限公司.
152 Jiangsu High Hope International Group Corporation website, “Introduction,” accessed January 15,
2024, http://www.highhope.com/html/AboutUs/3371.html.
153 S&P Capital IQ Profile on Shanghai Sailing High Hope Investment Management Co., Ltd. —上海赛领汇
鸿投资管理有限公司.
154 S&P Capital IQ profile of Wanjia Asset Management Co., Ltd.
Select Shandong, “The “Business and Investment Attraction” of Shandong Through Funds Gradually
Takes Effect,” November 14, 2019,
https://www.selectshandong.com/website/article/index/id/9439/cid/754.html.
155 S&P Capital IQ profiles of Hwabao WP Fund Management Co., Ltd. and Hwabao Trust Co.
156 S&P Capital IQ profile of China Merchants Fund Management Company Ltd.
157 E Fund website, “E Fund at a Glance: About Us,” accessed January 1, 2023,
https://www.efunds.com.cn/en/lm/aboutus/; Infore website, “About Us: Company Profile,” accessed
January 1, 2023, https://www.infore.com/En; S&P Capital IQ profile of E Fund Management Co., Ltd.
158 Southern Asset Management website, “About Us: Company Overview,” accessed December 2, 2023 ,
https://www.southernfund.com/en/about.
159 S&P Capital IQ profiles of Guotai Asset Management Company Limited and China Jianyin Investment .
160 S&P Capital IQ profile on China Universal Asset Management Company Ltd. —汇添富基金管理股份有
限公司.
161 GF Securities website, “About Us,” accessed December 18, 2023, https://en.gf.com.cn/; PitchBook
profile on GF Fund Management Co., Ltd.
162 Barclays Private Bank website, accessed December 12, 2023. https://privatebank.barclays.com/.
163 S&P Capital IQ profile of BlackRock, Inc.
164 Tianhong Asset Management website, “About Us,” accessed December 4, 2023 ,
http://www.thfund.com.cn/.
Xie Yu, “Assets in Ant Group’s flagship money-market fund tumble to 2016 level,” The Wall Street
Journal, July 21, 2021, https://www.livemint.com/companies/news/assets-in-ant-group-s-flagship-
money-market-fund-tumble-to-2016-level-11626872755531.html.
Hui Ching-hoo, “China’s Ant-owned Tianhong Loses Top Fund House Crown to E Fund,” Asia Asset,
May 31, 2021, https://www.asiaasset.com/post/24681-z-ben-0528.
165 S&P Capital IQ Profile of Maxwealth Fund Management.
166 S&P Capital IQ profile of Nikko Asset Management Co.
167 Dimensional website, “Who We Are: About Us,” accessed September 14, 2023 ,
https://www.dimensional.com/.
168 S&P Capital IQ profile of the Vanguard Group.
169 S&P Capital IQ profile of China Asset Management Co. Ltd.
170 S&P Capital IQ profile of Harvest Fund Management Co. Ltd.
171 S&P Capital IQ profile of Mirae Asset Global Investments Co., Ltd.—미래에셋자산운용

===== PDF_PAGE 109 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 108

172 S&P Capital IQ profile of Fullgoal Fund Management Co. Ltd.
173 Sequoia Capital website, accessed October 4, 2023, https://www.sequoiacap.com/.
174 Everbright Limited website, “About Us: Corporate Profile,” accessed November 30, 2023 ,
https://www.everbright.com/en/about-us.
175 Shenzhen Capital Group (SCGC) website, “About Us,” accessed November 15, 2023 ,
https://www.szvc.com.cn/en.
176 S&P Capital IQ profiles of SB China Venture Capital, Oriza FOFs, and Suzhou Oriza Holdings .
SB China Capital (SBCVC) website, “About Us,” accessed September 23, 2023 ,
http://www.sbcvc.com/a/English/Portfolio/.
177 S&P Capital IQ profile of Huatai Securities.
178 S&P Capital IQ profile of China Life Insurance (Group) Company.
179 S&P Capital IQ profile of China Merchants Securities Co.
180 S&P Capital IQ profile of CHongShan
181 CB Insights, “About BGI Co-win,” accessed August 30, 2023,
https://www.cbinsights.com/investor/huada-gongying; Crunchbase, “BGI Co-win: Summary,” accessed
September 12, 2023, https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/bgi-co-win; BGI Co-win website,
“About BGI Win-Win,” accessed September 12, 2023, https://www.bgi-cowin.com/; PitchBook,
“Shenzhen Co-win Growth Fund Overview,” accessed September 13, 2023,
https://pitchbook.com/profiles/fund/17076-61F#overview.
182 S&P Capital IQ profile of China Life Insurance (Group) Company.
183 CITIC Securities, “About CITIC Securities,” accessed November 30, 2023,
http://www.cs.ecitic.com/newsite/en/aboutUs/index/.
184 YF Capital website, “About Us: Company Profile,” accessed December 8, 2023,
https://www.yfcapital.com/.
185 Sunbridge website, “About Shengqiao,” accessed December 11, 2023, http://www.sunbridge-
partners.com/cn/aboutus-detail-12.html.
186 Shanghai International Group website, “About SIG,” and “State-Owned Capital Operation,” accessed
November 10, 2023, https://www.sigchina.com/en and https://www.sigchina.com/en/site/operate; S&P
Capital IQ profile of Shanghai International Group.
187 Kaiwu Capital website, accessed September 19, 2023, www.kaiwucapital.com.
188 S&P Capital IQ profiles of Shanghai Orient Securities Capital Investment Co., Ltd., Orient Securities
Company Limited (SHSE:600958), and Shenergy (Group) Company Limited —申能(集团)有限公司.
189 Share Capital, “About Share Capital,” accessed December 15, 2023,
https://www.sharecapital.cn/en/about-us; S&P Capital IQ, profiles of Shenzhen Sharing Growth
Investment Management Co., Ltd., Oriza FoFs Investment Management, Suzhou Oriza Holdings Co., Ltd.,
China Life InsuranceCompany, and Jiangsu Guoxin Investment Group Limited
190 VC4A, “MSA Capital,” accessed October 16, 2023, https://vc4a.com/msa-capital/; MSA Capital
website, “About Us,” and “Portfolio,” accessed October 16, 2023, https://www.msacap.com/; PitchBook
profile of MSA Capital.
191 PitchBook profile of ShengJing360.
192 S&P Capital IQ profiles of Shanghai Orient Securities Capital Investment Co., Ltd., Orient Securities
Company Limited (SHSE:600958), and Shenergy (Group) Company Limited —申能(集团)有限公司.
193 Shenzhen Capital Group, “Company Profile,” accessed November 27, 2023 ,
https://www.szvc.com.cn/en-about.

===== PDF_PAGE 110 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 109

194 S&P Capital IQ profile of Yixing Guangkong Investment Co., Ltd.
195 Jinsheng Capital website, accessed November 19, 2023, https://www.jsfof.com/,
https://www.jsfof.com/index.php/category-c15.html, https://www.jsfof.com/index.php/category-
c18.html, https://www.jsfof.com/index.php/category-c117.html.
196 S&P Capital IQ profile of China Life Insurance (Group) Company.
197 Great Wall Fund website, “Company news: 前海长城旗下管理基金综合排名名列前茅！深圳市政府引
导基金 2021 年度绩效考核评价结果发布 [The comprehensive ranking of Qianhai Great Wall’s managed
funds ranks among the best! Shenzhen Municipal Government Guidance Fund 2021 Performance
Assessment Results Released],” accessed December 7, 2023,
http://greatwallfund.cn/News/show.aspx?id=809&kindid=420.
S&P Capital IQ profile of Great Wall Fund Management (Shenzhen) Co. Ltd.
198 The Central People’s Government of the People’s Republic of China, “科技型中小企业创业投资引导基
金管理暂行办法 [Interim Measures for the Management of Venture Investment Guidance Funds for Small
and Medium-sized Scientific and Technological Enterprises],” Central Government Portal, February 5,
2008, https://www.gov.cn/ztzl/kjfzgh/content_883848.htm; S&P Capital IQ profile of SME Industrial
Investment Fund Management Co., Ltd.
199 GH Capital website, accessed December 3, 2023, http://ghcapital.cn/.
200 Palace Asset Management website, “About Jiuju,” accessed December 5, 2023 ,
http://www.jiufufunds.com/website/w/h.
201 State Development and Investment Corporation (SDIC), “SDIC Chuangyi Industry Fund Management
Co., Ltd.,” July 15, 2017, accessed December 15, 2023,
https://www.sdic.com.cn/en/busssystem/bussframewk/emingines/webinfo/2021/07/162791557836848
6.htm.
202 Fusi Capital website, accessed October 30, 2023, http://fusi.tuweia.cn/.
203 HKTDC Research, “China (Fujian) Pilot Free Trade Zone,” September 25, 2019 ,
https://research.hktdc.com/en/data-and-profiles/mcpc/freetradezones/fujian-free-trade-zone.
204 Chuangling Capital website, accessed December 14, 2023, https://www.cs.com.cn/xgjj/xxzs/cc/.
205 Tang Ziyi, “Private Equity Giant Hillhouse Launches New Fund Business to Invest in Stock Market,”
Caixin Global, April 26, 2021, https://www.caixinglobal.com/2021-08-26/private-equity-giant-hillhouse-
launches-new-fund-business-to-invest-in-stock-market-101762295.html.
206 Youshan Capital website, accessed December 11, 2023, http://www.youshancapital.com/; PitchBook
profile of Youshan Capital.
207 NIH Issues in Policy: Synthetic Biology; https://www.genome.gov/about-genomics/policy-
issues/Synthetic-
Biology#:~:text=Synthetic%20biology%20is%20a%20field,them%20to%20have%20new%20abilities .
208 State Council of the People’s Republic of China (PRC), “国家中长期科学和技术发展规划纲要(2006–
2020 年)“ [National Medium- and Long-Term Plan for Science and Technology Development (2006–
2020)], 2006.
209 Brian Wang, “China’s $9.2 Billion Precision Medicine Initiative Could See a bout 100 Million Whole
Human Genomes Sequenced by 2030 and More If Sequencing Costs Drop,” Nextbigfuture.com, June 7,
2016; and David Cyranoski, “China Embraces Precision Medicine on a Massive Scale,” Nature 529
(2016): 9–10.

===== PDF_PAGE 111 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 110

210 State Council (PRC), “国务院关于印发十三五国家科技创新规划的通知 [13th Five-Year Plan for S&T
Innovation],” 2016.
211 Ministry of Science and Technology (PRC), “十三五”科技军民融合发展专项规划 [13th Five-Year
Special Plan for S&T Military-Civil Fusion Development],” 2017.
212 National People’s Congress and Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (PRC), “ 中华人民
共和国国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和 2035 年远景目标纲要 [The 14th Five-Year Plan for the
National Economic and Social Development of the People’s Republic of China and the Outline of Long-
Term Goals for 2035],” March 2021, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/china-14th-five-year-plan.
213 Office of the State Council (PRC), “温家宝主持召开三次新兴战略性产业发展座谈会 [Wen Jiabao
Hosted Three Emerging Strategic Industry Development Symposiums],” September 22, 2009; and State
Council (PRC), “国务院关于加快培育和发展战略性新兴产业的决定 [State Council Decision on
Accelerating the Cultivation and Development of Strategic Emerging Industries], ” 2010; National
Development and Reform Commission (PRC), “关于扩大战略性新兴产业投资培养壮大新增长点增长极的
指导意见 [Guiding Opinions on Expanding Investment in Strategic Emerging Industries, and Cultivating
New Growth Points and Poles],” 2020.
