
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Translation

The following document is China's national strategy for "innovation-driven development," issued in

May 2016 by the Communist Party Central Committee. The strategy identifies industries that China

feels would most benefit from increased indigenous innovation. The document also identifies foreign

talent and technology transfer as crucial to China's emerging technology sectors.

Title

Outline of the National Innovation-Driven Development Strategy
​
 Issued by the CPC Central Committee and

the State Council

中共中央

国
务
院印
发
《国家
创
新
驱动发
展
战
略
纲
要》

Author

Central Committee (
中央
) of the Communist Party of China (
中共
; CPC) and the PRC State Council (
国
务
院
)

Source

Xinhua News Agency (
新
华
社
), May 19, 2016. Xinhua is China's official state press agency.

The Chinese source text is available online at:

http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2016-05/19/c_1118898033.htm

The footnote on p. 3 is an addition by the translator; the source text contains no footnotes.

Translation Date

December 11, 2019

Translator

Etcetera Language Group, Inc.

Editor

Ben Murphy, CSET Translation Lead

Recently, the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the State

Council issued the
​
Outline of the National Innovation-Driven Development Strategy
​
(the
​
Outline
​
)

and issued a notice requiring earnest implementation by all regions and departments in light of

their actual conditions.

The main contents of the
​
Outline
​
 are as follows.

The 18th CPC National Congress proposed implementing an innovation-driven development

strategy, emphasizing that technological innovation is the strategic support for increasing social

productivity and overall national strength, and it must be placed at the core of the nation's

development as a whole. This is a significant national development strategy established by the

Central Committee in the new phase of development, one that is based on the overall situation,

oriented globally and focused on key aspects, and that drives the overall development. This

Outline
​
 has been especially formulated in order to accelerate implementation of that strategy.

I. Strategic Background

Innovation-driven means that innovation becomes the primary force driving development,

combining technological innovation and system innovation, management innovation, business

model innovation, business type innovation and cultural innovation, pushing a change in the

development approach toward reliance on sustained knowledge accumulation, technological

1

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
progress and labor quality improvement, and promoting the evolution of the economy in stages

toward a higher-level form, a more sophisticated division of labor, and a more rational

structure.

It is the nation's destiny to be innovation-driven. The core support of national strength is

technological innovation capability. National prosperity follows from strength in innovation,

and national misfortune follows from weakness in innovation. A major cause of China's

stagnation in the modern era was that it let previous technological revolutions pass it by,

leading to technological and national weakness. To achieve the Chinese dream of the great

rejuvenation of the Chinese nation (
​
中
华
民族
​
), one must truly make good use of science and

technology, which is a revolution in the highest sense and a powerful lever.

Being innovation-driven is an irresistible world trend. New global technological revolutions,

industrial revolutions and revolutions in military affairs are evolving at an accelerating pace.

Scientific exploration is deepening at all scales, from the micro to the cosmic, and technology

revolutions characterized by intelligence, greenness, ubiquity and group nature (
​
群体性
​
) will

trigger major adjustments in the international division of labor. Disruptive technologies are

constantly springing up, and they are reshaping the world's competitive playing field and

altering the relative strength of nations. For many countries, being innovation-driven has

become the core strategy for pursuing competitive advantage. China faces both historical

opportunities for catching up and forbidding challenges from growing gaps. It is only by bravely

setting the world trends in technological innovation that a country can gain the initiative in

development and make a greater contribution to the advancement of human civilization.

Being innovation-driven is required by our development situation. China's economic

development has entered a new normal. Traditional development drivers are growing

progressively weaker, and the expansive growth mode (
​
粗放型增
长
方式
​
) is difficult to sustain.

An innovation-driven approach must be relied upon to create new engines of development,

incubate new economic growth nodes, continue raising the quality and efficiency of China's

economic development, open up new space for it to develop, and achieve the twin goals of

medium-to-rapid growth of the economy and advancement toward medium-to-high-end levels

for industries.

At present, China's innovation-driven development already has a foundation for

acceleration. Following many years of hard work, technology development is entering a period

in which to leap from quantity growth to quality improvement. The scientific research system is

daily becoming more robust, talent teams are constantly expanding, and our independent

innovation capacity in science, technology, engineering and industry is growing rapidly. The

transformation and upgrading of the economy, continuous improvement in the standard of

living, and modernization of national defense give rise to enormous demand for innovation.

Huge-scale markets, well-formed industrial systems, diversified consumer demand and the

increased innovation efficiency of the internet age have combined to provide vast room for

innovation. The system of socialism with Chinese characteristics can combine the advantages of

concentrating power for major undertakings (
​
集中力量
办
大事
​
) with the market allocation of

resources, and has provided basic safeguards for achieving innovation-driven development.

At the same time, it must be recognized that many of our industries are still at the

lower-middle end of the global value chain. Some critical core technologies are controlled by

2

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
others (
​
受制于人
​
), advanced nations are still clearly ahead at the cutting edge of science and in

high-tech fields, and China's reserves of science and technology for supporting industrial

upgrading and leading future development are in urgent need of strengthening. Systems and

mechanisms adapted to the innovation-driven approach urgently need to be established and

improved, corporations have insufficient innovation momentum, the overall performance of

innovation systems is not high, and economic development has yet to truly turn onto the track

of relying on innovation. Science and technology talent teams are large but not strong,

leadership talent and highly skilled talented personnel are in short supply, and the ranks of

innovative entrepreneurs must be developed and enlarged. The market environment and social

atmosphere for encouraging innovation still needs to be further cultivated and optimized.

At a critical stage in China's accelerated advancement of socialist modernization, and its

realization of the "two centennial" objectives (
​
“
两个一百年
”
奋
斗目
标
​
) [establish a well-off

society in an all-round way by the centennial (2021) of the founding of the CPC; establish a rich,

strong, democratic, civilized, harmonious modernized socialist nation by the centennial (2049)

of the founding of the PRC]
 and of the Chinese dream of the great rejuvenation of the Chinese

1
nation, it is necessary to steadfastly maintain that to grasp innovation is to grasp development,

and to seek innovation is to seek the future. We must make innovation become the will of the

nation and the joint action of society, embark upon a new development path from strong talent

and strong technology to strong industries, a strong economy and a strong nation, and create a

new growth cycle for China's next ten-plus years or more.

II. Strategic Requirements

(i) Guiding ideology

We must insist on following the path of independent innovation with Chinese

characteristics, taking Deng Xiaoping theory, the important thinking of the "Three Represents,"

and the scientific development concept as the guide, with in-depth implementation of the spirit

of General Secretary Xi Jinping's series of important speeches, and in accordance with the

requirements of the "Four Comprehensivelys" strategic arrangement [comprehensively build a

well-off society in an all-round way, comprehensively deepen reform, comprehensively govern

the country according to law, comprehensively govern the party strictly]. Emancipate the mind,

be open and inclusive, and make innovation-driven development the nation's priority strategy.

Taking technological innovation as the core for driving comprehensive innovation, using system

and mechanism reform to stimulate innovation activity, and with a highly efficient innovation

system as the support for building a high-level innovation-oriented country, we must push for a

fundamental transformation in momentum of economic and social development, and provide

strong momentum for achieving the Chinese dream of the great rejuvenation of the Chinese

nation.

(ii) Basic principles

1
 The above definition of the "two centennial" objectives is as of the publication of this
​
Outline
​
 (May 2016). In his

report to the 19
​
th
​
 Party Congress on October 18, 2017, CPC General Secretary Xi Jinping redefined the second

"centennial" as follows: "Build China into a rich, strong, democratic, civilized, harmonious,
​
beautiful
​
 modernized

socialist
​
superpower
​
" (emphases added by translator).

3

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Adhere to development. Insist on being problem-oriented, oriented toward the world's

technological cutting edge, toward the nation's major needs and toward the main battlefield of

the national economy, clearly define the main directions of attack for China's innovative

development, achieve breakthroughs in key fields as quickly as possible, and strive to form

more competitive advantages.

Deepen reform. Insist on having technology mechanism reform and reform in economic and

social areas as simultaneous drivers, strengthen the linkages between technology and the

economy, adhere to the regular patterns of the socialist market economy and technological

innovation, get rid of all mental obstacles and institutional barriers that constrain innovation,

and construct a good environment for supporting innovation-driven development.

Strengthen incentives. Insist that the essence of being innovation-driven is being

talent-driven, put being people-centered (
​
以人
为
本
​
) into practice, respect value created by

innovation, stimulate the positivity and creativity of all types of talent, and accelerate the

coming together of cadre of innovative talent that is large in scale, rationally structured and

high in quality.

Expand opening. Insist on planning and promoting innovation with a global vision, properly

use global innovation resources to the maximum extent, comprehensively elevate China's

position in the global pattern of innovation, and strive for it to become a leader in a number of

important fields and a participant in the formulation of important rules.

(iii) Strategic objectives

These are divided into three steps:

Step one: Enter the ranks of innovation-oriented countries by 2020, basically construct a

national innovation system with Chinese characteristics, and strongly support accomplishing

the goal of forming a well-off society in an all-round way (
​
全面建成小康社会
​
).

— Initial formation of an innovation-oriented economic pattern. A number of industries

enter the high end of the global value chain, with maturation of a group of innovation-oriented

enterprises and industry clusters possessing international competitive strength. The

contribution of technological progress rises to over 60%, and value added in

knowledge-intensive service industries accounts for 20% of GDP.

— Dramatic increase in independent innovation capability. An innovation pattern shall be

formed that is oriented toward future development, welcomes technological revolutions, and

promotes industrial transformation. Breakthroughs shall be made on the major bottleneck

problems constraining economic and social development and national security, and the passive

situation where key and core technologies have long been controlled by others shall be

reversed, and unique advantages will be formed in a number of strategically contested fields

(
​
战
略必争
领
域
​
), providing strategic reserves and strategic space for expansion (
​
扩
展
战
略空
间
​
)

for the nation's prosperous development. Research and development (R&D) expenditures shall

reach 2.5% of GDP.

— Innovation system made collaborative to a high degree. Technology is more smoothly

integrated into the economy, innovative entities are full of activity, innovation chains are

4

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
organically linked, innovation governance is more scientific, and innovation efficiency is greatly

enhanced.

— Further optimization of the innovation environment. Policies and laws and regulations to

stimulate innovation shall be established and improved, and protection of intellectual property

rights shall be made more rigorous, forming a value orientation and culture that champions

innovative entrepreneurship, boldly engages in it and encourages it.

Step two: By 2030, be ranked among the leading innovation-oriented countries (
​
创
新型国
家
​
), and achieve a fundamental transformation in the driving force of development, with a

major increase in economic and social development level and international competitive

strength, and lay a firm foundation for building an economic superpower (
​
经济强
国
​
) and a

society of shared affluence.

— Main industries enter the high end of global value chains. Constantly create new

technologies and products, new modes and new business forms, new types of demand and new

markets, and achieve more sustainable development, higher quality employment, higher-level

incomes, and higher quality lives.

— On the whole, the situation where technological innovation is based on following in

others' tracks is reversed. In certain strategic fields, go from being even to being ahead, forming

Chinese schools of thought that lead in global scholarly development, and generating original

achievements that have important effects on the development of the world's technology and

the progress of human civilization. The main bottlenecks constraining national defense

technology shall be overcome. Research and development (R&D) expenditures shall reach 2.8%

of GDP.

— The national innovation system becomes more complete. In-depth integration and

mutual promotion between technology and the economy shall be achieved.

— There is a rich culture of innovation, legal system safeguards are strong, and the entire

society forms a lively arena in which all of its innovative vitality is released and the wellsprings

of innovation flow continuously.

Step three: By 2050, China shall be established as a world S&T innovation superpower (
​
世界
科技
创
新
强
国
​
), becoming one of the world's main centers of science and occupying the high

ground in innovation. It provides powerful support for building China into a rich, strong,

democratic, civilized, harmonious modernized socialist nation, and for achieving the Chinese

dream of the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.

— Technology and talent will become the most important strategic resources for national

strength, and innovation will become a core factor in policy formulation and system

arrangements.

— Increases in labor productivity and social productive force (
​
社会生
产
力
​
) will rely mainly

on technological progress and overall innovation, the quality of economic development will be

high, energy resource consumption will be low, and the core competitiveness of industries will

be high. National defense technologies will reach world-leading levels.

— China will have an array of scientific research institutes, research universities and

innovation-oriented enterprises that are among the best in the world, a host of important

5

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
original scientific achievements, and world-renowned scientists will have emerged, and it will

have become an important gathering place for global high-end talent, innovation, and

entrepreneurship.

— The environment for innovation in terms of systems, markets and culture shall be further

optimized. Respect for knowledge, championing of innovation, property rights protection, and

inclusive diversity will have become the common philosophy and value orientation of the whole

society.

III. Strategic Deployment

Becoming innovation-driven is a systemic transformation. Its layout must proceed in

accordance with "persisting in a two-wheel drive approach, constructing one system, and

promoting six major changes" (
​
“
坚
持双
轮驱动
、构建一个体系、推
动
六大
转变
”
​
), and a new

system shall be built for powering development.

The "two wheels" of the two-wheel drive are scientific and technological innovation on one

hand and institutional and mechanism innovation on the other, and they are mutually

coordinated and supply power continually. In order to grasp innovation, it is first necessary to

grasp scientific and technological innovation, and to make up shortcomings, it is first necessary

to make up shortcomings in technological innovation. Scientific discoveries play a decisive

guiding role in technological progress, and technological progress strongly propels the discovery

of scientific laws. We must clearly specify the directions and key points for supporting

development, strengthen scientific exploration and technological problem solving, and build a

systemic capacity for sustained innovation. For institutional and mechanism innovation,

adjustments must be made to all of the relations of production that are not suited to

innovation-driven development, and overall plans must be made for promoting institutional

and mechanism reform in the three governance areas of S&T, the economy, and government,

so as to unleash innovative vitality to the maximum extent.

"One system" refers to building a national innovation system. We must establish an

ecosystem in which innovation entities can collaborate and interact, and innovation elements

flow smoothly and are efficiently allocated, and must fashion a practical vehicle for

innovation-driven development, along with systemic arrangements and environmental

safeguards for it. We shall specify the functional positions of the various types of innovation

entities, including corporations, scientific research institutes, universities, and social

organizations, build an open and efficient innovation network, and establish a military-civil

fusion (
​
军
民融合
​
) platform for collaborative innovation in national defense science and

technology; we shall improve innovation governance, further clarify the division of labor

between the government and the market, and construct overall planning mechanisms for

allocating innovation resources; and we shall perfect the policy system for stimulating

innovation and the legal system for protecting innovation, construct a social environment for

encouraging innovation, and inspire the innovative vitality of the whole society.

The "six major changes" are: (1) a change in the approach to development from expansive

growth led by expansions of scale to sustainable development led by quality and efficiency; (2)

a change in the elements of development from development led by traditional factors to

development led by innovation factors; (3) a change in the industrial division of labor from the

6

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
lower-middle end to the high end of the value chain; (4) a change in innovation capability from

the current situation in which China is "catching up, pulling even, and taking the lead" but is

mainly "catching up," to a situation in which China is mainly "pulling even" and "taking the

lead"; (5) a change in resource allocation from being mainly based on research and

development links to an overall allocation taking in supply chains, innovation chains and

funding chains; and (6) a change in innovation groups from predominantly niche groups of

scientific and technological personnel to innovation and entrepreneurial interaction between

niche and mass groups.

IV. Strategic Tasks

While staying centered closely around the core essentials for boosting competitive strength,

urgent social development requirements, and major national security challenges, we shall

adopt differentiated strategies and asymmetric paths, and strengthen the allocation of tasks in

key fields and for essential links.

(i) Promote innovation in industrial technology systems and create new development

advantages

Accelerate the in-depth integration of industrialization and informatization (
​
信息化
​
), with

digitalization and becoming networked, intelligentized (
​
智能化
​
), and green taken as the basis

for boosting the competitive strength of industries; promote cross-cutting innovation of

emerging technologies in all fields; build modern industrial technology systems that are

rationally structured, advanced and efficacious, open and compatible, independently

controllable (
​
自主可控
​
), and that have international competitive strength, using the support of

mass breakthroughs in technology to lead the development of emerging industrial clusters, and

promoting quality upgrading in industries.

1. Develop a new generation of information network technology and strengthen the

informatization foundation for economic and social development. Strengthen research on such

technologies as humanlike machine intelligence (
​
类
人智能
​
), natural interaction and virtual

reality, microelectronics and optoelectronics; promote the R&D and comprehensive application

of technologies such as broadband mobile Internet, cloud computing, the Internet of things

(IoT), Big Data, high performance computing, and mobile intelligent terminals; expand R&D and

promotional efforts for independent hardware and software products and network security

technology, such as integrated circuits and industrial controls, providing safeguards for China's

economic transformation and upgrading and the protection of national network security (
​
国家
网
络
安全
​
).

2. Develop smart and green manufacturing technology, and promote climbing toward the

high end of the manufacturing industry. Refashion the manufacturing industry's technology

systems, production modes, industrial forms and value chains, and promote a change in the

manufacturing industry from large to strong. Develop technologies like smart manufacturing

equipment, accelerate the in-depth application in manufacturing of networked manufacturing

technology, cloud computing, Big Data and so on, and promote a change in the manufacturing

industry toward becoming automation and becoming intelligentized and service-oriented. Carry

out green retrofitting of traditional manufacturing industries across the board, and change from

extensive manufacturing to intensive manufacturing. Strengthen fundamental industrial

7

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
technology capabilities and establishment of experimental platforms, and raise the level of key

common technologies such as basic materials, basic components, basic processes and basic

software. Develop large aircraft, aircraft engines, nuclear power, high-speed rail, marine

engineering equipment and high-end equipment and products such as high-tech ships and UHV

power transmission and transformation equipment.

3. Develop modern agricultural technology that is ecologically green, highly efficient and

safe, ensuring that grain is secure and food is safe. With seed industry autonomy as the core,

transform the agricultural development approach, break through the constraints posed by too

many people on too little land and water scarcity, and take the agricultural development path

of production efficiency, product safety, resource conservation and environmental friendliness.

Systematically enhance animal and plant breeding and R&D of high-end agricultural equipment;

extend over large areas such technologies as those to transform high, medium and low-yield

fields; deeply develop R&D of such technologies as water-saving agriculture, circular agriculture

(
​
循
环农业
​
), organic agriculture and biological fertilizers; develop standardized, large-scale

modern breeding technology; and promote quality and efficiency improvement and sustainable

development in agriculture. Extend low-cost technologies and modes for preventing

agricultural diffused pollution (
​
面源
污
染
​
) and heavy metals pollution; develop food security

safeguard technologies, quality/safety control technologies and safety traceability technologies

for the entire supply chain; and establish a full-coverage food safety technology system with a

safe environment, clean production and ecological storage and transportation. Push for the

integration of primary, secondary and tertiary industries in agriculture, and achieve a

transformation in development toward branding and value-adding throughout the entire chain.

4. Develop modern energy technologies that are safe, clean and highly efficient, and press

for a revolution in energy production and consumption. Promote a transformation in energy

applications toward being clean and low-carbon, with optimization of the energy structure and

boosting energy use efficiency as the key points. Break through the technological bottlenecks

for the clean and efficient utilization of coal, petroleum, natural gas and other fossil fuels;

develop technology for oil and gas mineral resource exploration and extraction under deep-sea,

deep-earth and other complex conditions, and carry out comprehensive technology

demonstrations of exploration and development of unconventional oil and gas such as shale oil.

Accelerate the development of technology and equipment for, and large scale application of,

clean and new energy sources such as nuclear energy, solar energy, wind energy and biomass

energy; and conquer the key technologies for large-scale supply/demand interaction, energy

storage and grid connection. Promote the spread of new energy-saving technologies and

products, accelerate retrofitting with energy-saving technology in such industries as steel,

petrochemicals, construction materials and nonferrous metals, and promote the R&D and

application of technologies like new-energy vehicles and smart grids.

5. Develop efficient resource use and ecological protection technology, and build a

resource-saving, environmentally friendly society. Adopt systematic technological solutions,

industrial pathways, and develop pollution governance and resource recycling technologies and

industries. Establish a technology system for early warning and analysis of severe air pollution,

and develop highly precise monitoring and prediction technology. Establish a comprehensive

water resource utilization system; launch deep-earth mineral resource exploration,

development and utilization, develop remanufacturing and resource recycling industries, and

8

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
establish technology systems for urban household waste resource use, renewable resource

recycling, comprehensive utilization of industrial solid waste, etc. Perfect the environmental

technology administration system; strengthen R&D and application of technologies for water,

atmospheric, and soil pollution prevention and hazardous waste treatment and disposal,

environmental detection, and environmental emergency response; and increase environmental

carrying capacity.

6. Develop advanced and appropriate marine and space technology, and cultivate the

marine economy and space economy. Develop appropriate technology for efficient and

sustainable marine resource utilization, speed up development of marine engineering

equipment, construct a synchronized 3D marine observation system, and promote

implementation of China's maritime strategy and development of the blue economy. Vigorously

improve technological capabilities for space entry and exploitation, perfect space

infrastructure, promote technology development and application of satellite-based remote

sensing, communications, navigation, positioning services, etc., and perfect the innovation

chain for satellite applications.

7. Develop smart cities and digital society technology, and promote people-centered new

urbanization. Rely on new technology and management innovation to support new

urbanization and modern urban development and public services, innovate social governance

methods and measures, accelerate progress on informatization for comprehensive governance

of public security, and advance the establishment of a safe China. Develop standardized,

digitized and intelligentized technology for municipal infrastructure such as transportation,

electrical power, communications and underground pipe networks, and promote large-scale

application of key technologies in such fields as green architecture, smart cities and eco-cities.

Strengthen research of major technologies and products in disaster response and prevention

areas such as major disasters and public safety.

8. Develop advanced, effective, safe and convenient health technology, and address the

challenges of major diseases and aging of the population. Foster technology integration in

multiple fields such as life science, Chinese and western medicine, and bioengineering, and

increase technological safeguarding capability for major disease control and prevention, public

sanitation, reproductive health, etc. Research and develop innovative drugs, new types of

vaccines, advanced medical equipment and biotherapy technologies. Promote modernization of

traditional Chinese medicine. Promote Big Data research in genomics and healthcare, develop

precision medicine, research and develop genetic screening technology for genetic and chronic

disease susceptibility, and raise the level of diagnostic technology for cardiovascular disease,

malignant cancer, chronic respiratory disease, diabetes and other major diseases. Develop

digitalized and remote medical treatment technology, promote networking and customization

of social services such as prevention, treatment, rehabilitation, health maintenance and elderly

care, develop new models of integrated healthcare services, significantly boost capabilities in

population health protection, and strongly support establishment of a "Healthy China."

9. Develop modern service technology to support business model innovation, and drive

upgrading of economic forms. Using new-generation information and network technology as

support, actively develop modern service industry technology infrastructure, expand emerging

service industries like digital consumption, e-commerce, modern logistics, Internet banking and

9

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
online education, and promote the fusing of technological innovation and business model

innovation. Speed up promotion of integrated development of industrial design, cultural

creativity and related industries, and boost China's innovative design capabilities in key

industries.

10. Develop disruptive technology to lead industrial transformation, and constantly give

birth to new industries and create new jobs. Pay close attention to disruptive technologies with

the potential to "reset" (
​
“
归
零
”
​
) existing investment, talent, technology, industries and rules,

put in place a forward-looking technology R&D layout for the frontier of emerging industries,

and strive to achieve "overtaking at the turn" (
​
“
弯道超
车
”
​
). Develop mobile Internet

technology, quantum information technology and aerospace technology; promote

development of additive manufacturing equipment, intelligent robots, driverless vehicles, etc.;

emphasize such technologies as genomics, stem cells, synthetic organisms, and regenerative

medicine with profound impact on the fields of life science, biological breeding, and industrial

biology; develop hydrogen energy, fuel cells, and other new-generation energy technologies;

and fully leverage the role of technologies like nanotechnology and graphene in leading the

development of the new materials industry.

(ii) Strengthen original innovation and enhance sources of supply

Steadfastly combine national strategic needs with scientific exploration goals, enhance the

research deployment on scientific questions of global relevance, strengthen original innovation

capability, raise the overall level of China's scientific discovery, technology invention and

product-industry innovation, and support industry transformation and safeguarding of national

security.

1. Strengthen basic cutting-edge and high-technology research directed at national strategic

needs. Centered around the "stranglehold" problems involving long-term development and

national security, strengthen the forward-looking layout of basic research; expand basic

research in the space, marine, network, nuclear, materials, energy, information and biological

fields, and increase strategic high-technology research efforts; and achieve security,

independence and controllability (
​
安全、自主、可控
​
) in key core technologies. Specify

stage-by-stage objectives, integrate cross-disciplinary and interdisciplinary superiorities, hasten

key breakthroughs, and accumulate original resources for technological progress in industries.

2. Strongly support the free exploration of basic research. Strengthen innovation directed

toward cutting-edge science, strive to set the direction of the world's scientific research in more

fields, and increase China's contributions to mankind's scientific exploration. Focus on

supporting major technological breakthroughs, promote transformative research, aggressively

engage in new ways of thinking, new discoveries, new knowledge, new theories and new

methods, and bolster sources and reserves. Promote balanced and coordinated development of

academic curricula, strengthen interdisciplinary work and integration, emphasize support for a

group of non-consensus projects (
​
非共
识项
目
​
), and foster emerging and distinctive disciplines.

3. Build an array of infrastructure and platforms that support high-level innovation.

Adapting to the characteristics of innovation activity in the age of big science (
​
大科学
时
代
​
),

and targeting the nation's major strategic needs, establish a set of national laboratories that

have international standards and which feature interdisciplinary work and collaborative

10

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
innovation. Accelerate establishment of platforms for large-scale shared experimental facilities,

data resources, biological resources, knowledge, patent information services and other basic

conditions for science and technology. Research and develop high-end scientific research

instruments and equipment, and raise self-sufficiency level in scientific research equipment.

Establish digital infrastructure such as supercomputing centers and cloud computing platforms,

and form an advanced information network support system based on Big Data.

(iii) Optimize the regional layout of innovation and create regional economic growth poles

Focus on the national regional growth strategy, promote a rational industrial division of

labor using concentrations and flows of innovation factors, and propel the overall improvement

of regional innovation capabilities and competitive strengths.

1.Construct an innovation development pattern among regions with each having its own

unique features. The eastern region shall concentrate on raising its original innovation (
​
原始
创
新
​
) and integrated innovation (
​
集成
创
新
​
) capability, accelerate innovation-driven development

transformation across the board, and cultivate industry clusters and regional economies

possessing international competitiveness. The central region shall follow the path of

differentiated and leapfrog style development, flexibly aggregate innovation resources,

accelerate the extension and application of advanced appropriate technology, become

innovation-led in key fields, and cultivate emerging industries and strong economies with

regional characteristics.

2. Integrate innovation resources across regions. Construct cross-regional innovation

networks, and promote interregional joint design of innovation topics, interconnection and

intercommunication of innovation factors, and joint organization of technology research.

Increase the technological innovation capabilities of national strategic regions such as

Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei and the Yangtze River Economic Belt, create regional communities for

collaborative innovation, and provide coordinated planning and guidance for regionally

integrated development. Push advantaged regions such as Beijing and Shanghai to become

globally influential centers of scientific and technological innovation.

3. Create leading regional innovation demonstration areas. Optimize the layout of national

independent innovation demonstration zones, promote the transformation and upgrading of

national high-tech zones in the direction of developing high technology and incubating new

industries, conduct regional comprehensive innovation reform experiments, establish

innovation-oriented provinces and cities, nurture growth poles for emerging industry

development, and enhance the radiating impetus function of innovation development.

(iv) Deepen military-civil fusion and promote interaction for innovation

In accordance with the overall requirements of the military-civil fusion development

strategy, take full advantage of the important role played by national defense science and

technology innovation, accelerate the establishment and improvement of the integrated

military-civil innovation system, and form new patterns of deeply integrated military-civil

science and technology development that cover all elements and are multidisciplinary and

highly efficient.

1. Improve macro planning mechanisms. Abiding by the regular patterns of economic and

national defense development, devise military-civil fusion administrative mechanisms for

11

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
providing unified leadership, meeting demands and sharing resources; carry out overall

coordination of military-civil science and technology strategic planning, policies, resource

requirements, and application of results; and promote military-civil science and technology

development that is coordinated, balanced and compatible.

2. Carry out coordinated military-civil innovation. Establish mechanisms for the formation of

major scientific research tasks for military-civil fusion, with an integrated design of the

innovation chain, from basic research to key technology R&D and integrated applications;

devise joint demonstration and implementation modes for military-civil shared technology

projects; and establish military-civil technological innovation systems combining production,

teaching and research.

3. Promote merging of the basic elements for military-civil science and technology. Propel

integration of basic generic military-civil technology and interchangeability of basic materials

and parts. Propel in-depth development of military-civil fusion in marine, space, network and

other new fields. Carry out formulation and consolidation of general military-civilian standards,

promote two-way conversion of military-civilian standards, and encourage integration of

military-civilian standards systems. Conduct overall planning for the establishment of major

shared military-civil scientific research bases and infrastructure, and promote two-way

openness, information interaction and resource sharing.

4. Encourage two-way transfer and transformation of military-civil technology. Promote

application of advanced civilian technology in military fields, improve the national defense

intellectual property system, perfect the national defense intellectual property ownership and

benefit sharing mechanisms, and actively guide the accelerated transformation and application

in civilian fields of national defense scientific and technological achievements. Widen access to

national defense science and technology fields, increase open competition in the military

product R&D and services markets, and guide preeminent private enterprises to enter military

product scientific research, production and maintenance fields. Perfect the import

administration mechanisms for military-civil dual-use materials and technology.

(v) Enlarge innovation entities and lead in the development of innovation

Specify the functional positions of the various innovation entities at different links in the

innovation chain, stimulate the vitality of those entities, systematically boost the innovation

capability of various entities, and solidify the foundation for the development of innovation.

1. Incubate world-class innovation-oriented enterprises. Encourage industry-leading

enterprises to construct first-rate R&D institutions, form perfected R&D organization systems,

and concentrate high-end innovation talent. Guide leading enterprises to join with small and

medium-sized enterprises and scientific research units in systematically deployed innovation

chains, and provide integrated solutions for industrial technology innovation. Incubate a group

of innovation-oriented enterprises that have outstanding core technology capabilities and

strong integrated innovation capability, and that lead the development of important industries,

and strive to have a batch of enterprises enter the ranks of the world's top 100

innovation-oriented enterprises.

2. Establish world-class universities and curricula. Accelerate establishment of a modern

university system with Chinese characteristics, further advance the separation of management,

12

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
operation, and evaluation, increase schools' operational autonomy, and perfect the internal

governance structures of schools. Guide universities in strengthening their basic research and

pursuit of academic excellence, organize interdisciplinary, integrated and cross-over scientific

research teams, form a series of strong academic discipline clusters and high-level technological

innovation bases, establish a performance-based funding system on the basis of performance

capability evaluations, and systematically raise innovation standards with the triad of talent

cultivation, curriculum building and science and technology R&D. Build up original innovation

capability and the service economy's social development capability, and promote entry by a

group of high-level universities and curricula into the world's leading ranks or front ranks.

3. Establish world-class scientific research institutes. Clarify the functional position of

scientific research institutes, and enhance their role in basic cutting-edge and industrial key

cross-cutting technology R&D. Improve the modern scientific research institute system, and

develop corporate governance structures that conform to regular patterns of innovation,

embody regional characteristics and implement classified management (
​
分
类
管理
​
). Centered

around the nation's important tasks, effectively consolidate superior scientific research

resources, establish comprehensive, top-notch internationalized bases of technology

innovation, and in a number of superior fields organize world-class scientific research centers

with distinctive features.

4. Develop new types of market-oriented R&D institutions. Centered around the needs of

important technologies of a regional or industry-specific nature, carry out diversified

investments, diversified models and market-oriented operations, and develop an array of

different institutions for R&D, transformation of S&T achievements into commercial products

(
​
成果
转
化
​
), and industry incubation of advanced technologies.

5. Construct a professionalized technology transfer service system. Develop various types of

technology services such as those for R&D design, pilot maturation, entrepreneurial incubation,

intellectual property, and inspection, testing and certification. Perfect the nationwide market

system for technology trading, and develop standardized, specialized, market-based and

networked platforms for trading technology and intellectual property. Scientific research

institutes and institutions of higher education shall establish specialized technology transfer

organizations and teams of professional technology transfer talent, and smooth technology

transfer channels.

(vi) Implement significant scientific and technological projects and engineering works, and

make key leaps ahead

In key fields relating to national security and long-term development, deploy a series of

major technology projects and engineering works.

Looking toward 2020, continue to accelerate implementation of the National Science and

Technology Major Projects (
​
国家科技重大
专项
​
) already laid out; focus on goals and prominent

key points; conquer the key core technologies in the areas of high-end general-purpose chips,

high-end CNC lathes, integrated circuit equipment, broadband mobile communications, oil and

gas fields, nuclear power plants, water pollution control and treatment, new varieties of

genetically modified organisms, new drug creation, and infectious disease prevention and

13

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
control; develop a number of strategic technologies and products; and foster emerging

industries.

Looking toward 2030, while mindful of what must and must not be done according to

circumstances, launch major aviation engine and gas turbine projects as quickly as possible; in

such fields as quantum communications, information networks, smart manufacturing and

robotics, deep-space and deep-sea exploration, key new materials and new energy, brain

science and health care, fully demonstrate the arguments, set the right course, specify the key

points, and deploy another set of science and technology projects and engineering works that

realize China's national strategic intentions.

The major special projects for 2020 and major science and technology projects and

engineering works for 2030 shall form a tiered and sequential systematic layout, with rolling

adjustment and optimization carried out in a timely fashion based on new advances in

international scientific and technological development and new needs of China's economic and

social development. We must fully exploit the advantages of the new national system under

socialist market economy conditions, concentrate our strength, make coordinated attacks,

exert persistent effort, be unrelenting, accelerate breakthroughs in major core technologies,

develop important strategic products, and achieve quantum leaps in national strategic priority

fields.

(vii) Establish teams of high-level talent and build a foundation for innovation

Speed up the establishment of teams of leading and highly skilled technology innovation

talent. Centered around important academic fields and innovation directions, create a host of

world caliber scientists, leading science and technology talents and engineers, and high caliber

innovation teams; emphasize cultivation of first-line innovation talent and young science and

technology talent; open up special support channels for young talent; and support global talent

recruitment by colleges and universities, scientific research institutes and corporations.

Advocate a professional spirit of reverence for skill and constant refinement, and in industry

after industry, cultivate senior technicians, technology workers and highly skilled talent on a

large scale. Optimize the environment for talent development, implement more aggressive

policies for incentivizing and attracting innovative and entrepreneurial talent, put into practice

earnings and stock option incentive systems for science and technology achievements, and

allow various entities and innovative talent in different job positions to all make reasonable

returns in the process of commercializing science and technology achievements.

Fully exploit the important role of entrepreneurs in innovation and entrepreneurship,

vigorously champion the entrepreneurial spirit, establish a social orientation wherein

innovation is glorious and innovation leads to prosperity, protect entrepreneurs' innovation

income and property rights in accordance with law, cultivate and train a large contingent of

innovation-oriented entrepreneurs that dare to innovate and take risks, and establish

specialized, market-oriented and internationalized professional management teams.

Promote innovation in education, reform the modes of talent cultivation, and imbue the

entire education process with the scientific spirit, innovative thinking, creativity and a sense of

social responsibility. Improve the "dual support" (
​
二元支掌
​
) talent cultivation system for

14

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
high-end innovation talent and industrial skilled talent, and strengthen links between ordinary

education and vocational education.

(viii) Promote innovation and entrepreneurship and stimulate the creative vitality of the

whole society

Establish and improve channels for innovation and entrepreneurship, develop a maker

economy, and create a dynamic environment of mass entrepreneurship and innovation.

1.
Develop makerspaces (
​
众
创
空
间
​
). Relying on modern information technology such as

mobile Internet, Big Data and cloud computing, develop new types of entrepreneurial services,

establish an array of low-cost, convenient and open makerspaces and virtual innovation

communities, establish multiple forms of incubator organizations, construct an entrepreneurial

model of "incubation + venture capital", provide work space, network space, social space and

sharing space for entrepreneurs, and lower the costs and barriers for public participation in

innovation and entrepreneurship.

2.
Incubate innovation-oriented small and micro enterprises. Adapt to the new

characteristics of miniaturized, intelligentized and specialized industrial organizations, promote

distributed and networked innovation, encourage enterprises to engage in business model

innovation, guide social capital to participate in building public service platforms for social

technology innovation geared toward small and micro enterprises, push small and micro

enterprises to develop toward "specialization, refinement, distinctiveness, and novelty" (
​
专
精
特新
​
), and let a host of small and micro enterprises brimming with innovative vitality spring up

continually.

3.
Encourage innovation by all. Push the maker culture into schools, establish innovation

and entrepreneurship courses and programs, conduct product branding maker activities, and

encourage students to take action with hands-on entrepreneurship. Support involvement by

corporate employees in process improvement and product design, encourage

micro-innovation, micro-entrepreneurship, minor inventions, and small improvements that

benefit everyone, and transform fanciful thinking and innovative creativity into real

entrepreneurial activity.

V. Strategic Safeguards

To implement the innovation-driven development strategy, it is necessary to bolster

safeguards in terms of system reform, environment creation, resource inputs, expanding

openness and other aspects.

(i) Reform the innovation governance system

Conform to the new trend of innovation having a diversity of entities, a diversity of

activities, and changing paths, promote innovation in government administration, and form a

new pattern of innovation governance that features diverse participation and synergies.

Establish a high-level national innovation policymaking consultation mechanism, regularly

report to the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on foreign and domestic

developments in technological innovation, and propose significant policy recommendations.

Transform the government's innovation administration function, and rationally define the

functions of government and the market. Strengthen the government's functions, including

15

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
strategic planning, policymaking, environment creation, public services, oversight and

assessment, and major task implementation. With respect to development of new

technologies, new products and new business forms of a competitive nature, decisions should

be made by markets and enterprises. Establish innovation governance and social participation

mechanisms, and fully leverage the roles played by various industry associations, foundations,

and science and technology groups in innovation-driven development.

Rationally determine the functional division of labor among the central government

departments, and make full use of the roles played by industry departments in summarizing

new innovation demands, organizing and implementing tasks, the extension and application of

achievements, and other aspects. Scientifically divide central and local government

management authority for science and technology, with the central government's functions

focused on the tasks that are overall, fundamental and long-term in nature, and local

governments' functions focused on promoting technology development and transformation

into applications.

Construct a basic system of national science and technology management. Refashion the

science and technology plan management system, improve and optimize the national science

and technology plan management process, establish a national science and technology plan

management information system, and construct a monitoring and assessment system covering

the entire process. Improve the national science and technology reporting system, establish an

open sharing system for major national scientific research infrastructure and science and

technology basic resource platforms, and promote the opening of science and technology

resources to various kinds of innovation entities. Establish a national innovation survey system,

and guide different localities in adopting an innovation development orientation.

(ii) Increase innovation investment through multiple channels

Effectively strengthen steady support for basic, strategic and public interest research, and

improve mechanisms to coordinate steady support and competition-based support. Reform the

management of central government fiscal plans and funds for science and technology, and

increase efficiency in the use of funds. Improve preferential policies for encouraging corporate

R&D, and guide enterprises to become technology investors.

Explore establishing financial service models that conform to China's national conditions

and are suited to the development of science and technology-based startup enterprises.

Encourage innovation in financial products by banking/financial institutions, expand the

innovation support function of the multi-layer capital market, actively develop angel

investment, enlarge the scale of venture capital investment, and utilize Internet finance to

support innovation. Thoroughly leverage the role of various funds in supporting the

transformation of S&T achievements into commercial products, innovation by small and

medium-sized enterprises, incubation of emerging industries and other areas, and guide and

drive investment of social capital in innovation.

(iii) Comprehensively promote openness and innovation

Seize the historic opportunities in the accelerating flow of global innovation resources and

China's rising economic position, and boost China's ability to allocate innovation resources at

the global level. Support deployment of globally oriented innovation networks by corporations,

16

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
encourage the establishment of overseas R&D centers, carry out mergers and acquisitions of,

and joint venture investment and equity participation in, innovation-oriented enterprises and

R&D institutions, and increase operational capabilities with respect to overseas intellectual

property. Encourage China's advanced technology and equipment to go global (
​
走出去
​
), with

particular focus on satellites, high-speed rail, nuclear energy and supercomputers. Encourage

foreign investment in strategic emerging industries, high-tech industries and modern service

industries, support establishment of R&D centers in China by multinational companies, and

successfully attract a combination of foreign investment, talent, and technology.

Participate in-depth in global governance of technological innovation, proactively set the

topics of discussion on global innovation, participate actively in the formulation of major rules

on international scientific and technological cooperation, and jointly respond to global

challenges such as food security, energy security, environmental pollution, climate change and

public health. Enrich and deepen the innovation dialog, focus on the strategic concept of "the

Belt and Road" [the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21
​
st
​
 Century Maritime Silk Road] and the

blueprint for Asia-Pacific connectivity, and cooperate on establishing cutting-edge national

bases of technology innovation. Actively participate in and guide Big Science plans and projects,

and raise the external openness level of national science and technology plans.

(iv) Improve the evaluation system oriented toward outstanding innovation

Based on the regular patterns and characteristics of different innovation activities, establish

and improve the scientific classification-based institutional system for innovation assessment.

Promote classification-based evaluation of colleges and universities and scientific research

institutes, implement performance evaluation, include the economic and social impact of

technology transfer and scientific research achievements among the evaluation indicators, and

take the evaluation results as an important basis for government science and technology

funding support. Improve the talent evaluation system, further reform and improve the

professional title assessment system, and increase employers' autonomy in evaluations. Pursue

third-party evaluation, explore establishment of evaluation systems with participation by

multiple parties, including the government, social organizations and the public, and expand

public (
​
社会化
​
), specialized and international evaluation channels. Reform the national science

and technology reward system, optimize the structure, reduce the quantity and increase the

quality, gradually change from a reporting-based to a nomination-based system, and reinforce

incentives for people. Develop social awards (
​
社会
奖项
​
) that have their own brands and

credibility. Improve the system of national accounts, gradually explore including R&D spending

that reflects innovation activity in investment statistics, reflect the contribution of intangible

assets to the economy, and highlight innovation activity investments and results. Reform and

improve the state-owned enterprise evaluation mechanisms, and make R&D investment and

innovation performance important assessment indicators.

(v) Implement intellectual property (IPR), standards, quality and brand strategies

Speed up the building of an IPR superpower (
​
知
识产权强
国
​
). Deepen reform in the field of

IPR, further implement the IPR strategy action plan, and increase capabilities for the creation,

utilization, protection and administration of IPR. Guide support for market entities to create

and utilize IPR, use IPR benefit sharing mechanisms as links, and promote turning innovation

results into IPR. Give full play to the guiding role of judicial protection of IPR, strengthen

17

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
awareness of IPR protection among the whole people, and reinforce the basic safeguard role of

the IPR system with respect to innovation. Improve the antitrust review system for preventing

abuse of IPR, and establish mechanisms for international investigation of IPR infringement and

for overseas rights protection.

Raise the level of China's standards. Strengthen development of basic general standards,

improve support mechanisms for technology innovation, patent protection and standardized

interaction, and convert advanced technology into standards in a timely fashion. Promote

adoption of international advanced standards by Chinese industries, strengthen formulation

and implementation of mandatory standards, form standards groups to support industry

upgrading, and raise the levels of industry technology standards and industry access across the

board. Support Chinese enterprises, associations, and groups in either participating in or

leading international standard-setting, and advocate for superior Chinese technologies and

standards to become the international standards.

Promote China as a quality superpower (
​
质
量
强
国
​
) and promote Chinese brands. Improve

the quality integrity system, and form a host of superior enterprises and industry clusters with

outstanding brand image, robust service platforms and first-class quality levels. Formulate

international standards for brand evaluation, establish an internationally recognized brand

evaluation system, and promote the internationalization of superior Chinese brands.

(vi) Cultivate an innovation-friendly social environment

Improve the legal environment for protecting innovation. Accelerate the progress of

legislation on innovation's weak links and areas, amend regulatory documents that do not

conform to an innovation orientation, get rid of institutional regulations that inhibit innovation,

and construct a comprehensive and nuanced system of legal safeguards.

Foster an open and fair market environment. Speed up the breaking through of industry

monopolies and market segmentation. Strengthen the guiding role of demand-side innovation

policies, establish a government procurement system that conforms to international rules,

utilize first piece or set (
​
首台套
​
) ordering, preferential taxation, insurance and other policy

measures, lower enterprises' innovation costs, and enlarge the market space for new products

and services. Push forward market reforms of factor price formation mechanisms, strengthen

rigid energy resource and ecological constraints, increase the weight given to science and

technology, talent, and other innovation factors in product prices, and allow those who are

good at innovation to reap greater competitive advantages.

Create a cultural environment that reveres innovation. Vigorously publicize the patriotic

dedication, inspirational success stories and lofty spirit of science and technology workers,

create throughout the society an innovation culture that encourages innovation and the pursuit

of excellence, and push for innovation to become an important part of the national spirit.

Advocate an academic culture of letting a hundred schools of thought contend (
​
百家争
鸣
​
) and

respecting scientists' personalities, and reinforce their confidence to innovate—to dare to be

first, take risks and question boldly. Emphasize the value of trial and error exploration in

scientific research, and establish fault tolerance and error correction mechanisms to encourage

innovation and tolerance of failure. Create a relaxed scientific research atmosphere, and

safeguard the academic freedom of science and technology personnel. Strengthen the building

18

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
of scientific research integrity, guide all science and technology workers to scrupulously adhere

to academic ethics, and uphold social responsibilities. Strengthen science education, enrich the

content and forms of science education, and stimulate young people's interest in science and

technology. Strengthen the popularity of science and technology, raise the science literacy of

the whole people, and fashion a spirit of scientific rationality throughout society.

VI. Organization of Implementation

Implementing the innovation-driven development strategy is an important historic mission

of our Party in the new period. The entire Party and nation must be united in their thinking,

Party committees and governments at all levels must effectively strengthen their sense of

responsibility and urgency, coordinate overall planning, deploy systematically, organize

carefully, and progress firmly.

Strengthen leadership. In accordance with the unified arrangements of the CPC Central

Committee and the State Council, the State S&T Structural Reform and Innovation Structural

Construction Leading Group (
​
国家科技体制改革和
创
新体系建
设领导
小
组
​
) shall be

responsible for the specific organization and implementation tasks of this
​
Outline
​
, for

strengthening research and review of the major strategic issues of innovation-driven

development, and for directing promotion of the
​
Outline
​
's implementation.

Division of labor and coordination of work. The relevant departments of the State Council

and the military, and all provinces (and autonomous regions and municipalities directly under

the central government) must formulate specific implementation plans based on this outline,

strengthen their overall awareness and awareness of responsibilities, enhance coordination and

create synergies.

Carry out pilot projects. Strengthen task decomposition, specify the responsible units and

progress arrangements, and formulate annual and phase-by-phase implementation plans.

Specific plans must be formulated for major reform tasks and key policy measures, and pilot

projects shall be carried out.

Monitoring and evaluation. Improve assessment mechanisms oriented toward innovation

development, make innovation-driven development results an important indicator for

assessment, and guide cadres everywhere to adopt the correct view on political achievements

(
​
正确政
绩观
​
). Strengthen innovation surveys, and establish regular monitoring and evaluation

and mechanisms for rolling adjustment.

Strengthen propaganda. Handle public propaganda well, with timely propaganda reporting

on new advances and achievements in innovation-driven development, make the

innovation-driven development concept the consensus throughout society, and mobilize the

entire society's enthusiasm for participating in and supporting innovation.

The whole party and society must closely unite around the CPC Central Committee with

Comrade Xi Jinping as the general secretary, concentrate efforts from all quarters on

innovation-driven development, and fight hard to comprehensively build an

innovation-oriented country and to achieve the Chinese dream of the great rejuvenation of the

Chinese nation.

19

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20
