
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Translation

The following document is China’s action plan to improve university-level artificial intelligence (AI)

education. Issued by the Ministry of Education in April 2018, the action plan lays out a number of

objectives designed to significantly enhance China’s cadre of AI talent and its university AI curricula

by 2030.

Title

Notice of the Ministry of Education on Issuing the
​
Artificial Intelligence Innovation Action Plan for

Institutions of Higher Education

教育部关于印
发
《高等学校人工智能
创
新行
动计
划》的通知

Author

PRC Ministry of Education (
教育部
)

Source

Ministry of Education website, 2 April 2018

The Chinese source text is available online at:

http://www.moe.gov.cn/srcsite/A16/s7062/201804/t20180410_332722.html

Translation Date

14 November 2019

Translator

Etcetera Language Group, Inc.

Editor

Ben Murphy, CSET Translation Lead

To the education departments (commissions) of all provinces, autonomous regions, and

municipalities directly under the Central Government, the Education Bureau of the Xinjiang

Production and Construction Corps, the education departments (bureaus) of all relevant

agencies (units), and affiliated institutions of higher education:

This
​
Artificial Intelligence Action Plan for Institutions of Higher Education
​
 has been written

specifically to implement the
​
State Council Notice on the Issuance of the New Generation

Artificial Intelligence Development Plan
​
 (Guo Fa [2017] No. 35), encourage institutions of higher

education to set their sights on the cutting-edge of global science and technology, continuously

improve the ability to foster scientific and technological innovation, international cooperation

and exchange, and provide training in the AI field, and provide strategic support to develop the

next generation of artificial intelligence. This action plan is hereby printed and distributed to

you. Please implement this action plan conscientiously, taking your actual situation into

account.

Ministry of Education

April 2, 2018

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Artificial Intelligence Innovation Action Plan for Institutions of Higher Education

The rapid development of artificial intelligence (AI) will profoundly change the world and

how we live in it. This action plan has been written for the purposes of implementing the State

Council Notice on the Issuance of the New Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan

(Guo Fa [2017] No. 35) and the spirit of the 2017 National Work Conference on Science and

Technology in Higher Education, to encourage universities to set their sights on the

cutting-edge of global science and technology, bolster foundational research, conduct

fundamental forward-looking research and make significant, pioneering, original

breakthroughs, and further improving universities’ ability to innovate and train talented people

in the field of AI and serve China’s needs.

I. General requirements

1. Basic situation

As technologies such as the internet, big data, cloud computing, and the internet of things

have continued to develop, artificial intelligence has led to scientific and technological

breakthroughs that are capable of causing a chain reaction and a number of disruptive

technologies. It is accelerating the incubation of new drivers of economic development, shaping

a new type of industrial system, and leading to a new scientific and technological revolution

and industrial transformation. China is currently in the decisive stage of forming a well-off

society in an all-round way. The people’s desire for a good life and the requirements for

high-quality economic development have created a bright future for the development and

application of AI in China.

Artificial intelligence has characteristics that combine features of both the technical and

the social. It is a new driver of economic development and an accelerator of social

development. The capabilities of artificial intelligence, including big data-driven visual analytics,

natural language understanding, and speech recognition are increasing rapidly. Business

intelligence dialogue and recommendations, self-driving vehicles, smart wearables, language

translation, automatic navigation, and new economic forecasting are quickly moving into a

functional stage. AI technology is currently permeating and rebuilding the connections between

the economic activities of production, distribution, exchange, and consumption, creating new

intelligentized (
智能化
) demands, products, technologies, ways of doing business from the

macro to the micro level and changing the way we live down to our very social structure. This

has created a spike in the overall productivity of our society. At the same time, innovative

applications for artificial intelligence in education are accelerating. Using smart technology to

innovate new ways to provide training, revolutionize teaching methods, improve academic

administration, and build an intelligentized, networked, personalized, lifelong education system

are important measures for promoting the development of balanced education, educational

equity, and increased education quality. It is an indispensable driver of and support for

educational modernization.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Colleges and universities are places where science and technology are the number one

productive force, talent is the number one resource, and innovation is the number one driver.

They have distinct features when it comes to the study and application of key technologies such

as the basic theory of artificial intelligence, natural language understanding, computer vision,

multimedia, robotics, etc., as well as a solid foundation when it comes to training people and

the development of academic disciplines. Faced with the opportunity presented by new

generation AI development, colleges and universities must further enhance their strengths in

basic research, the development of new disciplines, and training. They must intensify their

applied basic research (
应
用基本研究
) and increase breakthroughs in key general-purpose

technologies. They must continuously promote the deep integration of artificial intelligence

with the real economy in order to foster new drivers of economic development. They must

continuously promote the deep integration of artificial intelligence with the demands of the

people in order to provide them with new ways to improve their livelihoods. They must

continuously promote the deep integration of artificial intelligence with education in order to

provide new ways to revolutionize education. In doing so, they will lead China in scientific and

technological innovation, training, and the demonstration of technical applications in the field

of artificial intelligence, increasing the overall strength of AI in China.

2. Guiding ideology

So that China can gain a first-mover advantage in the development of artificial intelligence,

and in order to provide strategic support for building China into an educational superpower, an

S&T superpower, and a smart society, the Ministry of Education will fully implement the spirit

of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China, and will be guided by Xi Jinping

Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era. The Ministry of Education will

implement a new development philosophy focused on innovation, coordination, environmental

sustainability, openness, and sharing, as well as strategic policies that include the rejuvenation

of China by embracing scientific education, strengthening China with talented people,

innovation-driven development, and military-civil fusion (
军
民融合
). It will accelerate the

creation of a new generation talent development system for the AI field and a scientific and

technological innovation system. It will comprehensively improve universities’ ability to train

people, conduct scientific research, provide social services, as well as pass on and innovate

culture and exchange and cooperate in the AI field on an international scale. It will promote the

comprehensive development of artificial intelligence as an academic discipline, training

programs, theoretical innovation, technological breakthroughs, and the demonstration of the

field’s applications.

3. Basic principles

Insist on innovation taking the lead. Put innovation at the core of AI development at

colleges and universities. Understand global AI development trends. Further improve the

scientific and technological innovation system for AI at colleges and universities. Make colleges

and universities epicenters for global scientific and technological innovation in AI.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Insist on melding science and education. Fully implement a fundamental mission that

fosters character and civic virtue. Firmly control the core issue of improving the ability to train

people; promote training, academic discipline development, and the integration of scientific

research. Realize the important role that scientific education plays in the essential development

(
内涵式
发
展
) of higher education and the training of high-quality talent. Continuously increase

China’s homegrown innovation by cultivating innovative talent and create an advantage

through sustained innovation and development.

Consider the needs of those being served. Intensify structural and institutional reform.

Strengthen cooperation between colleges and universities and local governments, businesses,

and research institutes. Accelerate the transfer and application of scientific and technological

achievements in the field of AI to key industries and sectors. Improve colleges’ and universities’

ability to serve major national strategies, the innovation and development of various sectors,

the transformation and upgrading of the economy, and ensure everyone can make a living.

Support military-civil fusion. Understand how much the military and civilian realms should

be integrated, the rules governing such integration, and its key factors. Take full advantage of

colleges and universities’ superiority in basic research and training and the features of

disciplinary integration. Actively combine China’s military–civilian integration systems.

Continuously promote the bidirectional transfer and transformative application of military and

civilian technology.

4. Main goals

By 2020, basically complete the scientific and technological innovation system for

developing new generation artificial intelligence at colleges and universities and optimize the

composition of the academic discipline system. Institutions of higher education will be making

new breakthroughs in the basic theories of new generation artificial intelligence and key

technical research while also further improving their superiority in training and scientific

research and promoting the broad application of AI technology.

By 2025, markedly improve scientific and technological innovation ability and training

quality in the field of new generation artificial intelligence. Make a number of original

achievements of international significance. Demonstrate a world-class level in some theoretical

research, innovative technology, and application. Effectively support the upgrading of national

industries, the transformation of the economy, and the building of a smart society.

By 2030, colleges and universities will become the main force behind building the world’s

main AI innovation centers and will lead the development of a new generation AI talent pool to

provide China with the scientific and technological support and guaranteed talent to put it at

the forefront of innovation-oriented countries.

II. Key tasks

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
1. Improve the scientific and technological innovation system for AI at colleges and

universities

A. Bolster basic theoretical research on new generation artificial intelligence. Focus on the

major cutting-edge scientific issues related to artificial intelligence, promote the thorough

interdisciplinary integration of fields such as AI, brain science, cognitive science, and

psychology. Focus on basic and theoretical research in the areas of big data intelligence,

cross-media sensing and computing (
跨媒体感知
计
算
), hybrid enhanced intelligence (
混合增
强
智能
), swarm intelligence, autonomous coordination control and optimized decision-making,

high-level machine learning, brain-inspired smart computing, and quantum smart computing in

order to provide a theoretical foundation for a paradigm shift in AI and lay a solid foundation

for important theoretical innovation for new generation AI.

B. Promote the innovation of key technologies for new generation artificial intelligence.

Focusing on the key algorithms, hardware, systems, etc. of new generation artificial

intelligence, accelerate research into key technologies such as machine learning, computer

vision, knowledge computing (
知
识计
算
), deep reasoning (
深度推理
), swarm intelligence,

hybrid enhanced intelligence, unmanned systems, virtual reality, natural language

understanding, and smart chips. Make major breakthroughs in fields such as brain-inspired

intelligence, autonomous intelligence, hybrid intelligence, and swarm intelligence to form a

technical system for new generation artificial intelligence. Based on core algorithms, data, and

hardware, enhance cross-media (
跨媒体
) reasoning ability, the analytical ability of swarm

intelligence, the increased capacity of hybrid intelligence, and the ability to execute

autonomous motions with a focus on human-computer interaction. Create standardized,

open-source, and mature artificial intelligence service support capabilities for collaboration

between algorithms and chips, hardware and software, and terminals and the cloud.

C. Accelerate the creation of scientific and technological AI innovation bases. Focusing on

what is needed for basic theories in the field of AI, key general-use technology, and public

support platforms, accelerate the construction of innovation bases like Ministry of Education

cutting-edge science centers (
前沿科学中心
), Ministry of Education key laboratories, and

Ministry of Education engineering research centers. Oriented by major needs like cutting-edge,

cross-disciplinary breakthroughs and national and regional development, promote interaction

with and collaboration between innovators such as colleges and universities, scientific research

institutes, and businesses. Build collaborative innovation centers. Accelerate the incubation of

national-level innovation bases, such as national laboratories, key national laboratories,

national technology innovation centers, national engineering research centers, and major

national science and technology infrastructure. Encourage colleges and universities to create

new types of scientific research organizations and conduct interdisciplinary research.

D. Accelerate the formation of world-class talent teams and high-level innovation teams.

Support colleges and universities taking on major national science and technology tasks. Train

and bring together a number of leading strategic scientific and technological minds with

international reputations. Support colleges and universities forming interdisciplinary and

multidisciplinary innovation teams and research groups in artificial intelligence, brain science,

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
and cognitive science. Support the use of China’s Thousand Talents Program, Ten Thousand

Talents Program, and Chang Jiang Scholars Program by colleges and universities to vigorously

develop and bring in outstanding key young talent. Firm up support for high-quality talent and

outstanding innovation teams that conduct foundational research in the public interest.

E. Bolster the formation of high-level science and technology think tanks. Encourage and

support colleges and universities spearheading or participating in the formation of strategic AI

research bases that conduct strategic and policy research on the development of AI for such

important, charged, and forward-looking issues as education, the economy, employment, the

law, and national security. Form a number of new, high-level science and technology think

tanks.

F. Increase efforts to promote academic exchange and collaboration at the international

level. Support the creation of a number of “111 Program” innovation centers and cooperative

international laboratories in the field of AI. Incubate China’s International Mega Science Plan

(
国
际
大科学
计
划
) and Mega Science Project (
大科学工程
). Bring in famous international

scholars more often to participate in academic discipline development and scientific research.

Support the organization of high-level international academic AI conferences. Encourage

Chinese scholars to take on important positions at relevant international academic

organizations to increase international influence. Support the active participation of Chinese

scholars in the drafting of international AI regulations and propose “Chinese initiatives” and

“Chinese standards” in due course.

Cutting-Edge Innovation

1.
Bolster basic and theoretical AI research. Make significant progress in

autonomous learning, intuitive cognition (
直
觉认
知
), and integrated reasoning, break

through challenging issues with artificial intelligence approaches such as logical

derivation, learning from knowledge, and learning from experience. Create new

theoretical AI models and methods that are highly interpretive, with flexible data

dependency and strong generalization transfer capabilities, making it possible to move

from data to knowledge and knowledge to decision-making.

2.
Increase research on key AI technologies. Focusing on key technological

breakthroughs such as knowledge computing, cross-media analysis and reasoning,

swarm intelligence, hybrid enhanced intelligence, and automated unmanned systems.

Promote coordination of AI-specific chips, software, and hardware. Create artificial

intelligence service capabilities for terminal–cloud collaboration.

3.
Promote the creation of an AI technology system. Based on the breakthroughs in

core technologies such as brain-inspired intelligence, autonomous intelligence, hybrid

intelligence, and swarm intelligence, focus on improving cross-media reasoning

capabilities, swarm intelligence analysis capabilities, hybrid enhanced intelligence

capabilities, autonomous moving body execution (
自主运
动
体
执
行
) capabilities, and

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
human-computer interaction capabilities. Promote algorithms as the core and use data

and hardware as the foundation to build a stable and mature AI technology system.

4.
Increase collaborative innovation and strategic AI research. Promote

collaboration and innovation in the areas of basic AI theory, multi-space security (
多元
空
间
安全
), knowledge services, internet finance, disaster prevention and reduction,

social delicacy management (
社会精
细
管理
), health protection and disease prevention,

and scientific poverty alleviation. Establish a number of high-level science and

technology think tanks for AI and support major strategic and policy-related scientific

and technological research to provide theoretical support and strategic guidance for

social and economic development and respond to important social concerns.

2. Improve the training system in the field of AI

G. Improve subject matter organization. Increase interdisciplinary integration with relevant

fields of study, such as computing, control, quantum, neuro, and cognitive science, as well as

mathematics, psychology, economics, law, and sociology. Support the creation of AI-oriented

fields of study within computer science and technical areas by colleges and universities.

Promote the creation of first-level disciplines (
一
级
学科
) in the field of AI. Improve

development in areas related to basic AI theory, computer vision and pattern recognition, data

analysis and machine learning, natural language processing, knowledge engineering, and

intelligent systems. Support colleges and universities in building world-class universities and

world-class curricula (“
双一流
”). Increase investment in subjects related to AI and promote the

development of relevant interdisciplinary fields of study.

H. Create additional majors. Accelerate the implementation of the “Plan for Educating and

Training Outstanding Engineers (version 2.0)” and promote the creation of the best majors, the

best undergraduate degrees, and the best students. According to AI theory and technology, AI

has the characteristics of universality, portability, and permeability. Actively incorporate

students’ academic interests and the needs of society. Actively develop the research and

practice of “new engineering.” Pay increased attention to the cross-integration of professional

education for AI with computer and control science, mathematics, statistics, physics, biology,

psychology, sociology, law, and other disciplines. Explore a new training model of “AI + X.”

Encourage the adaptation and integration of mathematics, big data technology, and other

disciplines into intelligent science and technology for computer science majors. Place AI-related

majors according to industrial demand both nationally and regionally.

I. Create more teaching materials. Accelerate the transfer of scientific and technological AI

achievements and resources to education and teaching. Promote important AI-oriented

teaching materials and the creation of open online curricula, especially in the main subjects of

AI foundations, machine learning, neural networks, pattern recognition, computer vision,

knowledge engineering, and natural language processing. Promote the drafting of a number of

world-class undergraduate and graduate teaching materials and high-quality, national-level

open online courses. Add artificial intelligence to the basic university course materials for

computer science.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
J. Increase training intensity. Improve the multi-entity collaborative AI education

mechanism. Deepen industry–university educational collaboration. Expand and implement

collaborative industry–university education projects in the AI field. Utilize the most recent

achievements in industrial and technological development to promote training reform. Support

the creation of a “new engineering discipline” in the AI field to ally industry, education, and

research. Create a number of shared regional training and practice platforms that combine

education, training, and research. Actively set up temporary positions in which professors in the

AI field can gain experience and collaborative industry–university–research institution training

platforms for engineering skills. Promote mechanisms for bidirectional exchange between

university and college professors and those in industry. Encourage qualified colleges and

universities to set up artificial intelligence schools, research institutes, and interdisciplinary

research centers to promote the innovation of a collaborative education model that integrates

science, industry, and technology and multi-channel training for innovative, entrepreneurial

people in the AI field. Help colleges and universities by using incremental support (
增量支持
)

and stock adjustments (
存量
调
整
). Steadily increase the scale of enrollment for relevant fields

of study and determine an equitable hierarchical structure. Increase the intensity of AI training.

K. Increase educational accessibility. Encourage and support colleges and universities

making relevant teaching and research resources available outside of their institutions. Build a

public service platform to popularize AI among young people and the general public and

actively work towards making science more accessible. Support the participation of college and

university professors in popularizing AI education at the elementary and middle school level

and conducting related research. Create pre-service and in-service training courses for teachers

on AI knowledge and skills. Train teachers on how to implement intelligent education. Create

non-degree AI continuing education courses at colleges and universities.

L. Support innovation and entrepreneurship. Encourage Chinese university science and

technology parks and innovation and venture bases to develop innovative entrepreneurship

projects. Identify a number of startup and innovation demonstration parks at colleges and

universities. Support the development of innovation and entrepreneurship activities in the field

of AI by college and university professors and students. Create AI-focused competitions as part

of the China College Students’ “Internet+” Innovation and Entrepreneurship Competition and

actively promote the development of multi-level, multi-type AI science and technology

competitions such as the China Adolescents Science and Technology Innovation Contest and

the “Challenge Cup” National Undergraduate Extracurricular Science and Technology

Competition.

M. Increase international exchange and cooperation. Support exchange students who

come to China to study in the AI field through the Chinese Government “Silk Road” Scholarship

Program to train industry leaders and highly talented people from Belt and Road countries.

Encourage and support Chinese students going abroad to study in countries that excel in AI.

Increase the amount of support for exchange students in the AI field, and use excellent

international education resources in multiple ways through a variety of channels. Rely on the

UNESCO Entrepreneurship Education Network National Chapter in China to increase and

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
promote international exchange and cooperation related to AI innovation and

entrepreneurship.

Training

1.
Accelerate the development of AI as an academic discipline. Support the

creation of AI-oriented disciplines in computer science and other technical disciplines at

colleges and universities. Thoroughly discuss and confirm what is included in field of

study of AI, improve the AI discipline system, and promote the development of a

first-level discipline in the field of AI.

2.
Strengthen specialized AI majors. Promote the creation of a “new engineering

discipline” and create a new way to educate with a combined “AI + X” major; develop

100 of these special combined “AI + X” majors by 2020. Promote the creation of

important teaching materials and open online courses and publish 50 world-class

undergraduate and graduate textbooks and create 50 national-level quality open online

AI courses by 2020. Increase AI content in majors related to big data and information

management at vocational schools and train people in technical skills applicable in the

AI field.

3.
Strengthen AI talent cultivation. Increase integration between training and

innovation research bases and improve the multi-entity collaborative education

mechanism in the AI field in order to train AI talent at multiple levels in a variety of

ways. Open 50 AI schools, research institutes, or interdisciplinary research centers by

2020 and help colleges and universities by using incremental support and stock

adjustments. Increase training intensity in the AI field.

4.
Create a multi-level AI education system. Introduce AI into elementary and

middle school-level education. Work continuously to optimize and improve specialized

majors and build a higher education system that blends specialized AI education,

vocational training, and foundational university-level education. Encourage and support

colleges and universities making relevant teaching and research resources available

outside of their institutions. Build a public service platform to popularize AI among

young people and the general public and actively work towards making science more

accessible.

3. Promote the transformation of S&T achievements into commercial products (
科技成果
转
化
) by colleges and universities in AI and demonstrate their applications

N. Expand the application of AI in key areas. Implement “AI + X” initiatives. Support

technology transfer and transformation of S&T achievements into commercial products from

colleges and universities to intelligent education, smart manufacturing, intelligent medical care,

smart cities, smart agriculture, smart finance, smart judiciary, and national defense and expand

the application of these technologies. Increase collaboration with relevant industries. Promote

the formation of new industries and new ways of doing business in the education, culture,

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
medical, transportation, manufacturing, agriculture and forestry, finance, security, and national

defense sectors. Incubate a number of leading AI technology businesses. Promote the

formation of numerous industry clusters and demonstration areas.

O. Promote the development of intelligent education. Promote educational and teaching

reform. Move towards a smart campus model based on digital campuses. Create a

technology-enabled teaching environment. Explore new AI-based teaching models. Reconstruct

how teachers teach, using AI to monitor the teaching process, analyze students, and assess

attainment levels. Set up comprehensive, multi-dimensional, big data-based smart

assessments. Accurately evaluate both teacher and student performance. Institute

individualized aptitude-based curricula. Promote academic administration reform. Support

schools’ use of AI technology to modify their organizational structures and management

systems and optimize how they operate and serve their students. Implement delicacy

management and personalized service on campuses to completely upgrade schools’

administrative levels. Promote lifelong online learning, encourage the development of

student-centric intelligentized learning platforms, provide a rich variety of personalized learning

resources, innovate how services are provided, and tailor lifelong learning.

P. Promote strong military–civil fusion (
军
民深度融合
). Focus on information technology

and make AI technology the starting point of breakthroughs. Turn towards efficient information

access, semantic understanding, and information leveraging, using unmanned and

human–machine hybrid systems as a model. Build joint military–civil AI technology innovation

bases. Foster more joint military–civil AI innovation research projects. Promote relevant

technological innovation at colleges and universities to drive military superiority and

information superiority, such that innovations are “upgraded for military use and downgraded

for civilian use” (“
升
级为军
，退
级为
民
”).

Q. Encourage the formation of innovation alliances and the open sharing of resources.

Encourage and support colleges and universities joining with business, industry groups,

scientific research organizations, etc. to form AI industry technological innovation alliances.

Actively participate in implementing major scientific projects with new generation AI and

creating a national set of AI standards formulated alongside international ones. Support

colleges and universities participating in the creation of open-source and open (
开源开放
) AI

platforms, encourage them to consider the technologies that are added to the platform as

achievements in scientific research, to recognize them as such, and to use them as a factor for

evaluations and awards.

R. Support local and regional innovation and development. According to the developmental

specificities of regional industry and the economy, focusing on major national deployment,

strengthen regional and local cooperation with the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Region, the Xiongan

New Area, the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macau Greater Bay Area, and Northeast, Central, and

Western China. Support the joint construction of a number of innovation platforms and new

R&D organizations, such as collaborative innovation centers and cooperative laboratories, by

colleges and universities, the government, and companies. Promote foundational, original AI

research by colleges and universities that is linked to the needs of both the region and industry.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Accelerate regional transformation and upgrading as well as regional innovation and

development.

Transforming S&T Achievements into Commercial Products and Demonstrating their

Application

1.
Demonstrating the application of AI in intelligent education. Accelerate and

promote the deep integration and innovative development of AI in education. Research

strategies, standards, and specifications for developing intelligent education. Explore

channels and methods for integrating AI technology into the educational environment,

teaching models, curricula, teaching methods, academic administration, educational

assessment, and educational research. Develop an intelligentized, cloud-based

education platform and encourage new ways of teaching that are supported by AI to

modernize education from the ground up.

2.
Demonstrating the application of AI in smart manufacturing. Intelligentize the

entire smart manufacturing supply chain life cycle, from design, production, testing, and

support to management and service. Research and develop new types of smart sensors,

solve difficult intelligent control equipment issues, and deploy the smart manufacturing

cloud. Build a new ecosystem that exists across the internet and that is driven by data

and knowledge, is a shared service, is self-informing, and is engaged in mass innovation.

Promote the deep integration of new generation AI into smart manufacturing.

3.
Demonstrating the application of AI in intelligent medical care. Target major

health issues like the graying population, infectious and chronic disease, birth defects,

and infertility. Break through bottlenecks in analyzing and understanding streams of

multimodal big health data. Promote the efficient integration of technologies such as

integrated reasoning with incomplete information, computer-aided diagnosis, and

medical knowledge graphing in the healthcare sector. Advocate for the integration of

big data from the medical field with big data from other fields. Set up AI-assisted

intelligent medical care systems and cloud-based innovative service platforms with

identification, exclusion, filtering, and reasoning features. Improve the serviceability of

intelligent medical care.

4.
Demonstrating the application of AI in smart cities. Based on ubiquitous and

convergent intelligent sensing technology, fully analyze and understand urban

ecological elements and complex urban systems. Based on core technologies such as

integrated reasoning, knowledge computing engines, and swarm intelligence, build a

model urban intelligent application system. Further promote high-level decision-making

for city operations management. Promote the creation of an urban big data platform.

Build a system to support intelligent urban delicacy management, knowledge discovery,

and assisted decision-making. Create intelligent products and systems for the

environment, government, and for making people’s lives easier.

5.
Demonstrating the application of AI in smart agriculture. Promote the deep

integration of information technologies such as the internet, big data, cloud computing,

and the internet of things with modern biotechnology, health and nutrition, and smart

device technology. Make breakthroughs in key technologies such as farm animal and

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
plant information perception, analysis and smart identification, cross-media data mining

analysis in agriculture, hybrid human-computer intelligent interaction and virtual reality

in agriculture, swarm intelligence decision-making in agriculture, and

human-computer-animal (
人机物
) coordination. Work together to build

environmentally friendly, efficient, intelligentized, and multifunctional future

agricultural models and demonstration bases.

6.
Demonstrating the application of AI in smart finance. Focusing on the new issues

and requirements that have come up during the implementation of the “Internet+”

strategy in the financial sector, based on comprehensive information in financial big

data, build a macro-level financial decision-making model in line with the conditions in

China. Break through the constraints between the development rules inherent to

finance and the external social environment. Use core smart technologies like deep

learning for mining and analysis based on financial data from banking, securities, and

the internet. Create complex financial instruction models by industry and by sector. Use

models such as knowledge graphing and reasoning computing (
推理
计
算
) to accurately

prevent financial risk, rate credit, and track trends based on the spatiotemporal and

individual behavior attributes of financial big data.

7.
Demonstrating the application of AI in the smart judiciary. Promote the

combination of AI disciplines with relevant disciplines at law schools. Make full use of

technologies such as text analysis, speech recognition, machine learning, and

knowledge graphing. Develop intelligent prosecutorial and legal systems based on

large-scale historical legal data, internet data, and other relevant data. Research and

develop intelligent, assistive tools for automated clue discovery for cases, intelligent

conviction and sentencing, automatic document generation, automated legal advice,

and smart trials. Demonstrate the application of these technologies in courts and

prosecutors’ offices so as to improve the efficiency of those handling cases as well as

the standardization and accuracy of case trials.

III. Policy measures

1. Improve organization and implementation. The Ministry of Education is establishing an AI

S&T Innovation Strategy Expert Committee (
人工智能科技
创
新
战
略
专
家委
员
会
) to direct and

coordinate the implementation of this plan. All relevant departments will actively research

concrete implementation measures to ensure that all tasks are accomplished. The education

authorities in each province (or autonomous region or municipality directly under the Central

Government) and institutions of higher education, with the goal of serving the major needs of

the country, must coordinate resources, increase exploration, use their stocks incrementally

and efficiently (
用好增量、
盘
活存量
), support the development of interdisciplinary subjects in

the field of AI, train talented people, make scientific innovations, and transform S&T

achievements into commercial products and applications.

2. Improve resource allocation. Make appropriate increases in graduate student enrollment

targets in order to meet China’s major strategic needs. Investigate the establishment of

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
national-, provincial- and ministerial-level innovation platforms to support major national

science missions undertaken by colleges and universities that serve major national strategic

deployments. Improve training for high-level personnel and comprehensively improve training

quality for graduate students, especially doctoral candidates, in order to provide the necessary

talent to innovate and develop artificial intelligence. Increase the inclination of outstanding

talent in major Chinese talent projects such as the Chang Jiang Scholars Program towards AI

fields.

3. Increase guidance and incubation. Through Ministry of Education expenditures on

science, focus on the top-level design and incubation of major innovation platforms, the

creation of major science and technology projects, and research on major science and

technology strategies and policies. Accelerate the creation of a number of Ministry of Education

innovation platforms. Increase incubation for major national science and technology projects

and national-level science and technology innovation platforms. Encourage colleges and

universities to conduct exploratory interdisciplinary research as well as foundational,

forward-looking research to arrive at leading, original results and major breakthroughs.

4. Increase propaganda and promotion. The Ministry of Education will increase propaganda

on and promotion of major scientific and technological achievements to colleges and

universities using methods such as the China University Scientific and Technological

Achievements Fair (
中国高校科技成果交易会
). The education authorities in each province (or

autonomous region or municipality directly under the Central Government), as well as

universities operating under the Ministry of Education, must without delay summarize and

report on their college- or university-level training, how they are working to implement major

national projects, theoretical technological breakthroughs, and major instances of the

transformation of S&T achievements into commercial products at their institutions or wherever

they are located.
