
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
P olicy Br ief
F ebr uar y 2023
U .S. Outbound
In v estment int o
Chinese AI
Com panies
Aut hor s
Emil y S. W einst ein
Ngor L uong

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 1
Executive Summary
Policymakers in the United States and abroad are increasingly concerned about the
national security implications associated with outbound investment, and some in
Washington are advocating for a potential outbound investment security review or
regime to address the national security risks associated with outgoing U.S. capital. This
policy brief analyzes data from Crunchbase on U.S. outbound investment into Chinese
artificial intelligence companies between 2015 and 2021 to better understand the
scope and nature of these transactions. This report aims to identify: 1) the main U.S.
investors active in the Chinese AI market, and 2) the set of AI companies in China that
benefitted from U.S. capital during this period. It also lays out potential implications
and next steps for U.S. policy. Our key findings include the following:
● Chinese investors remain the dominant investors in Chinese AI companies.
Between 2015 and 2021, at least 71 percent of the transaction value and 92
percent of the investment transactions with no U.S. participation came from
Chinese investors alone.
● Based on available data in Crunchbase, between 2015 and 2021, 167 U.S.
investors participated in 401 investment transactions—or 17 percent of 2,299
global investment transactions—into Chinese AI companies.
● Collectively, observed transactions involving U.S. investors totaled $40.2 billion
invested into 251 Chinese AI companies, which accounts for 37 percent of the
$110 billion raised by all Chinese AI companies. However, we do not know the
exact portion of the $40.2 billion that came from U.S. investors.
● Ninety-one percent of the observed U.S. investment transactions into Chinese AI
companies during the covered time period came at venture capital (VC)
investment stages, such as angel, seed, and pre-seed.
While Crunchbase data suggests that U.S. outbound investment into Chinese AI
companies is limited, such financial activity, commercial linkages, and the tacit
expertise that transfers from U.S.-based funders to target companies in China’s
booming AI ecosystem carry implications that extend beyond the business sector.
Earlier stage VC investments in particular can provide intangible benefits beyond
capital, including mentorship and coaching, name recognition, and networking
opportunities. As such, U.S. outbound investment in Chinese technology, and
particularly AI, merits additional attention and tracking.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2
The U.S. government is not currently in a position to effectively monitor, measure, or
regulate outbound investment flows to Chinese AI companies. This, combined with the
highly complex nature of these transactions, means policymakers should attain a full
understanding of the nature and scope of U.S. financial and technological support to
Chinese AI companies before proceeding to address any concerns, and doing so
cautiously. To this end, we provide a set of recommendations:
1. Identify clear policy objectives for any potential outbound investment
security review or regime. There is a sufficient amount of U.S. outbound
investment into Chinese AI companies to warrant further investigation with
clearly scoped objectives.
2. Devise a pilot program for collecting data on U.S. outbound investment into
China. Revise disclosure requirements for U.S.-based funds, as well as
disclosure requirements for U.S. firms investing in Chinese companies,
particularly those in sectors deemed critical to national security.
3. The U.S. Department of Treasury, in conjunction with the interagency, should
expand and revise the scope of the Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial
Complex Companies List. The expansion could include privately-held Chinese
companies that can attract VC investments, as well as sectors critical to national
security beyond defense/materiel and surveillance.
4. Create a mechanism to prevent U.S. investment into Chinese companies on
the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Entity List. This could require divestiture
from Chinese companies on the Entity List and restrict future investment in
listed entities.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ 1
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................... 4
Background on the Chinese AI Ecosystem ................................................................................. 6
Methodology ........................................................................................................................................ 8
Assessment of U.S. Outbound Investment into Chinese AI Companies ............................ 10
Investment in Chinese AI Companies: Understanding the Trends .................................. 10
Transactions with U.S. Investor Involvement ..................................................................... 11
Transactions without U.S. Investor Involvement .............................................................. 16
Types of Chinese AI target companies ..................................................................................... 18
Types of U.S. Outbound Investment into Chinese AI Companies .................................... 20
Understanding the Intangibles Attached to VC Investment .................................................. 23
Top U.S. VC in China ...................................................................................................................... 24
Mentorship and Coaching ......................................................................................................... 25
Name Recognition and Building Strategic Networks ...................................................... 27
Limitations .............................................................................................................................................. 33
Next Steps .............................................................................................................................................. 35
Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................. 42
Authors .................................................................................................................................................... 44
Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................................ 44
Appendix A: Methodology for Identifying AI Companies and Cross-border AI
Investment.............................................................................................................................................. 45
Appendix B: Taxonomy of Primary Applications of AI ............................................................ 46
Appendix C: Additional Figures and Tables ................................................................................ 50

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4
Introduction
Policymakers in the United States and abroad are increasingly concerned about the
national security implications associated with foreign investment. There are several
ongoing debates surrounding the rationale for a potential outbound investment
security review or regime. Policymakers who have advocated for an outbound
investment screening regime fear that U.S. capital is flowing into entities in China that
are actively supporting the Chinese military (formally known as the People’s Liberation
Army, or PLA), some of which includes taxpayer dollars through the retirement and
pension funds of public sector employees.1 Others worry about safeguarding supply
chains—especially in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, which saw a world forced
to reckon with the fact that China dominated critical supply chains around personal
protective equipment and other important materials.
Separately, others in the White House and in Congress are worried that the tacit
knowledge associated with investment into Chinese high-tech firms in areas such as
artificial intelligence poses national security concerns. In October 2022, new export
control policies aimed at China’s advanced node semiconductors and supercomputing
inputs attempted to lay the groundwork for future U.S. policies aimed at slowing
China’s progress in AI.2 Just a month earlier, National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan
argued that AI is one of several “force multiplier” technologies, and as such, leadership
in these fields is a national security imperative, and the United States must maintain as
much of a lead as possible.3
This report analyzes Crunchbase data from 2015 to 2021 on U.S. outbound investment
into Chinese AI companies to more effectively understand the scope and nature of
these transactions. It seeks to identify the main U.S. investors active in the Chinese AI
ecosystem and the set of Chinese AI companies that have benefitted from U.S. capital.
We find that, although there are several gaps in our ability to track and monitor these
investments, there is sufficient U.S. investment going into Chinese AI companies to
warrant further and closer investigation. In addition, we discuss how such investments,
and particularly the early-stage venture capital (VC) funding that accounts for the
majority of U.S. investment transactions in Chinese AI companies, can provide
additional benefits and support beyond pure capital. We reflect on the potential effect
these investments might have in the broader scheme of U.S.-China technology
competition. Based on these findings, we provide a set of recommendations focused on
increasing transparency and bolstering pre-existing policy tools.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5
As U.S. policymakers deliberate ways to tackle the aforementioned concerns tied to
U.S. investments in China, putting data behind the outbound investment screening
conversations will be helpful to both map the range of potential policy responses and
improve the accuracy and efficiency of these responses. First, however, it is important
to acknowledge that putting a full stop to U.S. outbound investment in China would be
neither practical nor beneficial for either side. China is the second-largest economy and
second-largest destination of foreign investment, after the United States. In 2021, U.S.
companies had an estimated $118 billion in foreign direct investments (FDI) in China.4
Second, while an outbound investment regime that limits the flow of U.S. capital and
resources to China’s technology sector may hinder or slow down China’s progress in
AI, it will not be able to fully stop it. As our data suggests, there is sufficient domestic
support for AI development in China that, although restrictive U.S. policies may have
some impact on China’s AI development, these policies are unlikely to have a long-
term crippling effect on the country’s AI advancement.
There are also limits to what an outbound investment regime can do to answer
questions of supply chain resilience and diversification, or deal with how capital that
originates in the United States may end up buttressing the PLA.5 Although some
concerns around U.S. technology flowing to the PLA could potentially be remedied via
an outbound investment regime, the process of identifying military end-users in China
is difficult, thanks in part to Beijing’s Military-Civil Fusion (MCF) strategy. As such, any
outbound investment screening regime aimed at blocking U.S. capital from making its
way into the Chinese military-industrial complex would be imperfect at best. China’s
whole-of-society approach to MCF does not mean that all entities in China are
problematic. Rather, it suggests that an end-user approach to outbound investment
may be less than effective.
Finally, the value of a carefully crafted outbound investment regime, especially when it
comes to investment in emerging technologies such as AI, may in fact be less related
to its ability to stop capital from flowing to China, and more to curtailing the influx of
intangible or tacit expertise that transfers to China through these investment
relationships. As such, we have included several case studies to show examples of the
intangible benefits associated with early-stage VC investment. However, we note that
examining these case studies requires significant time and resources, and in many
instances, entities are not required to disclose certain information, making it harder to
piece things together.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6
Background on the Chinese AI Ecosystem
Since 2015, China’s leadership has prioritized the development of a strong indigenous
AI ecosystem.6 In a 2018 speech, Xi Jinping argued that accelerating the development
of AI is an important strategic starting point for China to “gain the initiative in global
scientific and technological competition.”7 Toward this end, Beijing has adopted a
whole-of-government approach that coordinates AI development efforts across
government agencies. AI-relevant policymaking is led by two primary departments: the
Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) and the Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology (MIIT). MOST is tasked with coordinating China’s AI
development strategies and research, whereas MIIT, through its network of industry
alliances and think tanks, coordinates the testing and fielding of AI applications.8
One of the first major AI-specific policies, known as the 2017 “New-Generation AI
Development Plan” (hereinafter referred to as the 2017 AI Plan; 新一代人工智能发展规
划), laid out Beijing’s strategic ambitions in AI development across all sectors—from
national security and military operations, to economic and social development—and
emphasized the role that AI would have in shaping international competition.9 More
specifically, the 2017 AI Plan lays out a three-stage progression for the future of
China’s AI industry:
● By 2020, China’s AI industry will be “in line” with the most advanced countries,
with a core AI industry gross output exceeding $22.5 billion (RMB 150 billion)
and AI-related industry gross output exceeding $150.8 billion (RMB 1 trillion).
● By 2025, China’s AI industry will reach a “world-leading” level in some AI fields,
with a core AI industry gross output exceeding $60.3 billion (RMB 400 billion)
and AI-related industry gross output exceeding $754 billion (RMB 5 trillion).
● By 2030, China will become the world’s “primary” AI innovation center, with a
core AI industry gross output exceeding $150.8 billion (RMB 1 trillion) and AI-
related industry gross output exceeding $1.38 trillion (RMB 10 trillion).10
Whether or not China has succeeded in reaching its 2020 AI industry goals is difficult
to ascertain; however, progress has certainly been made. Its government and state-

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7
owned media reports often single out Beijing as a beacon of progress.* In 2018, Beijing
Daily reported that AI-related industry output in Beijing alone reached $21.7 billion
(RMB 150 billion), and in 2019, MOST stated that this number had grown to $24.6
billion (RMB 170 billion).11 As of September 2022, Xinhua asserts that Beijing’s AI-
related output value for 2022 is expected to reach $32.9 billion (RMB 227 billion).12
Among other things, domestic and foreign investment is critical to meeting China’s AI
development and growth goals. The 2017 AI Plan called for the establishment of
financial support mechanisms for fundamental and advanced AI research by using
“angel investment, risk investment, start-up investment funds, financial market
funding, and any other such channels to guide social capital to support AI
development.” It even emphasizes the role of foreign mergers and acquisitions, foreign
investment, and collaboration with overseas enterprises to help support domestic AI
firms.13 More recently, China’s National Development and Reform Commission
(NDRC)—China’s top economic regulator under the State Council—listed AI in its
catalog of industries in which to encourage foreign investment.14
Private equity (PE) and VC investments play an important role in funding China’s AI
advancement. With extensive support from Chinese government actors as well as
foreign capital and networks, including those from the United States, China’s PE and
VC market has grown to become the world’s second largest, following that of the
United States.15 That said, China’s VC growth is a recent phenomenon as its VC market
only started in the early 2000s.16 Still in its formative years, China’s VC industry lacks
conventional institutions such as well-established and long-standing innovation
systems, legal infrastructure, a higher level of entrepreneurship, among other factors.17
China’s government often steps in to reform the country’s financial system and
introduce other financial means to accelerate VC development.18 One financial
instrument includes Chinese government guidance funds (GGFs; 政府引导基金), which
are modeled on the PE fund structure and have a dual mandate to achieve financial
returns while furthering the state’s industrial policy goals in strategic sectors like AI.
The GGF mechanism faces a number of challenges, but overall, the mechanism

* Chinese official statistics and estimates should be taken with a grain of salt. While national-level
statistics are usually accurate, local governments frequently inflate their economic numbers. And
Chinese governments at all levels commonly target or estimate high levels of future growth that they
subsequently prove unable to meet.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8
appears to function better than traditional policy mechanisms like subsidies and tax
preferential treatments, for instance, by offering patient capital for tech startups to
cross the “valley of death” to scale up and commercialize.19 With this level of
government financial support and facilitation, VC investment has become one of the
more successful funding mechanisms in China.
In comparison, U.S. VC firms are world-renowned, massive, well-established, and have
significantly more resources than most of their Chinese counterparts. Given that the
Chinese VC industry is less mature, U.S. VC firms have been active participants in
funding Chinese innovation, often with the tacit approval of the U.S. government if not
outright encouragement, albeit the practice has indeed become more controversial
over the past few years due to rising concerns over China’s MCF and human rights
violations.20
Methodology
This report relies on investment data from Crunchbase, one of the leading financial
data providers.21 Crunchbase, like other financial data providers, does not perfectly
cover the entire investment market, but even imperfect coverage sheds new light on AI
investment activity into China. We spot-checked Crunchbase data with data on “AI
companies’ financing events” (人工智能全部公司及投融资事件信息表) acquired from
Chinese-language financial data provider, ITJuzi, and found no meaningful transactions
not already covered by Crunchbase.22 See Appendix A for more details on the
methodology.
To identify AI companies, we ran a regular expression-based search query against
business descriptions of the target companies in Crunchbase. The results comprised
companies whose descriptions include either terms associated with specific AI
applications such as “machine learning,” “computer vision,” “TensorFlow,” or generic
AI-related terms such as “artificial intelligence,” and “semiconductor.” Where
Crunchbase’s company business descriptions are missing, we supplemented our
keyword-based method using Crunchbase’s AI category.23 This means AI companies in
our analysis are limited to companies that CSET or Crunchbase has identified as AI
companies. In other words, for example, not all “semiconductor” companies are
classified as AI companies. Understanding that AI itself is not a sector, we used CSET’s
“TINA” (Taxonomy of INtelligence Applications) classification to identify company
sectors within AI.24 More detailed information on this taxonomy can be found in
Appendix B.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9
Focusing on U.S. outbound investment, we identified investors’ country of origin based
on their company headquarters. If investors are individuals rather than firms and their
country of origin is unlisted, we extrapolate their country of origin based on the
location of their affiliated primary organization, which serves as a proxy for their
nationality. It is important to note that the location of an individual or a company’s
headquarters may not actually reflect the ultimate source of capital or the actual
location of the investor. While our methodology may misplace firms like GSR
Ventures—which, although headquartered in California, mainly operates in China—this
approach still offers meaningful insights into corporate influence.25
Finally, we filled in transaction value gaps with estimated value. Financial data
providers like Crunchbase only provide information on the total value that companies
in a funding round raised where such information is disclosed. We produced the
estimated totals using a multistage estimation process where we assigned each round
the median amount for funding rounds of the same investment stage, target country,
and year.*
While the data used in this report is not without limitations, our analysis of U.S.
investment in Chinese AI companies is an important step toward understanding this
complex phenomenon and is a useful foundation to further explore intangible
knowledge transfer aiding China’s ability to leapfrog the United States in key strategic
technologies such as AI.

* The estimated value amounts to $33.6 billion, 25 percent of which comes from the investment
transactions that involved U.S. participation. The estimated value skews toward the transactions that
involved Chinese investors. In our dataset, a majority of undisclosed transaction value which we
estimated for is associated with investment with Chinese participation.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10
Assessment of U.S. Outbound Investment into Chinese AI Companies
Investment in Chinese AI Companies: Understanding the Trends
With over 1,600 active AI companies by the end of 2021, the Chinese AI market is the
world’s second largest, behind the United States. According to Crunchbase data,
between 2015 and 2021, 1,239 Chinese AI companies raised $110 billion across
2,299 investment transactions from 36 countries.*
Table 1 provides more details on the different categories of investors into China’s AI
sector and examples associated with each category. While keeping the limitations of
Crunchbase data in mind, these categories nonetheless help us to better understand
the various investors who have helped fuel China’s AI boom and locate areas where
any potential U.S. policy may have an impact.
Table 1: Categories of Investors
Category Example of Investment Transaction in Chinese AI Company
U.S. participation:
Only U.S. investors U.S.-based SOSV invested in Zeemo.ai.
Only U.S. and
Chinese investors
U.S.-based Qualcomm Ventures and China-based Dark Horse
Ventures invested in Bell.ai.

* Despite there being 1,600 active AI companies (according to Crunchbase) in China by the end of 2021,
we only found 1,239 that received any investment during the time period between 2015 and 2021. It
could be that some of the 1,600 active AI companies did not receive any investment funding during this
time period.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 11
U.S., Chinese, and
other investors
U.S.-based Cisco, Singapore-based Capikris Foundation, and
China-based Lenovo, Co-Stone Venture Capital, Green Pine
Capital Partners, and China CITIC Bank invested in 4Paradigm.
U.S. and other non-
Chinese foreign
investors
U.S.-based GSR Ventures and South Korea-based Korea
Investment Partners invested in Longmao Data.
Non-U.S. participation:
Only Chinese
investors
China-based Qiming Venture Partners invested in Bomming
Vision.
Chinese and non-
U.S. foreign
investors
China-based Alibaba Group and Suning.com, and Singapore-
based Temasek Holdings invested in SenseTime.
Other non-U.S.
foreign investors
Germany-based Volkswagen Group invested in Mobvoi.
Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.
Transactions with U.S. Investor Involvement
Based on available data in Crunchbase, from 2015 to 2021, 167 U.S. investors
participated in 401 investment transactions into Chinese AI companies, accounting for
17 percent of the observed transactions. Collectively, these transactions invested a
total of $40.2 billion into 251 Chinese AI companies, making up 37 percent of the total
global funding raised by all Chinese AI companies in our dataset for this time period.
However, we do not know what portion of the $40.2 billion came directly and
exclusively from U.S. investors. We attempted to address this issue by breaking down
the 401 investment transactions by different groups of investors, as seen in Figure 1.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 12
Of the 401 observed investment transactions with U.S. participation, 107 (27 percent)
came exclusively from U.S. investors, amounting to $7.45 billion (19 percent) of the
total $40.2 billion raised from transactions involving U.S. investors (See Appendix C,
Table C1). This $7.45 billion represents the lower bound of U.S. investment into
Chinese AI companies during this time period. Some of the largest investments include
Goldman Sachs’ solo investment in 1KMXC, an AI-enabled robotics company, as well
as an investment by three U.S.-based VC firms in Geek+, an autonomous mobile robot
company.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 13
 Figure 1: Breakdown of Investment into Chinese AI Companies with U.S. Investor Participation, 2015-2021
 Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 14
As Figure 1 illustrates, U.S. investors do not typically act alone and are often involved
in transactions that also include Chinese or other foreign investors. Such syndication
deals—deals where two or more VC firms come together to take an equity stake in an
investment—may help foreign investors from the United States or elsewhere obtain
critical on-the-ground information from domestic Chinese investors, and in return help
domestic investors become more skilled.26 Other explanations for binding together
include a potential increase in financial return, reduction in operation uncertainty, and
less competition in bidding.27 That said, while the number of investment transactions
that brought together U.S. and Chinese investors accounts for more than half of the
401 transactions with U.S. participation, the value of these transactions comprises only
27 percent ($10.8 billion) of the total amount raised.
In other instances, there are other foreign investors participating in the same
transaction as U.S. and Chinese investors. Figure 1 shows that, although this category
of investors sees less frequency in investment than the pair of U.S. and Chinese
investors, the size of these investment transactions accounts for $21.4 billion—or 53
percent of the total amount of capital raised in transactions with U.S. participation. This
is not uncommon; more investors often means larger-value transactions, and more
investors suggests that shares of capital are more distributed. However, since
investors are not required to disclose their individual contribution, the share attributed
to U.S. investors here is unclear.
Looking more closely at the data, we also identified three transactions where a U.S.
company invested in a Chinese AI company alongside a Chinese company that is listed
on the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Entity List. As Table 2 illustrates, in one of
these cases, a U.S. company co-invested with iFlytek—a Chinese company already on
the Entity List at the time of the investment. The other two examples involve a U.S.
investor investing alongside SenseTime before it was added to the Entity List.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 15
Table 2: Selected U.S. Joint Investment With Entity Listed Chinese Companies

Note: SenseTime was not on the Entity List at the time the investments were announced.
Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.
While U.S.-based investors by no means dominate the Chinese AI market, Crunchbase
data does show such activity is prevalent, often intertwined with Chinese investors and
other foreign actors looking for opportunities in China’s massive technology landscape.
Considering the national security implications of U.S. outbound investment into one of
China’s strategic priority sectors, additional information about these trends and further
scrutiny of the actors and funds involved is warranted. However, given the current
scale and scope of U.S. investment in Chinese AI companies, any proposal to regulate
U.S. outbound investment to China is unlikely to significantly impact the overall
development of the AI industry in China, as U.S. investor participation represents just a
fraction of the overall capital flowing into China.
The following section will go further in examining investments into Chinese AI
companies without involvement from U.S. entities. Other actors that are actively
invested or interested in investing in Chinese AI companies may backfill in the event
that U.S. investors are required or encouraged to divest or stop investing. As such, it is
crucial to understand the scope and scale of such investment, a portion of which may
be less affected by or perhaps even insulated from changes in U.S. policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 16
Transactions without U.S. Investor Involvement
Between 2015 and 2021, 83 percent of the observed investment transactions (1,898
transactions) and 63 percent of transaction value ($69.8 billion) raised by Chinese AI
companies did not involve U.S. investors. As Figure 2 shows, 71 percent of this $69.8
billion and 92 percent of the 1,898 investment transactions with no U.S. participation
came from Chinese investors alone. Funds secured by Chinese AI companies from
Chinese investors amounted to nearly $50 billion across 1,749 investment transactions
(See Appendix C, Table C2).

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 17
 Figure 2: Breakdown of Chinese AI Investment Without U.S. Participation (Including Chinese and/or Foreign Investors), 2015-2021
 Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 18
Given that the majority of investment in Chinese AI companies comes from Chinese
investors alone, regulating U.S. outbound investment into China’s AI ecosystem will be
unlikely to achieve desired objectives if those objectives are to halt China’s AI progress.
Moreover, Chinese AI companies are also capable of attracting investment from foreign
investors other than the United States. For instance, Chinese investors co-investing
with foreign investors other than U.S. investors, accounts for $11 billion over 92
investment transactions (See Appendix C, Table C2). Foreign investors from countries
such as Singapore, Taiwan, and South Korea, among others, have also put in about $9
billion across 57 deals into China’s AI ecosystem from 2015 to 2021.
Types of Chinese AI target companies
AI is a general-purpose technology that has a broad range of applications, spanning
across different sectors. The Chinese companies in our dataset that received U.S.
investment are developing applications in sectors such as business services and
analytics, transportation, medicine and life science, security and biometrics, among
others.28 More specifically, as Table 3 shows, the majority of Chinese AI companies
that we identified as recipients of U.S. investment focuses on general purpose AI-
related tools and applications, transportation, and business uses such as business
services and analytics and sales/retail/customer relations. Advances in AI are likely to
impact many sectors of the economy and in doing so, spur innovation and enable other
cutting-edge technologies, such as chips and semiconductors, and vice versa. Within
the general-purpose category, eight AI companies focus on computing hardware that
may be applied to different sectors, whereas two AI companies develop chips catered
to specific uses, including in finance and transportation.29

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 19
Table 3: Distribution of Chinese AI Companies with U.S. Investor Participation by
Application, 2015-2021

Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.
Note: The application areas assigned in this report are based on previous CSET Taxonomy of INtelligence
Applications (see Appendix B).
According to our data, only one Chinese AI company that received funding from U.S.
investors is involved in developing AI applications for military or public safety uses. In
this case, the classification adopted in Table 3 above could obfuscate the fact that AI
algorithms and technologies developed in the commercial sector can, and in some
cases, already are, modified for military or law enforcement use. For example, Chinese
law enforcement and intelligence organizations have adapted SenseTime’s platform
and core technologies for domestic surveillance and security purposes.30 In addition,
China’s MCF strategy has increasingly blurred the lines between the military and
civilian sectors, especially in emerging technologies. A key aspect of MCF
implementation is the two-way transformation of military and civilian science and
technology achievements; therefore, Chinese leadership has emphasized the

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 20
advancement of dual-use technologies with simultaneous applications in both the
military and civilian sectors.31
It is also worth noting that 22 of the 251 Chinese AI Companies (9 percent) that
received U.S. investment are members of the Chinese government’s AI innovation
network, the Artificial Intelligence Industry Alliance (AIIA; 中国人工智能产业发展联盟).
AIIA fosters collaborations among local governments, academic institutions, and
companies, which are consistent with Chinese government goals, strategies, and
policies.32 For example, the CEO of Laiye—an AI automation company that received
investment from U.S. investors including Cathay Innovation, Lightspeed Venture
Partners, and Microsoft—is on the expert committee of AIIA Talent Development
Center (中国人工智能产业发展联盟人才发展中心) launched with the intention of
cultivating talent in support of the Chinese government’s “Internet+ AI Action Plan.”33
Similarly, Zhuiyi Technology, a natural language processing company that benefited
from Chinese government funding, is the vice-chair of the AIIA’s Digital Humans
Working Committee (AIIA人工智能产业联盟数字人工作委员会副理事长单位) and is
responsible for drafting the AIIA’s Virtual Digital Human Guideline (中国人工智能产业
发展联盟 (AIIA) 虚拟数字人规范).34 A full list of companies in our dataset that are
members of AIIA can be found in Appendix C, Table C3.
Although only a small subset of the AI companies that received U.S. funding have also
benefited from funding and support of the Chinese government through this AIIA
initiative, it serves to illustrate that it is often difficult to parse out Chinese government
influence across the commercial and private AI sector in China. Furthermore, U.S.
investors and funds may unknowingly be crossing paths with Chinese government
presence in these companies and settings. Moreover, given this intricate relationship
between the Chinese government and the commercial and private sector, it is possible
that these AI companies might be more likely to respond to Chinese government policy
priorities or pressures rather than market demands in which investors have the most
interests.
Types of U.S. Outbound Investment into Chinese AI Companies
The frequency and volume of U.S. investment in Chinese AI companies alone are not
enough to assess the impact of U.S. involvement in or contributions to Chinese AI
development. To further understand the nature of these investments, we examined the
different types of deals U.S. investors are pursuing, differentiating between VC and PE
funding rounds wherever possible. The two forms of investment belong to a much
larger, complex part of the private equity industry.35 VC financing focuses on funding

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 21
and mentoring early-stage companies with high growth potential, in exchange for a
(often minority) stake of equity in target companies. Early-stage VC funds such as
angel, pre-seed, seed, Series A, and Series B funding rounds typically involve earlier-
stage target companies and smaller transaction values. In contrast, PE investments
often target well-established companies with much larger stakes.
Table 4 shows that VC investment at all stages accounts for 91 percent of observed
investment transactions involving U.S. investment in Chinese AI companies between
2015 and 2021. This trend is not unique to U.S. investors. Over the same period,
Chinese AI companies have generally raised more VC funding rounds than PE
financings (see Appendix C, Figure C4). This trend can partly be explained by the fact
that China’s AI ecosystem is relatively new in comparison to that of the United States.
As such, many Chinese AI companies may still be in the earlier stages of development
and have yet to reach the mature stage that might attract PE investment.36
Table 4: Percentage of Chinese-Bound AI Investment Transactions and Value Involving
U.S. Investors by Investment Stages, 2015-2021

Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.
Note: Private equity investment is a part of the broader private equity industry. M&A is mergers and acquisitions.
With the majority of U.S. investments into Chinese AI companies happening in earlier-
stage VC rounds, we can assume that U.S. investors are helping to supply capital to
Chinese companies at the stage where they are still tweaking their business models
and refining their commercialization strategies. Given that a large share of U.S.
investment in the Chinese AI market is VC investment, in particular at the earlier
stages, the following section of this report investigates the implications associated

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 22
with this trend—for instance, the transfer of knowledge and other intangible benefits
Chinese AI companies receive alongside the influx of capital.
Late-stage venture capital funds, in contrast, generally invest in Series C and later,
often offering larger amounts of money before companies receive a prospective initial
public offering (IPO). The amount of money raised in VC rounds is generally far less
than the funds raised during the later stages, such as through PE and especially during
the exit stage that may involve an IPO or mergers and acquisitions. For instance, as
Table 4 shows, the funds raised in only 10 rounds of private equity funding are nearly
equivalent to the money raised in more than three hundred transaction investments
spanning the angel, seed, and pre-seed rounds and the early stage of VC funding.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 23
Understanding the Intangibles Attached to VC Investment
Investment from technologically advanced countries like the United States brings
intangible benefits beyond pure capital, and investment in Chinese AI companies is no
exception. A 2019 Chinese state-funded research paper notes that knowledge transfer
in VC investment scenarios is inevitable, and that the “type of knowledge transferred
from venture capitalists can help venture-backed firms acquire important information,
such as that related to technological innovation, thus improving their technological
innovation ability.”37 Additional literature states that VC investors can “communicate
valuable knowledge to an entrepreneur,” thus spurring innovation.38 These intangible
benefits come in various forms, including but not limited to:
● Mentoring and coaching from experts on international markets,
managerial practices, efficiency and quality control practices, competitors,
etc.
● Name recognition and seal of approval (if the investor is American or
well-known).
● Networking opportunities via VC networks. 39
This knowledge transfer is a two-way street. VC investment in China has provided U.S.
investors with critical insight into China’s high-tech ecosystem. U.S. VC investors are
also in the uniquely favorable position to act as knowledge intermediaries by
transferring knowledge between their different portfolio companies, allowing one
startup to learn from another via a connection back to the same investor.40 More
broadly, this two-way street has also facilitated further collaboration between U.S. and
Chinese counterparts, resulting in greater innovative potential on both sides.
However, in the context of U.S.-China technology competition and broader PRC
technology indigenization strategies, the transfer of this intangible knowledge could, in
the long term, contribute to Beijing’s goals of catching up with and eventually
leapfrogging the United States in key strategic technologies. At the same time,
because this intangible knowledge, connections, and development opportunities are
chiefly offered by U.S. investors, it can be seen as a potential chokepoint for Chinese AI
and as such, an area where changes to U.S. policy could indeed have an impact on the
speed and trajectory of China’s AI development.
This section describes potential instances of knowledge transfer associated with U.S.
VC investments in Chinese AI companies. We discuss the role of U.S. VC in China’s AI

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 24
ecosystem via several case studies that illustrate these different transfer mechanisms.
This discussion should be treated as a summary review of informative examples rather
than an exhaustive account of this phenomena.
Top U.S. VC in China
Table 5 shows the top 10 U.S. VC investors participating in investment transactions
targeting Chinese AI companies from 2015 to 2021. According to our data, GGV
Capital (formerly known as Granite Global Ventures) has been the most active overall
in financing Chinese AI companies during this time period, with a total of 43
investment transactions. While GGV Capital is also active outside of China, its
involvement in Chinese AI companies makes up 38 percent of its overall known AI
investment transactions during this time period. In Table 5 below, we calculated the
share of observed AI investment by the top 10 U.S. investors that went toward
Chinese AI companies (based on what is available via Crunchbase) to estimate the role
of Chinese AI companies in these firms’ AI investment portfolios.
Table 5: Top 10 U.S. Investors Involved in Chinese AI Investment Transactions, 2015-
2021

Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.
Note: “Number of transactions in all AI companies globally” refers to the total number of AI investments in
Crunchbase that a company made globally (including China) between 2015-2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 25
Some of the top U.S. VC investors on this list are more active in China than elsewhere
in the world. For instance, 20 of BlueRun Ventures’ 24 global AI investment
transactions (83 percent) between 2015 and 2021 went to Chinese AI firms. GSR
Ventures also appears to have a heavy investment footprint in China’s AI ecosystem,
with 33 of its 62 global AI investment transactions (53 percent) targeting Chinese AI
companies.
GSR Ventures is an interesting example for understanding the limitations of
Crunchbase data. Although Crunchbase claims that GSR Ventures is a U.S.-
headquartered company, there are reasons to question this claim. In January 2015, the
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) aimed to block a
consortium of firms, including GO Scale Capital—managed by U.S.-based Oak
Investment Partners and GSR Capital (which was formerly part of GSR Ventures)—
from buying lighting company Lumileds out of concerns for the transfer of gallium
nitride semiconductor technology to China. Dutch firm Phillips, the seller in question,
eventually scrapped this deal.41 Some U.S. reporting of the incident even referred to
GSR Ventures as a Chinese firm.42 According to the company’s Linkedin bio, as of
2016, GSR Ventures and GSR Capital, as well as GSR United Capital, are three
“independent yet complementary teams,” suggesting a potential reorganization effort
after the dropped deal.43
Mentorship and Coaching
One of the primary intangible benefits that overseas industries get from U.S.
investment is the opportunity for mentorship and coaching. The decades of expertise
and experience of VC investors from leading U.S. companies is invaluable for younger
firms, especially those in countries with burgeoning, yet relatively young, high-tech
industries.
SOSV appears to have the largest global footprint in AI investment, participating in
284 investment transactions from 2015 to 2021, with 38 of the transactions (13
percent) targeting Chinese AI companies. In 2010, SOSV set up a subsidiary known as
Chinaaccelerator—a program designed to assist small startups in entering China, as
well as assisting Chinese startups in entering the global market. Chinaaccelerator
claims to provide $150,000 in funding in exchange for 6 percent of the target
company’s equity; one-on-one mentorship from three hundred mentors across China
Southeast Asia, the United States, and Europe; a free co-working space at People
Squared (with locations in Shanghai and Beijing); a robust alumni network; and other

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 26
perks. Startups in the program embark on a six-month-long journey divided into a
three-month growth phase and three-month fundraising phase.44
In addition to Chinaaccelerator, SOSV oversees HAX, a similar accelerator program
that provides early-stage startups with access to experts, investors, manufacturers,
engineers, and other relevant stakeholders.45 HAX has offices in San Francisco and
Shenzhen, but according to the company’s website, HAX itself is not a Chinese fund;
rather, it is part of SOSV and merely maintains offices in Shenzhen.46 Several
companies in our dataset went through the HAX hardware accelerator program before
securing financing. For instance, autonomous mobile robot startup Youibot participated
in the HAX program in Shenzhen in 2018.47
Other accelerators attached to large U.S. firms have invested in and helped coach the
Chinese AI companies that received U.S. investment in our dataset. For example,
Clobotics—a computer-vision-based wind turbine blade inspection service, and Raven
Tech—an AI software company, both participated in the Microsoft Accelerator
program. For Clobotics, an initial investment from GGV Capital helped move the
company to the head of the 2017 class of the Microsoft Accelerator program,
according to Clobotics founder George Yan, who previously held the position of Head
of Microsoft China for 16 years.48
In addition to participating in the Microsoft Accelerator program, Raven Tech also
received backing from Y Combinator—an elite California-based accelerator with a very
low 1.5-2 percent acceptance rate.49 These opportunities and experiences likely made
Raven Tech more attractive to other investors, and in 2017 the company was acquired
by Baidu.50
Among other companies in our dataset, California-based VC firm Sequoia Capital
made five investments into Chinese AI companies from 2015 to 2021. However, its
China-based subsidiary was much more active during this time period, participating in
104 investment transactions that Chinese AI companies raised from 2015 to 2021.
Sequoia Capital China has also established incubator programs in China, including the
“Sequoia Digital Intelligent Industry Incubator Center.” Located within the Shanghai
Zhangjiang Artificial Intelligence Island, this incubator was established in 2020 in
cooperation with the local government in Shanghai.51 At the opening ceremony for the
new incubator, the deputy mayor of Shanghai said that Sequoia “provides important
support for the growth and expansion of enterprises” in the area.52 Although this
incubator was set up by Sequoia Capital China, it is difficult to assess the incubator’s or
its parent company’s relationship with its ultimate parent, U.S.-based Sequoia Capital.
However, the brand recognition in itself is valuable.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 27
In addition to funding portfolio companies, Sequoia Capital China has also played an
active role in bolstering the VC ecosystem in China by teaming up with local partners
to establish China-based VC firms. One prominent example is ZhenFund (真格基金)—a
Beijing-based seed-stage venture fund founded in 2011 in collaboration with Sequoia
Capital China and New Oriental Education & Technology Group.53 ZhenFund has gone
on to invest alongside prominent U.S. firms such as Sequoia Capital, Microsoft
Ventures, GSR Ventures, and others. More information on the network-building aspect
of VC investment can be found in the next section. Although beyond the scope of this
paper, more information is needed to better understand the networks among U.S. and
Chinese VC and PE firms.
Other U.S. VC firms have similar mentorship programs in China. For example, in 2020,
GGV Capital held 19 “Master Classes” on topics such as finance, talent, strategy,
organizational structure, sales, and more. The sessions brought in expertise from
Alibaba, Huawei, Tsinghua University, and others.54 GGV also claims to maintain
relationships with local Chinese government offices and representatives in more than
20 cities to help connect portfolio companies with government departments.55 In
theory, pairings of FDI more generally and host country regulatory strategies can help
the FDI-receiving nations expand their domestic markets and move up the value chain,
which, in most cases, is a positive development.56 However, given the critical nature of
AI and the current state of U.S.-China competition in technology, we may be forced to
rethink the cost-benefit analysis around FDI and VC investment more broadly.
Name Recognition and Building Strategic Networks
Investments by VC investors often help extend the social capital of their portfolio
companies via their network of contacts across industry. These connections can further
help portfolio companies build their strategic networks with companies and investors
working in adjacent or similar industries. Most importantly though, previous studies
suggest that investments from big VC firms—especially those in the United States—
may convey a credible signal of a firms’ quality to other parties.57 In the context of U.S.
VC investment into China’s AI ecosystem, this name recognition—alongside the
strategic access that U.S. investors may grant to portfolio companies—may be a crucial
indirect benefit that has contributed to the growth of China’s AI companies. In some
cases, this may also lead to coattail investing—or copying the investment decisions of
successful investors—where Chinese and other foreign firms follow in the footsteps of
prominent U.S. firms.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 28
Along these lines, Chinese media reports claim that Sequoia Capital assists portfolio
company Infervision by recommending that the company participate in relevant
government seminars and by helping to contact additional suitable investors.58 As an
example, in 2020, Sequoia Capital China and the China Development Research
Foundation (CDRF; 中国发展研究基金会) jointly held a press conference on
“Application Research of AI in the Field of Healthcare” at the Diaoyutai State Guest
House in Beijing—a significant location usually reserved for diplomatic guests or
government officials.59 In attendance alongside Chinese government and Party officials
were Sequoia Capital China leadership, as well as the CEOs of Infervision and Synyi—
both Sequoia Capital China (and, in the case of Infervision, Sequoia Capital too)
portfolio companies.60 These high-level interactions—likely facilitated by Sequoia
Capital—benefit portfolio companies by giving them access to government officials as
well as a platform to promote their brand. In line with the previous section on
mentorship and coaching, media reports also state that Sequoia Capital has helped
Infervision with issues related to government resources, investor resources, leadership
guidance, human resources, and public relations.61
The following two case studies, drawn from our dataset, provide examples of
intangible benefits that come from corporate venture capital (CVC)—that is, a type of
VC investment that comes directly from corporate funds.62 Academic literature
suggests that CVC investors often make strategic investments to strengthen the
competitiveness of their parent companies, allowing them to tolerate the risk
associated with early-stage investment in emerging technology, and focus on creating
value, rather than solely on generating investment returns. CVCs may invest in
startups to try and create synergies between their parent company and portfolio
companies by sharing technology know-how and/or via business partnerships, thereby
stimulating value creation for both the startup and the corporate parent.63
Intel Capital
Intel’s investments in China have led to collaboration with, and likely knowledge
transfer to, Chinese AI companies. According to our analysis of Crunchbase, between
2015 and 2021, Intel Capital—Intel’s own investment arm—participated in 11
transactions targeting Chinese AI companies. In some instances, Intel Capital obtained
a seat on the board of the Chinese AI company in which they’ve invested. For example,
Intel Capital’s investment in Horizon Robotics resulted in Intel’s Global Vice President,
Daniel McNamara, joining the company’s board of directors.64 Although a common
practice in the VC industry, the expertise provided by companies like Intel could give

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 29
Chinese firms access to U.S. expertise—particularly through name recognition and
networking access—that they might not be able to find elsewhere.
Horizon Robotics, often cited as a Chinese rival to Nvidia, specializes in AI chips for
robots and autonomous vehicles. The company’s Series A funding round in October
2017 was led by Intel Capital. In April 2022, Horizon Robotics announced a
collaboration with Chinese electric car giant BYD to equip BYD vehicles with Horizon’s
latest generation automotive processor, Journey 5—a high-performance automotive
processor designed for Level 4 autonomous driving.65 In addition to BYD, Horizon has
partnered with other Chinese and global companies working in the electric and new
energy vehicle industry, including Audi, Bosch, Continental, and SAIC Motor.66 In
October 2022, Volkswagen announced intentions to take a 60 percent stake in a new
joint venture with Horizon Robotics via its software unit, Cariad. The JV, based in China,
will help Volkswagen “speed up customization of automated driving solutions in
China.”67 Just weeks after this announcement, Volkswagen also announced that it
would no longer be investing in Pittsburgh-based Argo AI, stating that it would
instead be concentrating its autonomous driving efforts on its existing partnerships
with Bosch and Horizon Robotics.68
Despite Horizon Robotics touting its Intel support in its early days, the company now
seems to be competing with Intel in developing auto-grade AI chips. In essence, Intel’s
support for Horizon Robotics may have helped the company better compete with Intel.
In early 2022, Intel, via its Mobileye unit, revealed its EyeQ Ultra system-on-a-chip
(SoC) designed to enable Level 4 autonomous driving.69 Several industry analyses
refer to Horizon as a rival to Intel/Mobileye, and some analysts believe that Horizon’s
Journey 5 chip may be a starting point for Horizon to overtake international rivals like
Nvidia and Mobileye.70 In May 2021, Chinese electric car firm Li Auto announced that it
would be leaving Mobileye in favor of Horizon Robotics.71
In another instance, Intel Capital’s investment in Eeasy Tech, a company focused on
SoC design, resulted in the head of Intel Capital China, Wang Tianlin, joining the
company’s board.72 Eeasy Tech was founded in the Zhuhai Hi-Tech Industrial
Development Zone in 2016, and Intel’s Series A investment coincided with investment
from the Zhuhai Science & Technology Venture Capital—a firm held by the Zhuhai
Provincial Government’s State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration
Commission (SASAC). In China, SASAC, at the national, provincial, and municipal
levels, “performs investor’s responsibilities, and supervises and manages the state-
owned assets of enterprises under [its jurisdiction],” according to its official website.73
This high-level interaction between Intel and the local government may have

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 30
presented an additional opportunity for knowledge transfer, presumably business and
investment acumen, directly to the Chinese government.
In other situations, Intel Capital’s investments in Chinese AI firms have led to the
formation of strategic collaborations that could benefit the Chinese companies in a way
that complements Chinese government strategies. Following Intel Capital’s
investments in Reconova Technologies, the Fujian-based company stated that Intel
Capital’s investment helps the company unlock its AI potential: “With AI becoming an
important part of China’s national strategy, there exists a huge opportunity. . . . The
new investment from Intel Capital . . . will help us further expand our AI industry
deployment, increase market share, and strengthen our industry leadership position.”74
According to Intel Capital leadership, the investment aimed to help Reconova develop
“innovative visual perception technologies to accelerate AI application implementation
and the upgrading of smart industries in China.”75
Intel Capital’s 2018 investment in Beijing-based HuiyiHuiying (now known as HY
Medical) came after the two companies had previously established a joint AI
laboratory. Following the 2018 corporate round investment, the two companies
claimed they would be collaborating to develop an AI full-cycle breast health
management cloud platform, and Huiyi Huiying stated that the investment from Intel
Capital will help it enhance its research and development capabilities, broaden its
market reach, and further grow its business.76 Since then, Huiyi Huiying collaborated
with Intel to optimize its algorithms that run on Intel’s Xeon Scalable processors.77
HY Medical is not the only Intel Capital target company in China using this technology.
Konfoong Biotech International also used the Intel Xeon Scalable processors to
optimize algorithms related to tuberculosis screening.78 As with many core processors,
Intel’s Xeon models are dual-use and have a range of potential military use-cases in
addition to their commercial ones. Although these two instances involving medical and
biotech technology seem outside the scope of national security concerns and play
important roles in medical science, U.S. companies like Intel should take into account
any potential diversion to a military end-use or end-user in China. The U.S. government
has made it clear with recent export controls that cutting-edge chip exports to China
are potentially problematic, and although Xeon processors are not the most cutting-
edge chips on the market, they could eventually be subject to similar scrutiny.79
Qualcomm Ventures
Similar to Intel Capital, Qualcomm Ventures’ investments in China have created
inroads to collaboration with, and knowledge transfer to, Chinese AI companies.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 31
Launched in 2000 and headquartered in California, Qualcomm Ventures is the
investment arm of U.S. information and communications technology giant Qualcomm.
When founded, the company set out with an initial mission to “accelerate innovation by
making investments that leverage smartphone technologies and lead to new,
connected verticals and markets.”80 Since then, the company has not only expanded its
portfolio in terms of technology areas—moving into ride-sharing, smart hardware, and
other sectors—but has also expanded its geographic footprint, setting up branches in
China, India, Israel, and Brazil, among others.81 Notably, the company’s China office
was the first overseas branch it set up, just three years after Qualcomm Ventures was
founded.82
Qualcomm Ventures has had an active presence in China since 2003. From 2015 to
2021, the company participated in 13 investment transactions raised by Chinese AI
companies. Qualcomm Ventures’ parent company, Qualcomm Incorporated, made two
additional investments during this time period. In July 2014, Qualcomm announced its
$150 million Strategic China Venture Fund to invest in Chinese startups across all
stages, with Qualcomm Ventures advising and directing these investment activities.
According to the official statement in July 2014, Qualcomm viewed China as a “strong
player in the semiconductor industry” and wanted the company to continue investment
in this area in China “to add to its strategic investments in Chinese companies.”83 The
company also noted that Chinese companies who receive investments from Qualcomm
“can benefit from Qualcomm’s insights on mobile technologies and leverage
Qualcomm relationships throughout the industry.”84
Qualcomm Ventures has made a handful of investments in the Chinese self-driving
vehicle industry. In 2019 and 2021 respectively, the company made Series C and D
investments in Zongmu—a tech firm working on self-driving vehicles. In August 2021,
Qualcomm Ventures called its relationship with Zongmu a “strong strategic
partnership . . . utilizing Qualcomm’s Snapdragon technology in its solutions.”85
Although beyond the scope of this report, it is important to consider instances where
U.S. firms may have leverage over Chinese ones. In the Zongmu case, the Snapdragon
technology appears to be a critical gap that could not be filled as easily without U.S.
contributions. Besides Zongmu, Qualcomm Ventures also invested in Haomo.AI, a
Beijing-based startup working on self-driving vehicles. Haomo.AI was born out of
China Great Wall Motor—China’s largest automotive manufacturer—and is still
controlled by its Chairman, Wei Jianjun.86
Some of Qualcomm’s portfolio companies have established partnerships or
collaborations with entities in China that may have national security implications for

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 32
the United States. In 2016, Qualcomm Incorporated reached into its Strategic China
Venture Fund to make an investment in 7Invensun—a Beijing-based company working
in the field of eye-tracking, eye-motion control, head-tracking, and facial identification
technology.87 In 2020, at a Qualcomm-hosted conference in Nanchang, 7Invensun said
they planned to share their eye-tracking applications and explore further ways to
improve their technology with other tech executives.88 Through these types of events,
Qualcomm is giving its portfolio companies opportunities to build their strategic
networks.
Due to the sensitive nature of this technology, there is potential for 7Invensun’s
products to end up in the hands of China’s security forces. As an example, in 2018,
7Invensun published two co-authored pieces with the Beijing Institute of Aerospace
Intelligence and Information (北京航天情报与信息研究所), a subsidiary organization
under the state-owned defense firm China Aerospace Science and Industry
Corporation (CASIC; 中国航天科工集团).89 One piece focused on the development of a
driver-fatigue warning system, while the other looked at improving near-infrared
cameras for facial recognition.90 In addition, the 7Invensun website boasts two
examples of the company’s use cases that involve Chinese military actors.91 One
example mentions collaboration with the PLA’s Air Force Aviation University (空军航空
大学) that tracks eye movement during pilot training tasks, and the other highlights
work with the China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology (CALT; 中国运载火箭技术
研究院) aimed at improving visual technology for astronauts.92
Along similar lines, Qualcomm Ventures and its parent company have also invested in
SenseTime—a Chinese facial recognition company that has been sanctioned by the
U.S. government due to its alleged participation in surveilling the Uyghur population in
Xinjiang.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 33
Limitations
While the analysis in this report is illuminating, several limitations still exist. First,
investment information found in the Crunchbase database is limited to publicly-
announced transactions, and unknown or secret transactions are not captured.
Based on the information provided in Crunchbase, it is difficult to ascertain how much
money a company receives from one specific investor in a funding round, since
investment transactions are often represented as a lump sum of money without
specific breakdowns of investor contributions. It is therefore difficult to determine how
much money from U.S. sources is flowing to China from U.S.-based investors involved
in such transactions. For example, in 2018, Chinese AI surveillance leader SenseTime
raised $620 million from seven investors, three based in the United States, two located
in China, one headquartered in Singapore, and another in the United Kingdom. In this
instance, we were unable to identify the exact amount each of the seven investors
individually invested in the company.
Even in cases with one investor, it can still be difficult to assess the origin of capital
due to the lack of transparency in investment data. PE/VC funds managed by general
partners (GPs), such as U.S.-based Sequoia Capital, typically source capital from
limited partners (LPs) whose background and degree of capital contribution are kept
confidential, and funds are not required to disclose further information. This reality
makes it difficult to track the original source of capital. In addition, the definition of a
“U.S. investor” is not a straightforward one, as firms often have complicated and
opaque ownership structures, and Crunchbase does not always provide reliable
information on beneficial or ultimate ownership.93 For instance, a U.S. VC firm could
have capital coming from Chinese or other foreign LPs that they are not required to
disclose.
Additionally, it is challenging to use Crunchbase data to determine whether a given
investor has obtained a controlling interest through their investment. Similarly, it is
difficult to effectively quantify the intangible two-way benefits that both the investors
and the recipients receive during these deals. Beyond board seats, Crunchbase does
not provide any information on what types of rights may be conveyed along with any
given investment. As such, we are unable to effectively assess the degree of
passiveness of the U.S. investment.
Lastly, syndication deals, as discussed earlier, often result in a network of co-
investments where venture capital firms are interconnected.94 Although beyond the
scope of this report, our data suggests that U.S. VC firms like GGV Capital and GSR

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 34
Ventures are at the center of China’s VC network and are highly connected to Chinese
VC firms like Sequoia Capital China—the China-based subsidiary of U.S. firm Sequoia
Capital. GGV Capital is the U.S. investor with the most unique partnerships with
Chinese co-investors (67 partners), followed by GSR Ventures (50 partners). Between
2015 and 2021, GGV Capital most frequently co-invested with Sequoia Capital China
in eight investment transactions raised by Chinese AI companies. Similarly, GSR
Ventures jointly invested with Sequoia Capital China in six investment transactions,
which is more often than it did with other Chinese VC firms. A network of U.S. and
Chinese VC firms brings in a lot of expertise about the high-tech industry to portfolio
companies. When VC firms are well-connected, they often share information and
investment opportunities.95 However, additional research is required to effectively
understand what intangible assets this network of investors brings to Chinese firms.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 35
Next Steps
Although U.S. outbound investment into Chinese AI companies is limited, the highly-
complex nature of such financial activity, commercial linkages, and the tacit expertise
that transfers from U.S.-based funders to AI companies in China carries implications
that warrant further investigation. As U.S. policymakers deliberate ways to tackle the
concerns tied to U.S. investments in China, putting data behind the outbound
investment review conversations will be critical to both mapping the range of potential
policy responses and improving the accuracy and efficiency of those responses.
To address the aforementioned issues, we suggest the following as next steps for
policymakers to consider.
1. Identify clear policy objectives for any potential outbound investment review
regime.
In the context of outbound investment to China, there are several issues at play. As
previously mentioned, the debates span a variety of concerns, including but not limited
to supply chain resilience, competition in innovation, military modernization, and more.
These concerns, although all related to national security in their own right, bring with
them different desired outcomes that will require unique policy approaches if the U.S.
government wishes to address them effectively. As we have demonstrated in this brief,
the existing U.S. outbound investment into Chinese AI companies and the intangible
benefits that come with such financial transactions warrant further investigation;
however, any investigation must begin with clearly scoped objectives in mind to avoid
overreach that could have adverse effects.
The discussions around defining national security objectives in the context of export
controls provide a helpful comparison for understanding the significance of this
recommendation. Similar to an investment review regime, export controls are merely a
means to an end and do not exist as a tool for their own sake. Without a clearly
articulated vision for what their desired end should be, it can be difficult to use export
controls effectively.96
In addition, the lack of a defined vision can result in policies that have adverse
consequences for U.S. trade and company competitiveness. Companies will often over-
comply with trade controls to avoid being tangled in complicated, ambiguous nets. If
an outbound investment review regime is not scoped and clearly defined, it may force
companies to be more risk-averse and even stop investing in China altogether, which
would have significant negative implications for global trade flows and supply chains.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 36
More recently, the Biden administration has made efforts to clarify some of the
objectives surrounding the national security concerns associated with inbound
investments. The September 2022 executive order (E.O. 14083) aims to clarify and
define the criteria that the administration believes CFIUS should be considering in
evaluating transactions.97 A similar approach could be taken in the context of outbound
investment.
What is our goal? Are we trying to prevent the Chinese military from reaching its 2049
modernization goals? Are we working to stymie Beijing’s efforts to use technology to
abuse human rights? Are we worried about China gaining a first-mover advantage in
emerging technologies? However we choose to define national security will help to
inform the type of outbound investment screening regime, as well as bolster its
effectiveness.
2. Devise a pilot program for collecting data on U.S. outbound investment into
China. As part of this effort, the U.S. government should consider revising
disclosure requirements for U.S.-based funds and disclosure requirements
for U.S. firms investing in Chinese companies, particularly those in sectors
deemed critical to national security.
As a first step, the administration should develop a program for gathering data on U.S.
outbound investment into sectors deemed critical to national security, as scoped by the
previous recommendation. This data could then be used by the U.S. government and
kept confidential to better shape any future outbound investment review regime while
simultaneously protecting the competitiveness of U.S. firms.
While this policy brief provides some information about the scale and scope of these
transactions, more information is needed. As noted earlier, a large portion of VC-
related activity is either outside of the scope of or exempt from U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission disclosure requirements.98 Many of the U.S. VC firms in our
dataset operate funds that are registered or headquartered in the United States and
receive funding from a number of LPs; however, current U.S. law does not require
disclosure of the names of these LPs regardless of their location, so it can be difficult to
ascertain the origins of money behind a fund.99 While such opaqueness is not in and of
itself a national security risk, imposing disclosure requirements is a first step to gaining
more visibility into the potential risks associated with a given transaction. We
understand that forcing U.S. companies to publicly disclose this information could be
problematic; as such, we recommend that a first step could be imposing disclosure
requirements that only go to relevant offices in the U.S. government.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 37
Furthermore, an outbound investment screening regime that is too broad may create
too much uncertainty for the business community and reduce U.S. companies’
willingness and ability to maintain operations in China—or even base themselves in
the United States—leading to additional supply chain issues at home and potentially
decreasing the competitive edge of U.S. companies. As such, a data collection program
such as a notification regime could provide necessary visibility into the types of
transactions, as well as the actors in those transactions, that present potential risks to
national security.100
The U.S. Department of Treasury previously proposed draft legislation on this issue—
the “Sensitive Technologies Supply Chain Risk Management Act of 2022.” This draft
lays out a pilot program that would require U.S. companies and individuals to submit
notifications regarding certain outbound investments in China, Russia, and other
“covered states” that involve sensitive technologies.* Although this draft appears to
have lost political momentum, the stated purpose of the program would have been to
better inform the U.S. government’s assessment of the national security concerns
arising from the aforementioned transactions, and, based on those findings, identify
what potential new authorities might be needed to address those risks.101
Others have proposed similar ideas for data collection. A September 2022 report from
the Center for a New American Security (CNAS) and the Atlantic Council calls for a
mandatory notification regime of certain U.S. investments in China. 102 The authors
argue that a notification regime can inform the U.S. government of the proper scope of
an outbound investment mechanism while simultaneously providing necessary
information to support diplomatic outreach to allies to help understand the utility and
need for such tools. The proposed regime would cover any transaction that involves
the acquisition by a U.S. person, including any entity owned or controlled by a U.S.
person, of an equity interest in a Chinese entity. This, as the authors note, would cover
both “smart money”—a term they use to describe investments that convey an
additional benefit beyond mere capital, as well as purely passive investment.103 The
idea of gathering data on the smart money aspect of U.S. outbound investment fits
with our previous discussion of the intangible benefits that come with U.S. VC
investments in China. Indeed, more information is required to better understand what
types of knowledge, connections, know-how, and resources Chinese companies gain

* The term “Covered States” in this context applies to countries referenced in Section 126.1 of the
International Traffic in Arms Regulations.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 38
from U.S. investment beyond dollar amounts. That being said, we acknowledge the
need to balance these data collection efforts with the fact that public disclosure of
investment activities may hurt the competitiveness of U.S. companies; thus, it may be
prudent to find ways to anonymize this data whenever and wherever possible.
In addition, the CNAS/Atlantic Council piece argues that, under the proposed
notification regime, notification should be required for “covered investments made in
any Chinese entity that produces, designs, tests, manufacturers, fabricates, or develops
any item that would be controlled under U.S. export controls if originating in the
United States.”104 If the U.S. government has already decided to restrict the export of
an item for national security or foreign policy reasons, it would make sense to ensure
that U.S. dollars are not flowing into companies that make these items. First, however,
we need to figure out where this is occurring.
3. The Department of Treasury, in conjunction with the interagency, should
expand and revise the scope of the Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial
Complex Companies (CMIC) List.
Although the U.S. government currently does not have the capability to review U.S.
investment into Chinese AI companies, it does already have in place a mechanism to
prevent U.S. capital from flowing into certain swaths of Chinese companies. Under the
Treasury Department, the CMIC List seeks to address the issue of securities
investments in the United States that finance companies linked to China’s military-
industrial complex. It gives the administration the ability to prohibit the purchase or
sale of any publicly traded securities by entities that have been found to operate
(currently or previously) in the defense and related materiel sector or China’s
surveillance technology sector, in addition to those who are owned or controlled by an
entity within those sectors.105 The CMIC List could be used to block U.S. investment
into specific Chinese AI companies that fall within its jurisdiction.
In essence, the CMIC List aims to prevent U.S. persons from buying or providing
investment exposure to Chinese companies deemed by the U.S. government to be part
of China’s military-industrial complex or complicit in surveillance regimes against
minority populations in China.106 As of December 2022, there are 68 entities on the
CMIC List.107
The CMIC List should, at minimum, be expanded beyond publicly traded securities to
include privately-held Chinese companies that can, and do, attract investment,
including U.S. investment. This would also capture JVs and private-sector investments
like VC investments.108 This tool should then be used in cases of U.S. outbound

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 39
investment flowing to problematic actors in China, especially those working in the
defense/military and surveillance industries, like iFlytek, which can be found in our
dataset. This modified list could then be used in the most egregious cases, in
conjunction with the aforementioned data collection regime, to gain a better
perspective of the issues at play.
The CMIC List gives U.S. companies and persons 365 days to divest from an entity
once it is added to the list. Once this period lapses, any purchase or sale of listed
CMICs is prohibited absent authorization from Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets
Control (OFAC).109 Chinese AI companies that appear in our dataset like Yitu
Technology are on the CMIC List, but it is unclear how much this listing has actually
affected Yitu, if at all.110 According to our dataset, San Francisco-based VC firm GC
Capital was a Series C investor in Yitu Technology in 2018.
Several gaps still exist. The CMIC List only prohibits the “purchase for value, or sale” of
publicly traded securities. In other words, privately-held Chinese companies and non-
state-owned enterprises (SOE) are not within the scope, despite some being on the list
anyways. In addition, U.S. persons are still allowed to provide assistance and services
that could allow Chinese firms to circumvent the essence of the CMIC List.
As of December 2022, the CMIC List already includes some privately-held Chinese
firms, such as Yitu Limited (also known as Yitu Technology), Huawei, Inspur Group,
Proven Glory Capital Limited, and more, despite its mandate. In other instances, the
CMIC List contains wholly SOEs that are not traded on any stock market, such as China
Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation, China General Nuclear Power Group,
China National Offshore Oil Corporation, and others. In these cases, the CMIC List is
acting merely as a blacklist.*
To address these gaps, the administration should consider revising the CMIC List
beyond its initial “defense materiel and surveillance” sectors. As of now, the CMIC List
only includes Chinese entities that “operate or have operated in the defense and
related materiel sector or the surveillance technology sector of the economy of the

* The U.S. government could consider moving some of the SOEs on the CMIC List—if not already
listed—to the DOD’s Section 1260H list. However, the 1260H list is limited to Chinese military
companies that are operating directly or indirectly in the United States, so some SOEs may not fall under
this umbrella.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 40
PRC.”111 The scope could be revised to include other Chinese AI companies operating
in sectors critical to national security, as determined by Congress or the administration.
4. Create a mechanism to prevent U.S. investment into Chinese companies on
the Entity List.
Policymakers have expressed frustration with the limitations of the Entity List,
especially as it relates to capital flows into listed entities. In November 2021, a group
of U.S. senators wrote a letter criticizing the U.S. government for doing little to
“impede the flow of U.S. exports and investment to Chinese AI companies with PLA
ties.” In turn, the senators urged the Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry
and Security (BIS) to “take all steps necessary to prevent key technologies from falling
into the hands of the PLA,” including adding the companies listed in previous CSET
reports to the Entity List.112 In addition to U.S. VC firms, many U.S.-backed Chinese VC
firms have invested in Chinese firms that have been blacklisted by the U.S.
government. For instance, Chinese facial recognition firm Yitu Technology received
investments from Sequoia Capital China, ZhenFund, and Hillhouse Capital.113 These
firms have also co-invested alongside U.S. Entity Listed Chinese firms like iFlytek; on
multiple occasions, Hillhouse Capital has invested in Chinese AI companies in the
same transaction as iFlytek.114
There is no element of the Entity List that requires any amount of divestiture from or
limitations on investment into listed entities. As such, U.S. companies that may have
previously invested in Chinese companies before they were added to the Entity List are
not legally obligated to divest from the listed company or organization. For instance,
according to our dataset, Qualcomm Ventures made a corporate round investment into
SenseTime, a Chinese AI startup, in 2017, and invested again in 2018 in Series C.
SenseTime was later added to the Entity List in October 2019 after BIS deemed it to
be engaged in human rights violations and abuses against the Uyghur population in
China’s Xinjiang Province.115 Until December 2022, Qualcomm Ventures still listed
SenseTime as part of its portfolio, although SenseTime’s presence on the Entity List
does prevent Qualcomm from sharing any sensitive technology or information with the
company.116
The Entity List, under BIS, is designed to restrict the export, reexport, and/or transfer of
specified items to specific end-users. This restriction occurs by imposing license
requirements on specific end-users—ranging from companies, government and private
institutions, individuals, and research institutions—for which there is “reasonable cause
to believe . . . that the entity has been involved, is involved, or poses a significant risk of
becoming involved in activities that are contrary to the national security or foreign

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 41
policy interests of the United States.”117 When an entity is added to the Entity List, U.S.
exporters are required to obtain a license if they wish to export to that listed
destination. In short, the Entity List deals with the flow of goods, not the flow of
capital.
The Biden administration should consider adopting a general policy of cross-listing
entities placed on the Entity List and those on an expanded CMIC List. This should, of
course, only be done in instances where the underlying facts and risk assessment
support a listing under each legal authority, as OFAC and BIS operate under different
authorities.118 In addition, the rationale for adding entities to both lists should be
distinct to prevent jurisdictional overreach. Moving forward, a Chinese company could
be added to the Entity List for risk of potential diversion to a military end-user in China,
while simultaneously added to the CMIC List because of a connection to the Chinese
defense sector. This ensures that both listings fall within the jurisdiction of their
various agencies and regulations.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 42
Conclusion
Concerns surrounding the flow of capital between the United States and China will
continue to grow over the next few years. The Biden administration is already working
to outline its specific concerns related to Chinese investment in the United States,
including matters related to supply chain resilience, leadership in emerging
technologies, investments in key industries, and more.119 In Congress, Senators Cornyn
and Casey spent the better parts of 2021 and 2022 advocating for their “National
Critical Capabilites Defense Act,” which aimed to establish an outbound investment
screen for critical capabilities where the United States appears too reliant on China.120
This report aims to identify the main U.S. investors active in the Chinese AI market, the
set of AI companies in China that benefitted from U.S. capital, and the effect these
investment activities and the intangible benefits that emanate from them might have in
the broader scheme of U.S.-China technology competition.
The nature of U.S. outbound investment into Chinese AI companies is incredibly
complex, and it will be critical for U.S. policymakers to temper expectations regarding
the effectiveness of any outbound investment regulation related to emerging
technologies. As this report shows, regulating U.S. outbound investment into China’s
AI ecosystem will unlikely halt China’s AI progress. With AI in particular, the majority
of financial backing comes from domestic Chinese entities. This means that, unlike
export control maneuvers that rely on U.S. dominance in supply chain chokepoints, the
U.S. has very little leverage over China in terms of funding AI development. The
Chinese domestic market is so large that it has the potential to sustain itself in certain
areas. Moreover, Chinese AI companies also attract investment from foreign investors
other than the United States. Any unilateral U.S. action will be weaker without the
help of U.S. allies.
As our data shows, although investors from other countries besides the United States
and China occupy a smaller percentage of investment into China’s AI ecosystem, it will
be vital to work with other countries to ensure that they understand the potential risks
of investing in Chinese high-tech firms. It will also be essential to ensure that they do
not backfill any gaps left by any U.S. firms that choose to invest elsewhere.
This report has just touched the surface of this issue. Although we are able to provide
a baseline assessment of capital flows, several questions remain unanswered. Further
study is required to better understand the specific intangible benefits of U.S.
investment into Chinese tech companies beyond pure capital. This could include
systematic studies on VC mentorship and coaching as well as accelerator and

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 43
incubator programs, beyond the case studies provided in this report. In addition, if the
Biden administration revises any disclosure requirements or implements any data
collection programs, there will be a massive need to study this data over the next three
to five years.
Finally, it is unlikely the U.S. and Chinese capital markets will decouple entirely. Money
will and must continue to flow between the United States and China, as a broader
effort to separate these two economies, without well-scoped objectives, would have
an immense blowback on the global economy. Therefore, if U.S. policymakers assume
that trade and bilateral (and multilateral) investment will continue, they would do well
to first refine their thinking about national security in the context of outbound
investment and, more broadly, technology competition, and then use this
contextualized definition to inform the design and implementation of an outbound
investment screening regime.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 44
Authors
Emily S. Weinstein is a research fellow at CSET, where Ngor Luong is a research
analyst.
Acknowledgements
For their feedback and assistance, the authors would like to thank Catherine Aiken,
Zachary Arnold, Amy Chao, Hanna Dohmen, James Dunham, Rebecca Gelles,
Margarita Konaev, Channing Lee, Cole McFaul, Igor Mikolic-Torreira, Ben Murphy,
Anna Puglisi, and Christian Schoeberl. The authors are especially grateful to Martin
Chorzempa and Sarah Bauerle Danzman for their comprehensive reviews, as well as to
Emily Kilcrease, Kevin Wolf, and Nargiza Salidjanova for their help in thinking through
this complicated subject.
Finally, we thank Matt Mahoney for his fact-checking and Lynne Weil and Shelton
Fitch for their editorial support.

© 2023 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20210067

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 45
Appendix A: Methodology for Identifying AI Companies and Cross-border
AI Investment
To identify AI companies, we ran a regular expression-based search query against the
business descriptions of the target companies in Crunchbase. The results include
companies whose descriptions include either terms associated with specific AI
applications such as “machine learning,” “computer vision,” “TensorFlow,” or generic
AI-related terms such as “artificial intelligence,” “semiconductor.”121
In addition, given that the company business description provided by Crunchbase
appears limited in some cases, we supplement the AI company identification using the
keyword-based method with Crunchbase AI tag. AI companies in our analysis include
companies that CSET or Crunchbase has identified as AI companies.
To test for the degree of Crunchbase’s coverage, we randomly selected one hundred
companies in ITjuzi data and spot-checked against Crunchbase. Sixty-four percent of
the transactions are covered by Crunchbase overall, but when we checked for
transactions used for analysis in this report, 74 percent of the transactions were
covered by Crunchbase. Furthermore, when we validated the missing transactions (16
percent), we found that only two transactions involve U.S. investors, which means that
94 percent of the missing transactions skewed heavily on the transactions that involve
domestic Chinese investors.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 46
Appendix B: Taxonomy of Primary Applications of AI
The following table is an adapted version of the TINA (Taxonomy of INtelligence
Applications) coding guide used by CSET analysts to classify companies’ primary
applications of AI. The notes in the table are illustrative, not exhaustive.
Category Notes
1 Medicine and life
sciences
Includes physiological monitoring, imaging and
diagnostics, public health, and drug discovery.

Companies whose products and services relate to the
back-office business and logistical needs of healthcare
providers—for example, medical billing and coding, or
transcription of doctors’ notes—are classified in
category 11, not category 1.
2 Agriculture Includes agricultural sensing and analytics as well as
autonomous farm machinery.
3 Transportation Includes autonomous vehicles, aerospace, avionics, and
related components. This category also includes
producers of AI-enabled unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAV), drones, and mobile robots for the logistics and
warehousing industries.
4 Process automation Includes companies focused on automating production
and processing of tangible goods, and on monitoring
and maintenance of related equipment.
5 Consumer goods Includes companies that design or produce consumer
goods and devices.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 47
6 Utilities Includes companies whose products serve utility
producers (e.g., oil and gas companies or electric power
producers) or utility consumers. This would include (for
example) companies that produce software to help
businesses understand and reduce their electricity or
water consumption.
7 Construction and field
services
Includes AI-enabled software and equipment for
monitoring construction sites and civil infrastructure
(e.g., power lines and pipelines) and planning
construction projects.
8 Security and biometrics Includes cybersecurity and authentication, including
biometric authentication. Companies focused on facial
recognition, gait recognition, voice printing, and similar
biometric identity resolution techniques are classified in
this category.
9 Finance Includes investing, lending, insurance, cryptocurrency,
credit rating, and personal finance. Companies focused
on accounting are classified in category 11, not
category 9.
10 Sales, retail, and
customer relations
Includes marketing, lead generation, customer service,
and customer relationship management.

This category generally includes sales and marketing
tools even if the tools’ intended users might otherwise
be captured in another category. For example, an online
insurance marketplace or a customer service platform
for use by airlines would be properly classified in this
category, not category 3.
11 Business services and Includes business analytics not captured in category 10,
logistics and supply chain management, human

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 48
analytics resources (including job search websites and recruiting
platforms), enterprise reputation management, and
accounting and legal services. “Business analytics”
means “business intelligence” tools and similar analytic
applications not generally visible to the user’s
customers.

This category also includes back-office tools even if the
tools’ intended users might otherwise be captured in
another category. For example, billing or human
resources software with special features for universities
or hospital systems are generally classified in this
category, because accounting and human resources are
relatively generic functions that exist in many different
types of organizations.
12 Broadcasting and media
production
Includes AI-enabled platforms for recommending and
disseminating digital media.
13 Arts, sports, leisure,
travel, and lifestyle
Includes personal social media platforms.
14 Education Includes AI-enabled instruction and assessment tools.
15 Military, public safety,
and government
Includes companies whose products are designed
specifically for use by governments and militaries or
relate to services strongly associated with governments
(e.g., traffic management).
16 General purpose A catch-all category for companies whose goods and
services are not developed specifically for one of the
above categories, or seem useful for more than one of
the above categories.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 49

Generally, this category includes companies focused on
computing hardware (chips, semiconductors, etc.),
robotics, sensors, cloud computing, networking and
Internet of Things, software development, tools for
cleaning and structuring data, human-computer
interface (including AR/VR), speech and text processing,
and image and video processing—but only when not
tailored to an application described in categories 1-15.
For example, a company that produces sensors
specifically for use in UAVs would be classified in
category 3, not category 16.
17 Diversified/NOS/Unclear Includes companies that cannot reasonably be placed in
any other category, or that lack sufficient information to
categorize.
Source: “Tracking AI Investment: Initial Findings From the Private Markets,” Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, September 2020.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 50
Appendix C: Additional Figures and Tables
This appendix presents additional charts and tables of relevance to this topic.
Table C1: Breakdown of Investment into Chinese AI Companies with U.S. Investor
Participation, 2015-2021

Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.

Table C2: Breakdown of Investment into Chinese AI Companies with Non-U.S. Investor
Participation, 2015-2021

Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 51
Table C3: Target Company Membership in China’s AIIA.
Full Name Common Name Chinese Common Name
Shanghai Tianshu Zhixin
Semiconductor Co. Ltd.

Iluvatar CoreX
上海天数智芯半导体有限公司 (天数智
芯)
Beijing Laiye Network
Technology Co., Ltd.

Laiye
北京来也网络科技有限公司 (来也科技)
Xinjiang Aihua Yingtong
Information Technology Co., Ltd. AIWinn 新疆爱华盈通信息技术有限公司 (爱华
盈通)
Wuhan Cobot Technology Co.,
Ltd. COBOT 武汉库柏特科技有限公司 (库柏特)
Beijing Deepwise Bolian
Technology Co., Ltd. Deepwise 北京深睿博联科技有限责任公司 (深睿
医疗)
Didi Chuxing Technology Co. Ltd. DiDi 滴滴出行 (滴滴)
Liangfengtai (Shanghai)
Information Technology Co., Ltd. HiScene 亮风台（上海）信息科技有限公司 (亮
风台)
Beijing Horizon Information
Technology Co., Ltd. Horizon Robotics 北京地平线信息技术有限公司 (地平线)

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 52
Beijing Infervision Medical
Technology Co., Ltd. Infervision 北京推想科技有限公司 (推想科技)
Beijing Kuaishou Technology Ltd. Kuaishou 北京快手科技有限公司 (快手)
Shenzhen Leishen Intelligent
System Co., Ltd. Leishen Intelligent System 深圳市镭神智能系统有限公司 (镭神智
能)
Hangzhou Lvwan Network
Technology Co., Ltd. Lvwan Technologies 杭州绿湾网络科技有限公司 (绿湾科技)
Beijing Yufanzhi Information
Technology Co., Ltd. Mobvoi (Chumenwenwen) 北京羽扇智信息科技有限公司 (出门问
问)
Qianhai Enterprise Insurance
Technology (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd. Qibot 前海企保科技（深圳）有限公司 (企保
科技)
Shanghai Qiniu Information
Technologies Co., Ltd. Qiniu Cloud 上海七牛信息技术有限公司 (七牛云)
Beijing Circulation Intelligent
Technology Co., Ltd. Recurrent AI 北京睿科伦智能科技有限公司 (循环智
能)
Beijing Roobo Technology Co.,
Ltd. Roobo 北京儒博科技有限公司 (儒博科技)122
SenseTime Group Inc. SenseTime 北京市商汤科技开发有限公司 (商汤科
技)

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 53
Terminus Technologies Group
Co., Ltd. Terminus Technologies 特斯联科技集团有限公司 (特斯联)
Beijing Unisound Information
Technology Co., Ltd. Unisound 北京云知声信息技术有限公司 (云知声)
Shanghai Yitu Network
Technology Co., Ltd. YITU Technology 上海依图网络科技有限公司 (依图科技)
Shenzhen Zhuiyi Technology Co.,
Ltd. Zhuiyi 深圳追一科技有限公司 (追一科技)
Source: CSET AIIA Data, Crunchbase.123

Figure C4: Percentage of Chinese-bound AI transactions with U.S. investors by
investment stages, 2015-2021

Source: CSET analysis of Crunchbase.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 54

Endnotes
1 Congress.gov. “Text - H.R.1093 - 117th Congress (2021-2022): Stop Funding the PLA Act.” February
18, 2021, https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/house-bill/1093/text; “Rubio Demands Biden
Administration Protect Military Retirement Funds from China,” Marco Rubio, U.S. Senator for Florida,
August 4, 2022, https://www.rubio.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/2022/8/rubio-demands-biden-
administration-protect-military-retirement-funds-from-china.
2 “Implementation of Additional Export Controls: Certain Advanced Computing and Semiconductor
Manufacturing Items; Supercomputer and Semiconductor End Use; Entity List Modification,” Bureau of
Industry and Security, U.S. Department of Commerce, October 13, 2022,
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/10/13/2022-21658/implementation-of-additional-
export-controls-certain-advanced-computing-and-semiconductor.
3 “Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan at the Special Competitive Studies Project Global
Emerging Technologies Summit,” White House Briefing Room, September 16, 2022,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2022/09/16/remarks-by-national-
security-advisor-jake-sullivan-at-the-special-competitive-studies-project-global-emerging-
technologies-summit/.
4 “FDI in Figures,” OECD, April 2022, https://www.oecd.org/investment/investment-policy/FDI-in-
Figures-April-2022.pdf; “News Release: Direct Investment by Country and Industry, 2021,” Bureau of
Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce, July 21, 2022,
https://www.oecd.org/investment/investment-policy/FDI-in-Figures-April-2022.pdf; “Direct Investment
by Country and Industry, 2021,” Bureau of Economic Analysis, July 2021,
https://www.bea.gov/sites/default/files/2022-07/dici0722.pdf.
5 Sarah Bauerle-Danzman and Emily Kilcrease, “Sand in the Silicon: Designing an Outbound Investment
Controls Mechanism,” Atlantic Council and the Center for a New American Security, September 2022,
https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-reports/issue-brief/sand-in-the-silicon-designing-an-
outbound-investment-controls-mechanism/.
6 The “Internet +” Action Plan includes the first formal mention of AI and identifies 11 specific actions for
technological transformation, PRC State Council, “State Council’s Guidelines on Positively Promoting
‘Internet +’ Action,” July 4, 2015.
7 “Xi Jinping: Promote the healthy development of my country’s new generation of artificial intelligence”
[习近平：推动我国新一代人工智能健康发展], Xinhua News, October 31, 2018, https://perma.cc/PSC4-
TVGG; and Elsa Kania and Rogier Creemers, “Xi Jinping Calls for ‘Healthy Development’ of AI
[Translation],” New America, November 5, 2018, https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-
initiative/digichina/blog/xi-jinping-calls-for-healthy-development-of-ai-translation/.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 55

8 Major Richard Uber, “China’s Artificial Intelligence Ecosystem,” National Intelligence University, 2021,
https://ni-u.edu/wp/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/Uber_Monograph_DNI2021_02261.pdf.
9 “Notice of the State Council on Issuing the New Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan”
[国务院关于印发新一代人工智能发展规划的通知], PRC State Council, 2017, https://perma.cc/B9ZR-5LQL;
and Graham Webster, Rogier Creemers, Paul Triolo, and Elsa Kania, “Full Translation: China’s ‘New
Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan’ [2017],” New America, August 1, 2017,
https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/full-translation-chinas-new-
generation-artificial-intelligence-development-plan-2017/.
10 “Notice of the State Council on Issuing the New Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan.”
11 “High-tech industries lead Beijing’s economic growth” [高精尖产业领跑北京经济增长], Beijing Daily
rehosted by the PRC State Council, May 24, 2019, https://perma.cc/VY65-7KNR; and “Consolidate the
cornerstone of scientific and technological innovation and support self-reliance and self-improvement in
science and technology—New achievements have been made in the construction of Beijing Science and
Technology Innovation Center” [夯筑科技创新基石，支撑科技自立自强——北京科技创新中心建设取得新
成效], Ministry of Science and Technology, January 18, 2021, https://perma.cc/T6UH-KY7K.
12 “High-tech industries lead Beijing’s economic growth,” Beijing Daily rehosted by the PRC State
Council; and “Consolidate the cornerstone of scientific and technological innovation and support self-
reliance and self-improvement in science and technology—New achievements have been made in the
construction of Beijing Science and Technology Innovation Center,” Ministry of Science and Technology;
and “Beijing builds a new highland for artificial intelligence industry” [北京打造人工智能产业新高地],
Xinhua News, November 22, 2022, https://perma.cc/TR89-S9QY.
13 Graham Webster, Rogier Creemers, Paul Triolo, and Elsa Kania, “Full Translation: China’s ‘New
Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan’ (2017),” New America, August 1, 2017,
https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/full-translation-chinas-new-
generation-artificial-intelligence-development-plan-2017/.
14 “Catalog of Industries Encouraging Foreign Investment” [鼓励外商投资产业目录], National
Development and Reform Commission of China, 2022, https://perma.cc/R2TL-XREQ.
15 “China private equity and venture capital: too big to ignore,” Mercer, 2021,
https://www.mercer.com/content/dam/mercer/attachments/global/gl-2021-6011825b-we-china-
private-equity.pdf.
16 “China private equity and venture capital: too big to ignore.”
17 Dilek Çetindamar, “The growth of venture capital: a cross-cultural comparison,” Praeger, New York,
2003, https://research.sabanciuniv.edu/id/eprint/20048/; Anton Malkin, “China’s Experience in Building a

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 56

Venture Capital Sector,” CIGI Papers No. 248 — January 2021, Centre for International Governance
Innovation, https://www.cigionline.org/static/documents/documents/no.248_0.pdf.
18 For more information, see Yiping Huang, Xun Wang, and Anqian Huang, “Promoting High-Quality
Growth Through Financial Reform in the People’s Republic of China,” ADB East Asia Working Paper
Series, December 2021, https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/760726/eawp-043-high-
quality-growth-financial-reform-prc.pdf.
19 Ngor Luong, Zachary Arnold, and Ben Murphy, “Understanding Chinese Government Guidance Funds:
An Analysis of Chinese-Language Sources,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, March 2021,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-Understanding-Chinese-Government-
Guidance-Funds.pdf.
20 Several administrations from both political parties emphasized the benefits of U.S. investment in
China. For more information, please see: Robert Sutter, “The Obama Administration and US Policy in
Asia,” Contemporary Southeast Asia Vol. 31, No. 2, August 2009, pg. 189-216,
https://www.jstor.org/stable/41487382; and Ankit Panda, “Bush Gave China Permanent Normal Trade
Relations Status With the US 15 Years Ago. What Did That Change?” The Diplomat, December 2016,
https://thediplomat.com/2016/12/bush-gave-china-permanent-normal-trade-relations-status-with-the-
us-15-years-ago-what-did-that-change/; and Nancy Bernkopf Tucker, “A Precarious Blanace: Clinton
and China,” Current History Vol. 97 No. 620, September 1998, pg. 248-249,
https://www.jstor.org/stable/45317828; and “Full Text of Clinton’s Speech on China Trade Bill,” New
York Times Archive, March 2000,
https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/library/world/asia/030900clinton-china-text.html.
21 Replication data and code are available at https://github.com/georgetown-cset/outbound_investment.
22 “Information sheet of all artificial intelligence companies and investment and financing events” [人工
智能全部公司及投融资事件信息表], ITJuzi,
https://detail.youzan.com/show/goods?from_source=gbox_seo&alias=2ody3gjl9lre2; additionally, the AI
investment transactions not covered in Crunchbase but found in ITJuzi skewed towards domestic
Chinese investors.
23 For more information on Crunchbase’s industry tags, please see: “What Industries are included in
Crunchbase,” Crunchbase, 2020, https://support.crunchbase.com/hc/en-us/articles/360043146954; and
“How are industries organized?” Crunchbase, 2020, https://support.crunchbase.com/hc/en-
us/articles/360043671353-How-are-industries-organized-.
24 For more details on the methodology, see Zachary Arnold, Ilya Rahkovsky, and Tina Huang, “Tracking
AI Investment: Initial Findings From the Private Markets,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology,
September 2020, https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-Tracking-AI-Investment.pdf,
33.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 57

25 Chad Bray, “Philips to Sell Majority Stake in Lumileds After Earlier Deal Scrapped,” The New York
Times, December 12, 2016, https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/12/business/dealbook/philips-lumileds-
china-apollo-cfius.html; For more information, see Tracking AI Investment, 36.
26 Arif Khurshed, Abdulkadir Mohamed, Armin Schwienbacher, Fan Wang, “Do venture capital firms
benefit from international syndicates?” Journal of International Business Studies, 51, January 2020,
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1057/s41267-019-00296-8.
27 James A. Brander, Raphael Amit, Werner Antweiler, “Venture-Capital Syndication: Improved Venture
Selection vs. The Value-Added Hypothesis,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 11 (3),
2002, https://repository.upenn.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1357&context=mgmt_papers.
28 To categorize the AI applications, we used TINA (Taxonomy of INtelligence Applications) coding
guide; see Appendix B for more details.
29 Semiconductors, especially more specialized “AI chips,” are essential for cost-effectively
implementing AI at scale, as attempting to deliver the same AI application using older AI chips or
general-purpose chips can cost tens to thousands of times more. For more information on AI chips, see:
Saif M. Khan and Alexander Mann, “AI Chips: What They Are and Why They Matter,” CSET, April 2020,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/ai-chips-what-they-are-and-why-they-matter/.
30 Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian, “Beijing is creating a digital surveillance-based governance model,” Axios
China, September 6, 2022, https://www.axios.com/2022/09/06/beijing-digital-surveillance-governance-
model; and Dahlia Peterson and Samantha Hoffman, “Geopolitical Implications of AI and Digital
Surveillance Adoption,” Foreign Policy at Brookings, Brookings Institution, June 2022,
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2022/06/FP_20220621_surveillance_exports_peterson_hoffman_v2.pdf; Toni
Campbell, “SenseTime and Public Safety,” Harvard Technology and Operations Management, November
18, 2018, https://d3.harvard.edu/platform-rctom/submission/sensetime-and-public-safety/.
31 Emily S. Weinstein, “Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic Security and Review Commission on
‘U.S. Investment in China’s Capital Markets and Military-Industrial Complex’,” Center for Security and
Emerging Technology, March 19, 2021, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/emily-weinsteins-
testimony-before-the-u-s-china-economic-and-security-review-commission/.
32 Ngor Luong and Zachary Arnold, “China’s Artificial Intelligence Industry Alliance: Understanding
China’s AI Strategy Through Industry Alliances,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, May
2021, https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-Chinas-Artificial-Intelligence-Industry-
Alliance-1.pdf.
33 “Laiye Technology is on the list 【AI China · TOP 30 Strongest Artificial Intelligence Company】” [来
也科技上榜【AI 中国 · 最强人工智能公司 TOP 30】], Laiye company website, September 26, 2021,

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 58

https://perma.cc/EV9A-6DGZ; “Introduction to Talent Training System” [人才培训体系介绍], Artificial
Intelligence Industry Alliance (AIIA), September 29, 2018, https://perma.cc/KN3A-D238
https://perma.cc/EV9A-6DGZ; https://perma.cc/KN3A-D238.
34 “Special fund support policy for the development of strategic emerging industries in Shenzhen” [深圳
市战略性新兴产业发展专项资金扶持政策], Commerce Bureau of Shenzhen Municipality, December 14,
2018, https://perma.cc/CBP8-PW8A; and Zhuiyi Technology company website, https://perma.cc/RL6S-
M46G.
35 The definitions of private equity and venture capital investment are adopted from the Center for
Private Equity and Venture Capital at the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth, see further “Glossary,”
the Center for Private Equity and Venture Capital at the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth, 2021,
https://cpevc.tuck.dartmouth.edu/uploads/centers/files/NVCA_2021_Yearbook_Glossary_section.pdf.
36 “Through the cold winter, China's AI industry will receive a nearly $400 billion investment in 2021｜
ITjuzi ‘China Artificial Intelligence Venture Capital Data Report’ released” [穿越寒冬, 2021年中国AI产业
获近4000亿投资｜IT桔子《中国人工智能创投数据报告》发布], WeChat, March 31, 2022
https://perma.cc/JVK8-7VKD.
37 Chuanrong Wu, Xiaoming Yang, Veronika Lee, and Mark E. McMurtrey, “Influence of Venture Capital
and Knowledge Transfer on Innovation Performance in the Big Data Environment,” Journal of Risk and
Financial Management 2019, 12, 188, doi:10.3390/jrfm1204018; this research was funded by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NFSC), an institution directly under the jurisdiction of the
PRC State Council, and the Key Scientific Research Fund of Hunan Provincial Education Department of
China.
38 Roberta Dessí and Nina Yin, “Venture Capital and Knowledge Transfer,” June 28, 2015, Available at
SSRN: Dessi, Roberta and Yin, Nina, Venture Capital and Knowledge Transfer (June 28, 2015). Available
at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2642596 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2642596.
39 Sarah Bauerle Danzman, “Toward a Balanced Outbound Investment Screening Regime,” Testimony
before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, Hearing on “Examining Outbound
Investment,” September 29, 2022,
https://www.banking.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Danzman%20Testimony%209-29-22.pdf.
40 Roberta Dessí and Nina Yin, “Venture Capital and Knowledge Transfer,” June 28, 2015, Available at
SSRN: Dessi, Roberta and Yin, Nina, Venture Capital and Knowledge Transfer (June 28, 2015).
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2642596 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2642596.
41 Chad Bray, “Philips to Sell Majority Stake in Lumileds After Earlier Deal Scrapped,” The New York
Times, December 12, 2016, https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/12/business/dealbook/philips-lumileds-
china-apollo-cfius.html; “Philips’ $3.3 billion sale of Lumileds fails on U.S. objections,” Reuters, January

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 59

22, 2016, https://www.reuters.com/article/philips-lumileds-sale-idUKL8N1560CW; Paul Mozer and
Jane Perlez, “Concern Grows in U.S. Over China’s Drive to Make Chips,” The New York Times, February
4, 2016, https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/05/technology/concern-grows-in-us-over-chinas-drive-to-
make-chips.html.
42 Daniel N. Anziska and Megan Conway Rahman, “The CFIUS Process Is Becoming More Challenging
For Foreign Investors,” Troutman Pepper, October 10, 2017, https://www.troutman.com/insights/the-
cfius-process-is-becoming-more-challenging-for-foreign-investors.html; and Kevin Granville, “Cfius,
Powerful and Unseen, Is a Gatekeeper on Major Deals,” The New York Times, March 5, 2018,
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/05/business/what-is-cfius.html.
43 “GSR Capital” LinkedIn, https://www.linkedin.com/company/gsr-capital/about/.
44 “Offerings,” Chinaaccelerator, https://chinaccelerator.com/offerings/.
45 “Program,” HAX, https://hax.co/program.
46 “FAQ,” HAX, https://hax.co/faq.
47 Rita Liao, “SoftBank leads $15M round for China’s industrial robot maker Youibot,” TechCrunch, May
2021, https://techcrunch.com/2021/05/06/youibot-funding/; and “HAX Portfolio: Youibot,” HAX,
https://hax.co/portfolio/youibot; and Dylan Crow, “YouiBot Closes Second Series B, Bringing 2021
Financial Total to Over USD $62M,” HAX, December 2021, https://hax.co/blog/youibot-closes-second-
series-b-bringing-2021-financing-total-to-over-usd-62m.
48 Alan Boyle, “Clobotics raises $5M and opens office in Seattle area for drone data monitoring,”
GeekWire, June 26, 2017, https://www.geekwire.com/2017/china-based-clobotics-raises-5m-opens-
seattle-office-drone-data-monitoring/; and “George Yan: From Microsoft China to Clobotics,” Evolving
for the Next Billion by GGV Capital, April 14, 2020, https://nextbn.ggvc.com/podcast/s1-ep-27-george-
yan-from-microsoft-china-to-clobotics/.
49 “Resources for Investors,” Y Combinator,
https://www.ycombinator.com/investors#:~:text=Since%202005%2C%20Y%20Combinator%20has,%2
5%20%2D%202%25%20acceptance%20rate.
50 Donovan Jones, “Baidu Acquires Raven Tech to Ramp Up Smart Home Efforts,” Seeking Alpha,
February 21, 2017, https://seekingalpha.com/article/4047919-baidu-acquires-raven-tech-to-ramp-up-
smart-home-efforts; and Jon Russell, “Baidu furthers AI push with acquisition of digital assistant startup
Raven Tech,” TechCrunch, February 16, 2017, https://techcrunch.com/2017/02/16/baidu-raven-tech/.
51 “Sequoia Capital launched Incubation Center at China ZhangJiang AI Island,” ChinaPOTION, August
16, 2020, https://chinapotion.medium.com/sequoia-capital-launched-incubation-center-at-china-

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 60

zhangjiang-ai-island-2d7bac71092f; Ding Yi, “Sequoia Capital Opens Its First Tech Incubation Center in
Shanghai,” Caixing Global, July 9, 2020, https://chinapotion.medium.com/sequoia-capital-launched-
incubation-center-at-china-zhangjiang-ai-island-2d7bac71092f; https://www.caixinglobal.com/2020-
07-09/sequoia-capital-opens-its-first-tech-incubation-center-in-shanghai-101577714.html.
52 “Sequoia’s first industrial incubation center officially opened in Shanghai, with a deep focus on digital
intelligence” [红杉首个产业孵化中心在沪正式启用 深度布局数字智能], Sequoia Capital,
https://perma.cc/CE76-SRF4.
53 “Stepping Stones for Entrepreneurs” [做产业者的垫脚石], Zhenfund, https://perma.cc/H4NX-RLFX; and
“Decoding ZhenFund: Not afraid of making mistakes and casting a wide net, it has the closest
cooperation with Sequoia Capital and Matrix Partners China” [解码真格基金：不怕错投广撒网 与红杉资
本、经纬中国合作最为密切], ChinaVenture [投中网], January 3, 2018, https://perma.cc/33HR-JYMC.
54 “Please check the GGV 2020 answer sheet!” [这份GGV的2020年答卷, 请查收 !], GGV Capital,
February 25, 2021, https://perma.cc/Z5XG-S6VZ.
55 “Please check the GGV 2020 answer sheet!” [这份GGV的2020年答卷, 请查收 !], GGV Capital.
https://perma.cc/Z5XG-S6VZ.
56 VC is usually excluded from FDI; see: Sara Bauerle Danzman, Testimony before the Senate
Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Development, Hearing on “Examining Outbound Investment:
Toward a Balanced Outbound Investment Screening Regime,” September 29, 2022,
https://www.banking.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Danzman%20Testimony%209-29-22.pdf.
57 Massimo G. Colombo, Terttu Luukkonen, and Philippe Mustar, “Venture capital and high-tech start-
ups,” Venture Capital Vol. 12, No. 4, October 2010, pg. 261-266,
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/13691066.2010.486153.
58 “Why was 150 million invested in these 6 companies? Revealing Sequoia Capital’s detailed layout of
medical AI” [1.5亿为何投给这6家公司? 揭红杉资本对医疗AI布局详图], Sina Tech, October 19, 2017,
https://perma.cc/6QPM-7B29.
59 According to its official website, CDRF is a “public research foundation initiated by the Development
Research Center of the [PRC] State Council.” For more information, see: “Who We Are,” China
Development Research Foundation, https://cdrf-en.cdrf.org.cn/jj.jhtml.
60 “CDRF Collaborates with Sequoia to Launch Application Research Report on AI in Healthcare,”
Sequoia Capital China, 2020, https://perma.cc/H2CT-CVRN.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 61

61 “Why was 150 million invested in these 6 companies? Revealing Sequoia Capital’s detailed layout of
medical AI.”
62 Henry Chesbrough, “Making Sense of Corporate Venture Capital,” Harvard Business Review, March
2002, https://hbr.org/2002/03/making-sense-of-corporate-venture-capital.
63 “Corporate Venture Capital vs. Venture Capital, what’s the difference?” TechMind, April 10, 2019,
https://techmind.vc/en/corporate-venture-capital-vs-venture-capital-whats-the-difference/.
64 McNamara subsequently left Intel in January 2020 and is no longer on the board of directors. See:
Dylan Martin: “AMD Hires Top Intel Exec Dan McNamara To Grow EPYC Business,” CRN, January 16,
2020, https://www.crn.com/news/components-peripherals/amd-hires-top-intel-exec-dan-mcnamara-
to-grow-epyc-business.
65 “Horizon Robotics Unveils Journey 5 Processor,” Horizon Robotics, August 5, 2021,
https://en.horizon.ai/resources/news/horizon-robotics-unveils-journey-5-processor-2/; There are 6 levels
of autonomous driving ranging from Level 0 to Level 5. Level 4 refers to High Driving Automation,
meaning that the vehicle does not require human interaction in most circumstances, but a human still
has the option to manually override. For more information, see: “The 6 Levels of Vehicle Autonomy
Explained,” Synopsys, https://www.synopsys.com/automotive/autonomous-driving-levels.html#e.
66 Rita Liao, “Horizon Robotics, a Chinese rival to Nvidia, seeks to raise over $700M,” TechCrunch,
December 22, 2020, https://techcrunch.com/2020/12/21/horizon-robotics-700-million-funding/; and
“Highway Autonomous Driving with C-V2X and Automotive Perception,” Horizon Robotics,
https://en.horizon.ai/resources/case-studies/case-study-audi/.
67 “New automated driving joint venture between CARIAD and Horizon Robotics,” CARIAD, October 13,
2022, https://cariad.technology/de/en/news/stories/joint-venture-cariad-horizon-robotics.html; and
Victoria Waldersee, “Volkswagen to take 60% stake in $2 bln tech JV with China’s Horizon Robotics,”
Reuters, October 13, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/business/autos-transportation/volkswagen-take-
60-stake-tech-joint-venture-with-chinas-horizon-robotics-2022-10-13/.
68 “Volkswagen no longer investing in self-driving startup Argo AI,” Reuters, October 26, 2022,
https://www.reuters.com/business/autos-transportation/volkswagen-no-longer-investing-self-driving-
startup-argo-ai-2022-10-26/.
69 “New Mobileye EyeQ Ultra will Enable Consumer AVs,” Intel Newsroom, January 4, 2022,
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/newsroom/news/mobileye-ces-2022-tech-news.html.
70 Robert Castellano, “Intel’s Mobileye: Strong Headwinds From Competitor SoCs, Particularly in China,”
Seeking Alpha, December 13, 2021, https://seekingalpha.com/article/4474916-intel-mobileye-strong-
headwinds-china-soc-competitors; and Li Fusheng, “Horizon launches latest chip to take on global

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 62

rivals,” China Daily, July 30, 2021,
https://global.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202107/30/WS6103c1e6a310efa1bd6659b4.html.
71 Phate Zhang, “Analysts explain why Li Auto ditches Mobileye in favor of local self-driving chip,”
CNEVPost, May 28, 2021, https://cnevpost.com/2021/05/28/analysts-explain-why-li-auto-ditches-
mobileye-in-favor-of-local-self-driving-chip/.
72 “Tangjiawan AI startup Eeasy Tech backed up by Intel,” City of Zhuhai News, April 17, 2019,
https://perma.cc/23HA-8XVX.
73 “What we do,” State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council,
updated July 17, 2018, https://perma.cc/C72D-X7M5.
74 “Reconova Receives Investment from Intel Capital to Help Accelerate AI Implementation,” Intel
Capital, May 8, 2018, https://www.intelcapital.com/reconova-receives-investment-from-intel-capital-to-
help-accelerate-ai-implementation/.
75 “Reconova Receives Investment from Intel Capital to Help Accelerate AI Implementation,” Intel
Capital, May 8, 2018, https://www.intelcapital.com/reconova-receives-investment-from-intel-capital-to-
help-accelerate-ai-implementation/.
76 “HuiyiHuiying Closes Funding Round Led by Intel Capital,” PRNewswire via Huiyihuiying, November
7, 2018, https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/huiyihuiying-closes-funding-round-led-by-intel-
capital-300745347.html.
77 Jingwen Jia, “Collaboration, Innovation and Acceleration: Huiying Medical Takes on Digital Health &
Medical Imaging AI,” Intel, 2019, https://builders.intel.com/ai/blog/huiying-medical-digital-health-
imaging-ai.
78 “KFBIO Accelerates Tuberculosis Detection with AI,” Intel,
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/customer-spotlight/stories/kfbio-ai-customer-story.html.
79 “International Trade Alert: BIS Imposes New Controls to Limit the Development and Production of
Advanced Computing and Semiconductor Capabilities in China,” Akin Gump Strauss Hauer and Feld
LLP, October 27, 2022, https://www.akingump.com/en/news-insights/bis-imposes-new-controls-to-
limit-the-development-and-production-of-advanced-computing-and-semiconductor-capabilities-in-
china.html.
80 “Qualcomm Ventures: Two Decades of Driving Innovation in Mobile,” Qualcomm Ventures, November
25, 2020, https://www.qualcommventures.com/insights/blog/qualcomm-ventures-two-decades-of-
driving-innovation-in-mobile/.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 63

81 “Qualcomm Ventures: Two Decades of Driving Innovation in Mobile,” Qualcomm Ventures, November
25, 2020, https://www.qualcommventures.com/insights/blog/qualcomm-ventures-two-decades-of-
driving-innovation-in-mobile/.
82 “Qualcomm Ventures: Two Decades of Driving Innovation in Mobile,” Qualcomm Ventures.
83 “Qualcomm Commits Up To $150 Million to Strategic Venture Fund in China,” Qualcomm, July 22,
2014, https://www.qualcomm.com/news/releases/2014/07/qualcomm-commits-150-million-strategic-
venture-fund-china.
84 “Qualcomm Commits Up To $150 Million to Strategic Venture Fund in China,” Qualcomm.
85 Song Mao, “The Evolutionary Path of AI: Lessons from China,” Qualcomm Ventures, August 19, 2021,
https://www.qualcommventures.com/insights/blog/the-evolutionary-path-of-ai-lessons-from-china/.
86 “Haomo.Ai,” Crunchbase, https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/haomo-ai; “Chinese Autonomous
Driving Startup Raises $157 Million From Hillhouse, Meituan,” Reuters rehosted by U.S. News and
World Report, December 21, 2021, https://www.usnews.com/news/technology/articles/2021-12-
21/chinese-autonomous-driving-startup-raises-157-million-from-hillhouse-meituan.
87 “7Invensun,” Crunchbase, https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/7invensun.
88 “7Invensun was invited to participate in the 2020 Qualcomm XR Ecological Partner Conference” [七鑫
易维受邀参加2020 Qualcomm XR 生态合作伙伴大会], 7Invensun, September 6, 2020,
https://perma.cc/UY43-ARAW.
89 “Beijing Aerospace Intelligence and Information Research Institute—Appearance at the 2020 China
(Beijing) Military Expo” [北京航天情报与信息研究所—将亮相2020中国 (北京) 军博会], Beijing Military
Expo, https://perma.cc/Z26S-P6EV.
90 Liu Jinxing, Li Kemin, and Fu Yang, “Design scheme of an in-vehicle fatigued driving warning system”
[一种车载疲劳驾驶预警系统设计方案], Electroacoustic Technology No. 9, 2018, https://archive.ph/a1b6T;
Liu Jinxing, Fu Yang, Li Kemin, “Facial recognition near-infrared camera system based on USB3.0
transmission,” Electroacoustic Technology, August 2018, https://archive.ph/PZICi.
91 “Typical Uses” [典型案例], 7Invensun, https://perma.cc/T53Y-XAGU.
92 The example on the 7Invensun website mentions the Aerospace First Academy (航天一院)—an alias
for the China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology (CALT), which is a subsidiary of state-owned
China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation (CASC). CALT has been one of the primary
contributors to the development of China’s Long March family of rockets. For more information on CALT,
see: Mark Stokes, Gabriel Alvarado, Emily Weinstein, and Ian Easton, “China’s Space and Counterspace

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 64

Capabilities and Activities,” U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, March 30, 2020,
https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2020-05/China_Space_and_Counterspace_Activities.pdf.
93 A “beneficial owner” refers to a person or entity who ultimately owns or controls an interest in a legal
entity, such as a security, property, or interest in a trust. “Beneficial owner,” Legal Information Institute,
Cornell University, https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/beneficial_owner.
94 William D. Bygrave, “The structure of the investment networks of venture capital firms,” Journal of
Business Venturing, Vol. 3 Issue 2, Spring 1988,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/0883902688900237.
95 Bygrave, “The structure of the investment networks of venture capital firms.”
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/0883902688900237.
96 Kevin J. Wolf, Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing
on “U.S.-China Relations in 2021: Emerging Risks,” Panel III: “Assessing Export Controls and Foreign
Investment Review,” September 8, 2021, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2021-
08/Kevin_Wolf_Testimony.pdf; Tim Hwang and Emily S. Weinstein, “Decoupling in Strategic
Technologies: From Satellites to Artificial Intelligence,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology,
July 2022, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/decoupling-in-strategic-technologies/; and Bauerle-
Danzman and Kilcrease, “Sand in the Silicon: Designing an Outbound Investment Controls Mechanism,
https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/Sand_in_the_Silicon-
Designing_an_Outbound_Investment_Controls_Mechanism..pdf.
97 “FACT SHEET: President Biden Signs Executive Order to Ensure Robust Reviews of Evolving National
Security Risks by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States,” The White House,
September 15, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/09/15/fact-
sheet-president-biden-signs-executive-order-to-ensure-robust-reviews-of-evolving-national-security-
risks-by-the-committee-on-foreign-investment-in-the-united-states/.
98 “Modernizing the SEC’s Definition of Venture Capital Fund,” National Venture Capital Association
(NVCA), February 2020, https://www.sec.gov/spotlight/sbcfac/2020-02-04-presentation-vc-fund-
definition.pdf; and Stephen Matza, Kate Bridge, Maria LoPreiato-Bergan, and Cole Sauers, “What is an
Exempt Reporting Advisor?” AngelList, https://learn.angellist.com/articles/exempt-reporting-advisor;
and Morgan Lewis, “Venture Capital and Private Equity Funds,” 2015, https://www.morganlewis.com/-
/media/files/special-topics/vcpefdeskbook/regulation/vcpefdeskbook_securitieslawoverview.pdf.
99 “Private Equity: Fund formation and transactions in 42 jurisdictions worldwide,” Getting the Deal
Through, 2009, https://www.stblaw.com/docs/default-source/cold-fusion-existing-
content/publications/pub849.pdf?sfvrsn=2.

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 65

100 Bauerle-Danzman and Kilcrease, “Sand in the Silicon: Designing an Outbound Investment Controls
Mechanism.
101 “Christian C. Davis, Kevin J. Wolf, Joseph G. Fawkner, Clete R. Willems, Katherine P. Padgett, “U.S.
Policy-makers Consider Alternatives for Outbound Investment Review,” Akin Gump Strauss Hauer &
Feld LLP, May 5, 2022, https://www.akingump.com/en/news-insights/us-policymakers-consider-
alternatives-for-outbound-investment-review.html; and Darshak Dholakia, Betsy Feuerstein, Hrishikesh
Hari, Brooklynn Moore, Jeremy Zucker, “Proposed Outbound Investment Review Legislation Has
Sweeping Extraterritorial Scope,” JDSupra, August 19, 2022,
https://www.jdsupra.com/legalnews/proposed-outbound-investment-review-5864076/.
102 Bauerle-Danzman and Kilcrease argue that these “certain investments” should include: “Investments
made in any Chinese entity that produces, designs, tests, manufactures, fabricates, or develops any item
or items that would be controlled under US export controls if originating in the United States.”
103 Bauerle-Danzman and Kilcrease, “Sand in the Silicon: Designing an Outbound Investment Controls
Mechanism.”
104 Bauerle-Danzman and Kilcrease, “Sand in the Silicon: Designing an Outbound Investment Controls
Mechanism.”
105 “Executive Order Addressing the Threat from Securities Investments that Finance Certain Companies
of the People’s Republic of China,” The White House, 2021,
https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/126/eo_cmic.pdf.
106 Alison J. Stafford Powell and Alexandre Lamy, “US Government Issues Executive Order Amending
Ban on US Persons Purchasing Securities of Certain Chinese Companies,” Sanctions & Export Controls
Update, Baker McKenzie, June 10, 2021, https://sanctionsnews.bakermckenzie.com/us-government-
issues-executive-order-amending-ban-on-us-persons-purchasing-securities-of-certain-chinese-
companies/; and “International Trade Alert: Biden Administration Revamps Sanctions Program Targeting
Publicly Traded Securities of Designated Chinese Military Companies,” Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld
LLP, June 7, 2021, https://www.akingump.com/a/web/7yixJx7xPVzh7vTPwiWDYF/2LHFPt/biden-
admin-revamps-sanctions-program.pdf.
107 “Consolidated Screening List Search,” International Trade Administration, U.S. Department of
Commerce, https://www.trade.gov/data-visualization/csl-search.
108 Bauerle-Danzman and Kilcrease, “Sand in the Silicon: Designing an Outbound Investment Controls
Mechanism.”
109 “International Trade Alert: Biden Administration Revamps Sanctions Program Targeting Publicly
Traded Securities of Designated Chinese Military Companies,” Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP,

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 66

https://www.akingump.com/en/news-insights/biden-administration-revamps-sanctions-program-
targeting-publicly-traded-securities-of-designated-chinese-military-companies.html; and “Frequently
Asked Questions,” Chinese Military Companies Sanctions, U.S. Department of Treasury,
https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/faqs/added/2022-06-01.
110 Yitu is listed on the NS-CMIC List as “Yitu Limited.”
111 “Executive Order Addressing the Threat from Securities Investments that Finance Certain Companies
of the People’s Republic of China,” The White House,
https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/126/eo_cmic.pdf.
112 “Cotton, Colleagues Call on Secretary Raimondo to Blacklist Companies that Provide AI Technology
to the Chinese Military,” Tom Cotton, Senator for Arkansas, November 16, 2021,
https://www.cotton.senate.gov/news/press-releases/cotton-colleagues-call-on-secretary-raimondo-to-
blacklist-companies-that-provide-ai-technology-to-the-chinese-military.
113 “Ji Yue explains Sequoia China’s AI layout in detail: nearly 30 companies have been invested in, and
there are only two core standards” [计越详解红杉中国AI布局: 已投资近30家, 核心标准只有两个], Sequoia
China, https://perma.cc/26JT-2FCF; and Reuters Staff, “U.S. adds eight Chinese firms to trade blacklist,”
Reuters, October 8, 2019, https://www.reuters.com/article/usa-trade-china-blacklist/u-s-adds-eight-
chinese-firms-to-trade-blacklist-idINKBN1WN174; and Winne Liu, “Hillhouse leads $55m round for
China AI developer Yitu,” Asian Venture Capital Journal, May 16, 2017,
https://www.avcj.com/avcj/news/3004936/hillhouse-leads-usd55m-round-for-china-ai-developer-yitu.
114 For example, according to Crunchbase, both Hillhouse Capital and iFlytek (out of 8 investors)
invested in the Seed round for VirtAI Tech in 2020, and in 2021, both (out of 10 investors) invested in
the Series C round for Guoyi Quantum.
115 “Addition of Certain Entities to the Entity List,” A Rule by the Bureau of Industry and Security, U.S.
Department of Commerce, October 9, 2019,
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2019/10/09/2019-22210/addition-of-certain-entities-to-
the-entity-list.
116 “Our Portfolio,” Qualcomm Ventures, https://www.qualcommventures.com/portfolio/.
117 Eric L. Hirschhorn, Brian J. Egan, and Edward J. Krauland, U.S. Export Controls and Economic
Sanctions, Oxford University Press, 2022, DOI: 10.1093/ oso/ 9780197582411.003.0001.
118 Bauerle-Danzman and Kilcrease, “Sand in the Silicon: Designing an Outbound Investment Controls
Mechanism.

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 67

119 “FACT SHEET: President Biden Signs Executive Order to Ensure Robust Reviews of Evolving
National Security Risks by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States,” The White
House. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/09/15/fact-sheet-
president-biden-signs-executive-order-to-ensure-robust-reviews-of-evolving-national-security-risks-
by-the-committee-on-foreign-investment-in-the-united-states/.
120 “Supporters of Outbound Investment Legislation Urge Administration to Take Executive Action to
Safeguard National Security, Protect Supply Chains,” U.S. Senator Bob Casey, September 27, 2022,
https://www.casey.senate.gov/news/releases/supporters-of-outbound-investment-legislation-urge-
administration-to-take-executive-action-to-safeguard-national-security-protect-supply-chains.
121 For more details on the methodology, see https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-
Tracking-AI-Investment.pdf, 33.
122 北京儒博科技有限公司 (儒博科技) was rebranded to 北京如布科技有限公司 (如布科技), while the
company’s English-language name remains the same; see:
https://www.jiemian.com/article/6431399.html.
123 For more details, see: https://github.com/georgetown-cset/aiia.
