
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
SEPTEMBER 2020
CHINA’S SYSTEM OF OPPRESSION IN XINJIANG: HOW
IT DEVELOPED AND HOW TO CURB IT
JAMES MILLWARD AND DAHLIA PETERSON
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE AND NORMS
1
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) policies towards
Xinjiang have increased colonial development, further
eroded Uyghur autonomy through force and ethnic
assimilationism, and co-opted the “Global War on
Terror” framing to portray all Uyghur resistance as
“terrorism.” Since 2016, an intensified regime of
technologically-driven mass surveillance, internment,
indoctrination, family separation, birth suppression,
and forced labor has implicated the provinces and
municipalities of eastern China that fund the Xinjiang
gulag through the Pairing Assistance Program, as well
as potentially thousands of Chinese and international
corporations that directly and indirectly supply and
benefit from the system.
Today, more than 1,400 Chinese companies are
providing facial, voice, and gait recognition capabilities
as well as additional tracking tools to the Xinjiang
public security and surveillance industry. While a
handful of these companies have been placed on the
U.S. Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry
and Security’s (BIS) Entity List, limiting their access
to imported components, this sanctioning has not yet
significantly arrested these companies’ development.
While it is infeasible to sanction every company
operating in or associated with Xinjiang, it is still of
great concern that many companies have evaded
scrutiny and continue to perpetuate oppression
today. Furthermore, Western companies continue to
sell Chinese firms core hardware such as chips and
storage solutions, for which China currently lacks
viable homegrown alternatives.
To meet these challenges and increase public aware-
ness, we provide a slate of policy recommendations for
the United States, its allies, and China. These include
that the United States’ messaging strategy must more
clearly articulate the intended aims of its policy actions
on Xinjiang, including but not limited to the closure of
its internment camps, the reduction of surveillance,
and the elimination of “pre-criminal” profiling of
Xinjiang’s indigenous peoples. The Uyghur Human
Rights Policy Act of 2020 and the Tariff Act of 1930
should be resolutely applied to address forced labor
and other repression. BIS and the State Department,
along with academics, researchers, and NGOs, should
publicly report on Chinese surveillance companies’
supply chains to close alternative solutions loopholes
and increase corporate due diligence. Candidates for
the Entity List should also be informed by a public
repository of rights abuses in Xinjiang and beyond. To
achieve these goals, State Department-run Track 1
dialogues and the newly formed Inter-Parliamentary
Alliance on China (IPAC) and Global Partnership on AI
(GPAI) should also develop an allied set of principles
and goals for countering the global expansion of
China’s surveillance approach, as well as proposing
alternative surveillance technology standards at the
United Nations’ International Telecommunications
Union. U.S. allies should strengthen refugee and
cultural protection for Uyghurs, and apply sanctions to
responsible entities and individuals.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
GLOBAL CHINA
CHINA’S SYSTEM OF OPPRESSION IN XINJIANG: HOW IT DEVELOPED AND HOW TO CURB IT
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE AND NORMS
2
HISTORY
Although the current crisis in Xinjiang is the immediate
product of People's Republic of China (PRC) policies
in the 21st century, the longer term history of Qing
imperial and Chinese Nationalist rule as well as earlier
decades of CCP rule over the region offer instructive
contrasts to — as well as some continuities with —
recent approaches to governing China’s Central Asian
region.
Qing and Chinese Nationalist rule in Xinjiang
For millennia, the region now called Xinjiang was a
focus of Central Asian geopolitical struggle as well as
a conduit for trans-Eurasian trade, cultural exchange,
and migration. The Qing empire conquered the region
in 1758 and controlled it through a pluralist system
with ethnic elites administering co-ethnics. In its last
decades, the Qing attempted to colonize parts of
Xinjiang with Han Chinese, but this effort failed and
most of the Han farmers returned east.
The Chinese Nationalist government (KMT) first
gained a foothold in the region in the early 1940s.
It promulgated its own ambitious plans to colonize
Xinjiang with one million Chinese refugees (the
region’s indigenous population was under 4 million). 1
Such schemes were impossible for the hard-pressed
Nationalists to implement, and with few Han in Xinjiang,
the KMT granted representation and considerable
local autonomy to indigenous Xinjiang groups, while
sharing power in the region overall with the Soviet-
sponsored Eastern Turkestan Republic (ETR) based in
northern Xinjiang.
PRC acquisition and administration of
Xinjiang
In the summer of 1949, KMT forces surrendered
southern Xinjiang to the People’s Liberation Army (PLA).
After the leadership of the ETR died in a mysterious
plane crash en route to Beijing, the CCP appointed
a new cadre of Turkic officials, who renounced East
Turkestan autonomy. The PRC resettled 80,000 KMT
troops as the Xinjiang Production Construction Corps
(XPCC) or Bingtuan (兵团) and recruited women from
east China cities to marry them and put down roots in
Xinjiang. Supported by massive subsidies from Beijing,
the Bingtuan became Xinjiang’s primary colonial
institution, resettling millions of Han beginning in the
1950s, building Han enclaves throughout the region,
and running state farms, industrial enterprises, labor
camps, prisons, and now “educational transformation”
camps.2 That the proportion of Han in Xinjiang
has grown from a few percent in 1949 to equal or
outnumber indigenous Uyghurs and other Central
Asian peoples is largely due to the efforts of the
Bingtuan. The XPCC has developed a portfolio of global
assets with over 800,000 majority and minority shell
company holdings. 3 The XPCC security bureau and
some of its top leaders were sanctioned by the U.S.
Treasury Department in 2020 for its role in internment
camps and forced labor — if stringently enforced, this
could limit the outsized and discriminatory role of this
organization in Xinjiang’s economic development.4
Following Qing and Soviet precedents, the PRC
implemented ethno-pluralist policies in Xinjiang under
its system of 56 minzu (民族, “nationalities” or ethnic
groups). In 1955 Xinjiang was designated the Xinjiang
Uygur Autonomous Region (XUAR). However, autonomy
has always been symbolic, and Han party officials in
fact control the region, under direction from the CCP,
backed up by police, the paramilitary People’s Armed
Police and, as necessary, the PLA. Ironically, the Han-
dominated Bingtuan is the only somewhat autonomous
political unit in the Uygur Autonomous Region, as it is
only nominally subject to the XUAR while in practice
handling its own administrative and judicial affairs
and answering directly only to Beijing.5
Despite its Potemkin qualities, the minzu system
functioned relatively well in Xinjiang for the first
decades of the PRC. Arguments suggesting Muslim
Central Asians will automatically resist Chinese
rule are not borne out by PRC history. What serious
disruptions occurred in the region resulted from
disastrous policies such as the Great Leap Forward
and the Cultural Revolution. During the latter, it was
the Bingtuan and rusticated Han youth from eastern
Chinese cities who occasioned unrest, more than the
Uyghurs.
In the 1980s, the modest liberalization that followed
the Cultural Revolution ushered in what some Uyghurs
now wryly consider a golden age for Xinjiang’s non-Han
peoples. Indigenous representation in government

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
GLOBAL CHINA
CHINA’S SYSTEM OF OPPRESSION IN XINJIANG: HOW IT DEVELOPED AND HOW TO CURB IT
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE AND NORMS
3
and party increased somewhat, and non-Han cultural
production flourished. As tensions with the Soviet
Union abated, trade with Central Asia expanded. No
longer viewing Xinjiang simply as a strategic buffer
against possible Soviet invasion, the PRC began
investing more substantially in the region’s urban and
transport infrastructure.
Liberalization in Xinjiang affected Xinjiang people as
it did those elsewhere in China: just as Han students
in eastern China took advantage of this relaxation to
demonstrate over social and political issues, so did
Uyghur students in Xinjiang. However, discontent in
Xinjiang was labeled “separatist” and “pan-Turkic,” as
well as “counter-revolutionary.”
In 1990, an attempted uprising in the small town of
Baren evoked a region-wide state response, the first
of an ongoing series of “Strike Hard” campaigns that
have recurred sporadically from the 1990s through
the most recent iteration in 2014. These waves of
repression are characterized by house searches,
religious restrictions, mass arrests, and executions.
In 1997, authorities violently put down a large
demonstration in Ghulja protesting the illegalization of
popular Uyghur social clubs. Thereafter, through 2008
the region was generally quiet.6
Branding indigenous unrest as “terrorism”
However, during this quiet period, Chinese state and
international media began to amplify the narrative of
growing Islamic threat. Following the September 11,
2001 attacks in the United States, the PRC employed
the Bush administration’s rhetoric to situate Uyghur
unrest within the “Global War on Terror,” despite lack
of evidence of large-scale organization behind, or
international involvement in, incidents in the Uyghur
region. In an apparent bid to court PRC support for a
United Nations resolution justifying the U.S. invasion
of Iraq, the United States in 2002 problematically
designated the “East Turkestan Islamic Movement”
(ETIM) an international terrorist organization, a move
that we and other analysts think was incorrect based
on the facts. In the designation statement, the U.S.
State Department quoted PRC propaganda, while
attributing to ETIM a list of acts that not even the PRC
had blamed on the previously unknown group, which
had never had a presence in China.7
Thereafter the false notion took root that ETIM was a
substantial, organized international group responsible
for violent acts in Xinjiang. Many terrorism analysts
have continued to repeat this mistaken conventional
wisdom, though ETIM effectively disappeared in 2003.8
For example, a line in one recent Brookings paper is
untrue in key respects: “China has long faced low-level
violence from the East Turkestan Islamic Movement
(ETIM), which seeks an independent Xinjiang.” 9 Low-
level violence, yes, but not from the ETIM, which has
never been active in or even had a presence within
Xinjiang. Nor can we confidently connect Xinjiang’s
ongoing low-level violence with desire for independence
— we simply do not have reliable information on the
motives of those behind the unrest, most of which
involves clashes with police and state offices.
After the U.S. and U.N. designations of ETIM, “Uyghur
terrorism” became a constant drumbeat. Fears voiced
in PRC and global media that Uyghur terrorists would
attack the 2008 Beijing Olympics were not borne out,
although there were attacks on police and military
units in Xinjiang around that time. The July 5, 2009
race riots in Xinjiang’s capital Ürümqi, though labeled
“terrorist” by Chinese authorities, in fact erupted
because armed police forcefully repressed a peaceful
protest by Uyghurs demanding an investigation into
the lynching of two Uyghurs in a Guangdong factory
several days earlier. Official PRC statistics mention
only the nearly 200 Han killed on July 5, not the many
Uyghurs killed by live fire from police and military and
at the hands of Han vigilantes over the next two days.
Hundreds or thousands more Uyghurs were detained
over subsequent days and weeks.
The first incidents since the 1990s10 that clearly involved
premeditated Uyghur political violence against civilians
were a vehicular attack and self-immolation in Beijing
in October 2013, a mass knifing at the Kunming railway
station in March 2014, a knife and bomb attack at the
Ürümqi train station in April 2014, and a vehicular and
explosives attack on an Ürümqi market in May 2014.
These events marked the long-predicted advent in
Xinjiang and China of jihadi tactics. There is, however,
little evidence of organization beyond the small numbers
of attackers themselves or of coordination with any
group outside of China. Besides these unambiguous
incidents of terrorism, in the 2010s there were more
frequent clashes between Uyghurs and security forces

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
GLOBAL CHINA
CHINA’S SYSTEM OF OPPRESSION IN XINJIANG: HOW IT DEVELOPED AND HOW TO CURB IT
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE AND NORMS
4
during riots, at state offices, or inside Uyghur homes as
police ostensibly searched for extremists and enforced
the state prohibition on veils. 11 In some of these
incidents, the deaths of Uyghur so-called terrorists far
outnumbered other casualties. PRC sources describe
all such unrest as terrorism, but it is important to
distinguish growing unrest — some of it violent, against
increasingly repressive policies of a regime reneging on
constitutional promises of autonomy — from the four
acts of civilian-targeted violence in 2013-14.
“The PRC measures go far beyond
constraints on religion, to target
the Uyghur language itself and
arbitrarily incarcerate intellectual
elites and Uyghur party members
who are patently secular.
A recent influential article by Sheena Chestnut Greitens,
Myunghee Lee, and Emir Yazici suggests that the high-
tech surveillance, mass political indoctrination in
internment camps, and coerced labor in Xinjiang have
been motivated primarily by PRC state perception of a
terrorist threat, both arising from religious “extremism”
of Muslim Turkic people at home, and seeping back
into Xinjiang from abroad like an infection. 12 As will
be seen below, the PRC measures go far beyond
constraints on religion, to target the Uyghur language
itself and arbitrarily incarcerate intellectual elites and
Uyghur party members who are patently secular. Thus
the idea that top CCP leaders themselves believe they
are responding to a jihadi threat is questionable. In any
case, whether fear of religious extremism is a genuine
PRC perception or propaganda, one of us (Millward)
argues that it is a mistake to discuss Xinjiang with PRC
interlocutors under the rubric of “counterterrorism”
as Greitens, Lee, and Yazici suggest. To do so would
perpetuate the original U.S. mistake of the 2002
ETIM designation, and risk once again confining our
understanding of the Xinjiang crisis within the subjective
and myopic frame of “terrorism.” The “infectious
thought virus” from which people may be coercively
“inoculated” is a dangerous Orwellian metaphor, not
a realistic security analysis, and U.S. and international
commentators and governments should not validate it.
Rather, we should discuss the broader reasons
for Uyghur dissatisfaction and unrest, which has
sporadically erupted into violence against police and
official targets as well as in the four terrorist incidents
of 2013-14. Though the PRC labels all unrest as
religiously motivated “terrorism,” that is a misdiagnosis
of the problem.13
CRISIS
Development and assimilationism
Space here does not permit a full historical examination
of PRC policies in Xinjiang leading to the crisis of the
late 2010s. However, the crisis, which some have
called ethnocide, cultural genocide, or even genocide,14
may be broadly understood as the convergence
and culmination of failed development policies, 15
increasingly aggressive assimilationist policies, and
a cycle of repression-resistance-repression that has
played out in Xinjiang since the 1990s.
Although development efforts have featured in the
PRC’s Xinjiang policies for decades, since the start of
the 21st century, two campaign-style programs have
amplified these efforts. With the Great Development
of the West ( 西部大开发), launched in 2000, Beijing
invested in major transportation and economic
projects, stressing cotton and oil, then Xinjiang’s most
lucrative products. This western development program
largely bypassed Uyghurs and the local economy, and
it did not achieve its stated goals of stimulating local
growth or narrowing the economic gap between the
eastern and western parts of the country.16
In the aftermath of the 2009 violence, Xinjiang and
central authorities greatly expanded an existing
program, the Pairing Assistance Program ( 对口支
援新疆), by requiring 19 eastern provinces and
municipalities to devote 0.3-0.6% of annual revenues
to development in a Xinjiang sister-city, and to dispatch
personnel as advisers. Yuhui Li’s study concludes that
the Pairing Assistance Program resulted in a flurry
of top-down, capital-intensive projects, especially
industrial parks and latch-key commercial development
zones, chosen to suit the industrial needs of the
eastern Chinese partners, and often ill-suited to local
economic conditions. Over-capacity and ghost towns
resulted.17 The Pairing Assistance Program’s relatively

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
GLOBAL CHINA
CHINA’S SYSTEM OF OPPRESSION IN XINJIANG: HOW IT DEVELOPED AND HOW TO CURB IT
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE AND NORMS
5
minor investment in human development prioritized
Chinese-language instruction (teaching Uyghurs to
teach Mandarin), a sensitive issue that resonated
with contemporary sinicization policies, including the
razing of the old city of Kashgar and state opposition
to veiling, public prayer, and fasting at Ramadan.18
Mass, technologically-enabled repression of
Xinjiang indigenous peoples
In May 2014, then-Xinjiang Party Secretary Zhang
Chunxian revived “Strike Hard” and inaugurated the
“People’s War on Terror” in the region. A “Xinjiang
Work Forum” that same year enshrined “stability
maintenance” as the centerpiece of Xinjiang policies,
displacing the prior goal of economic development.
By that point, hacker groups connected to the state
were in full swing, targeting Uyghur mobile users
around the world for mass real-time surveillance. 19
A new counterterrorism law (December 2015), a
“de-extremification” ordinance (March 2017), and a
revision of the regulations governing religions affairs
(September 2017) provided new, often vaguely
worded, justifications for detaining and punishing
Uyghurs, Kazakhs, Kyrgyz, and other Muslims based
on symbols and practices related to Islamic belief and
other behavior.
From 2017, CCP policy trajectories of colonial
development and ethnic assimilation converged
dramatically in a repressive program implemented
on an unprecedented scale by the new Xinjiang Party
Secretary, Chen Quanguo, who had been transferred
to the region from Tibet in 2016. While the record
of new laws and regulations since 2014 or earlier
suggests that Chen’s arrival in Xinjiang in August
2016 was not the sole catalyst for the heightened
repression that began in 2017, he presided over its
material implementation against the intensified legal
and regulatory backdrop. In his first year in Xinjiang,
Chen hired 100,000 new security personnel and
built thousands of “Convenience Police Stations”
to implement grid policing. 20 Chen’s Xinjiang
supplemented conventional police methods with facial
recognition video, cell phone inspection software,
remote cell phone tracking and sniffing (remote data
collection), and the gathering of personal information
(banking, travel, social media, religious practice) as
well as biometric data. The biodata, collected in the
course of mandatory medical examinations and in the
process of issuing ID cards, included DNA, blood type,
face-scan, retinal scan, voice-print and gait-print.
In principle, all data is entered into the Integrated
Joint Military Operations Platform (IJOP, 一体化联合
作战平台),21 made by a subsidiary of the state-owned
defense conglomerate China Electronics Technology
Company (CETC). The IJOP uses algorithms to predict
the likelihood of “extremism” in individuals and sort
them for imprisonment, indoctrination, or surveillance,
and legitimizes computational racism by punishing the
entire Uyghur ethnic group for behaviors and beliefs
deemed suspicious by authorities. Such behavior
includes insufficient socialization with neighbors,
avoiding the front door, having more than two children,
or having foreign contacts. 22 The extent of the IJOP’s
influence was revealed in late 2019 when the
International Consortium of Investigative Journalists
(ICIJ) obtained classified Chinese documents,
including four “bulletins” from June 2017 on how the
IJOP surveils Xinjiang residents and those who became
foreign nationals for monitoring, indoctrination, or
detention based on purported threats of “terrorism”
and “extremism.” These terms are never defined in the
documents.23
In one week in June 2017, for example, the system
flagged 24,421 “suspicious persons” in Kashgar,
Khotan, Kizilsu, and Aksu districts and prefectures;
706 of these were arrested as criminals; 15,683 were
sent to the “concentrated educational transformation”
camps (see below); and 2,096 were put under
“preventive surveillance.” 24 Authorities also used
material discovered on smartphones or sent in
previous years via WeChat to justify internments.
The introduction of 3G networks and smartphones in
Xinjiang from the early 2010s had allowed convenient
exchange of images, voice memos, and video and audio
clips, including on religious topics. The subsequent
state deployment of technology that could transcribe
Uyghur speech and then search the transcripts for
keywords deemed extremist, such as “Quran” or
“Allah,” provided pretexts for interning or imprisoning
people for their thoughts. 25 In 2017 and 2018, more
than 350,000 people were prosecuted through the
legal system in Xinjiang, while in previous years, the
figure had been less than 30,000 annually.”26

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
GLOBAL CHINA
CHINA’S SYSTEM OF OPPRESSION IN XINJIANG: HOW IT DEVELOPED AND HOW TO CURB IT
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE AND NORMS
6
In addition to the approximately tenfold increase
of the prison population, Chen expanded so-called
“concentrated educational transformation” ( 集中
教育转化), a program previously forced upon drug
addicts, problem children, Falun Gong practitioners
and, in Xinjiang, some young men with beards and
women who chose to wear certain head and facial
coverings. Starting in the spring of 2017, Xinjiang
authorities began detaining 5-15% of the Muslim
population across Xinjiang, more in the south, and
more men than women, within a vastly scaled up re-
education system. To manage such numbers, Xinjiang
administrative units and Bingtuan settlements called
for private corporate bids to build and outfit dozens
of large internment camps surrounded by high walls,
barbed wire and guard towers, and secured inside with
locked cells, locked corridors, and ubiquitous video
surveillance.27
According to leaked documents and first-person
accounts, these Xinjiang internment camps provided
at least three levels of confinement, from reform-
school to prison conditions, and interned more
than one million people. 28 New kindergartens and
orphanages for the children of detainees went up in a
parallel construction boom.29 It is not known how many
remain in the camps or to what extent new internees
are being confined. There have also been reports of
prisoner transfers from Xinjiang to Sichuan and Gansu
provinces as well as China’s northeast.30
Uyghur, Kazakh, Kyrgyz, and Uzbek internees have not
been tried before internment, but simply accused of
extremism. Signs of supposed extremism, published in
a list used by police for the purpose of identifying “pre-
crimes” in potential internees, include such mundane
Islamic practices as avoiding alcohol, fasting, veiling,
wearing a beard, or owning a Quran. Foreign travel
or contacts and having “too many children” are also
justifications for detention. 31 Within the camps,
internees are subjected to regimented daily routines,
political indoctrination, some Mandarin language
training, and forced renunciations of Islam and Uyghur
culture. Former detainees who have managed to leave
China report crowded cells, unsanitary conditions,
poor food, beatings, physical and psychological torture,
and systematic rape, as well as forced sterilization,
IUD-implantation, and administration of anti-fertility
drugs.32
Although PRC authorities insist that the camps are
“vocational training centers,” a leaked template for
design and running of the camps signed by Zhu Hailun,
Chen’s deputy party chief and security tsar in Xinjiang,
specifies that “students” must complete at least one
year of “concentrated educational transformation”
and pass a strict evaluation of their political thinking
and discipline before they proceed to a further three
to six months of “vocational” training that actually
involves factory skills. 33 Whatever vocational training
internees are given, then, only takes place after their
release from the camps.
From the latter half of 2018, some internees began
to be assigned to work in factories located within the
internment camps, transferred to “satellite factories”
near poor villages in southern Xinjiang, transferred to
factories in industrial parks or Bingtuan settlements
in various parts of Xinjiang, or transferred to factories
in eastern parts of China. And this is how CCP policy
trajectories of colonial development and ethnic
assimilation converged: many of the factories to which
internees have been assigned are those constructed
and run by the XPCC or by eastern Chinese provinces,
cities, and companies under the Pairing Assistance
Program.34 The former internees were sometimes not
paid, or were paid low wages. The numbers involved
are substantial: in 2018 Kashgar prefecture alone
announced plans to transfer 100,000 workers from the
camps to industrial parks and village satellite factories,
where they would manufacture textiles and garments
for companies receiving government subsidies for
employing them. This pattern was repeated across
Xinjiang and elsewhere in China.35
Researchers for the Australian Strategic Policy Institute
(ASPI) identified 27 factories in nine Chinese provinces
employing transferred Uyghur workers either directly
from the camps or after completion of non-confinement
political education programs. Some of these factories
are outfitted like prisons, with walls and guard towers,
and officially labeled “semi-military.” Workers are
required to attend political study and Chinese classes
and are denied freedom of movement outside of
dormitories or immediate factory precincts.36
Prolonged confinement in camps and involuntary labor
transfer has broken up families. Women and older
people in Uyghur villages, too, have been employed

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
GLOBAL CHINA
CHINA’S SYSTEM OF OPPRESSION IN XINJIANG: HOW IT DEVELOPED AND HOW TO CURB IT
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE AND NORMS
7
in satellite factories under regimented conditions.
Children whom they would traditionally have cared
for at home are now housed in Mandarin-language
boarding kindergartens and primary schools.37
“The extensive linkages of Xinjiang
and other Chinese factories
employing Uyghur labor to Chinese
and foreign suppliers mean that
global supply chains are already
extensively tainted by the internment
camp and forced labor regime,
especially in the textile industry.
While official PRC statements describe these programs
as “poverty alleviation,” 38 in a situation where more
than a million people have been extra-legally confined
in internment camps, none of these work assignments
can be considered voluntary, and in cases may amount
to slave labor. The extensive linkages of Xinjiang
and other Chinese factories employing Uyghur labor
to Chinese and foreign suppliers mean that global
supply chains are already extensively tainted by the
internment camp and forced labor regime, especially
in the textile industry. Xinjiang produces between a fifth
and a quarter of the world’s cotton, depending on the
year, much of it on Bingtuan farms.39 Xinjiang cotton
is mixed with cotton from elsewhere in yarn, fabric,
and garments. The ASPI researchers connected forced
Uyghur labor to 83 well-known global brands, including
Nike, Adidas, Fila, BMW, Mitsubishi, Panasonic,
Huawei, The North Face, H&M, and Victoria’s Secret.40
In July 2020, the U.S. Commerce Department added a
subsidiary of the Hong Kong-based Esquel Group, one
of the world’s largest shirt-makers, to the BIS Entity
List. Esquel maintained a partnership with the XPCC
until April 2020, and in summer 2020 was still running
three factories in Xinjiang.41
Surveillance companies involved
Chinese and non-Chinese companies alike are involved
in Xinjiang’s system of surveillance, implicating them
in the forms of repression mentioned above. These
companies benefited financially and reputationally
in 2015 from the central government’s policy of
prioritizing “stability” in Xinjiang and the construction
of the national rural-focused Sharp Eyes surveillance
program.42 By 2018, nearly 1,400 Chinese companies
were competing for lucrative contracts in Xinjiang — of
these, around 1,000 were Xinjiang-based.43
From the perspective of policy options, these
companies fall into three groups: Chinese companies
that have landed on the BIS Entity List for their harms
to human rights in Xinjiang; active Chinese players in
Xinjiang that have so far evaded U.S. sanction; and
Western companies selling core hardware to either of
the two preceding groups.
Entity List companies and impact
In October 2019, the United States began to use
human rights to justify adding Chinese companies and
government bodies to the BIS Entity List in order to
cut off these entities’ access to imported components.
Many offending Chinese companies, however,
remain unlisted. 44 BIS selected eight companies
and 20 Xinjiang government institutions, including
the XPCC’s Public Security Bureau, pointing to their
“implementation of China’s campaign of repression,
mass arbitrary detention, and high-technology
surveillance” against Uyghurs, Kazakhs, and other
Turkic Muslim groups in Xinjiang. 45 The list included
video surveillance companies Dahua, Hikvision, Megvii,
Yitu, Sensetime, and Yixin Science and Technology Co.
Ltd, voice recognition firm iFlytek, and digital forensics
firm Xiamen Meiya Pico Information Co. Ltd.46 The role
these companies play in Xinjiang will be discussed
below.
In May 2020, BIS added eight more Chinese
companies and China’s Ministry of Public Security’s
Institute of Forensic Science to the list under the
same justification. 47 The additions included Aksu
Huafu Textiles, likely due to forced labor concerns,
facial recognition companies CloudWalk, Intellifusion,
IS’Vision, NetPosa and its subsidiary SenseNets, and
IT infrastructure company FiberHome Technologies
Group, along with its cloud and big data subsidiary
Nanjing FiberHome Starrysky Communication
Development.48

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
GLOBAL CHINA
CHINA’S SYSTEM OF OPPRESSION IN XINJIANG: HOW IT DEVELOPED AND HOW TO CURB IT
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE AND NORMS
8
Many of the sanctioned Chinese companies are also
on the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology’s
national “AI Champions” list. 49 AI champions have
a voice in national technical standards setting,
relative freedom from competition with state-owned
enterprises, and are meant to help China lead the
world in AI technologies by 2030.50 Of the 15 national
champions, five have been placed on the Entity List for
human rights violations in Xinjiang: iFlytek, Hikvision,
Yitu, Megvii, and SenseTime.
China’s facial recognition giants form the backbone of
its surveillance system in Xinjiang and exercise great
influence across China and the globe. Hikvision and
Dahua supply around one-third of the global market
for security cameras and related goods like digital
video recorders.51 From 2016 to 2017, 11 Hikvision
and Dahua Public-Private Partnership Safe Cities and
public security checkpoint projects in Xinjiang totaled
more than 7 billion yuan ($1.2 billion).52 One Hikvision
project in of Ürümqi was worth $79 million, with a
network of 30,000 security cameras, video analytics
hubs, intelligent monitoring systems, big data centers,
police checkpoints, and drones. 53 Another Hikvision
project in Pishan County included the installation of
a surveillance system in a re-education camp and
mosques.54
Unlike other facial recognition companies on the
Entity List, state-owned CETC has controlled Hikvision
since its inception and enjoyed “substantial fiscal
subsidies.”55 Hikvision has worked closely with CETC
to expand and maintain the IJOP in Xinjiang (originally
developed by another CETC subsidiary). 56 Hikvision
had also won a bid to build the second stage of the
IJOP, including WiFi sniffers to track the unique
addresses of networked devices and allow cameras to
track people via personal electronics.57
Facial recognition companies, such as Yitu, Cloudwalk,
and Intellifusion, actively market their products for
public security use. At “anti-terrorism” expos held in
Xinjiang in August 2017, CloudWalk demonstrated its
Fire Eye (火眼) product, capable of 24-hour monitoring
and immediate police notification upon detection
of fugitives or persons of interest. 58 At the same
expos, Intellifusion demonstrated Deep Eye ( 深目),
purportedly customizable for anti-terrorism needs. 59
Yitu launched a similar project called Dragonfly Eye (蜻
蜓眼), capable of performing static photo-based face
comparisons or video-based dynamic comparisons in
both residential and public areas. 60 All of the above-
mentioned companies’ products could be used
to identify subjects of interest among the Uyghur
population, referred to by the authorities as “focus
personnel.”61
Beyond facial recognition, longtime voice recognition
player iFlytek collaborated with hardware and service
providers Meiya Pico and Fiberhome to develop tools
automating transcription and translation of Uyghur
language audio into Mandarin. This product enables
authorities to scan for “pre-criminal” and criminal
content.62 After iFlytek established a subsidiary and
laboratory in Xinjiang to develop speech recognition
technology focusing on non-Chinese languages,
authorities in the region adopted the tool for tracking
and identifying non-Han populations.63
Limited impact of Entity List designation
Placement on the Entity List has not yet significantly
slowed the development of these companies, as they
have claimed to source supply chain alternatives and
have received renewed demand under COVID-19.
Following the October 2019 BIS decision, Hikvision
and Dahua stated that, while hardware such as
central processing units (CPUs), graphics processing
units (GPUs), and field-programmable gate arrays
(FPGAs) will be difficult to replace, the vast majority of
American components can be substituted, with little
or no impact on product performance. 64 iFlytek said
it will boost research and development efforts given
technology tensions between the United States and
China.65
One might argue, however, that goal of placement on
the Entity List is not simply to restrict companies’ access
to U.S. technology. The BIS listing of a subsidiary of the
Esquel Group, a behemoth shirt-maker which supplies
the world’s most famous fashion labels, sent shock
waves through the global garment industry. The fact
that Esquel unwound its long term joint venture with
Bingtuan subsidiary White Field Farming by May 2020
suggests that it had already recognized the liability
of association with the XPCC before being listed. 66 It
remains to be seen whether BIS listings can have a
similar effect on technology companies less reliant

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
GLOBAL CHINA
CHINA’S SYSTEM OF OPPRESSION IN XINJIANG: HOW IT DEVELOPED AND HOW TO CURB IT
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE AND NORMS
9
on brand names and consumer sales, and whether
Esquel or other companies can shift to sourcing
robotics manufacturing tools from non-U.S. sources.67
Non-Entity List companies’ influence
Several technology companies not yet placed on the
Entity List have perpetuated both overt and indirect
human rights harms in Xinjiang. Longtime Xinjiang-
based Leon Technology, for example, oversaw half of
the Safe City projects in Ürümqi by the end of 2017.68
The firm also launched a joint venture with SenseTime
called Tang Li Technology, increasing surveillance
through “convenience police stations” in Kashgar and
expanding monitoring to thousands of video access
points in the city’s rural areas.69
Data doors, manufactured by companies such as
Pingtech, CETC, and Dilusense, have also been integral
to data collection efforts in Xinjiang. 70 Resembling
walk-through metal detectors, these smart entryways
have facial recognition capabilities and ID card
verification, and can lift electronic device identifier
numbers such as MAC addresses and IMEI, IMSI, and
ESN numbers; who builds them and how they source
their components is often unclear. 71 When collected
data is combined with data from facial recognition,
surveillance cameras, license plates, phone records,
and social media posts, authorities can track
individuals with alarming clarity.72
Western companies’ role
An under-examined question is how Western
companies have bolstered China’s surveillance state
and Xinjiang operations through investment and/
or financing, academic and research partnerships,
intellectual property transfer, medical equipment
export for surveillance (as in the case of Thermo
Fisher), or hardware exports. 73 These firms provide
a technical basis for China’s unprecedented mass
racial profiling and ethnic oppression, especially
in hardware, as Chinese companies largely cannot
provide homegrown substitutions and rely on the West
for the chips that enable deep learning and storage
hard drives designed for surveillance.74
American companies such as Intel, NVIDIA, Xilinx,
Seagate, and Western Digital have sold hardware
used in Chinese surveillance operations. 75 According
to Chinese sources, GPUs from Intel and NVIDIA have
delivered direct benefits to Chinese surveillance
companies.76 Hikvision and Dahua both rely on
these chips for their servers, cameras, and safe city
applications.77 Hikvision and Dahua also depend
on leading American hard drive companies such as
Seagate and Western Digital; Chengdu Xiwu Xinan,
a company active in Xinjiang, stated that it only uses
Western Digital and Seagate’s products.78
It is also possible that NVIDIA and Intel hardware
have contributed to detection of Uyghurs in video
surveillance systems outside of Xinjiang, as at least
eight nationwide Ministry of Public Security (MPS)
projects require NVIDIA and Intel chips to perform
Uyghur detection.79 The MPS mandated this capability
in its December 2017 draft facial recognition
guidelines — which were met by Hikvision, Yitu, Megvii,
SenseTime, and CloudWalk.80
CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
Viewed against the backdrop of 70 years of PRC rule,
the heightened oppression in Xinjiang since 2016 can
be seen as both continuation of and departure from
earlier CCP policies. Colonialist and assimilationist
tendencies underlay the earliest PRC and even Chinese
Nationalist rule. They are now greatly intensified, as
even official sources shift from a narrative of ethnic
pluralism in favor of a patently Han-centric vision of a
homogeneous China. But what is new, beyond just the
extremity of the policies, is the degree to which what
happens in Xinjiang is no longer just about Xinjiang:
the massive, technologically-sophisticated systems
of surveillance, internment, and involuntary labor
are linked to the rest of China through the Pairing
Assistance Program, and to myriad Chinese and
international companies through webs of supply and
investment.
After two years of ambivalence, U.S. President Donald
Trump’s signature of the Uyghur Human Rights Policy
Act of 2020 has belatedly allowed the Xinjiang issue
its proper place in U.S.-China relations. The Trump
administration’s previously self-contradictory China
policies arguably led many countries worldwide to
remain largely silent on the Xinjiang crisis. Some
countries have even expressed support for PRC policies

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
GLOBAL CHINA
CHINA’S SYSTEM OF OPPRESSION IN XINJIANG: HOW IT DEVELOPED AND HOW TO CURB IT
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE AND NORMS
10
in Xinjiang, owing to their economic interdependence
with China, hope for Belt and Road Initiative-related
loans or aid, their own poor human rights records, and
their adherence — shared with China — to so-called
“non-interference in internal affairs.” Thirty-six states
backed China in the U.N. Human Rights Council in
response to a critical 2019 letter by 22 democratic
nations calling out the Xinjiang atrocities. 81 However,
with U.S. denunciation of the Xinjiang repression now
forthright and enjoying bipartisan domestic support,
there is renewed hope for creating a concerted allied
strategy with clearly articulated goals to address this
issue, through parallel and possibly joint actions.
Below, we offer relevant policy recommendations for
the United States, other global and multilateral actors,
and the Chinese authorities.
Policy recommendations for the United States
related to surveillance technology
1. State Department-run Track 1 dialogues, the
newly formed Inter-Parliamentary Alliance on
China (IPAC) and the Global Partnership on AI
(GPAI) can develop an allied set of principles
and goals to understand countries’ surveillance
adoption drivers, and counter the global
expansion of China’s surveillance apparatus
with democratically-driven alternatives. This
coordination would advance the IPAC’s goals
of upholding human rights and strengthening
security, and the GPAI’s goals of responsible
development and use of AI grounded in human
rights.82 Alternative surveillance technology
standards can be proposed at the U.N.’s
International Telecommunications Union, where
Chinese companies have been the only submitters
since 2016, and therefore the only major player
shifting normative goalposts.83
2. BIS and the State Department, along with
academics, researchers, and NGOs, should
publicly disclose knowledge of Chinese
surveillance companies’ supply chains, and
determine how many suppliers are from the
U.S. and other democracies. This would help
determine if, how, and from where companies on
the Entity List are finding alternative solutions,
and assist with companies’ export due diligence.
3. The above-mentioned groups should create a
public repository of rights abuses in Xinjiang,
modeled off databases such as the California
Proposition 65 list or the Environmental
Protection Agency’s Toxics Release Inventory
(TRI) Program, to further scrutinize and identify
underexamined companies for the Entity List. 84
For instance, Chinese video surveillance company
Uniview’s president told reporters that, at a time
when “leading Chinese technology companies
are facing tough scrutiny overseas,” companies
such as Uniview had the opportunity to grow and
pursue their global strategies.85
4. Utilizing the above knowledge, the State
Department should compare its draft guidance
for surveillance technology exports with other
democracies’ approaches, and discuss where to
advance its guidance. 86 Relevant bodies include
the 42-member Wassenaar Arrangement.87
5. Congress should prevent Chinese surveillance
companies from selling their technology in the
United States, beyond current bans on use by U.S.
government customers, as in the case of Hikvision
and Dahua. Closing a significant market would
reduce these companies’ abilities to plow profits
into research and development and slow progress
toward alternative hardware solutions for firms on
the Entity List. Congress should additionally pass
the Foreign Advanced Technology Surveillance
Accountability Act of 2020, which would document
the use of excessive surveillance to violate human
rights in annual State Department country reports
on human rights practices.88
6. BIS and the interagency process should disclose
if the earlier inclusion of Huawei on the Entity
List has arrested its surveillance activities
in Xinjiang , even if that was not why Huawei
was initially sanctioned. For example, Huawei
reportedly built the police surveillance systems
in Karamay and Kashgar prefectures, and was
praised by the head of Xinjiang provincial police
department for its contributions to the “Safe
Xinjiang” program.89

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
GLOBAL CHINA
CHINA’S SYSTEM OF OPPRESSION IN XINJIANG: HOW IT DEVELOPED AND HOW TO CURB IT
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE AND NORMS
11
General policy recommendations for the
United States regarding repression of
Uyghurs and other Xinjiang indigenous
peoples
1. The United States should more clearly articulate
the intended aims of its policy actions on
Xinjiang to include the closure of internment
camps; reduction of surveillance and elimination
of “pre-criminal” profiling of Xinjiang indigenous
peoples; an end to family separation and birth
suppression targeted at Uyghurs and other non-
Han groups; return to previous PRC support
and promotion of the identity and culture of
Xinjiang’s non-Han groups; and encouragement
of a Xinjiang economic development program
prioritizing indigenous conditions and human
rights.
2. The U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
(USCIS) should address its asylum backlog for
the hundreds of Uyghurs settled in the United
States who face deportation risk and near-
certain internment if returned to China. This
logjam is especially prevalent at the Arlington,
Virginia, USCIS service center, which processes
applications in the region where most Uyghurs
have settled.90
3. The United States should enhance its position
to advocate for human rights and fair economic
practices in Xinjiang and the PRC more broadly
by joining and/or re-energizing its role in Asia-
Pacific regional multilateral organizations and
meetings (TPP, APEC, ASEAN), and by rejoining
the U.N. Human Rights Council. This will add
more collective weight to U.S. remonstrances
regarding PRC practices, provide support to other
states who might hesitate to speak out about PRC
rights abuses or expose complicit corporations
without U.S. and regional backing, and counter
PRC influence in these bodies.
4. The Labor Department’s Bureau of International
Labor Affairs (BILA) should prioritize
investigating and publicizing the Xinjiang issue
and be provided with requisite funding to do
so.91 The BILA should investigate not only Xinjiang-
based factories, but commercial and carceral
operations of the Bingtuan; Xinjiang-related
activities of Chinese municipalities, provinces and
corporations involved in the Pairing Assistance
Program; and other arrangements by which the PRC
state channels Xinjiang labor into manufacturing.
The BILA should publish and frequently update
lists of goods and enterprises of concern.
5. Potential U.S. importers of goods from China
should strengthen their due diligence in
scrutinizing supply chains for involvement in
the Xinjiang surveillance, internment, and
involuntary labor complex. Many importer and
third party supply-chain audits have proven
unreliable.92 The potential for brand tainting by
association with Xinjiang repression is high, even
for firms relying on suppliers based in other parts
of China.93 Where possible, firms should demand
full information about Chinese supply chains from
raw material to consumer product, and outsource
audits less to third-party audit firms in favor of
personal site-visits. Trade organizations should
invest in emerging technologies that allow tracing
of materials through DNA, microbial, blockchain,
and other tagging methods. Consumers should
demand transparent sourcing of products from
China, and exercise caution regarding products
from or associated indirectly with the XUAR or the
19 provinces and municipalities in the Partner
Assistance Program.94
6. U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), as
informed by the BILA and private actors, should
robustly enforce forced labor restrictions to block
imports of goods associated with the Xinjiang
surveillance, internment, and involuntary
labor complex. CBP should take as a rebuttable
presumption that Xinjiang-related manufactures,
those produced with Uyghur labor in factories
outside of Xinjiang, and goods produced by firms
supplied indirectly by Xinjiang-related enterprises,
especially the XPCC, use forced labor as defined in
Section 307 of the Tariff Act of 1930. Challenges
to CBP “withhold release” orders that proceed as
far as the U.S. Court of International Trade should
be treated as opportunities to further publicize the
issue.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
GLOBAL CHINA
CHINA’S SYSTEM OF OPPRESSION IN XINJIANG: HOW IT DEVELOPED AND HOW TO CURB IT
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE AND NORMS
12
7. The president of the United States, secretary
of state, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
and director of national intelligence should
thoroughly fulfill reporting and implementation
provisions of the Uyghur Human Rights Policy
Act of 2020 (P.L. 116-145). 95 In determining the
list of “foreign persons” deemed responsible for
repression of Xinjiang indigenous peoples, the
President should continue to scrutinize officials in
XUAR party and administration and in the Bingtuan,
as well as officials of other Chinese municipalities
and provinces involved in the Pairing Assistance
Program, and key officers of companies linked
to the Xinjiang surveillance, internment. and
forced labor complex. Congressional committees
concerned with foreign affairs, finance, and
intelligence should pay close attention to the
reports they are scheduled to receive according to
the act.
Policy recommendations for global and
multilateral actors
1. Other nations should coordinate with the United
States to identify, publicize, and sanction
officials and corporations associated with the
repression in Xinjiang. Chinese and international
corporations should redouble their diligence
efforts to avoid direct or indirect association with
the Xinjiang surveillance, internment, and forced
labor complex. All nations should denounce the
repressive policies in Xinjiang during interactions
with PRC interlocutors.
2. All nations should provide asylum and support
to ethnic Uyghurs, Kazakhs, Kyrgyz, and other
Xinjiang indigenous peoples fleeing oppression
in the PRC, in adherence to the principle of non-
refoulement.
3. The United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) should
investigate whether the PRC is adequately
fulfilling its obligations as a party to the
Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible
Cultural Heritage in regard to Meshrep and
Muqam, both inscribed on the Intangible Cultural
Heritage list.96
4. Corporations and nations should signal to
PRC authorities that their sponsorship and
participation in the 2022 Beijing Olympics
will be impossible if the current treatment of
Xinjiang peoples continues. Where possible,
these démarches should be issued collectively.
Policy recommendations for the People’s
Republic of China and authorities in the
Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region
To avoid further damage to China’s international
standing and to the Xinjiang economy, and to minimize
the risk of future instability, the PRC and Xinjiang
authorities should:
1. Immediately curtail practices of internment,
psychological and physical abuse including
“concentrated educational transformation”
(集中教育转化), family separation, birth
suppression, and involuntary labor in Xinjiang.
Reduce levels of surveillance targeting non-
Han peoples; allow Uyghurs and other non-Han
peoples freedom of movement within the PRC;
end discrimination in housing and the use of the
hukou registration system to restrict freedom of
movement and residence for Uyghurs and other
non-Han peoples; restore free use of the spoken
and written Uyghur language in public settings;
and return to earlier PRC policies that celebrated
the diversity of the country’s ethnic groups.
2. Implement a development program sensitive to
the needs of Uyghurs and other Xinjiang peoples.
In lieu of capital-intensive construction projects or
coercive efforts to turn farmers en masse into low-
wage factory workers, implement best-practice
development strategies such as microfinancing to
encourage small-scale entrepreneurship among
Uyghurs, based on principles of individual, family,
and local autonomy. End labor and credit systems
in southern Xinjiang that force Uyghur farmers into
conditions of debt servitude.97
3. Desegregate, break up, and reform the
Bingtuan (XPCC). Eliminate its discriminatory
hiring and residential practices; cease recruiting
migrants from eastern China to Xinjiang while
simultaneously transferring Uyghurs out of Xinjiang

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
GLOBAL CHINA
CHINA’S SYSTEM OF OPPRESSION IN XINJIANG: HOW IT DEVELOPED AND HOW TO CURB IT
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE AND NORMS
13
to eastern China. Subsidies now given to Bingtuan
recruits and residents should be reallocated
towards environmentally sound development
benefiting local people. The involvement of the
Bingtuan in prisons, extralegal internment camps,
and involuntary labor has tainted its agricultural,
industrial, and commercial enterprises, along with
the Chinese and foreign companies with which
they do business, such as the Esquel Group.
This stain will continue to damage Xinjiang’s
economic prospects as long as the XPCC, now
85% Han, remains segregated and dedicated
to developing Xinjiang for the primary benefit of
Han and the central PRC government. The XPCC’s
carceral and security activities should be divested
from its economic activities, and the remaining
network of enterprises broken up and reformed to
staunch fiscal waste and encourage local non-Han
involvement.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14
REFERENCES
1  James Millward, Eurasian Crossroads: A History of Xinjiang (New York: Columbia University Press, 2007), 212.
2  Bingtuan recruitment ads appear frequently on Xinjiang job websites such as “事业单位招聘考试网” [Work
unit recruitment exam net], http://www.shiyebian.net/xinjiang/. For example, there were 19 Bingtuan listings on
the Sheyebian website on September 4, 2020, archived at https://web.archive.org/save/http://www.shiyebian.
net/xinjiang/.
3  Alex Bate, “U.S.-Sanctioned Xinjiang Paramilitary Has Over 800,000 Holdings Worldwide,” Sayari, August
4, 2020, https://sayari.com/blog/u-s-sanctioned-xinjiang-paramilitary-has-over-800000-holdings-worldwide/.
On Bingtuan historical and current involvement in forced labor at all tiers of the cotton apparel industry, see
Amy Lehr, “Addressing Forced Labor in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region: Toward a Shared Agenda,”
(Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and International Studies, July 30, 2020) https://www.csis.org/analysis/
addressing-forced-labor-xinjiang-uyghur-autonomous-region-toward-shared-agenda.
4  “Treasury Sanctions Chinese Entity and Officials Pursuant to Global Magnitsky Human Rights Executive Order,”
U.S. Department of the Treasury, July 31, 2020, https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm1073;
Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian, “U.S. sanctions China’s paramilitary in Xinjiang,” Axios, July 31, 2020, https://www.
axios.com/us-sanctions-china-paramilitary-xinjiang-xpcc-41e29c92-9649-4e47-9e91-a7f78330d4d8.html.
5  Bao Yajun, “The Xinjiang Production Construction Corps: An Insider’s Perspective,” originally published online
in January 2018 as part of the University of Oxford’s Blavatnik School of Government’s working papers series
(BSG-WP-2018/023). A significantly altered version was published as Bao Yajun, “The Xinjiang Production and
Construction Corps: An Insiders Perspective,” China: An International Journal 18, no. 2 (May 2020): 161-174,
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/756368. The journal-published version lacks some of the specific data included in
the original. It states that the Bingtuan was restored in 1981 (after being dissolved during the Cultural Revolution)
“due partly to the rise of the Islamic Resistance Movement in Afghanistan” (163), a reference to Islam and
Afghanistan which Bao did not make in the original version. The 2020 version cuts Bao’s discussion of the
degree to which Bingtuan recruitment of Han Chinese from eastern China is directly subsidized by the central
government and elides his note that “in recent years” 90% of the XPCC budget consists of central government
financial support” (16), a figure which underscores how Beijing uses the Bingtuan, despite its vast economic
inefficiencies, to promote Han settler colonialism in Xinjiang. The original 2018 version, removed in summer
2020 from the University of Oxford website, has now been republished on Academic.edu: https://www.academia.
edu/44022879/Bao_Yajun_The_Xinjiang_Production_and_Construction_Corps_An_Insiders_Perspective_.
Millward can also provide a copy of the 2018 version to interested scholars who inquire at millwarj@georgetown.
edu.
6  On the PRC regime and its 1990s policies see Gardner Bovingdon, The Uyghurs: Strangers in Their Own Land
(New York: Columbia University Press, 2010) and James Millward, Eurasian Crossroads, chapters 6-7. On the
Bingtuan, see Tom Cliff, Oil and Water: Being Han in Xinjiang (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2016) and
Greg Fay, The Bingtuan: China’s Paramilitary Colonizing Force in East Turkestan (Washington, DC: Uyghur Human
Rights Project, April 2018), https://docs.uhrp.org/pdf/bingtuan.pdf. On the background to the 1997 Ghulja
incident, see Jay Dautcher, Down a Narrow Road: Identity and Masculinity in a Uyghur Community in Xinjiang
China (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009).
7  On the argument that the designation of ETIM was meant to court PRC support for U.N. Security Council
Resolution 1441 justifying the George W. Bush administration’s invasion of Iraq, see Erik Eckholm, “U.S. Labeling
of Group in China as Terrorist Is Criticized,” The New York Times, September 13, 2002, https://www.nytimes.
com/2002/09/13/world/us-labeling-of-group-in-china-as-terrorist-is-criticized.html; James Dao, “THREATS AND
RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; Closer Ties With China May Help U.S. on Iraq,” The New York Times, October 4, 2002,
https://www.nytimes.com/2002/10/04/world/threats-and-responses-diplomacy-closer-ties-with-china-may-help-
us-on-iraq.html; Karen DeYoung, “U.S. and China Ask U.N. to List Separatists as Terror Group,” The Washington

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
15
Post, September 11, 2002, https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/2002/09/11/us-and-china-ask-
un-to-list-separatists-as-terror-group/a3adaa3e-2cd3-4861-b544-eac800757255/. A State Department official
speaking on background with one of the authors (Millward) in late 2002 confirmed that the ETIM designation was
part of the campaign to gain PRC support. ETIM was a small group based in Afghanistan, previously unknown to
most Xinjiang specialists. The PRC had included ETIM in a white paper cataloging a number of “‘East Turkistan’
terrorist forces” and alleging that these forces had committed 200 terrorist attacks, causing 162 deaths and
over 440 injuries, between 1990 and 2001, although the document actually described many fewer incidents
and the death and casualty tolls of events described in the document do not add up to these totals. The white
paper associated few acts with specific named groups, and did not allege that ETIM was responsible for any of the
acts. See State Council Information Office, People’s Republic of China, “‘East Turkistan’ Terrorist Forces Cannot
Get Away With Impunity,” Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in the United States of America, January
21, 2002, http://www.china-embassy.org/eng/xw/t34101.htm. However, the U.S. State Department statement
designating ETIM a terrorist group attributed all 200 attacks, 162 deaths, and 440 injuries to ETIM — and thus
the idea of an organized, international, and deadly Uyghur terrorist organization was born. See Philip P. Pan,
“U.S. Warns Of Plot by Group in W. China,” The Washington Post, August 29, 2002, https://www.washingtonpost.
com/archive/politics/2002/08/29/us-warns-of-plot-by-group-in-w-china/5607dd9b-9d70-419a-8bac-
1f3b39e12bc9/. The PRC language, as mis-copied by the U.S. statement, was subsequently reiterated in the U.N.
designation of ETIM as a terrorist group. “Press Statement on the UN Designation of The Eastern Turkistan Islamic
Movement,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, September 12, 2002, https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/
press-releases/pages/po3415.aspx. See James Millward, Eurasian Crossroads, 340, and Sean R. Roberts, The
War on the Uyghurs: China’s Internal Campaign against a Muslim Minority (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2020), 78-80. Earlier studies must be treated with extreme caution, if not entirely discounted, as many are
based on the original uncorroborated PRC white paper or the mistaken State Department statement.
8  Sean R. Roberts, The War on the Uyghurs, 85-86, 141. See also Sean R. Roberts, “China’s hidden partner
in suppressing the Muslim Uighurs – the US,” The Guardian, June 24, 2020, https://www.theguardian.com/
commentisfree/2020/jun/24/china-suppressing-muslim-uighurs-us-trump-9-11.
9  Daniel L. Byman and Israa Saber, “Is China prepared for global terrorism? Xinjiang and beyond,” (Washington,
DC: The Brookings Institution, September 2019), https://www.brookings.edu/research/is-china-prepared-for-
global-terrorism/.
10  In 1992 and 1997 there were bus bombings in Ürümqi about which we know little.
11  In 2011, Xinjiang authorities launched “Project Beauty,” a campaign discouraging veils, hijab, and other
kinds of face and hair coverings worn by Uighur women. In 2015, the standing committee of the Ürümqi People’s
Congress illegalized clothing “items that mask the face or robe the body in public places.” Timothy Grose,
“Beautifying Uyghur Bodies: Fashion, ‘Modernity’, and State Power in the Tarim Basin,” The Contemporary China
Centre Blog, University of Westminster, October 11, 2019, http://blog.westminster.ac.uk/contemporarychina/
beautifying-uyghur-bodies-fashion-modernity-and-state-power-in-the-tarim-basin-2/.
12  Sheena Chestnut Greitens, Myunghee Lee, and Emir Yazici, “Counterterrorism and Preventive Repression:
China’s Changing Strategy in Xinjiang,” International Security 44, no. 3 (Winter 2019/2020): 9-47, https://www.
mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/isec_a_00368. Sean R. Roberts in The War on the Uyghurs, published
after Greitens, Lee, and Yazici’s article, shows that the ETIM of the early 2000s and the Uyghurs who fled Xinjiang
from 2010 were unconnected organizationally. Uyghurs who had been active in Syria whom Roberts interviewed
had never heard of ETIM. Roberts also argues that the few thousand Uyghurs in Syria, many of them women and
children, were extremely unlikely to return to China; he does acknowledge, however, that fear of their potential may
be common among Chinese people generally and within the state bureaucracy below those highest levels privy to
the best intelligence. Sean R. Roberts, The War on the Uyghurs, 196-197.
13  Sean R. Roberts, “China’s hidden partner in suppressing the Muslim Uighurs – the US.” Roberts provides
full background and documentation underlying this essay in his book, The War on the Uyghurs.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16
14  James Leibold, “China’s treatment of Uighurs is cultural genocide,” Asia Times, July 28, 2019, https://
asiatimes.com/2019/07/chinas-treatment-of-uighurs-is-cultural-genocide/; Editorial, “What’s happening in
Xinjiang is genocide,” The Washington Post, July 6, 2020, https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/global-
opinions/whats-happening-in-xinjiang-is-genocide/2020/07/06/cde3f9da-bfaa-11ea-9fdd-b7ac6b051dc8_
story.html.
15  Xinjiang has among the lowest average incomes, lowest life expectancy, and highest infant and maternal
mortality rates of any place in China (maternal mortality rates in 2014 were five times the PRC national average,
second only to Tibet). Southern Xinjiang, and other places where the Uyghur population is densest, is far poorer
than the Xinjiang average. Ethnicity (Han or non-Han) is the strongest predictor of health outcomes: the greater
the Han population in a locale, the better the outcomes. Yuhui Li, China’s Assistance Program in Xinjiang: A
Sociological Analysis (New York: Lexington Books, 2018), 103-06. Regarding the failures of development,
see also Ilham Tohti, “Present-Day Ethnic Problems in Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region: Overview and
Recommendations,” trans. Cindy Carter, Ilham Tohti Initiative, September 2016, https://ilhamtohtisite.files.
wordpress.com/2016/09/ilham-tohti_present-day-ethnic-problems-in-xinjiang-uighur-autonomous-region-
overview-and-recommendations_complete-translation3.pdf. Regarding intensified securitization and assimilative
policies, see Darren Byler, “Spirit Breaking: Uyghur Dispossession, Culture Work and Terror Capitalism in
a Chinese Global City,” (PhD diss., University of Washington, 2018), https://digital.lib.washington.edu/
researchworks/bitstream/handle/1773/42946/Byler_washington_0250E_19242.pdf; David Tobin, Securing
China’s Northwest Frontier: Identity and Insecurity in Xinjiang (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
2020). Regarding Uyghur birthrate suppression, see “China cuts Uighur births with IUDs, abortion, sterilization,”
Associated Press, June 29, 2020, https://apnews.com/269b3de1af34e17c1941a514f78d764c; Adrian
Zenz, “Sterilizations, IUDs, and Mandatory Birth Control: The CCP’s Campaign to Suppress Uyghur Birthrates
in Xinjiang,” (Washington, DC: The Jamestown Foundation, June 2020), https://jamestown.org/product/
sterilizations-iuds-and-mandatory-birth-control-the-ccps-campaign-to-suppress-uyghur-birthrates-in-xinjiang/.
16  Yuhui Li, China’s Assistance Program in Xinjiang: A Sociological Analysis (New York: Lexington Books,
2018), 132-33.
17  Agence France-Presse, “Ghost cities haunt stability dream in China’s far west,” South China Morning
Post, September 4, 2017, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/economy/article/2109555/ghost-cities-haunt-
stability-dream-chinas-far-west.
18  Yuhui Li, China’s Assistance Program in Xinjiang, especially 134-39.
19  Paul Mozur and Nicole Perlroth, “China’s Software Stalked Uighurs Earlier and More Widely, Researchers
Learn,” The New York Times, July 1, 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/01/technology/china-uighurs-
hackers-malware-hackers-smartphones.html.
20  Adrian Zenz and James Leibold, “Securitizing Xinjiang: Police Recruitment, Informal Policing and Ethnic
Minority Co-optation,” The China Quarterly 242, no. (June 2020), https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/
china-quarterly/article/securitizing-xinjiang-police-recruitment-informal-policing-and-ethnic-minority-cooptation/
FEEC613414AA33A0353949F9B791E733; James Leibold, “Surveillance in China’s Xinjiang Region: Ethnic
Sorting, Coercion, and Inducement,” Journal of Contemporary China 29, no. 121 (2020), https://www.
tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/10670564.2019.1621529.
21  Although usually translated as “Integrated Joint Operations Platform,” the Chinese term specifies 作
战，i.e. war-making or military operations. It is significant that the system feeding “students” into the so-called
vocational training program is designated a military system created by a defense conglomerate.
22  Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian, “Exposed: China’s Operating Manuals for Mass Internment and Arrest by
Algorithm,” International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, November 24, 2019, https://www.icij.org/
investigations/china-cables/exposed-chinas-operating-manuals-for-mass-internment-and-arrest-by-algorithm/.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
17
An IJOP bulletin instructed officials that “if it is not possible at the moment to eliminate suspicion, it is
necessary to put [the suspect] in concentrated training and further screen and review.” Scilla Alecci, “How China
Targets Uighurs ‘One by One’ for Using a Mobile App,” International Consortium of Investigative Journalists,
November 24, 2019, https://www.icij.org/investigations/china-cables/how-china-targets-uighurs-one-by-
one-for-using-a-mobile-app/. See also Maya Wang, “China’s Algorithms of Repression: Reverse Engineering a
Xinjiang Police Mass Surveillance App,” (New York: Human Rights Watch, May 1, 2019), https://www.hrw.org/
report/2019/05/02/chinas-algorithms-repression/reverse-engineering-xinjiang-police-mass.
23  Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian, “Exposed: China’s Operating Manuals for Mass Internment and Arrest by
Algorithm.”
24  “‘Integrated Joint Operations Platform’ Daily Essentials Bulletin No. 14,” Integrated Joint Military Operations
Platform, June 25, 2017, https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/6558506-China-Cables-IJOP-Daily-
Bulletin-14-English.html. Document published by International Consortium of Investigative Journalists as part of
“The China Cables,” https://www.icij.org/investigations/china-cables/. Original Chinese version: https://www.
documentcloud.org/documents/6558505-China-Cables-IJOP-Daily-Bulletin-14-Chinese.html.
25  Darren Byler, “Spirit Breaking,” 47.
26  Emily Feng, “‘Illegal Superstition’: China Jails Muslims For Practicing Islam, Relatives Say,” NPR, October
8, 2019, https://www.npr.org/2019/10/08/764153179/china-has-begun-moving-xinjiang-muslim-detainees-
to-formal-prisons-relatives-say. Data drawn from the PRC and Xinjiang statistical yearbooks, court records,
and other sources. Given the 99% conviction rate in Chinese courts, we can assume that 300,000 additional
prosecutions equates to approximately 300,000 more convicts in prison.
27  Adrian Zenz, “‘Thoroughly reforming them towards a healthy heart attitude’: China’s political re-education
campaign in Xinjiang,” Central Asian Survey 38, no. 1 (September 2018), 102-128, https://www.tandfonline.
com/doi/full/10.1080/02634937.2018.1507997.
28  Adrian Zenz calculated the initial estimates of numbers interned on the basis of camp size, local quotas,
and Chinese documents. Ibid. In February 2018, a Uyghur activist media outlet in Turkey released a document
it says was leaked by a “believable member of the security services on the ground” in Xinjiang. The document,
dating from late 2017 or early 2018, tabulates precise numbers of internees in county-level detention centers,
amounting to 892,329 (it excluded municipal-level administrative units, notably the large cities of Ürümqi,
Khotan, and Yining). Naoko Mizutani “水谷尚子, “ウイグル絶望収容所の収監者数は89万人以上” [" [The
number of internees in Uyghur despair camps exceeds 890,000], Newsweek Japan, March 13, 2018, https://
www.newsweekjapan.jp/stories/world/2018/03/89-3_1.php. Though the document’s provenance cannot
be confirmed, if genuine it supports the estimates of a million or more total internees. Randall Schriver, then
assistant secretary of defense for Indo-Pacific Security Affairs at the U.S. Department of Defense, estimated
that up to three million Xinjiang Muslims were interned in the camps. Phil Stewart, “China putting minority
Muslims in ‘concentration camps,’ U.S. says,” Reuters, May 3, 2019, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-
china-concentrationcamps/china-putting-minority-muslims-in-concentration-camps-us-says-idUSKCN1S925K.
These figures and figures quoted in media accounts generally do not include over 300,000 newly put in prison
in 2017-2018, though they are also victims of the algorithm-aided round-up of supposed extremists. Shawn
Zhang and other researchers gathered further evidence of the internment system’s scale from satellite images
and coordinates from Google Earth and other open sources. Journalists were able to confirm the identification
of sites as internment camps by visiting some of them on the ground. See Shawn Zhang, “List of Re-education
Camps in Xinjiang 新疆再教育集中营列表,” Medium, May 20, 2018, https://medium.com/@shawnwzhang/list-
of-re-education-camps-in-xinjiang-%E6%96%B0%E7%96%86%E5%86%8D%E6%95%99%E8%82%B2%E9%9B%
86%E4%B8%AD%E8%90%A5%E5%88%97%E8%A1%A8-99720372419c; Shawn Zhang, “Xinjiang Re-education
Camps List by Cities,” Medium, May 20, 2019, https://medium.com/@shawnwzhang/xinjiang-re-education-
camps-list-by-cities-f4ed0a6e095a; and other photo essays posted on by Zhang on Medium, https://medium.
com/@shawnwzhang. A more extensive BuzzFeed News investigation identified through satelite imagery 268

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18
compounds with prison features built since 2017 in Xinjiang and through other sources verified 92 of these as
detention centers. Megha Rajagapolan, Alison Killing, and Christo Buschek, “China Secretly Built A Vast New
Infrastructure To Imprison Muslims,” BuzzFeed News, August 27, 2020, https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/
meghara/china-new-internment-camps-xinjiang-uighurs-muslims.
29  Nicole Bozorgmir and Isobel Yeung, “Uighur Parents Say China Is Ripping Their Children Away and
Brainwashing Them,” Vice, July 1, 2019, https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/7xgj5y/these-uighur-parents-say-
china-is-ripping-their-children-away-and-brainwashing-them. Official statistics for Khotan (Hotan) prefecture show
an abrupt increase from approximately 400 kindergartens in 2011-2016 to approximately 1,200 in 2017.
30  “Xinjiang Authorities Secretly Transferring Uyghur Detainees to Jails Throughout China,” Radio Free Asia,
October 2, 2018, https://www.rfa.org/english/news/uyghur/transfer-10022018171100.html. One of the
authors (Millward) received an account written by a witness to the arrival in Sichuan of a bus caravan of
prisoners from Xinjiang.
31  For more on the punishments for having “too many” children, see “China cuts Uighur births with IUDs,
abortion, sterilization,” Associated Press.
32  Maya Wang, “‘Eradicating Ideological Viruses’,” (New York: Human Rights Watch, September 9, 2018),
https://www.hrw.org/report/2018/09/09/eradicating-ideological-viruses/chinas-campaign-repression-
against-xinjiangs; “China cuts Uighur births with IUDs, abortion, sterilization,” Associated Press; Adrian Zenz,
“Sterilizations, IUDs, and Mandatory Birth Control.”
33  Zhu Hailun, “Opinion on further strengthening and standardizing vocational skills education and
training centers work,” Autonomous Region State Organ Telegram, 2017, https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/6558510-China-Cables-Telegram-English.html. Document published by International Consortium of
Investigative Journalists as part of “The China Cables.” Original Chinese version: https://www.documentcloud.
org/documents/6558509-China-Cables-Telegram-Chinese.html.
34  The Pairing Assistance Program and techno-oppressive surveillance / internment / forced labor system
are thoroughly intermeshed. The first cases of Western companies reported to be relying on Uyghur forced
labor, Badger Sportswear and Costco, were found to be supplying from factories in a new industrial park built
by Beijing in Khotan (Hetian) under the Pairing Assistance Program and run by the Chinese firm Hetian Taida.
Juozapas Bagdonas, “Tracking Down the Fruits of Xinjiang’s Forced Labor Industry,” The Diplomat, November
16, 2019, https://thediplomat.com/2019/11/tracking-down-the-fruits-of-xinjiangs-forced-labor-industry/. The
website of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region Development and Reform Commission boasted on December
5, 2019 that “with vocational skill educational training centers [i.e. internment camps] as the vehicle, [our
policies] have attracted a large number of coastal enterprises from eastern China to invest and build factories,
which has powerfully expanded employment and promoted income growth.” “自治区经济结构稳中有活 发
展良好” [The economic structures of the Autonomous Region are lively within stability and development is
excellent], 新疆维吾尔自治区发展和改革委员会 [Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region Development and Reform
Commission], December 5, 2018, https://web.archive.org/web/20190520143306/http:/www.xjdrc.gov.cn/
info/9923/23516.htm. Adrian Zenz compiles voluminous evidence of the connections between the Pairing
Assistance Program and the surveillance / internment / forced labor system in Xinjiang. Adrian Zenz, “Beyond
the Camps: Beijing’s Long-Term Scheme of Coercive Labor, Poverty Alleviation and Social Control in Xinjiang,”
Journal of Political Risk 7, no. 12 (December 2019), https://www.jpolrisk.com/beyond-the-camps-beijings-long-
term-scheme-of-coercive-labor-poverty-alleviation-and-social-control-in-xinjiang/.
35  “喀什地区困难群体就业培训工作实施方案” [Implementation program for Kashgar region impoverished
groups’ employment and job training], August 7, 2018, https://web.archive.org/web/20181204024839/http://
kashi.gov.cn/Government/PublicInfoShow.aspx?ID=2963, cited in Adrian Zenz, “Beyond the Camps,” 9.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
19
36  Vicky Xiuzhong Xu, Danielle Cave, James Leibold, Kelsey Munro, and Nathan Ruser, “Uyghurs for sale: ‘Re-
education’, forced labour and surveillance beyond Xinjiang,” (Barton, Australia: Australian Strategic Policy Institute,
March 1, 2020), https://www.aspi.org.au/report/uyghurs-sale.
37  Adrian Zenz, “Beyond the Camps,” 17.
38  For example, “Path to Prosperity: Localized factories lift Xinjiang locals out of poverty,” CGTN, May 8, 2020,
https://news.cgtn.com/news/2020-05-08/Localized-factories-lift-Xinjiang-locals-out-of-poverty-QkbViBZI6Q/index.
html.
39  Global cotton production has ranged between 25 and 27 million tons in recent years. China produced 5.9
million tons in 2019, and “more than 5 million” tons were grown in Xinjiang, 89% of China’s total. “Top 10 Cotton
Producing Countries in the World,” Discover Natural Fibres Initiative, July 1, 2020, https://dnfi.org/cotton/top-
10-cotton-producing-countries-in-the-world_4785/; Mao Weihua and Zheng Caixioing, “Xinjiang still China’s
largest cotton producer in 2019,” China Daily, January 8, 2020, https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202001/08/
WS5e156c70a310cf3e3558336b.html.
40  Vicky Xiuzhong Xu, Danielle Cave, James Leibold, Kelsey Munro, and Nathan Ruser, “Uyghurs for sale”; Eva Dou
and Chao Deng, “Western Companies Get Tangled in China’s Muslim Clampdown,” The Wall Street Journal, May 16,
2019, https://www.wsj.com/articles/western-companies-get-tangled-in-chinas-muslim-clampdown-11558017472.
As the authors completed drafting this article, the Caterpillar corporation was reported to be selling clothing made
with Xinjiang forced labor. Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian, “Exclusive: Caterpillar sourced clothes from Xinjiang factory
involved in coercive labor,” Axios, June 29, 2020, https://www.axios.com/caterpillar-xinjiang-uighur-labor-a6ec73df-
b75e-4aea-ae76-cc8182ad6a3c.html.
41  Peggy Sito, “Esquel Group, garment supplier to Tommy Hilfiger and Nike, says it’s seeking to overturn US sanction
on its Xinjiang plant,” South China Morning Post, July 21, 2020, https://www.scmp.com/business/article/3094073/
esquel-group-garment-supplier-tommy-hilfiger-and-nike-says-its-seeking; “Divestment of Xinjiang White Field Farming
Co. Ltd.,” Esquel Group, May 13, 2020, https://www.esquel.com/news/divestment-xinjiang-white-field-farming-co-ltd.
42  Danielle Cave, Fergus Ryan, and Vicky Xiuzhong Xu, “Mapping more of China’s tech giants: AI and surveillance,”
(Barton, Australia: Australian Strategic Policy Institute, November 28, 2019), https://www.aspi.org.au/report/
mapping-more-chinas-tech-giants; Dahlia Peterson and Josh Rudolph, “Sharper Eyes: Shandong to Xinjiang,” China
Digital Times, September 13, 2019, https://chinadigitaltimes.net/2019/09/sharper-eyes-shandong-to-xinjiang-
part-3.
43  Darren Byler, “The Global Implications of ‘Re-education’ Technologies in Northwest China,” (Washington,
DC: Center for Global Policy, June 8, 2020), https://cgpolicy.org/articles/the-global-implications-of-re-education-
technologies-in-northwest-china; Danielle Cave, Fergus Ryan, and Vicky Xiuzhong Xu, “Mapping more of China’s tech
giants.”
44  Placement on the Entity List means companies are subject to additional license requirements and limited
availability of most license exceptions for exports, reexports, and in-country transfers to entities on the list. See
“Addition of Certain Entities to the Entity List,” Federal Register, October 9, 2019, https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2019/10/09/2019-22210/addition-of-certain-entities-to-the-entity-list; Amy K. Lehr and Efthimia Maria
(“Mariefaye”) Bechrakis, “The United States Blacklisted 28 Chinese Entities over Repression of Muslim Minorities
in Xinjiang. What Does This Mean for Human Rights?” Center for Strategic and International Studies, October 11,
2019, https://www.csis.org/analysis/united-states-blacklisted-28-chinese-entities-over-repression-muslim-minorities-
xinjiang.
45  “Addition of Certain Entities to the Entity List,” Federal Register.
46  AFP, “China’s blacklisted AI firms: what you should know,” Bangkok Post, October 13, 2019, https://www.
bangkokpost.com/business/1771179/chinas-blacklisted-ai-firms-what-you-should-know.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20
47  “Commerce Department to Add Nine Chinese Entities Related to Human Rights Abuses in the Xinjiang Uighur
Autonomous Region to the Entity List,” U.S. Department of Commerce, May 22, 2020, https://www.commerce.
gov/news/press-releases/2020/05/commerce-department-add-nine-chinese-entities-related-human-rights.
48  “Commerce Department to Add Nine Chinese Entities Related to Human Rights Abuses in the Xinjiang Uighur
Autonomous Region to the Entity List,” U.S. Department of Commerce; Simon Glover, “BCI slammed for refusing
to quit Xinjiang,” EcoTextile News, January 29, 2020, https://www.ecotextile.com/2020012925609/materials-
production-news/bci-slammed-for-refusing-to-quit-xinjiang.html.
49  The national team was first launched in November 2017 with five members, and has since expanded to
15 total. See Jeffrey Ding, “China’s AI “National Team,” ChinAI, May 20, 2019, https://chinai.substack.com/p/
chinai-51-chinas-ai-national-team; “科技部扩容‘AI国家队’名单，十家新公司入选” [The Ministry of Science and
Technology expands the list of ‘AI National Team,’ 10 new companies are selected], 电子工程专辑 [EE Times
China], August 30, 2019, https://www.eet-china.com/news/201908301010.html.
50  Gregory C. Allen, “Understanding China’s AI Strategy” (Washington, DC: Center for a New American Security,
February 6, 2019), https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/understanding-chinas-ai-strategy.
51  Charles Rollet, “In China’s Far West, Companies Cash in on Surveillance Program That Targets Muslims,”
Foreign Policy, June 13, 2018, https://foreignpolicy.com/2018/06/13/in-chinas-far-west-companies-cash-in-on-
surveillance-program-that-targets-muslims.
52  A big contributor to the discrepancy between Hikvision and Dahua’s shares of the $1.2 billion is Dahua
winning the $686 million Safe County project for Yarkant County, the location of the July 2014 rioting. See
Charles Rollet, “Dahua and Hikvision Win Over $1 Billion In Government-Backed Projects In Xinjiang,” IPVM, April
23, 2018, https://ipvm.com/reports/xinjiang-dahua-hikvision.
53  Charles Rollet, “In China’s Far West, Companies Cash in on Surveillance Program That Targets Muslims.”
54  Charles Rollet, “Evidence Of Hikvision’s Involvement With Xinjiang IJOP And Re-Education Camps,” IPVM,
October 2, 2018, https://ipvm.com/reports/hikvision-xinjiang.
55  “Hikvision: PRC Government ‘Exert Significant Influence Over Our Business,’” IPVM, March 28, 2018,
https://ipvm.com/reports/hikvision-influence.
56  Charles Rollet, “Evidence Of Hikvision’s Involvement With Xinjiang IJOP And Re-Education Camps”; “How
Mass Surveillance Works in Xinjiang, China,” Human Rights Watch, May 2, 2019, https://www.hrw.org/video-
photos/interactive/2019/05/02/china-how-mass-surveillance-works-xinjiang; The CETC subsidiary, Hebei Far
East Communication System Engineering Company, and 16 other entities tied to CETC had already been placed
on the Entity List in August 2018 for “illicit procurement of commodities and technologies for unauthorized
military end-use in China.” See “Addition of Certain Entities; and Modification of Entry on the Entity List,” Federal
Register, August 1, 2018, https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2018/08/01/2018-16474/addition-of-
certain-entities-and-modification-of-entry-on-the-entity-list.
57  Charles Rollet, “Evidence Of Hikvision’s Involvement With Xinjiang IJOP and Re-Education Camps.”
58  The expos were the 4th China-Asia-Europe Security Expo and the 13th Xinjiang Police Anti-Terrorism
Technical Equipment Expo. See “共筑平安新疆 云从科技携人脸识别亮相亚欧安防展览会” [Building
safety in Xinjiang: CloudWalk Technology debuts face recognition at the Asia-Europe Security Exhibition], CTI
Forum, August 24, 2017, https://web.archive.org/web/20200623203839/http://www.ctiforum.com/news/
guonei/519237.html; “商汤、旷视、云从、依图，究竟谁将在人脸识别领域独领风骚?” [Sensetime, Megvii,
Cloudwalk, Yitu, who will be the leader in face recognition?], 新鲜事研究社 [What’s New Research], May 19,
2013, https://web.archive.org/web/20200623212409/https://baijiahao.baidu.com/s?id=163341456583246
3606&wfr=spider&for=pc.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
21
59  “云天励飞“深目”动态人像识别解决方案将亮相亚欧安博会” [Intellifusion’s ‘Deep Eye’ Dynamic Portrait
Recognition Solution Will Debut at Asia-Europe Expo], 中国安防展览网 [China Security Exhibition Network],
August 8, 2017, https://archive.vn/OZkfO.
60  Cao Yiqing, “从依图科技看中国AI的弯道超越” [Seeing the Acceleration of Chinese AI from Yitu
Technology’s Perspective], Yu De, October 11, 2019, https://web.archive.org/web/20200623212059/https://
baijiahao.baidu.com/s?id=1647058344062254767&wfr=spider&for=pc.
61  The “focus personnel” label is likely similar to the seven groups of “focus personnel” highlighted by Human
Rights Watch: petitioners, those who “undermine stability,” those who are involved in terrorism, major criminals,
those involved with drugs, wanted persons, and those with mental health problems who “tend to cause
disturbances.” See “China: Police ‘Big Data’ Systems Violate Privacy, Target Dissent,” Human Rights Watch,
November 19, 2017, https://www.hrw.org/news/2017/11/19/china-police-big-data-systems-violate-privacy-
target-dissent.
62  Darren Byler, “The Global Implications of ‘Re-education’ Technologies in Northwest China”; Meiya Pico was
also responsible for the intrusive spying app MFSocket. Celia Chen and Meng Jing, “What you need to know
about Meiya Pico, China’s low-profile forensics champion named in data privacy scandal,” South China Morning
Post, July 9, 2019, https://www.scmp.com/tech/start-ups/article/3017688/what-you-need-know-about-meiya-
pico-chinas-low-profile-forensics.
63  Danielle Cave, Fergus Ryan, and Vicky Xiuzhong Xu, “Mapping more of China’s tech giants.”
64  “‘实体清单’事项 海康威视、大华股份最新、全面回应” [Hikvision, Dahua share their latest and
comprehensive response to the ‘Entity List’], 中国安防行业网 [China Security Industry Network], October 10,
2019, https://web.archive.org/web/20200623220513/http://news.21csp.com.cn/c34/201910/11389485.
html.
65  Jane Zhang, “China’s AI champions are already powering a mind-boggling array of processes and this
will rise in 2020,” South China Morning Post, January 1, 2020, https://www.scmp.com/tech/start-ups/
article/3044188/chinas-ai-champions-are-already-powering-mind-boggling-array.
66  “Divestment of Xinjiang White Field Farming Co. Ltd.,” Esquel Group. Increased scrutiny on Esquel’s exports
of U.S. technology might endanger the company’s access to robotics, a strategic direction the company has
announced. Ryan Swift, “Hong Kong shirtmaker Esquel turns to robots to beat US tariffs,” South China Morning
Post, September 25, 2018, https://www.scmp.com/business/banking-finance/article/2165582/hong-kong-
shirtmaker-esquel-turns-robots-beat-us-tariffs.
67  Ryan Swift, “Hong Kong shirtmaker Esquel turns to robots to beat US tariffs.”
68  This includes one of the 11 Dahua and Hikvision Xinjiang projects highlighted by IPVM worth $1.2 billion.
Leon was one of the awardees alongside Dahua in the Qiemo Safe County project in 2017. See Charles Rollet,
“Dahua and Hikvision Win Over $1 Billion In Government-Backed Projects In Xinjiang”; Jeffrey Ding, “Complicit
- China’s AI Unicorns and the Securitization of Xinjiang,” ChinAI, September 23, 2018, https://chinai.substack.
com/p/chinai-newsletter-29-complicit-chinas-ai-unicorns-and-the-securitization-of-xinjiang.
69  Jeffrey Ding, “Complicit - China’s AI Unicorns and the Securitization of Xinjiang.”
70  Masha Borak, “China’s ‘data doors’ scoop up information straight from your phone,” South China
Morning Post, May 7, 2019, https://www.scmp.com/abacus/tech/article/3029333/chinas-data-doors-scoop-
information-straight-your-phone.
71  Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22
72  Ibid.
73  For more on how Thermo Fisher enabled biometric surveillance in China, see Sui-Lee Wee, “China is
Collecting DNA from Tens of Millions of Men and Boys, Using U.S. Equipment,” The New York Times, June 17,
2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/17/world/asia/China-DNA-surveillance.html.
74  These hardware solutions include GPUs and FPGAs. See Lorand Laskai and Helen Toner, “Can China Grow
Its Own AI Tech Base?,” New America, November 4, 2019, https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/
digichina/blog/can-china-grow-its-own-ai-tech-base.
75  Xilinx provides chips called FPGAs, while Seagate and Western Digital provide AI surveillance-optimized
storage solutions. For further details see Dahlia Peterson, “Foreign Technology and the Surveillance State”
in China’s Quest for Foreign Technology: Beyond Espionage, eds. William C. Hannas and Didi Kirsten Tatlow
(London: Routledge, September 2020).
76  “AI芯片厂商与传统安防制造企业紧密合作 拓展安防业务” [AI chip manufacturers work closely with
traditional security manufacturing companies to expand security business], 中国安防行业网 [China Security
Industry Network], December 28, 2017, https://web.archive.org/web/20200630000620/http://news.21csp.
com.cn/c34/201712/11365694.html.
77  For further examples see Dahlia Peterson, “Foreign Technology and the Surveillance State.”
78  “Congressional Letter Calls Out US Companies Supporting Dahua and Hikvision,” IPVM, March 11, 2019,
https://ipvm.com/reports/letter-support; Liza Lin and Josh Chin, “U.S. Tech Companies Prop Up China’s Vast
Surveillance Network,” The Wall Street Journal, November 26, 2019, https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-tech-
companies-prop-up-chinas-vast-surveillance-network-11574786846.
79  “China Uyghur Analytic Projects Require Intel And NVIDIA, Intel Condemns, NVIDIA Silent,” IPVM, December
2, 2019, https://ipvm.com/reports/uyghur-intel-nvidia.
80  Charles Rollet, “China Government Spreads Uyghur Analytics Across China,” IPVM, November 25, 2019,
https://ipvm.com/reports/ethnicity-analytics; Paul Mozur, “One Month, 500,000 Face Scans: How China Is
Using A.I. to Profile a Minority,” The New York Times, April 14, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/14/
technology/china-surveillance-artificial-intelligence-racial-profiling.html. Hikvision is a notable example of a
company that actively marketed — then deleted — coverage of its Uyghur detection and analytics capabilities on
its website. See Charles Rollet, “Hikvision Markets Uyghur Ethnicity Analytics, Now Covers Up,” IPVM, November
11, 2019, https://ipvm.com/reports/hikvision-uyghur.
81  Matt Schiavenza, “Why Aren’t More Countries Confronting China over Xinjiang?,” ChinaFile, January 14,
2020, https://www.chinafile.com/reporting-opinion/viewpoint/why-arent-more-countries-confronting-china-over-
xinjiang. Qatar initially signed, then withdrew its support for the UNHCR letter deploring the Xinjiang situation.
82  “Inter-Parliamentary Alliance on China,” Inter-Parliamentary Alliance on China, https://www.ipac.global;
Benedict Rogers, “Parliamentarians From Around the World Unite to Discuss the China Challenge,” The Diplomat,
June 6, 2020, https://thediplomat.com/2020/06/parliamentarians-from-around-the-world-unite-to-discuss-the-
china-challenge; “Launch of the Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence by 15 founding members,” French
Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs, June 15, 2020, https://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/en/french-foreign-policy/
digital-diplomacy/news/article/launch-of-the-global-partnership-on-artificial-intelligence-by-15-founding.
83  Anna Gross and Madhumita Murgia, “China Shows its Dominance in Surveillance Technology,” Financial
Times, December 26, 2019, https://www.ft.com/content/b34d8ff8-21b4-11ea-92da-f0c92e957a96.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
23
84  California Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment, “The Proposition 65 List,” https://oehha.ca.gov/
proposition-65/proposition-65-list; United States Environmental Protection Agency, “Toxics Release Inventory (TRI)
Program,” https://www.epa.gov/toxics-release-inventory-tri-program.
85  Danielle Cave, Fergus Ryan, and Vicky Xiuzhong Xu, “Mapping more of China’s tech giants.”
86  The guidance says “Before a transaction, Exporters should consider what the Item is capable of, and how it
could be used or misused by authorities. Exporters might consider integrating safety and ‘privacy by design’ features
that enable them to track the Item’s deployment and alert them to misuse, strip certain capabilities from the Item,
auto-delete data and provide a kill-switch.” See “Draft U.S. Government Guidance for the Export of Hardware,
Software and Technology With Surveillance Capabilities and/or Parts/Know-how,” U.S. Department of State,
October 29, 2019, https://www.eff.org/files/2019/10/29/draft-guidance-for-the-export-of-hardware-software-and-
technology-with-surveillance-capabilities.pdf.
87  The Wassenaar Arrangement, https://www.wassenaar.org/.
88  Foreign Advanced Technology Surveillance Accountability Act, H.R. 7307, 116th Cong. (2020), https://www.
congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-bill/7307/text; “Curtis, Malinowski Introduce Bipartisan Foreign Advanced
Technology Surveillance Accountability Act,” Congressman John Curtis, June 24, 2020, https://curtis.house.gov/
press-releases/curtis-malinowski-introduce-bipartisan-foreign-advanced-technology-surveillance-accountability-act.
89  Danielle Cave, Fergus Ryan, and Vicky Xiuzhong Xu, “Mapping more of China’s tech giants.”
90  James T. Areddy and Michelle Hackman, “China’s Muslim Uighurs Are Stuck in U.S. Immigration Limbo,”
The Wall Street Journal, July 28, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/chinas-muslim-uighurs-are-stuck-in-u-s-
immigration-limbo-11595937603.
91  Involuntary labor related to Xinjiang oppression is complex and pervasive, occurring well beyond factories
located within or adjacent to internment camps. The U.S. Tariff Act of 1930 defines “forced labor” as “all work or
service which is exacted from any person under the menace of any penalty for its nonperformance and for which
the worker does not offer himself voluntarily.” This could potentially include all Uyghurs and others channeled into
state-run and public-private manufacturing arrangements in a context when refusal may result in internment or
imprisonment. Tariff Act of 1930, 19 U.S.C. §1307 (1930), https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@
title19/chapter4&edition=prelim.
92  Jason Judd and Sarosh Kuruvilla, “Why apparel brands’ efforts to police their supply chains aren’t working,”
The Conversation, April 30, 2020. https://theconversation.com/why-apparel-brands-efforts-to-police-their-supply-
chains-arent-working-136821.
93  Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian, “Exclusive: Caterpillar sourced clothes from Xinjiang factory involved in coercive
labor.”
94  Amy Lehr, “Addressing Forced Labor in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region.”
95  Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act of 2020, Pub. L. No. 116-145 (2020) https://www.congress.gov/116/plaws/
publ145/PLAW-116publ145.pdf.
96  See “Meshrep,” Intangible Cultural Heritage, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
https://ich.unesco.org/en/USL/meshrep-00304 and “Uyghur Muqam of Xinjiang,” Intangible Cultural Heritage,
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, https://ich.unesco.org/en/RL/uyghur-muqam-
of-xinjiang-00109. For background on abuses of these and other Uyghur cultural heritage, see “UHRP Report:
Extracting Cultural Resources: the Exploitation and Criminalization of Uyghur Cultural Heritage,” (Washington,
DC: Uyghur Human Rights Project, June 12, 2018), https://uhrp.org/press-release/extracting-cultural-resources-
exploitation-and-criminalization-uyghur-cultural.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24
97  Minxin Pei, “China needs an exit strategy from Xinjiang,” Nikkei Asian Review, August 8, 2020, https://asia.
nikkei.com/Opinion/China-needs-an-exit-strategy-from-Xinjiang2; Amy Lehr, “Addressing Forced Labor in the
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region.” Ilham Tohti, “Present-Day Ethnic Problems in Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous
Region” and other writing by Tohti and other Chinese social scientists have proposed models for Xinjiang
development that would avoid the mistakes of both the Pairing Assistance Program and the Great Development
of the West campaigns.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
James Millward is a professor of history at the Walsh School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University, where
he teaches Chinese, Central Asian, and world history. He also teaches as visiting faculty in the Máster Oficial
en Estudios de Asia Oriental at the University of Granada in Spain.  His specialties include the Qing empire, the
silk road, and historical and contemporary Xinjiang. Millward is the author of Eurasian Crossroads: A History of
Xinjiang (second edition forthcoming in 2020 with Hurst).
Dahlia Peterson is a research analyst at Georgetown’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET). She
researches China’s use of predictive policing algorithms and facial, voice, and gait recognition technologies for
its AI-powered surveillance programs, how Western companies contribute to Chinese surveillance, and how to
safeguard the U.S. from threats to its research enterprise. She previously interned for the U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission (USCC), the State Department’s Virtual Student Federal Service, and the Foreign
Commercial Service at the U.S. Embassy in Beijing. Peterson holds a B.A. in Economics and Chinese Language
with a minor in China Studies from the University of California, Berkeley (Phi Beta Kappa), and is pursuing a
masters at Georgetown University’s Security Studies Program.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Julian Gewirtz for helpful discussions, Igor Mikolic-Torreira, Lynne Weil, and Remco
Zwetsloot for editing assistance, and anonymous peer reviewers for comments on the draft. Ted Reinert
edited this paper, and Rachel Slattery provided layout.
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20200017
The Brookings Institution is a nonprofit organization devoted to independent research and policy solutions. Its
mission is to conduct high-quality, independent research and, based on that research, to provide innovative,
practical recommendations for policymakers and the public. The conclusions and recommendations of any
Brookings publication are solely those of its author(s), and do not reflect the views of the Institution, its
management, or its other scholars.
