
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
AUTHORS
Wm. C. Hannas
Huey-Meei Chang
Jennifer Wang
Catherine Aiken
Daniel Chou
China AI-Brain
Research
BRAIN-INSPIRED AI,
CONNECTOMICS, BRAIN-
COMPUTER INTERFACES
SEPTEMBER 2020
類類
腦腦
智智
能能

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
2
Established in January 201 9, the Center for Security and
Emerging Technology (CSET) at Georgetown’s Walsh
School of Foreign Service is a research organization fo-
cused on studying the security impacts of emerging tech-
nologies, supporting academic work in security and tech-
nology studies, and delivering nonpartisan analysis to the
policy community. CSET aims to prepare a generation of
policymakers, analysts, and diplomats to address the chal-
lenges and opportunities of emerging technologies. During
its first two years, CSET will focus on the effects of progress
in artificial intelligence and advanced computing.
CSET.GEORGETOWN.EDU | CSET@GEORGETOWN.EDU

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
China AI-Brain
Research
SEPTEMBER 2020
AUTHORS
Wm. C. Hannas
Huey-Meei Chang
Jennifer Wang
Catherine Aiken
Daniel Chou
BRAIN-INSPIRED AI, CONNECTOMICS,
BRAIN-COMPUTER INTERFACES

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
PRINT AND ELECTRONIC DISTRIBUTION RIGHTS
© 2020 by the Center for Security an d Emerging Technology.
This work is licen sed under a Creativ e Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 International License .
To view a copy of thi s license, visit:
https://creativecommo ns.org/licenses/by -nc/4.0/.
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20190033
Cover illustration: "Brain-inspired AI" in Chinese.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
i
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
INTRODUCTION
1| BI-AI, CONNECTOMICS, AND BCI
2| AI-BRAIN BENCHMARKS AND CHALLENGES
3| CHINESE SCIENTISTS’ GOALS AND UNDERSTANDING
4| LEADERSHIP, STATUTORY, AND BUDGETARY SUPPORT
5| CHINA CENTERS OF AI-BRAIN RESEARCH
6| TOP CHINESE RESEARCHERS, ADMINISTRATORS
7| SURVEY OF CHINESE SCIENTISTS AND PROJECT MANAGERS
8| CHINA AI-BRAIN PUBLICATIONS—CONTENT EVALUATION
9| FOREIGN DEPENDENCIES
CONCLUSION
APPENDIX | SEARCH TERMS
END NOTES
III
V
1
3
9
21
29
35
41
47
55
61
65
69
Contents

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
iv

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
iii
ince 2016, China has engaged in a nationwide effort to “merge”
artificial and human intelligence as a major part of its next-gener-
ation AI development program. The effort is not unique to China,
although China enjoys natural advantages that may expedite its success.
The term “merge” is meant both figuratively, in the sense of creating a
more human-friendly AI, for example, to support human decision making,
and literally, in the sense of erasing distinctions between how AI and the
brain operate, and how the two forms of intelligence interact.
China’s initiative involves research in three disciplinary areas:
“brain-inspired” AI that models aspects of human cognition, “connecto-
mics” or brain mapping, and brain-computer interfaces that link the two
platforms. “Neuromorphic” digital-analog hybrid chips also play a role.
A review of China’s statutory proclamations, enabling infrastructure,
main practitioners, and scientific literature indicates the initiative is genuine
and that China is pursuing the benchmark challenges characteristic of AI-
brain research worldwide.
China’s advantages in this area are national commitment, the world’s
largest supply of laboratory grade non-human primates, a more per-
missive experimental ethos, fewer privacy concerns on data collection
and use, and an unrivaled ability to absorb and apply foreign technical
advances.
Some Chinese scientists involved in this initiative believe artificial
general intelligence (AGI) may someday issue from this research, but we
find no indication in the materials examined that any such “breakthrough”
is imminent.
Executive Summary
S

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
iv
Chinese scientists agree almost unanimously that international structures and
agreements are needed to ensure the safety of next-generation AI, whatever forms
it may take. Identifying those scientists able to lead such initiatives in China should
be a U.S. priority.
U.S. ability to monitor China’s AI and other high-tech development is hampered
by the lack of a national STI (scientific and technical intelligence) organization. Cur-
rent efforts are fragmentary, uncoordinated, ephemeral, and give the false assur-
ance that a non-existent capability exists.
We recommend creating within the U.S. government—possibly outside its intelli-
gence community—a centralized body of open source specialists to monitor China’s
AI development and foreign acquisitions, and other potentially risky technologies,
on the theme of “trust, but verify.”

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
v
Introduction
his paper examines China’s program to combine artificial intelli-
gence (AI) with neuroscience (NS) research, leverage synergies to
address hard problems in both areas, and efforts to merge human
and artificial intelligence.
In particular, we aim to:
• explain the goals of China’s AI-brain program;
• identify key players, institutes, and pillars of support;
• evaluate research done in each of the major topic areas;
• determine the program’s foreign dependencies; and
• take stock of its trajectory and potential concerns.
The paper begins by describing the technologies that shape China’s
AI-brain program (1) and benchmarks used to evaluate progress (2) as a
basis for understanding points made in the study.
We then explore China’s program itself: its goals and motivation (3),
the statutory provisions that enable it (4), its physical infrastructure (5), and
the caliber of those running it (6). A survey of its architects and practitioners
is also provided (7). Finally, we evaluate the program using primary sourc-
es and expert consultation (8) as a foundation for assessing its dependen-
cies (9). Recommendations to address potential areas of concern are given
by way of conclusion.
T

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
vi
The authors of this study thank Dr. Jennifer Wang, and CSET’s Dr. Catherine
Aiken and Daniel Chou for their subject matter support, help fielding the scientists
survey, and data crunching expertise, respectively. We also thank the Allen Insti-
tute’s Dr. Christof Koch and SOS International’s Dr. James Mulvenon, who served
as readers, and IARPA’s Dr. David Markowitz, for many helpful suggestions. We
also acknowledge with gratitude the support of our CSET directors, fellows, and
research assistants.
WM. C. HANNAS
HUEY-MEEI CHANG

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
1
rain-inspired artificial intelligence (BI-AI, 类脑智能) can be under-
stood on three levels:
Most basically, all artificial intelligence is brain-inspired since
“intelligence” derives from the activity of biological brains. Accordingly,
human efforts to emulate intelligence on artificial platforms are brain-in-
spired by default. Many AI concepts, including neural nets (NN), hidden
layers, and connection weights, draw inspiration from—and are analogs
of—these naturally occurring “wet” phenomena.
A second level of BI-AI seeks to replicate higher cognitive skills such
as intuitive reasoning, causation modeling, and associative recall, or
even “simpler” skills like visually distinguishing objects from background.
The “inspiration,” however, owes less to detailed modeling of brain pro-
cesses and more to equating machine learning successes with analogous
macro-level brain behavior—whether the algorithms have anything in
common is irrelevant.1 In this sense, inspiration is a metaphor, which we
characterize here as “weak” BI-AI.
A third level attempts to write accurate mathematical descriptions of
brain processes that contribute to behavior, and run these algorithms on
computers to reproduce the behavior. Functional equivalence is es-
chewed in favor of neural models that correspond directly to the “com-
putation performed by biological wetware.” 2 This line of research we
characterize as “strong” BI-AI—and is the primary object of our concern
in this paper.*
BI-AI, connectomics,
and BCI
1
B
*Not to be confused with “strong” or “general” AI, i.e., human-equivalent artificial
intelligence, although some researchers believe development of the one (BI-AI) is a
precondition for the other (AGI).

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
2
Connectomics (人脑连接组) or “brain mapping” refers to empirical and com-
putational efforts to replicate on multiple levels the structure, function, and system
features of neurobiological circuitry—the mammalian central nervous system (CNS)
especially.3 While conceptually distinct from BI-AI, the two fields share the same
goal of reproducing brain functionality. Connectomics relies heavily on AI because:
• Models of brain function are tested as mathematical simulations that
invoke AI.
• The complexity of the brain is such that AI algorithms are needed to com-
plete the mapping, e.g., to interpret images or to extrapolate from observ-
able sequences.4
The interdependence of AI and brain study, exemplified here, creates a par-
adox: if a brain too complicated to understand itself builds an artifact that can
(namely, AI), can a principled distinction between the two be maintained? Per-
spectives like this drive speculation that the two forms of “intelligence” may boot-
strap one another, augmenting human intelligence, 5 and leading to their effective
“merger” (混合).6
Brain-computer interfaces ( 脑机接口) further blur the distinction between “real”
and artificial intelligence, potentially to the point of identity. BCIs are devices that
acquire electrical signals from the brain, analyze them on computers and, op-
tionally, translate the signals into actionable commands. BCI devices are distin-
guished along two dimensions: (1) read only or read-write, and (2) whether they
receive input “invasively” by direct contact with in vivo neurons (i.e., penetrate the
skull) or “non-invasively” through electrodes placed on or just under the scalp.
Early devices could move cursors after calibration and training, but lacked preci-
sion and throughput for rapid control of complex movements and communication.
To remedy these problems, AI is now being applied in “primary BCI”* proj-
ects to digitize neuronal signals, interpret their coding schema, learn optimal fea-
tures and, ultimately, diagnose and alleviate medical conditions. 7 Beyond these
therapeutic uses, BCI is seen as a potential direct link to AI resources, eradicating
the middleware (keyboards and mice) and opening the door to cognitive en-
hancement (“non-primary BCI”) and related ethical issues. 8
Collectively, these fields—BI-AI, connectomics, and BCI—constitute the three
main areas of AI-brain research identified by Chinese scientists (Section 7 below)
and international experts.
*The restoration of motor and sensory function to damaged brain tissue.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
3
any goals of AI-brain research are identical to those of main-
stream AI, the difference being that while the latter may draw
inspiration from human behavior, the former emulates particu-
lar neuronal functioning that gives rise to behavior. We summarize these
matters here as a baseline for evaluating the scope of AI-brain research
in China.
BRAIN-INSPIRED AI
Strong BI-AI—computationally modeling features and functions of a bio-
logical brain—aims to overcome shortcomings of “traditional” AI, such as
its narrowness (proficiency at one task only), slowness (training requires
repeated runs with many examples), and cost (hardware and power
consumption). The human brain, weighing just three pounds, assembled
genetically, and running on 25 watts, effortlessly performs many high
order tasks beyond the reach of the artificial neural nets (ANNs) used in
most types of machine learning (ML), and hence becomes AI’s model.
Specifically, the goal of BI-AI is to “understand the computational
principles of the cortex, and implement intelligent systems that operate on
those principles.”9 Algorithms inferred from the actual behavior of inter-
acting neurons are tweaked on ANNs to emulate their functionality. As
described by Baylor College of Medicine’s Andreas Tolias:
“Our ultimate goal is to apply the principles and canonical algo-
rithms we learn from cortical circuits to build the next generation artifi-
cial neural networks that will be based on a set of new computational
primitives inspired by neuroscience.”10
AI-brain benchmarks
and challenges
2
M

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
4
Put succinctly, the aim is “a less artificial intelligence.”11 One must look beyond
the nodes and edges of network architecture to other features that contribute to
network function. This begins by appreciating that the “integrate-and-fire” neuron
model that informs most ML is inadequate:
“Most state-of-the-art algorithms assume static data or at best linear models
in the form of primitive linear dynamical systems of hidden Markov models. The
reality of neural processing is that these systems are highly dissipative nonlinear
dynamic systems.”12
Emulating neurons and their interconnections in isolation ignores much of what
happens in biological brains. Other parameters must be accounted for, such as
firing (“spiking”) rates, local field potentials,* co-firing with other neurons, system
wide oscillations, and chemicals outside the synaptic cleft that affect system-wide
performance—not to mention connectivity with other areas of the cortex and
subcortical structures (thalamus, hippocampus) needed for sensory integration and
higher order functions. The contrast between real brain functioning and standard
ANNs is striking:
"(F)or a particular neuron in the brain, only 5% to 10% of the input is actu-
ally coming from the previous layers. On the other hand, a[n artificial] neural
network is almost 100% learning from a previous layer. And further, in a real
neuron, 90-95% of the activity is listening to neighbor or boss neurons from
downstream."13
Replicating each of these parameters, while theoretically possible, in practice
will be addressed piecemeal—and, in our view, slowly. Meanwhile, two areas of
research likely to be part of an overall solution are so-called “spiking neural net-
works” (SNNs) and neuromorphic chips. The former is software that accommodates
spatial and temporal excitation patterns. Neuromorphic computing is hardware
that emulates biological architectures via analog or a mixture of analog and digital
circuits.
*Extracellular signals caused by imbalances of ion concentrations around (outside) the cells.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
5
Other key areas of AI research of particular relevance to the BI-AI effort are:
• Sparse coding, namely, the ability to represent things by strongly activating
a small subset of the available neurons, achieved by modeling a network’s
hidden states.
• Metalearning, or learning how to learn—in this context, teaching a system
to make sense of a task, rather than learning a brittle representation of the
data.
• Transfer learning, whereby knowledge gained in one domain is trans-
ferred to new domains, reducing learning time and potentially enabling
planning and creativity.15
• Context-dependent learning meant to eliminate catastrophic forgetting,
an endemic problem in ANNs, where new information erases previously
learned patterns.
CONNECTOMICS*
“Connectomics” or brain-mapping is a physical process that relies on the obser-
vation of actual brain tissues for its data. It is hard for a discipline to be any less
artificial. We include it in this study of AI and the brain because (1) it comple -
ments BI-AI, on which the latter depends for ground truth, and (2) AI plays key
roles in the success of the connectomics project.
SOME (ASPIRATIONAL) FEATURES OF BI-AI THAT DISTINGUISH IT
FROM AI IMPLEMENTED ON STANDARD NEURAL NETWORKS 14
• Structure and function follow those of a brain.
• Data and information are encoded and processed as spikes over
time.
• The system can scale to trillions of connections and is highly parallel in
operation.
• It allows (in theory) for “one pass” learning based on little prior
knowledge.
• It is computationally inexpensive.
*We are indebted to Dr. Christof Koch of the Allen Institute for his comments on this and the following
sections particularly, from which we have borrowed freely.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
6
Connectomics aims at discovering the brain’s structural linkages, functional
correlations, and effective (causal) interactions.16 The term mimics “genomics” by
design, which belies its goal of creating a comprehensive map of the human brain.17
The enterprise is based on a commonsense belief that the brain’s physical wiring
affects (but does not determine) the computations it can perform. Functional and
effective connections are also pursued because structural connectivity is insufficient
to predict behavior; it only puts a constraint on the network’s dynamics.
Owing to its size and complexity, there is no full connectome of the human
brain nor will one appear soon. The mapping of the nematode roundworm, with a
nervous system of exactly 302 neurons, until recently was the only animal whose
connectome had been completed.18 The feat was surpassed in 2020 with completion
of a fly brain connectome of some 25,000 neurons.19 The human brain, by contrast,
contains some 86 billion neurons (16 billion in the cerebral cortex), up to 50,000
synapses (chemical and electrical links between neurons) per neuron, and more
than 1,000 neuronal cell types with a spectrum of different features.20
The connectomics literature identifies three mapping scales, each with its own
challenges and methods. Macro-scale seeks to describe the structural and function-
al connections between all cortical and subcortical areas at the mm scale, almost
always using functional imaging tools (fMRI and diffusion tensor imaging, DTI).
Micro-scale connectomics maps individual neurons, glial cells,21 synapses, and sub-
cellular components—elements visible at micrometer* resolution using electron-
microscopy. “Meso-scale” (100s of micrometers) is an intermediate level that can
be acquired and exploited with current tools. Its targets are distinct genetically de-
fined neural populations throughout the entire brain of experimental animals (mice
and, soon, non-human primates).22
Data collection tools are of two types: non-invasive (outside the skull) imag-
ing of in vivo tissue (e.g., magnetic resonance imaging, electroencephalography),
and section preparation of deceased brain tissue into 20-40-micron slices, which
are stained (embedded with heavy metals), imaged with electron microscopy, and
aligned computationally to capture the original 3D configuration. AI supports these
reconstructions, which are skewed by inaccuracies in the alignment tools.† By far,
the biggest and most essential contribution of AI to connectomics is segmentation
and labeling of the hundreds of millions of images needed for reconstruction of
cortex tissue.23
*Millionth of a meter, also called “micron.”
† “EM approaches are used for densely mapping local connectivity. There are molecular and
optical approaches available for mapping long-range interactions.” Our thanks to Dr. David
Markowitz for pointing this out.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
7
Connectomics will benefit from improvements in the resolution, speed, and ac-
curacy of imaging, (semi-) automatic machine labeling and segmentation tools, and
in the sophistication of AI algorithms and graph theory. Drawing inspiration from the
human genome project, there is cautious optimism within the profession that a full
(microscale) connectome of a human brain can be assembled eventually.24
BCI
Brain-computer interfaces (BCI) are mechanisms that typically link the central ner-
vous system with a computational device. Information is exchanged between the
two—ideally in both directions, without invoking the sensory receptors—through
electrodes planted on or under the scalp, inside the skull but outside the brain, or
in direct contact with living brain tissue. The choice is a trade-off: performance
improves with proximity to the brain, but invasiveness—besides the obvious risks of
infection and bleeding—can scar healthy tissue and lead to rejection.
Historically, neuroprosthetics—devices that supplant or supplement the input/
output of the nervous system—has been the main purpose of BCI.25 More recently,
opportunities for cognitive enhancement have captured the attention of commer-
cial26 and military27 investors and the imaginations of others, who foresee the tech-
nical equivalent of telepathic communication, simulated life experiences, unlimited
knowledge—in short, a merger with AI and the best chance for humans to avoid
obsolescence.28
Meanwhile, serious obstacles impede this vision. One is bandwidth limitations.
Non-invasive BCI records electrical activity on the scalp,* the output of which is
slow and highly ambiguous.29 Invasive devices, which give better signals, entail risk
and inconvenience. Even so, the main problem is that “we simply do not understand
what is going on at the relevant causal level” nor is science able to precisely identify
and target the relevant neurons from which to record.30
The challenge, beyond these fundamental ones, is to create a sensor mo-
dality that is both safe and robust, ideally a wearable device “that can record
from very large numbers of neurons simultaneously in order to create a seamless,
high-throughput data link between the human brain and computers” with both
“read” and “write” functionality.31
*Called “electroencephalography” (EEG). Electromyography (EMG), which records electrical
activity at muscles, is being used experimentally to decode signals from the brain’s speech centers.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
8
Object/scene vision A nearly intractable problem in computer science, in
part caused by the lack of data to build algorithms of the brain’s intermediate
vision processes.
Attention modeling Biological attention mechanisms work to prioritize and
isolate information relevant at a given moment.
Continual learning Another name for the “catastrophic forgetting” problem,
i.e., learning new tasks without forgetting old ones.
Episodic memory Recording of and access to personal (autobiographical)
events that can be explicitly stated along with their associated context.
Intuitive understanding Including core concepts abstracted by the brain from
experience or, by some accounts, present from birth.
Imagination Recombining elements familiar in one context into a new context
on the basis of analogy (see “transfer learning” above).
Planning Closely related to imagination: the ability to run simulated outcomes
based on internalized models.
Sensemaking Identifying relationships that situate new or ambiguous data in
a familiar context.
Effective BCI Linking intact brains directly with computing resources to cure/
manage illness, enhance human performance, and augment cognition.
SOME GOALS OF AI-BRAIN RESEARCH
Regardless of modality, AI’s role in BCI is essential, for example, in helping
resolve three contradictory performance vectors: accuracy, response latency, and
multi-functionality.32 Signals are “noisy, non-stationary, complex, and of high di-
mensionality,” necessitating AI-dependent preprocessing and feature extraction.33
A common language (exchange protocol) is needed for robust interaction and
that medium will likely emerge in the hidden layers of an AI program.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
9
Chinese scientists’
goals and
understanding
3
review of Chinese and English technical papers, government
proclamations, statements by leading scientists, facility websites,
interactions with foreign organizations, and a survey of the coun-
try’s principal practitioners indicate that China—officially, institutionally,
and as a matter of practice—has embraced the need to “merge” (混合) AI
research and brain science.
Indeed, it is probable China was exploring the intersection of human
and artificial intelligence before it acknowledged the value of AI as a
standalone discipline. As this and the following sections will demonstrate,
Chinese scientists are involved domestically and internationally in each of
the identifying features of this hybrid area, research the same sets of ques-
tions, share the tripartite BI-AI / connectomics / BCI characterization of
the enterprise, and are not reticent about stating their longer-term goals of
creating a “more general AI.”
Although antecedents of the problem were being researched in China in
2005* or earlier,34 the business came fully into its own a decade later with
the founding of dedicated BI-AI research centers starting in 201 4,† the enact-
ment of enabling statutory provisions beginning in 201 5 (see Section 4 be-
low), and the issuance of key documents in authoritative journals in 2016 by
the project’s prime movers that outline China’s course clearly and consistently.
We examine 1 2 such documents by leading Chinese scientists in each
of the three research areas, including six from a core group of 2016 pa-
pers, to introduce the dynamics of China’s approach.
A
* The earliest date for which we have consolidated Chinese language data.
† Tsinghua University’s Center for Brain-inspired Computing Research (清华大学类脑计算研究中心),
founded in September 201 4.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
10
1. “Retrospect and Outlook of Brain-inspired Intelligence Research” (类脑智能研究的
回顾与展望). Zeng Yi (曾毅), Liu Chenglin (刘成林), Tan Tieniu (谭铁牛) in Chinese
Journal of Computers (计算机学报), 39(1), January 2016, 2 1 2-222.
The paper reviews BI-AI developments worldwide, concludes it is the future of
AI, and defines China’s near-term goals as: (1) semantic recognition of perceptual
information that is both feature- and model-driven; (2) collaborative and continuous
autonomous learning; (3) efficient big data computing; and (4) brain-like language
processing, including semantic interpretation, knowledge representation, reasoning,
and sentiment analysis. Autonomous decision-making and control will also be ex-
plored. The authors, whose affiliations span both the northern (Beijing) and southern
(Shanghai) focal areas of BI-AI research in China, describe the mission as follows:
“Its goal is to realize various human cognitive functions as well as their coordi-
nation mechanisms by machine through brain-inspired principles, and eventually
reach and go beyond human-level intelligence (最终达到或超越人类智能水平).”
2. “Brain Science and Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology-an Overview”
(脑科学与类脑研究概述). Pu Muming (蒲慕明), Xu Bo (徐波), Tan Tieniu (谭铁牛) in
Bulletin of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3 1(7), July 2016, 725-736.
The authors acknowledge a worldwide “emergent trend” to fuse brain and
computer sciences based on the perception that the brain’s structural organization
and functional connectivity provide models to solve intransigent problems in tradi-
tional AI. AI at present is “not well adapted to real needs,” selective perception is
a problem, and language understanding and pattern recognition lag. Current AI
“lacks generalizability” (缺乏通用性): learned capabilities cannot be easily extend-
ed to other tasks. While deep learning has achieved successes, they are shallow
and processes are expensive to run.
The brain has none of these issues. Hence, a new AI, inspired by brain research,
is needed with “multi-brain area, multi-modality, and multi-task coordination as the
core.” The brain’s structure, learning methods, and mathematical foundations (our
emphasis) must be studied and applied to “realize intelligent systems with autono-
mous learning capabilities.”
China has advantages and disadvantages. On the plus side, a decade of
state-sponsored research in brain science has positioned China to move into this area
on a comparable footing with other countries (已取得了一批国际水平的成果). Chi-
na’s 201 2 launch (below) of a connectome pilot preceded analogous projects in the
United States, Europe, and Japan. On the negative side, there is a considerable gap
between China’s technical ability and that of advanced countries, especially in basic
research (see Section 9) and a lack of overall planning that must be addressed.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
11
3. “Progress and Prospect on the Strategic Priority Research Program of ‘Mapping
Brain Functional Connections and Intelligence Technology’ .” (“脑功能联结图谱与
类脑智能研究”先导专项研究进展和展望). Zhang Xu (张旭), Liu Li
(刘力), Guo Aike (郭爱克) in Bulletin of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3 1(7),
July 2016, 737-7 46.
The paper surveys international developments in connectomics (brain mapping)
research in part as justification for China’s own project, in part to baseline China’s
indigenous goals. Zhang Xu and colleagues describe the Chinese Academy of
Science’s 201 2 "Brain Function Atlas Project" (i.e., functional connectomics) situat-
ed within CAS’s Institute of Neuroscience (中国科学院神经科学研究所) in Shanghai
(Section 5 below), budgeted at 600 million RMB (USD 84 million) over 10 years.
The project was expanded in 201 5 and renamed “Brain Function Atlas and Brain-in-
spired Artificial Intelligence Research” (脑功能联结图谱与类脑人工智能研究), which
the authors claim is “the first practical integration of neuroscience and intelligence
technology fields in the world,” indicative of China’s shifting research focus to the
AI-brain nexus.*
The project’s goal “is not to describe all the connections and electrical activi-
ties of all nerve cells,”35 but to “describe the functional connection and operation
between special types of nerve cell groups in various brain regions” (our emphasis).
In particular, the project aims to “achieve theoretical breakthroughs in the study of
brain functional connection maps, and clarify the organizational structure of brain
functional connections [used in] perception, learning and memory, emotions, and
decision-making.” Another area of research is the “neural basis of self-awareness”
(自我意识的神经基础). The project aims to elevate China’s research of the brain’s
cognitive basis “to the international advanced level” or higher.†
4. “The Human Brainnetome Atlas: A New Brain Atlas Based on Connectional
Architecture.” Fan Lingzhong (樊令仲) and 1 3 others, primarily with Chinese
institutional affiliations, in Cerebral Cortex, 26 (8), August 2016.
The paper describes China’s whole brain atlas—the cornerstone of its “Brain-
netome Center” (脑网络组研究中心) connectomics project begun in 201 3 within the
CAS Institute of Automation’s (中科院自动化研究所) “Research Center for Brain-in-
spired Intelligence (类脑智能研究中心, BII) in Beijing. The authors argue, “many
* IARPA MICrONS program manager David Markowitz reminds us that China’s functional
connectomics is, as far as is known, rooted entirely in fMRI.
† The project so far has “netted only modest new scientific insights” as indicated by the absence of
papers in top-ranked scientific publications. (Christof Koch, personal communication, July 9, 2020)

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
12
current human brain atlases cover only specific structures, lack fine-grained
parcellations, and fail to provide functionally important connectivity information.”
Accordingly:
“Using noninvasive multimodal neuroimaging techniques, we designed a con-
nectivity-based parcellation framework that identifies the subdivisions of the
entire human brain, revealing the in vivo connectivity architecture. The resulting
human Brainnetome Atlas, with 2 10 cortical and 36 subcortical subregions,
provides a fine-grained, cross-validated atlas and contains information on
both anatomical and functional connections.”
The paper describes the methodology used to create the atlas, provides views
of its structural parcellation, and instructions on how to display functional relations
between brain areas on a publicly accessible website (http://atlas.brainnetome.
org). A review of information on the parent organization’s (BII) site shows work
proceeding on the macro-, meso-, and micro-scales.36
5. “Neuroscience and Brain-inspired Artificial Intelligence: Challenges and Op-
portunities” (神经科学和类脑人工智能发展：机遇与挑战). Han Xue (韩雪), Ruan
Meihua (阮梅花), Wang Huiyuan (王慧媛), Yuan Tianwei (袁天蔚), Wang Cha-
onan (王超男), Fu Lu (傅璐), Chen Jing (陈静), Wang Xiaoli (王小理), Xiong Yan
(熊燕), Zhang Xu (张旭) in Chinese Bulletin of Life Sciences, 28. 1 1, November
2016, 1 295-1 307.
This is a clarion call from top scholars in the Shanghai-area neuroscience
institutes. The paper celebrates the inclusion of BI-AI in China’s top-down planning,
alerts the country to analogous projects abroad, and urges further state support for
AI-brain fusion in China.
Its authors cite five statutory measures (see Section 4)—from the State Coun-
cil’s “Outline of the National Medium- and Long-term Scientific and Technological
Development Plan (2006-2020)” to the 2016 “National Plan for Scientific and
Technological Innovation”—which “lay out the development of neuroscience [in
China], and have made brain science and brain-inspired research major scientific
and technological innovation projects.”
They anticipate “major breakthroughs in brain-like computers and brain-inspired
artificial intelligence” by 2025. “Meanwhile, a strong working mechanism should
be set up and a big brain science program should be planned and implemented
efficiently.”

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
13
6. “China Brain Project: Basic Neuroscience, Brain Diseases, and Brain-inspired
Computing” (全面解读中国脑计划：从基础神经科学到脑启发计算).37 Pu Muming
(蒲慕明), Du Jiulin (杜久林), Nancy Y. Ip (叶玉如), Xiong Zhiqi (熊志奇), Xu Bo (徐
波), Tan Tieniu (谭铁牛) in Neuron 92.3, November 2016.
This paper by several of China’s leading BI-AI/connectomics scientists lays out
the paramount role played by the new hybrid discipline in China’s overall “Brain
Project.”38 The paper, in our view, evidences a consummate understanding of the
field and its challenges.
It begins with a core assumption that “brain-inspired computing methods and
systems are essential to achieve stronger artificial intelligence (AI) and to harness
the ever-increasing amount of information.” While acknowledging worldwide
progress in brain science on the macroscopic and microscopic levels, it laments an
“enormous gap in our knowledge at the mesoscopic [intermediate] level.”39 Ac-
cordingly, detailed information is needed “on the architecture of neural circuits at
single-cell resolution and on the spatio-temporal pattern of neuronal activity,” i.e.,
the “spiking” component absent in earlier ML models. The goal, as the authors see it,
is to “dissect neural circuit mechanisms underlying brain cognition and behaviors.”
Optimistically, “mesoscopic mapping of neural circuits and their activity patterns”
will happen within the next two decades, along with “the underlying logic and
mechanisms of cognitive processes.”
China’s Brain Project, in their view, will impact AI in several ways.
• Structurally, the brain’s different types of neurons, synapse stabilization and
pruning, the neocortex’s layered composition, and “feedforward and feed-
back connections within and among brain regions” will provide insight into
designs for NNs.
• Functionally, spike coding, synaptic variety and plasticity, short-term mem-
ory to long-term memory conversion rules, and “integration of information
processing at different levels” will suggest “operational principles for de-
signing efficient” AI.
Another target is machine learning, which (in 2016 and today) “tends to pursue
brute-force optimization of a cost function, often using simple and relatively uniform
initial architecture.” It is both labor intensive (“labeled data are needed to tune the
huge number of parameters”) and costly to run, requiring “high throughput data for
training and running [today’s] AI systems.” By contrast, China will research alterna-
tive brain-inspired “infrastructures” such as neuromorphic chips and modeling the
brain’s ability to combine computation and storage. Other designs may simulate
cortical columns, brain regions, and neural pathways between brain regions “to

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
14
achieve efficiency and high throughput in information processing.” In sum, BI-AI
“systems are expected to exhibit stronger intelligence with less training data or even
with unsupervised learning.”
Other areas of research described in the paper align with wish list items in Box
3 above, namely, categorization, concept formation, decision-making, “cognition
of self and non-self, empathy, and theory of mind.” Two citations lay bare the proj-
ect’s ultimate aim (our italics):
• “Learning from information processing mechanisms of the brain is clearly
a promising way forward in building stronger and more general machine
intelligence (通用的机器智能).”
• “The goal is to simulate in principle the mechanisms and architecture of the
brain at multiple levels to meet the grand challenge of making a general
AI (更具有普遍性的AI) that is capable of multitasking, learning, and self-
adapting.”
Six more papers round out, and update, our characterization of China’s AI-
brain “fusion” enterprise.
7. “The Strategic Option of Neuroscience and Brain-inspired Artificial Intelligence
in China: Based on a Hundred Experts' Insights” (神经科学和类脑人工智能发展：
未来路径与中国布局—基于业界百位专家调研访谈). Ruan Meihua (阮梅花), Yuan
Tianwei (袁天蔚), Wang Huiyuan (王慧媛), Wang Chaonan (王超男), Fu Lu (傅
璐), Chen Jing (陈静), Han Xue (韩雪), Wang Xiaoli (王小理), Xiong Yan (熊燕),
Yu Jianrong (于建荣), Zhang Xu ( 张旭) in Chinese Bulletin of Life Sciences (生命
科学) 29.2, February 201 7.
The authors claim to have consulted “over a hundred experts” on a “roadmap”
for Chinese neuroscience and brain-inspired AI. The results of their inquiry are cap-
tured in a proposed “3 + 2 + 2” model for brain science, brain-inspired research,
and AI, namely:
• Three key directions—basic neurobiology, neuropsychiatric diseases, and
brain-like artificial intelligence;
• Two major supporting areas—transformative neuroscience technology and
supporting platforms;
• Two major industries—neurobiological pharmaceuticals / biomedical engi-
neering, and the artificial intelligence industry.
The first of these three points is characterized by the following schematic, widely
publicized now in policy papers and on AI-brain related websites:

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
15
 A proposed “implementation path” (实施路线), defined as follows, suggests that
China’s AI-brain project in 201 7 was already transitioning from consensus-building
to realization:
• Integration and docking* of five major systems: China’s ministries link up
their major projects; local projects are meshed with state-led initiatives;
military-civilian equities are adjudicated; state funds are combined with
enterprise investment, and the whole of it is integrated with other large-scale
plans.
• An overall management structure is built with multi-faceted participation and
centralized coordination, a “Neuroscience and Artificial Intelligence Devel-
opment Leading Group” is created, and an “overseas expert participation
mechanism is established.”
• “The government and enterprise cooperation mechanism invites experts in
sociology and industrial applications to carry out” the recommended road-
map (above).
8. “Looking Back on the Research and Development Hotspots of Brain-computer
Interfaces in 201 7” (201 7 年脑机接口研发热点回眸). Zhang Dan (张丹), Chen
Jingjing (陈菁菁), Wang Yijun (王毅军) in Science and Technology Review (科技
导报), January 201 8.
*“Docking” (对接) is a synonym for “linking up” used commonly in China’s S&T policymaking circles.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
16
The paper reviews significant worldwide developments in BCI for the preceding
(201 7) year comprehensively, concisely, and professionally. Chinese innovations
that made the cut include: tapping into user “imaginative movement tasks” for better
writing performance, at Shanghai’s East China University of Science and Tech-
nology (華東理工大學); production of a standard data set for steady-state visual-
ly-evoked potentials (SSVEP, electrical activity generated by the brain in response
to visual stimulation at certain frequencies) with 40 stimulation frequencies (Tsinghua
and CAS Institute of Semiconductors); and, at the same CAS institute, “the fastest re-
ported scalp-brain computer interface systems (6.3 bits/second), which is expected
to promote the application of BCI in the daily life of ordinary healthy people.”†
A second paper the following year40 reported improved BCI transmission rates.
It affirmed the importance of artificial intelligence in BCI: “Deep learning has great
potential in brain-computer interfaces, and it is expected to become an effective
method for encoding complex signals from sensory systems or implanted electrode
arrays, thereby promoting the development of intelligent brain-computer interfaces.”
Lack of data is a problem that China is working to address.
9. “Current Situation and Prospect of the Basic Translational Application of Brain
and Brain-inspired Intelligence in Shanghai” (上海市脑与类脑智能基础转化应用
研究的现状及展望). Xie Xiaohua (谢小华), Feng Jianfeng (冯建峰) in Psychologi-
cal Communications (心理学通讯), February 201 9.
The authors acknowledge China’s late start in brain and brain-inspired research
but argue that Shanghai, and its Zhangjiang facilities particularly (see C.6 below),
are closing the gap in theory and practical application. They regard brain-inspired
AI systems as a “core breakthrough point for next generation AI (下一代人工智能的
核心突破点),” and propose a “one two three project” (一二三工程) aimed at insuring
the Shanghai area’s predominance in the field, namely: “one infrastructure” (the
Zhangjiang facilities), “two core capabilities (brain-inspired algorithms and chips),
and three key areas of support (brain disease, robotics, intelligent decision-mak-
ing).”
Co-author Feng’s position as Dean of Fudan University’s Institute of Brain-in-
spired Intelligence Science and Technology lends credence to the paper’s descrip-
tion of research. Its title suggests a focus on practical applications (转化, “conver-
sion, transformation”) and examples are given in the medical fields and robotics
especially. Of greater relevance, in our view, given China’s historic weakness in
† The “non-primary” BCI discussed in Section 1 above.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
17
theory-driven science41 is the attention paid here to cutting edge research, exempli-
fied in the following project goals:
• Establish a brain-like intelligence theory system that combines mathematical
and biological foundations.
• Establish brain measurement specifications and data standards, mesoscop-
ic-scale data assimilation methods, and multi-scale brain network computing
simulation models.
• Develop new modular learning algorithms, and a multi-source, heteroge-
neous big data theory of intelligence (多源性与异构性大数据智能理论).
10. “Brain-like Machine: Thought and Architecture” (类脑机的思想与体系结构综
述). Huang Tiejun (黄铁军), Yu Zhaofei (余肇飞), Liu Yijun (刘怡俊) in Journal of
Computer Research and Development (计算机研究与发展) 56(6), June 201 9,
1 1 35-1 1 48.
The paper reviews past and current worldwide developments in brain-like com-
puting42 as evidence for its argument that brain-inspired computing and architecture,
implementing spiking neural networks, will lead over the next 20 years to “machines
with structure close to the brain and performance far beyond the brain.”
China’s developments “got off to a relatively late start” (起步较晚), but over the
past few years have “achieved breakthroughs and large-scale applications.” Its
authors regard September 1, 201 5 as the start of China’s official (正式, “formal”)
involvement when the Beijing Municipal S&T Commission released a “Beijing Brain
Science Research” plan consisting of two parts: “brain cognition and brain medi-
cine” (脑认知与脑医学) and “brain cognition and brain-inspired computing” (脑认
知与类脑计算). The formulation precedes and—we speculate—was a model for, the
“one body two wings” (一体两翼) formula shown in the schematic above.
1 1. “The Three Development Directions of Brain Science Research” (脑科学研究的三
大发展方向). Pu Muming (蒲慕明) in Bulletin of the Chinese Academic of Scienc-
es (中国科学院院刊) 34.7 , July 201 9, 807-8 1 3.
Author Pu Muming (Mu-ming Poo) repeats the common—and likely valid—com-
parison of today’s brain science with what was known of physics at the beginning
of the 20th century, i.e., not much. He outlines three lines of research that will move
brain science and related disciplines forward—an affirmation by China’s foremost
expert of the “one body two wings” formula. Of the three, two are restatements of
the BI-AI / connectomics enterprise.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
18
The project’s “main structure” (一体) is the neural basis of the brain’s cognitive
function. “We hope to launch an international large-scale scientific project led by
Chinese scientists (our italics) to make a neural connection map at the whole-brain
(mesoscopic) level.” Treatment of brain disease constitutes one of the “wings” (翼);
BI-AI is the other, in his words, “brain-inspired artificial intelligence, brain-inspired
computing, and brain-computer interfaces. Research in this area will have a signifi-
cant impact on the future artificial intelligence industry.”
1 2. “Miniaturized Design of Implantable Brain-computer Interface System” (面向植
入式脑机接口系统的微型化设计). Liu Zhaoxu (刘朝旭), Wang Minghao
(王明浩), Guo Zhejun (郭哲俊), Wang Xiaolin (王晓林), Liu Jingquan (刘景全) in
Transducer and Microsystem Technologies (传感器于微系统), September 201 9.
The paper describes a complete and portable BCI that works with implant-
ed “neural signal acquisition modules.” Experimental results “show that the sin-
gle-channel sampling frequency of the designed 16-channel brain-computer inter-
face can be as high as 20 kHz, the sampling accuracy is 16 bits, and the system
input noise … is close to the performance of mainstream [stationary] acquisition
equipment.”
The study was one of 79 Chinese language technical papers in 201 9 focused
on BCI that we retrieved from a database of peer-reviewed academic journal
articles.43 Other titles investigated the application to BCI of AI concepts (Sections 1
and 2 above) such as deep learning, sparse representation, convolutional neural
networks, functional network connectivity, and cognitive computing. In 201 9, the
popular scientific literature heralded Tianjin University’s development of a “Brain
Talker” (脑语者) chip allegedly able to separate signal from noise with greater levels
of accuracy.44 The development aims to “replace traditional computer devices used
in BCI due to its more portable size, precision in decoding, high efficiency in com-
puting and faster communication ability.”45
Other recent pronouncements by leading figures underscore these observations.
Pu Muming, in a statement reminiscent of Silicon Valley entrepreneur Kai-Fu Lee’s
assessment of China’s AI development,46 states:
“Very little pioneering work in AI technology development in the past was
done in China, and current AI research in China remains largely focused on the
application or incremental modification of existing technologies. The Chinese
government has approved the funding of a major 2030 Science and Technol-
ogy Project on ‘Brain Science and Brain-Inspired Technology’ (also known as
‘China Brain Project’), aiming in part to apply neuroscience knowledge for the

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
19
development of next-generation AI with human-like intelligence and brain–
machine interface technology. Thus we expect an accelerated development of
brain-inspired AI technology in China in the coming decade.”47
Pu reiterates his justification of the enterprise: “If the ultimate goal of AI is to
achieve human intelligence, then it would be useful to introduce structural and opera-
tional principles of the brain into the design of computing algorithms and devices.”48
(our italics)
Zhang Xu and seven other Shanghai area BI/connectomics researchers also
reference the 2016 launch of China’s Brain Science and Brain-Inspired Technology
project as a game-changer for China AI, noting as does Pu:
“Using the functional connectome big data, computational neuroscientists will
build theoretical models of perception and cognition, to establish a basis for
developing a simulated brain, and the corresponding AI algorithms and hard-
ware.49 (our italics)
This review of primarily macro-level, policy-oriented papers offers a window
into Chinese scientists’ understanding of AI-brain dynamics, its role in China’s S&T
development, and overall research directions. Technical papers, which number in
the thousands, are examined statistically in a literature survey (Section 8) below.
The following section details official and institutional support for the scientists’ “next
generation AI” aspirations.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
30

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
21
 hina’s transition to “next-generation artificial intelligence”—in
particular, AI inspired by and linked to the human brain—is
supported by a host of government statutes and policies. It is
hard to find a more explicit endorsement of a scientific paradigm by a
nation-state.
The earliest appearance of “artificial intelligence” (人工智能) in a min-
istry-level notification is the July 1, 201 5 “State Council Guiding Opinions
on Positively Promoting ‘Internet +’ Activity” (No. 40), 50 wherein “AI and
other technologies” are promoted as components of, or catalysts for, com-
mercial products. The following year a supplement to the notice was issued
by a consortium of ministries elaborating on the role AI would play in nine
areas of application.51
Similarly, on July 28, 2016, a “State Council Notification on National
Science and Technology Innovation Programs for the 1 3th Five-Year Plan,”
(No. 43) was issued.52 The document is relevant mostly for what it does not
emphasize: although AI is mentioned, it is not included among the six ma-
jor S&T or nine major engineering projects (项目). What appears instead is
“brain science and brain-inspired research,” listed in the fourth position of
importance, defined in the document as “brain-inspired computing”
(类脑计算) and “brain-computer intelligence” (脑机智能). In other words,
China identified the nexus between “wet” and machine intelligence as a
topic for concentrated research before designating AI as a priority re-
search area.53
By the end of the year, it was clear the Chinese government was mov-
ing toward acceptance of AI as a discipline in its own right. On November
29, 2016, the State Council released another notification related to the
C
Leadership, statutory,
and budgetary
support
4

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
22
1 3th Five-Year Plan, this time for “National Strategic Emerging Industry Develop-
ment Projects” (No. 67).54 Among 2 1 projects listed, the fifth called specifically for
“innovative engineering in artificial intelligence,” in particular:
“Promote basic theoretical research and core technology development, realize
the commercialization of neuromorphic computing chips, intelligent robots and
intelligent application systems, embed new artificial intelligence technologies
in various fields.”55
The defining document for China’s AI program was issued by the State Council
on July 8, 201 7 , titled “The New Generation AI Development Plan” (No. 35).56 It
describes a three-step project to: “synchronize” (同步) AI technology and applica-
tions with the world’s advanced levels by 2020; make breakthroughs in basic AI
theory with some technology and applications reaching world-leading levels by
2025; and lead the world in AI theory, technology, and applications by 2030, a
decade from now.57 More on this later.
Meanwhile, predating these AI-specific measures were China’s “National Me-
dium- and Long-term S&T Development Plan (2006-2020)”58 issued by the State
Council on February 9, 2006, which counted “brain science and cognition (脑科学
与认知) in its top eight basic research topics; the “1 2th Five-Year Plan for National
S&T Development59 issued July 1 4, 201 1, which listed “brain science and cognitive
science” (脑科学与认知科学) as “important research” topics; and the Shanghai city
government’s May 27 , 201 5 “Opinions on Accelerating the Construction of an S&T
Innovation Center with Global Influence,”60 which put “brain science and artificial
intelligence” (脑科学与人工智能), i.e., the composite term,61 among its “first order
priorities.”
Just as 2016 witnessed the emergence in China of several key BI-AI / connec-
tomics / BCI-related publications (see Section 3 above), so too did it mark the ap-
pearance of new statutory measures establishing these disciplines as priority areas
of research. The China Brain Project (中国脑计划), a 1 5-year project approved in
March 2016 as part of the 1 3th Five-Year Plan (2016-2020), “prioritized brain-in-
spired AI over other approaches.”62 The July 2016 State Council “Notification”
(通知) of the five-year S&T plan elaborates on “brain science and brain-inspired
research” as follows:
“With the brain’s cognitive principles forming its main body, and brain-inspired
computing and brain-computer intelligence, and the diagnosis and treatment
of major brain diseases as its two wings, build key technology platforms to
seize the commanding heights of frontier research in brain science.”

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
23
On May 30, 2016, PRC president Xi Jinping himself in a speech to a Ministry of
Science and Technology-sponsored assembly of scientists titled “Striving to Build a
World S&T Superpower” made the following reference to brain science research in
China:
“Connectomics is at the scientific forefront for understanding brain function
and further exploring the nature of consciousness. Exploration in this area not
only has important scientific significance, but also has a guiding role in the
prevention and treatment of brain disease and the development of intelligent
technology.”63
Two landmark pronouncements the following year (201 7) heralded China’s
commitment to integrate brain research into its AI program—or, in chronological
terms, the converse.
The goal of China’s “New Generation AI Development Plan”64 as stated in its
introductory paragraph, is to “build for China a first-mover advantage in artificial
intelligence development.”65 A few lines later, under Strategic Situation, “brain
science research” and “brain intelligence” are named specifically as key elements
of China’s AI program. The word “brain” (脑) itself appears 27 times and “brain-in-
spired/neuromorphic” (类脑) 20 times in this foundational AI document.
Among the plan’s “strategic goals” are to create within the present decade
“major breakthroughs in brain-inspired intelligence, autonomous intelligence, mixed
[human-artificial] intelligence, swarm intelligence, and other areas so as to have an
important impact in the area of international AI research, and occupy the command-
ing heights of AI technology.” More specifically:
“Brain-like intelligent computing theory focuses on breakthroughs in brain-
like information coding, processing, memory, learning, and reasoning the -
ories; on forming brain-like complex systems, brain-like control, and other
theories and methods; and on establishing new models of large-scale brain-
like intelligent computing and brain-inspired cognitive computing models.”
In terms of priorities, “AI-brain” project areas occupy two of the plan’s eight
“basic theory” categories, specifically “(3) hybrid enhanced intelligent theory” and
“(7) brain intelligent computing theory,” defined respectively as:
“Research on ‘human-in-the-loop’ hybrid enhanced intelligence, hu-
man-computer intelligence symbiosis behavior enhancement and brain-com-
puter collaboration, machine intuitive reasoning and causal models, asso-
ciative memory models and knowledge evolution methods, hybrid enhanced
intelligent learning methods for complex data and tasks, cloud robot collab-

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
24
orative computing methods, situational understanding in real-world environ-
ments, and human-machine group collaboration.”
and
“Research theories and methods of brain-like perception, brain-like learning,
brain-like memory mechanisms and computational fusion, brain-like complex
systems, and brain-like control.”
Most of these priorities address our Box 3 “goals of AI-brain research,” cre-
ated independently of the Chinese data from international research and literature
reviews. Later in the document under “intelligent computing chips and systems” the
plan states:
“Focusing on breakthroughs in energy-efficient, reconfigurable brain-like
computing chips and brain-like vision sensor technologies with computation-
al imaging capabilities, we shall research and develop high-performance
brain-like neural network architectures and hardware systems with autono-
mous learning capabilities to achieve multimedia-aware information under-
standing and intelligent growth, brain-like intelligent systems with common
sense reasoning ability.” (our italics).
The “National Natural Science Foundation of China Artificial Intelligence Basic
Research Urgent Management Project Guide,”66 issued on August 2, 201 7 , solicit-
ed proposals for 25 AI projects. Its first section, titled “Frontiers of Artificial Intelli-
gence,” outlined three areas of support for AI’s “new stage.” All are brain-related,
but are also targets of mainstream AI: “(1) information processing mechanisms of
human cognitive behavior; (2) brain-inspired models and new computing architec-
tures that reflect cognitive function and brain structure; and (3) how to properly test
machine intelligence.” Ten “research areas” (研究方向) were nominated, most within
our understanding of AI-brain fusion:67
1. Multi-modal, efficient cross domain perception and augmented intelligence
2. Machine understanding of perception and behavior under uncertain condi-
tions
3. New methods for complex task planning and reasoning
4. Machine learning theory and methods based on new mechanisms (deep
reinforcement learning, adversarial learning, brain-like / natural learning)
5. New brain-inspired computing architectures and methods

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
25
6. New methods of human-machine hybrid intelligence
7. Chinese semantic computing and deep understanding (machine reading
comprehension and Chinese text creation, human-computer dialogue, etc.)
8. New computing devices and chips for artificial intelligence
9. Heterogeneous multi-core parallel processing methods and intelligent com-
puting platforms
10. Machine intelligence test models and evaluation methods
A second section sponsors “combined advances in cognitive psychology, brain
science, and other fields to study the intelligent cognition and behavior of intelligent
autonomous bodies.” A third section on “intelligent decision theory and key technol-
ogies for complex manufacturing” funds such projects as:
• Intelligent prediction and self-healing for abnormal operating conditions
• Feature extraction and knowledge discovery based on heterogeneous data
• Optimal decision-making and mutual learning of human-machine coopera-
tion in an uncertain and open environment
Subsequently, in January 201 8, the NNSF published its annual “Project Guide-
lines” (201 8 年度国家自然科学基金项目指南), which for the first time identified “ar-
tificial intelligence” (人工智能) as an independent category in the funding schema.
Here is the semantic breakdown:68
CHINA NNSF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FUNDING CATEGORIES
F06 AI (人工智能)
F0601 AI fundamentals (人工智能基础)
F0602 machine learning (机器学习)
F0603 machine cognition and pattern recognition (机器感知与模式识别)
F0604 natural language processing (自然语言处理)
F0605 knowledge representation and processing (知识表示与处理)
F0606 intelligent systems and application (智能系统与应用)
F0607 cognitive and neuroscience-inspired AI (认知与神经科学启发的
 人工智能)

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
26
While this classification scheme provides clues for gauging NNSF’s AI-brain re-
search budget, several problems complicate the matter: (1) information (number of
grants and total funding per subdivision) is available for “general program” and mi-
nor funding types only; the same data are not available by subdivision for “priority”
(重点项目) and other larger funding types; (2) some of the projects under the F0607
funding code are retrievable through online search tools,69 but not all of them; (3)
many that are retrievable do not bin into BI-AI, connectomics, or BCI categories; (4)
or do not meet the criteria for “strong” BI-AI (see Section 1 above) and are better
regarded as “traditional” AI; (5) and some AI-brain projects are funded by NNSF
under other disciplines.
Accordingly, a total NNSF budget for China’s AI-brain research cannot be
calculated with the data available. A full measure of China’s expenditures in these
areas would also take account of:
• Grants to scientists from other PRC funding organizations, e.g., MOST,
MOE, CAS;70
• Institution-level funding for intersectional neuroscience and AI research;
The guidelines also included the foundation’s first attempt to amalgamate AI-
brain topics under a consistent rubric (F0607 above):
CHINA NNSF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FUNDING CATEGORIES
F060701 computational modeling of cognitive mechanisms (基于认知机理
的计算模型)
F060702 modeling attention, learning, and memory (脑认知的注意、学习与
记忆机制的建模)
F060703 audiovisual perception modeling (视听觉感知模型)
F060704 neural information encoding and decoding (神经信息编码与解码)
F060705 neural system modeling and analysis (神经系统建模与分析)
F060706 neuromorphic engineering (神经形态工程)
F060707 neuromorphic chips (类脑芯片)
F060708 brain-like computing (类脑计算)
F060709 BCI and neural engineering (脑机接口与神经工程)

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
27
• National, provincial, and local government funding for institute construction,
outfitting, maintenance, and research;
• Foreign funding, such as the McGovern Institutes (three in Beijing, another in
Shenzhen), Microsoft Research Asia, and other in-country operations and
joint ventures;
• Private and state-backed Chinese enterprise investment;
• Diaspora contributions in funding, shared research, and services;
• Bang-for-buck adjustments to reflect China’s greater per-dollar purchasing
power;
and most importantly:
• The unquantifiable advantages realized from state-sponsored technology
transfer programs, discussed below (Section 9) and in other studies by the
authors,71 designed to leverage the investments made by competing nations.
For many technologies—AI included—a dollar spent on R&D abroad is a
dollar spent for China.
Spending comparisons that do not take account of these China-specific ele-
ments are at best misleading, and at worst drastically understate actual (effective)
“investment” levels.72 We lay out these facts for consideration by colleagues con-
templating further studies.*
*The authors are preparing follow-up investigations that cover aspects of the program that could not
be studied here, including a comparison of China’s BI and “traditional” AI efforts. Meanwhile, a very
rough measure of how effort is proportioned between these two overlapping communities can be
gleaned from the inventory of scientists identified in our survey (Section 7 below) as “belonging” to
the one camp or the other.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
38

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
29
hereas AI emerged as a standalone discipline in China only
recently, brain science—including aspects germane to our
inquiry—has been established there for decades.
The Tsinghua University BCI Lab (清华大学脑机接口研究组) began
operations in Beijing in 2004.74 A year later, two national laboratories
were launched in the city by China’s Ministry of Science and Technology
(MOST): the State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learn-
ing (认知神经科学与学习国家重点实验室) at Beijing Normal University,
engaged in connectomics research, and the State Key Laboratory of Brain
& Cognitive Science (脑与认知科学国家重点实验室) also called CAS-ION,
doing “multi-disciplinary research on the major scientific issues of ‘cogni-
tive basic unit’ and ‘learning and decision’ .”75 By contrast, there was only
one state key lab for AI in China before 201 7 , when MOST stood up its
State Key Lab of Cognitive Intelligence (认知智能国家重点实验室) under
iFlytek’s auspices.76
Meanwhile, south of the capital region, Shanghai Jiaotong University
has been operating a Center for Brain-like Computing and Machine Intelli-
gence (上海交通大学仿脑计算与机器智能研究中心)* also called BCMI Lab-
oratory, since 2002. Besides its BCI projects, the center’s “long term mission
is to understand the mechanism of intelligent information processing and
cognitive process in the brain and develop new type computing structures
and algorithms for information technology,” including research in “comput-
er vision, speech signal processing, natural language processing, bioinfor-
matics, machine learning and cognitive computing,”77 all AI-dependent.
W
China centers for
AI-brain research
5
*The word 仿脑 (“imitate brain”) in the center’s name belies its early establishment. Today’s term-of-
art is 类脑 (“brain-like” or “brain-inspired”).

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
30
Pu Muming’s International Mesoscopic Connectome Project (国际介观连接体项
目), situated in Shanghai within the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) Institute
of Neuroscience (中国科学院神经科学研究所), has been operating since November
1999.78 The Beijing Key Laboratory of Human-Computer Interaction (人机交互北
京市重点实验室) was originally the “CAS Institute of Software, Laboratory of Hu-
man-Computer Interaction Technology and Intelligent Information Processing” (中科
院软件所人机交互技术与智能信息处理实验室), also established in 1 999.
Our point here, beyond establishing the bona fides of China’s neuroscience
establishment, is to emphasize that the fundamentals of China’s “AI-brain” initiative
were in place before AI itself took root in the country as an independent discipline.
In China, practice has always preceded theoretical inquiry and this is no exception.
Here are more examples:
• CAS Institute of Psychology, Key Laboratory of Behavioral Science (中国科
学院心理研究所, 中科院行为科学重点实验室), established in 2009 in Beijing,
formally certified as a CAS key lab in 201 4.79 The institute is home to Zuo
Xinian (左西年), lead author of the authoritative “An open science resource
for establishing reliability and reproducibility in functional connectomics”80
and a world-class expert.
• Tsinghua University’s Center for Brain-inspired Computing Research (清华大
学类脑计算研究中心), established in 201 4. Research includes neural func-
tional/computational theory, neural coding, machine learning algorithms,
and chip architecture. The center recently developed a brain-inspired com-
puting chip and software tool chain.81
• CAS Institute of Automation, Research Center for Brain-inspired Intelligence
(中科院自动化研究所,类脑智能研究中心), established in Beijing in 201 5. The
center has research groups for Cognitive Brain Modeling, Brain-inspired
Information Processing, and Neuro-robotics.82 Its Brainnetome Center (脑
网络组研究中心) studies brain anatomical and functional connectivity at the
macro-, meso-, and microscales.83
Note that each pre-dates the emergence of dedicated AI research centers in
China beginning in 201 7.
A final example from Beijing is the Chinese Institute for Brain Research (北京脑
科学与类脑研究中心) established in March 201 8. CIBR was “strategically deployed”
(战略部署) by the city’s S&T commission as a “cooperative framework” for Beijing
area universities, the PLA Academy of Military Science (军事科学院), and others.84 Its
mission is “responsibility for coordinating research institutes and managing research
programs under the guidance of the China Brain Initiative and Beijing Brain Initia-
tive, and making Beijing the world epicenter for neuroscience and brain-inspired

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
31
computation.”85 CIBR will spend some 1 84 million RMB (USD 29 million) on the
“first five or six research groups.” Cost per year at full capacity will be 400 million
RMB (USD 56 million).86
We look now at Shanghai, the second largest concentration of AI-brain insti-
tutes in China.
Fudan University’s Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intel-
ligence (复旦大学类脑智能科学与技术研究院), launched in 201 5, hosts “centers” for
cognitive neuroscience, computational biology, big data biomedical science, bio-
medical imaging, neural and intelligent engineering, and brain-inspired chips.87 Run
by Feng Jianfeng (see Section 6 below), it boasts the world’s largest brain science
database, with access to the U.S. Human Connectome Project, England’s Biobank,
ISTBI’s own 10 terabyte holdings,88 and the “largest number of magnetic resonance
imaging devices in Asia” paired with AI algorithms to screen the images.89
Early in 2016, the CAS launched a Center for Excellence in Brain Science
and Intelligence Technology (中国科学院脑科学与智能技术卓越创新中心, CEBSIT),
drawing on “resources from 20 research institutions, including 80 top laboratories”
nationwide.90 The center shares a website with CAS’s own Institute of Neuroscience
(ION) in Shanghai (above); both are directed by Pu Muming. It has five broad
areas of focus: “(1) neural circuit basis of cognitive functions, (2) mechanisms,
diagnosis and therapeutic interventions of brain diseases, (3) novel technologies in
brain research, (4) brain modeling and intelligence information processing, and
(5) brain-inspired devices and systems.”91 Other areas of research listed under
“brain-inspired modeling and intelligent information processing” are:
• “whole brain connectomics analysis (全脑联结组分析), multi-sensory mode
perception and accurate image recognition, and computational models for
speech and semantic comprehension”
Under “brain-inspired devices and system” are:
• “neuron-inspired computing chips, a new generation of neural network
computing devices, brain-inspired intelligent robots, and intelligent training
and growth environments for human-machine collaboration”92
Pu Muming’s center in 201 8 established a “G60 Brain Intelligence Innovation
Park” (G60脑智科创基地) with a $1.5 billion (US) budget as a “national-level
development and transformation center of achievements in technologies regarding
brain-inspired intelligence.” The facility uses cloned monkeys to eliminate variables
between laboratory specimens.93 Information provided by the Shanghai Municipal
S&T Committee (上海市科学技术委员会) on July 1, 2020 indicates a “second phase”
of funding in the amount of USD 2.85 billion to be expensed by Dec. 2022.94

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
32
A third such facility is the Shanghai Research Center for Brain Science and
Brain-inspired Intelligence (上海脑科学与类脑研究中心)—also called the Shanghai
Brain/AI Center—set up in 201 8 by CAS and the Shanghai city government.95 The
center is part of the Institute of Brain-Intelligence Technology (BIT), located in Pudong’s
Zhangjiang Science City. A major research area is “brain-inspired computing based
on artificial neural networks.” Collaborators include the HUST-Suzhou Institute for
Brainsmatics (below), and the CAS Kunming Institute of Zoology.96
Similar institutes are spread throughout China. A sample includes:
• Sichuan Institute of Brain Science and Brain-like Intelligence (四川省脑科学
与类脑智能研究院), est. 201 8 in Chengdu
• Fujian Key Laboratory of Brain-Inspired Computing Technique and Appli-
cations, Department of Cognitive Science, School of Informatics, Xiamen
University (福建省仿脑智能系统重点实验), est. 2009 in Xiamen
• South China University of Technology, Center for Brain Computer Interfaces
and Brain Information Processing (华南理工大学脑机接口与脑信息处理中心),
est. 2007 in Guangzhou
• Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area Center for Brain Sci-
ence and Brain-Inspired Intelligence (粤港澳大湾区脑科学与类脑研究中心),
est. 201 8 as a consortium of 16 universities and laboratories
• Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Brain Cognition and Brain
Disease Institute (深圳先进技术研究院,脑认知与脑疾病研究所) est. 201 4 in
Shenzhen (BI research, functional connectomics)
• Guangdong Key Laboratory of Brain Connectomics (广东省脑连接图谱重点
实验室), est. 201 8 in Shenzhen
• Zhejiang University School of Brain Science and Brain Medicine (浙江大
学脑科学与脑医学学院), est. 201 9 in Hangzhou (hybrid intelligence, BCI,
brain-inspired computing)
• Hangzhou Dianzi University, International Joint Research Center for
Brain-Machine Collaborative Intelligence (杭州电子科技大学脑机协同智能技
术国际联合研究中心, est. 201 8 in Hangzhou
• Harbin Brain and Brain-inspired Intelligence Research Center (黑龙江省脑科
学与类脑智能研究中心), est. 201 9 at the Harbin Institute of Technology
• Southeast University of Brain Science and Intelligent Technology (东南大学
脑科学与智能技术研究院), est. 201 8 in Nanjing

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
33
• Shandong University Institute of Brain and Brain-inspired Science (山东大学
脑与类脑科学研究院), est. 201 7 in Qingdao
• Henan Key Laboratory of Brain Science and Brain-Computer Interface Tech-
nology (河南省脑科学与脑机接口技术重点实验室), est. 201 7 at Zhengzhou
University
Two more institutes stand out for their size and linkages with other facilities and
organizations:
The National Engineering Laboratory for Brain-inspired Intelligence Technol-
ogy and Application (NEL-BITA) (类脑智能技术及应用国家工程实验室), set up in
Hefei’s University of Science and Technology of China in May 201 7. It was jointly
established by Fudan University, CAS’s Shenyang Institute of Automation, Institute of
Microelectronics, Institute of Electronics, Institute of Neuroscience, Microsoft Re-
search Asia, Baidu, iFlytek (科大讯飞), Datatang (数据堂), and the “new generation”
Artificial Intelligence Industry Technology Innovation Strategic Alliance (新一代人
工智能产业技术创新战略联盟, AITISA). Research priorities are brain cognition and
neural computing, brain-inspired multimodal sensing and information processing,
brain-inspired chips and systems, quantum artificial intelligence, and brain-inspired
intelligent robots.97
Finally, there is the HUST-Suzhou Institute for Brainsmatics (华中科技大学苏州脑
空间信息研究院) in Suzhou, established in 2016 at Huazhong University of Science
and Technology (Wuhan), run by Luo Qingming (Section 6 below), and budgeted
at 450 million RMB (USD 63 million) over five years with a staff of 1 20. Its commit-
ment to mesoscale connectomics is laid out clearly:
“With Micro-Optical Sectioning Tomography (MOST) serial techniques as
its core, and employing high-resolution, high-throughput and large-detec-
tion-area 3D micro-optical imaging techniques, the institute will create a
high-resolution mammalian brain atlas for the fine morphology and con-
nectivities of neurons, glia, vasculature, and other complex structures in the
whole brain.”98
The institute goes on to state:
“These activities include, but are not limited to, digital mapping and visual-
izing of the neuronal/glial/vascular networks, the connectome, projectome
and transcriptome of the brain. Based on big data of three-dimensional
fine structural and functional imaging of neuron types, neural circuits and
networks, neural-glial interfaces, vascular networks, etc. with high tempo-

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
34
ral-spatial resolution and specific spatial locations, brainsmatics makes
it possible to better decipher brain function in health and disease, and to
promote brain-inspired artificial intelligence (BI-AI) by extracting cross-level
and multi-scale temporal-spatial characteristics of brain architectural and
functional connectivity.” 99
Mapping these 30 institutions*provides a visceral sense of China’s commitment
to the AI-brain project.
Computing the simple average of the years these institutions were established
gives a mean figure of 201 3. Statistics provided by CERNET for new AI colleges or
research institutes established from 201 5, the earliest on record, through 201 9 show
a mean start-up year of 201 7.100 While the comparison is imperfect, the gap is wide
enough to demonstrate a point we have emphasized throughout this paper—name-
ly, that the intersection between brain science and advanced computational algo-
rithms, including ML, occurred earlier in China than the government’s focus on AI
itself, which has absorbed so much of the world’s attention.
*Others exist. Our count excludes facilities engaged in BI-AI / connectomics / BCI only peripherally.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
35
his segment introduces a sample of top Chinese scientists* asso-
ciated with the AI-brain project. Candidacy for this “top 20” list
is based on institutional leadership, publication records, and sub-
ject matter experts’ assessment. The list is a starting point for outreach.
It demonstrates the caliber of personnel addressing the AI-brain issue in
China.
Du Jiulin (杜久林) is Assistant Director of CAS’s Institute of Neurosci-
ence (ION), and Deputy Director of CEBSIT and the State Key Labora-
tory of Neuroscience. He is a winner of the National Outstanding Young
Scientist Award, the Hsiang-Tung Chang Outstanding Young Neuroscientist
award, and a Ten Thousand Talents Plan101 selectee. Du earned a Ph.D.
from CAS’s Shanghai Institute of Physiology in 1 998 and did postdoc work
at Tokyo University and UC Berkeley. He joined ION in 2006. His re-
search interests are neural mechanisms underlying visuomotor transforma-
tion and adaptive behavior, and molecular mechanisms supporting brain
vascular development.102
Duan Shumin (段树民) is Dean of Zhejiang University’s Faculty of Med-
icine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, where he led the creation of the Chinese
Brain Bank. Duan earned a Ph.D. in neuroscience at Kyushu University in
1 99 1 and began postdoc work that year at CAS’s Shanghai Brain Research
Institute. From 1 995 to 1 999, he trained at Kyushu University, University of
Hawaii, and UC San Francisco. A Hundred Talents selectee, Duan served as
principal investigator at Shanghai’s ION from 2000 to 2009. He was elect-
ed to the CAS in 2007 and The World Academy of Science in 2008.103
T
Top Chinese
researchers,
administrators
6
*We exclude diaspora scientists whose primary affiliations are outside China. International support
for China’s brain-AI project is reviewed in Section 9 of this paper.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
36
Feng Jianfeng (冯建峰) is chair of the Shanghai National Center for Mathe-
matical Sciences, Dean of ISTBI at Fudan University, and professor at the Centre
for Scientific Computing and Computer Science at Warwick University, UK. Feng is
a Changjiang Scholar and Thousand Talents selectee. He was awarded the Royal
Society Wolfson Research Merit Award in 201 1 and has contributed significantly to
modeling single neurons and neuronal networks, ML, and causality analysis.104
Guo Aike (郭爱克) is head of ION’s Laboratory of Learning and Memory, and
a research professor at CAS’s Institute of Biophysics. His doctorate is from Mu-
nich University and he was visiting scholar at the Max Planck Institute 1 982–84.
Guo was principal researcher for 973 Program projects and currently leads CAS’s
“Mapping Brain Functional Connections” strategic priority research program. Guo
studies the neuronal assembly of Drosophila, the roots of intelligence, and the brain-
mind problem.105
He Yong (贺永) is Deputy Director of BNU’s State Key Lab of Cognitive Neu-
roscience and Learning, Founding Director the Beijing Key Laboratory of Brain
Imaging and Connectomics, and Principal Investigator at IDG/McGovern Institute
for Brain Research (BNU). He was a postdoc fellow at McConnell Brain Imaging
Center at McGill University 2005–2007 and a Changjiang Distinguished Profes-
sor. Currently, he is Associate Editor of Human Brain Mapping and on the editorial
board of NeuroImage. He has been a “highly cited researcher” for four years
running with more than 200 publications.106
Huang Tiejun (黄铁军) is chair of Peking University’s Department of Computer
Science, Dean of the Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, and as of 201 9, a
member of the New Generation Artificial Intelligence Governance Expert Com-
mittee. Huang received his Ph.D. in pattern recognition and intelligent systems from
HUST in 1 998. A Changjiang Scholar, Huang has authored more than 100 journal
articles, three books, and holds 16 granted patents. He is on the IEEE Computing
Society’s advisory board and a member of the National Standardization Technical
Committee. His interests are visual information processing, neuromorphic comput-
ing, and artificial general intelligence.107
Jiang Tianzi (蒋田仔) is Director of CASIA’s Brainnetome Center and National
Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, and professor of neuroimaging at the University
of Queensland’s Brain Institute. Jiang is a Changjiang Scholar, Hundred Talents
Scholar, 973 Project chief scientist, IEEE Fellow, and Fellow of the American Insti-
tute for Medical and Biological Engineering. He serves as Associate Editor of IEEE
Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems, Frontiers in Neuroinformat-
ics, Neuroscience Bulletin, and BMC Neuroscience. He has authored more than
250 reviewed journal papers in neuroimaging, connectomics, and clinical applica-
tions.108

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
37
Li Yuanqing (李远清) is Dean of South China University of Technology’s School
of Automation and Director of its Research Center for BCI and Brain Information
Processing. Li researched at Japan’s RIKEN Brain Science Institute and Singapore’s
Laboratory for Neural Signal Processing. He is a Changjiang Scholar, IEEE Fellow,
and Assistant Editor for IEEE Transactions of Fuzzy Systems and Human-Machine
Systems. Li published more than 100 journal papers and edited two books. His
research involves blind signal processing, sparse representation, ML, BCI, and fMRI
data analysis.109
Liu Chenglin (刘成林) is Vice President of CAS’s Institute of Automation and
Director of the National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition. Liu was a postdoc at
the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology and Tokyo University, and
senior researcher at Hitachi’s Central Research Laboratory 1 999–2004. He is a
Hundred Talents Scholar, Fellow of the IEEE, Chinese Association for Artificial Intelli-
gence, and International Association of Pattern Recognition. Liu has published more
than 300 technical papers in journals and conferences.11 0
Luo Minmin (罗敏敏) is an Investigator at the National Institute of Biological
Sciences, Beijing, a professor at Tsinghua University, and Director of CIBR in Beijing.
He received his Ph.D. in Neuroscience from University of Pennsylvania and did post-
doc training under Dr. Larry Katz at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Duke
University. Luo, a Ten Thousand Talents award recipient (2016) is principal author of
some 60 articles in prestigious academic journals.111
Luo Qingming (骆清铭) is President of Hainan University, Dean of the Wuhan
Optoelectronics National Research Center of HUSTechnology, and founder of the
HUST-Suzhou Institute for Brainsmatics. Luo is a Changjiang Scholar and Fellow at
the American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering. His research focuses
on multi-scale optical bioimaging and cross-level information integration. He holds
80 patents and has authored more than 200 papers in peer-reviewed journals,
including Science and Nature. Luo pioneered micro-optical scanning tomography.112
Ming Dong (明东) is Dean of Tianjin University Academy of Medical Engi-
neering and Translational Medicine, Director of the Tianjin Key Laboratory of Brain
Science and Neuroengineering, and head of its Brain Science and Brain-inspired
Research Center, where the world’s first brain-computer codec chip (BC3) “Brain
Talker” was developed. Ming, a talents plan selectee, has managed six NNSF
projects and has more than 80 patents. His research focuses on BCI, neural system
cognition, and quantitative EEG calibration. He has published at least 1 2 peer-re-
viewed journal articles in the past three years.113
Pan Gang (潘刚) is professor at Zhejiang University’s College of Computer
Science and Technology and vice-director of the State Key Lab of CAD&CG. Pan
has a Ph.D. from Zhejiang University and was a visiting scholar at UC Los Angeles

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
38
in 2007–08 and a talents plan selectee. He is an associate editor of IEEE Systems
Journal, ACM Proceedings of Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Tech-
nologies, and Chinese Journal of Electronics. Research specialties are AI, pervasive
computing, BCI, and computer vision. Pan has 25 patents granted and has authored
more than 100 refereed papers.114
Pu Muming (蒲慕明), AKA Muming Poo, is founding director of the Institute of
Neuroscience and CEBSIT, and head of the Laboratory of Neural Plasticity. Pu is
a foreign member of the CAS (he became a PRC citizen in 201 8), and a member
of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences. He served as chief scientist of the 973
project “Neural Basis of Human Intelligence” in 201 1, and chief consultant to CAS’s
Strategic Priority Research Project on Mapping of Brain in 201 2.115 Pu called BI-AI a
“battleground” and believes it will usher in a “new beginning in next-generation AI
computing and devices.”11 6
Rao Yi (饶毅) is president of Capital Medical University in Beijing, former Dean
of Sciences at Peking University, Founding Director of the PKU-IDG/McGovern
Institute for Brain Research, and Founding Director of the Chinese Institute for Brain
Research in Beijing. His lab investigates molecular and cellular mechanisms under-
lying behavior and cognition. Rao returned to China as a member of the first group
of Thousand Talent recruits,11 7 and in 201 1 formally renounced his U.S. citizenship.118
Shi Luping (施路平) is Director of Tsinghua University’s Center for Brain-inspired
Computing Research and the Department of Precision Instruments. Shi earned a
Ph.D. at Cologne University and was program manager at Singapore’s Academy of
Science for AI and memory projects before entering Tsinghua as a Thousand Talents
Scholar in 201 2, when he founded the center. In 201 5, he developed the first brain-
like computing chip “Tianjic,”11 9 and in 201 7 wrote software for neuromorphic chips
to support automatic mapping and compilation of NN algorithms.12 0
Tan Tieniu (谭铁牛) is Vice-Director of the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Director of CASIA’s Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing,
a Hundred Talents selectee, and a Fellow of IEEE, The World Academy of Scienc-
es, and the UK Royal Academy of Engineering. Tan received a Ph.D. from Imperial
College, London in 1 989 and did research at the University of Reading’s Computa-
tional Vision Group until 1 997. He is also deputy chief of the PRC’s liaison office in
Hong Kong. His work has 35,000 Google Scholar citations.121
Xu Bo (徐波) is Director of CAS’s Institute of Automation, Associate Director of
CEBSIT, and chair of the “Next Generation Artificial Intelligence Strategic Adviso-
ry Committee.” He also serves as Director of USTC’s Department of Automation,
Vice-President of the Chinese Information Processing Society, and has led 973 and
NNSF projects. Xu has published more than 100 papers in major academic jour-
nals and conference proceedings.12 2

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
39
Zeng Yi (曾毅) is professor and Deputy Director of CASIA’s Research Center for
Brain-inspired Intelligence, Deputy Director of the Sino-Swiss Laboratory for Data In-
tensive Neuroscience, a principal investigator at CEBSIT, and serves on the 201 9 New
Generation Artificial Intelligence Governance Expert Committee. He currently works
on projects related to brain computational modeling and its applications in AI.12 3
Zhang Xu (张旭) is research professor at CAS’s Institute of Neuroscience and
Vice President of the Shanghai Branch of the CAS. Zhang graduated from the Fourth
Military Medical University in Xi’an and received his Ph.D. in neuroscience from the
Karolinska Institute in Stockholm. He is an academician of CAS, The World Acade-
my of Sciences, and directs CAST’s Neuroscience Direction Forecasting and Tech-
nology Roadmap project. Zhang has published some 1 10 papers in international
journals, including Cell and Neuron.124

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
50

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
41
s a supplement to our research, we surveyed PRC scientists di-
rectly on their views about China’s AI-brain project. Here are the
salient points, grouped into seven categories for convenience.
BACKGROUNDS
• Survey respondents were affiliated primarily with Beijing Normal
University, Shanghai’s Fudan University, and CAS for specialists,
and Xidian University, Tsinghua University, CUST in Hefei, and
Dalian University of Technology for generalists.
• A majority (three-fourths) of specialists have a neuroscience back-
ground, compared to only 1 2 percent of generalists, who tended to
have computer science and/or information science backgrounds.
Overall, computer science and neuroscience were the most com-
mon.
FUNDING
• The most prevalent source of funding for generalists (79 percent)
and specialists (92 percent) alike was the National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China. Universities were second for both
samples (average 40 percent). International funding of specialists
is nearly nil (4 percent).
• Most researchers (92 percent) expect NNSF funding in the future,
followed by 7 4 percent who expect funding from MOST. Special-
ists expect future funding from universities at a higher rate than
generalists, who look more to private companies for future funding.
A
Survey of Chinese
scientists and project
managers
7

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
42
CHARACTERIZATION
• Most researchers (86 percent) agreed with our description of BI-AI, con-
nectomics, and BCI as the pillars of AI-brain research, although a smaller
proportion of specialists agreed (75 percent compared to 96). Some added
neuromorphic computing.
• Researchers were split in their views on the significance of BI-AI: 39 percent
saw BI-AI as a normal progression of AI research, 35 percent saw it as
“transformational,” and 27 percent regarded BI-AI as one of many parallel
approaches. More specialists (42 to 28 percent) saw it as transformational.
FOREIGN DEPENDENCIES
• Almost all respondents claimed to work with international scholars on a reg-
ular basis. Most (86 percent) studied and/or worked abroad, on average
for 1–2 years. That figure rises to 96 percent for specialists.
• A large majority of respondents (88 percent) consider foreign collaboration
to be important to their research. Specialists were more likely to indicate
METHODOLOGY AND RESPONSE RATE
Our survey was fielded online through Qualtrics between January 5 and March
4, 2020. Responses were recorded anonymously; no identifier was collected to
map a response to a respondent.
The survey included 42 questions and was designed in English and translated
into Chinese. We sent the survey to two different populations of Chinese
researchers: (1) specialists working in the field of brain-inspired AI and (2)
generalists whose research areas are in artificial intelligence or neuroscience, but
are not specifically BI-AI related. Based on this selection criteria, we identified
nearly 850 researchers (390 specialists and 452 generalists).
Among all researchers, the response rate was 5.8 percent. We collected 49
complete responses; 24 from specialists (6.2 percent) and 25 from generalists
(5.5 percent). A response rate of this size is expected for an online, international
survey.
The survey’s timing could have been better. Reminders went out during Chinese
Spring Festival break, and the whole of it coincided with the outbreak of the
COVID-1 9 virus. The results of this exploratory survey nonetheless provide
valuable insight into the perspectives of Chinese researchers.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
43
foreign collaboration as extremely important (63 percent), while generalists
selected somewhat important (48 percent).
BI-AI IMPACT
• Both groups believe BI-AI will have more impact over the next five years
than other competing approaches; about 84 percent selected this option.
Only 40 percent of the generalists saw neuromorphic computing as having
an impact, compared to 79 percent of the specialists.
• A large majority of researchers (90 percent) foresee “extremely significant”
impact of next-generation AI on China and the world. Their projections
included replacing human labor, accelerating fundamental research, and
greater connectedness.
DRIVERS AND OBSTACLES
• About 60 percent of all respondents view academia as the driving force
for AI advances. A higher proportion of specialists selected academia and
government than generalists, who were split between academia and private
sector.
• 92 percent of generalists and specialists agreed that inadequate basic
research is an “obstacle” to the success of China’s next-generation AI pro-
gram. Only 16 percent of all respondents regard inadequate funding as a
factor.*
AI AND SAFETY
• A majority of researchers (7 4 percent) think brain-inspired AI will someday
lead to AGI. This prediction is more common among specialists (83 percent)
than generalists (64 percent). Of those who predicted AGI at all, a majority
(63 percent) believe AGI is more than 10 years out.†
• Researchers agree (96 percent) that international structures and agreements
are needed to ensure the safety of next-gen AI. Concern in China for AI
safety is “moderate,” though specialists were more likely to suggest there is
no concern. Here is the breakdown:
* Written comments included calls for greater integration of basic and applied BI-AI research in China,
to offset the application-driven research that characterizes most Chinese AI development.
† Generalists were 50/50 about whether AGI would be achieved in five to 10 years or 10+ years,
while specialists were more aligned that AGI is 10+ years away. This comports with our observation in
Section 2 about the sobering effects of hands-on research.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
44
Respondents’ predictions of achieving artificial general intelligence and esti-
mates of the level of concern around AI safety in China. The questions asked “Will
brain-inspired AI research lead to artificial general intelligence (AGI), meaning
human-equivalent intelligence or better?” and “To your knowledge, what is the
general level of concern in China around AI safety?” Respondents had the option to
select “don’t know.”
In sum, we believe the survey agrees with observations made elsewhere in this
paper about the status and future of China’s AI-brain project, namely:
• BI-AI is likely to have a significant impact on AI in China. In part, this is a
self-fulfilling prophecy, since the “new generation” AI program is heavily
brain-centric.
• BI-AI in China is more theory-driven than general AI, which responds to
commercial demand. That said, researchers agree that basic research gets
short shrift in China. We comment on this phenomenon later in the paper.
• Funding for individual researchers is mostly from NNSF, which is some frac-
tion of the total funding. Few respondents see lack of funding as an obstacle,
and even fewer depend on foreign funding.
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Predictions of AGI and AI Safety Concerns in China
Specialists Generalists
FIGURE 1
Source: CSET survey of China AI scientists.
PREDICT AGISIGNIFICANT CONCERNMODERATE CONCERNNO CONCERN
33%
12%
63%
80%
4% 8%
83%
64%

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
45
• Nearly all respondents have studied or worked abroad, collaborate with in-
ternational researchers, and consider foreign contact important. We discuss
this aspect in Section 9 below.
• Whereas many Chinese scientists believe BI-AI may someday lead to AGI,
specialists—who face real problems—are more pessimistic about its pros-
pects. Their lesser concern with AI safety, however, reinforces the need for
multilateral safeguards and discussions.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
56

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
47
his segment presents two types of evaluation of China’s AI-brain
program based on a Chinese language professional literature
review and a subject matter expert’s (SME) appraisal.
(1) CNKI-BASED LITERATURE
The review was undertaken to determine how Chinese researchers are
addressing the AI-brain topic as a whole, and the problems identified
in Section 2 above as indicative of a “strong” BI program, i.e., object/
scene vision, attention modeling, continual learning, episodic memory,
intuitive understanding, imagination, planning, sensemaking, and effec-
tive BCI. Neuromorphic computing was added in deference to the views
of some survey respondents.
The following three figures show the quantitative progression of a
defined class of Chinese language technical journal articles published be-
tween 2010 and 201 9, whose main author claims a primary China affilia-
tion.* The sets were generated by restricted keyword lists to avoid inflation
with peripheral topics. Some 22,000 documents were returned by the ini-
tial search. The corpus underwent further selection to eliminate papers that
referenced topic areas but did not focus on them specifically and, finally,
was hand curated to produce core document sets that could be compared
reliably across years—the goal of this exercise.
T
China AI-brain
publications—
content evaluation
8
* All CNKI content furnished as machine-readable data files for off-platform use by East View
Information Services, Minneapolis, MN, USA. The corpus did not include (a) papers in English by
China-affiliated authors, (b) diaspora papers in either language, (c) papers with China-affiliated (non-
primary) co-authors only, or (d) a search for papers by authors in the core set whose output was not
fully retrieved by the basic keyword searches—a process that typically doubles the corpus.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
48
CKNI Papers Per Year (BI-AI)
FIGURE 2
Source: CNKI database of Chinese academic journal articles.
PUBLICATION YEAR
NUMBER OF PAPERS
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
20
40
60
80
100
120
8
13
26
32
41
58
102
80
89
112
Figure 2 of BI-AI-related publications shows the anticipated spike in 2016 and
continued growth to the present as the program gathers steam.
CKNI Papers Per Year (Connectomics)
FIGURE 3
Source: CNKI database of Chinese academic journal articles.
PUBLICATION YEAR
NUMBER OF PAPERS
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
20
40
60
80
100
120
64
57
89
104
83 80
105
84 82 79
0

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
49
Figure 3 of connectomics is a more level distribution reflecting its earlier arrival
as a neuroscience discipline. Although the 2016 peak appears, its subsequent de-
cline is an artifact of the binning process, where increasing identification with BI-AI
makes it harder to tag separately.
Figure 4 of BCI shows continuous rise. The anomalous drop in 2016, the same
year publications in BI-AI and connectomics spiked, may merit further study.
These records support inferences made from other types of information that
China has engaged in an accelerated effort since 2016 to “merge” AI and neuro-
science. Among the 56 1 BI-AI related papers published 2010 to 201 9 that matched
the keywords query, 352 papers can be categorized into one or more of the 10 BI-
AI categories identified above (Section 2) as indicative of state-of-the-art research.
The following figure—a heat map of 352 Chinese BI-AI technical journal docu-
ments—is evidence the project is addressing, or at least appreciates, the problem’s
“hard” goals.
CKNI Papers Per Year (BCI)
FIGURE 4
Source: CNKI database of Chinese academic journal articles.
PUBLICATION YEAR
NUMBER OF PAPERS
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
20
40
60
80
100
120
53
62 66 70
83
78
67
96
111 112
0

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
50
Each of the 352 columns represents a single document of a CNKI corpus,*
arranged by affinity to two canonical indicators: “neuromorphic computing” and
“object/scene vision” (the choices are arbitrary). The color spectrum of each
segment reflects the category affinity of that paper. The figure demonstrates that all
categories—albeit some more than others—indicative of a serious BI-AI program by
international standards are objects of Chinese research.
(2) SME NARRATIVE APPRAISAL †
1. BI-AI
There was an earnest call to develop brain-inspired research in 2016 and many
new research institutes were founded in this namesake. Speaking to the more pro-
* A refined query returned 56 1 BI-AI related papers published 2010 to 201 9, from which 2, 1 9 1
keywords were extracted. Each keyword was manually assigned, where possible, to one of the 10
categories. If a keyword was too generic to be assigned a category, it was discarded and the paper
itself removed from the inventory. In a rough sense, this expedient alone (352 papers of 56 1 qualified)
establishes that “hard” problems associated with BI-AI are being addressed in China.
† Dr. Jennifer Wang, computational neuroscientist, SETA Contractor at the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA), and consultant to IARPA’s MICrONS Project.
Source: CNKI database of Chinese academic journal articles.
FIGURE 5
OBJECT SCENE VISION
ATTENTION MODELING
CONTINUAL LEARNING
EPISODIC MEMORY
INTUITIVE UNDERSTANDING
IMAGINATION
PLANNING
SENSEMAKING
EFFECTIVE BCI
NEUROMORPHIC COMPUTING
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
51
vincial institutes, they were happy to take the extra funding in 2016 and continue
doing the research they had already been doing. However, there is a core of
scientists genuinely interested in BI-AI research, who have kept up the momentum
of the initiative. They are mostly computational neuroscientists interested in deriv -
ing generalizable computing schemes and data representation principles from
brain data. This group coincides with the leadership at the several newly erected
institutes in Beijing and Shanghai under the Brain Project. Their activity can be
reflected in BI-AI conferences and workshops that have become annual events in
Beijing and Shanghai since 2016.
Outside China, these researchers had a presence at the 201 9 NeurIPS confer-
ence, which shows innovative work is being done. From the many papers submitted
to AAAI 201 9, it is evident that Chinese researchers are aligned with the rest of the
world in terms of trends and benchmarks.
China has emerged a top contender in applicable AI technologies. On the ma-
chine learning theoretical front, China is rapidly gaining footing in the BI-AI research
community on par with Western institutes, as indicated in part by the quantity of
accepted papers at international AI conferences and by cover articles in prominent
journals over the last five years. With the vast number of Chinese nationals studying
at and contributing to the top AI research institutions in the United States (Carne-
gie Mellon University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Stanford University),
China has direct access to the top algorithms in the academic world. Many of these
scholars are well positioned to return to China and start their own labs.
2. Connectomics
Whereas most brain projects around the world are using mammalian models,
China’s model system for connectomics is the larval zebrafish. Zebrafish are rela-
tively transparent creatures, so it is possible to optically record neural data in live
fish while obtaining neuroanatomical data, resulting in valuable functional connec-
tomes. These datasets are invaluable, in that one can directly study the live interac-
tion of a group of neurons as they respond to the world. Fish and mammalian neural
architectures drastically differ; it is highly likely the principles derived may not apply
to humans. But the neural algorithms could still offer more elegant data representa-
tion or computational solutions in computer science. Creating a zebrafish connec-
tome is not as resource-intensive as generating a mouse or human brain connec-
tome, so China has not needed to innovate on the hardware front of connectomics.
China is actively developing software and algorithms associated with studying
connectomes. To establish connectivity among nodes, 2D neuroanatomy images
must be stacked, aligned, and each nanometer scale neural process traced through
the sample volume. This need to identify objects and track them through thousands
of frames is a generalizable problem in computer vision. Connectomics offers vast

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
52
controlled image datasets to develop these computational capabilities. Solving
these questions for connectomics will also lend powerful tools to analyze satellite
and surveillance data.
There are several ongoing challenges to reconstruct neural connectomes, a
prominent one being the SNEMI3D challenge. As of April 2020, the CAS Institute
of Automation (CASIA) ranks in the top 10 alongside Princeton and MIT on the
leaderboard, showing they are invested in this field and are excelling.12 5
3. BCI
Historically, BCI is a field led by the United States, enabled by the drive to rehabil-
itate handicapped soldiers returning from combat. This domain is all but inactive in
Europe, as it has scaled back non-human primate research due to ethical concerns
and, with the exception of Switzerland, lacks access to capital markets.12 6 This trend
has also spread in the United States to a lesser degree. Invasive brain implants for
therapeutic use in paralysis, Parkinson’s, pain, and depression are mostly developed
and used in the United States.
There are few known invasive human studies in China for BCI. The existing ones
often originate from military and civilian hospitals and are labeled “rehabilitation
studies.” China has an active non-invasive BCI community, however, based on
EEG, which is inexpensive and safe—but has many limitations in terms of signal
quality and remains in its infancy. The annual BCI Robotic challenge (held in Shang-
hai as part of a robotics conference) consists largely of approaches that depend on
decoding EEG signals in real time.
The resources for China to develop BCI in earnest came together with the Brain
Project. The neurophysiology model for China’s Brain Project is the macaque mon-
key. They are more closely related to humans evolutionarily and are extremely
intelligent. The most cutting-edge BCI work has been conducted on macaque mon-
keys. The brain initiative expanded primate facilities in and around China to house
thousands of macaques and marmoset monkeys. Freedom to conduct neuroscience
research on these primates has attracted foreign talent to China.127
In sum
China is intent on becoming the world leader in AI and has invested heavily in
research in academia and industry. The country is very competitive at worldwide AI
competitions. It has state-of-the-art technology in facial recognition and is often in
the top five for machine vision challenges. China frequently takes the best working
algorithms and develops them to train faster, perform better, or apply them to a
brand-new domain. Innovating on the theoretical front of AI takes time because it is
tied to basic research. China’s political and scientific leaders increasingly recognize

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
53
BI-AI as a worthy investment, as they believe this will lead to the next generation
of AI. China’s ability to apply its burgeoning AI expertise to practical problems, its
growing (albeit still modest) investment in neuroscience, and demonstrable intent to
make the two fields advance in tandem suggest the AI-brain project will be an abid-
ing feature of China’s AI landscape.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
64

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
55
o description of China’s AI-brain project—or any advanced
Chinese technology program—is complete without an account
of its foreign associations. While dwelling on China’s foreign de-
pendencies can distract attention from the country’s significant indigenous
efforts—an error we have no wish to propagate—neither can this dimen-
sion be ignored.
China’s appetite for foreign technology and penchant for acquiring it
has been described on the one hand as a universal practice engaged in
by all nations,12 8 as the “greatest transfer of wealth in history” on the other
hand,12 9 and as a composite of legal, illegal, and extralegal behaviors that
defy any simple characterization.1 30 What cannot be disputed is the scale
of China’s use of foreign “models” as a shortcut to technological develop-
ment, particularly in high-tech areas. This phenomenon has been estab-
lished beyond doubt by multiple studies.131
More recently, the authors examined China’s application of these
transfer practices to AI development and, perhaps unsurprisingly, found the
same pattern of activity.132 In this segment, we will update these findings, as
they apply to the AI-brain project especially.
The key document guiding China’s formal efforts to achieve parity with,
and eventually surpass, world-class levels of sophistication in AI is the
“New Generation AI Development Plan” issued by China’s State Council
in July 201 7. We described (Section 4 above) how this document showcas-
es the role that brain-centric research is expected to play in achieving this
outcome. The other outstanding feature of the document, from our perspec-
tive, is revealed in Section 4 “Key Tasks,” where it calls for “speeding up
the introduction of top AI talent and younger AI talent worldwide” to form
China’s “high ground” (高地) of AI experts. This will be achieved by:
N
Foreign
dependencies
9

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
56
• cooperation and interaction with major AI institutes worldwide;
• the use of “special channels and policies” to recruit top AI “talent”;
• the “flexible introduction”133 of AI talent via projects and consultation;
• coordination with China’s foreign talent programs (“Thousand Talents Plan”).
This State Council plan was followed later that year by a Ministry of Industry
and Information Technology action plan134 for “full use of bilateral and multilateral
international cooperation mechanisms” and “attracting high level AI talent and
innovative entrepreneurial talent by various means.”* The plan also recommended
using the “Thousand Talents” and “Ten Thousand Talents” plans to support staffing
goals.
Two other state notifications are germane. The Ministry of Education’s (MOE)
“AI Innovation Action Plan for Institutes of Higher Education,” issued April 2,
2018 ,135 mandates “key tasks” that are largely foreign-oriented. They include:
• “Increase international academic exchanges and cooperation. Support the
establishment of 1 1 1 Project ‘foreign intellect bases’ (引智基地).”
• “Accelerate the introduction of internationally renowned scholars to join in
establishing scientific disciplines and scientific research.”
• “Organize high-level international academic AI conferences; promote
Chinese scholars to important posts in relevant international academic orga-
nizations.”
As we shall see, these directives were largely fulfilled for the AI-brain project.
The second document is especially important in light of China’s known challeng-
es in basic research. On October 1 2, 201 8, MOST issued its “Project Application
Guidelines for S&T Innovation 2030 - ‘New Generation Artificial Intelligence’
201 8 Major Projects”1 36 as a follow up to the 201 7 “New Generation” plan. A key
feature is that, while applicants are limited to “China mainland-registered R&D insti-
tutes, universities, and enterprises,” project leaders can be foreign scientists (外籍科
学家) employed by a Chinese entity or concurrently “by both a foreign and Chinese
employer.” This provision will resonate with many readers, given the U.S. focus
on foreign participation in China’s talent programs.137 It helps explain what award
*以多种方式 (“by various means”): A broader expression of the “flexible introduction” concept and
a staple of the transfer rhetoric. It invites participants to exercise personal latitude in facilitating a
technology’s acquisition.

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
57
recipients and “two bases”1 38 co-optees do in China, and clarifies the paradox of
how a country, perceived as poor at abstract science, can do innovative work that
is theory-based.
Examples of the role China’s foreign talent plays in its AI-brain program are
easy to find, including job solicitations from USTC’s NEL-BITA lab; biographic in-
formation on famous international scientists recruited to China’s service; links to the
AI-brain program in the “1000 Talents Magazine” (千人杂志);13 9 references to Feng
Jianfeng (冯建峰), dean of Fudan University’s ISTBI, and Zhang Hongjiang
(张宏江), former managing director of Microsoft Advanced Technology Center;
and a summary in a CAS bulletin of a brain lab’s talent plan inductees (1 7 of its 32
person staff).14 0
CAS, the progenitor of all China’s talent programs,* in 201 9 hosted interna-
tional symposia on non-human primate brain science, connectomics, intelligent
robotics, pattern recognition, computational neural modeling, advanced mathemat-
ics, brain-inspired AI, and computational intelligence.141 Its Institute of Automation
(CASIA), home of the Brainnetome project, runs joint laboratories with universities
in Australia, France, Switzerland, Hong Kong, and Singapore on connectomics,
intelligent recognition, and data-intensive neuroscience.142 Its “Introduction to Inter-
national Cooperation” page reads:
“More than 320 of CASIA’s R/D staff are annually sent abroad on short-term
scientific and technological exchanges. CASIA annually hosts more than 700
overseas guests for scientific visits, † and chairs more than ten international
conferences each year. Meanwhile, CASIA has actively worked in partner-
ship with a number of internationally well-known research organizations and
worldwide companies.”
China’s AI-brain labs, institutionally and in their staffing, are tied closely to for-
eign peer organizations. CAS’s partnership with IDG/McGovern in Shenzhen, and
McGovern’s own partnerships with Peking, Tsinghua, and Beijing Normal universi-
ties are one example. The Shenzhen Nell Neuroplasticity Laboratory (深圳内尔神经
可塑性实验室) established in 201 9 at CAS’s Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Tech-
nology is another. Many more can be found:
*CAS’s “100 Talents Plan” (百人计划) launched in 1 994, 1 4 years before the Thousand Talents Program.
† A canonical abbreviation for the “Special Fund for Overseas Scholars to Return to China for Short
Periods to Work and Lecture” (留学人员短期回国工作讲学专项基金) administered jointly by CAS and the
NNSF.

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
58
CAS’s Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology,
besides its national network of affiliates, is supported by an “international adviso-
ry committee” which for 2020–2025 includes 10 distinguished researchers from
Caltech, Harvard, Stanford, Collège de France, UCL, and Berlin’s Max Planck
Institute. Its 201 3–201 9 slate was no less impressive.14 3
CAS’s Institute of Automation, Research Center for Brain-inspired Intelligence
has its own advisory committee of 1 5 experts from the United States, Europe, Can-
ada and Australia, engaged in the U.S. Human Connectome Project and Europe’s
Human Brain Project.14 4
Fudan University’s Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-inspired Intel-
ligence hosts an “interdisciplinary international research team” of 2 1 professor-re-
searchers, including:
Nobel laureate Michael Levitt, Brain Prize winner Trevor Robbins and other
members of the Royal Academy of Sciences, four members of the U.S. Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, two Changjiang Scholars,*the chief scientist of
China’s "973" program,† eight project leaders of key national R&D projects,
and “a large number of outstanding overseas young researchers”—in all
“more than 1 30 famous international scholars in brain and brain-inspired re -
search. This is in addition to its research partnerships with some 20 renowned
universities and research institutes worldwide.” 14 5
ISTBI is certified by China’s Ministry of Education and State Administration of
Foreign Experts Affairs (国家外国专家局)‡ as a “1 1 1 Project base” for foreign expert
recruitment,1 46 along with Xidian University’s Joint Laboratory of International Co-
operation on Intelligent Perception and Computing (智能感知与计算国际合作联合实
验室) in Xi’an, the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China’s MOE
Key Lab for Neuroinformation (神经信息教育部重点实验室) in Chengdu, East China
Normal University’s MOE Key Lab of Brain Functional Genomics (脑功能基因组学教
育部重点实验室), and BNU’s State Key Lab of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning
(认知神经科学与学习国家重点实验室).
We have collected a few dozen other examples of collaborative arrangements
between China’s AI-brain community and foreign institutions but see no need to
belabor the point. Instead, we conclude this segment by pointing to a document
*A high-level Ministry of Education award used, like 1000 Talents, to incentivize foreign “talent”
participation.
†Also called the “National Basic Research Program.” China’s national key R&D program for basic
science.
‡ China’s premier technology transfer oversight organization, now part of the Ministry of Science and
Technology.

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
59
issued by China’s General Office of the Organization Department of the CPC
Central Committee in 2016 (No. 60) titled “Notice on Reference Catalogue for the
National Introduction of Overseas High-level Talent” (国家引进海外高层次人才参考
目录的通知) that lays out—in order—1 29 S&T disciplines (“priority directions” 重点方
向) targeted for talent plan recruitment. In the first of 10 categories of “frontier basic
interdisciplinary science” (前沿基础交叉科学领域), “brain-inspired computing”
(类脑计算) is listed third, behind “core mathematics” and “applied mathematics,”
two areas where China is notoriously weak.147
Given China’s appetite for foreign technology, ability to acquire it, and the
country’s storied ingenuity at “re-innovation” (再创新), documentation such as this
is probably a better measure of China’s prospect for developing a technology than
(visible) budget outlays, to the extent the latter can be determined at all.

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
70

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
61
TRUST, BUT VERIFY*
In 2016, China embarked on an effort to accelerate its pace of AI devel-
opment by leveraging brain science, publicized as a program to “merge”
(
混合) AI and neuroscience. Our study, beyond validating the existence of
this program as a component of China’s AI effort, also determined that the
program enjoys support within China’s scientific community, is addressing
international benchmark challenges, is backed by a plan that balances
pragmatic achievements (revenue) with theoretical advances, and is insinu-
ated into China’s R&D infrastructure.
Accordingly, we assess China’s AI-brain program to be a credible effort
that merits respect and cooperation for the following reasons:
•
China’
s quest to marry NS with AI predates its focus on AI itself,
and is an established line of research.
• T
he project enjoys significant policy support, with a clear and
consistent emphasis on the “brain” as the bedrock of China’s “new
generation AI” project.
• T
here is a coherent national program (“one body, two wings”)
based on using market demand (medical, therapeutic products) to
incentivize cutting-edge research.
•
Ded
icated infrastructure exists throughout the country, co-located
with centers of AI development. Funding mechanisms are exercised
at all levels.
Conclusion
*“Доверяй, но проверяй.”

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
62
• AI-brain research in China is addressing the issues characteristic of a
goal-oriented, alternative AI program.
• Key figures within China’s scientific establishment embrace the program;
foreign “talent” is attracted by competitive salaries, facilities, and operating
advantages.
• These advantages include the world’s largest supply of non-human primates
bred for research, and an ethical framework conducive to experimentation.
The program also merits scrutiny. While we dislike ending every China study on
a negative note, it is hard to ignore the potential, long-term challenges to United
States and world security that China’s AI-brain program presents.
For the record, we assess the likelihood of China achieving artificial general
intelligence (AGI) soon as low. Chinese scientists agree with this assessment. The
project is in its infancy and there is no indication in the published literature that Chi-
na has made breakthroughs in key areas.
However, we are less confident over the long term (10+ years) that poten-
tially troublesome aspects of this research—or of AI generally—will not emerge,
an assessment that comports with the views of Chinese AI experts. One need not
subscribe to an AGI scenario to appreciate that AI research alone can entail chal-
lenging risks. Here is one scenario, for example, which is plausible over a shorter
term—and comes directly from a credible Chinese source:
“Speaking of the brain-computer interaction of tomorrow, we will move from
intelligence [of one type] to intelligence [of another] ( 从智能而来，到智能而
去). The future is not about replacing human beings with artificial intelligence,
but making AI a part of human beings through interconnection and interoper-
ability. A blend of human and computer without barriers is the inevitable end
of the future.”14 8
Our proposal to manage these nascent challenges is not an AI “race” for which
no provocation can be found in the data surveyed here. Rather, our recommenda-
tions are twofold:
1. Chinese scientists agree nearly unanimously (96 percent) on the need for
international conventions and safeguards to ensure the safe development of a
“next-generation” of artificial intelligence, whether brain-inspired or some other
progression of existing research. We believe it incumbent on policymakers world-
wide to reward this positive attitude with genuine efforts to achieve win-win solu-
tions, agreeable to all sides, that result in a safer world for everyone.

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
63
We have less confidence that political decision-makers in China necessarily
share these high levels of safety concern, not for sinister reasons, but simply because
science—and arguments based on its subtleties—are not necessarily at the top
of their daily agendas. The good news is that many of China’s political elite have
technical backgrounds and are unlikely to dismiss the arguments of near or former
colleagues, who are aware of the compelling need for AI safety.
A useful exercise, accordingly, would be to identify leading Chinese scien-
tists who share these near universal concerns and have access to China’s political
decision-makers—or, at least, have sufficient stature within China’s AI and neurosci-
ence communities to compel groundswells of concern among colleagues that filter
through to responsible officials.
2. Secondly, we reiterate a point made in an earlier paper on Chinese AI
technology transfer,149 namely, the need for a serious, government-sponsored S&T
monitoring program based on open sources that can discern when China’s, or any-
one’s, AI or neuroscience programs approach danger points. Absent a determined
(institutionalized) effort to observe developments on a day-to-day basis, much as
China does vis-à-vis the rest of the world, we have little confidence the United States
can detect game-changing technologies early enough to matter, let alone predict
their emergence.
While building trust through multilateral agreements, cooperation and even mu-
tual inspections, the ability to verify our trust through a sustainable open source S&T
monitoring apparatus—akin if not comparable to what China has been operating
since the 1 950s—would ensure that our trust is not misplaced.

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
74

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
65
The following keywords were used to search CNKI-based literature. Keywords listed below are components of
regular expressions case-insensitive search syntax. Sometimes it is necessary to use word fragments (“morphemes”)
in queries. For example, we use the fragment “connectom” to capture case-insensitive results containing both
“Connectomics” and “Connectome.”
Figures on BI-AI, Connectomics, and BCI incorporate aggregate statistics compiled from CNKI metadata query
results. We excluded results from journals whose names contain these Chinese and English words: economics, social,
management, finance, business, accounting, insurance, education, food, forum, global, and mosaic.
BI-AI KEYWORDS
• 类脑智能
• 类脑计算
• 神经网络芯片
• 脉冲神经
• 认知脑?计算
• 类脑信息处理
• neural network chip
• pulse neural
• cognitive comput
• 脑连接组
• connectom
• 生.{1,4}机器学习
• biologically informed machine learning
• biologically realistic machine learning
• machine learning neurofidelity
• 仿生机器学习
• biomimetic machine learning
• 类脑人工智能
• brain-inspired AI
• brain-inspired artificial intelligence
• 类脑机器学习
• 脑.{1,4}机器学习
Appendix: Keywords for searching CNKI-based literature

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
66
• brain-inspired machine learning
• neuro-inspired machine learning
• neurally-inspired machine learning
• 长期.{1,4}机器学习
• long-term learning machine learning
• long-term potentiation machine learning
• LTP machine learning
• neurobiological constraint machine learning
• predictive coding machine learning
• predictive modeling machine learning
• 稀疏.{1,4}机器学习
• sparse representation machine learning
• 脉冲.{1,4}机器学习
• spike timing machine learning
• 突触智能
• synaptic intelligence
• 质机器学习
• cortical model machine learning
• 类脑架构
• brain-derived architecture
• brain-inspired architecture
• neuromorphic architecture
• 类脑学习
• brain-inspired learning
• neuromorphic learning
• image segmentation machine vision neuroscience
• large-scale projection mapping brain
• neuroinformatics machine learning
• virtual brain connectomics neuroscience machine learning
• brain simulation neuroscience machine learning
• brain-based communication
• closed-loop brain computer machine interface
• invasive brain computer machine interface
• neuropixel
• deep brain stimulation machine learning

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
67
• 脑机接口道德
• 脑机道德
• brain machine interface ethics
• 神经义肢
• neuroprosthetics
• neuro-prosthetics
• noninvasive brain machine interface
• 强化学习脑机接口
• reinforcement learning brain machine interface
CONNECTOMICS KEYWORDS
• 脑连接
• 连接组
• connectom
BCI KEYWORDS
• 脑机接口
• brain[\- ]computer interface

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
78

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
69
Endnotes
1. “From an engineering perspective, what works is ultimately all that matters. For our purposes then, biological
plausibility is a guide, not a strict requirement.” Demis Hassabis, et al., “Neuroscience-Inspired Artificial
Intelligence,” Neuron 95.2, July 1 9, 201 7.
2. IARPA, “IARPA Seeks Partners in Brain-Inspired AI Initiative,” January 22, 201 5, www.iarpa.gov/index.
php/research-programs/microns.
3. Olaf Sporns, Discovering the Human Connectome (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 201 2).
4. For example, Google’s use of a trained NN to fill in data lost while aligning Drosophila brain slices. Peter
H. Li, et al., “Automated Reconstruction of a Serial-Section EM Drosophila Brain with Flood-Filling Networks
and Local Realignment,” https://www.biorxiv.org/content/biorxiv/early/201 9/08/04/605634.full.pdf.
5. Margaret Rouse, “Augmented Intelligence,” WhatIs.com, February 201 9, whatis.techtarget.com/definition/
augmented-intelligence.
6. “人机混合智能” (human-machine hybrid intelligence). PRC State Council, “新一代人工智能发展规划”
(New Generation Artificial Intelligence Plan), July 8, 201 7.
7. “Artificial intelligence (AI)/machine learning (ML) has received great attention for the development of BCI
applications to solve difficult problems in several domains… AI/ML has since become the most efficient tool
for BCI systems.” Larbi Boubchir and Yuling Yan, “Call for Papers. Special Issue ‘Advances in Artificial Intel-
ligence and Machine Learning for BCI/BMI’ ,” Bioengineering, September 201 9, www.mdpi.com/journal/
bioengineering/special_issues/AI_BCI.
8. Charles N. Munyon, “Neuroethics of Non-primary Brain Computer Interface: Focus on Potential Military
Applications,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, October 28, 201 8.
9. IARPA, “MICrONS Proposers Day Abstracts” (hereafter “MICrONS PDA”): Numeta presentation, https://
www.iarpa.gov/index.php/newsroom/iarpa-in-the-news/1 55-research/current-research/microns. The
cortex is a thin layer of neural tissue that covers the outer part of the brain’s cerebral hemispheres in mam-
mals, and is responsible for motor function, sensory processing, and high order functions such as language
and planning.
10. MICrONS PDA: Tolias presentation.
11 . Lab motto. Andreas Tolias Lab, “A Less Artificial Intelligence,” https://toliaslab.org.
1 2. MICrONS PDA: Smith, Huerta, Bashenov presentation.
13 . Nand Kishor, “IARPA Project Targets Hidden Algorithms of the Brain,” House of Bots, June 28, 201 7 ,
houseofbots.com/news-detail/7 1 2-1-iarpa-project-targets-hidden-algorithms-of-the-brain.
1 4. Adapted from Nikola Kasabov, Time-Space, Spiking Neural Networks and Brain-Inspired Artificial Intelli-
gence, (Berlin: Springer 201 9), 228. These theoretical capabilities are constrained by serious limitations on
hardware and associated algorithms (Dr. Christof Koch, personal communication, July 9, 2020).
15. Demis Hassabis, et al., “Neuroscience-Inspired Artificial Intelligence,” 245-258.
16. Farahani et al., “Application of Graph Theory for Identifying Connectivity Patterns in Human Brain Net-
works: A Systematic Review,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, June 6, 201 9, frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fnins.201 9.00585/full.
17. “In 2005, Dr. Olaf Sporns at Indiana University and Dr. Patric Hagmann at Lausanne University Hospital
independently and simultaneously suggested the term ‘connectome’ to refer to a map of the neural connec-
tions within the brain. The term was directly inspired by the ongoing effort to sequence the human genetic
code—to build a genome.” “Connectome,” Wikipedia, May 5, 2020, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Connectome#Origin_and_usage_of_the_term.

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
70
1 8. The mapping, done originally in 1 986, was redone in 201 9 using new techniques and discovered some
1,500 synapses missed the first time. Steven J. Cook, et al., “Whole-animal Connectomes of Both Caenor-
habditis Elegans Sexes,” Nature 57 1, July 3, 201 9, 63-7 1, nature.com/articles/s41 586-01 9-1 352-7.
19. Gerald M. Rubin, “Unveiling the Biggest and Most Detailed Map of the Fly Brain Yet,” Howard Hughes
Medical Institution, January 22, 2020, https://www.hhmi.org/news/unveiling-the-biggest-and-most-
detailed-map-of-the-fly-brain-yet.
20. MICrONS PDA: David J. Hamilton presentation. Rebecca Hodge, et al., “Conserved Cell Types with Diver-
gent Features in Human Versus Mouse Cortex,” Nature, September 201 9, https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/3 1 43501 9/.
21. Cells that surround, insulate, and support neurons. At least one type of glial cell (astrocytes) is believed to
send information to neurons, hence must be accounted for in the connectome. Andrew Koob, “The Root of
Thought: What Do Glial Cells Do?,” Scientific American, October 27 , 2009, scientificamerican.com/arti-
cle/the-root-of-thought-what/.
22. Seung Wook Oh, et al., “A Mesoscale Connectome of the Mouse Brain,” Nature, April 201 4, https://www.
nature.com/articles/nature1 3 1 86. Julie A. Harris, Stefan Mihalas, et al., “Hierarchical Organization of
Cortical and Thalamic Connectivity,” Nature, October 201 9.
23. Christof Koch, personal communication, July 9, 2020.
24. “A connectivity atlas of one post-mortem human brain for the larger axons … is probably feasible within ten
years.” Christof Koch, personal communication, July 9, 2020.
25. Eric C. Leuthardt, et al., “Neuroprosthetics,” The Scientist, November 201 4, www.the-scientist.com/
features/neuroprosthetics-365 10. For a description of DoD spending on BCI for prosthetics see: Newsweek
Staff, “Using Brain Signals to Move Prosthetic Limbs,” Newsweek, September 2, 2007 , https://www.
newsweek.com/using-brain-signals-move-prosthetic-limbs-100529.
26. Elon Musk (Neuralink), “An Integrated Brain-machine Interface Platform with Thousands of Channels,”
bioRxiv, August 2, 201 9, https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10. 1 101/703801v4.
27. DARPA, “DARPA and the Brain Initiative,” https://www.darpa.mil/program/our-research/darpa-and-the-
brain-initiative.
28. Ming Dong (明东), “‘脑语密码’ 破译者” (“Decipherer of ‘Brain Language Code’”), Keji Ribao (S&T Daily),
December 25, 201 9, http://m.chinanews.com/wap/detail/zw/gn/201 9/1 2-25/9042386.shtml.
29. One scientist described it as being “like two supercomputers trying to talk to each other using an old 300-
baud modem.” DARPA Neural Engineering System Design program manager Phillip Alvelda. DARPA,
“Bridging the Bio-Electronic Divide,” January 1 9, 2016, https://www.darpa.mil/news-events/201 5-01-1 9.
30. Christof Koch, personal communication, July 9, 2020.
31. Ben Williamson, “Brain Data: Scanning, Scraping and Sculpting the Plastic Learning Brain Through
Neurotechnology,” Post Digital Science and Education, April 201 9, 65-86, https://link.springer.com/
article/10. 1007/s42438-01 8-0008-5.
32. Larbi Boubchir and Yuling Yan, “Call for Papers. Special Issue ‘Advances in Artificial Intelligence and
Machine Learning for BCI/BMI’ .”
33. Jeff Coleman, “Brain Computer Interface with Artificial Intelligence and Reinforcement Learning,” Medium.
com Blog, May 4, 201 8, medium.com/@askwhy/brain-computer-interface-with-artificial-intelligence-and-
reinforcement-learning-9c94b0454209.
34. E.g., Su Min (苏敏) and Yao Dezhong (尧德中), “脑功能多种成像方式整合技术的研究及其进展”
(“Research Progress in the Technique of Integrating Multiple Imaging Modalities in the Functional Brain”),
生物医学工程学杂志 (Journal of Biomedical Engineering), 2005(2), 385-388.
35. I.e., it is not Sporns’ “human connectome.” Olaf Sporns, Discovering the Human Connectome.
36. http://bii.ia.ac.cn.
37. The Chinese version of the paper, issued separately, omits “Brain Diseases” from the title. It reads literally:
“Comprehensive interpretation of the China Brain Project: from basic neuroscience to brain-inspired
computing.” The content of the two versions is comparable.
38. The project’s formal title is “脑科学与脑启发智能” (“Brain Science and Brain-inspired Intelligence”),
reflecting BI-AI’s importance in the overall enterprise. Pu Muming et al.’s paper describes it as being
“formulated as a 1 5-year plan (2016–2030), with the first five years coincident with China’s 1 3th five-year
plan for national social and economic development.”

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
71
39. The complaint was echoed as late as 201 8 in a briefing by IARPA’s “MICrONS” project manager, attended
by one of the present authors.
40. Chen Xiaogang (陈小刚), Zhang Dan (张丹), Wang Yijun (王毅军), 201 8年脑机接口研发热点回眸
(“Looking Back on the Research and Development Hotspots of Brain-computer Interfaces in 201 8”), 科技导
报 (Science and Technology Review), January 201 9.
41. Wm. C. Hannas and Didi Kirsten Tatlow, eds., China’s Quest for Foreign Technology (London and New
York: Routledge, 2020).
42. The paper gives a shout-out to IARPA’s MICrONS project: “In March 2016, the American Advanced
Research Projects Agency for Intelligence (IARPA) launched the Machine Intelligence from Cortical
Networks (MICrONS) program to reverse engineer (反向工程) 1 mm3 of cerebral cortex and use these
findings to improve machine learning and artificial intelligence algorithms.” A DARPA project is also
acknowledged: “In 2007 , the IBM Almaden Research Center Cognitive Computing Research Group
launched a Systems of Neuromorphic Adaptive Plastic Scalable Electronics, (SyNAPSE) project with the
support of the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency’s (DARPA) research and development of
cerebral (大脑) simulation software—a cortical simulator.”
43. China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI) database, accessed in January 2020.
44. Liu Qian (刘茜), et al., 脑语者：脑科学时代正在走来 (“Brain Talker: The Era of Brain Science
Is Coming”), 光明日报 (Guangming Daily), January 1 8, 2020, http://news.sciencenet.cn/
htmlnews/2020/1/434964.shtm.
45. Liang Yu, ed., “China Unveils Brain-computer Interface Chip,” Xinhua, May 1 8, 201 9, http://www.
xinhuanet.com/english/201 9-05/1 8/c_1 38069590.htm.
46. Lee argues that China—to date—has focused on practical applications of AI, leaving theoretical work to
foreign scientists. Kai-Fu Lee, AI Superpowers: China, Silicon Valley, and the New World Order (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 201 8).
47. Mu-ming Poo, “Towards Brain-inspired Artificial Intelligence,” National Science Review 5, October 25,
2018 .
48. Mu-ming Poo, “Towards Brain-inspired Artificial Intelligence.”
49. Zhang Xu, et al., “Brain Science and Technology: Initiatives in the Shanghai and Yangtze River Delta
Region,” Nature, July 201 9.
50. PRC State Council, 国务院关于积极推进“互联网+”行动的指导意见 (“State Council Guiding Opinions on
Positively Promoting ‘Internet +’ Activity” No. 40), July 1, 201 5.
51. PRC National Development and Reform Commission, Ministry of Science and Technology, Ministry of
Industry and Information Technology (MIIT), and the Cyberspace Administration of China, 四部门关于印发
《“互联网+”人工智能三年行动实施方案》的通知 (“Three-Year Action Implementation Plan for ‘Internet +’
Artificial Intelligence”), May 23, 2016.
52. PRC State Council, 国务院关于印发“十三五”国家科技创新规划的通知 (“State Council Notification on
National Science and Technology Innovation Programs for the 1 3th Five-Year Plan”), July 28, 2016.
53. A “draft outline” of the plan presented to the National People’s Congress on March 5, 2016, more than
four months earlier, listed “brain science and brain-inspired research” as fourth in importance on a list of
100 “national strategic engineering plans” (国家战略的百大工程项目). http://www.xinhuanet.com//
politics/2016lh/2016-03/05/c_1 1 1 8240939.htm.
54. PRC State Council, 国务院关于印发“十三五”国家战略性新兴产业发展规划的通知 (“National Strategic
Emerging Industry Development Projects”), November 26, 2016.
55. PRC State Council, “National Strategic Emerging Industry Development Projects.”
56. PRC State Council, 国务院关于印发新一代人工智能发展规划的通知 (“New Generation AI Development
Plan”), July 8, 201 7.
57. Parts adapted from Hannas and Chang, “China’s ‘Artificial’ Intelligence,” in Wm. C. Hannas and Didi
Kirsten Tatlow, eds., China’s Quest for Foreign Technology.
58. PRC State Council, 国家中长期科学和技术发展规划纲要(2006-2020年) (“National Medium- and Long-
term S&T Development Plan (2006-2020)”), February 9, 2006.
59. PRC State Council, 国家“十二五”科学和技术发展规划 (“1 2th Five-Year Plan for National S&T
Development), July 1 4, 201 1.

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology72
60. PRC State Council, 关于加快建设具有全球影响力的科技创新中心的意见 (“Opinions on Accelerating the
Construction of an S&T Innovation Center with Global Influence”), May 27 , 201 5.
61. The contiguous phrase “脑科学与人工智能” generated some 36,500 Google hits in May 2020.
62. Mu-ming Poo, “Towards Brain-inspired Artificial Intelligence.”
63. “脑连接图谱研究是认知脑功能并进而探讨意识本质的科学前沿，这方面探索不仅有重要科学意义，
而且对脑疾病防治、智能技术发展也具有引导作用.” http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2016-
05/3 1/c_1 1 1 8965 169.htm.
64. PRC State Council, “New Generation AI Development Plan.” Translation by the Foundation for Law and
International Affairs, verified by the present authors.
65. “构筑我国人工智能发展的先发优势” Our italics. The formulation in another context might be less
threatening; here it invokes the self-bootstrapping scenario—a mainstay of the AI ethics literature—of a
country with an early AI advantage leveraging its lead beyond the point where other nations can compete.
66. PRC National Natural Science Foundation, 国家自然科学基金人工智能基础研究应急管理项目指南.
(“National Natural Science Foundation of China Artificial Intelligence Basic Research Urgent Management
Project Guide”), August 2, 201 7 , http://www.nsfc.gov.cn/publish/portal0/tab452/info69927.htm.
67. PRC National Natural Science Foundation, “National Natural Science Foundation of China Artificial
Intelligence Basic Research Urgent Management Project Guide.”
68. http://www.research.pku.edu.cn/docs/201 8-07/201 80702201045 167 492.pdf.
69. “LetPub Professional SCI Paper Editor” (LetPub专业SCI论文编辑), www.letpub.com.cn.
70. E.g., “Class ‘B’ Strategic Priority Project” funding for “Brain Cognition and Brain-like Frontier Research” (脑
认知与类脑前沿研究升级版B类先导专项). Lu Qi (陆琦),以脑启智 融合慧聚, 中国科学报 (China S&T Daily),
June 25, 201 9, http://www.cas.cn/zkyzs/201 9/07/206/cmsm/201 907/t201 90702_4697801.shtml.
71. Wm. C. Hannas and Huey-Meei Chang, “China’s Access to Foreign AI Technology: An Assessment,” Center
for Security and Emerging Technology, September 201 9; and “China’s ‘Artificial’ Intelligence,” in Hannas
and Tatlow, eds., China’s Quest for Foreign Technology (2020).
72. Andrew Spear, former USTR China analyst and co-architect of the U.S. government’s “Section 301
Investigation” into China’s IPR appropriation, refers to the phenomenon as “China’s composite innovation
system,” a framework accepted now by many students of the problem. (see Andrew Spear, “Serve the
Motherland while Working Overseas” in Hannas and Tatlow, eds., China’s Quest for Foreign Technology).
73. http://thubci.org/en/. The lab is complemented by the Tsinghua Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence (清华
大学脑与智能实验室) established in 201 7.
7 4. http://brain.bnu.edu.cn/en/Home/.
75. http://bcslab.ibp.cas.cn.
76. Hannas and Chang, “China’s Access to Foreign AI Technology: An Assessment,” 1 5.
77. http://bcmi.sjtu.edu.cn/index.html.
78. http://www.ion.ac.cn/. China’s International Mesoscopic Connectome Project was launched at the end of
the 1 990–1 999 “Decade of the Brain” announced in July 1 989 by former U.S. President Bush, which had
given rise to waves of public and private funding and centers created for advanced research on the brain
and its functioning.
79. http://www.psych.cas.cn/jgsz/kyxt/xwkx/.
80. Xi-Nian Zuo, et al., “An Open Science Resource for Establishing Reliability and Reproducibility in Functional
Connectomics, Scientific Data, December 9, 201 4, https://www.nature.com/articles/sdata201 449.
81. https://www.cbicr.tsinghua.edu.cn.
82. http://bii.ia.ac.cn. The lab is equipped to “model mammalian brains,” has achieved successes in
“brain-like learning and decision-making on intelligent robots,” and claims to have created “the world's
first robot that passed mirror tests in a brain-like manner.” http://www.xinhuanet.com/science/201 8-
05/1 4/c_1 37 1 78022.htm.
83. http://www.brainnetome.org/.
84. www.cibr.ac.cn/.
85. https://jobs.sciencecareers.org/employer/5 1 3965/the-chinese-institute-for-brain-research-beijing-cibr-/.
86. David Cyranoski, “Beijing Launches Pioneering Brain-science Centre,” Nature, vol. 556, April 1 2, 201 8,
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41 586-01 8-041 22-3.
87. https://istbi.fudan.edu.cn/.

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
73
88. www.ecst.com.cn/topic/detailIndex.html?id=1 347.
89. David Cyranoski, “Beijing Launches Pioneering Brain-science Centre.”
90. http://www.ion.ac.cn/.
91. http://www.cebs.ac.cn/en/about.php.
92. http://www.cebsit.cas.cn/yjsjj/szzc/.
93. Zhou Wenting, “Insights to Come from New Brain Research Base,” China Daily, July 1 9, 201 8, http://www.
chinadaily.com.cn/cndy/201 8-07/1 9/content_3660387 1.htm.
94. https://www.cingta.com/detail/1 7634.
95. https://www.bsbii.cn/.
96. Zhang Xu, et al., “Brain Science and Technology: Initiatives in the Shanghai and Yangtze River Delta
Region.”
97. https://braindata.bitahub.com/.
98. http://en.jitri.org/yanjiuyuan72.html.
99. http://en.jitri.org/yanjiuyuan72.html.
100. Hannas and Chang, “China’s Access to Foreign AI Technology: An Assessment,” 20.
101. 万人计划. The MOE’s “AI Innovation Action Plan for Institutes of Higher Education” (201 8) calls for building
“interdisciplinary and cross-disciplinary teams and innovative research groups” from AI, brain science and
cognitive science through use of talent programs. http://www.moe.gov.cn/srcsite/A16/s7062/201 804/
t201 80410_332722.html.
102. http://www.cebs.ac.cn/en/duiwu_teacher.php?id=92.
103. https://person.zju.edu.cn/en/0006042#0. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duan_Shumin.
104. https://istbi.fudan.edu.cn/lnen/info/1 1 57/1629.htm.
105. http://www.cebs.ac.cn/en/duiwu_teacher.php?id=1.
106. http://brain.bnu.edu.cn/a/zh/keyantuandui/jiaoshou_yanjiuyuan/2016/022 1/600.html.
107. https://eecs.pku.edu.cn/info/1 503/6707.htm. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/author/37 401 330100.
108. http://www.nlpr.ia.ac.cn/jiangtz/. https://researchers.uq.edu.au/researcher/2339.
109. http://www.med.tsinghua.edu.cn/SingleServlet?newsId=1 345. http://www.201 7.ieeeglobalsip.org/
sym/1 7/HCE.html.
1 10. http://www.nlpr.ia.ac.cn/liucl/#Awards.
111 . http://en.cibr.ac.cn/index.php?s=/Show/index/cid/16/id/1 7.html.
1 1 2. http://brainsmatics.org/document.action?docid=69677.
113 . http://amt.tju.edu.cn/portal/teachers/getperson/id/40/sId/2/bId/2.html.
1 1 4. https://person.zju.edu.cn/en/gpan.
115 . http://www.cebs.ac.cn/en/duiwu_teacher.php?id=104.
1 16. http://www.xinhuanet.com//world/2016-04/28/c_1 28942 1 47.htm.
11 7 . https://gairdner.org/staff/yi-rao/.
1 1 8. Rao, Yi, “My Relatives in Wuhan Survived. My Uncle in New York Did Not,” The New York Times,
July 22, 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/22/opinion/coronavirus-china-us.html?_
ga=2.228975 1 88.996362065. 1 595722016-1 1 99988922. 1 595722016.
11 9 . https://cncc.ccf.org.cn/.
1 20. https://www.cbicr.tsinghua.edu.cn/shi-luping/.
121. http://cripac.ia.ac.cn/people/wwang/authors/tieniu-tan/; https://baike.baidu.com/item/谭铁牛.
1 22. http://www.cebs.ac.cn/en/duiwu_teacher.php?id=160.
12 3 . http://bii.ia.ac.cn/~yizeng/.
1 24. http://www.cebs.ac.cn/en/duiwu_teacher.php?id=9 1.
12 5 . http://brainiac2.mit.edu/SNEMI3D/leaders-board.
1 26. Christof Koch, personal communication, July 9, 2020.
127. Gretchen Vogel, “Monkey Facility in China Lures Neuroscientist,” Science 3 1, January 2020, 496-497 ,
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/367/6477/496.2. Vogel’s complaint reflects the frustration of
American and European scientists with restrictions on primate research. China has fewer such obstacles. As
he points out, “(T)he acceptance of nonhuman primate research by authorities and the public in China is
much higher than in Europe.”
1 28. Declarations to the authors at multiple closed and open U.S. government and academic fora.

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology74
12 9. Keith Alexander, former Director, U.S. National Security Agency. Josh Rogin, “NSA Chief: Cybercrime
Constitutes the ‘Greatest Transfer of Wealth in History’ ,” Foreign Policy, July 9, 201 2, https://foreignpolicy.
com/201 2/07/09/nsa-chief-cybercrime-constitutes-the-greatest-transfer-of-wealth-in-history/.
1 30. Hannas and Tatlow, eds. China’s Quest for Foreign Technology.
131. E.g., The IP Commission Report, The Theft of American Intellectual Property: Reassessments of the Challenge
and United States Policy, February 201 9. Wm. C. Hannas, James Mulvenon, and Anna B. Puglisi,
Chinese Industrial Espionage (London and New York: Routledge, 201 3), hereafter “CIE.” Michael Brown
and Pavneet Singh, China’s Technology Transfer Strategy (Washington, DC: Defense Innovation Unit
Experimental, February 201 7). Office of the United States Trade Representative, “Section 301 Report into
China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices Related to Technology Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation,”
March 27 , 201 8. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “201 9 Annual Report to
Congress,” November 201 9.
1 32. Hannas and Chang, “China’s Access to Foreign AI Technology: An Assessment.”
133 . 柔性引进: a term of art in the technology transfer literature defined on Baidu as: “Flexible introduction refers
to breaking the rigid constraints in the flow of talents such as nationality, household registration, region,
identity, archives, personnel relations, etc., and adapting to the requirements of the market economy and the
socialization of talents without changing and affecting the personnel relations between the talents and their
affiliates” (our italics). https://baike.baidu.com/item/柔性引进/68 1 2 1 50. In other words, service China’s
technical needs without losing access to the (foreign) institutional knowledge base supporting those needs.
1 34. PRC Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, 促进新一代人工智能产业发展三年行动计划 (“Three-
Year Action Plan to Promote the Development of New-Generation AI Industry”), December 1 4, 201 7 ,
Section 4, “Accelerate the Cultivation of Talent.”
135 . PRC Ministry of Education, 高等学校人工智能创新行动计划 (“AI Innovation Action Plan for Institutes of
Higher Education”), April 2, 201 8.
1 36. PRC Ministry of Science and Technology, 科技部关于发布科技创新2030—“新一代人工智能”重大项目2018
年度项目申报指南的通知 (“Project Application Guidelines for S&T Innovation 2030 - ‘New Generation
Artificial Intelligence’ 201 8 Major Projects”), October 1 2, 201 8, http://www.most.gov.cn/mostinfo/
xinxifenlei/fgzc/gfxwj/gfxwj201 8/201 8 10/t201 8 101 2_1 42 1 3 1.htm.
137. See Jeffrey Stoff, “China's talent programs” in Hannas and Tatlow, eds., China’s Quest for Foreign
Technology for an up-to-date account of China’s foreign talent recruitment programs.
1 38. 两个基地: another common term in the Chinese technology transfer lexicon. It refers to a policy launched
by China’s National Natural Science Foundation in 1 992, subsequently reaffirmed, to incentivize overseas
scientists to contribute to—or lead—research in China while maintaining a parallel operation abroad. See
Hannas et al., CIE, 89, 168, 1 7 1-1 7 4.
13 9. http://www. 1000thinktank.com/ztbd/26499.jhtml.
1 40. http://www.bulletin.cas.cn/publish_article/2016/7/201607 1 8.htm.
141. http://www.bic.cas.cn/gjhy/jqgjhylb/201 907/P0201 907257 42660780529.pdf.
1 42. http://english.ia.cas.cn/ic/introduction/.
1 43. www.cebsit.cas.cn.
1 44. http://www.ia.cas.cn/kxcb/kpwz/201 307/t201 30730_3906966.html.
1 45. http://www.rencai8.com/web/job_content.php?id=34286. https://baike.baidu.com/item/复旦大学类
脑智能科学与技术研究院/22704541.
1 46. The “Project of Introducing Talents of Academic Disciplines to Universities” (高等学校学科创新引智计划), a
state-led program to create 100 first-class universities in China by recruiting 1,000 overseas experts from
the world’s top 100 research institutions. Each “base” is required to hire 10 or more foreign experts. The
project over-achieved; by 201 8, 41 2 bases were established. Andrew Spear, “Serve the Motherland While
Working Overseas” in Hannas and Tatlow, eds., China’s Quest for Foreign Technology.
147. https://hr.pku.edu.cn/docs/201 70106 1 3 1009584633.pdf.
1 48. Ming Dong (see Section 6 above), “Decipherer of ‘Brain Language Code’ .”
149. Hannas and Chang, “China’s Access to Foreign AI Technology: An Assessment.”

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology
87

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
CSET.GEORGETOWN.EDU | CSET@GEORGETOWN.EDU
