
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
February 2021
Assessing the Scope
of U.S. Visa Restrictions
on Chinese Students
CSET Issue Brief
AUTHORS
Remco Zwetsloot
Emily Weinstein
Ryan Fedasiuk

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ............................................................................................... 3
U.S. Visa Restrictions on Chinese Students and Researchers ............................. 5
Operationalizing “Military-Civil Fusion” for Visa Screening ............................. 6
Estimating the Number of Individuals Affected by the Proclamation ................ 7
Putting the Numbers of Affected Students in Context ...................................... 16
Conclusion .......................................................................................................... 18
Acknowledgments .............................................................................................. 21
Appendix ............................................................................................................. 22
Endnotes .............................................................................................................. 30

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3
Executive Summary In May 2020, the White House issued a Proclamation barring Chinese graduate students and researchers from studying or working at U.S. universities if they previously had been affiliated with Chinese institutions that “implement or support” China’s military-civil fusion (MCF) strategy. This Brief summarizes what we know—and do not know—about the policy, and uses two new datasets to estimate how the policy’s impact would differ depending on how federal agencies define and operationalize “military-civil fusion.” It also compares the number of students who could be blocked by the Proclamation to the overall number of Chinese student enrollments at U.S. universities. Our key findings are: ● The scope of the Proclamation is unclear because it leaves several of the key terms and concepts undefined. ○ The Proclamation defines China’s MCF strategy as “actions by or at the behest of the PRC to acquire and divert foreign technologies, specifically critical and emerging technologies, to incorporate into and advance the PRC’s military capabilities.” This definition differs in substance and emphasis from how other U.S. government documents define MCF, complicating attempts to assess the impact of MCF-related policies. ○ The Proclamation blocks individuals who have been affiliated with a Chinese entity that “implements or supports” China’s MCF strategy, though individuals who work in fields that “would not contribute” to China’s MCF strategy are exempt. The Proclamation does not specify what criteria will be used to judge which entities or fields are related to MCF. ○ These and other uncertainties mean that assessments of the Proclamation’s likely impact need to be based on assumptions and estimates. This Brief presents such an estimate, focusing on the annual number of Chinese students whose visa applications would be denied under the Proclamation. ● Assumption: The MCF-related “entity” criterion likely targets a small number of Chinese universities that are on the Entity List, including the “Seven Sons of National Defense.”

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4
○ Eleven civilian Chinese universities on the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Entity List (which designates entities subject to strong export control requirements), including all members of the CCP-designated Seven Sons of National Defense. ○ Chinese students may also be barred on other grounds, including past employment (at a company involved in MCF-related work or directly for government) or participation in a Chinese scholarship program. We do not have data on all such risk indicators, so our assessment is not comprehensive. ● Assumption: The MCF-related “field” criterion is likely to encompass all STEM enrollments. ○ We were unable to find authoritative analyses or documents that list all academic fields relevant to MCF. However, our initial analysis of MCF technology lists suggest they are so broad that all STEM fields could be relevant in some way. ○ At the Ph.D. level, 85 percent of Chinese Ph.D. students at U.S. universities are in STEM fields, compared to less than half of Chinese master’s students. Among graduates from Seven Sons or other Entity List universities, the share of Ph.D. students in U.S. STEM programs is 95 percent. ● Estimate: The Proclamation could block more than one-fifth of annual new Chinese enrollments in U.S. STEM graduate programs. ○ To estimate what percentage of Chinese students are affected by the Proclamation, we suggest 3,000 to 5,000 as a reasonable range for the annual number of students affected. This number is in line with news reports, but due to the many sources of uncertainty we consider it a low-confidence estimate. ○ This range reflects an estimate for the number of students rejected per year. As such, the most natural comparison group for our estimate is the annual number of new Chinese graduate enrollments in STEM programs. Our estimate of 3,000 to 5,000 blocked students equals between 16 and 27 percent of the roughly 19,000 Chinese STEM students who start U.S. STEM graduate programs per year. ○ Our calculations reflect historical data from 2017 through 2019. Future enrollment changes due to COVID-19 and

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5
other political and economic trends add significant uncertainty to any impact forecast. ● Our analysis leaves several important questions unanswered. ○ While the proclamation also applied to “researchers,” we were unable to perform detailed analysis of the number of affected researchers (those on J visas) due to a lack of data. Data gaps on international researchers are significant, and filling them should be a priority. ○ We also recommend further data collection and analysis aimed at disaggregating master’s from Ph.D. students at U.S. universities; determining what academic fields are relevant to China’s MCF strategy; and measuring department- and lab-level affiliations at Chinese universities.U.S. Visa Restrictions on Chinese Students and Researchers On May 29, 2020, the White House issued the “Proclamation on the Suspension of Entry as Nonimmigrants of Certain Students and Researchers from the People’s Republic of China” (“the Proclamation”).1 It bars Chinese graduate students and researchers (undergraduates are exempted) from receiving F and J visas if they have been affiliated with an organization that implements or supports China’s military-civil fusion strategy. The Proclamation defines China’s “military-civil fusion strategy” as “actions by or at the behest of the PRC to acquire and divert foreign technologies, specifically critical and emerging technologies, to incorporate into and advance the PRC’s military capabilities.” Some observers worry that the language is so broad that it “can be interpreted as an effective ban on Chinese students.”2 However, reports by The New York Times and Reuters immediately after the policy’s announcement, citing unnamed official sources, suggested between 3,000 and 5,000 Chinese students could be affected.3 Four months after the policy was adopted, the State Department had revoked more than 1,000 visas, but it did not say how many visas it expected to revoke or reject in total.4 This Brief explains how the number of individuals affected depends on how the Proclamation is implemented. To do so, we analyze two new data sources with information on Chinese students’ undergraduate affiliations. Our findings suggest that, in line with news reports, the number of individuals affected per year is likely in the low to mid-thousands — if the Proclamation applies mainly to those who have attended a Chinese university that is on the Department of Commerce’s Entity List or a member of the Seven Sons. However, that number

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6
would be much larger if the Proclamation is interpreted to include other elite Chinese institutions such as Tsinghua or Beijing University, as some have advocated. By providing context and data relevant to different implementation scenarios, this Brief seeks to inform discussions and oversight of U.S. visa policy with respect to Chinese students and researchers. Analysts and journalists currently have to evaluate visa policy with very limited information on how policy is, or could be, implemented.5 State Department officials emphasized that the Proclamation is “not designed to impact large numbers of people,”6 but a small number by itself does not guarantee that a policy is well-targeted. If screening criteria are poorly chosen or operationalized, even a narrow policy may still fail to capture many high-risk students and researchers or, conversely, block many low-risk ones. We also identify several data gaps that complicate analysis of visa policy-related questions; these gaps can inform future U.S. government data collection and dissemination priorities. This Brief does not take a position on the efficacy of the Proclamation’s approach to visa policy. We believe the data presented here is necessary for assessing the policy’s efficacy, but it is not sufficient. A full assessment of efficacy would also require a comparison to alternative policies and additional data. The Brief proceeds as follows: First, we lay out open questions about the operationalization of “military-civil fusion” as a criterion for visa screening. Second, we offer plausible answers to these open questions, and we use these answers to assess how many individuals are likely to be affected by the Proclamation. Third, to place the findings in context, we compare the likely number of affected individuals to the overall number of new Chinese graduate enrollments. Finally, we review open questions and remaining areas of uncertainty. Operationalizing “Military-Civil Fusion” for Visa Screening Implementing the Proclamation requires federal agencies to operationalize “military-civil fusion” along at least two dimensions: determining which PRC entities “implement or support” MCF, and determining which academic fields “contribute to” MCF. Determining which entities implement or support military-civil fusion. Individuals affiliated with “an entity in the PRC that implements or supports the PRC’s ‘military-civil fusion strategy’” are barred by the Proclamation from receiving visas. The terms “implements” and “supports” are left undefined.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7
The Proclamation assesses an individual’s affiliation with a PRC entity on the basis of (a) receiving funding, (b) past or current research activities on behalf of an entity, (c) past or current employment, and (d) past or current study. Determining which fields are relevant to military-civil fusion. The Proclamation exempts Chinese individuals “studying or conducting research in a field involving information that would not contribute to the PRC’s military-civil fusion strategy.” What fields fall under this exemption is left undefined; the Proclamation puts the State Department and Homeland Security in charge of making that determination. To avoid Chinese government circumvention, the U.S. government is unlikely to release a list of precise criteria, Chinese entities, and scientific fields that it deems related to China’s MCF strategy.7 This paper therefore draws on our analysis of military-civil fusion documents and two data sources to assess how many Chinese students and researchers would be affected under different interpretations of the Proclamation’s core concepts. Estimating the Number of Individuals Affected by the Proclamation Estimating how many students could be affected by the Proclamation requires analysts to answer three questions: (1) which entities are targeted by the Proclamation; (2) how many individuals who have been affiliated with those entities are in, or are likely to come to, the United States; and (3) how many of those individuals study in fields related to MCF. Answering each of these questions involves both conceptual and measurement problems, which we discuss below. Which Chinese Universities Are Associated with MCF? Assessing which Chinese universities are involved in MCF is difficult, in no small part because it is often unclear what “military-civil fusion” entails and how Chinese entities implement it (see Box 1). Acknowledging these uncertainties, this section lays out our assumptions for which Chinese universities may be covered under the current interpretation of the Proclamation. We focus on universities because there is no publicly available data on Chinese students’ past jobs or scholarships, even though the State Department may also block individuals based on their past or current professional affiliations or source of funding.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8
Box 1. What is “military-civil fusion,” and what role do universities play in it? One issue with using “military-civil fusion” as an organizing concept for policy, such as visa screening, is that it is often unclear what “military-civil fusion” refers to — and, equally important, what it does not refer to. Different U.S. government statements and documents have used different definitions of MCF, or describe the concept so broadly that its boundaries are unclear (see Appendix A). The problem is not limited to U.S. discussions. PRC policies often employ broad and ambiguous terms, conditions, and wording so they may be interpreted as Beijing sees fit.8 This has led to some confusion, however; several PRC government researchers in 2018 argued for more formal definitions of MCF and codification in legislation.9 Chinese writing on how to learn from American “military-civil fusion” cites dozens of U.S. policies as examples of MCF, some of which, such as the 1980 Bayh-Dole Act on university research commercialization, point to a very broad conception of MCF.10 Beyond definitional questions, it is hard to assess what MCF means in practice. Some U.S. analysts argue that “MCF initiatives permeate the entire [Chinese] scientific and technological landscape,”11 but others say that “MCF must be recognized as a desired end-state, rather than a reflection of the current condition of the Chinese technology and innovation ecosystem.”12 Policy documents provide a valuable window into the CCP’s hopes and intentions, but they do not necessarily reflect reality on the ground. Even if a consensus definition of MCF emerges, operationalizing that definition for the purpose of policy implementation requires deep knowledge of what is happening in practice. So far, most empirical analyses of MCF have focused on the private sector, not on universities.13 Table 1 lists the 11 Chinese universities that we consider most likely to be covered by the Proclamation. It is composed of two groups: ● The Seven Sons of National Defense (国防七子 or 国防七校) are the seven Chinese universities under the supervision of the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT).14 These institutions are ostensibly civilian universities—as opposed to official People’s Liberation Army (PLA) academies—but they have historically maintained strong connections to the Chinese defense industry and the PLA. Many of their graduates go on to work for state-owned defense enterprises or the military.15 Several recent U.S. government publications have specifically mentioned the Seven Sons as core to MCF.16 ● The U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security’s (BIS) Entity List includes the names of people and entities subject to certain export license requirements, restrictions, and sanctions. Typically, institutions on the Entity List are closely affiliated with a foreign military, implicated in human rights abuses, or act in some other manner opposed to U.S. policy. At the time of the

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9
Proclamation, six non-military Chinese universities were on the Entity List, four of which are also members of the Seven Sons. In December 2020, BIS added the remaining three Seven Sons universities and two additional non-military universities to the Entity List. Table 1. Chinese universities that are likely to be included as affiliated with “military-civil fusion.”
University Seven Sons BIS Entity List Beihang University (北京航空航天大学) X X (2001) Harbin Institute of Technology (哈尔滨工业大学) X X (2020) Beijing Institute of Technology (北京理工大学) X X (2020) Northwestern Polytechnical University (西北工业大学) X X (2012) Nanjing University of Science and Technology (南京科技大学) X X (2020) Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics (南京航空航天大学) X X (2020) Harbin Engineering University (哈尔滨工程大学) X X (2020) University of Electronic Science & Technology of China (电子科技大学) X (2012) Sichuan University (四川大学) X (2012) Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (北京邮电大学) X (2020) Tianjin University (天津大学) X (2020) Note: Years in parentheses denote when Chinese universities were added to the Entity List. The universities in Table 1 have been the focus of most English- and Chinese-language coverage of the Proclamation, and of the few prior in-depth analyses of Chinese universities’ role in MCF.17 Our analysis suggests the number of graduates from these universities who continue their studies at U.S. universities is in the low to mid-thousands. This assessment is consistent with reporting by The New York Times and Reuters that there would likely be 3,000 to 5,000 individuals affected per year. Table 1 omits PLA universities, such as the National Defense University of Technology (NUDT,国防科学技术大学), as these universities are known to be directly affiliated with the military.18 Chinese media reports have also speculated that five Chinese universities on the BIS “Unverified List” would be covered by the Proclamation.19 Appendix B provides data on these universities.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10
How Many Chinese Students Come to the United States from These Universities? We found two sources — one from China, and one from the United States — that could help assess how many Chinese students come to the United States after studying at universities of potential concern: (1) Chinese university employment reports and (2) the National Science Foundation’s Survey of Earned Doctorates (NSF SED). Chinese university employment reports. Chinese universities publish employment reports that detail what their students do after graduation. All provide information on how many students continue their studies abroad, and some provide information on the specific study abroad locations.20 Table 2 includes data from the employment reports of the eleven Entity List universities, including all Seven Sons. We estimate that 2,847 students went on to study in the United States immediately after graduating from these eleven universities in 2019.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 11
Table 2. Graduates from selected Chinese universities who do further study in the United States, 2019.
University No. of Grads in 201921 No. of Grads Continuing Ed. Abroad No. of Grads Continuing Ed. in the U.S. Beihang University 6,573 837 268 (32%)* Harbin Institute of Technology 7,865 609 199 (33%) Beijing Institute of Technology 7,349 785 251 (32%)* Northwestern Polytechnical University 6,334 343 110 (32%)* Nanjing University of Science and Technology 6,277 295 57 (19%) Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 7,241 2,264 724 (32%)* Harbin Engineering University 5,843 233 70 (30%) University of Electronic Science & Technology of China 8,575 1,054 317 (30%) Sichuan University 15,257 1,047 289 (28%) Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 6,422 667 313 (47%) Tianjin University 8,373 670 249 (37%) Total 86,109 8,779 2,847 Source: CSET analysis of Chinese university post-graduation employment reports. * All employment reports include the total number of students who go abroad, but the number of graduates who go to the United States specifically is not always included. For universities where this data is missing, we estimate the number who go to the United States as 32% of all graduates who do continuing education abroad, the average proportion for the universities where data is available. The numbers included in Chinese universities’ employment reports refer to their graduates’ activities directly after they receive their degrees. As such, these numbers may omit graduates from these universities who pursue further study in the United States after, for example, working at a company for a year. The 2,847 number is thus likely an underestimate (see “Summary” section below for more details). Note that this data represents an annual “flow:” the number of students who begin study at a U.S. university in a given year. Because some students will complete multi-year degrees, the total “stock” of students present in the United States in a given year likely exceeds a single year’s flow. Graduates can enroll in one- or two-year master’s programs, or in five- to six-year Ph.D. programs.22 Appendix D discusses the difference between “flow” and “stock” in more detail.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 12
NSF Survey of Earned Doctorates. A second data source that can be used to assess how many Chinese students may be affected by the Proclamation is the NSF’s Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED). Each year, the SED surveys all U.S. Ph.D. graduates and asks a battery of questions, including the respondent’s citizenship and the name of their undergraduate institution. It consistently has response rates over 90 percent. The latest year for which data is complete is 2017.23 In total, 6,055 Chinese citizens who received a Ph.D. from a U.S. university and responded to NSF’s SED survey in 2017. Of these Chinese Ph.D. graduates, 93 percent did their undergraduate degree in China, 4 percent in the United States, and 3 percent elsewhere in the world (including Hong Kong). Table 3 looks at the 5,624 Chinese Ph.D. graduates who did their undergraduate degree in China,* and lists the number of graduates for all Seven Sons and Entity List universities. We find that 546 Ph.D. graduates got their bachelor’s degrees from Seven Sons and Entity List universities, or 10 percent of the total.
 * Students who did their undergraduate outside of China are less likely to be affected by the Proclamation since they would have had fewer opportunities to be affiliated with an MCF-related institution.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 13
Table 3. Chinese Ph.D. graduates from U.S. universities by Chinese undergraduate university, 2017. Undergraduate Institution No. of Ph.D. Graduates All Chinese Universities 5,624 (100%) Seven Sons and Entity List universities 546 (10%) Beihang University 100 Tianjin University 94 Harbin Institute of Technology 92 Sichuan University 75 Beijing Institute of Technology 53 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 40 University of Electronic Science & Technology of China 39 Northwestern Polytechnical University 25 Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 23 Harbin Engineering University (5)* Nanjing University of Science and Technology 0 Source: NSF Survey of Earned Doctorates. * Because fewer than 10 individuals from Harbin Engineering University appeared in the data, NSF privacy restrictions prevent us from publishing the actual number. We insert an estimate of 5, representing the midpoint of the possible range (1-9). Although the Chinese university employment reports and the NSF SED data are not directly comparable, we infer from these datasets that the majority of students affected by the proclamation are master’s students. Based on NSF data, we estimate that there were around 820 newly enrolled Ph.D. students from Seven Sons universities in 2018.24 Compared with the figures reported in Table 2 — which suggest around 2,850 Chinese graduates from these universities start at U.S. universities each year — it appears likely that around three-quarters of incoming Seven Sons and Entity List students enroll in master’s programs. How Many of These Students Are in MCF-related Fields? Chinese strategy and implementation documents related to MCF typically focus on technologies, not research fields. For example, the CCP’s 13th Five-Year Special Plan for S&T Military-Civil Fusion Development lists “intelligent

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 14
unmanned vehicles, biological crossover technology, advanced electronics, quantum technology, future networks, advanced energy, new materials, [and] advanced manufacturing” as examples of technologies in which China wants to “seize the commanding heights in international competition.”25 A provincial MCF implementation document also includes nuclear, aerospace, and environmental protection technologies.26 Due to the wide-ranging nature of such Chinese technology target lists, it is difficult to determine which academic research fields are relevant to the PRC’s military-civil fusion strategy. All the major STEM fields — mathematics and statistics, computer science, engineering, the life sciences, and the physical sciences — make important contributions to the technologies listed above.27 As such, our best guess is that the Proclamation will bar affected students from all STEM fields.28 Table 4, drawing on NSF SED data, shows that limiting the Proclamation to all STEM fields does little to reduce the number of potentially affected students at the Ph.D. level. Nearly all (95 percent) of the students who attended Seven Sons or Entity List universities got their U.S. Ph.D. degrees in STEM fields. The comparable number for all Chinese students who did their undergraduate degree in China (not shown in Table 4) is 85 percent (4,797 out of 5,624).
At the master’s level, data on Chinese student enrollments — from both U.S. and Chinese sources — are unfortunately less granular. However, it seems likely that a much lower proportion (less than half) of Chinese students are in STEM fields at the master’s level (see Appendix D). It Is Unclear How Many Researchers Will Be Affected We have focused our analysis on students, i.e. those who would enter the United States on F visas. But the Proclamation also affects researchers who
Table 4. Graduates from U.S. universities in STEM fields, 2017 Total No. of Ph.D. Graduates No. of Ph.D. Graduates in STEM Fields % of Total in STEM
Students with Undergraduate Degree at Seven Sons or Entity List University 546 517 95%
Source: NSF Survey of Earned Doctorates. Social sciences are excluded from our definition of “STEM.”

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 15
rely on J visas. Unfortunately, too little information is available about this population to conduct a similarly in-depth assessment. According to the Institute for International Education (IIE), there were about 48,000 “international scholars” from China at U.S. universities in the 2018-19 academic year.29 However, no public data source we are aware of tracks these researchers’ prior educational or professional affiliations, or even their current fields of study.30 Moreover, not all researchers rely on J visas; according to IIE data, around 71 percent of international scholars do.31 H-1B skilled worker visas (18 percent) and F1-OPT (5 percent) are the most common other categories. Researchers in visa categories other than J or F currently appear to be unaffected by the Proclamation. Summary In summary, we looked at two datasets to assess how many students per year come to study in the United States directly after graduating from one of the eleven Chinese universities that are on the BIS Entity List, including all members of the Seven Sons of National Defense (Table 1). We found that an estimated 2,850 came to the United States directly after graduating from these universities in 2019 (as seen in Table 2), of whom the majority are likely master’s students (as implied by Table 3). These 2,850 students would have likely all been blocked from entering the United States by the Proclamation. However, as noted above, this 2,850 number does not include other groups of students who may be blocked by the Proclamation: • students who went to one of these 11 universities but studied or worked elsewhere before enrolling at a U.S. university; • students who are blocked based on a past private sector affiliation (e.g. who previously worked for a company involved in MCF) or who worked directly for the Chinese government, which we do not have data on; • students with Chinese government funding (e.g. from the China Scholarship Council) who might, for that reason, be counted as associated with MCF;32 and • students who attended another university or program that was blocked by the Proclamation but omitted in Table 2, such as the Chinese universities on the BIS Unverified List (see Appendix B).

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 16
We therefore consider 2,850 a lower bound on the number of students likely to be blocked by the Proclamation per year.* The actual number is almost certainly higher. We think it is likely that the annual number of affected students falls somewhere between 3,000 and 5,000.† This estimate is consistent with anonymous official sources quoted by The New York Times and Reuters, who said 3,000 to 5,000 individuals would be affected by the Proclamation.33 Given the many sources of uncertainty, however, this is not a high-confidence estimate. When putting this estimate in context below, we provide background data that is sufficiently detailed for others who disagree with our analysis to re-do our calculations using different numbers. Putting the Numbers of Affected Students in Context If we estimate between 3,000 and 5,000 students would be blocked under the Proclamation each year, how does that compare to the overall flow of Chinese students to the United States? This question seems simple, but answering it poses some difficulties. In mathematical terms, we previously focused on assessing who may be affected: the numerator. We now ask what proportion of potentially affected students are in fact affected, which also requires knowing the denominator. Just as there are issues in estimating the numerator, it is not straightforward to determine the appropriate denominator. The overall number of Chinese students in the United States is approximately 370,000. Compared to this population, 3,000 to 5,000 students is only around 1 percent. This comparison, and this 1 percent number, is what U.S. * Note that our method of estimating the number of students affected by the Proclamation counts as “blocked” both (1) students who apply for a U.S. visa and are rejected; and (2) students who would have applied for a U.S. visa if the Proclamation had not been adopted but who, now that the Proclamation is in place, will refrain from applying because they expect their application to be denied. Many (perhaps most) “blocked” students will be deterred by the Proclamation from applying to U.S. universities in the first place, and will therefore belong to group (2). † For example, CSET analysis of Chinese university post-graduation employment reports finds that Huawei is the most common employer of graduates from China’s best universities. Many students also work at other companies linked by the U.S. government to MCF. If some of those students would later apply for U.S. graduate school, they would be blocked under the Proclamation. Similarly, some Seven Sons and/or Entity List graduates could have worked elsewhere before coming to the United States, which would lead to their exclusion from Table 2 and our 2,850 lower bound. Our 3,000 to 5,000 range estimate assumes between 150 and 2,150 students who are not captured in our datasets will be blocked by the Proclamation each year.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 17
government officials have emphasized when they’ve discussed the Proclamation’s impact.34 However, this comparison is not necessarily the right one. First, the Proclamation only applies to graduate students, and, as we noted above, most likely only to those in STEM fields. Second, our analysis focuses on the annual number of Chinese applicants who are likely to be blocked by the Proclamation. For this paper, then, it is more appropriate to compare our estimates to the number of new Chinese enrollments. Table 5 presents this comparison. It shows the Proclamation will likely block between 9 and 15 percent of new Chinese graduate enrollments per year, or between 16 and 27 percent when looking only at STEM programs. Appendix C reviews how we did these calculations. Table 5. Number of students affected by the Proclamation compared to annual new Chinese graduate enrollments.
Number of Students Affected (Est.) Comparison Group Number of Students in Comparison Group Percent of Comparison Group Affected
3,000 – 5,000 Estimated annual new Chinese graduate enrollments 34,471 9% – 15% Estimated annual new Chinese graduate enrollments (STEM only) 18,732 16% – 27%
Note: See Appendix C for methodology and sourcing. Estimated annual new enrollments are for fall 2019.
In Appendix D, we provide additional analysis on the total number of Chinese graduate students currently in the United States, both overall (around 130,000) and in STEM specifically (around 76,000). Total current enrollments are not an appropriate reference group for our estimate, which focuses on annual new enrollments. However, the totals are a useful reference group (1) for assessing the Proclamation’s initial impact, which may be higher than its future annual impact because the initial impact also includes students currently enrolled in multi-year degrees who have their visas revoked; and (2) for assessing the possible scope of stricter visa policies that have been proposed.35 Appendix D discusses these questions in more detail. We emphasize that this discussion is based on historical enrollment data. Projections about the Proclamation’s impact are confounded by possible

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 18
future changes in enrollment trends. For example, political tensions and COVID-19-related developments are likely to have an impact on Chinese student applications going forward.36 These complications mean estimates of the number of future students who are affected (the numerator) and the total applicant pool (the denominator) face additional uncertainty. This uncertainty is one of the reasons that State Department officials have declined to publicly speculate on the number of students they expect to be affected.37 Our estimate should therefore be interpreted with caution. Conclusion The text of the White House’s Proclamation left many questions about the U.S. government’s approach to Chinese student and researcher visas unanswered. Elsa Kania, an expert on China’s military-civil fusion policy, has called the Proclamation’s framing of the MCF issue “fairly vague and rather questionable.”38 This vagueness is likely a feature, not a bug. It provides agencies and consular staff flexibility in the visa screening process, which is helpful when the target—in this case, the Chinese government—constantly changes its tactics.* At the same time, vagueness can mask disagreements about policy, prevent debate, or stymie oversight. In light of the Proclamation’s broad language, most assessments have focused on questions around interpretation and implementation. For example, as Anja Manuel and Kathleen Hicks recently argued in Foreign Affairs: “Narrowly defined, [the Proclamation] makes perfect sense. It is essential to strictly limit access to some research programs in order to protect national security. Broadly interpreted, however, the visa move could affect thousands and thousands of Chinese students and researchers who have no relationship at all with the PLA. Encouraging a substantial brain drain from the United States to China or other markets seeking to attract the best and the brightest will only undermine U.S. competitiveness.”39 Other researchers worry that the Proclamation’s level of discretion “could lead to a lot of error,” including the possibility that it “miss[es] lots of
 * Prior to the Proclamation, the State Department argued it had inadequate authorities to deny visas to Chinese students and researchers that it considered potential risks. See remarks and responses to questions for the record by Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Edward Ramotowski at the U.S. Senate Judiciary hearing “Student Visa Integrity: Protecting Educational Opportunity and National Security,” June 6, 2018, available at https://www.judiciary.senate.gov/meetings/a-thousand-talents-chinas-campaign-to-infiltrate-and-exploit-us-academia.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 19
programs at Chinese universities that do defense work or classified
research.”40
This paper provides a data-driven assessment of the Proclamation’s
implementation and impact. We find that between 3,000 and 5,000 students
are likely to be blocked per year—
if the Proclamation is applied mainly to
graduates from the 11 Chinese universities that are on the Entity List, including
all seven members of the “Seven Sons of National Defense.” This estimate
equals between 16 and 27 percent of all new Chinese graduate enrollments
in U.S. STEM programs per year. If “military-civil fusion” is defined more
broadly to include other civilian universities, the Proclamation’s impact would
be much larger. Our assessment is based on policies and statements issued
under the Trump administration; it is unknown whether the Biden
administration will maintain or amend the Proclamation.
This paper does not take a position on the efficacy of the Proclamation’s
approach to visa policy; the data we present are necessary but not sufficient
for a comprehensive policy assessment. We do hope the paper will help
inform detailed and nuanced policy conversations about the Proclamation’s
approach. Such conversations are a prerequisite for a U.S. government
policy that balances risks and benefits while countering the Chinese
government’s efforts to exploit democratic countries’ openness and acquire
technology from abroad. We identify several specific questions that would
benefit from more data and debate:
●
Impact on researchers. China experts and university officials argue
that researchers on average pose higher technology transfer risks
than students.
41 However, we were unable to assess the
Proclamation’s likely impact on researchers because available data
on international researchers at U.S. universities is much less detailed
than data on international students. Federal agencies and researchers
should make it a priority to fill this gap.
●
Delineation of MCF- related fields. On the basis of broad MCF
target technology lists, we inferred that the Proclamation’s definition
of “MCF-related” fields is likely to include all STEM fields. But this is a
low-confidence assessment; we were unable to find detailed
assessments of which research fields are included in or excluded from
China’s MCF-related efforts. Future studies could look at whether it is
feasible, and desirable, to define MCF’s boundaries more narrowly
or broadly than STEM.
●
Finer- grained “entity” measures. In this study, we looked primarily at
data on universities. However, finer-grained assessments may be

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 20
possible. Certain schools, departments, or labs at Chinese universities
that are not members of the Seven Sons or on the Entity List are known
to do military work.42 Future studies should dig into these layers below
the university level. Likewise, more research should be done on
students at Seven Sons universities. These universities are widely seen
as elite universities in China, and it is unknown to what extent students
are thinking about MCF considerations when they enroll there.
43
More thinking is needed to assess the level of risk associated with
such students. Similarly, more work should be done on specific
Chinese scholarship programs.
44
● Distinguishing between master’s and Ph.D. students. The
Proclamation targets “graduate students” as a single category, but
there are important differences between Ph.D. and master’s students,
including their financial contributions and costs and the level of their
training.
45 The analysis presented in this paper suggests that around
three quarters of affected students are master’s students, but this
estimate is uncertain because data sources only rarely distinguish
between master’s and Ph.D. students.
46 Federal agencies should
distinguish, where possible, between master’s and Ph.D. students in
data collection and publication,
* and analysts should do more in-
depth work on the similarities and differences between these two
groups.
* For example, the Department of Homeland Security could, without requiring any new data
collection, distinguish between master’s and Ph.D. students (instead of lumping them together
under “graduate students”) in its SEVIS Data Mapping Tool; see “SEVIS Data Mapping
Tool,” Study in the States, https://studyinthestates.dhs.gov/sevis-data-mapping-tool.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 21
Authors
Remco Zwetsloot is a research fe llow with CSET. Emily Weinstein and Ryan
Fedasiuk are CSET research ana lysts.
Acknowledgments
We thank Zach Arnold, Alexander Bowe, James Dunham, Jacob Feldgoise,
Jeffrey Gorsky, Lorand Laskai, Igor Mikolic-Torreira, and Dahlia Peterson for
their input, and Tessa Baker, Melissa Deng, Matt Mahoney, Adrienne
Thompson, and Lynne Weil for editorial support. The use of NSF data does
not imply NSF endorsement of the research, research methods, or
conclusions contained in this report.
© 2021 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0
International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20200076

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 22
Appendix
A. Definitions of Military- Civil Fusion
As discussed in Box 1, one of the issues with using “military-civil fusion” for
the purpose of policy is that the concept does not have a single clear
definition. The Proclamation defines China’s “military-civil fusion strategy” as
“actions by or at the behest of the PRC to acquire and divert foreign
technologies, specifically critical and emerging technologies, to incorporate
into and advance the PRC’s military capabilities.” Other U.S. government
sources define military-civil fusion differently, and/or emphasize different
elements. Examples include:
●
China Aerospace Studies Institute (U.S. Air Force): “[MCF] hopes
to achieve a state of ‘deep fusion’ through the integration of the two
essential building blocks: the ‘military’ and the ‘civil.’ The ‘military’
includes every aspect of the national defense and force building
endeavor, including armed forces, national defense technology,
industry, facilities, mobilization, education, resources, as well as the
major operational domains. The ‘civil’ refers to fields in the economic
and social system that are closely related to national defense and
force-building, such as the national science and technology and
industrial system, the national talent education and training system,
the national social services system, the national emergency
management system, as well as emerging domains and nascent
technological areas such as maritime, space, cyberspace, and
artificial intelligence that are closely linked to the generation of ‘New
Type Combat Capabilities’.”
47
● Department of Defense : “MCF encompasses six interrelated efforts:
(1) fusing the China’s defense industrial base and its civilian
technology and industrial base; (2) integrating and leveraging
science and technology innovations across military and civilian
sectors; (3) cultivating talent and blending military and civilian
expertise and knowledge; (4) building military requirements into
civilian infrastructure and leveraging civilian construction for military
purposes; (5) leveraging civilian service and logistics capabilities for
military purposes; and, (6) expanding and deepening China’s
national defense mobilization system to include all relevant aspects of
its society and economy for use in competition and war.”
48
● State Department: “The goal of MCF is to give the CCP the most
advanced military in the world by 2049, the centennial of its takeover
in China. MCF aims to make any technology accessible to anyone

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 23
under the PRC’s jurisdiction available to support the regime’s
ambitions. Yes, this is in part about economic power, but it is also,
quite centrally, about augmenting Beijing’s military power.”
49
● U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission: “The
Chinese government’s military-civil fusion policy aims to spur
innovation and economic growth through an array of policies and
other government-supported mechanisms, including venture capital
(VC) funds, while leveraging the fruits of civilian innovation for
China’s defense sector. The breadth and opacity of military-civil
fusion increase the chances civilian academic collaboration and
business partnerships between the United States and China could aid
China’s military development.”
50
● White House : “Beijing’s Military-Civil Fusion (MCF) strategy gives the
PLA unfettered access into civil entities developing and acquiring
advanced technologies, including state-owned and private firms,
universities, and research programs. Through non-transparent MCF
linkages, the United States and other foreign companies are
unwittingly feeding dual-use technologies into PRC military research
and development programs, strengthening the CCP’s coercive ability
to suppress domestic opposition and threaten foreign countries,
including United States allies and partners.”
51
While all these statements on MCF emphasize concerns of a broadly similar
nature, they do not clearly delineate risks in a way that allows researchers to
understand what specific entities the U.S. government considers “in” or “out”
of the MCF system. For example, the Proclamation’s text targets entities that
divert foreign technologies into the PRC’s military capabilities. The State
Department document quoted above, however, says MCF means “
any
technology accessible to anyone under the PRC’s jurisdiction” could be used
for military purposes. Moreover, the CASI and DOD definitions do not
mention technology transfer from abroad as a component of MCF, focusing
instead on purely domestic dynamics.
We emphasize these differences as a source of analytical difficulty for this
paper, not to pass judgment on policy. Internal, operational definitions of
MCF may well be consistent. As we note in the Conclusion, it is not surprising
the U.S. government maintains a level of public ambiguity and uncertainty
with respect to the Proclamation’s implementation. Such ambiguity can help
prevent the Chinese government from circumventing the Proclamation, and
preserves leeway for U.S. officials to target entities and individuals of
concern.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 24
B. Enrollments from Other Relevant Chinese Universities
In the body of this Brief, we focused on Chinese universities that are (a)
members of the “Seven Sons of National Defense” and/or (b) on the BIS
“Entity List” as the most likely targets of the Proclamation. This section reviews
data on two other relevant categories of universities: those on the BIS
“Unverified List” and those that send most graduates to the United States.
Chinese Universities on the BIS Unverified List
The BIS “Unverified List” is a list of entities that have not complied with BIS
requests but are not seen as sufficiently risky to be put on its Entity List.
52 The
five Chinese universities on the Unverified List have not been mentioned in
U.S. media coverage of the Proclamation, but they have been noted in
Chinese sources.
53 Tables 6 and 7 present data based on employment
reports and NSF surveys for the five Chinese universities on the Unverified List,
comparable to the data presented in Tables 2 and 3 in the main body.
Table 6. Graduates from selected Chinese universities who do further study in the United States,
2019.
University
Total No. of Grads
in 2019
No. of Grads
Continuing Ed.
Abroad
No. of Grads
Continuing Ed. in the
U.S.
Xi'an Jiaotong University 7,532 669 267 (40%)
Tongji University 7,535 925 277 (30%)
Renmin University 6,876 887 254 (29%)
Guangdong University of Technology 11,371 326 33 (10%)
Nanchang University 11,089 340 43 (13%)
Total 44,403 3,147 874
Source: CSET analysis of Chinese university post-graduation employment reports.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 25
Table 7. Chinese Ph.D. graduates from U.S. universities by Chinese undergraduate university, 2017. Undergraduate Institution No. of Ph.D. Graduates All Chinese Universities 5,624 (100%) Universities on the BIS Unverified List 219 (4%) Xi'an Jiaotong University 76 Tongji University 71 Renmin University 55 Nanchang University 12 Guangdong University of Technology (5)* Source: NSF Survey of Earned Doctorates. * Because fewer than 10 individuals from Guangdong University of Technology appeared in the data, NSF privacy restrictions prevent us from publishing the actual number. We insert an estimate of 5, representing the midpoint of the possible range (1-9). Chinese Ph.D. Students’ Most Common Undergraduate Institutions Table 8 lists the ten Chinese universities that were the most common undergraduate institutions for Chinese graduates from U.S. Ph.D. programs. These ten universities include seven of China’s most elite “C9” university league.* About 2,300 (41 percent) of all Chinese university graduates in our NSF data got their bachelor’s degrees at one of these ten institutions.54 Table 8 thus shows the potential impact of adopting a broader definition of MCF for the purpose of visa screening. Past research has found military-affiliated labs at the universities listed in Table 8, such as Tsinghua University. 55 If graduates from these and similar universities are also blocked under the new policy, the Proclamation would thus plausibly block more than half of all incoming Chinese Ph.D. students (similar data for master’s students is not available).
 * The C9 league is commonly referred to as “China’s Ivy League.” Its members are Tsinghua University, Beijing (Peking) University, Fudan University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, University of Science and Technology of China, Zhejiang University, Nanjing University, Xi’an Jiaotong University, and Harbin Institute of Technology (which is on the Entity List).

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 26
Table 8. Chinese Ph.D. graduates from U.S. universities by Chinese undergraduate university, 2017. Undergraduate Institution No. of Ph.D. Graduates All Chinese Universities 5,624 (100%) 10 Chinese universities with most U.S. Ph.D. graduates 2,297 (41%) Beijing University 417 University of Science & Technology of China 335 Tsinghua University 316 Zhejiang University 229 Nanjing University 193 Shanghai Jiaotong University 185 Huazhong University of Science and Technology 178 Wuhan University 166 Nankai University 144 Fudan University 134 Source: NSF Survey of Earned Doctorates.
C. Comparing the Number of Affected Students to New Annual Chinese Enrollments In Table 5, we compared our estimates of the number of Chinese students affected by the Proclamation to the annual number of new Chinese graduate enrollments. This section explains the source and method we used for this comparison. Table 9 shows that 34,471 new Chinese graduate students enrolled at U.S. universities in fall 2019, according to data from the Council of Graduate Schools. No data source that we know of tracks annual new Chinese graduate STEM enrollments specifically (CGS does not publish field data broken out by nationality), so the number of new STEM enrollments has to be estimated.56 We estimate that 18,732 of the 34,471 new graduate enrollments in fall 2019 were in STEM programs, with the vast majority of non-STEM enrollments being at the master’s level (e.g. in business or other professional programs).57

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 27
Table 9. New Chinese graduate student enrollments at U.S. universities, fall
2019.
Number of Chinese Graduate New Enrollments
Overall Master’s Ph.D.
STEM (est.) 18,732 12,583 6,149
Total 34,471 27,237 7,234
Source: Council of Graduate Schools.58 For methodological details on the STEM estimate,
see note 57.
D. Comparing the Number of Affected Students to Total Current Chinese
Enrollments
Many discussions of the number of students affected by the Proclamation
have compared that number to the total number of Chinese students at U.S.
universities, which is around 370,000. One problem with this comparison is
that, of those 370,000 students, about 148,900 are undergraduates and
17,200 are in non-degree programs, and are thus by definition exempt from
the Proclamation.
* As Table 10 shows, only around 130,000 are graduate
students, and only a subset of those graduate students are in STEM fields.
Graduate students in non-STEM fields are also likely to be exempt from the
Proclamation.
* An additional 70,000 were participants in the optional practical training (OPT) program, a
program that allows international graduates to work in the United States between one and
three years. While still on an F visa, OPT participants are no longer taking classes at
universities. Some OPT participants may also have been affected by the Proclamation if they
were previously affiliated with a targeted Chinese entity and had studied in a graduate STEM
program. Note that Table 10 does not include OPT participants. For enrollment numbers
across student categories, see Feldgoise and Zwetsloot, “Estimating the Number of Chinese
STEM Students.”

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 28
A second problem with comparing the number of students affected to the total
number of currently enrolled students is that this total is not necessarily an
appropriate comparison group. In this paper, we focused on estimating the
number of
new Chinese applicants who would be blocked under the
Proclamation per year. Comparing this number to the total number of current
enrollments is apples-to-oranges.
However, the data in Table 10 can still be useful in other ways: first, for
assessing the Proclamation’s total initial impact, and second, for assessing
how many Chinese students would be affected under proposed visa
restrictions that go beyond the Proclamation.
Assessing the Proclamation’s Initial Impact
The Proclamation’s
initial impact may be larger than its annual impact in
subsequent years if it is applied retroactively to students who are enrolled in
multi-year programs. In its first year, the Proclamation will impact two groups
of Chinese students: (1) those who apply (or would have applied) to enter a
U.S. STEM graduate program; and (2) those were already enrolled in U.S.
STEM programs when the Proclamation was issued, for example STEM Ph.D.
students who were in their third year when the Proclamation was issued.
Students in group (1) will see their future visa applications denied, whereas
students in group (2) will see their already-issued visas revoked. After the
visas of those in group (2) are revoked in the first year, the Proclamation’s
annual impact is limited to visa denials for individuals in group (1) in
subsequent years.
As noted above, in this paper, we focused our analysis on the first group.
Analyzing the Proclamation’s initial impact would also require estimating
Table 10. Total number of Chinese graduate students enrolled at U.S.
universities, AY2018/19.
Number of Enrolled Chinese Graduate Students
Overall Master’s (est.) Ph.D. ( est.)
STEM 76,060 40,473 35,587
Total 129,440 not estimated not estima ted
Source: Science and Engineering Indicators (via DHS SEVIS); NSF Survey of Graduate
Students and Postdoctorates in Science and Engineering. For methodological details, see
Feldgoise and Zwetsloot, “Estimating the Number of Chinese STEM Students in the United
States,” Appendix B.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 29
what proportion of currently enrolled Chinese students attended Seven
Sons/Entity List universities or are likely to have their visas revoked under the
Proclamation on other grounds. For that analysis, the numbers listed in Table
10
would be an appropriate comparison group.
Assessing the Potential Scope of Wider Restrictions
The second way in which knowing the total number of current Chinese
students is useful is for assessing the potential scope of visa policy proposals
that go beyond the Proclamation we focus on in this paper. Senator Tom
Cotton, for example, has argued that the U.S. government should block all
Chinese graduate students from studying STEM fields in the United States.
59 If
such policies include retroactive visa revocations, they could impact all
Chinese graduate students currently studying at U.S. universities (Table 10).

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 30
Endnotes
1 “Proclamation on the Suspension of Entry as Nonimmigrants of Certain Students and
Researchers from the People’s Republic of China,” Executive Office of the President, May
29, 2020, https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/proclamation-suspension-
entry-nonimmigrants-certain-students-researchers-peoples-republic-china/.
2 Yangyang Cheng, “This Land Is Not Your Land,” SupChina News, June 25, 2020,
https://supchina.com/2020/06/25/this-land-is-not-your-land/.
3 Edward Wong and Julian E. Barnes, “U.S. to Expel Chinese Graduate Students With Ties to
China’s Military Schools,” The New York Times, May 28, 2020,
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/28/us/politics/china-hong-kong-trump-student-
visas.html; Matt Spetalnick and Humeyra Pamuk, “U.S. Planning to Cancel Visas of Chinese
Graduate Students: Source,” Reuters, May 28, 2020,https://www.reuters.com/article/us-
usa-china-students/us-planning-to-cancel-visas-of-chinese-graduate-students-sources-
idUSKBN2342AX. Note that news reports talk about students being “expelled,” but a
student whose visa is revoked would not automatically be subject to deportation. Visas are
travel documents that allow noncitizens to travel to a port of entry to seek admission to the
United States. A student without a valid visa could still maintain their right to be present in the
United States, typically referred to as their “legal status” (or just “status”). If the State
Department revokes a student’s visa, that student could not re-enter the country after leaving.
However, so long as the student remains in the United States, the Department of Homeland
Security would have to initiate separate removal proceedings before they could be expelled.
Removal proceedings are rare and subject to judicial review. See Stuart Anderson, “Inside
Trump’s Immigration Order to Restrict Chinese Students,”
Forbes, June 1, 2020,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/stuartanderson/2020/06/01/inside-trumps-immigration-
order-to-restrict-chinese-students/. Our analysis in this paper focuses on the likely number of
new visa applicants blocked by the Proclamation, not on current students, so this question
does not affect our analysis; see Appendix D for more discussion.
4 Humeyra Pamuk, “U.S. Revokes More Than 1,000 Visas of Chinese Nationals, Citing
Military Links,” Reuters, September 9, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-
china-visas-students/u-s-revokes-more-than-1000-visas-of-chinese-nationals-citing-military-
links-idUSKBN26039D.
5 Tawanda W. Johnson, “APS Files FOIA Request in Response to Revocation of Visas for
Chinese Students,” APS News, October 16, 2020,
https://aps.org/publications/apsnews/updates/foia.cfm.
6 Office of the Spokesperson, “Briefing on Limiting the CCP’s Ability to Steal U.S.
Technologies and Intellectual Property,” U.S. Department of State, June 2, 2020,
https://www.state.gov/briefing-with-senior-state-department-officials-on-u-s-limiting-the-
peoples-liberation-armys-ability-to-use-nonimmigrant-visa-programs-to-illicitly-acquire-u-s-
technologies-an/. The Deputy National Security Advisor described the Proclamation as a
“surgical approach”; David Brunnstrom and Matt Spetalnick, “U.S. Targets Only One

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 31
Percent of Chinese Students over Security: White House Official,” Reuters, September 30,
2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-china-students/u-s-targets-only-one-
percent-of-chinese-students-over-security-white-house-official-idUSKBN26M41X.
7 Office of the Spokesperson, “Briefing on Limiting the CCP’s Ability.”
8 Besides MCF, Chinese policies such as the National Intelligence Law and the Hong Kong
National Security law have been called out for their ambiguity. See, e.g., Samantha Hoffman
and Elsa Kania, “Huawei and the Ambiguity of China’s Intelligence and Counter-Espionage
Laws,” The Strategist , September 13, 2018, https://www.aspistrategist.org.au/huawei-and-
the-ambiguity-of-chinas-intelligence-and-counter-espionage-laws/.
9 Translation of “Characteristics of, and Lessons from, the U.S. Legal System for Military-Civil
Fusion” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, August 5, 2020),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/characteristics-of-and-lessons-from-the-us-legal-
system-for-military-civil-fusion/: “A clear definition is the prerequisite for advancing military-
civil fusion with pooled resources and efforts. An infinitely expanded definition will not be
practical. To advance military-civil fusion development, we must first clearly define the
concept of military-civil fusion.”
10 See, e.g., Zhou Fei and Zhang Zhiqiang, “Characteristics of, and Lessons from, the
Development of Deep Military-Civil Fusion in the U.S. Innovation System” [美国创新体系军
民深度融合发展特点及启示], Defense Technology Review (国防科技), October 2018,
70-80,
http://ir.las.ac.cn/bitstream/12502/10229/1/%E7%BE%8E%E5%9B%BD%E5%88%9B
%E6%96%B0%E4%BD%93%E7%B3%BB%E5%86%9B%E6%B0%91%E6%B7%B1%E5%B A
%A6%E8%9E%8D%E5%90%88%E5%8F%91%E5%B1%95%E7%89%B9%E7%82%B9%
E5%8F%8A%E5%90%AF%E7%A4%BA.pdf; and Wang Luhao and Hu Lingjia, “Policy
Changes in the United States Civil-Military Integration Strategy: An Analysis Based on the
Policy Text” [美国军民融合战略的政策变迁:给予政策文本的分析], Journal of UESTC
(Social Sciences Edition) [电子科技大学学报(社科版)], February 2019, 30-36, 75,
https://www.ixueshu.com/document/b6a0a2e89f6b9322f7d67e60d0695624318947
a18e7f9386.html. Full CSET English-language translations of these documents are available
to other analysts on request.
11 Emily de la Bruyere and Nathan Picarsic, “How to Beat China’s Military-Civil Fusion,” The
American Interest , June 22, 2020, https://www.the-american-
interest.com/2020/06/22/how-to-beat-chinas-military-civil-fusion/.
12 Elsa B. Kania and Lorand Laskai, “Myths and Realities of China’s Military-Civil Fusion
Strategy,” Center for a New American Security, January 28, 2021, https://www.cnas.org/
publications/reports/myths-and-realities-of-chinas-military-civil-fusion-strategy.
13 For example, the China Aerospace Studies Institute’s 140-page report contains only two
pages focused on non-PLA universities; see Alex Stone and Peter Wood, “China’s Military-
Civil Fusion Strategy” (China Aerospace Studies Institute, June 2020),
 https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/CASI/Display/Article/2217101/chinas-military-civil-

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 32
fusion-strategy/; see also Marcel Angliviel de la Beaumelle, Benjamin Spevack, and Devin
Thorne, “Open Arms: Evaluating Global Exposure to China’s Defense-Industrial Base”
(C4ADS, October 17, 2019), https://www.c4reports.org/open-arms; Greg Levesque and
Mark Stokes, “Blurred Lines: Military-Civil Fusion and the ‘Going Out’ of China’s Defense
Industry” (Pointe Bello, December 2016),
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/569925bfe0327c837e2e9a94/t/593dad0320
099e64e1ca92a5/1497214574912/062017_Pointe+Bello_Military+Civil+Fusion+Rep
ort.pdf.
14 “Introduction to the Seven Sons of National Defense” [国防七校的介绍], Jiangsu
Admissions Examination Network [江苏招生考试网], April 20, 2016,
https://web.archive.org/web/20170225103359/http://www.js-
edu.cn/n/416096.html.
15 Alex Joske, “The China Defence Universities Tracker: Exploring the Military and Security
Links of China’s Universities” (Australian Strategic Policy Institute, November 25, 2019),
https://www.aspi.org.au/report/china-defence-universities-tracker; Ryan Fedasiuk and
Emily Weinstein, “Universities and the Chinese Defense Technology Workforce” (Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, December 2020),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/universities-and-the-chinese-defense-technology-
workforce/.
16 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the
People’s Republic of China 2020, (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2020), 22,
https://media.defense.gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-
CHINA-MILITARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF.
17 The most prominent studies are Joske, “The China Defence Universities Tracker”; and
Glenn Tiffert (ed.), “Global Engagement: Rethinking Risk in the Research Enterprise” (Hoover
Institution, July 2020), https://www.hoover.org/global-engagement-rethinking-risk-
research-enterprise. The Seven Sons were also mentioned in Angliviel de la Beaumelle et al.,
“Open Arms,” 21-22; and Wood and Stone, “China’s Military-Civil Fusion Strategy,” 82-
83.
18 NUDT has been on the Entity List since February 2015. The other Chinese university on the
Entity List is Xinjiang Police College. We also exclude the Chinese Academies of Sciences
and Engineering.
19 Emily Weinstein and Dahlia Peterson, “Assessing Chinese Reactions to New U.S. Visa
Policies on Chinese Students and Researchers” (Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, June 2020), https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/assessing-chinese-
reactions-to-new-u-s-visa-policies-on-chinese-students-and-researchers/.
20 For more details on this data source, see Fedasiuk and Weinstein, “Universities and the
Chinese Defense Technology Workforce.”

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 33
21 The total number includes bachelor’s, master’s, and Ph.D. graduates.
22 In 2017, the median duration of U.S. doctoral programs was 5.8 years in the life sciences,
5.7 in the physical and earth sciences, 5.7 in mathematics and computer science, and 5.3
years in engineering; see
https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsf19301/assets/data/tables/sed17-sr-tab031.pdf.
23 For more background on NSF SED, see https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/srvydoctorates/;
NSF SED micro-data is not public and was accessed through a CSET license.
24 Ph.D. degrees take a long time to complete; the 2017 graduating cohort that we have
NSF data on mainly enrolled between 2010 and 2012. There were 546 Ph.D. students with
Seven Sons or Entity List undergraduate degrees in this cohort, but, due to enrollment growth,
more recent cohorts from these universities are probably larger. Between 2012 and 2018,
the number of Chinese graduate students enrolled at U.S. universities increased from around
50,000 to 76,000, an increase of around 50 percent. If this 50 percent increase also held
for Ph.D. students from Seven Sons and Entity List, there would have been around 820 newly
enrolled Ph.D. students from these universities in 2018. For the 50 percent growth number
and a discussion of the data gaps on Chinese enrollments in the United States, see Jacob
Feldgoise and Remco Zwetsloot, “Estimating the Number of Chinese STEM Students in the
United States” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, October 2020),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/estimating-the-number-of-chinese-stem-students-in-
the-united-states/.
25 A full translation of the five-year plan is available from CSET at “Translation: The ‘13th
Five-Year’ Special Plan for S&T Military-Civil Fusion Development” (Center for Security and
Emerging Technology, June 2020), https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/the-13th-five-
year-special-plan-for-st-military-civil-fusion-development/.
26 “Notice on Issuing the “Administrative Measures for the Establishment of a Military-Civil
Fusion Industry Demonstration Base in Hubei Province” [关于印发《湖北省军民融合产业
示范基地创建 管理办法》的通知], Office of the Military-Civil Fusion Development
Committee of the Hubei Provincial CCP [中共湖北省委军民融合发展委员会办公室],
April 15, 2019, https://archive.vn/NqJ0w.
27 This definition of “STEM” excludes the social sciences.
28 This assessment is also supported by the seemingly broad nature of the State Department’s
“Technology Alert List,” which is used by consular officers to screen visa applicants. The
current TAL is not public, but older versions are available online. The most recent (2002)
version lists dozens of fields and technologies, including broad categories such as
“biochemistry,” “artificial intelligence,” “chemical engineering,” and “data fusion.”
Combined, these cover most if not all STEM fields; see U.S. Department of State,
“Technology Alert List,” August 2002, available at
https://www.bu.edu/isso/files/pdf/tal.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 34
29 “International Scholars: Leading Places of Origin,” Institute for International Education
Open Doors, https://opendoorsdata.org/data/international-scholars/leading-places-of-
origin/.
30 IIE does track field of study for international scholars as a whole— around 77 percent of
scholars are in STEM fields— but that data is not China-specific; see “International Scholars:
Major Field of Specialization,” Institute for International Education Open Doors,
https://opendoorsdata.org/data/international-scholars/major-field-of-specialization/. It is
also not possible to use J visa data to study the number of researchers because the J visa
category is used by many professions that do not involve research, such as au pairs. Public J
visa data does not disaggregate visa applicants or holders by professional category.
31 “Open Doors: 2018,” Institute for International Education, print report, Table 4.1. This
data is not broken out by nationality and is thus not China-specific.
32 Christopher A. Ford, the Assistant Secretary of State for International Security and
Nonproliferation, wrote in a background paper in a wake of the Presidential Proclamation
that the State Department has been looking at the China Scholarship Council “with increased
concern in recent years”; see Christopher A. Ford, “Technology Transfers to the PRC Military
and U.S. Countermeasures: Responding to Security Threats with New Presidential
Proclamation,” Arms Control and International Security Papers 1, no. 9 (June 5, 2020),
Office of the Under Secretary of State for Arms Control and International Security,
https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/T-paper-Visa-Policy-Final-3.pdf.
The U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, in its 2020 annual report, also
singled out CSC-like programs for scrutiny in its recommendations on visa policy; see 2020
Annual Report to Congress (Washington, DC: U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, 2020), 537, https://www.uscc.gov/annual-report/2020-annual-report-
congress.
33 Wong and Barnes, “U.S. to Expel Chinese Graduate Students”; Spetalnick and Pamuk,
“U.S. Planning to Cancel Visas.” The New York Times and Reuters articles did not specify
whether the anonymous official sources who told them that 3,000 to 5,000 students would
be affected by the Proclamation were referring to an annual number or not. Our estimates
are consistent with an interpretation of this range as an annual impact. Appendix D discusses
the possibility that the Proclamation’s initial impact is higher than this range.
34 Brunnstrom and Spetalnick, “U.S. Targets Only One Percent.”
35 See, e.g., Gregg Re, “Tom Cotton Suggests Chinese Students Shouldn’t Be Allowed to
Study Sciences in the US,” Fox News, April 26, 2020,
https://www.foxnews.com/politics/tom-cotton-suggests-chinese-students-shouldnt-be-
allowed-to-study-sciences-in-the-us.
36 Yifan Yu, Cheng Ting-Fang, Lauly Li, and Coco Liu, “Trump and COVID Force Chinese
Students to Rethink the US,” Nikkei Asia, September 2, 2020,

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 35
 https://asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/The-Big-Story/Trump-and-COVID-force-Chinese-students-to-rethink-the-US. 37 State Department officials have said they are “unable to say exactly what that number is going to be because we can’t predict how many individuals will actually be applying.” See Office of the Spokesperson, “Briefing on Limiting the CCP’s Ability.” 38 Yojana Sharma, “Chinese Students, Researchers with ‘Military Links’ Barred,” University World News, June 3, 2020, https://www.universityworldnews.com/post.php?story=20200603185019349. 39 Anja Manuel and Kathleen Hicks, “Can China’s Military Win the Tech War?”, Foreign Affairs, July 29, 2020, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2020-07-29/can-chinas-military-win-tech-war. 40 Remarks by University of Michigan professor Mary Gallagher at a panel by the Penn Project on on the Future of U.S.-China Relations, “New Perspectives on US-China Relations: Research, Education, & Academic Freedom,” October 9, 2020, available at https://web.sas.upenn.edu/future-of-us-china-relations/panel-discussions/. 41 Remco Zwetsloot, “US-China STEM Talent Decoupling: Background, Policy, and Impact” (Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Lab, October 2020), https://www.jhuapl.edu/assessing-us-china-technology-connections/publications. Recent research security cases under the Department of Justice’s China Initiative almost exclusively involve researchers and professors rather than students; see https://www.justice.gov/opa/information-about-department-justice-s-china-initiative-and-compilation-china-related. 42 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Military and Security Developments, 23; Joske, “The China Defence Universities Tracker”; Tiffert, Global Engagement, 107. 43 Weinstein and Peterson, “Assessing Chinese Reactions.” 44 The China Scholarship Council administers several different scholarship programs, as do other entities. For an overview, see Ryan Fedasiuk, “The China Scholarship Council: An Overview” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, July 2020), https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/the-china-scholarship-council-an-overview/; Anastasya Lloyd-Damnjanovic and Alexander Bowe, “Overseas Chinese Students and Scholars in China’s Drive for Innovation (Washington, DC.: U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, October 2020), https://www.uscc.gov/research/overseas-chinese-students-and-scholars-chinas-drive-innovation. 45 See discussion and sources in Zwetsloot, “US-China STEM Talent Decoupling.” 46 Feldgoise and Zwetsloot, “Estimating the Number of Chinese STEM Students.”

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 36
 47 Stone and Wood, “China’s Military-Civil Fusion Strategy,” 8. 48 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Military and Security Developments, 18. 49 Christopher A. Ford, “The PRC’s ‘Military-Civil Fusion’ Strategy Is a Global Security Threat,” U.S. Department of State, March 16, 2020, https://www.state.gov/the-prcs-military-civil-fusion-strategy-is-a-global-security-threat/. 50 “Emerging Technologies and Military-Civil Fusion,” 2019 Annual Report to Congress (Washington, DC: U.S.-China Security and Economic Review Commission, November 2019), 205, https://www.uscc.gov/annual-report/2019-annual-report-congress. 51 National Security Council, “United States Strategic Approach to the People’s Republic of China,” White House, May 26, 2020, 7, https://www.whitehouse.gov/articles/united-states-strategic-approach-to-the-peoples-republic-of-china/. 52 Bureau of Industry and Security, “Entity List FAQs,” Department of Commerce, https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/2011-09-12-20-18-59/export-and-reexport-faqs/cat/33-entity-list-faqs#faq_148, says: “The Unverified List is a list of parties that have not cooperated with BIS during post-shipment verification checks. The presence of a party on the Unverified List in a transaction is a “red flag” that must be resolved before proceeding with the transaction.” 53 Weinstein and Peterson, “Assessing Chinese Reactions.” 54 This finding is consistent with past research that suggests the United States by and large attracts China’s most elite students; see, e.g., Patrick Gaule and Mario Piacentini, “Chinese Graduate Students and U.S. Scientific Productivity,” Review of Economics and Statistics 95, no. 2 (May 2013), https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00283. 55 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Military and Security Developments, 23; Joske, “The China Defence Universities Tracker”; Tiffert, Global Engagement, 107. 56 Most data sources on international and Chinese students in the United States track total enrollments or number of graduates, not the number of new entrants. For a review of data sources, see Feldgoise and Zwetsloot, “Estimating the Number of Chinese Students.” 57 The Council of Graduate Schools, our source for new enrollments from China, does not publish data on Chinese students’ fields of study. This means the STEM-specific number of enrollments has to be estimated. We made these estimates as follows: ● First, as noted in our discussion of Table 4, we know that approximately 85 percent of all Chinese Ph.D. graduates in 2017 were in STEM fields. We assume this ratio also holds for new enrollments. This means we estimate 6,149 new STEM enrollments at the Ph.D. level (85 percent of 7,234 new Ph.D.s).

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 37
 ● Second, we have to estimate the percentage of master’s enrollments that are in STEM fields. To do so, we can combine our knowledge about Ph.D. students with the total enrollment numbers from Table 10. Assuming that 85 percent of Ph.D. students are in STEM fields implies that total (STEM plus non-STEM) Ph.D. enrollments in 2018/19 was 41,867. Subtracting this number from total Chinese graduate enrollments (129,440) suggests that total master’s enrollments (STEM plus non-STEM) was 87,573 that year. We already knew that STEM-specific master’s enrollment was 40,473. Comparing that number to total enrollments (87,573) suggests that 46.2 percent of Chinese master’s students enroll in STEM fields. Applying this percentage to the overall new master’s enrollment from the Council of Graduate Studies (27,237), we infer that 12,583 new Chinese master’s enrolled in STEM degrees in Fall 2019. ● Finally, to estimate the total number of new Chinese STEM graduate enrollments, we simply add the master’s and Ph.D. estimates together to arrive at 6,149 + 12,583 = 18,732. 58 Enyu Zhou, Radomir Ray Mitic, Christian P. L. West, and Hironao Okahana, “International Graduate Applications and Enrollment: Fall 2019” (Council of Graduate Schools, February 2020), Table B3, https://cgsnet.org/sites/default/files/civicrm/persist/contribute/files/CGS Fall 2019 International Report.pdf?v=1. 59 Re, “Tom Cotton Suggests Chinese Students Shouldn’t Be Allowed to Study Sciences in the US.”
