
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Translation

The following notice describes three different Chinese government programs designed to recruit

foreign talent in 2020 in support of China’s economic development, particularly in tech fields. The

notice explains the purpose of each talent program and provides information about the application

process and the benefits that they confer upon foreign experts whose applications they accept. All

three programs require Chinese companies, universities, or research institutes to apply on behalf of the

foreigners they wish to recruit; they do not allow foreign experts to apply independently.

Title

Notice on Applying for 2020 National Foreign Expert Projects

关于申
报
2020
年度国家外国
专
家
项
目的通知

Author

PRC Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST;
科技部
)

Source

This notice circulated widely online in China. This translation is based on the version that the International

Exchange and Approval Office (
国
际
交流与
认证办
公室
) of Nankai University (
南开大学
) in Tianjin, China

posted to the university website on January 10, 2020. This version includes a few more details about the talent

plans than most other versions available online in China.

The Chinese source text is available online at:

https://bs.nankai.edu.cn/_upload/article/files/50/76/1ccb741b40bc9c8de51bd61dab83/c47f1393-0250-47ac-a
458-e8d230491830.docx

The URL above appears as a link in the following Chinese-language posting on the Nankai University website:

https://bs.nankai.edu.cn/2020/0110/c10085a263390/page.htm

Translation Date

February 13, 2020

Translator

Ben Murphy, CSET Translation Lead

The High-End Foreign Expert Recruitment Plan

I. Purpose of the Plan

Serve the construction of an innovation-oriented country (
创
新型国家
). Meet the

requirements of China's economic and social development in key industries and domains.

Focusing on the four domains of strategic S&T development, industrial technology innovation,

social and ecological construction, and the rejuvenation of agriculture and rural areas, place

emphasis on the recruitment of scientists, S&T leading talent (
科技
领军
人才
), management

talent, and innovative and entrepreneurial talent who can advance original innovation, make

breakthroughs in key technologies, develop high- and new technology, and push forward

emerging disciplines.

II. Areas of Emphasis

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
The "High-End Foreign Expert Recruitment Plan" chiefly supports the following four

domains:

A. Strategic S&T Development. Principally focusing on the requirements for national

major S&T innovation and the S&T Innovation 2030 Major Projects, recruit foreign experts who

undertake cutting-edge and basic research, S&T industry innovation, and engineering and

technology innovation. Aggressively recruit (
大力引
进
) those whose research interests are in

international cutting-edge S&T fields. Recruit top talent who undertake exploratory, original,

and innovative research, who can lead the nation's major scientific research tasks and major

engineering projects, and who possess the potential to achieve major breakthroughs in key and

core technological fields. Continue to promote strengthened open cooperation on China's

national S&T plans. Actively encourage the in-depth participation of foreign scientists in China's

national S&T plans. Give priority support to these types of projects.

B. Industrial Technology Innovation. Focusing on industrial transformation and

upgrading, innovative development, and the implementation of the "go global" (“
走出去
”)

strategy, aggressively recruit all sorts of innovative technology talent. Promote new

breakthroughs in key technologies, production and the industrial arts, and product design.

Produce major economic and social benefits. Recruit high-level foreign experts to make

breakthroughs in the research, development, and application of new generation information

technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), 5G, cloud computing, big data, the Internet of

Things (IoT), and blockchain. Promote R&D of technologies such as rare earth materials,

semiconductors, and fuel cells. Strengthen biotechnology R&D. Accelerate the development of

ocean S&T (
海洋科技
). Support the recruitment of entrepreneur and strategic planner foreign

experts capable of transnational operations management and cross-cultural management.

C. Social and Ecological Construction. Focus on recruiting foreign experts who can

advance green development, resolve prominent environmental problems, and advance the

protection of ecological systems, and who can play an important role in the construction of a

"Beautiful China" and in implementing the strategy of coordinated and sustainable regional

development.

D. The Rejuvenation of Agriculture and Rural Areas. Serve the strategy of rejuvenating

rural areas. Spearhead the priority development of S&T innovation in agriculture and in rural

areas. Aggressively recruit foreign agricultural experts who fit into the national agricultural and

rural development plan and the strategic arrangements for fighting deep-rooted poverty, and

who can introduce superior foreign breeding, planting, and cultivation technology, safe

production and production safety testing technology, and advanced modes of production and

operations. Push forward high-yield, superior quality, high-efficiency, environmentally friendly,

and safe modern agricultural development.

III. Application (
申
报
) Requirements

A. Units eligible to apply: Legal entities such as companies, scientific research institutes,

and universities that have been legally established within China's borders.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
B. Foreign expert or team (of 5 people or more) candidates must fulfill at least one of

the following criteria:

A professional scholar with a position or title equivalent to assistant professor or above

at a famous foreign university or scientific research academy;

Professional technical talent or managerial talent with high-level positions at famous

international corporations and institutions;

Other high-level foreign talent urgently needed in China.

C. Duration of work in China: Experts who apply to work on individual projects should, in

principle, work no fewer than one month per year in China. As for teams that apply to work on

team projects, members should, in principle, work no fewer than two months per year in China.

D. The employer of a foreign expert must sign a salary contract with the foreign expert if

the foreign expert stays in China for more than one month.

IV. Application Instructions

A. Each project unit (
单
位
) is required to submit an application in accordance with the

application notice.

B. Apply for projects based on the nature of the work (research topic or technical

objective). Organizations hiring multiple foreign experts focused on the same type of work

should apply as if this work is one project.

C. An organization may submit one application per year per project. If the project will

continue over successive years, the applicant must specify this when applying. Projects will be

subsidized for a maximum of three years. If the applicant wishes to apply for funding beyond

this time limit, the applicant must submit an entirely new application for review.

IV. Support Provided for Projects

High-end foreign experts (or teams) whose projects are approved will receive funding

from the Ministry of Science and Technology suitable to their projects. They will also enjoy

perquisites (
便利
) and preferential treatment related to their work.

The "Belt and Road" Innovative Talent Exchange Project for Foreign Experts

I. Purpose of the Plan

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
In the spirit of the 2019 Second "Belt and Road" [the Silk Road Economic Belt and the

21st Century Maritime Silk Road] International Cooperation Summit Meeting, advance,

implement, and jointly build the "Belt and Road" S&T Innovation Action Plan.

II. Application Requirements

A. Units eligible to apply: Legal entities such as companies, scientific research institutes,

and universities that have been legally established within China's borders.

B. The focus is on key domains for bilateral and multilateral innovation and cooperation

with the "Belt and Road" countries. These include cutting-edge domains such as AI, life

sciences, high-end manufacturing, and modern agriculture. Support high-level foreign experts

from the countries along the "Belt and Road" in coming to China to launch academic exchanges,

talent cultivation, product R&D, technical consultations, and so on. Support foreign experts

from the countries along the "Belt and Road" in coming to China to launch cooperative research

in areas such as law and policy, economics and finance, humanities and history, and languages.

C. This project chiefly supports applications by teams (of five or more people). The

members of the team must spend no fewer than two months per year working in China.

III. Application Instructions

A. Each project unit is required to submit an application in accordance with the

application notice.

B. An organization may submit one application per year per project. Projects will be

subsidized for a maximum of one year.

C. No project unit may submit more than three applications.

IV. Support Provided for Projects

Projects that are approved will receive suitable funding from the Ministry of Science and

Technology. The foreign experts (or teams) will enjoy perquisites and preferential treatment

related to their work.

The Young Foreign Talent Plan

I. Purpose of the Plan

Focusing on the national innovation-driven development strategy, support a cadre of

young foreign talent who hold a favorable view of China (
对华
友好
), are young and vigorous

(
年富力
强
), and have a high level of scientific research potential in coming to China to

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
undertake scientific research cooperation to include postdoctoral research. Encourage young

foreign scholars to develop long-term, stable academic exchanges and research work.

II. Application Requirements

A. Units eligible to apply: Legal entities such as companies, scientific research institutes,

and universities that have been legally established within China's borders.

B. As a general rule, the age of the young foreign experts should not exceed 40 (birthday

January 1, 1980 or later); the expert must be the recipient of a doctoral degree from a foreign

university.

C. The unit that applies must sign a work agreement with any personnel who receive

subsidies.

III. Application Instructions

A. Each project unit is required to submit an application in accordance with the

application notice.

B. Projects will be subsidized for a maximum of 1-2 years. After the first year’s subsidy is

exhausted, those who have made good progress in their work and who continue to undertake

relevant research work may apply for a subsidy for the following year.

IV. Support Provided for Projects

Young foreign talent whose projects are approved will receive suitable funding from the

Ministry of Science and Technology. They will also enjoy perquisites and preferential treatment

related to their work.
