Policy Brief
September 2023
CSET Analyses of
China’s Technology
Policies and Ecosystem
The PRC’s Domestic Approach
Author
Owen J. Daniels

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 1

Introduction: China is Organizing at Home to Lead Abroad
At Georgetown University’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET), we
have made a concerted effort to understand the People's Republic of China’s (PRC)
approach to emerging technologies. China aspires to global leadership in numerous
emerging technology areas, and understanding the steps China is taking at home and
abroad to achieve its goals will allow U.S. officials to favorably shape technological
and strategic competition with China. This paper focuses on China’s internal actions to
advance and implement its technology-related policy goals, and complements a
companion brief on steps the PRC is taking abroad to become more competitive.*
The research summarized here is based on global tech monitoring, primary source
language translations, and data analyses of private sector activity. We work to
contextualize China’s technology development and acquisition strategies alongside
those of the United States and its global allies and partners, and to situate the U.S.-
China rivalry in the broader landscape of democratic and authoritarian technology
competition.
Key Themes
We identify several high-level, strategic themes from China’s domestic efforts to
achieve global leadership across numerous emerging technology areas:
● China’s rapid progress in talent development and acquisition. China hopes to
overtake the United States in terms of talent acquisition, in areas including
STEM PhDs graduated, AI education, and centralized talent tracking programs.
Its advances could prove worrisome to long-term U.S. national and economic
security and competitiveness.
● China’s unique and evolving tech ecosystem. China’s tech ecosystem is
evolving to more closely resemble other innovation ecosystems through its
rapidly developing patent system and new policy mechanisms. However, it
retains unique characteristics, particularly the close linkages among military,
private sector, and public sector research under its military-civil fusion policy.

* See “CSET Analyses of China’s Technology Policies and Ecosystem: The PRC’s Efforts Abroad,” Center
for Security and Emerging Technology, September 2023.

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2

● State actions to boost China’s innovation infrastructure and develop
technological self-sufficiency in key areas. China is increasing the number of
publicly and privately backed research facilities working on emerging
capabilities, particularly State Key Laboratories, and is experimenting with
mingling industrial facilities in AI and biotechnologies that could potentially
amplify research impact. The PRC also aims to lessen its dependence on foreign
technology and supply chains in semiconductors.
U.S. Policy Options
To address these developments in China’s domestic ecosystem, CSET’s research offers
U.S. policymakers practical steps for maintaining and growing tech competitiveness:
● When it comes to remaining competitive with China in AI education, the
United States should leverage the unique advantages of its comparatively
decentralized system and approach. The United States’ decentralized approach
to AI education does not necessarily pose an inherent disadvantage compared
to the PRC. In fact, diverse curricula and standards could actually provide an
advantage in fostering innovation.
● To fortify the U.S. and its allies’ and partners’ dominance in the advanced
chip manufacturing necessary for AI and other emerging technologies, the
United States should adopt “protect” and “promote” policies around
semiconductor manufacturing equipment export and production. Adopting
these policies could keep China from becoming a critical part of the supply chain
or a critical source of semiconductor technology and manufacturing (especially
high-end materials and manufacturing equipment) for the next 20-30 years. The
United States has already begun to make strides in this area with the 2022
CHIPS and Science Act.
● The U.S. should also focus on developing and retaining its talent pipeline,
particularly access to foreign skilled labor that comprises about 40% of the
U.S. semiconductor industry workforce. It should consider increasing country-
based caps on annually distributed employment-based green cards, and
generally try to expand the number of American students who are in
semiconductor-related graduate programs.

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3

● As China continues to make domestic strides, the United States will need to
think strategically about the areas in which it attempts to decouple from
China, including the advantages and disadvantages of doing so in different
areas. The effectiveness of decoupling efforts may depend on the particular
characteristics of different technologies.
The brief begins with a look into how CSET conducts its China-related research, it
examines the themes mentioned above, and concludes with recommendations.
Overall, the underlying CSET research provides a higher-resolution picture of China’s
efforts in these areas with illustrative examples and data-backed analysis. Readers are
encouraged to consult source reports for greater detail.

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4

Table of Contents
Introduction: China is Organizing at Home to Lead Abroad ..................................................... 1
Key Themes ........................................................................................................................................................... 1
U.S. Policy Options ............................................................................................................................................. 2
Research Context for CSET’s Work on China’s Domestic Tech Policies .............................. 5
CSET’s Unique Analytical Approach to China Research ............................................................ 8
Chinese Talent Development and Discovery Efforts................................................................... 9
Robust STEM PhD and AI Talent Pipelines ............................................................................................... 9
Linking Civilian and Defense Research under Military-Civil Fusion ................................................ 11
National Talent Recruitment and Tracking Programs ......................................................................... 12
China’s Unique and Evolving Tech Ecosystem ........................................................................... 14
Maturing Patent System ................................................................................................................................ 14
Exploring New Policy Tools.......................................................................................................................... 15
Boosting the Domestic Innovation Base .................................................................................................. 16
Developing Greater Self-Sufficiency in Strategic Technologies ...................................................... 17
Relevant Recommendations for U.S. Policy ................................................................................ 19
Acknowledgments............................................................................................................................... 23

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5

Research Context for CSET’s Work on China’s Domestic Tech Policies
At the Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET), we develop a data and
primary-source informed understanding of the People's Republic of China’s (PRC)
approach to emerging technologies. We analyze how this approach affects the United
States and how U.S. policies can in turn favorably shape technological and strategic
competition with China. Our analytical products incorporate global tech monitoring,
primary source language translations, and data analyses of private sector activity,
helping contextualize China’s technology development and acquisition strategies
alongside those of the United States and its global allies and partners. Our work also
situates the U.S.-China rivalry in the broader landscape of democratic and authoritarian
technology competition.
This analysis derives from several CSET papers that address these topics in greater
detail, with a particular emphasis on higher STEM education, military-civil fusion, talent
recruitment, and policy innovation and experimentation, among several other topics
relevant to policymakers. See Table 1 for more details.

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6

Table 1. CSET Papers Cited in this Brief and Their Author(s)
Report Author(s)
Academics, AI, and APTs Dakota Cary
AI Education in China and the United States Dahlia Peterson, Kayla Goode, and
Diana Gehlhaus
China’s Industrial Clusters Anna Puglisi and Daniel Chou
China’s Progress in Semiconductor Manufacturing
Equipment: Accelerants and Policy Implications
Will Hunt, Saif M. Khan, and Dahlia
Peterson
China’s State Key Laboratory System Emily Weinstein, Channing Lee,
Ryan Fedasiuk and Anna Puglisi
China is Fast Outpacing U.S. STEM PhD Growth Remco Zwetsloot
Chinese and U.S. University Rankings: A Lens into
Top Universities and Their Graduates
Jack Corrigan and Simon Rodriguez
Chinese Government Guidance Funds Ngor Luong, Zachary Arnold, and
Ben Murphy
The Chipmakers: U.S. Strengths and Priorities for the
High-End Semiconductor Workforce
Will Hunt and Remco Zwetsloot
Chokepoints: China’s Self-Identified Strategic
Technology Import Dependencies
Ben Murphy
A Competitive Era for China’s Universities Ryan Fedasiuk, Alan Omar Loera
Martinez, and Anna Puglisi
Counting AI Research: Exploring AI Research Output
in English- and Chinese-Language Sources
Daniel Chou
Decoupling in Strategic Technologies: From Satellites
to Artificial Intelligence
Tim Hwang and Emily Weinstein
Downrange: A Survey of China’s Cyber Ranges Dakota Cary

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7

Maintaining China’s Dependence on Democracies for
Advanced Computer Chips
Saif M. Khan and Carrick Flynn
Patents and Artificial Intelligence Patrick Thomas and Dewey
Murdick
Securing Semiconductor Supply Chains Saif M. Khan
The Semiconductor Supply Chain: Assessing National
Competitiveness
Saif M. Khan, Alexander Mann, and
Dahlia Peterson
Universities and the Chinese Defense Technology
Workforce
Ryan Fedasiuk and Emily
Weinstein
Using Machine Learning to Fill Gaps in Chinese AI
Market Data
Zachary Arnold et al.

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8

CSET’s Unique Analytical Approach to China Research
CSET’s analytical approach draws on Chinese language translation, data-driven
research, and subject matter expertise in areas like semiconductors, cybersecurity, and
patents that differentiates our work in the issue areas mentioned above.
● CSET’s work draws extensively on primary source translation. We employ
researchers and analysts with Chinese language skills and have developed over
500 original translations of Chinese policy documents through our translation
pipeline. CSET’s merged corpus of scholarly technology literature also draws on
Chinese-language publications, which provides a more granular picture of
Chinese research output.1
● CSET employs methods like AI and machine learning (ML) tools to “scrape”
Chinese language documents related to technology investments. For
example, our team used a natural language ML processing model to find AI-
related Chinese companies missing from two leading commercial datasets,
Crunchbase and PEData/Zero2IPO, which contributed to a richer picture of
China’s AI sector.2
● Finally, we employ technical subject matter experts in research areas directly
tied to the U.S.-China AI competition, including semiconductor
manufacturing, cybersecurity, export controls, and patent issues. Our fellows
and analysts draw on government, academic, and private sector experiences
that inform their insights and research across the thematic areas discussed in
this brief.

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9

Chinese Talent Development and Discovery Efforts
Analyzing China’s efforts to develop or acquire tech talent capable of creating cutting-
edge capabilities represents an important aspect of our work, and a useful starting
point for looking at domestic steps the PRC is taking to augment its competitiveness.
China is making strides to overtake the United States in tech talent, in areas including
educational investments and STEM PhDs graduated, AI educational programs (“AI
education”), and centralized talent tracking programs. Its progress in these areas could
prove worrisome for U.S. national and economic security and competitiveness in the
long-term.
Robust STEM PhD and AI Talent Pipelines
Improvements in China’s education system, particularly in higher education, represent
strategic steps to improve the country’s domestic innovation ecosystem. Given its
military-civil fusion policy, an approach to technology acquisition intended to provide
the PRC’s military easier access to cutting-edge research and technology emerging
from the civil sector,3 improvements in the quality of Chinese higher education and
talent could also contribute to new military and intelligence capabilities. Analyzing
how China and the United States compare can help policymakers understand the
competitive challenge the former poses to the latter.
From 2012 to 2021, total central government funding for higher education in China
has more than doubled, with Ministry of Education spending exceeding $179
billion. Funding for the country’s best-known universities has increased each year
since 2017, and individual institutions’ budgets now exceed $5 billion. These
funding increases stem from China’s long-term science and technology (S&T) strategy,
an important component of which entails revitalizing the country’s elite universities.
These universities are closely integrated with the Chinese political and defense
establishments and dominate China’s civilian basic research ecosystem; since they
often serve as touchpoints for international collaboration, this could create security
concerns for foreign partnering institutions. Elite Chinese universities now have
comparable budgets to their U.S. counterparts.4
In this context, China’s educational ecosystem has become highly competitive with
that of the United States. It is pulling away in the number of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) PhDs produced and will likely graduate
nearly twice as many as the United States by 2025 (77,000 to 40,000).5 The quality

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10

of Chinese PhD graduates also appears to be rising and China’s STEM PhD talent
pipeline is becoming more robust. Given the scale of China’s investments in higher
education, the gap in STEM PhD production could undermine U.S. long-term economic
and national security.6
STEM talent is an increasingly critical national asset given the rise of AI and other
emerging tech. PhD-level experts are a small, but important, component of the STEM
workforce, spearheading R&D efforts that push the boundaries of their fields and
educate future science and technology leaders.7 The quantity and quality of a country’s
PhD graduates are important indicators of its future competitiveness.8 China has
consistently produced more STEM PhDs than the U.S. since the mid-2000s. Currently,
Chinese universities graduate roughly three STEM PhDs for every two graduated by
U.S. universities each year.9
In terms of quality, CSET research has demonstrated that Chinese universities are
steadily climbing different global university rankings because of increasing measures
of research output, which can serve as a proxy indicator of a PhD program’s
educational quality. In one ranking, the number of Chinese universities in the top 500
global universities more than tripled from 23 to 71 between 2010 and 2020.10 A large
share of recent Chinese PhD graduates come from universities with high quality
standards. About 45 percent of Chinese PhDs graduate from the country’s elite
Double First Class (A) universities.11 The number of students entering PhD programs at
such institutions rose about 34 percent from 2015 to 2019 and accounted for roughly
65 percent of the total increase in first-time PhD enrollments across China in that
period.12 Economic signals suggest Chinese PhD production is not perfectly matched
with labor market needs. However, the number of elite university graduates, the
institutions’ growing international reputations, and the fact that over three-
quarters of Chinese PhDs specialize in STEM fields indicates China’s STEM talent
pipeline is becoming more robust.13
As the country’s broader STEM talent pipeline solidifies, China is centralizing its
efforts to expand AI education at all levels, granting it a higher likelihood of
developing a strong talent base to solve future AI challenges. Standardized
curricula, centralized AI education implementation plans, and company-university
collaborations benefit China’s AI talent pipeline. Western companies such as Microsoft
Research Asia have worked with Chinese universities—including the Seven Sons,
closely linked to the PRC’s defense sector and discussed more below—through
formalized partnerships involving curricula development. In comparison, the

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 11

decentralized U.S. approach to education integration is more piecemeal and is heavily
focused on tackling computer science education over AI. Recent years have seen a
flurry of U.S. initiatives, programs, and private companies emerge in the AI education
space, but the United States lacks a cogent vision and cohesive national standard to
guide such efforts compared to China.14
Linking Civilian and Defense Research under Military-Civil Fusion
Equipping Chinese graduates with cutting-edge education, skills, and training is but
one aspect of how the PRC’s universities benefit the state. Under military-civil fusion,
China uses close relationships between universities and the government to
translate cutting-edge research into security policy and shorten the path to
operationalizing new techniques, both for defensive and offensive capabilities.15
China’s “Seven Sons of National Defense,” universities administered directly by the
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, provided three quarters of graduates
recruited by defense state-owned enterprises in 2019.16 Chinese state-owned defense
firms directly hired a combined 6,000 graduates from 29 leading Chinese universities
in 2019, a 0.3 percent increase over their estimated 2018 workforce of 2.1 million
people. Nearly two-thirds of graduates bound for the defense industry (3,725 people)
took jobs at the three largest state-owned electronics and aerospace companies: China
Electronics Technology Group (CETC), Aviation Industry Corporation of China (AVIC),
and China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation (CASC).17
Documents from the Chinese Ministry of Education indicate that the Seven Sons have
benefited from training programs and partnerships with the China-based subsidiaries
or joint ventures of Autodesk, Dell, Google, Honeywell, IBM, Intel, Merrill Lynch,
Microsoft, National Instruments, Rockwell Automation, Synopsys, Tektronix, and Texas
Instruments, raising questions about how U.S. companies may be benefitting China’s
defense industry.18 While the Seven Sons are important feeders for China’s military
and defense industry, it appears that the vast majority of civilian universities in China
maintain at least some connection to the country’s defense industry.19

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 12

China’s universities have also collaborated with the security services and Advanced
Persistent Threat (APT) actors on cyber research, techniques, and operations,
including offensive tactics.* CSET conducted a study of six universities that had:
1. previously conducted cyber operations (Hainan University, Southeast University,
and Shanghai Jiao Tong University);
2. partnered with specific divisions of the security services that conduct cyber
operations (Xidian University); or,
3. were noted by U.S. cyber threat intelligence companies as places of recruitment
for APTs (Zhejiang University and Harbin Institute of Technology).20
Our research found that the integration of universities and state-sponsored espionage
shortens the time required to turn academic research into operational capabilities. It
also hints at operators’ possible research priorities by examining certain universities’
current research. For example, the six universities mentioned above research the
intersections of AI/ML and offensive and defensive cyber operations; students at the
universities pick up government-relevant skills by using these capabilities for hacking
while security services exploit university expertise.21
Universities have also collaborated with technology laboratories and companies to run
cyber ranges supporting the PLA and military-civil fusion. Ranges are interactive
environments with hardware and software components that can be used for talent
development and to test different cyber capabilities. China’s development of cyber
ranges points to its desire to harness both military and civilian cyber talent that can
carry out operations or conduct cutting-edge research in areas like AI cybersecurity
applications.22
National Talent Recruitment and Tracking Programs
In addition to the significance of its universities for producing talent and supporting the
security services, China is also cultivating talent recruitment and tracking at different

* Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) actors typically refers to state-affiliated cyber attackers who display
exceptional technical proficiency and capability. Some sophisticated criminal groups can approach such
levels, but are generally suspected of affiliation with nation-states.

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 13

administrative levels in its mission to discover and harness potential talent and
technological breakthroughs.
China employs a range of talent recruitment programs from the State and Party
levels down to the local level focused on cultivating and exploiting its growing
domestic talent pool to support China’s strategic civilian and military technology
goals. China also looks to recruit talent and knowledge from abroad through these
programs.23 Beijing views these programs as vital to China’s economic innovation and
growth, as well as social development, aiming to recruit everyone from experts to
students of both Chinese and non-Chinese citizenship for positions spanning
government, industry, defense, and academia.
The Thousand Talents Plan has recently come under increasing scrutiny from Justice
Department indictments and Congressional reports, but Chinese talent initiatives far
exceed the scope and scale of this program alone. Other illustrative examples include
the “Support Plan for Overseas Chinese Students Who Return to Start Businesses,”
active since 2009, which offers funding to new start-ups legally represented by a
returned overseas student with a masters’ degree or higher. The start-ups receive a
one-time award of 500,000 RMB if classified by the Ministry of Human Resources and
Social Security as a “Key Entrepreneurial Project” and 200,000 RMB if determined to
be an “Outstanding Entrepreneurial Project.” The “International Training Program for
Artificial Intelligence Talents in Chinese Universities: Expert Forum,” established in
2018, is another international networking program that brings together 30
internationally-renowned AI experts to teach a group of 300 academic and commercial
participants on various AI-related subjects. 24
In addition to the 43 national-level programs in CSET’s tracker, including the two
examples listed above, more than 200 talent programs exist at sub-national levels,
and the number is growing and shifting constantly as Beijing seeks to retain, manage,
and recruit talent globally.

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 14

China’s Unique and Evolving Tech Ecosystem
The ecosystem into which China incorporates the talent described above is unique and
evolving. While the extent of its military-civil fusion policy and its malign behavior,
including rampant IP and data theft, are specific to the PRC, in other ways China’s tech
ecosystem is changing to more closely resemble U.S. and European innovation
ecosystems. This is due to factors like its rapidly maturing patent system and the
adoption of new policies like public-private funding mechanisms. Yet global tensions
stemming from its more disruptive practices and geopolitical positioning are forcing
China to take a creative approach to cultivating its domestic innovation base and to
seek self-sufficiency in strategic technologies, especially semiconductors.
Maturing Patent System
China’s patent system—a marker of its AI innovativeness and the perceived
economic value of research—is changing rapidly and developing characteristics of
more established patent systems. In recent years, Chinese AI patent applications
have sharply risen, and while quality concerns remain, China’s patent system should
not be dismissed.25 Both the number of global AI patent documents and shares of
Chinese AI patent applications have risen dramatically within the last decade.26 There
were 10 times as many AI patent applications published in 2019 as in 2013 (over
5,000 to 65,000) and an almost four-fold increase in granted AI patents (over 2,000 to
just over 10,000).27
The uptick in AI patent applications and granted AI patents mirrors broader patenting
trends in China. According to the Chinese National Intellectual Property Association
(CNIPA), the number of invention patent applications it received increased by more
than 500 percent between 2009 and 2019, from 241,000 to 1.4 million. Most of the
Chinese patenting increase stems from domestic, rather than international,
applications; of 1.4 million CNIPA applications in 2019, domestic sources filed almost
90 percent (compared to 48 percent of USPTO applications). For comparison, the
number of patent applications at the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office increased by
only 35 percent (456,000 to 621,000) over the same period. In 2009, U.S. patent
applications outnumbered PRC applications by almost two-to-one, but that ratio was
reversed by 2019.28
Though the largest AI granted patent portfolios are still associated with IBM,
Microsoft, and Google, beyond these three U.S. companies, Chinese organizations

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 15

dominate. These include companies (Ping An, Baidu, Tencent), government
organizations (State Grid), and universities (Electronic Sci/Tech, Zhejiang, Xidian). The
patent portfolios of these Chinese organizations currently consist almost entirely of
recently published applications, rather than granted patents, making them a future
space to watch.29
Recently, China’s focus has shifted from incentivizing the sheer number of patents
produced, particularly in academic institutions, to emphasize quality. Government
bodies like the PRC Ministry of Education recognize China must produce quality
over a high quantity of patents, per CSET’s translation of a 2020 policy document.
The policy eliminates patent application subsidies, bars using patent applications as a
metric for universities to assess professors' and departments' performance, and bans
ranking universities by their patent applications numbers.30
Overall, as a marker of innovative competitiveness, the increasing patent quantity and
quality indicate that China’s tech ecosystem appears poised to compete with U.S. and
European ecosystems on their terms, particularly in AI.
Exploring New Policy Tools
Even as it improves its patenting, China is also employing new mechanisms to get
around flawed traditional policy tools it has previously used to support strategic
industries. Guidance funds, public-private investment vehicles to fund innovative
industrial work, aim to strategically align private sector interests with the state’s policy
goals and produce financial returns around AI and other strategic and emerging
technologies China hopes to dominate.
Central, provincial, and local government agencies are all establishing guidance funds
that may invest directly in companies or projects or indirectly through other funds.
Government sponsors provide 20 to 30 percent of the fundraising target, with private
“social capital” investors providing the rest. As of the first quarter of 2020, Chinese
officials had set up 1,741 guidance funds, with a cumulative registered target size of
11 trillion RMB (1.55 trillion USD), but these funds had only raised about 4.76 trillion
RMB (672 billion USD).31
Guidance funds offer several strengths from a policy perspective. The funds
incorporate private sector discipline and expertise, potentially reducing inefficiency and
corruption associated with other policy tools, and leveraging private sector capital,

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 16

information, contacts, and expert judgment beyond the government’s abilities. Patient
capital means funds can supply stable, long-term investment capital to technology
startups during traditionally challenging scaling periods involved with high quality
technologies. Funds amplify industrial policy measures by providing or coordinating
measures like state-sponsored technology parks, R&D incentives, and talent
recruitment plans, making them more effective and fostering local economies of scale
that help emerging and strategic businesses take off.32
However, guidance funds can also raise less money than planned, waste capital, fail to
invest in early-stage companies as intended, fail to invest altogether, or raise
insufficient funds. Structural issues include too many guidance funds overall, poor fund
management, and failure to attract truly private capital or even crowding private
capital out of the market. Guidance fund progress appears localized and uneven as a
policy tool, but this mechanism is likely better than other, deeply flawed traditional
tools the Chinese government might use to support strategic industries, like direct
government ownership or cash handouts to companies favored by the state.33
Boosting the Domestic Innovation Base
In addition to taking policy steps to advance its domestic technology ecosystem, China
is also boosting its physical innovation infrastructure. It is increasing the number of its
State Key Laboratories (SKLs), through both public and private funding efforts, to
develop its domestic innovation base and talent and capitalize on foreign
knowledge and technology transfers. The PRC began to develop SKLs in the 1980s
to spur defense and commercial innovation, and CSET research has found nearly 500
SKLs to be in operation today with plans to develop more. Modeled loosely on the U.S.
innovation ecosystem comprising national labs, federally-funded research and
development centers, and university-affiliated research centers, SKLs have evolved to
become critical building blocks in China’s innovation ecosystem.34
A number of government ministries, most prominently the Ministry of Education, are
responsible for managing SKLs, which the state relies on to conduct cutting-edge
research, recruit personnel and talent, and carry out academic exchanges within and
outside China across the life sciences, engineering, information, and material sciences.
Often, SKLs will develop or be promoted from university-affiliated research centers or
corporate R&D programs, and seek to work in areas of overlapping interest among the
private sector and government. In addition to their domestic benefits, SKLs present
windows of opportunity to the outside world. China’s SKLs have collaborated with

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 17

international institutions at a higher rate than the country’s overall rate of international
academic collaborations. Meanwhile, SKLs remain a key part of the military-civil fusion
infrastructure that intermingles civilian, academic, and military research. In light of
these facts, they could pose serious research security issues for international
collaborators and complicate relationships with U.S. partners without clear
assessments of the potential risks and benefits of partnership.35
China is also exploring how emerging technologies and research areas might be
used to make breakthrough discoveries and amplify each others’ impacts using
methods like industrial clustering of research facilities. For example, governments at
the state, provincial, and local levels have experimented with physically co-locating AI
and biotechnology research facilities to ease interdisciplinary collaboration. The
government views these industrial clusters as a way to capitalize on AI applications
that could lead to a “transformation of China from a biotech power to a biotech
superpower.”36 While nascent, such research clustering and the subsequent impacts of
using AI for biological discovery could have broad and concerning commercial, ethical,
and national security implications.37
Developing Greater Self-Sufficiency in Strategic Technologies
Finally, in certain key technology areas, particularly leading-edge semiconductors
necessary for advanced computing, China is heavily dependent on imports of often
originating in the United States or its allies and partner nations. As such, China hopes
to achieve self-sufficiency and indigenization across the semiconductor supply chain
to decrease its reliance on foreign equipment for advanced chip manufacturing.38
CSET research and translations have demonstrated that Chinese officials recognize
major strategic technological “chokepoints” or import dependencies that could disrupt
the semiconductor and other vital industries.39
Efforts to develop self-sufficiency in chips could pose a long-term threat to the
collective technological edge and dominant market share enjoyed by the U.S. and its
allies in virtually all segments of the semiconductor supply chain. Though China
currently contributes only 6 percent of value-add to the global semiconductor supply
chain,40 it is projected to become the world’s largest semiconductor manufacturer by
2030.41 While it is strongest in Assembly, Test, and Packaging (ATP), including tools
for semiconductor assembly and packaging and raw materials, China will need access
to a range of linchpin technologies (advanced chip-making equipment, design

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 18

software, IP for advanced chips)42 currently made in the United States and allied
countries in order to reach the leading edge in manufacturing. 43
China is exploring several methods and possibilities for expediting its semiconductor
manufacturing equipment (SME) independence. One is by importing equipment
components, since many of the specialized components required for building SME are
made either in the U.S. or in a U.S.-allied country. China is trying to indigenize these
components to avoid controls, with an emphasis on photolithography tools. Another
method is by providing government subsidies to SME firms. China is likely to ramp up
its assistance to its fledgling SME industry and may improve its fund investment
management in the coming years. As of now, the National Integrated Circuit Industry
Investment Fund, or “Big Fund,” has invested $950 million in Chinese SME firms,
although poor management has limited its benefits.44
Explicit and tacit knowledge transfers could also benefit China’s domestic chip
industry. Explicit knowledge efforts involve reverse engineering, along with IP theft
and corresponding extralegal methods of obtaining engineering knowledge, and
China’s expected to increase in the coming decade. Capitalizing on tacit know-how
involves drawing on the knowledge of Chinese nationals employed at foreign SME
firms who return to China with valuable information to contribute to the SME
indigenizing effort. It should be noted, though, that of the approximately 1,100 Chinese
nationals working at SME firms outside of China, very few have or are expected to join
Chinese SME firms.45
Finally, partnerships and collaboration between Chinese SME firms and fabs could
spur on indigenization efforts. Chinese SME firms are currently experiencing difficulty
finding buyers — in the form of chip fabrication facilities — that are open to
collaborating on the refinement process. If they can build these collaborative
relationships in the future, China would be able to catch up to the U.S. and allies and
reduce their competitive advantage in SME.46

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 19

Relevant Recommendations for U.S. Policy
Some of the steps China is taking at home to augment its technology policies and
ecosystem may present challenges to the United States amid strategic and
technological competition. CSET’s research and analyses have produced a number of
recommendations related to the discussion above to help U.S. policymakers navigate
this competition, particularly in areas such as strategy, export controls, and education.
Goals include ensuring the United States does not lag behind China in producing talent
and developing cutting-edge capabilities, as well as safeguarding the responsible
development of new capabilities.
● When it comes to remaining competitive with China in AI education, the United
States should leverage the unique advantages of its comparatively decentralized
system and approach. The United States’ decentralized approach to AI education
does not necessarily pose an inherent disadvantage compared to the PRC. In fact,
diverse curricula and standards could actually provide an advantage in fostering
innovation. Greater U.S. educational autonomy allows room for experimentation,
creativity, and innovation among companies and educational institutions. The
challenge lies in successfully evaluating and scaling these experiments and
initiatives throughout the entire education system.47

To leverage this advantage, U.S. states will need to engage in targeted and
coordinated efforts with unprecedented levels of support for long-term AI
educational and workforce policies. U.S. AI education efforts will be the most
effective with consistent application over time, unaffected by the election cycle,
with assured state and local access to the requisite resources for schools,
educators, and students.

In addition, the future U.S. S&T education and workforce policy should be
considered in a globally competitive context. That consideration includes
recognizing and capitalizing upon the U.S.’s enduring advantage in attracting elite
foreign talent, including Chinese nationals.48
● To fortify the U.S. and its allies’ and partners’ dominance in the advanced chip
manufacturing necessary for AI and other emerging technologies, the United
States should adopt “protect” and “promote” policies around semiconductor
manufacturing equipment export and production. Adopting these policies could
keep China from becoming a critical part of the supply chain or a critical source of

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 20

semiconductor technology and manufacturing (especially high-end materials and
manufacturing equipment) for the next 20-30 years. The United States has already
begun to make strides in this area with the 2022 CHIPS and Science Act.49

Aspects of “protect” policies include export controls, which can be targeted
towards chokepoints (SME, Electronic Design Automation software, etc.)—aspects
of the semiconductor supply chain for which China lacks the ability to construct
advanced chip factories and to indigenize chip production. In addition, export
controls can be applied to specific end-use and end-user (Chinese semiconductor
firms, military) to target entities in China that are using semiconductors to power
advancements in military modernization or surveillance technologies. Previous
CSET research recommended that the U.S. government monitor AI chip end uses
through reporting requirements to identify purchasers and the types and numbers
of chips (server-grade CPUs, FPGAs, AI training ASICs) sold for exports, re-exports,
and in-country transfers to or within countries of concern.50
This research also argued that the U.S. government should impose (1) direct
export controls on advanced chips, (2) controls on re-exports of such chips, and
(3) a vetting regime for large cloud computing purchases where China or others
use chips to harm international security or human rights. In October 2022, the U.S.
government announced new export controls on the sale of advanced
semiconductors, including but not limited to the aforementioned AI chips and
related equipment, to restrict the ability of Chinese entities to use advanced chips
for military modernization and human rights abuses. The U.S. government is now
working across several international fora to promote the multilateralization and
plurilateralization of these export controls, in line with previous CSET
recommendations to work with allies and partners to secure the chip supply
chain.51

On the “promote” side of the ledger, the United States and its allies should
continue to push the leading edge forward by funding R&D, increasing financial
incentives to chipmakers, developing and retaining the talent pipeline, and
preventing and reducing technology transfer. Domestically, effectively
implementing the CHIPS and Science Act funding is the most urgent item on the
“promote” agenda. Top-tier “promote” priorities include attracting chipmakers to
the U.S. to mitigate the high probability of an extremely costly disruption in high-
end imports from East Asia (especially Taiwan). In addition, allocating funding to

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 21

offset potential losses from export control policies that slow China’s chip
manufacturing will be important. $2 billion of funding would help offset losses to
U.S. and ally firms.52 Reducing the costs of operating an advanced logic or
memory fab down to $20-22B, in conjunction with new incentives of $3-5B per
fab, will help to close the gap with Taiwan, South Korea, and China, who offer
large incentives to their chipmakers.53
● The U.S. should also focus on developing and retaining its talent pipeline,
particularly access to foreign skilled labor that comprises about 40 percent of the
U.S. semiconductor industry workforce. It should consider increasing country-
based caps on annually distributed employment-based green cards, and
generally try to expand the number of American students who are in
semiconductor-related graduate programs. To do so, policymakers should
allocate funding to universities and government-industry-academic partnerships to
facilitate the increased implementation of on-the-job training models.54
● As China continues to make domestic strides, the United States will need to
think strategically about the areas in which it attempts to decouple from China,
including the advantages and disadvantages of doing so in different areas. The
effectiveness of decoupling efforts may depend on the particular characteristics of
different technologies. For example, attempting to totally decouple from China in AI
could prove challenging given the diffuse nature of AI/ML supply chains. The export
controls on high-end logic and memory chips imposed by the Biden Administration
in October 2022 are intended to limit China’s access to the computing power
necessary for advanced AI systems. However, advancements in algorithmic
development and data processing, the other two legs of the “AI triad” (data,
algorithms, and computing power) could offer alternative pathways toward
powerful AI and ML capabilities, and decoupling might incentivize China to invest in
low compute ML research.55

Similarly, applied without sufficient support from allies and partners, foreign direct
product rules controlling Chinese-developed technologies for national security
purposes, could lead foreign companies to remove U.S. tools, content, and
intellectual property, from their products and manufacturing processes. This would
harm U.S. interests in the long run. The United States will need to continually
monitor the effectiveness of decoupling techniques and ensure ongoing support

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 22

from and cooperation with the allies and partners who are critical to limiting
Chinese access to key technologies.

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 23

Author
This analysis was compiled and edited by Owen J. Daniels, the Andrew W. Marshall
Fellow and a policy communications specialist at the Center for Security and Emerging
Technology.
Acknowledgments
For their helpful feedback and editorial assistance, we would like to thank Igor Mikolic-
Torreira, Jacob Feldgoise, Emily Weinstein, and Cynthia Cook and the Defense-
Industrial Initiatives Group team at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
We would also like to acknowledge the work and assistance of the cited authors.

© 2023 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
CSET Product ID #: 20230035
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20230035
Document Last Modified: 20 September 2023

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 24

Endnotes
1 Daniel Chou, “Counting AI Research: Exploring AI Research Output in English- and Chinese-Language
Sources,” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, July 2022), https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-
content/uploads/CSET-Counting-AI-Research.pdf
2Zachary Arnold et al., “Using Machine Learning to Fill Gaps in Chinese AI Market Data,” (Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, February 2021), pp.2-4,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/using-machine-learning-to-fill-gaps-in-chinese-ai-market-data/
3 Elsa B. Kania and Lorand Laskai, “Myths and Realities of China’s Military-Civil Fusion Strategy,”
(Washington, DC: Center for a New American Security, January 2021),
https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/myths-and-realities-of-chinas-military-civil-fusion-strategy.
4 Ryan Fedasiuk, Alan Omar Loera Martinez and Anna Puglisi, “A Competitive Era for China’s
Universities,” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, March 2022), pp. 1-11,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-A-Competitive-Era-for-Chinas-Universities.pdf
5 Remco Zwetsloot et al., “China is Fast Outpacing U.S. STEM PhD Growth,” (Center for Security and
Emerging Technology, August 2021), pp.1, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/china-is-fast-
outpacing-u-s-stem-phd-growth/
6 Zwetsloot et al., “China is Fast Outpacing U.S. STEM PhD Growth,” pp.9-10.
7 Ibid.
8 Zwetsloot et al., “China is Fast Outpacing U.S. STEM PhD Growth,” pp.1.
9 Zwetsloot et al., “China is Fast Outpacing U.S. STEM PhD Growth,” pp.9-10.
10 Jack Corrigan and Simon Rodriguez, “Chinese and U.S. University Rankings A Lens into Top
Universities and Their Graduates,” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, January 2022), pp.1-
11. https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-Chinese-and-U.S.-University-Rankings.pdf
11 Zwetsloot et al., “China is Fast Outpacing U.S. STEM PhD Growth,” pp.1.
12 Zwetsloot et al., “China is Fast Outpacing U.S. STEM PhD Growth,” pp.6.
13 Zwetsloot et al., “China is Fast Outpacing U.S. STEM PhD Growth,” pp.8.

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 25

14 Dahlia Peterson, Kayla Goode, and Diana Gehlhaus, “AI Education in China and the United States,”
(Center for Security and Emerging Technology, September 2021), pp.38-39,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/ai-education-in-china-and-the-united-states/
15 Dakota Cary, “Academics, AI, and APTs,” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, March 2021),
pp.25, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/academics-ai-and-apts/
16 A source note from page 9: based on the study’s approach, foreign observers of the United States
could describe U.S. universities like Carnegie Mellon, the University of Arizona, or Georgia Tech as
“defense affiliated” because their graduates frequently take jobs at Honeywell, Lockheed Martin, or
Raytheon. There are fundamental differences between the U.S. and Chinese higher education systems,
and U.S. defense companies are not state-owned. But policymakers should carefully consider the
political and scientific costs and benefits of labeling certain universities as “defense-affiliated.” Ryan
Fedasiuk and Emily Weinstein, “Universities and the Chinese Defense Technology Workforce” (Center
for Security and Emerging Technology December 2020), pp. 3,9,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/universities-and-the-chinese-defense-technology-workforce/
17 Fedasiuk and Weinstein, “Universities and the Chinese Defense Technology Workforce,” pp. 9-10.
18 Fedasiuk and Weinstein, “Universities and the Chinese Defense Technology Workforce,” pp. 3-9.
19  It is worth noting for comparison that a number of U.S. universities like Carnegie Mellon, Georgia
Tech, or the University of Arizona could be considered defense affiliated under these criteria given their
links to industry and the high number of graduates they send to defense contractors. Fedasiuk and
Weinstein, “Universities and the Chinese Defense Technology Workforce,” pp. 3-9. In addition,
according to U.S. Department of Defense sources, over U.S. 1,700 colleges and universities host Reserve
Officers’ Training Corps (ROTC) programs linking to the U.S. military services, technically giving them at
least some connection to the DoD. See Today’s Military, “ROTC Programs,” U.S. Department of Defense,
2023: https://www.todaysmilitary.com/education-training/rotc-programs.
20 Cary, “Academics, AI, and APTs,” pp. 1-6.
21 Cary, “Academics, AI, and APTs,” pp. 21-25.
22 Dakota Cary, “Downrange: A Survey of China’s Cyber Ranges,” (Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, September 2022), pp.3-18, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/downrange-a-survey-
of-chinas-cyber-ranges/
23 CSET’s national-level program tracker catalogs 43 different Chinese Party-State-sponsored tech
talent tracking initiatives using open-source analysis of PRC ministry and government websites, state-
owned media sources, and Chinese university websites. Emily Weinstein, “Chinese Talent Program
Tracker,” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology Webpage) https://chinatalenttracker.cset.tech/.
CSET has also translated a number of documents related to China’s overseas talent recruitment efforts,
see Ben Murphy, “Translation Snapshot: Chinese Overseas Talent Recruitment,” (Center for Security and

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 26

Emerging Technology, September 2023), https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/translation-snapshot-
chinese-overseas-talent-recruitment/.
24 Weinstein, “Chinese Talent Program Tracker.”
25 Patrick Thomas and Dewey Murdick, “Patents and Artificial Intelligence” (Center for Security and
Emerging Technology, September 2020), pp.12, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/patents-and-
artificial-intelligence/
26 CSET and 1790 Analytics created a database containing all AI granted patents and published
applications (collectively “patent documents”) between January 2000 and March 2020 in all patent
systems worldwide. Our AI patent database contains 287,532 patent documents (230,855 published
applications and 56,677 granted patents). Thomas and Murdick, “Patents and Artificial Intelligence,”
pp.8-9.
27 Thomas and Murdick, “Patents and Artificial Intelligence,” p. 13.
28 Thomas and Murdick, “Patents and Artificial Intelligence,” p. 10-12.
29 Thomas and Murdick, “Patents and Artificial Intelligence,” p. 14.
30 Certain Opinions of the Ministry of Education, the China National Intellectual Property Administration,
and the Ministry of Science and Technology on Improving the Quality of Patents at Institutes of Higher
Education and Promoting [Patent] Conversion and Use (Translation, Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, March 2021), p 1., https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-
content/uploads/t0271_no_univ_patent_subsidies_EN.pdf
31 Ngor Luong, Zachary Arnold, and Ben Murphy, “Chinese Government Guidance Funds” (Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, March 2021), pp.2-3,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/chinese-government-guidance-funds/
32 Luong, Arnold, and Murphy, “Chinese Government Guidance Funds,” pp. 4-5.
33 Luong, Arnold, and Murphy, “Chinese Government Guidance Funds,” pp. 5-9.
34 Emily Weinstein, Channing Lee, Ryan Fedasiuk and Anna Puglisi, “China’s State Key Laboratory
System,” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, June 2022), pp.1-6.
https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-Chinas-State-Key-Laboratory-System.pdf
35 Weinstein, Lee, Fedasiuk, and Puglisi, “China’s State Key Laboratory System,”pp.1-6, 23-27.
https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-Chinas-State-Key-Laboratory-System.pdf

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 27

36 Anna Puglisi and Daniel Chou, “China’s Industrial Clusters,” (Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, June 2022), pp.15, https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/Chinas-Industrial-
Clusters.pdf
37  Anna Puglisi and Daniel Chou, “China’s Industrial Clusters,” (Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, June 2022), pp.1-15, https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/Chinas-Industrial-
Clusters.pdf
38 Saif M. Khan and Carrick Flynn, “Maintaining China’s Dependence on Democracies for Advanced
Computer Chips” (Brookings and Center for Security Emerging Technology, April 2020), Figure 6, pp.7,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/maintaining-chinas-dependence-on-democracies-for-
advanced-computer-chips/.
39 Ben Murphy, “Chokepoints: China’s Self-Identified Strategic Technology Import Dependencies,”
(Center for Security and Emerging Technology, May 2022),
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/chokepoints/
40 Saif M. Khan, Alexander Mann, and Dahlia Peterson, "The Semiconductor Supply Chain: Assessing
National Competitiveness" (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, January 2021), Table 1, pp.8.
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/the-semiconductor-supply-chain/
41Antonio Varas et al., “Government Incentives and US Competitiveness in Semiconductor
Manufacturing” (Boston Consulting Group and Semiconductor Industry Association, September 2020),
Exhibit 2, pp.7, https://web-assets.bcg.com/27/cf/9fa28eeb43649ef8674fe764726d/bcg-government-
incentives-and-us-competitiveness-in-semiconductor-manufacturing-sep-2020.pdf.
42  Saif M. Khan, Alexander Mann, and Dahlia Peterson, "The Semiconductor Supply Chain: Assessing
National Competitiveness" (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, January 2021), Table 1, pp.8.
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/the-semiconductor-supply-chain/
43 Saif M. Khan, “Securing Semiconductor Supply Chains” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology,
January 2021), Table 1, pp.12-13, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/securing-semiconductor-
supply-chains/.
44 Hunt, Khan, and Peterson, “China’s Progress in Semiconductor Manufacturing Equipment: Accelerants
and Policy Implications,” pp. 18-23.
45 Hunt, Khan, and Peterson, “China’s Progress in Semiconductor Manufacturing Equipment: Accelerants
and Policy Implications,” pp. 23-26.
46 Hunt, Khan, and Peterson, “China’s Progress in Semiconductor Manufacturing Equipment: Accelerants
and Policy Implications,” pp. 29-30.

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 28

47 Dahlia Peterson, Kayla Goode, and Diana Gehlhaus, "AI Education in China and the United States"
(Center for Security and Emerging Technology, September 2021), pp.39,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/ai-education-in-china-and-the-united-states/.
48 Peterson, Goode, and Gehlhaus, "AI Education in China and the United States," pp.39-40.
49 Khan, “Securing Semiconductor Supply Chains,” p. 3-6.
50 Khan, “Securing Semiconductor Supply Chains,” p. 30.
51 Khan, “Securing Semiconductor Supply Chains,” p. 27-30.
52 U.S., Japanese, and Dutch equipment firms could lose $920 million for an advanced threshold (≤16
nm) and $6.3 billion for a less advanced threshold (≤28 nm) chip sales from these policies. Khan,
“Securing Semiconductor Supply Chains,” p. 46.
53 Taiwan and South Korea are the primary manufacturers of leading-edge logic chips. Antonio Varas et
al., “Government Incentives and US Competitiveness in Semiconductor Manufacturing” (Boston
Consulting Group  and Semiconductor Industry Association, September 2020), pp.1, 35, https://web-
assets.bcg.com/27/cf/9fa28eeb43649ef8674fe764726d/bcg-government-incentives-and-us-
competitiveness-in-semiconductor-manufacturing-sep-2020.pdf.
54 Will Hunt and Remco Zwetsloot, “The Chipmakers: U.S. Strengths and Priorities for the High-End
Semiconductor Workforce” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, September 2020), pp.6-31,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-The-Chipmakers.pdf.
55 Tim Hwang and Emily Weinstein, “Decoupling in Strategic Technologies: From Satellites to Artificial
Intelligence,” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, July 2022), pp.15-18,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-Decoupling-in-Strategic-Technologies-3.pdf
