EFI REPORT 
2019
32
A
Financing for basic research can take various forms. In 
Germany, funding is provided through basic financing 
of tertiary education institutions (universities 
and universities of applied sciences) and non-
university research institutions (außeruniversitäre 
Forschungseinrichtungen, AUFs) on the one hand, 
and in competitive processes through research 
funding organizations on the other. In its previous 
annual reports, the Commission of Experts has 
examined research at tertiary education institutions 
(2012) and AUFs (2010) in considerable detail. The 
present analysis investigates the funding structures 
in competitive basic research funding, which in 
Germany is allocated by the German Research 
Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, 
DFG).
International comparisons show that competitive 
research funding can take place through various 
funding lines, allowing the same overall level 
of funding to be structured in entirely different 
ways. This analysis compares the DFG’s funding 
structures with the most prominent research funding 
organizations in the United Kingdom (UKRI), the 
Netherlands (NWO), Switzerland (SNF) and the 
USA (NIH and NSF). 85 A v a i l a b l e  d a t a  f r o m  t h e  
ten-year period 2008 to 2017 is taken as the basis 
for this comparison. The comparison takes the 
following structural characteristics into account: 
the total amounts awarded for individual funding 
lines, average funding amounts, maximum funding 
durations for specific programmes, distribution of 
approved funding across subject groups and success 
rates. The assumption is that different structures will 
result in different research results. Consequently, this 
analysis also makes an international comparison of 
the structure of research results (publication quality 
and quantity) which could be attributed to funding 
allocated through the research funding organizations 
considered here.
Funding and funding structures of the DFG
The DFG is Germany’s central research funding 
organization for competitive financing of basic 
research. According to its statutes, the DFG “serves 
all branches of science and the humanities by funding 
research projects and facilitating national and 
international collaboration among researchers”.  
The specific tasks of the DFG also include selecting 
“the best projects by researchers at universities 
and research institutions on a competitive basis”; 
funding ³excellent science without regard to extra-
scientific factors´ awarding ³the best researchers 
with funding”; providing “the means and freedom 
necessary for successful research”, and facilitating 
“the advancement and training of early career 
researchers”.87 “In principle, every scientist working 
in Germany or at a German research institution 
located abroad who has completed their academic 
training (a doctorate as a rule) is eligible to submit a 
proposal”.88
In addition, basic research in Germany is funded 
through basic financing of A8Fs, whose researchers 
can only submit applications to the DFG in 
cooperation with tertiary education institutions 
(cf. box A 3-1).
By far the largest proportion of all DFG subsidies 
(around €3.1  billion in 2017) 89 was granted to 
applicants at universities (91.3  percent in 2017). 90 
In addition to direct project costs, programme 
allowances also finance indirect proMect expenses 
related to funding (also known as overheads, such as 
accommodation, administration and energy costs). 
At present, programme allowances account for 
22 percent.91
Basic research funding  
structures and publications 
in international comparison
A 3

33
Current developments and challenges
A
The DFG is Mointly financed by the Federal Govern-
ment (58 percent) and the Länder governments  
(42 percent). 9 T h e  l e v e l  o f  f i n a n c i a l  s u p p o r t  i s  
granted on the basis of an economic plan proposed 
by the -oint Committee (Hauptausschuss) of the 
DFG and approved by the -oint Science Conference 
(Gemeinsame Wissenschaftskonferenz, GWK).97 The 
Pact for Research and Innovation (Pakt für Forschung 
und Innovation, PFI) sets down research policy 
objectives to be implemented by the DFG. In return, 
the DFG receives financial planning security in the 
form of annual funding increases. 98 From 200 to 
2010, this increase in funds amounted to 3 percent per 
year; from 2011 to 2015, it amounted to 5 percent per 
year, and annual increases of 3  percent are planned 
for the period 201 to 2020.99 Additional funding was 
made available to the DFG as part of the Excellence 
Initiative. In 2005, the Federal Government and the 
Box A 3-1
In addition to the DFG, Germany finances an 
independent sector of AUFs, each of which has 
speciﬁc missions. Max Planck Institutes conduct 
knowledge-oriented basic research in natural 
sciences, life sciences, the humanities and social 
sciences. The Helmholtz Association performs 
top-level research in strategic programmes 
in the fields of natural sciences, technology 
and biomedicine. The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft 
conducts application-oriented research in the 
fields of health, security, communications, 
mobility, energy and the environment. The Leibniz 
Association conducts knowledge-oriented and 
application-oriented basic research into issues of 
societal, economic and ecological importance.92
The sector of AUFs – which may only submit 
applications to the DFG under speciﬁc conditions 
– is unique to Germany. The Federal and 
Länder governments provide total funding of 
€6.82 billion for AUFs (2017 target). 93 When 
scientists at AUFs94 nevertheless wish to apply 
for funding from the DFG, they can only do so in 
cooperation with tertiary education institutions. 
This mechanism is also known as the duty to 
cooperate.95
Non-university research institutions as 
further pillars of publicly ﬁnanced research 
in Germany
/lnder concluded the agreement on the Excellence 
Initiative’s first financial support period from 200 
to 2011. As part of this, the DFG was awarded 
additional funding totalling €1.9  billion. 100 I n  t h e  
second Excellence Agreement for the period 2011 to 
2017, signed in 2009, the DFG received total funding 
of €2.7 billion.101
In 2017, the DFG awarded total funding in the 
amount of €3.15  billion102 (including the Excellence 
Initiative). In 200, this figure stood at €2.23 billion, 
representing a significant funding increase of more 
than 40 percent over the entire ten-year period from 
2008 to 2017. 103 This growth can be traced back in 
part to the programme allowance, introduced in 2007 
and financed from the Higher Education 3act. Since 
2013, a further portion is attributable to significant 
financial allocations as part of the second round of the 
Excellence Initiative.104 The distribution of approved 
funds across the individual funding lines has 
remained broadly stable over the last ten years. The 
main recipient groups of DFG funding, the average 
funding amounts and the maximum funding duration 
of programmes have changed only slightly.105
The DFG system comprises various programme 
lines. There are 39 funding lines which cover a wide 
spectrum of objectives and target groups. According 
to the DFG itself, the portfolio of funding schemes is 
composed of the instruments divided into Individual 
Grant Programmes, 10 Coordinated Programmes, 107 
the Excellence Initiative of the Federal Government 
and the /lnder (2005 to 2017), the Excellence 
Strategy of the Federal Government and the Länder 
from 2018, 108 R e s e a r c h  I n f r a s t r u c t u r e ,  S c i e n t i f i c  
Prizes and International Programmes.109
The single largest share of funding in 2017 went 
on Individual Grant 3rogrammes at approximately 
35 percent, followed by Collaborative Research 
Centres at almost 23  percent (cf. figure A 3-2). The 
five most important Coordinated Programmes 
(Collaborative Research Centres, Priority 
Programmes, Research Training Groups, Research 
Units and DFG Research Centres) account for 
around 42  percent of funding awarded. 110 T h e  
aim of Coordinated Programmes is to promote 
“cooperation and structural innovation”. 111 T h e  
DFG aims to achieve this “by encouraging national 
and international collaboration in areas of current 
relevance and by concentrating scientific potential 
at a university”. 112 In doing so, DFG funding 
A 3  Basic research funding structures and publications 
in international comparison

EFI REPORT 
2019
34
A
places major emphasis on supporting collaboration 
between researchers. The Excellence Initiative and 
Research Infrastructure programmes also account for 
significant proportions of spending (at 13.9 percent 
and 7.3 percent respectively). The ranking of funding 
lines has also broadly remained stable since 2008.113
In 2017, the average funding amount in the Individual 
Grants 3rogrammes category was approximately 
€200,000 across all new applications in the same 
category.114 The success rate for the Individual Grants 
Programmes category was around 30 percent in 2017; 
however, this figure has fluctuated significantly over 
the course of time. The lowest figure was 23 percent, 
recorded in 2013; the highest stood at 35  percent in 
2009.115 The funding period for new applications in 
Individual Grants Programmes is usually between 
two and three years (in fact, the average for 2017 
was 31. months). 11 C o o r d i n a t e d  p r o g r a m m e s  
are generally longer – for instance, Collaborative 
Research Centres can run for up to twelve years, 
while Research Training Groups can run for up to 
nine.117
International comparison of funding structures
The following section compares the funding 
structures of the DFG with those of the most 
important research funding organizations in the 
United Kingdom (UKRI), the Netherlands (NWO), 
Switzerland (SNF) and the USA (NIH and NSF). 
In doing so, reference is made to a study conducted 
by the Austrian Institute of Economic Research 
(Österreichisches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung, 
WIF2) on behalf of the Commission of Experts.118
In all these countries, the funding awarded by the 
aforementioned research funding organizations only 
represents a proportion of total research funding for 
tertiary education institutions. At 18  percent, the 
proportion of overall research funding for tertiary 
education institutions awarded by the DFG is at the 
lower end in international comparison. 119 The same 
is true for the funding amounts provided by the DFG 
per scientist in the tertiary education sector. 120 In the 
international comparison, the cumulative average 
growth rate of .  percent for DFG funding in the 
period 2005 to 201 ranks in the middle of the table.121
Fig. A 3-2
14%
22.7
7.0
6.5
5.3
34.7
1.77.3
0.8
13.9
39% 47%
Coordinated Programmes
Collaborative Research Centres
Priority Programmes
Research Training Groups
Research Units
DFG Research Centres
Individual Grants Programmes
Excellence Initiative
Infrastructure funding
Prizes, other grants
42.3
Annual total funding volume for ongoing projects awarded by each programme in 2017 
as a percentage of all funding
Source: DFG data. Calculations by Fraunhofer ISI in Kroll (2019).
Download 
data

35
Current developments and challenges
A
Box A 3-3
Classiﬁcation of funding lines and instruments
Structural priority area
Thematic priority area
Education and training
Career
Mobility
Diversiﬁcation
Prizes
Applied research
R&D collaboration with ﬁrms
Commercialisation
R&D value chain
Categories of funding lines for 
international comparison
Project funding
Priority areas
Translation
Infrastructure
Funding of people
Larger-scale, coordinated funding lines
Promotion of people
Project funding
Funding with the aim of using basic research for 
speciﬁc applications
Funding for research equipment (outwith funding in 
single project funding)
(Scientiﬁc Instrumentation and Information Technology, Scientiﬁc 
Library Services and Information Systems)
Funding with the aim of reinforcing scientiﬁc excellence and boosting international 
visibility (Collaborative Research Centres, DFG Research Centres, Excellence Initiative)123
Support for research on predeﬁned topics (Priority Programmes)
Funding for potential scientists not holding a doctorate with the aim of preparing 
them for or guiding them towards a scientiﬁc career (Research Training Groups)
Funding for post-doctoral researchers with the aim of improving their career prospects 
(e.g. Emmy Noether Programme, Heisenberg Programme)
Funding to facilitate researchers’ international mobility and support exchange 
programmes (e.g. Research Fellowships)
Funding for researchers with the aim of improving diversity in terms of gender, 
origin or type of tertiary education institution (Project Academies)
Prizes for researchers (e.g. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Prize, Heinz Maier-Leibnitz Prize)
Funding for applied research within the tertiary education system
(e.g. Clinical Trials)
Funding for collaborative R&D projects
Funding for commercialization of research results
Funding for the entire research cycle, from basic research to applied research and 
experimental development through to commercialization
Description (selected examples from DFG funding lines)122
Single project funding
Single project funding early career
Single project funding high-risk
Networks and multi-project funding
Interdisciplinary research
Standard funding for single principal investigator-led research projects 
(Research Grants)
Single project funding for early career researchers, i.e. ﬁxed-term staff and/or 
ﬁrst-time applicants
Single project funding with a speciﬁc focus on high-risk projects
(Reinhart Koselleck Projects)
Funding for collaborations between scientists/research directors, usually from different 
research institutions (e.g. Research Units)
Funding for research projects with interdisciplinary collaboration or interdisciplinary 
approach
Scientiﬁc communication
International cooperation
Funding to communicate research ﬁndings to a 
non-scientiﬁc audience
Funding for bilateral research collaboration between different countries 
(e.g. establishing international collaborations, submitting joint applications for D-A-CH)
Source: Janger et al. (2019: 23f.).
A 3  Basic research funding structures and publications 
in international comparison

EFI REPORT 
2019
36
A
Fig. A 3-4 
Funding lines
Single project funding
Structural priority area
Infrastructure
Thematic priority area 
Education and training
Networks and multi-project funding 
Career 
Prizes
Mobility
Applied research
Single project funding high-risk
Single project funding early career
Commercialisation
Scientific communication
International cooperation
R&D collaboration with firms
R&D value chain
Interdisciplinary research
Diversification
Other or data not available
15.9
11.0
21.7
18.3
10.1
23.0
Netherlands*
Germany
0.3
Switzerland
4.2
4.3
6.8
0.50.81.3
4.1
6.5
5.4
8.1
1.2
5.9
1.3
USA
9.2
11.8
3.5
3.4
49.5
7.7
4.7
3.3
0.7
3.0
0.7
3.6
3.4
7.8
64.6
1.9 0.2
0.4 0.8
0.50.1
6.6
10.1
United Kingdom*
49.6
7.3
7.0
0.9
37.5
0.7 0.4
0.1
3.3
6.0
6.5 30.0
1.3 0.5 0.1 0.5
Structure of funding lines in international comparison in 2017  
as a percentage of all funding
* 2016
United Kingdom: weighted average of the AHRC, BBSRC, EPSRC, ESRC, MRC, NERC and STFC. Data taken from ﬁnancial reports.
USA: weighted average of the NIH and NSF.
Source: research funding organizations’ data. Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland: WIFO calculations in Janger et al. (2019).
United Kingdom, USA: own calculations based on Janger et al. (2019).
Download 
data

37
Current developments and challenges
A
To make it possible to compare the complex funding 
structures of different countries’ research funding 
organizations, the various funding lines ± the finer 
details of which differ – are allocated to broader (but 
internationally comparable) categories. Box A  3-3 
outlines the funding line classification method that 
the international comparison is based on.124
One aspect shared by research funding organizations 
in almost all of the countries examined here is that 
single project funding is one of the most important 
funding lines (cf. figure A 3-). Following the above 
classification method, single proMect funding from 
the DFG includes Research Grants. In the United 
Kingdom, Switzerland and the USA, single project 
funding is the largest funding line, representing 50 
to 5 percent of total funding in these countries. It is 
striking that the proportion of structural priority area 
funding is higher for the DFG than in comparative 
countries; structural priority areas concern funding 
with the aim of reinforcing scientific excellence 
and boosting international visibility. Based on 
the above classification, structural priority areas 
include three DFG funding lines: Collaborative 
Research Centres, DFG Research Centres and the 
Excellence Initiative (cf.  box A 3-3). This pattern 
has remained comparatively stable in recent  
years; in Germany, it has even been further 
reinforced by the Excellence Initiative. 125 D F G  
funding is therefore more concentrated on larger-
scale, coordinated funding lines than is the case for 
research funding organizations in other countries.
However, international empirical studies show that 
such coordinated funding lines are not always more 
successful. In particular, their success appears to 
differ depending on the subject area.12 The following 
section examines whether there are systematic 
differences in the publications of projects funded by 
the respective research funding organizations in an 
international comparison.
In terms of the distribution of funding across subjects, 
the largest proportion of funding was allocated 
to projects in the natural sciences in the countries 
examined here ± with the exception of the 8SA. 127 
Due to the funding activities of the NIH, the largest 
proportion of funding in the USA on average went 
to the field of medicine. In Germany, the field of 
engineering sciences receives more funding than in 
the comparison countries.128
The results of the WIFO study suggest that, in this 
international comparison, Germany has the lowest 
average funding amount and a rather low maximum 
Tab. A 3-5
Country Research funding 
organization
Average funding 
amount (in €m)
Maximum funding 
duration (in years)2)
Success rate
(in percent)
Germany DFG 0,28 3  3 0
Netherlands NWO 0,33 6 22
Switzerland SNF 0,50 1-4   48
United Kingdom AHRC 0,64 5 25
BBSRC N/A 5    244)
EPSRC 0,98 N/A 29
ESRC N/A N/A   234)
MRC N/A 5 22
NERC N/A N/A   314)
STFC N/A N/A N/A
USA NIH  0,411) 3-5   191)
NSF 0,34  2,93)  21
International comparison of funding characteristics of single project funding  
on the basis of new applications in 2017
N/A: data not available. AHRC, BBSRC, ESRC, MRC, NERC and NWO: 2016. 
1) On the basis of new applications, applications for renewal and applications for amendments. 2) 2018 or last available applicable 
documents without speciﬁc year stated. 3) Average duration. 4) Overall success rate.
Source: research funding organizations’ data. WIFO calculations in Janger et al. (2019).
A 3  Basic research funding structures and publications 
in international comparison
Download 
data

EFI REPORT 
2019
38
A
funding duration in terms of single project funding on 
the basis of new applications (cf. table A 3-5). 129 No 
comparable data on other funding lines was available 
to the Commission of Experts. Regarding the effects 
of different funding durations, empirical studies 
suggest that shorter funding durations tend to lead to 
less excellent publications, partly due to less freedom 
for research. 130 In terms of the effects of increasing 
funding amounts on research results, the empirical 
evidence is controversial; however, there tends to 
be good evidence of a positive correlation between 
the funding amount and the results of the funded 
Box A 3-6
Scientific publication results  
are one method by which to 
measure the results of research 
projects. Publications are al-
located to research funding 
organizations based on the 
details in the acknowledgement 
sections of journal articles. Not 
all research funding organizations 
make such acknowledgements 
a legal obligation. However, 
for some time now, they have 
been the standard query for 
many scientific journals when 
submitting articles via the 
corresponding institution tools. 
According to both Thomson 
Reuters (Web of Science) and 
Elsevier (SCOPUS), funding 
information has been collected 
as standard since 2009 and is 
reliably interpretable. 133 Data 
from Web of Science was used 
as the basis for comparisons in 
this regard, as it provided more 
robust funding reference data for 
the period under examination. 
Nevertheless, a comparative 
analysis with SCOPUS – which 
still contains incomplete funding 
references but includes data 
from a wider range of subjects 
– provided almost identical 
results, at least in the case of 
research council acknowledging 
publications within individual 
scientiﬁc disciplines.
A total of around 5.6  million 
publications were analyzed 
using Web of Science data for 
the period 2010 to 2017. Publi-
cations that acknowledge one 
of the key research funding 
organizations included in the 
analysis are referred to brieﬂy as 
research council acknowledging 
publications (RCAPs).
The number of RCAPs of 
the respective country and 
the number of national and 
international co-publications 
among the RCAPs are taken as 
quantitative indicators. These 
publication-based indicators are 
available for the period 2010 to 
2017.
The excellence rate and the 
crown indicator (CI) are used as 
qualitative indicators.
The excellence rate is defined 
as the proportion of a country’s 
publications that are among 
the 10 percent of the world’s 
most-cited publications in the 
respective scientific discipline. 
The CI compares a country’s cita - 
tion rates with those of the rest 
of the world, normalized for 
speciﬁc disciplines. 134 The CI is 
normalized to 1.0. For example, a 
CI of 1.4 would indicate that the  
publications of the country in 
question are cited 40  percent 
more frequently than the inter-
national average.
The excellence rate and the CI 
are calculated on the basis of 
citations. These citation-based 
indicators are based on a citation 
window of three years (including 
the year of publication), meaning 
that only publications with a 
corresponding time interval 
until the current margin can be 
recorded. These indicators are 
available for the period 2010 
to 2015. In order to satisfy the 
various starting situations of 
qualitative indicators of all 
publications, the difference 
between the RCAP excellence rate 
and the excellence rate for all 
publications is taken as a further 
qualitative indicator for the 
research funded in a respective 
country (with the same approach 
applied for the CI).
Operationalization and measurement concept for research council  
acknowledging publications (RCAPs)132
research. 131 At 30  percent, the DFG’s success rate 
for single project funding is quite high compared to 
other countries – with low average funding amounts 
at the same time (cf.  table A 3-5). In summary, both 
the funding duration and the average funding amount 
appear to be structural characteristics that merit more 
detailed analysis and examination in future.
There is also a difference between the eligibility of 
indirect costs in single project funding programmes. 
While the DFG applies a rate of 22  percent – similar 
to the SNF (20  percent) – the NWO does not fund

39
Current developments and challenges
A
Tab. A 3-7
Country Excellence rate 
for RCAPs 
(in percent)
Excellence 
rate for all 
publications 
(in percent)
Difference in 
excellence rates 
(in percentage 
points)
Crown indicator 
for RCAPs
Crown indicator 
for all 
publications
Difference 
in crown 
indicators
Germany 17 14 +3 1.4 1.3 +0.1
Netherlands 22 17 +5 1.8 1.6 +0.2
Switzerland 22 19 +3 1.8 1.7 +0.1
United Kingdom 21 15 +6 1.8 1.4 +0.4
USA 20 14 +6 1.7 1.3 +0.4
International comparison of excellence rates and crown indicators of RCAPs as well as 
excellence rates and crown indicators of all publications and differences in 2015144
The term RCAP denotes a publication which acknowledges one of the research funding organizations considered in this analysis. 
Cf. Box A 3-6.
Source: Thomson Reuters – Web of Science. Calculations by Fraunhofer ISI in Kroll et al. (2019).
any indirect costs, while the NIH and NSF fund all 
indirect costs (30 to 9 percent). The 8.RI finances 
80 percent of all costs incurred (direct and indirect 
costs); the remaining 20 percent must be borne by the 
research institution.135
International comparison of research results:
publications from funded projects
Assessing research results on the basis of publication 
performance and taking publications which 
acknowledge funding from national research funding 
organizations (referred to here in short as research 
council acknowledging publications, RCAPs) as an 
indicator of the results of funded research produces 
clear, country-specific patterns. Box A  3- explains 
how publications can be allocated to research funding 
organizations.
The publication analysis results outlined in the 
following originate from a Fraunhofer ISI study 
commissioned by the Commission of Experts. This 
study shows that the proportion of RCAPs among 
all national publications is highest in the USA at 
the end of the period (2017), at 31  percent. The 
figure in Germany was 23  percent, in Switzerland 
21 percent, in the United Kingdom 20 percent and in 
the Netherlands 14  percent.13 While the number of 
RCAPs rose for all countries from 2010 to 2017, 137 
the growth rate of RCAPs in Germany (37  percent) 
was lower than in European comparison countries.138
In almost all countries, RCAPs occur less frequently 
in co-authorship than publications as a whole.139 If co-
authorship is divided into national and international 
co-authorship, it can be seen that RCAPs are 
produced more frequently with co-authors from 
the same country than publications as a whole (in 
Germany, for instance, 23 percent of RCAPs were co-
authored with a national partner and 20 percent of all 
publications were co-authored with a national partner 
in 2017).140 However, in Germany, as in most other 
countries, RCAPs are produced with international 
co-authors less frequently than for all publications 
(in Germany, for instance, 53  percent of RCAPs 
were co-authored with an international partner and 
59 percent of all publications were co-authored with 
an international partner in 2017). 141 Moreover , the 
proportion of international co-publications has grown 
less sharply for RCAPs than for publications as a 
whole – a trend evident across all countries.142
In terms of the quality of the research results, 
measured using the citations of respective 
publications, there are clear country-specific 
differences. 143 The excellence rate can be applied 
as the primary indicator (cf. table A 3-7) – that is to 
say, the proportion of publications that are among 
the 10 percent of the most-cited publications in the 
respective discipline (cf. box A 3-).
The results of the Fraunhofer ISI study make clear 
that each country’s RCA3 excellence rate is higher 
than the excellence rate for respective countries’ 
publications as a whole. In Germany, for example, the 
RCA3 excellence rate is recorded at 17  percent and 
the excellence rate for all publications is 1  percent. 
This figure places Germany at the lower end of both 
rankings. Germany also falls behind the comparative 
A 3  Basic research funding structures and publications 
in international comparison
Download 
data

EFI REPORT 
2019
40
A
countries examined here using the excellence rate for 
all publications determined by the OECD. 145 At the 
same time, Germany has the second-lowest number 
of publications per scientist in the tertiary education 
sector (in full-time equivalent positions) after the 
8nited .ingdom. The proportion of excellent 
publications among RCAPs is therefore not simply 
low because there is a disproportionately high number 
of other publications. 1 At 3 percentage points, the 
excellence rate increase for DFG-funded RCA3s 
compared to all publications is also rather low in the 
international comparison. Only in Switzerland is the 
rate of increase eTually low ± but the Swiss figure is 
an increase on a significantly higher excellence rate 
across all publications.147
For the purpose of classification, it is also useful to 
compare the excellence rate of DFG-related RCA3s 
used here to the excellence rates for all publications 
from tertiary education institutions and AUFs. 
This comparison can be conducted on the basis of 
an earlier study for the year 2012. 148 It is clear that 
the excellence rate for DFG RCA3s (17  percent) is 
higher than the rates for the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft 
(10  percent), tertiary education institutions 
(13 percent), the Leibniz Association (13 percent) and 
the Helmholtz Association (1  percent). However, 
the excellence rate of the 0ax 3lanck Society 
(23 percent) is significantly higher than for DFG 
RCA3s ± as is to be expected, given the 0ax 3lanck 
Society’s concentration on excellent basic research. 
The results of the comparisons indicate that, in terms 
of the excellence rate, competitively funded research 
still has considerable scope for improvement.149
The crown indicator (CI) can be applied as an 
alternative qualitative indicator (cf.  table A  3-7); 
it compares a country’s citation rates with those 
of the rest of the world on the basis of a discipline-
specific normalization (cf.  box A 3-). This measure 
of quality also shows that, in all countries, the CI for 
RCAPs is higher than the CI for all publications in 
the respective country. 150 When compared to other 
countries, with 1.4 in 2015, Germany has the lowest 
CI for RCAPs and – together with the USA – also has 
the lowest CI for all publications (1.3). The difference 
between the CI of RCAPs and that of all publications 
also puts Germany at the lower end of the ranking 
compared to the other countries examined here.
Taken as a whole, it is clear that DFG RCAPs display 
a relatively low increase in terms of their excellence 
rate and CI when compared to the figure for all 
publications in Germany and that this cannot be 
Mustified by the latter already returning above-average 
figures.
Another of the DFG’s objectives is to promote 
cooperation and structural innovation. To date, 
no evaluations have been conducted into whether 
it achieves this objective. As a result, it is also 
not possible to evaluate whether the heavy focus 
of financing on funding programmes aimed at 
promoting cooperation and structural innovation 
compared to the funds allocated to single project 
funding is actually productive. For those submitting 
applications, this entails considerable additional 
effort in giving systematic consideration to structural 
innovation and collaborative elements when planning 
their research. Evidence that such efforts generally 
provide sufficient benefit to Mustify them is yet to be 
provided.
Conclusions and recommendations
The DFG as well as the research funding organizations 
in the comparison countries have differentiated 
funding structures in basic research, which are based 
on different objectives and target groups and are 
often comparable. Germany places a higher than 
average emphasis on funding for structural priority 
area programmes (Collaborative Research Centres, 
DFG Research Centres and the Excellence Initiative) 
compared with other countries – a pattern that has 
become yet more pronounced in recent years. This 
means that the DFG concentrates more heavily on 
larger-scale, coordinated funding schemes than other 
countries’ research funding organizations. At the 
same time, it is clear that the total funding amount 
provided by the DFG in relation to the number of 
full-time scientists employed in the tertiary education 
sector is rather low compared to other countries. The 
results also indicate that for single project funding, 
the DFG has the lowest average funding amounts 
and among the shortest maximum funding durations 
per new application. The DFG’s success rate is, by 
contrast, comparatively high.
Assessing the research results on the basis of 
research council acknowledging publications, it 
can be determined that the excellence rate and CI of 
publications which acknowledge the DFG are lower 
than for RCAPs in comparison countries. Meanwhile, 
the difference in quality between publications with 
funding acknowledgements and those without is 
among the smallest in the international comparison.

41
Current developments and challenges
A
 – The Commission of Experts suggests that the 
reasons for these patterns should be investigated 
more closely. It therefore recommends that 
greater use should be made of causal analyses 
according to the latest scientific standards. 151 
The Commission also proposes preparing the 
underlying data, making it freely available to the 
scientific community and having more in-depth 
quantitative and qualitative analyses conducted 
by the scientific community for example as part 
of a specific research priority programme. 152 
Scientific insights into the effects of various 
structures gained through this research should 
then be integrated by the DFG when examining 
its funding and support portfolio.
 – The international comparison indicates that 
the DFG places heavy emphasis on funding 
programmes that aim to promote cooperation 
and structural innovation. At the same time, the 
average funding amounts awarded by the DFG 
to new applications for single project funding are 
rather low and the funding durations rather short. 
In addition, the overall level of DFG funding 
in relation to the number of scientists in the 
German tertiary education sector is rather low. 
Empirical findings suggest that the innovative 
content of funded projects and the quality of 
research results could be improved by increasing 
funding durations. In light of these results and 
the DFG obMective of promoting excellence, it 
may be advisable to increase the average funding 
amounts and maximum funding durations for 
single project funding. As the heavy emphasis 
on funding programmes aimed at promoting 
cooperation and structural innovation represents 
a distinctive feature in the international 
comparison, it should be subjected to critical 
examination based on detailed DFG data.
 – The below-average level of international co-
operation measured by the co-authorship of 
publications referencing the DFG (RCAPs) is 
also striking. This finding is Tuestionable as the 
mission of promoting international collaboration 
among researchers is a specific mission of the 
DFG, embedded in its statutes. This therefore 
raises the question of whether international 
cooperation should not be more strongly pro-
moted by the DFG.
 – The present analysis is unable to provide con-  
clusive answers to every question due to prob-
lems with data availability. Further analyses 
should be conducted, in particular to examine 
whether the DFG should not be more rigorous in 
its single project funding when selecting projects 
but, in return, award more generous funding 
amounts and durations. Beyond that, a discussion 
is required into whether larger-scale, coordinated 
funding should be downsized for the benefit of 
excellent individual proMects.
 – The international comparison also shows that 
the programme allowance offered by the DFG  
is rather low. The increase in the DFG pro -
gramme allowance to 30 percent – as embedded 
in the coalition agreement 153 – is therefore to 
be welcomed, as it also improves the general 
conditions and the basis for research at univer -
sities.
A 3  Basic research funding structures and publications 
in international comparison

EFI REPORT 
2019
42
A
