B 3 Development and 
 Application of  Artificial Intelligence 
in  Germany and Europe

97
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026 — B 3 Development and  Application of  Artificial Intelligence in  Germany and Europe
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3

98
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
A
 
rtificial intelligence (AI) offers enormous 
potential for innovation and opportunities 
for economic growth. It promises productivity 
gains and enables new products, services and busi­
ness models. AI can help to overcome a wide range 
of societal challenges – from the early detection of 
diseases and the optimization of electricity grids in 
the context of the energy transition to the moderni­
zation of government services. At the same time, 
AI brings challenges in terms of the labour market, 
international dependencies and ethical aspects of 
its use. For Germany and the EU, the successful 
development and application of AI is a key lever 
for securing the international competitiveness of 
companies, strengthening digital sovereignty and 
maintaining prosperity in the long term.
The Federal Government should align its AI strat ­
egy with Europe. It is important to avoid techno ­
logical dependencies and to realize key elements of 
value creation in Europe. To this end, a powerful AI 
infrastructure must be established quickly, excellent 
research and development must be promoted, an 
innovation­friendly regulatory framework must be 
created, and the widespread economic application 
of AI in Germany and the EU must be supported.
B 3-1 Technical Aspects of AI
Diverse Elements in the AI Ecosystem
Figure B 3­1 shows the key elements of an AI ecosys­
tem and their interdependencies. The starting point 
is the prerequisites necessary for setting up and 
operating AI data centres and, in particular, AI Fac­
tories.387 These include, for example, hardware and 
software, as well as energy supply and buildings. 
Other prerequisites include data and application 
knowledge, which are needed to train AI models. 
The data flows into foundation models, which pro ­
vide the underlying technology, and into specialized 
models developed for specific fields of application. 
Data and application knowledge are continuously 
incorporated into the further development of the 
models. Qualified specialists and capital are overarch­
ing key factors that support all fields of the ecosys­
tem. These prerequisites create AI systems that 
can then be used to generate economic and social 
benefits. The entire ecosystem is accompanied by 
a regulatory framework that, among other things, 
sets rules for the responsible use of AI, clarifies lia­
bility issues and strengthens consumer protection. 
Rapid Developments in AI
AI is currently undergoing a phase of rapid develop­
ment, characterized by a sharp increase in invest ­
ment388 and the convergence of various strands of 
development. At the same time, the long­term goal 
of artificial general intelligence (AGI) is drawing 
closer – some AI researchers predict that artificial 
general intelligence will be achieved by around 
2040, while others believe it will happen sooner. 389 
Various experts emphasize that powerful AI models 
are now already giving some countries significant 
economic and military advantages, and that these 
effects could be significantly amplified once artificial 
general intelligence is achieved.390 At the same time, 
there is a trend towards smaller, specialized models 
that work more efficiently and cost­ effectively than 
the large foundation models.
Significant developments are also taking place with 
regard to licensing. Currently, many AI  companies 
offer open models that disclose their parameters 
and, in some cases, their training data, thus allow ­
B 3 Development and 
 Application of  Artificial Intelligence 
in  Germany and Europe

99
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026 — B 3 Development and  Application of  Artificial Intelligence in  Germany and Europe
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
ing for customization and royalty­free use. In addi­
tion to the early and still influential generative open 
source models391 from Western providers such as 
Meta (Llama), these now include many Chinese 
companies such as DeepSeek. 392 New standards 
and formats such as the Model Context Protocol 
and Safetensors facilitate, among other things, data 
usage and model storage.393
An important trend in terms of applications is physi­
cal AI, which enables AI to interact with the real 
world and is trained accordingly with data from the 
physical world. The most significant change in appli­
cation currently comes from AI agents. They enable 
the operation of systems that can interact auto­
nomously with other systems, retrieve information 
and perform actions such as sending a message or 
controlling logistics chains. Companies have already 
begun to integrate these agents into their business 
processes.
Graphics processing units (GPUs) are AI chips that 
were originally developed for demanding computer 
graphics. They are used for training AI models, pro­
cessing inference queries and high­performance 
computing. The GPU market is dominated by the US 
company Nvidia, with an estimated market share of 
over 80 percent.394 Nvidia’s proprietary computing 
platform and interface CUDA, which enables the 
efficient use of Nvidia GPUs and is not compatible 
with GPUs from competing providers such as AMD, 
is also of great importance. 395 Numerous AI tools 
such as TensorFlow and PyTorch are optimized for 
CUDA, which favours the dominance of Nvidia’s 
GPUs.
These are countered by Google’s TPUs, highly spe ­
cialized chips (accelerators) that are optimized 
for extensive AI workloads and play a key role in 
 Google’s own services. They have also been made 
available to other individual companies since 
2025.396 This could create a counterweight to 
 Nvidia’s GPU dominance. 397
Fig. B 3-1 Prerequisites and elements of AI development and application
Qualified staff
Capital
GPUs
Specialized
models
Foundation
models
Other hardware
Training algorithms
AI data
centres
AI (Giga-)
Factories
Other software
Services
Energy supply
Buildings
General data
Specialized data
Application knowledge
Use cases
Economic
development
Digital
sovereignty
Social
progress
Prerequisites Elements of AI Use
Regulatory framework
Note: Arrows should be read as ‘prerequisite for’. Nodes represent arrows that converge.
Source: Own representation.
© EFI – Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation 2026.

100
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
B 3-2 International Comparison of 
AI Research and Development
AI Publications: EU on Par with the USA
Scientific publications on AI have increased signifi­
cantly worldwide since 2018 (cf. figure B 3­3).406 In 
all three years under review, most publications came 
from China, followed by the EU, which had signifi ­
cantly more AI publications than the USA in 2024. 
The USA and India, in third and fourth place, are at a 
similar level to the EU. Germany ranks fifth behind 
the UK in terms of publications, making it the EU 
country with the most AI publications.407
Looking at the share of publications on gener ­
ative AI in all AI publications (cf. figure B 3­4), it 
can be seen that in 2024, the USA had the high ­
est share among the top 10 publishing countries 
with 16.9  percent, followed by Italy (15.3  per ­
cent) and Germany (13.4 percent). In China, the 
share was only 8.7 percent. In addition, the share 
Box B 3-2 AI Terminology
Artificial Intelligence: The term artificial intelli­
gence is used to describe processes, algorithms 
and technological solutions that make it possible 
to transfer complex cognitive processes previous­
ly carried out by humans to learning machines 
and software.398
Generative AI: Generative AI is a form of AI that 
is used to generate or edit content such as text, 
images, video, audio and computer code. Uni­
modal AI systems can only work with one type of 
data (e.g. only text or only images), while multi­
modal AI systems can process different types of 
data and, if necessary, also output different types 
of data.
Physical AI: Physical AI is an AI system that is 
not limited to the digital space, but perceives the 
physical world via sensors, learns from it and 
interacts with it.399 Applications include robotics 
and autonomous driving.
AI Agents: An AI agent is a system that inde­
pendently collects and processes information and 
translates it into actions. An AI agent can, for 
example, record stock levels, forecast demand 
and, as a result, trigger orders.400
Machine Learning: Machine learning uses learning 
algorithms and data to train complex AI models, 
which are then applied to new data of the same 
type.401
Parameters: Parameters are numerical values 
determined by machine learning models during 
training.402 The number of parameters in a model 
influences the model’s capability.
Artificial General Intelligence: Artificial general 
intelligence is a hypothetical form of AI that has 
the ability to master or learn any cognitive task 
that a human can perform, at a level that is at 
least equal to that of a human. Unlike current AI 
systems, which are usually specialized for specif­
ic tasks, artificial general intelligence systems 
have comprehensive general knowledge and can 
transfer knowledge.403
Foundation Models: Foundation models are 
genera tive AI models that are trained on a broad, 
general database. They form the basis for the 
development of specific applications.404
Specialized AI Models: Specialized AI models 
focus on specific tasks in clearly defined fields. 
They are trained with data from specific fields of 
application. One example is AI models for diag­
nostic imaging in healthcare. These must be 
distinguished from models derived from general 
generative models that are specialized in a 
certain way, e.g. for a specific language.
Inference: Inference is the process by which an AI 
model applies what it has learned and derives a 
result from a new input.
H100 Equivalent: H100 is a high­performance 
graphics processing unit (GPU) by Nvidia, which 
is primarily used for AI training. The performance 
of the H100, which has been on the market since 
2022, is considered the benchmark for comparing 
the performance of different AI computing 
 systems.405

101
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026 — B 3 Development and  Application of  Artificial Intelligence in  Germany and Europe
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
of  generative AI publications in China and India 
grew less strongly than in the other countries.408 In 
absolute terms, however, China continues to clearly 
dominate the USA and the EU in terms of publica ­
tions on generative AI. In absolute terms, Germany 
ranks behind India and the UK.
AI Patent Applications: USA and China Dominant
Figure B 3­5 shows transnational AI patent applica­
tions from the ten countries with the most patent 
applications. In China and the USA, the absolute 
number of transnational AI patent applications rose 
sharply after 2016. A more moderate increase can 
also be observed in the other top 10 countries. In 
the period from 2020 to 2022, the USA and China 
dominated ahead of the EU, Japan and South Korea. 
Germany lagged significantly behind Japan and 
South Korea but was the EU country with the most 
transnational AI patent applications. The UK, one 
of the biggest AI actors in Europe, ranks behind 
Germany.409
In Germany, most transnational AI patent applica­
tions come from large companies such as Siemens, 
Robert Bosch, Siemens Healthcare, Volkswagen 
and Bayer. For most of these companies, AI patents 
account for less than 10 percent of their total trans­
national patent applications; only Siemens Health­
care has a significantly higher share, at 25.7 percent.
USA Dominates Development 
of Notable AI Models
A market­orientated indicator of a country’s inno ­
vative strength in the field of AI is the number of 
AI models developed. To this end, figure B 3­6 exam­
ines data from the non­profit research organization 
Epoch AI on notable410 AI models.411
Fig. B 3-3 Number of publications by the top 10 countries in the field of AI in 2018, 
2021 and 2024 
0
20,000
40,000
60,000
80,000
100,000
120,000
140,000
EU 27Japan
Australia
South Korea
Canada
Italy
GermanyUnited   Kingdom
IndiaUSAChina
2018 2021 2024
Number
Country
Legend: In 2024, a total of 14,415 AI publications were published in Germany.
Due to differences in data sources, the figures presented here differ slightly from those in chapter A 2. The trends and the ranking of the 
countries are consistent.
Source: Elsevier SCOPUS. Calculations based on Weber et al. (2026).
© EFI – Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation 2026.

102
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
Figure B 3­6 shows an increase in the development 
of notable AI models in most countries, with the 
USA leading by a wide margin. China lags clearly 
behind the USA but is well ahead of the UK and 
the EU. Within the EU, 24 notable AI models were 
published between 2023 and 2025, eleven of which 
came from France and nine from Germany. Not­
able models from Germany originate primarily from 
research institutions that often collaborate with US 
partners, such as the Technical University of Berlin 
with Google, but not with organizations from other 
EU Member States. German companies that have 
published notable AI models include DeepL, deepset 
and Bosch.
Overall, these three analyses paint a familiar pic ­
ture: Germany and the EU are strong in research, 
mediocre in patented inventions and comparatively 
weak in the development of innovative products.
Publicly funded AI Models in Europe
To support the competitiveness of European com ­
panies and research institutions, the development 
of AI models that pay particular attention to com ­
pliance with the EU Data Protection Directive 
is publicly funded in Europe. Examples include 
Teuken­7B from the OpenGPT ­X research project 
of the Fraunhofer Institutes IAIS and IIS, and 
EuroLLM­9B from Utter, a joint project of various 
European universities. Apertus­70B from the Swiss 
AI Initiative is an open model whose parameters, 
data and training algorithms are publicly available; 
it was trained with the opt out consent of data own­
ers and avoids storing training data in the model. 
With 7, 9 and 70 billion parameters respectively, 
these models are relatively small compared to the 
leading commercial models, which use more than 
500 billion parameters.412
Fig. B 3-4 Share of publications on generative AI in total AI publications for selected 
countries in 2018, 2021 and 2024 in percent
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
EU 27Japan
Australia
South Korea
Canada
Italy
GermanyUnited   Kingdom
IndiaUSAChina
Percent
Country
2018 2021 2024
Legend: In Germany, the share of publications on generative AI out of all AI publications stood at 13.4 percent in 2024.
The selection of countries is based on figure B 3-3.
Source: Elsevier SCOPUS. Calculations based on Weber et al. (2026).
© EFI – Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation 2026.

103
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026 — B 3 Development and  Application of  Artificial Intelligence in  Germany and Europe
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
Some commercial AI models from European com ­
panies also received public funding. TFree ­HAT­ 
Pretrained­7B­Base from the German company 
Aleph Alpha was trained on English and German 
data and developed specifically for use in German­ 
speaking countries. The multimodal open model 
Mistral Large 3 from the French company Mistral, 
released in early December 2025, exists in different 
variants with up to 675 billion parameters. Mistral 
models are often used as a basis for further devel ­
opments. One such example is Minerva­7B, which 
has been completely retrained with Italian language 
data.413 To develop future AI models in Europe, the 
Next Frontier AI initiative was launched, a project 
with which SPRIND aims to promote the develop ­
ment of next­generation AI companies.414
B 3-3 Use of AI in the Private 
and Public Sectors
Germany Ranks Mid-Range Globally in Terms 
of Number of AI Companies, but Leads the EU
A high number of specialized AI companies, i.e. 
companies that develop AI or whose products or 
services rely significantly on AI, is an indicator of 
innovative strength, economic dynamism and the 
ability to translate research results into marketable 
applications. With this in mind, a study commis ­
sioned by the Commission of Experts examined 
Germany’s position in terms of the number of AI 
companies.415 An evaluation of the Crunchbase data­
base416 from February 2025 shows that, although 
Germany is one of the leaders in terms of the num­
ber of AI companies within the EU, it only occupies a 
mid­range position in a global comparison and also 
Fig. B 3-5 Number of transnational AI patent applications by the top 10 countries 
2014–2022
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
10,000
EU 27SwedenFrance
Netherlands
 United      KingdomGermany
South Korea
JapanChinaUSA
2014 – 2016 2017 – 2019 2020 – 2022
Total over the year
Country
Legend: Between 2020 and 2022, 1,709 transnational AI patent applications were filed from Germany.
Transnational patent applications are applications in patent families with at least one application to the World Intellectual Property Organi-
zation (WIPO) via the PCT procedure or one application to the European Patent Office. Due to differences in the scope of the data, the figures 
presented here differ slightly from those in chapter A 2. The trends and the ranking of the countries are consistent.
Source: PATSTAT. Own representation based on Weber et al. (2026).
© EFI – Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation 2026.

104
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
lags behind smaller economies such as Canada and 
the UK (cf. figure B 3­7).
The USA is the clear global leader with 21,719 AI 
companies, ahead of the EU with 9,709 AI compa ­
nies. Germany leads the EU ranking with 1,980 AI 
companies. In a global comparison, Germany ranks 
seventh, behind the USA, China (4,500 AI compa ­
nies), India (4,286), the UK (3,985), Canada (2,318) 
and Japan (2,302), but ahead of France (1,441). 
Among the other EU Member States, Italy, Spain 
and the Netherlands in particular have a relatively 
high number of AI companies (between 759 and 
952).
Start­ups, i.e. companies that are less than five years 
old, are a key driver of the development and spread 
of AI, especially when they quickly adopt new tech­
nological approaches, develop them at a rapid pace, 
scale them up quickly and transform them into 
marketable applications. At 31.3 percent, the share 
of start­ups among all AI companies in Germany is 
almost on a par with that in the USA (32.9 percent) 
and the UK (30.8 percent) and slightly above the 
EU average (27.7 percent). Italy (28.5 percent) and 
the Netherlands (27.9 percent) also show similar 
figures to the EU average. The results indicate that 
the German AI business landscape is characterized 
not only by a high number of AI companies, but also 
by active start ­up activity in comparison to other 
European countries.417
Despite the positive picture painted by the analy ­
sis of Crunchbase data, (AI) start ­ups in Germany 
and the EU face two major obstacles. Firstly, the 
fragmentation of the European Single Market rep ­
resents a significant barrier to scaling up. Different 
national regulations and markets increase costs for 
start­ups and can hinder their growth. More inte ­
grated markets such as the USA or China have an 
advantage here. A ‘28th regime’, a project of the 
EU as part of its Start ­up and Scale­up Strategy 
to reduce fragmentation in the EU Single Market, 
would remedy this situation (cf. chapter A 4).418
Another problem lies in the taxation of employee 
share ownership in Germany. So far, monetary ben­
efits from asset participation have been taxable in 
Fig. B 3-6 Number of notable AI models in the top 10 countries 2017–2025
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
EU 27
Hong Kong
IsraelFrance SingaporeUnited 
   Kingdom Germany
South Korea
CanadaChinaUSA
2017 – 2019 2020 – 2022 2023 – 2025
Total over the year
Land
Legend: Between 2023 and 2025, nine notable AI models were developed in Germany.
Source: Own calculations based on data from Epoch AI (2025). 
© EFI – Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation 2026.

105
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026 — B 3 Development and  Application of  Artificial Intelligence in  Germany and Europe
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
the event of a change of employer or after 15 years 
at the latest, even if no real inflow of liquidity has 
taken place (so­ called dry income taxation). How ­
ever, liquidity usually only flows when the company 
is sold or goes public. 419 This tax regulation, which 
is unattractive by international standards, makes it 
difficult for growth­orientated start ­ups to attract 
highly qualified personnel.420
Diffusion of AI in the Economy 
Increasing Rapidly
The use of AI in the German and European econo ­
mies has gained significant momentum in recent 
years (cf. figure B 3­8). Eurostat surveys show that 
in Germany, the share of companies with at least ten 
employees that use AI in general rose from 11.6 per­
cent in 2023 to 26.0 percent in 2025. 421 In 2025, 
Germany ranked eighth in a European  comparison. 
The Nordic countries Denmark (42.0  percent), 
Finland (37.8 percent) and Sweden (35.0 percent) 
have the highest shares here. The Benelux countries 
also have higher shares than Germany (Belgium 
34.5 percent, Luxembourg 33.6 percent, Nether ­
lands 33.2 percent).
According to the Eurostat survey, in 2025, the per­
centage of companies that generally use AI was 
highest in the group of large companies with 250 or 
more employees in all countries under review (Ger­
many: 57.0 percent; EU: 55.0 percent), followed by 
medium­sized companies with 50 to 249 employ ­
ees (Germany: 35.6 percent; EU: 30.4 percent) and 
small enterprises with 10 to 49 employees (Ger ­
many: 23.1 percent; EU: 17.0 percent). In addition, 
a representative survey conducted on behalf of the 
Commission of Experts also shows a rapid increase 
in the use of generative AI, particularly in the infor­
mation economy and the manufacturing sector. 422 
It should be noted, however, that these surveys 
do not record the type of use. There are major dif ­
ferences between the use of simple chat tools and 
that of agent­based generative AI. The development 
described therefore only allows conclusions to be 
drawn about a general trend in AI use, but not about 
changes in its quality.
Fig. B 3-7 Number of AI companies worldwide listed on Crunchbase in February 2025
 
United KingdomEU 27USA China India
South KoreaJapanCanada Israel Brazil
Number of companies
Germany 1,980
France 1,441
Italy 952
Spain 938
Netherlands 759
Others 3,639
2,302
1,276
1,199
1,103
2,318
3,985 4,286
4,500
9,709
21,719
Legend: In February 2025, there were a total of 9,709 AI companies in the EU 27, 1,980 of which were based in Germany.
For the purposes of this analysis, AI companies are defined as those that, according to Crunchbase’s own industry classification, belong to the 
‘Artificial Intelligence’ industry group.
Source: Crunchbase. Calculations based on Weber et al. (2026).
© EFI – Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation 2026.

106
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
AI in Public Administration: Many 
Questions Remain Unanswered
With its Modernization Agenda for the State and 
Administration, the German Federal Government 
has adopted an interdepartmental reform pro ­
gramme that aims to make the state “simpler, more 
digital and more successful” and focuses, among 
other things, on the use of AI. 423 Although 23 lever 
projects bundle measures that are considered par ­
ticularly effective and can be implemented in the 
short term, key structural reforms have yet to be 
implemented. Furthermore, the Deutschland­
Stack is intended to create a platform that offers 
a “secure, interoperable, European­compatible and 
sovereign” infrastructure for the digitalization of 
administration and integrates cloud services and 
AI applications.424 This is a desirable goal, but the 
specific design remains unclear and should be deter­
mined as soon as possible. A uniform digital basic 
system would be a prerequisite for making AI ser ­
vices usable on a large scale and avoiding individ ­
ual solutions. A modular approach that simplifies 
the replacement of individual software elements in 
the Stack can reduce dependencies through lock­in 
effects.425 It must also be clarified to what extent 
the underlying infrastructure is actually designed 
to be “sovereign” and independent of non­European 
providers. Finally, clear impact indicators and con­
crete timetables would help to measure the innova­
tive effects of AI in public administration and the 
intended strengthening of sovereignty.426
There are also impulses from the private sector for 
the digitalization of the public sector, for exam ­
ple to improve citizen services or optimize inter ­
nal information flows. In autumn 2025, SAP and 
OpenAI announced the ‘OpenAI for Germany’ 
partnership, which aims to make large language 
models such as ChatGPT and other AI technologies 
available to the public sector via the Delos Cloud, 
in compliance with data protection, data sover ­
eignty and compliance requirements in Germany.427 
Nevertheless, this solution cannot guarantee 
Fig. B 3-8 Share of companies with more than ten employees using AI in the top 10 EU 
countries in 2023–2025 in percent
0
10
20
30
40
50
EU 27Estonia Slovenia
Netherlands
GermanySweden Austria
Luxembourg
BelgiumFinlandDenmark
2023 2024 2025
Percent
Country
Legend: In Germany, 11.6 percent of companies with more than ten employees were using AI in 2023, whereas by 2025 this figure had risen to 
26.0 percent.
Source: Own representation based on Eurostat (2025b).
© EFI – Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation 2026.

107
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026 — B 3 Development and  Application of  Artificial Intelligence in  Germany and Europe
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
 technological  independence or data sovereignty, as 
the Delos Cloud is based on components of propri­
etary Microsoft Azure technology, which is subject 
to the US CLOUD Act. 428 Therefore, the data is not 
safe from access by US authorities, even though it 
is physically stored in data centres in the EU and is 
therefore subject to the GDPR. Added to this is the 
lack of transparency regarding the functioning and 
training data of OpenAI’s models. In light of this, 
it seems appropriate to continuously evaluate the 
sovereignty and security architecture of such hybrid 
models.
B 3-4 Infrastructure and Compute Power
Germany and EU Lag Behind Interna-
tional Competitors in Compute Power
Both training and using large AI models require 
extensive compute power. The further development 
of AI systems and the provision of models for the 
mass market also place very high demands on com­
pute power. Accordingly, the capacity expansions 
currently planned, particularly in the USA, go far 
beyond existing capacities.
Although investment in data centres in Germany 
reached an all­time high in 2025, it remains low by 
global standards.429 Unlike in the USA, there are cur­
rently no very large data centres in Germany that 
are used exclusively for AI. Figure B 3­9 illustrates 
how much the USA dominates in terms of compute 
power, with approximately six times the capacity 
of China. 430 The capacities of European countries, 
including Germany with around 26,000 publicly 
recorded H100 equivalents, are lower by several 
orders of magnitude. In addition, compared to 
the USA, where most of the AI compute power is 
built, financed and used by the private sector, most 
of the AI compute power in Germany is publicly 
operated, meaning that, due to EU state aid law, 
private companies can only use it in the pre­ com­
petitive field.431 Noteworthy private sector projects 
include the announced data centre of Deutsche Tele­
kom with an estimated capacity of around 20,000 
H100  equivalents and that of Schwarz Digits with 
a  capacity of up to 100,000 GPUs.432
Bottlenecks in Expansion of AI 
Compute Power in Germany
The construction of new data centres in Germany 
and the EU is currently being hampered by bottle ­
necks in the power grid, high electricity costs and 
administrative barriers. Between 2010 and 2024, 
the electricity consumption of German data centres 
rose by around 90 percent despite significant effi ­
ciency gains;433 the increasing use of AI applications 
is likely to cause energy demand to rise significantly 
further.435 In Germany, the lack of suitable grid and 
connection capacities is a bottleneck for the expan­
sion of AI and data centre infrastructure, 436 espe­
cially in conurbations such as the Rhine­Main area 
and Berlin, where land and grid capacities are par ­
ticularly limited.437 In addition, the high cost of elec­
tricity compared to other countries is a competitive 
disadvantage, as it can account for around half of 
the operating costs of data centres.438 France and the 
Nordic countries of Denmark, Sweden, Norway and 
Finland have a more cost­effective, climate­friendly 
energy supply and network capacities 439 that addi ­
tionally favour the rapid development of high­ 
performance compute power.
In addition to energy bottlenecks, lengthy approval 
and planning procedures are hampering the expan­
sion of data centre infrastructure. 440 The estab ­
lishment of new data centres is being delayed by 
complex environmental, construction and grid con­
nection procedures. 441 International comparisons 
reveal locational disadvantages in this area: France 
and Norway, for example, have partially accelerated 
and better coordinated approval and planning pro­
cedures.442 On average, it takes up to seven years 
in Germany to connect a data centre to the grid – 
 significantly longer than in other countries.443
AI Gigafactories Planned to Support 
Expansion of AI Capacity in the EU
The European Commission’s AI Continent Action 
Plan covers five fields: infrastructure, data access, 
algorithms, AI skills and simplification of legisla ­
tion.444 The core element of the infrastructure field 
is the development of AI compute power in so­called 
AI Factories and AI Gigafactories.
AI Factories are AI ecosystems centred around 
European supercomputers that are part of the 
European High Performance Computing Joint 
Undertaking (EuroHPC JU). 445 They pool material 
and human resources and are primarily intended to 
serve the development and training of AI models, 
in particular by start­ups, small and medium­sized 
enterprises (SMEs) and academia. 446 In December 
2025, nine of these AI Factories were in operation,

108
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
including the JAIF (Jupiter AI Factory, Jülich) with 
approximately 24,000 H100 equivalents447 and the 
IT4LIA (Italy for Artificial Intelligence, Bologna) 
facility, which currently has around 6,000 H100 
equivalents.448 Further AI Factories are in the plan­
ning stage. When setting up the planned AI Facto ­
ries, it makes sense to promote innovative solutions 
from young European companies. One example is 
the photonic coprocessors developed by the German 
company Q.ANT, which are already being used in 
public data centres.449
AI Gigafactories are five large­scale facilities planned 
by the European Commission, each with approxi ­
mately 100,000 H100 equivalents,450 where complex 
AI models are to be developed, trained and deployed. 
After 76 consortia expressed interest in operating 
one of these Gigafactories in mid­2025,451 the invi­
tation to tender is expected early this year. Given 
an estimated investment volume of €3 to €5 billion 
per AI gigafactory, the European Commission plans 
to operate them as public­private partnerships and 
cover up to 35 percent of the initial investment. 452 
A European Union regulation from December 
2025 stipulates that a maximum of 17 percent of 
investment expenditure should be financed from 
EU funds. The participating Member States are to 
contribute at least the same amount.453 In return, a 
corresponding portion of the compute power is to be 
made freely available for public applications.
However, there are doubts about the planned imple­
mentation of the AI Gigafactories. 454 The Commis ­
sion of Experts shares this scepticism to a certain 
extent and notes that there is still a need for clari­
fication, particularly with regard to the following 
points:
 — Costs: The EU plans to fund only the initial 
investment in AI Gigafactories with up to 
35 percent from public funds. In addition, this 
share is to be offset by AI computing power.455 
Fig. B 3-9 Publicly documented compute power in large data centres for selected 
countries in 2025 in millions of H100 equivalents
0 0.026
Million H100 equivalents
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
United Arab      Emirates
India
South Korea
 United       KingdomFranceGermany
ChinaUSA
Country
EU 27 
Legend: In Germany, around 26,000 H100 equivalents were recorded in publicly documented large data centres for the year 2025.
These figures should be interpreted in relative terms, not as exact inventory figures. The underlying data from Epoch AI covers only 10 to 20 
percent of all global large-scale data centres. As the data is based on publicly available sources, it covers public and private computing 
infrastructure to varying degrees.434
Source: Epoch AI. Own calculations based on data by Pilz et al. (2025).
© EFI – Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation 2026.

109
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026 — B 3 Development and  Application of  Artificial Intelligence in  Germany and Europe
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
However, the ongoing operating costs of AI 
data centres are considerable, particularly 
due to their high energy consumption. This is 
 particularly significant in locations with high 
electricity costs, such as Germany. In addi ­
tion, regular replacement investments are 
required, as GPUs can only be used for three 
to five years, depending on their utilization, 
and become technically obsolete even faster.
It is true that companies and consortia that sub­
mit detailed proposals for the operation of AI 
Gigafactories will have analyzed their economic 
viability and developed viable business mod ­
els.456 However, given the high level of uncer ­
tainty, the risk of misinvestments or politically 
motivated decisions remains. In addition, the 
EU could find itself under pressure if, after a 
few years, the Gigafactories can only continue 
to operate with additional funding.
 — Location: Within the EU, potential locations 
for the planned AI Gigafactories differ signifi­
cantly in terms of energy costs.457 The extent to 
which factors such as local demand, operator 
expertise and the availability of complemen ­
tary services can justify a location with higher 
electricity costs remains an open question. The 
identification of a suitable location in terms 
of electricity prices and sufficient connection 
capacities is crucial for a potential AI Gigafac ­
tory in Germany.
 — Use: The planned AI Gigafactories are to be 
used for both the development and training 
of AI models and for inference. 458 This seems 
sensible, as the planned capacity is unlikely 
to be utilized to full capacity in the long term 
through development and training alone. The 
large AI compute power in the USA is used to 
a large extent by companies with extensive AI 
activities such as OpenAI, Anthropic, Google 
and Meta, which currently have no equivalent 
in Europe. Users of AI Gigafactories will there­
fore often be companies with little AI experi ­
ence. For them, Gigafactories must provide not 
only AI compute power, but also supporting 
services such as complementary software and 
consulting. The Gigafactories should also be 
closely linked to existing research, expertise 
and start­up ecosystems in order to enable the 
development of know­how and effective use of 
infrastructure.
The specialization of AI Gigafactories accord ­
ing to function (development and training ver­
sus use) or field of application (e.g. industry or 
medicine) could help to achieve a critical mass 
of expertise. For inference, it should also be 
noted that AI Gigafactories will face global 
competition and therefore require efficien ­
cy­orientated business models.
B 3-5 Investment in AI
AI Expenditure in Germany Strongly 
Focused on Research
Precisely measuring the volume of private and pub­
lic investment in AI is methodologically challeng ­
ing.459 A recent study estimated this expenditure 
for 2023 for EU Member States and, where data 
availability permitted, for selected non­European 
countries.460 AI­related expenditure on research and 
development (R&D)461 and expenditure on data and 
equipment462 (cf. figure B 3­10) can be compared 
internationally. This shows that the EU, with a 
total of around €130 billion (0.75 percent of GDP), 
lags significantly behind the USA, with €310 billion 
(1.22 percent of GDP). With estimated expenditure 
of around €20 billion, Germany makes a significant 
contribution to EU­wide AI expenditure in absolute 
terms, but at 0.53 percent of GDP , it is below the 
EU average and far behind the USA. 463 In addition, 
investment activity in 2025 has exacerbated this 
investment gap with the USA, with investment 
rising significantly in the USA and more slowly in 
Germany and the rest of the EU.
In Germany, R&D expenditure accounts for a rela­
tively high proportion of total expenditure at 
49 percent (cf. figure B 3­10). In an international 
comparison of AI­related R&D expenditure, the EU 
(€33 billion, 0.19 percent of GDP) lags far behind 
the USA (€90 billion, 0.35 percent of GDP).464
European Venture Capital Investment 
Has Room for Improvement
Another indicator of innovation­driving expendi ­
ture on AI that allows for international comparison 
is the volume of private venture capital investment. 
A look at private venture capital flows between the 
five regions that account for the most AI­related 
venture capital worldwide reveals significant dif ­
ferences. In 2025, EU investors invested signifi ­
cantly less venture capital in AI (US$13.1 billion)

110
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
than investors in the USA (US$119.8 billion), the 
UK (US$19.4 billion) and China (US$16.3 billion) 
(cf. figure B 3­11).465 Possible reasons for this include 
the fragmentation of the European capital market, 
restrictive investment regulations for insurance 
companies, people’s saving behaviour and a pension 
system that is largely based on pay­as­you­go/earn 
financing. A European Capital Markets Union, also 
known as a Savings and Investment Union, could 
remedy this situation and significantly improve 
opportunities for start­ups in the EU.466
In terms of total venture capital investment in AI, 
EU­based companies rank second with approxi­
mately US$13.8 billion, but are roughly on a par 
with the UK (US$12.1  billion), which attracts a 
comparable volume of investment despite its sig ­
nificantly smaller market. At 53 percent, the larg ­
est share of venture capital investments received by 
EU­based companies comes from the EU itself, fol­
lowed by the USA (31 percent) and the UK (15 per­
cent). The USA is the economic area that attracts the 
most AI­related venture capital.
Fragmented Public Funding
A look at public investment in AI reveals a wide vari­
ety of support programmes at European, national and 
regional level.467 Funding for AI research within the 
EU’s Research Framework Programme has increased 
significantly in recent years, both in terms of the 
number of projects funded and the volume of fund­
ing.468 In addition, there are targeted digital funding 
lines at EU level that are more application­orientated, 
such as the Digital Europe Programme and the Euro­
pean Investment Bank’s TechEU programme. Ger­
many’s national AI Strategy had a budget of around 
€5 billion available between 2018 and 2025, of which 
only €2.8 billion had been used for specific projects 
by the end of 2024.469 Germany’s High­Tech Agenda 
also provides for funding of around €1.5  billion 
for AI. No reliable evaluations are available to date 
that allow causal statements to be made about the 
 effectiveness of the funding used.470
B 3-6 Data Availability
The development of powerful AI models requires 
extensive, high­quality data. Both broad­based 
and specialized data sets are important: general 
data (e.g. general text, speech and image data) pro­
vides a basis for foundation models, while domain­ 
specific applications require specialized data (e.g. 
industry­specific production, sensor and personal 
data). Making suitable training data available is a 
challenge. Many experts see the lack of data avail ­
ability, both for general and specialized models, as 
the biggest obstacle to AI in Europe, even more so 
than limited compute power.471
Fig. B 3-10 Estimated AI-related expenditure in selected countries in 2023  
in billions of euros
R&D Data and equipment
29% 71%
26% 74%
18% 82%
11% 89%
49% 51%
Billion
Euros
USA
EU 27
Canada
Germany
United
Kingdom
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Legend: In Germany, AI-related expenditure totalled €22.1 billion in 2023. Of this, 49 percent was spent on research and development.
Source: Own representation based on OECD estimates in Fonteneau et al. (2025).
© EFI – Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation 2026.

111
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026 — B 3 Development and  Application of  Artificial Intelligence in  Germany and Europe
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
Development of AI Foundation Models 
in the EU Complicated by GDPR
US­American AI companies typically use publicly 
available internet data to train large AI models. 
Legal uncertainties and any resulting legal proceed­
ings472 seem to be accepted in the interests of rapid 
market readiness. In Europe, on the other hand, 
the GDPR limits the use of internet data beyond 
copyright protection. Added to this is uncertainty 
about the interpretation of the laws; for example, 
it is considered unclear whether and to what extent 
AI training with data from the Common Crawl 
Foundation473 is permitted. These restrictions hin ­
der innovation. For example, there are foundation 
models from German research where legal concerns 
regarding the GDPR have led to delays of several 
months and the models ultimately being published 
only under a research licence, thus excluding com ­
mercial use.
According to legal experts, a strict interpretation 
of the GDPR prohibits the use of personal data for 
the training or operation of AI systems. 474 With its 
prohibition principle and reservation of permission, 
the GDPR thus worsens the framework conditions 
for the development of data­intensive AI models 
in Europe. The European Commission’s Digital 
Omnibus, presented in November 2025, proposes 
exceptions which, according to legal expert Härting, 
do not solve the problem for companies: “The con ­
fusing web of exceptions and exceptions to these 
exceptions in Art. 9(5) GDPR will lead to the recom­
mendation that the ‘safest course’ is to completely 
refrain from using specially protected personal data 
when training and operating AI applications.”475
It seems downright absurd that, at the same time, 
US providers are successfully marketing their AI 
models in Europe, even though their model train ­
ing practices do not comply with the requirements 
of the GDPR.
Fig. B 3-11 AI-related venture capital flows between regions in 2025  
in billions of US dollars
119.8 135.8
19.4
7.5
13.1
16.3
2.8
12.1
13.8
11.7
USA United Kingdom CanadaEU 27 China
Billion 
US dollars
Legend: By 2025, European investors had invested approximately US$13.1 billion in AI venture capital. During the same period, the EU 27 
received approximately US$13.8 billion in AI-related venture capital investments. Just under 50 percent of this came from the EU.
The selected regions are the five country groups from which the most AI-related venture capital originates. The analysis covers only AI-relat-
ed venture capital flows between the five country groups under consideration. Investments from or into countries outside these groups are not 
taken into account. Last revised 5 January 2026.
Source: Own representation based on data from Prequin and processed by OECD.AI (2026).
© EFI – Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation 2026.

112
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
Scepticism About Data Exchange Slows 
Down Development of Specialized Models
The data required for the development of special ­
ized AI models in industry is mostly proprietary 
and in the hands of various companies. However, 
effective AI training often requires combining data 
from different companies, which is potentially prob­
lematic for the protection of trade secrets as well 
as for data protection. One solution lies in the use 
of privacy­enhancing technologies (cf. box B 3­12). 
Another approach is the use of trusted data inter ­
mediaries (TDIs). These include data trustees, data 
rooms such as Catena­X, a data ecosystem for the 
automotive industry, and data marketplaces.
Various initiatives already exist to simplify data 
sharing. For example, acatech’s Mission AI aims to 
connect data rooms across industries and countries, 
thereby strengthening the database, standards and 
quality checks for AI applications in Germany.476 As 
part of this, for example, they have developed a data 
set search engine 477 and an AI­based compliance 
testing system for secure data exchange.478 Another 
example comes from the mechanical engineering 
sector in the form of the Siemens Data Alliance.479
According to a Bitkom survey conducted in April 
2025, 9 percent of the companies surveyed used 
data rooms, with a further 40  percent consider ­
ing doing so.480 As part of the Important Project of 
Common European Interest (IPCEI481) Industrial AI, 
there are plans to improve the availability of data 
from industry  – among other things, linking up 
with the Manufacturing­X data room initiative.482
As part of its digital strategy, the EU has already 
drafted several laws aimed at strengthening the 
EU’s data economy. For example, the Data Govern­
ance Act aims to strengthen data exchange by creat­
ing transparency and security for actors.483 The Data 
Act, in turn, aims to ensure fair access to and fair 
use of data (in particular data generated through 
the use of networked products and connected 
services).484 In addition, there are sector ­specific 
data laws such as the European Health Data Space 
Regulation. However, various contradictions exist 
between all these laws,485 meaning that the legisla ­
tion currently fails to achieve its purpose of simpli­
fying data sharing. The European Commission has 
now recognized this problem. Harmonizing and 
simplifying data legislation486 is one of the three pil­
lars of the European Data Union Strategy published 
in November 2025, which in turn has the explicit 
goal of making data usable for AI.487
B 3-7 Regulatory Framework 
and Funding Opportunities
Work Underway to Simplify Implementation 
of the AI Act and Other Digital Laws
The AI Act, the centrepiece of European AI legis ­
lation, has been in the process of implementation 
since the beginning of this year. Since August 2025, 
Box B 3-12 Examples of Privacy 
Enhancing Technologies for  
Secure Sharing of AI Model Training 
Data
Multi-Party Computation: A cryptographic method 
in which multiple parties jointly perform calcula­
tions on their data without having to disclose 
their raw data to each other.
Federated Learning: A distributed learning method 
in which the AI model is brought to the data and 
not vice versa. The data remains decentralized 
(e.g. on devices, in clinics, companies). Only 
model parameters are shared, not the original 
data.
Synthetic Data: Artificially generated data that 
corresponds to real data in its statistical proper­
ties but does not contain any real personal 
information. It is used to train or test machine 
learning models when real data is inaccessible, 
too sensitive, incomplete or expensive.
Trusted Execution Environments: Hardware­based 
security areas in processors that protect data 
during processing, shielded from operating sys­
tems, cloud providers, and administrators.

113
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026 — B 3 Development and  Application of  Artificial Intelligence in  Germany and Europe
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
its provisions have applied to general­purpose AI, 
and guidelines and a code of practice have been pub­
lished to ensure compliance.488 The majority of the 
AI Act’s provisions will come into force in August 
2026, when enforcement will also begin. However, 
the harmonized technical standards developed by 
the European standardization committees CEN and 
CENELEC on behalf of the European Commission to 
support the implementation of the AI Act have not 
yet been finalized. As the development of standards 
is delayed, companies fear that they will not have 
enough time to implement them before the AI Act 
comes into force. At the same time, it is becoming 
apparent that parts of the AI Act are extremely 
costly to implement – for example, transparency 
requirements, double regulation and coordination 
with existing digital laws.489 There are also concerns 
that the standardization processes provided for in 
the AI Act do not take sufficient account of SMEs 
and start­ups.490
To simplify digital legislation, the European Com ­
mission presented the Digital Omnibus package on 
19 November 2025.491 The first sub­package amends 
key existing digital regulations such as the GDPR, 
the ePrivacy Directive and the Data Act. The second 
sub­package contains amendments and simplifica ­
tions to the AI Act. Among other things, it stipu ­
lates that the obligations for high­risk AI systems 
will no longer apply automatically from 2 August 
2026, but will be linked to the availability of techni­
cal standards.492 In addition, some SME exemptions 
have been extended to small mid ­caps, and an AI 
regulatory sandbox at European level is being envis­
aged, parallel to the national regulatory sandboxes 
provided for in the AI Act.493
Since the publication of the Omnibus proposal, 
there has been debate as to whether it actually only 
includes simplifications or also substantial deregu­
lations that could weaken fundamental and civil 
rights. Critical voices are coming in particular from 
parts of the European Parliament and civil society.494 
In view of the controversial debate, it remains to 
be seen whether the Digital Omnibus package will 
be adopted before the general application date of 
the AI Act on 2 August 2026. If no agreement is 
reached, the previous deadlines of the AI Act will 
initially apply, which makes planning difficult for 
companies.495 In this context, it is questionable 
whether a rapid agreement can be reached that 
can create legal certainty in the short term for 
companies and developers of high­risk AI systems. 
However, further delays due to ongoing regulatory 
uncertainty carry the risk of slowing down innova­
tion and encouraging poor decisions.496
In August 2025, the key European governance 
requirements of the AI Act came into effect, includ­
ing the establishment of the AI Board, the Scien ­
tific Panel and the Advisory Forum.497 At the opera­
tional level of the EU, the AI Act Service Desk and 
the Single Information Platform were launched on 
8  October 2025.498 They are intended to support 
the consistent implementation of the regulation 
in the Member States by pooling the information 
resources of the national supervisory authorities 
and supplementing them with practical tools, such 
as a compliance checker.499
With regard to the competent German authorities, 
the Federal Ministry for Digitalization and State 
Modernization (BMDS) presented a draft bill in 
September 2025 that provides for a hybrid govern­
ance structure.500 The Federal Network Agency (Bun­
desnetzagentur, BNetzA) is to play a pivotal role in 
this, serving as the market surveillance and notify­
ing authority, the central point of contact for the EU 
Commission and the operator of a complaints office. 
In addition, the Coordination and Competence Cen­
tre for AI Regulation (KoKIVO) within the BNetzA 
is to provide support in interpreting horizontal legal 
issues. Specialist authorities such as the Federal 
Financial Supervisory Authority (Bundes  anstalt 
für Finanzdienstleistungsaufsicht, BaFin) will 
remain responsible for sector­specific applications. 
It is currently unclear how cross ­authority coordi­
nation will be organized, how much autonomy the 
specialist authorities will have in decision­making, 
and whether sufficient staff capacity will actually be 
built up at the authorities involved (especially at the 
BNetzA).501
Public Support Services for 
 Introduction of AI in Companies
One important project supporting the use of AI in 
businesses is the IPCEI on industrial AI, which was 
launched in November 2025.502 Coordinated by the 
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy 
(BMWE), 13 EU countries are working together to 
develop new sovereign foundation models and other 
specialized models for industry. The IPCEI makes it 
easier to promote cross­border projects between dif­
ferent Member States. Germany is providing €1 bil­
lion in funding for this initiative. Companies have

114
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
been able to apply with project proposals since early 
December 2025.
The use of AI in Mittelstand companies is sup ­
ported by programmes such as the AI Compe ­
tence Centres503 funded by the Federal Ministry of 
Research, Technology and Space (BMFTR) and the 
Mittelstand­Digital Innovation Hubs funded by 
the BMWE, as well as by state initiatives such as 
regional AI labs. All these programmes are designed 
to boost knowledge transfer, lower financial barri ­
ers, build skills and support Mittelstand companies 
in the practical introduction of AI technologies.504
The European Digital Innovation Hubs (EDIH), 
co­financed by the European Commission and EU 
Member States, also aim to achieve this. 505 Accord­
ing to a study by the Joint Research Centre (JRC), 
they fulfil their task of providing companies with 
knowledge about the possible applications of AI. 506 
However, there is still room for improvement in 
terms of links to regulatory authorities,  providers of 
AI regulatory sandbox and standardization author­
ities. At present, EDIHs can only serve as a first 
point of contact for regulatory support to a limited 
extent and should be developed iteratively to fulfil 
this task.
B 3-8 Digital Sovereignty
Europe’s digital sovereignty is a declared goal of the 
Federal Government507 and an essential component 
of the more general concept of technological sover­
eignty, which can be defined as follows:
“A national economy has technological sovereignty 
if it can itself provide and further develop a tech ­
nology it deems critical for its welfare, competitive­
ness and ability to act, and if it can participate in its 
standardization and is able to apply and to source 
this technology from other economic areas without 
one­sided structural dependency.”508
In this sense, digital sovereignty refers to digital 
technologies and digital security. 509 As a key en ­  
abling technology, AI is one of the technologies that 
is relevant in terms of digital sovereignty.
Digital sovereignty is only possible under the fol ­
lowing conditions:
 — Technology: Avoiding unilateral dependen ­
cies on non­European technology providers, 
including in the fields of cloud infrastructures, 
operating systems, artificial intelligence and 
semiconductors.
 — Regulation: The ability to set standards instead 
of adopting the rules of other countries.
Digital sovereignty, in turn, is a prerequisite for 
data control, security and the preservation of social 
values:
 — Data: Individual control over the data of Euro­
pean citizens and companies.
 — Security: Cybersecurity, protection of critical 
infrastructure and digital defence capability.
 — Society: Preservation of European culture and 
values such as data protection, freedom of 
expression and democratic control.
The prerequisites for digital sovereignty often go 
hand in hand with strong digital value creation.
Europe’s Low Level of Digital 
Sovereignty Problematic
Europe’s digital sovereignty is severely limited. 
Technologies from non­European companies such 
as AWS, Microsoft, Nvidia and OpenAI dominate 
the digital field, while Germany and Europe lag 
behind in AI patents and models (cf. B 3­2). With 
regard to data control, the GDPR and the possibility 
of data localization within the EU create a certain 
degree of security, but this is incomplete. Cyberse ­
curity in Germany and the EU is limited because 
central digital infrastructures and security­relevant 
technologies are not sufficiently under their own 
control. Economically, the EU is heavily dependent 
on US providers. In 2024, the EU’s deficit with the 
USA in trade in services, most of which were digital, 
amounted to €148 billion.510 Added to this is a deficit 
of €52 billion for the eurozone alone in the transfer 
of primary income to the USA,511 with cross­border 
payments from subsidiaries of large tech compa ­
nies to their parent companies playing an impor ­
tant role. Finally, European culture and values are 
threatened by non­European content providers and 
by AI systems trained with non­ European data.

115
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026 — B 3 Development and  Application of  Artificial Intelligence in  Germany and Europe
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
The consequences of this limited digital sover ­
eignty of the EU are highly problematic: access to 
technologies from non­European providers is not 
permanently guaranteed, which makes Europe vul­
nerable to blackmail. For example, under pressure 
from the US government, Microsoft blocked the 
email access of the chief prosecutor of the Interna­
tional Criminal Court in May 2025. 512 In addition, 
US President Trump announced in November 2025 
that he wanted to prevent the sale of Nvidia’s latest 
GPU abroad.513 Even in data centres within the EU 
that are operated by European companies but use 
technical solutions from US providers, the security 
of European data is not fully guaranteed due to the 
provisions of the US CLOUD Act. 514 With regard 
to regulation, the EU appears to be sovereign, but 
in reality it can be put under pressure due to its 
dependence on non­European technologies. 515 The 
economic imbalance between the EU and the USA 
in digital services exacerbates this problem and also 
reflects the EU’s lack of competitiveness and value 
creation in the digital field. The problems of limited 
cybersecurity and, ultimately, a threat to European 
culture and values are obvious. A serious example of 
the latter is the denial of the Holocaust by Grok, the 
AI model developed by the company xAI.516
The EU’s sovereignty, especially in AI infrastruc ­
ture, varies significantly depending on the compo ­
nent. The situation is particularly critical for GPUs, 
whose market is dominated by a single US company, 
NVIDIA.517 Although data centre operators have 
the option of using products from other suppliers, 
these also originate from the USA. This unilateral 
dependence on US companies is increasingly being 
exploited politically, even though European compa­
nies are technological market leaders in upstream 
key enabling technologies for semiconductor man­
ufacturing, which could be used as leverage in 
global value chains.518 Examples of this are ASML’s 
EUV lithography and the optics and laser systems 
from Zeiss and TRUMPF that are essential for this. 
The situation with high­performance AI models is 
 similarly problematic to that with AI chips. These 
models originate almost exclusively from US and 
Chinese companies, and their use results in a wor ­
rying lock­in effect.
The situation is somewhat better for other hard ­
ware, especially data storage devices. Although 
the most important providers are mainly based in 
the USA and South Korea, there is a competitive 
market that reduces dependencies. Where supple ­
mentary software is concerned, e.g. for data man ­
agement, partially sovereign European solutions 
do exist. European solutions are generally available 
for data centre operators and data centre locations. 
To improve the digital sovereignty of the EU and 
Germany in the field of AI, the EU is focusing on 
the planned AI Gigafactories (B 3­4) and AI models 
developed with public support (B 3­2).
Consistent Efforts Needed to 
Build Digital Sovereignty
Digital sovereignty cannot be achieved abruptly 
but is the result of a long­term and consistent plan. 
From the Commission of Experts’ point of view, the 
issue of digital sovereignty is essential for Germany 
and the EU, as technological dependencies have a 
direct impact on political, economic and social scope 
for action.
When it comes to AI, the EU faces a strategic bal ­
ancing act: on the one hand, it is important to avoid 
technological dependencies, but on the other hand, 
the use of AI must not be delayed by excessive cau­
tion and a lack of European solutions. A balanced 
approach is therefore necessary  – temporarily 
accepting dependencies where they are unavoid­
able, while at the same time working systematically 
to reduce and ultimately overcome them in the long 
term.
Closer cooperation within the EU has a key role to 
play in this regard. A prime example of this is the 
EU AI Champions Initiative, which is being driven 
forward by business and politics in France and Ger­
many and under whose umbrella 18 new AI­related 
corporate partnerships were formed in November 
2025.519 However, sceptical questions have been 
raised about how the intended cooperation between 
companies, some of which are direct competitors, 
can be structured in order to develop strategically 
important technologies.520
The issue of digital sovereignty is particularly evi ­
dent in the field of internal security. In Germany, 
the use of Gotham analysis software from the US 
company Palantir is the subject of heated debate. 
Gotham accesses large amounts of data, e.g. from 
police authorities, analyzes and links it, and gen ­
erates comprehensive situation reports (although 
the software’s AI functions have been restricted or 
removed in Germany due to legal requirements).521 
While the Federal Ministry of the Interior  considers

116
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
automated data analysis and the use of AI to be 
indispensable,522 data protectionists have expressed 
concerns about Palantir’s proximity to US­American 
intelligence agencies and military institutions. 523 
In addition, the far ­reaching dependence on a US 
company in an application that is central to security 
policy must be viewed critically.
B 3-9 Recommendations for Action
Artificial intelligence has rapidly developed into a 
key enabling technology of the 21st century. It is 
increasingly shaping economic performance, inter­
national competitiveness and social innovation. The 
analysis clearly shows that although Germany and 
Europe have strong research landscapes and have 
achieved initial successes in the application of AI, 
they lag behind in the development of AI models 
and the implementation of AI in value creation 
when compared internationally, especially with the 
USA and China.
There is a lack of powerful infrastructure that reli ­
ably supports research, development and wide ­
spread application of AI, thereby strengthening 
Europe’s digital sovereignty. The dominant role of 
non­ European technology providers and the eco ­
nomic imbalance in digital services create structural 
dependencies that, in view of growing geopolitical 
tensions, call into question reliable access to key 
technologies and thus further jeopardize Europe’s 
digital sovereignty. Furthermore, energy prices 
for AI development and operation are increasingly 
becoming a location factor.
There are also gaps in data availability, particu ­
larly in the industrial field and the public sector. 
In addition, regulatory requirements restrict the 
use of data for AI training in the EU more than in 
non­European countries. Last but not least, the EU 
lags behind the world’s leading countries in terms of 
venture capital for AI. This, like the fragmentation 
of the Single Market, is an obstacle, especially for 
start­ups.
Given this situation, the Commission of Experts 
recommends a European approach and coordinated 
AI policy, expanding AI infrastructure, supporting 
top­notch research, having rules that are friendly to 
innovation, specifically backing the broad economic 
use of AI in Germany and the EU, and supporting 
start­ups in the AI field and their growth.
Taking a European Approach to AI Policy
 — To catch up with the USA and China and avoid 
further technological dependencies, AI must be 
considered a key enabling technology at Euro­
pean level. Cooperation between Germany and 
France has a special role to play in this regard, 
acting as a kind of European driving force.
Coordinated pooling of resources and expertise 
at EU level is crucial for an agile and effective 
European AI policy. On the one hand, funding 
structures must be harmonized horizontally 
and vertically, and the conditions improved 
through infrastructure investments. On the 
other hand, it also means distancing oneself 
from national interests and allowing intra­ 
European competition so that European mar­
kets can be established.
With this in mind, Germany should act as a 
strong voice at EU level for cooperation in 
building infrastructure, creating legal certainty 
and promoting AI in research and industry, 
and, as the largest EU country, take the lead in 
shaping the AI market in a uniform European 
and innovation­friendly manner.
 — To strengthen the EU’s position in global 
competition, Germany should strive for closer 
cooperation at EU level with strong democratic 
partners such as the UK, Canada, Japan and 
South Korea in order to jointly establish a third 
AI hub alongside the USA and China.
 — To increase the total investment volume in AI in 
the EU, private investment is urgently needed 
in addition to public funding. To this end, it is 
essential to create more business­friendly con­
ditions, for example through a 28th regime.
 — Digital regulations at EU level (Data Act, AI 
Act, GDPR, etc.) should be harmonized in 
their national interpretations, contradic ­
tions should be eliminated, and compliance 
requirements should be simplified, especially 
for SMEs and start ­ups. With this in mind, 
the Federal Government should advocate 
for  further simplification of the AI Act when 
designing the Digital Omnibus. Regulatory 
uncertainty should be reduced as quickly as 
possible, as it slows down innovation and leads 
to wrong decisions.

117
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026 — B 3 Development and  Application of  Artificial Intelligence in  Germany and Europe
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
Expanding European AI Infrastructure
 — Germany and the EU should pursue 
dynamic expansion targets when build ­
ing data centres at the European level.  
To keep up internationally, the EU should set 
itself the goal of providing 10 to 15 percent 
of global compute power within the next five 
years. To this end, the private sector must be 
empowered to drive forward expansion rap ­
idly. In Germany, this requires simplified and 
accelerated approval procedures for data cen ­
tres and an expansion of the energy networks.
 — The framework conditions for Gigafactories 
must be designed in such a way that they are 
commercially competitive and do not require 
long­term subsidies. This requires a time 
limit on the compute power to be made freely 
available for public applications. The choice of 
location should be based on economic criteria 
in order to avoid politically motivated deci ­
sions favouring economically unsustainable 
solutions. The Commission of Experts recom ­
mends a phased approach to the construction 
of the planned AI Gigafactories in the EU so 
that learning effects can be exploited, flexibil­
ity is maintained and technological develop ­
ments can be responded to.
 — If data centres are built with public funds (as 
is the case with the EU’s AI factories and giga­
factories), a monitoring system should be set 
up to record utilization and types of use in par­
ticular and to ensure that capacities are used in 
a targeted manner.
 — Given the short lifespan of GPUs, a shorter 
depreciation period seems sensible. To make 
the use of data centres attractive to businesses, 
a regulation must be found that allows pri ­
vate­sector use of publicly funded infrastruc ­
ture.
 — The establishment of the planned AI Facto ­
ries should be used to promote innovative 
solutions from young European companies 
within the framework of pre­ commercial pro­
curement. One example is the use of photonic 
coprocessors from the company Q.ANT at the 
Leibniz Supercomputing Centre in Garching.
Support Ambitious AI Research and Development
 — Germany and its European partners should 
promote research and development into AI 
models that offer the potential for the next 
fundamental breakthrough in global AI devel­
opment. In light of high electricity costs, 
research and development into energy ­effi­
cient models should be systematically sup ­
ported.
 — A key obstacle to training European AI models 
is legally secure access to data. To this end, the 
General Data Protection Regulation should be 
amended accordingly to facilitate the training 
of foundation models, and opportunities for 
the joint training of specialized models should 
be created (e.g. data trustee models and the 
legally secure use of privacy ­enhancing tech­
nologies). Another measure in the context of 
generative AI would be to introduce the prin ­
ciple of misuse, which basically allows the use 
of data as long as it is not misused.
 — The centralized and user­friendly provision of 
public data, for example by federal, Länder and 
local administrations, must be accelerated.
 — To strengthen digital sovereignty, reduce secu­
rity­related dependencies on non­European 
AI providers and facilitate the development 
of derivative models, the Federal Government 
should work towards promoting private­ sec­
tor European cooperation to develop an open­
source foundation model. Since the competi­
tiveness of such models requires iterative 
further development, the EU and its Member 
States should provide long­ term support for 
the foundation model as anchor customers.
Strengthen AI Application in the Public Sector
 — The use of AI in the public sector should be 
significantly expanded. To this end, the devel­
opment of a Germany ­wide, digitally uni ­
form administrative infrastructure should be 
rapidly advanced – for example, through the 
Deutschland­Stack and considering European 
open models to ensure European digital sover­
eignty. A modular approach that simplifies the 
replacement of individual software elements 
in the Stack can reduce dependencies through 
lock­in effects.

118
      EFI  
REPORT  
2026
CORE TOPICS 2026
B 3 B 3
 — The extent to which the use of German and 
European AI solutions can contribute to 
strengthening digital sovereignty should be 
examined, even though they do not yet match 
the performance level of non­European pro ­
viders in all fields. However, it must be ensured 
that the use of such solutions does not shield 
providers from technological competition but 
rather supports them in catching up with the 
world leaders.
Promote AI Start-ups
 — Start­ups should be supported by being consid­
ered more frequently in public procurement, 
for example through the increased use of the 
special direct contract limit of €100,000 pro ­
vided for in the HTAD for innovative services 
from start­ups.
 — The issue of the taxation of employee share 
ownership in start ­ups should be addressed 
much more consistently than it has been in 
the Future Financing Act 2023.
 — The framework conditions for venture capital 
should be improved; in addition, the Savings 
and Investment Union should be promoted at 
EU level.
 — The Federal Government should advocate for 
the most comprehensive 28th regime pos­
sible within the EU (cf. chapter A 4) in order to 
reduce the fragmentation of the Single Market 
and make it easier for EU start­ups to scale up.
