JRC115449 - Seville, Spain: European Commission, 2019 - © European Union, 2019 
INDUSTRIAL R&I - JRC Policy Insights 
 
DISTRIBUTION OF INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH & INNOVATION ACTIVITIES:  
AN APPLICATION OF TECHNOLOGY READINESS LEVELS 
 
Technology and Innovation Challenges 2030 BRIEFS SERIES - January 2019 
 
The Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs) approach is 
relevant to map the functional decomposition of 
companies’ R&D value chains. TRLs matter for 
corporate location choices.  
 
Knowing what distinct types of R&D&I activities (or 
TRLs) stay, go and come back in EU territories – and 
why – is central for policies supporting local industrial 
and innovation ecosystems and clusters, and the 
identification and integration into strategic  value 
chains.  
Fast-developing local strengths of Asian countries such 
as China, Japan and South Korea, in Automotive, and in 
Electronics and related fields are shaping companies’ 
geographical decomposition of R&D&I activities. 
  
While the EU has strong value chains in e.g. 
automotive (network of combustion engine) and 
pharma (highly skilled labour force and strong 
research institutions), corporate R&D&I investments 
are finding their way to novel applications in emerging 
technologies in Asia.
 
1. Introductory background 
“It is essential for Europe to support the competitive 
development of strategic value chains of the future” 
(European Commission, 2018). 1 Understanding how 
companies organise and split up their research and 
innovation activities is essential to inform policies 
targeting the integration of local firms into (future) 
value chains and the attractiveness for knowledge-
intensive projects and strategic activities in the EU. 
 
This policy brief contributes to the latest 
developments in the analysis of R&D 
internationalisation and builds upon recent evidence 
from case studies undertaken within the European 
Commission’s GLORIA project.  2 The main rationale 
relates to the need to understand the organisational 
and geographical patterns of corporate R&D and 
innovation dynamics. With this objective in mind, this 
note suggests avenues for a finer and better 
collection of evidence on industrial research and 
innovation (IRI) at the microeconomic level.  
 
Policy objectives like attracting investments in 
innovative sectors with relevant growth potential and 
higher value added activities are doomed to remain 
an empty shell with out a comprehensive 
understanding of global innovation networks or the 
functioning of corporate value chains. Territories  
benefit a lot from the ability to strategically position 
themselves therein in order to develop unique  
                                                        
1 See also European Commission, 2017. 
2 See Box 1 on the GLORIA project 
competitive advantage s.3 For example, even if two 
regions perform automobile -related R&D, the local 
firms may not be competent in the same segments of 
the value chains or activities. These activities may 
also not require the same mixes of skills and 
resources, giving rise to knowle dge gaps for 
policymakers such as: 
 
 Which R&D and Innovation (R&D&I) activities - 
sub-functions/tasks - are actually performed in 
the territory?  
 By which type of firms or organisations? 
 What are the location and governance specific 
patterns? 
 
Such knowledge would facilitate the identification and 
attraction of territory -specific innovation activities 
and a better -fitted integration strategy for local 
companies and organisations. This is even more 
important for less developed regions, which are often 
not we ll connected at the EU and global levels and 
where critical mass is hardly achievable in most R&I 
domains. Furthermore, such knowledge and 
positioning constitute relevant inputs for both 
innovation policy and research in order to apprehend 
the differentiated effects of corporate strategies on 
territorial industrial and innovation dynamics and 
development.  
 
                                                        
3 See e.g. the positioning exercise of the Lombardy region in 
emerging and fast -growing technologies compared to a peers 
group in: Vezzani et al. (2017): "Smart Specialisation, seizing new 
industrial opportunities" JRC technical report.

This paper is published under the responsibility of the JRC Unit B3. The opinions expressed and   
the arguments employed do not necessarily reflect the official view of the European Commission 
DISTRIBUTION OF INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH & INNOVATION ACTIVITIES: AN APPLICATION OF TECHNOLOGY READINESS LEVELS 
www.ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publications 
To shed light on these issues, this brief first provides 
updated evidence on the functional decompositions of 
innovation activities for the sampled companies. 
Then, important reasons why policy and research 
should consider finer data collection on R&D&I 
processes and organisation at the firm level are put 
forward. 
 
 
2. Literature snapshot 
The studies related to the functional decomposition of 
corporate R&D and innovation activities can be 
analysed from three di fferent angles: the micro -, 
meso- and macro -angle (Ramirez, 2018). Micro - 
studies address the firm -level relations between 
production and innovation, but mostly disregard the 
inter-firm collaboration and task decomposition, for 
which there is a different l iterature on modularity. 
These two however disregard the global 
internationalisation aspects that have taken place. 
Meso- or industry level works generally do not look 
the distinction between higher -level innovation and 
other GVC tasks, like production. Fi nally macro -level 
studies focus on aggregate-based studies by scholars 
of International Business (IB), geographers, as well as 
aggregate studies by international organisations such 
as OECD. 
 
These different streams of research on corporate 
R&D internationalisation and economic geography 
have greatly improved our knowledge on the nature, 
scale and spatial dimensions of (international) 
innovation processes. Most systematic empirical 
analyses have exploited measures derived from 
Foreign Direct In vestments (FDI), Mergers and 
Acquisitions (M&A), industrial properties (patents and 
patent citations, designs), R&D activities or 
expenditures and innovation collaborations (see for 
instance Iammarino and McCann 2013; Dachs et al 
2014). However the differe nces between innovation 
and production networks or the potential offered by 
new manufacturing technologies or digitisation of 
organisational processes has been neglected. Recent 
qualitative studies and surveys show the increasingly 
intertwined nature of th e global innovation and 
production networks taking advantage of new 
organisational modes and linked to the emergence of 
serious competition from e.g. Chinese companies. 4 
Thus, more disaggregated data are needed to map 
corporate activities or functions that  form the R&D 
                                                        
4 See e.g. Ramirez (2018), Cantwell (2017) and Rezk et al (2016). 
and innovation chains and their importance and 
meaning in different industrial contexts.  
 
3. Functional decompositions of corporate 
R&D and innovation activities 
During 2017, case studies on 10 main global R&D 
investors were performed in ord er to better 
understand the functional fragmentation of R&D&I 
activities and the associated geographical 
distributions.5 The companies include 10 top R&D -
                                                        
5 The case -studies and interviews were implemented in 
collaboration with Idea Consult/VDI, see "R&D and innovation 
activities in companies across Global Value Chains: Summary 
Report", Idea Consult/VDI, 2018 
Box 1. GLORIA project in brief 
Since 2004, the European Commission's JRC and 
DG-RTD have been jointly implementing the 
Global Research &  Innovation Analyses (GLORIA) 
project and its predecessors. These provide 
evidence for the EU innovation policy agenda 
based on a science -to-policy approach building 
upon the annual monitoring of the world’s top 
R&D-investing firms. The projects' analyses rely 
on quantitative and qualitative research methods 
in order to address the following broad thematic 
issues:  
 the characteristics, drivers and impacts of 
corporate R&D and innovation investments 
and their industrial properties (patents, 
trademarks, indus trial designs); this is 
complemented with specific sector analyses. 
 the technological profiles of top R&D 
investors and the development of specific 
technologies, e.g. digital technologies, KETs, at 
the firm, industry and regional levels. 
 the geographical d imension of R&D&I 
organisation: European and international 
location of corporate R&D&I activities, 
corporate global innovation networks and 
value-chains. 
 
The GLORIA project: http://iri.jrc.ec.europa.eu/home    
EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboards: 
http://iri.jrc.ec.europa.eu/scoreboard.html     
The EU Surveys on R&D Investment Business 
Trends: http://iri.jrc.ec.europa.eu/survey.html

This paper is published under the responsibility of the JRC Unit B3. The opinions expressed and   
the arguments employed do not necessarily reflect the official view of the European Commission 
DISTRIBUTION OF INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH & INNOVATION ACTIVITIES: AN APPLICATION OF TECHNOLOGY READINESS LEVELS 
www.ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publications 
investing firms that operate in three EU strategic 
sectoral groups – pharmaceuticals, mobility 
(aerospace, automobiles) and ICT. In total, 60 
structured interviews were performed on the basis of 
an ex ante agreed upon questionnaire (about 6 per 
company) and case-study information compiled from 
public sources. This note focuses on the outcomes of 
these inte rviews in relation to (1) the functional 
decomposition of their R&D&I processes (distinct 
activities) and (2) the patterns and rationales of 
locational dynamics at the activity level. 
 
In order to analyse the fragmentation of R&D&I 
processes of these compa nies, the Technology 
Readiness Levels (TRLs) approach has been adopted 
(see Table 1  in the Annex ). Indeed, TRLs allow 
mapping the steps in the different R&D&I processes 
(European Commission, 2011). In addition, companies 
were also asked to provide detailed  information of 
their non-R&D innovation activities, also displayed in 
Table 1. 
 
Why do TRLs matter? Insights from case studies 
 
The right columns of Table 1 illustrate the 
decompositions for companies in the investigated 
sectors for which information on approximate and 
indicative budget shares and staff ranges were 
available. Results confirm that TRLs enable a more 
detailed functio nal description of R&D 
activities, alongside non -R&D innovation 
activities of companies . Furthermore, the table 
also confirms that companies actually grant different 
importance and budget to distinct TRLs; here it 
appears that activities within TRL 5 to 8 attract non 
negligible share of the R&D investments.  
Heterogeneity appears also across  companies in the 
same sector. For instance, one company from the 
automotive sector confirms relatively more sizeable 
investments granted to technological research (TRL 2-
4) and product demonstration (TRL 5 -8), while it 
reports relatively lower investments  in fundamental 
research (TRL 1) and competitive manufacturing (TRL 
9).6 Differently, another automotive company 
highlights competitive manufacturing (TRL 9) as a key 
focus area for investments in its R&D value chain. In 
comparison, the pharma companies’ interviews reveal 
that high proportions of R&D investments are 
dedicated to clinical trials/clinical studies (TRL 6 -8) in 
order for instance to achieve drug approval for new 
                                                        
6 Similar patterns came up for one aerospace company, where 
fundamental research activities (TRL 1) often take place through 
external collaborations with research organisations. 
medicines. Basic research (lower TRLs) increasingly 
takes place in CROs, universiti es, spin-offs and start -
ups. 
 
The interviews also confirm that the importance of 
non-R&D activities is sector - and sub -function 
specific. The interviews suggest that more 
investigation and evidence at the (within) firm level 
are needed to better understand  whether specific 
non-R&D innovation activities matter more for the 
performances of firms in different industries. 
Although R&D expenditures are widely used, with 
caveats, and can be computed or proxy from 
company accounts (see EU Scoreboards of the 
GLORIA project), detailed information on non -R&D 
innovation activities are more difficult to obtain, 
especially given the international accounting 
standards (see Annex for some clarifications on the 
issue).  
 
The EU R&D Survey 7 finds further support to these 
findings. The automotive sector invests the second 
largest proportion of their total R&D to applied 
research and technological development (43%, after 
Chemicals) and the smallest proportion to basic 
research (3%). On the other hand, ICT services and 
Pharma ha ve the highest proportion of R&D 
dedicated to the market launch, where for the latter 
this is mainly related to the costs for clinical trials to 
get new drugs approved.  
 
While these findings are hardly generalizable, they 
call upon a better account of and  a finer mapping of 
R&D&I activities across strategic value chains. 
 
 
4. An application of finer data: distribution 
of IRI activities in selected subsectors 
Finer and more systematic data on the decomposition 
of firms’ R&D and innovation processes is neede d in 
order to better understand the locational decisions 
and behaviours of companies - i.e. where and why 
they locate, co-locate or relocate their distinct R&D&I 
sub-activities/functions or tasks – and their impact of 
these decisions on the local innovation systems in the 
EU.  
 
Expectedly, R&D&I location dynamics feature techno -
sectoral specificities. For instance in the automotive 
industry, (re)-location scope is limited by factors such 
as the high -capital intensity, the existence of strong 
                                                        
7 Potters and Grassano (2018)

This paper is published under the responsibility of the JRC Unit B3. The opinions expressed and   
the arguments employed do not necessarily reflect the official view of the European Commission 
DISTRIBUTION OF INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH & INNOVATION ACTIVITIES: AN APPLICATION OF TECHNOLOGY READINESS LEVELS 
www.ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publications 
local networks and knowledge clusters as well as 
expert knowledge of local legal and economic 
frameworks. Besides, pharma companies confirm that 
external collaborations can take place all along the 
technology readiness levels, either with universities or 
contract researc h organisations 8 depending on the 
TRL stages.  
The following lines further illustrate the TRLs-oriented 
(co)locational dynamics from different sectoral 
perspectives. 
 
Pharmaceutical sector 
The case study confirms that the location decision 
patterns depend on the type of R&D activities or TRLs 
in the pharmaceutical sector. Results suggested an 
increasing shift of activities at the later stages of the 
TRL towards Asia, for cost -, regulation - and market 
size considerations. More applied innovative activities 
(e.g. TRL 7 -9) are often driven towards regions with 
large market demand (e.g. China), while early stage 
research activities (TRL 1 -3) generally occur in 
traditionally more advanced regions (triad EU-Japan-
US), that are endowed with highly-skilled labour force, 
strong research institutions and universities. Besides, 
co-location also exhibit some R&D sub -functional 
specificities, as some later-TRL activities (e.g. TRL 8 or 
phase 3 trials) need  close connection to 
manufacturing facilities.  
 
Automotive sector 
In the Automotive sector, interviews suggest that 
offshoring patterns of R&D activities are mainly 
driven by proximity to customers, value chain 
considerations (original equipment manufactu rers 
(OEMs) will be strongly co -located with their clients, 
such as the large car manufacturers), labour costs 
and the availability of technological capabilities and 
skills. Here also, a shift towards Asia (e.g. South 
Korea, Japan and China) is underlined,  mainly due to 
the local strengths in electronics and related 
industries, such as hybrid technology and battery 
development, battery and cell manufacturing for 
electric vehicles, electronics and battery 
manufacturing base, telematics, etc ., and their 
increasing importance in the automotive industries. 
On the other hand, the EU automotive industry is 
characterised by OEMs that are traditionally 
specialised in combustion engines that consist of 
many more and completely different parts than 
electrical motors, which leads to a mismatch in the 
(innovation and production) infrastructure and the 
                                                        
8 See also a previous brief based on an IRIMA work shop on the 
topic (Dosso et al 2017). 
company needs. For these companies, co -location 
seems to be more common between non -R&D 
innovation activities and production and the product 
characteristics certainly influ ence the organizational 
patterns of R&D&I activities in this sector.  
 
Aerospace sector 
Companies from the aerospace sector confirm the 
existence of rather geographically consolidated 
supply chains due to their complexity and to the 
presence of high technological and economic barriers. 
Locations with high technological capabilities are 
clearly preferred, while R&D outsourcing increases but 
remains limited and mainly at earlier stages (e.g. TRL 
1-2) in order to access new technologies, capabilities 
or skills that are not available at home (home -based 
augmenting activities). In addition, collaborations at 
lower TRLs are also established with local or foreign 
highly-specialized universities, technological centres 
or start -ups; this is done also through the 
development of local ecosystems where large 
companies often act as incumbent technology leaders 
as or key participant. 9 Nevertheless, the core of 
R&D&I activities in this sector is rather seen in closer-
to-market R&D stages and performed in-house. These 
higher TRL activities would often be co -located with 
manufacturing facilities or assembly lines for the 
purpose of costs -efficient testing and technological 
demonstration in real environments. 
 
ICT sector 
In the ICT sector, an important degree of R& D 
integration within the manufacturing process is 
expected. In the electronic & parts and systems sub -
sector, front -end and back -end manufacturing 
activities may present different location patterns; the 
latter ones being more frequently located in Asia, 
while product design, technological research, research 
and development activities are rather concentrated in 
Europe and the US. In the software sub -sector, 
(foreign) innovation activities may require co -location 
with production.   
 
5. Concluding remarks 
This brief provides evidence based on firms level data 
and shows the importance of better collection and 
more research on the functional decomposition and 
geographical distribution of R&D&I activities. Such 
firm- and activity-levels evidence is needed because 
of the implications it raises for the (co)location and 
                                                        
9 See also the earlier JRC brief on the leading role of R&D 
investors in the dynamics of ecosystems (Dosso et al 2015)

This paper is published under the responsibility of the JRC Unit B3. The opinions expressed and   
the arguments employed do not necessarily reflect the official view of the European Commission 
DISTRIBUTION OF INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH & INNOVATION ACTIVITIES: AN APPLICATION OF TECHNOLOGY READINESS LEVELS 
www.ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publications 
relocation of companies’ R&D&I and production in the 
EU.  
The interviews have confirmed the need for Europe to 
further strengthen technology -specific capabilities of 
regions in relation to targeted str ategic value chains. 
Yet, a balance between regional specialisation and 
regional adaptability has to be found in order to 
facilitate sustainable transitions towards the 4th 
Industrial era. 
 
Selected References 
Cantwell, J. (2017). Innovation and internatio nal 
business, Industry and Innovation, 24(1), pp. 41-60.  
Deloitte IASPlus, International Accounting Standards, 
IAS38 Intangible Assets, 
https://www.iasplus.com/en/standards/ias/ias38  
Dachs B., Stehrer R., Zahradnik, G. (eds) (2014). The 
Internationalisation of Business R&D, Edward Elgar.  
Dosso, M., Potters, L., Tu ̈bke A. (2017). R&D and 
innovation across global value chains: insights for 
EU territorial Innovation policy . JRC Policy In sights - 
Industrial R&D, European Commission. 
Dosso, M., Hervás, F., Vezzani, A. (2015). Leading R&D 
Investors for the Dynamics of Innovation 
Ecosystems. JRC Policy Brief, Luxembourg: 
Publications Office of the European Union. 
European Commission (2018). A renewed European 
Agenda for Research and Innovation - Europe's 
chance to shape its future. The ECs contribution to 
the Informal EU Leaders' meeting on innovation in 
Sofia on 16 May 2018, EC COM (2018) 306 final. 
European Commission (2017). Investing in a smart, 
innovative and sustainable Industry - A renewed EU 
Industrial Policy Strategy. EC COM (2017) 479 final. 
European Commission (2011). High -Level Expert 
Group on Key Enabling Technologies. Final report. 
Available at https://www.iprhelpdesk.eu/node/431 
(latest access May 2018). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Iammarino, S. & McCann, P.(2013) Multinationals and 
economic geography: location and technology, 
innovation Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK. ISBN 
9781781954782 
Potters, L., Grassano, N. The 2018 EU Survey on 
Industrial R&D Investment Trends; EUR 28458. 
Ramirez (2018), Global Innovation Networks: State of 
the art and issues at stake for GVCs . See at 
http://iri.jrc.ec.europa.eu/research-collaborations.html  
Rezk, R., Srai, J. S., Williamson, P. J., (2016). The 
impact of product attributes and emerging 
technologies on firms' international configuration, 
Journal of International Business Studies , 47, pp 
610-618.  
Vezzani A., Baccan M., Candu A., Castelli A., Dosso M., 
Gkotsis P. (2017). Smart Specialisation, seizing new 
industrial opportunities . JRC Technical Report, 
European Commission. EUR 2880. 
 
 
 
Contact information  
Dosso, Mafini - Economic Analyst, DG JRC - 
Territorial Development Unit (B3) 
mafini.dosso@ec.europa.eu  
Edificio Expo - C/ Inca Garcilaso 3 - E-41092 
Seville (Spain) 
 
How to cite 
Dosso, M., Potters, L. and Tübke, A. Distribution of 
industrial research & innovation activities: an 
application of technology readiness levels  
Industrial R& I – JRC Policy Insights  - January 
2019

This paper is published under the responsibility of the JRC Unit B3. The opinions expressed and   
the arguments employed do not necessarily reflect the official view of the European Commission 
DISTRIBUTION OF INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH & INNOVATION ACTIVITIES: AN APPLICATION OF TECHNOLOGY READINESS LEVELS 
www.ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publications 
Annex I
