© European Union 2023– JRC134598
Putting knowledge and technology to work: A
look at EU innovation output

‘According to the Innovation Output Indicator, the EU
as a single economic block leads New Zealand, China,
Australia and Brazil in 2021, but lags behind its main
competitors, including the United States, South Korea
and Japan.
EU Innovation Output

Innovation plays an important role in tackling the most
pressing social, economic and environmental challenges. This
is why tracking innovation performance is high on the
European Commission's   agenda. Since 2013, the European
Commission produces the Innovation Output Indicator (IOI) - a
composite indicator offering an output-oriented measure of
innovation performance at the country and EU levels.
The IOI tracks the extent to which new ideas reach the
market, providing better jobs and making Europe more
competitive. It aggregates four components including 1.
patents and trademarks, 2. employment in knowledge-
intensive activities, 3. the domestic contribution to the value
of knowledge-intensive exports, and 4. Innovation-active
enterprises.
Each year the IOI is used to compare the innovation output of
the EU as a block to other world players. As depicted in Figure
1, the EU leads New Zealand, China, Australia and Brazil in
terms of innovation output in 2021, but still lags behind its
main competitors, including the United States, South Korea
and Japan.
Figure 1 – Innovation Output Indicator of the EU in 2021, compared
to international competitors
Source: Bello et al. 2023. Note: dotted line shows the EU27 value in 2011.
→ Tracking innovation performance is high on the European Commission's agenda. → According to the Innovation Output Indicator, developed by the European Commission since 2013, the EU as a single economic block leads New Zealand, China, Australia and Brazil in 2021, but lags behind its main competitors, including the United States, South Korea and Japan.  → The EU economy performs well regarding the
domestic contribution to the value of medium-high and high-tech manufacturing exports, but should improve the share of employment in knowledge-intensive industries as well as the percentage of innovation-active firms.  → The innovation divide persists among EU countries. Sweden, Germany and Finland are the best performers, while Romania, Latvia and Bulgaria are the EU Member States reporting the lowest performance in 2021.
HIGHLIGHTS

QUICK GUIDE -  Composite indicators and scoreboards are widely used to capture both the process and the outcomes of
complex phenomena such as innovation. Since 2013, the Joint Research Centre of the European
Commission has produced the Innovation Output Indicator within the INNOVA projects to offer an output-
oriented measure of innovation for the EU and its Member States. The IOI measures the extent to which
ideas for new products and services are able to reach the market, provide better jobs and make Europe
more competitive.
In its latest edition, the IOI includes six indicators combined in four components: 1) the number of Patent
Cooperation Treaty (PCT) patent applications and the number of trademark classes in total resident
trademark applications, each denominated by population (in millions); 2) the number of persons
employed in knowledge-intensive activities and business industries over total employment; 3) domestic
value added content of medium-high and high-tech manufacturing exports as a share of total
manufacturing exports and domestic value added content of knowledge-intensive service exports as a
share of total service exports; and 4) the number of innovation-active firms over the total number of
firms.
Among EU Member States (MSs), Sweden, Germany and
Finland are the best performers (Figure 2). Patent applications
drove the top performance of Sweden, partly due to its
exceptionally strong innovation in digital communication [7].
The domestic contribution to the value of knowledge-intensive
manufacturing exports drove Germany’s high performance,
reflecting its strong industrial base in basic metals, chemicals
and motor vehicles [6]. Finland, on the other hand, is very
strong in terms of its share of innovation-active enterprises in
the economy, reflecting its government’s commitment to
fostering an innovation ecosystem [5]. Conversely, Romania,
Latvia, Poland and Bulgaria are the EU MSs reporting the
lowest performance in 2021.
Figure 2 – Innovation Output Indicator of EU Member States, 2021
Source: The JRC Composite Indicators & Scoreboards Explorer,
https://ec.europa.eu/scoreboards-explorer, accessed on 26th June 2023
A closer look at the IOI components

EU MSs show a wide range of innovation performance in the
IOI, as well as in its components.
IP applications
According to 2021 IOI results, Sweden is leading the ranking
in terms of number of patent applications per million
population, while a large number of countries exhibits a
particularly low performance, with Romania and Bulgaria
being at the bottom of the distribution with nearly no Patent
Cooperation Treaty (PCT) patent applications (Figure 3). By
contrast, the innovation divide among MSs is less pronounced
in trademark applications with Luxembourg leading the
ranking, followed by Malta [2].
Figure 3 – Number of patent applications filed under the Patent
Cooperation Treaty per million population, 2019
Source: Bello et al. 2023. Note: The dotted line shows the EU27 average.
Contribution to knowledge-intensive exports
In 2021, around half of total EU product exports and three-
quarters of EU service exports were knowledge-based [1]. The
EU MSs, however, still show a high intra- and extra- EU
dependence in the production and exports of these products
and services. One example is that the domestic contribution to
the value of medium-high and high-tech manufacturing
exports in EU countries is less than one-third on average.
Germany is the EU country that depends the least on foreign
inputs. But when looking at the EU as a block, its performance
is comparable to the USA’s as over half of the value of
knowledge-intensive manufacturing exports comes from
within its own economy.
When it comes to the service sector, the EU MSs’ domestic
contribution to the value of knowledge-intensive service
exports is slightly higher. Finland is least dependent, with over
two fifths of their value being domestic. In comparison to
other countries like China, Japan, and Canada, the EU as a
whole is slightly ahead with a domestic value contribution
close to 40%. However, the EU falls behind Israel, the USA,
and the UK where over half of the value of knowledge-
intensive service exports is domestically contributed.

Figure 3 – Domestic value added content of exports in high and
medium-high technology manufacturing (MHT) industries as
percentage of total manufacturing exports, 2018
Source: Bello et al. 2023. . Note: The dotted line shows the EU27 average.
Employment in knowledge-intensive activities
Employment in knowledge-intensive activities and industries
is an additional challenge for EU MSs, as they make up less
than 15% of total employment in the EU on average. This is
well below other countries like Israel (34%), South Korea
(22%) and the United States (17%). The top performers
among EU MSs are Luxembourg (26%) and Sweden (21%).
Innovation-active enterprises
Innovation can happen in all sectors, including those that are
less knowledge-intensive. The share of innovative enterprises
aims to capture product and business process innovation
activities across the entire economy and is the newest
additional indicator in the IOI. According to 2021 IOI results,
nearly half of all firms in the EU have been identified as
innovation-active, placing the EU ahead of some international
competitors such as South Korea, Brazil, and China, and at par
with current world leader Israel, but still falling behind the
USA and Canada. However, as a block, the EU's performance
hasn't shown much improvement, with the latest data (from
2018) only 2 percentage points higher than in 2011 [2]. There
are significant variations among EU MSs, with Greece and
Belgium having the highest shares at around 60% - while
Romania has the lowest performance at only 14%.
Conclusions

The Innovation Output Indicator tracks the extent to which
new ideas reach the market, providing better jobs and making
Europe more competitive. According to the 2021 IOI, Finland,
Sweden and Germany are clear leaders within the EU while
Romania, Latvia and Bulgaria have the largest gap to close.
When looking at the individual components of IOI, EU MSs
have their unique strengths and weaknesses. On some
components, EU MSs are among the best performers globally:
of the top ten countries with the highest percentage of
innovation-active enterprises, six are EU MSs; Sweden is a
world top performer in terms of patents per million
population; and Germany competes with the US in terms of
the domestic contribution to the value of its medium-high and
high-tech manufacturing exports.
Some individual EU MS weaknesses are alleviated by the
overall strength of the Union. In particular, the EU as a single
block does well in its domestic contribution to the value of
high-tech manufacturing exports. However, to be a world
leader in innovation output, it must close its disparities with
the top performers on other components of the IOI and
improve the share of employment in knowledge-intensive
industries as well as the percentage of innovation-active
firms.
Related work

This work is a deliverable of the INNOVA MEASURE V project
(Horizon Europe 101052304). More information can be found
on: https://knowledge4policy.ec.europa.eu/projects-
activities/innova-project_en
REFERENCES
[1] Bello, M., Caperna, G., Damioli, G., Smallenbroek, O. and Steffen, M.,
Tracking country innovation performance: The Innovation Output
Indicator 2022, EUR 31526 EN, Publications Office of the European
Union, Luxembourg, 2023, ISBN 978-92-68-03991-5,
doi:10.2760/346938, JRC133568.
[2] OECD/Eurostat, Oslo Manual 2018: Guidelines for Collecting,
Reporting and Using Data on Innovation, 4th Edition, The Measurement
of Scientific, Technological and Innovation Activities, OECD Publishing,
Paris/Eurostat, Luxembourg,2018,
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264304604-en.
[3] European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and
Innovation, Hollanders, H., Es-Sadki, N., Khalilova, A., European
Innovation Scoreboard 2022, Publications Office of the European
Union, 2022, https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/309907.
Box 1: Impact of Covid The COVID-19 pandemic crisis has largely disrupted the business environment, as well as the functioning of the science and innovation systems. R&D investment (PPS, in constant prices), which tends to be pro-cyclical, declined by 2% in 2020, whereas the share of R&D expenditure on GDP increased by nearly 3.6%, mainly due to a stronger drop in GDP (by nearly 4%).  Preliminary data also seems to point to a decline in the competitiveness of EU knowledge-intensive exports. The share of medium and high-tech product exports declined by 3.4% in 2021, which is the highest drop in the last 10 years. Similarly, the share of these sectors in total employment declined by nearly 2%. Finally, the crisis also seems to have affected business dynamics in the EU with the employment share in newly-established firms and that of fast-growing firms declining by 15% and 19%, respectively, in 2020.  The effects of the pandemic crisis on EU countries’ innovation performance is not yet captured in the IOI as only two of six indicators, refer to the pandemic period.

[4] World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), Global Innovation
Index 2022: What is the future of innovation-driven growth? Geneva:
WIPO, 2022, DOI 10.34667/tind.46596.
[5] OECD. (2022). OECD Economic Surveys: Finland 2022. OECD.
https://doi.org/10.1787/516252a7-en
[6] OECD. (2022). Trade in value added: Germany. OECD.
https://www.oecd.org/sti/ind/CN2021_DEU.pdf
[7] WIPO. 2023. WIPO statistics database, accessed February 2023.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This policy brief has been prepared by Michela Bello, Giulio
Caperna, Giacomo Damioli, Oscar Smallenbroek, and Maike
Steffen. It benefitted from suggestions and feedback from
colleagues in the Competence Centre on Composite Indicators
and Scoreboards at the JRC and in the Common R&I Strategy
& Foresight Service unit of DG Research and Innovation.
COPYRIGHT
© European Union, 2023.
