Hristo Hristov, Milena Slavcheva, Koen
Jonkers and Katarzyna Szkuta
Intersectoral mobility and knowledge
transfer.
Preliminary evidence of the impact of
intersectoral mobility policy
instruments
2016
EUR 28027 EN

This publication is a Science for Policy r eport by the Joint Research Centre  (JRC), the European Commission’s
science and knowledge  service. It aims to provide eviden ce-based scientific support to the European policy -
making process. The scientific output expressed does not imply a policy posit ion of the European Commission.
Neither the European Commission nor any person acting on behalf of the Commission is responsible  for the use
which might be made of this publication.

JRC Science Hub
https://ec.europa.eu/jrc

JRC102534

EUR 28027 EN

PDF ISBN 978-92-79-60074-6 ISSN 1831-9424 doi:10.2791/041776 LF-NA-28027-EN-N

© European Union, 2016

Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

How to cite: Hristo Hristov, Milena Slavcheva, Koen Jonkers and Katarzyna Szkuta ; Intersectoral mobility and
knowledge transfer. Preliminary evidence of the impact of intersectoral mobility policy instruments; EUR 28027
EN; doi:10.2791/041776

All images © European Union 2016, except: cover page, Julien Eichinger, 2016. Source: Fotolia.com

Title: Intersectoral mobility and knowledge transfer.  Preliminary evidence of the impact of intersectoral mob ility
policy instruments

Abstract

This report aims to map the policy measures supporting intersectoral mobility in the Member States and based on
the policy measures evaluations analyse the available evidence of their impact. The analysis shows that policies
to foster intersectoral mobilit y are in place in almost all MS. Many of them have been implemented for several
years now, yet the readily available evaluations are scarce. The existing evaluations are also often coming short
of evaluating the broader socio -economic impact. Yet, the eval uations provide evidence of positive impact of
those measures on researchers' skills and employability. To a lesser extent data points to the impact on patents'
and publications' propensity and R&D intensity of companies. The strongest evidence is provided  in the industrial
PhDs evaluations and the impact on skills and employability of PhD researchers can be clearly attested.

Table of contents

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ...................................................... 3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ....................................................... 4
1 INTRODUCTION ........................................................... 6
2 CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK .......................................... 7
3 QUANTITATIVE ASSESSM ENT OF EU COUNTRIES
PERFORMANCE IN KNOWL EDGE TRANSFER AND
INTERSECTORAL MOBILITY ....................................... 10
4 METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH .................................. 13
5 ANALYSIS OF INTERSEC TORAL MOBILITY POLIC Y
MEASURES ................................................................. 16
6 ANALYSIS OF THE IMPA CT OF INTERSECTORAL
MOBILITY MEASURES BA SED ON EVIDENC E FROM
THE EVALUATIONS .................................................... 23
7 CONCLUSIONS ........................................................... 44
REFERENCES ................................................................... 45
ANNEX 1 ......................................................................... 48
ANNEX 2 ......................................................................... 55
LIST OF FIGURES ............................................................ 65
LIST OF TABLES .............................................................. 66

3

Acknowledgements
This report draws among other sources on the RIO Country Reports 2015 which were
drafted as a collaborative effort by the country analysts of  DG JRC B7.(Robert Gampfer,
Hristo Hristov, Jessica Mitchell, Giovanni La Placa, Milena Slavcheva, Maren Sprutacz,
Blagoy Stamenov, Katarzyna Szkuta, Jana Zifciakova ), and the network of experts
(Susan Alexander, Liviu Andreescu, Vladimir Balaz, Pierre Bit ard, Paul Cunningham,
Tibor Dőry, Ana Fernández Zubieta, Radu Cristian Gheorghiu, Christoph Grimpe, Kimmo
Halme, Pim Den Hertog, Merle Jacob, Matthijs Janssen, Stijn Kelchtermans, Gundars
Kulikovskis, Kr zysztof Klincewicz, Tom Martin, Manuel Mira Godinho, Leopoldo Nascia,
Agne Paliokaite, Domagoj Račić, Ruuta Ruttas -Kuttim, Veli -Pekka Saarnivara, Klaus
Schuch, Vitor Simoes, Hulda Skogland, Wolfgang Sofka, Espen Solberg, Martin Srholec,
Angelina Todorova, Lena Tsipouri, Boštjan Udovič and Brian Warrington).
We would like to thank Maren Sprutacz for providing additional analysis of the German
spin-offs programmes evaluations as well as Giovanni La Placa for his participation in the
initial reflections on the shape of this project.
The report benefitted from co mments from Karen Vandenvelde of Ghent University ,
Andrea Patel of the University of Birminigham, Paul Cunnigham of the University of
Manchester and our colleague Robert Gampfer of DG JRC B7 . Finally we would like to
thank Xabier Goenaga Beldarrain for encouraging us to write this report  and for all his
valuable suggestions and comments.

4

Executive summary
Policy context
The paper analyses knowledge transfer through the prism of intersectoral mobility of
researchers. That is the temporary or permanent mobility from one sector to another,
mainly from the public to the private sector  and back. It analyses the impact of policy
measures in EU Member States by building on existing, readily available evaluations of
different types of policy measures.
The imp ortance of knowledge transfer policies for Europe's competitiveness has long
been recognised by the European Commission and its Member State s. The 2012
Communication on 'A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for Excellence and
Growth' lists optim al circulation, access to and transfer of scientific knowledge including
via digital ERA among its five priorities. Commitment 21 of the Innovation Union points
out the importance of collaborative research and knowledge transfer within the research
Framework Programmes.
In the period 2011-2016, the European Semester process has delivered thirteen Country
Specific Recommendations related to knowledge transfer. In  2015, the European
Commission raised the issue of knowledge transfer and the necessity to streng then the
links between academia and business for fifteen Member States, which shows an
increasing policy attention to that matter.
Key conclusions
Policies to foster intersectoral mobility are in place in almost all MS. Many of them have
been implemented for several years now, yet readily available evaluations are scarce. In
the small sample of the evaluations we have analysed, the evaluations provide evidence
of the positive impact of those measures on researchers' skills and employability. Also,
there are some evaluations which report some limited positive  impact on patents' and
publication propensity as well as the R&D intensity of companies.
The strongest evidence is provided in the evaluation of " industrial PhD  programmes",
where the impact on skills and employability of PhD researchers is clearly attested.
The analysis of policies supporting spin -offs provides evidence for increasing the
entrepreneurial capacity of research organisations and promoting the translation of
research results into economic value.
The policy measures also build industry awareness of knowledge transfer, increase the
absorptive capacity of firms for internal and external R&D, strengthen academia –
industry collaboration and build trust between actors.
The main barriers relate to the unclear benefits to participating firms, the high
administrative burden on companies as well as the additional workload linked to
integrating new people into the company.  The need to understand the impact of the
various types of  programmes and the observed lack of high quality evaluations for
existing programmes provide a strong argument for strengthening the evaluation
capacity in member states and encouraging frequent and systematic assessments.
Main findings
The mapping of the intersectoral mobility policies per country shows that the most often
implemented types of policy interventions are: 1) funding and regulatory support for
Industrial PhDs and industrial traineeships; 2) post -doctoral researcher placements
(Industrial Po st-Docs and other similar measures) stimulating the uptake of PhDs by
private sector firms/SMEs; and 3) support measures for creating spin -offs. One observes
that most countries  have implemented a broad range of policy instruments to promote
intersectoral mobility. This holds both for countries with high and lower levels of
business employment of researchers.  EU-13 countries in general deployed the measures
quite recently and on a pilot basis – which partially explains the lack of evaluations.

5

For the three types of measures a limited number of readily available evaluations were
identified. In total, we have found 19 evaluations, covering 9 countries (8 EU Member
States and Canada), of the three aforementioned types of measures.
In terms of the impact on c areer perspectives and employment the industrial PhD
programmes are reported to represent "good value for money". Participating candidates
acquire new skills, practical experience and improved qualifications, thus increasing their
chances on the labour mar ket but also representing highly qualified personnel which
contribute to increasing the firms' "absorptive capacity". Several evaluations report a
positive impact on a series of outputs, such as larger number of patents, increased
exports and annual sales,  bigger market shares and additional R&D funding from the
industry.
The potential in relation to the level of mobility these measures create is significant:
since the primary goal for this type of policy measures is to ensure an industry
placement of PhD students while they pursue their doctoral studies at a university,
intersectoral mobility represents a natural outcome of such schemes. Some evaluations
also report longer term impacts on mobility. Moving back and forth between the public
and private secto r, the researchers create a network of contacts and serve themselves
as intermediates between public and private entities. Well -designed PhD projects,
previous knowledge of the partner organisation and the development of a research
strategy by the firm are prerequisites for success of the policy measure.
As far as the uptake of post-doctoral researchers by industry is concerned, evidence
shows that in all long term placements the recipients are directly employed by the
company and only the research -related part is reimbursed  by the programme . This
creates a stronger relation with the company. Short placements may increase awareness
among companies of knowledge and technology transfer activities and build trust
between the actors. However, the evaluations do not point to significant tangible outputs
such as increased patenting activities or co -publications. Longer post -doctoral
placements create a personal relation with the company and often result in prolonged
collaboration and/or in the offer of permanent employment in the host company.
Programmes targeting specific groups (e.g. women, SSH researchers) are mostly p ilots
and too limited in scope to yield sufficient measurable impact.
The policy measures supporting sp in-off creation have had  an indirect impact on
intersectoral mobility. By fostering a culture of entrepreneurship in university teaching,
research and management; developing the potential for business ideas at universities
and research institutions in a ta rgeted manner;  and promoting the translation of
research findings into economic value; they have helped increasing the number of
innovative business enterprises and creat ed employment for public sector researchers in
the private sector. In general  the spin-offs supported through these programmes have
remained small.
The main barriers include the lack of awareness by industrial firms, unclear expectations
from the programmes on the side of businesses, the high administrative burden linked to
application as well as additional costs for the hosting company (financial participation but
also human resources devoted to mentoring).
The combination of different instruments could create synergies and this is  an avenue
worth exploring in order to achieve a systemic change.
Related and future JRC work
This report ties in to forthcoming work by the JRC  on Entrepreneurial universities , which
will analyse the impact of national policies on the extent to which different types of
universities succeed in building fruitful interactions with their innovation ecosystem.

6

1 Introduction
Knowledge transfer between research organisations and business enterprises plays an
important role in innovation which makes understan ding the mechanisms of these
knowledge flows important to the design and application of adequate innovation policies.
The strong performance of public research institutes and universities in Europe is not
fully matched by the innovation performance of the economy.1 Increased intersectoral
collaboration can facilitate access to knowledge, its co-production by different actors
through new research collaboration , and enhance its dissemination. It can also ensure
industry-relevant teaching and create new employ ment oportunities by stimulating
economic growth.
The importance of knowledge transfer policies for Europe's competitiveness has long
been recognised by the European Commission and the EU Member States.2
The 2012 Communication on 'A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for
Excellence and Growth' lists optimal circulation, access to and transfer of scientific
knowledge including via digital ERA among its five priorities. Commitment 21 of the
Innovation Union pointed out the importance of collabor ative research and knowledge
transfer within the research Framework Programmes and beyond, as well as of
intellectual property protection models and of knowledge transfer offices.
In the period 2011-2016, the European Semester process has delivered thirte en Country
Specific Recommendations related to knowledge transfer. In  2015, the European
Commission3 raised the issue of knowledge transfer and the necessity to strengthen the
links between academia and business for fifteen Member States, which shows an
increasing policy attention to this issue.
This report is focused on intersectoral mobility (ISM) as a key mechanism for
transferring knowledge. The document presents an overview of national policy measures
supporting intersectoral mobility. Building on eval uations of selected measures, the
report provides insights into the results that the different types of policy initiatives have
achieved. It aims to take stock of the outcomes, outputs and socio -economic impacts of
those schemes, such as increasing the abs orptive capacity of private firms and increased
employability of researchers in industry.
The report is structured as follows. Section 2 provides the conceptual framework of the
analysis. Section 3 discusses the performance of the European Member States and
selected third countries using selected indicators related to intersectoral mobility.
Section 4 outlines the methodology applied in the study. Section 5 presents and analyses
policy measures supporting intersectoral mobility. Based on evaluation reports, section 6
provides evidence of the impact of policies supporting intersectoral mobility. Finally,
section 7 draws conclusions and presents the key policy messages stemming from the
study.

1 For a critical discussion of this argument see Jonkers and Sachwald (forthcoming)
2  2007 Communication on Improving knowledge transfer between research institutions and
industry across Europe, http://ec.europa.eu/invest-in-research/pdf/com2007182_en.pdf
3 In the Country Reports (Commission Staff Working Documents) which are part of "The European
Semester", the EU's annual cycle of economic policy guidance and surveillance.

7

2 Conceptual framework
Knowledge transfer  encompasses all the functions that “may lead to improved use of
knowledge developed and held in the research sector  for the benefit of society and its
individuals” (Finne et al. 2011). Early innovation policies were based on the
conceptualisation of knowledge transfer as a linear process of public sector researchers
producing new knowledge, which is then transferred to  industry and subsequently used
in innovative products, processes and services (Arnold et al., 2012; DeBackere et al,
2014). However, a broad body of theoretical and empirical literature suggests t hat the
linear model does not offer an adequate explanation  of the way in which  knowledge
flows and innovation occur in practice. Innovation is nowadays understood as a complex,
interactive, non-linear and risky process, involving multiple feedback routes between
research, development and innovation processes and the people involved in them both
inside and outside specific firms (Faberber (2005), Rothwell (1994), Benoit (2005) in
Arnold et al, 2012) . The open innovation  model has  more recently  conceptualised
innovation as a more fluid process: authors like Chesborough (2003)  argue that one can
no longer strictly demarcate between actors performing distinct roles in innovation
processes. F irms not only rel y on both external as well as internal knowledge and
expertise, but become co -creators of knowledge, which can be used by themselves or
other firms and research organisations in their innovation ecosystem . In these systems
that are characterised by more open boundaries between knowledge producers, public
research organisations need to incorporate the needs of knowl edge users in their
activities and become co -creators of new solutions together with private actors. (Arnold
et al, 2012; Finne et al., 2011)
Knowledge transfer between academia and business is a complex phenomenon, which
takes place through a number of mechanisms like informal interactions among people,
formal partnerships and exploitation of intellectual property.  The present study is
focused on the flow of research skills , which are inherently tacit:  i.e. person bound.
Intersectoral mobility is at the core of knowledge transfer between the academic and
non-academic sectors. In its narrow sense, intersectoral mobility is defined as "the
physical [temporary or permanent] mobility of researchers from one sector (academia in
particular) to another (industr y in the first place, but other sectors of employment as
well) [and return mobility from industry/ot her sectors back to academia] (Vandevelde,
2014). However, intersectoral mobility can also be considered in a broader context of
knowledge exchange through people. This therefore includes the hiring of higher level
university graduates and researchers,  PhD projects involving placements in private
companies, dual career paths in public research organisations (PROs), universities and
industry as well as spin-off creation.
There are three main groups of stakeholders in the knowledge transfer process:
business, research organisations  and governmental bodies and, although not
subject of our study , we may also identify a fourth group of actors  – civil society and
the non-profit sector . Characteristics of these groups that are interesting for the
purpose of this study are entrepreneurship, graduate training and public research for
the research organisations, absorptive capacity and private research for business, and
policy measures designed and implemented by the governmental bodies.
Academic entrepreneurship refers to economic development initiatives focused on
stimulating the commercialisation of technological, social and service innovations
developed by academic scientists (Grimaldi et al., 2011 ; Abreu et al, 2009; Abreu and
Grinevich, 2013 ). The development of academic entrepreneurship is influenced by the
extent to which individual scientists and research teams are willing and are incentivised
to become involved  in the commercialisation of their research results. Academic
entrepreneurship is manifested in several forms like university patents, licencing, the
creation of academic spin -offs, contract research and consulting, networking with
practitioners, staff exc hange and joint supervision of students. There has also been a
proliferation of technology transfer offices (TTOs), established to enhance the academic

8

patenting and licensing of results. This report is focused on 1) staff exchange, 2) joint
supervision of  doctoral researchers, and 3) the setup of university spin offs. While
normally studied for their potential impact on the economic development, spin -offs are
also clearly tied to the intersectoral mobility as a mechanism through which public sector
research staff moves to the private sector.
The concept of absorptive capacity is key to the involvement of a firm in a process of
collaborative R&D and knowledge transfer. Cohen and Levinthal (1990) argue that the
ability of a firm to recognise the value of new , external information, assimilate it, and
apply it to commercial ends is critical to its innovative capabilities. Absorptive capacity
can be generated as a by -product of a firm's R&D investment or manufacturing
operations. Firms also invest in absorptive capacity directly when they send personnel
for advanced technical training or hire new highly skilled staff (Cohen and Levinthal,
1990). A more highly skilled workforce, it is argued, increases the potential to
collaborate with outside knowledge producers and users. Literature shows that direct
collaboration with scien tific partners can give access to tacit scientific knowledge
(Cockburn and Henderson 1998), unpublished codified knowledge (Fabrizio, 2009), as
well as access to cutting edge scientific equipm ent (Leten et al. 2012). Hiring highly
qualified staff trained in the public research sector and direct collaboration with public
sector researchers can bring new knowledge directly to the company, thus reducing the
costs involved in the screening, evaluation and assimilation of new knowledge.
Intersectoral mobility, which involves the supply and recruitment of skilled labour by
industry, addresses several problems related to the integration of knowledge and skills
into a firm's activities. This integratio n of external knowledge can be a very complex
process. Laursen and Salter (2006), following the work of Katila and Ahuja (2002),
showed on the basis of  innovation survey data of a large sample of manufacturing firms
that over-search in terms of depth and breadth (number of sources or search channels)
has a negative effect on the performance because it takes too much of the firm's
resources. The resources allocated to research could be shifted to employing and
integrating a skilled worker that can directly deliver a limited number of solutions.
Intersectoral mobility may therefore address the attention allocation problem (Koput
1997), i.e., the abundance of external ideas is difficult to process and acquire, so they
need to be given a proper attention in ord er to be implemented. Knowledge can also be
better integrated when knowledge bases are similar (Kogut and Zander 1992) but not
too close (Sapienza et al. 2004) as the latter situation can limit the novelty of selected
solutions. Attracting highly skilled workers into the company can contribute to finding
the right balance between the similarity and difference of internal and external
knowledge bases.
Governments implement intersectoral mobility programmes allo wing companies to
access new knowledge by contracting students and researchers from public research
centres and universities. In most European countries legal and administrative measures
are in place to facilitate the intersectoral mobility of researchers.  Governments can play
a role in facilitating, promoting and funding placements for researchers, i.e., researchers
spend a limited period of time in other sectors in order to gain sector -specific experience
and share research expertise. Those policies could  be regarded as "soft measures" which
could potentially have long -lasting effects on researchers’ employability, employers’
perception of sources of innovation and the use of outside knowledge as well as the
mindset of academics by introducing a commercial perspective to their research , and
finally, trigger long-term collaborative activities.
The literature evaluating intersectoral mobility policies and presenting insights into
outputs and the impact of such measures is growing. Scholars  analyse additionality
effects in terms of innovation efforts and capabilities of firms (Herrera et al,(2010);
Martinez et al. (2015)), salaries and employment of R&D workers (Thomson and Jensen,
2010), the overall role of researchers in stimulating knowledge transfer (Levy,  2005) or
exploring the European community innovation survey (CIS) to investigate the firms co -

9

operation patterns (Tether, 2002). Different approaches are used to measure the impact
of intersectoral mobility, relying both on qualitative and quantitative as sessments.
Indicators used include: level of R&D investment (in -house, from external sources and
total), propensity to patent, innovative firms cooperating with external partners,
researchers employed by sector, level and sector of employment of PhDs. Resu lts from
the empirical studies confirm the positive effect of intersectoral mobility. However, they
also point to some constraints and unknowns which can limit the potential benefits from
intersectoral mobility (Herrera, 2010).
This report investigates po licy efforts at country level. By analysing relevant policy
instruments and their evaluations, the report aims to address t he following research
questions:
1. Which are the most commonly used measures to support intersectoral mobility in
the Member States?
2. To what extent are the intersectoral mobility policy measures evaluated and how?
3. What is the evidence of the impact of intersectoral mobility policy instruments
based on those evaluations?
 And more specifically , how is the effect of the policies measured – what are the
input, output/outcomes and impact indicators?

10

3 Quantitative assessment of EU countries performance in
knowledge transfer and intersectoral mobility

The EU Member States show stark differences in  performance on a number of widely
adopted knowledge transfer (KT) indicators. While acknowledging the fact that a mere
quantification of KT activities may lead to a biased assessment of a KT system's
effectiveness, this section provides a more general pic ture of the EU Member States'
performance in order to place the rest of the analysis into context. This section is based
on a series of indicators which are described in more detail in Annex 1. This Annex
provides an overview of the Member States' performance on three additional indicators:
innovative firms' cooperation patterns (CIS, Eurostat); publicl y performed R&D financed
by the business sector (Eurostat), and public -private co -publications (Scopus, Scival).
The Annex also provides some methodological background for the figures on inter -
sectoral mobility presented in this section.

When considering the share of companies reporting collaboration with universities
or public research organisations , one observes that there is no clear distribution
between the countries on the basis of overall innovation performance. The innovation
leaders and innovation  followers in general have a relatively high level of performance
on the extent to which companies collaborate with academia. A notable exception,
however, is Germany where this type of collaboration is relatively low. Especially the UK,
Belgium and Austri a show relatively high levels of academia -business interaction. The
moderate and modest innovators tend to score lower on this indicator, but there are a
number of exceptions including Cyprus, Lithuania, Estonia, Hungary and Slovakia, which
score higher ra tes than some of the leading innovators. Another frequently used
indicator of knowledge transfer activities is the share of public R&D directly funded by
the business enterprise sector  as a share of the gross domestic expenditure on R&D
(GERD). Again the p icture that emerges from the figures is mixed, but not in the same
way as for the first indicator. While for Germany a small share of companies reported to
depend on universities or PROs, the relative volume of business funding to these
organisations is the highest in Europe4. Other differences include the relatively low share
of British business funding of public R&D and the very high score of such funding in
Lithuania. The number of public-private co-publications as share of the total number
of publicatio ns by contrast provides a fairly straight -forward picture. The innovation
leaders and innovation followers clearly show high shares whereas the moderate and
modest innovators score below the EU28 average.

This brief description of the relative performance  across the EU Member States on KT
indicators leads to the conclusion that the KT process is multifaceted and difficult to
capture by a single indicator. Thus it is important to consider multiple indicators in
combination, but due to the big variation in t he performance of the EU Member States
on the three indicators it is difficult to draw clear conclusions on the relative KT
performance of the different countries.

4 A potential explanation for this observation is that in Germany, the Fraunhofer institutes stand
out as a major contributor to translational research.

11

Figure 1 Countries according to the number of researchers employed in industry as share of total employment
(Eurostat, 2016)

The number of researchers employed in industry as share of total employment
(Figure 1) may be considered as an indicator of past intersectoral mobility and
absorptive capacity of the firms 5  in the different EU Member States. It is also an
indicator of the investment of governments in PhD training. If the number of PhD
candidates funded exceeds the turnover of academic personnel, a surplus of researchers
is available for the non -academic labour market.  One observes that leading innovators
such as Finland, Sweden and Denmark have relatively high levels of full time equivalent
(FTE) researchers employed in the business sector. This partially reflects the structure of
their economy with a relatively high share of knowledge intensive sectors  (such as high-
tech manufacturing or financial services) . Germany, however, rates close to the EU
average.
The MORE 2 6 survey of doctorate holders currently employed in the Member States
universities shows that the mobility of doctorate holders  to industry and back to
academia7 is particularly high in Bulgaria, Hungary, Greece, Cyprus and Poland ( Figure
2). This suggest s that these countries may be less in need of policy instruments
stimulating temporary intersectoral mobility, as this process already oc curs at high
levels. Alternatively it may be due to the relative unattractiveness of industry
employment compared to academic emplo yment. The permanent recruitment of
researchers by the business sector (see Figure 1) remains at relatively low levels which
may also impact on the propensity of researchers to choose university employment.
Therefore, there remains a rationale in these countries for measures supporting
intersectoral mobility. Among knowledge intensive economies such as those of
Switzerland, Denmark, the Netherlands and Belgium, the levels of temporary
intersectoral mobility (as measured by MORE 2) are relatively high. In some countries,
such a s Italy, Portugal, Slovakia and Romania, the indicators of both permanent and
temporary mobility from the public to the private sector have low values. This is also
true for France concerning the indicators for temporary mobility derived from the MORE

5 See also Annex 1
6 ec.europa.eu/euraxess/pdf/research_policies/more2/Final%20report.pdf
7 A limitation of the MORE II study is that the sample only covered doctorate holders working in
universities. Respondents must thus have returned to academia when taking part in the survey.

12

II study. In terms of the share of researchers employed in industry, France scores well
above the EU average. One explanation for this observation is that the Eurostat
definition of researchers includes engineers 8 and that in France (as well as in some other
countries) engineers play an important role in private sector research. 9 Another reason
could be that academia is relatively closed to the reintegration of researchers with
business experience10.

Figure 2 Intersectoral mobility to private industry (per country)
Data: MORE2 HEI survey (2012)
Report: IDEA Consult et al, 2013. MORE2 - Support for continued data collection and analysis concerning
mobility patterns and career paths of researchers, HEI report (WP1). European Commission, DG Research and
Innovation.

The MORE 2 study focuses on researchers currently employed in academia and therefore
gives only a partial view of the intersectoral mobility of researchers. We adopt the
measure "researchers employed in business" as an indicato r11 of mobility from the public
to the private sector as well as the absorptive capacity of private sector firms. In general
the performance of countries on this indicator is in line with indicators like business R&D
intensity and a number of the broader KT indicators presented in Annex 1.

8  "Researchers are professionals engaged in the conception or creation of new knowledge,
products, processes, methods and systems and also in the management of the projects concerned"
(OECD Frascati Manual, 2002).
9 https://www.researchprofessional.com/0/rr/news/europe/france/2016/3/PhD-holders-play-
second-fiddle-to-engineers-in-French-industry.html
10
http://www.eui.eu/ProgrammesAndFellowships/AcademicCareersObservatory/AcademicCareersbyC
ountry/France.aspx
11  See definition for "re searchers" above. In addition, several studies acknowledge that the
employment of university researchers is an effective way to transfer knowledge from universities
to firms (Zucker et al., 2002; Gübeli and Doloreux, 2005). See Annex 1 for more information

13

4 Methodological approach

Evaluations can be viewed as case studies of the impact of individual R&I policy
interventions. This report follows Ebersberger et al. (2006) in arguing that a combined
analysis of evaluations c an provide us with an insight beyond specific policy
interventions. Through the approach outlined in this section, the intention is to analyse
the impact of different types of policy initiatives. The combined use of existing
evaluations to come to a more g rounded assessment of the effectiveness of types of
policy interventions knows a considerable history and is being used to inform R&I policy
(Ebersberger et al, 2006; Edler et al, 2008; Gok and Edler, 2012), education policy (e.g.
Scriven, 2009), developme ntal aid (e.g. Olsen & O'Reilly, 2011; The Copenhagen
Consensus, 201612) and health policy (e.g. Greenalgh, 2004).
The emergence of systematic evaluation has accompanied the development of R&I policy
making since the 1980s (Georghiou, 13 ). A first step in the analysis of R&I policy
evaluation was made by the OECD in 1997 14 in order to compare approaches and
identify best practices in R&I policy evaluation (Papaconstantinou and Polt, 1997,
followed among others by the JRC IPTS in Fahrenkrog et al, 2002). Base d on R&I
evaluation reports collected through several EU funded programmes (INNO -appraisal
(Edler et al, 2010) followed by SIPER), a literature is emerging, which seeks to exploit
existing evaluations to address questions regarding the nature and quality o f evaluations
of R&I policy measures carried out in the member states, the nature of evaluations
themselves in the R&I realm (Edler et al, 2012; Gok and Edler, 2012), their impact on
the policy making process, R&I policy performance at the system level (Ed ler et al,
2008; Ebersberger et al, 2006) and, most relevant for this study, to gain an insight in
the impact of specific types of policies beyond the singular cases to which individual
evaluations are applied (Edler et al, 2008, Ebersberger et al, 2006).
Evaluation synthesis is best understood as a content analysis of multiple evaluation
reports on similar programmes or projects in the field of evaluation of interest. Such a
synthesis is, in contrast to a meta -analysis in which the data from a larger numb er of
evaluations are "re-analysed" to increase the number of cases, mainly based on the key
messages from the evaluation reports and thus does not directly rely on the raw data on
which these evaluations are based (Bewyl & Associates, 2016; Ebersberger et  al,
2006)15:
Figure 3 provides a schematic overview of the research design and the approach taken.

12 http://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/bangladesh-priorities
13 http://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/1907894.pdf
Papaconstantinou G, Polt W. 1997. ‘Policy Evaluation in Innovation and Technology: An Overview’ .
in Proceedings from OECD Conference on Policy evaluation in innovation and Technology, Paris 26–
27 June 1997 < http://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/1822393.pdf > accessed May 2016.
15 http://eval-wiki.org/w_glossar/index.php?title=Kategorie:A_bis_Z&pagefrom=Meta-
Evaluation#mw-pages

14

Figure 3 Scheme of the methodological approach used for the purpose of the report

A first phase is to come to a broad and comprehensive overview of the national policy
measures taken in the Member States (with the exception of Belgium where the research
and innovation polic y is devolved to regions)  to promote the short and long term
intersectoral mobility of academic researchers to industry (and potentially also in the
other direction – from industry to academia). It should be noted that there is a wealth of
policy measures implemented on a regional level, by individual universities and
companies.

The national policy measures in all Member States are identified and classified according
to the type of interventions and beneficiaries.
Countries are then grouped applying a two-step classification:
1) The countries are grouped into two groups based on the number of
intersectoral mobility measures.
2) Within the groups identified, the countries are divided into two groups –
above and below EU -28 average  -based on the number of researc hers
employed in industry as share of total employment
The result is a matrix of 6 country groups.

15

The national policy measures are identified on the basis of the following sources:
 RIO Country Report series 2014 covering 28 Member States and 2015 series
covering 28 Member States and five associated countries (Iceland, Israel,
Norway, Switzerland, Turkey)16
 The DG RTD commissioned Researchers' Report 201417
 Complementary desk research
The second phase involved more in depth analysis of those policy instrumen ts, whose
impact has been evaluated by the Member States. We collected data on the selection of
policy measures, using readily available evaluation reports of intersectoral mobility
schemes. The main source of the evaluations is the SIPER database 18 , which is
complemented by desk research and information from the Research & Innovation
Observatory (RIO) policy repository 19. In view of the limited search outcomes, the
analysis also includes additional sources, such as self -evaluations, progress reports and
scientific articles, which evaluate more than one scheme.
Although there have been important policy initiatives, evaluating their success is difficult,
because there is little agreement as to what evaluation method is appropriate. Moreover,
there is no easy way to measure the counter -factual of what would have oc curred if
these initiatives had not been implemented (Grimaldi et al., 2011).
The evaluations used in this study vary considerably in their design, nature and the input
and output variables they use. The report aims to both do justice to some of the breadt h
of the evaluations covered and to zoom in into a number of shared elements. Clearly,
there are many challenges regarding the use of evaluation reports to assess the impact
of intersectoral mobility measures. In terms of coverage, the evaluations are very
scarce: only a limited number of documents have been identified. Moreover, the
evaluations differ in approaches, scope, metrics used, etc. This makes it even harder to
build a comprehensive picture for benchmarking and comparison across countries. This
heterogeneity also limits the extent to which the data sources can be used to draw
robust conclusions about the effect of the respective types of policy instruments.
Nevertheless, the evaluations represent a valuable source of information which allows us
to grasp the complexity of the whole process.

16 https://rio.jrc.ec.europa.eu/en/country-analysis
17 http://ec.europa.eu/euraxess/index.cfm/services/researchPolicies
18 SIPER (Science and Innovation Policy Evaluations Repository) database is a central source of
knowledge on research and innovation policy evaluations. Its aim is twofold: to provide on -line
access to a unique collection of policy evaluation reports, located at a single location; to allow
policy learning by providing an informed analysis of the database contents in a way that is both
searchable for policy makers and other stakeholders and provides the basis for additional academic
analysis.
19 Research and Innovation Observatory (RIO) is an initiative of the European Commission to
monitor and analyse research and innovation developments at country and EU levels to support
better policy making i n Europe. R&I documents are stored here:
https://rio.jrc.ec.europa.eu/en/library

16

5 Analysis of intersectoral mobility policy measures

The large scale mapping of the national policy measures (based on the sources described
in the previous section quantifying the number of measures without in -depth analysis of
their scale and amount of funding) in the Member States showed that the main types of
policy interventions are focused on bringing skilled personnel to the business sector and
only sporadically to other sectors (non -profit or government).  We have not identified
specific national policy measures focused on bringing back researchers to academia 20 but
some measures do not specify the direction of the mobility and allow for both directions.
The mapping does not include policy measures targeting  mediating/intermediary
structures such as Research and Technology Organisations (RTOs) that may also support
intersectoral mobility but have not been created for this purpose. We have, however,
included regulations supporting intersectoral mobility (see a nnex), but as such
instruments are rarely evaluated, they were not taken into account in the analysis.
The results of the policy measures mapping is as follows:
Member States: 17 Member States have 3 types of policy measures; 8 Member
States have 1-2 types; 2 Member States do not have any relevant measures;
Associated countries: 3 countries have each 3 measures, 1 country has only 1
measure, and 1 country has no measures.

Figure 4 Countries according to the number of researchers employed in industry as share of total employment
(Eurostat, 2016)

As discussed in the section on methodology, the countries are grouped according to the
number of researchers employed in industry as share of total employment  (see figure 4)
and the number of policy measures related to the intersectoral mobility that are in place.

20 At the EU level the MSCA programme does have an instrument with this objective.

17

Table 1 Country grouping based on the number of researchers employed in the business sector and range of
intersectoral mobility measures
 Above EU-28 average level
of researchers employed
in the business sector
Below EU-28 average level
of researchers employed
in the business sector
Countries with a wide
range of ISM
measures (all three
types)
AT, BE, DE, DK, FR, IE, NO,
SE,
BG, HR, EL, ES, HU, I T, LT,
PL, PT, TR, UK
Countries with limited
number of ISM
measures (1-2)
FI, LU, NL, SI  CH, CY, EE, MT,SK, RO ,
Countries with no ISM
measures
IS CZ, LV

Countries with a wide range of measures
One observes that most countries, both those with high an d lower levels of business
employment of researchers, have implemented a broad range of policy instruments to
promote intersectoral mobility. The Netherlands, Finland and Slovenia have not
implemented as broad an array of measures but do have relatively hi gh levels of
business employment of researchers. Two Member States (Czech Republic and Latvia)
and one associated country 21 (Iceland) do not yet have any measures  specifically
targeting intersectoral mobility of researchers . Slovakia and Slovenia have discontinued
measures aimed at intersectoral mobility. Slovakia has not implemented new ones and
Slovenia merged the measure in a programme funded by the European Social Funds
"Strengthening R&D departments in business enterprises (KROP)" .
Cluster 1 – Above EU -28 average level of researchers employed in business
sector and wide range of ISM measures
 Austria has introduced quite a variety of mobility schemes including an Industrial PhD
Programme, Young Experts programme targeted at PhD students and PhD h olders and a
specific programme targeting women researchers (FEMtech Career Paths). The country has
introduced also two measures aimed a t the creation of spin -offs (AplusB - Academia plus
Business and Phoenix Award).
 Belgium, given its regional competences  in the area of R&I, has a wide range of
measures such as PhDs targeted Baekeland Mandates in Flanders, Doctiris in
Brussels Capital, and PRODOC programme in Wallonia. Wallonia has also a FIRST
Higher Education Institutes measure targeting researcher and F landers support
research take up by industry through R&D tax credits and Flanders support
research take up by industry through R&D tax credits and Beware Fellowships. All
three regions support spin -offs creation (Spin -off Mandates in Flanders, the
Industrial Research Fund for universities  (in Flanders), Spin-off in Brussels, and
First spin-off in Wallonia).
 Denmark has a long standing tradition in an Industrial PhD programme (since

21 Israel, for which we do not have data about the number of researchers, runs two programmes
supporting PhDs – MAGNET and Nofar. The National Programme supporting the Return of Israeli
Academics also assists the Israeli industry to absorb qualified personnel. The Young Entrepreneurs
scheme supports the creation of spin-offs.

18

1994) and introduced also an Industrial Post -doc measure fairly recently (2011).
Both programmes have been evaluated and the results are used subsequently in
this study.
 Germany offers a number of measures, including Industrial PhDs, Fraunhofer
Attract Programme aimed at researchers, and Fraunhofer Institutes Shared
Professorship programme. The spin -offs are supported through Helmholtz
Enterprise, High -tech Start -up Fund (High -tech Gründerfonds) and EXIST -
University-Based Business Start-Ups programme, which has been evaluated.
 France is one of the Member States with a lon g lasting PhD intersectoral
mobility programme (since 1981) - CIFRE fellowship. It also supports in a wider
context researchers uptake in industry through the research tax credit (CIR).
Finally it has introduced a spin -off policy measure - JEU-JEI and PEPI TE
programme.
 Ireland offers PhD students an IRC Employment-based Postgraduate Programme
and seasoned researchers can choose between many programmes, including SFI
Industry Fellowship Programme, the loan of qualified personnel (for SMEs),
Enterprise Partn ership Scheme, Elevate SFI Short -term Industry Visiting
Fellowship. Enterprise Ireland New Frontiers Programme supports the creation of
spin-offs.
 Norway runs since 2008 an Industrial PhD scheme and evaluated it in 2012. In
2016 the country has introduced  a new pilot scheme for support to students and
PhDs who want to engage in entrepreneurship.
 Sweden runs two schemes targeted at PhDs - Company graduate schools
(Företagsforskarskolor) and Industrial PhD project (Industridoktorand projekt -
ID-projekt). Four different schemes were put in place to facilitate the uptake of
researchers by the private sector (Development of the Knowledge Triangle;
Mobility for Growth; VINNMER; FLEXIT)

Cluster 2 – Above EU -28 average level of researchers employed in business
sector and limited number of ISM measures
 Finland supports researchers' mobility on national level through Academy
Project funding.
 Luxembourg offers Public -Private Partnerships under the AFR (Aides à la
Formation-Recherche) for PhD researchers.
 The Netherlands supports the uptake of researchers in business through the
Kenniswerkers programme.
 Slovenia supported PhD students through the scheme Young researchers in the
business sector (closed in 2010) and PhD holders through the Call for
strengthening R&D departments in business enterprises (KROP),
Interdisciplinary teams in the business sector and Mobility grants for researchers
from public sector to enter business enterprises. None of those schemes are
available in the current programming.

19

Cluster 3 – Below EU -28 average level of researchers employed in business
sector and wide range of ISM measures
 Bulgaria has so far introduced two measures aimed at PhD students - Stipends
for doctoral students preparing their theses in a national company and Indu strial
PhDs. It finances also the spin -off creation through the Tehnostart programme -
Encouraging the innovation activity of young people in Bulgaria.
 Croatia, within its Operational Programme Human Resources Development,
supports PhD students' mobility,  and has introduced a specific intersectoral
policy measure Young Researchers' Career Development Project – Training of
Doctoral Students. It has also specific measures for PhD graduates - NEWFELPRO
and spin-off creation (PoC PUBLIC).
 Greece has used the s tructural funds (2007 -2013) to support enterprises in
recruiting high -level scientific personnel and to encourage spin -off creation
through the Creation programme.
 Hungarian researchers can use the industry sponsored PhD programmes, as
well as Kozma László  and 5LET/IDEA support researchers mobility to industry.
New Hungary Venture Capital Programme supports the creation of spin-offs.
 Italy has introduced a national measure PhD ITalents and high level
apprenticeship contracts are offered by regions. The upta ke of researchers in
business is also supported by a tax credit for hiring 'highly-qualified' personnel.
 Lithuania has just introduced the PhD doctorates scheme (2015). A previous
scheme, State Support for Employment of skilled personnel in companies, has
attracted only a few companies and researchers ( 17 researchers and 4
companies). The country is running also a couple of schemes targeting spin -offs
(Technostart, INOVEKS, and Joint initiatives since 2016).
 Poland offers a scheme for PhD students allowing  them to engage in internships
in business (SKILLS Impuls). It has also introduced a pilot scheme of short term
placements KadTech but there has been little interest in it (only two companies
granted support). Nevertheless, the regions run a similar, albei t more successful,
TEKLA programme that allows for both directions of mobility (from and to
academia). Recently, Poland has introduced also a set of measures aimed at spin -
offs, including BRIdge Alfa.
 Portugal runs since 2008 a doctoral degree grants in enterprises BDE scheme. It
also supports PhD holders through a similar measure (Mobility grants between
R&D institutions and enterprises or other entities - BMOB (bolsa de Mobilidade)).
 Spain runs schemes for both PhD students - Industrial PhDs (PECTI), a nd
experienced researchers - Torres Quevedo programme. It also supports spin -offs
through EMPLEA and NEOTEC schemes.
 The UK runs schemes supporting PhD students ( Industrial CASE, Knowledge
Transfer Partnerships (KTP), Doctoral Training Centres). It also su pports PhD
holders to gain experience in industry through Support to Secondments:
Knowledge Transfer Secondments, Knowledge Transfer Networks and dedicated
industry fellowships (e.g. Royal Society).  The UK has long lasting intersectoral
mobility measures, which are frequently evaluated.
 Turkey r uns an Industrial Thesis Supporting Programme (SAN -TEZ). The
Technology Development Zones (TDZs) programme provides specific tax
incentives to spin-offs.

20

Cluster 4 – Below EU-28 average level of researchers employed in the business
sector and limited number of ISM measures
 Cyprus has supported young researchers through the PENEK programme and
placements of students in industry through the network of Industry Liaison
Offices.
 Estonia supports PhD mobility through DoRA programme (currently DoRa Plus)
and researchers' mobility through the Competence Centres. The SPINNO
programme supports the creation of spin-offs.
 Malta supports the researchers' uptake in business through the Loan of Qu alified
Experts and restricts its support to SMEs only.
 Romania has used structural funds to support Mobility projects for PhDs and
secondments to SMEs. In the current programming period, Romania plans to run
a Competence centres scheme which will also support PhDs uptake in industry.
 Swiss CTI Entrepreneurship (formerly Venturelab) provides courses and training
for academics in entrepreneurship and the Swiss university system is very active
in promoting and launching start-up initiatives.

Cluster 5 – Above EU -28 average level of researchers employed in business
sector and no ISM measures
 Iceland

Cluster 6 – Below EU -28 average level of researchers employed in business
sector and no ISM measures:
 Czech Republic
 Latvia

As we can see from the country grouping presented above, the share of researchers
employed in business is not correlated with the number of measures in place in a given
country.
The EU-13 countries in general have deployed the measures quite recently and on a pilot
basis. It would be interesting to explore why Slovenia and Slovakia have decided to
discontinue the measures.
The mapping of policy measures shows that there are three main types of mobile
personnel supported through the policy measures – recent graduates of higher education
institutions, PhD students, and researchers (most often already holding a PhD title).
As far as the policy interventions are concerned, one can distinguish between:
 graduates supported by offers of subsidised placements and tax credits covering
their salaries;
 PhD students' mobility supported through internships, entrepreneurship skills
training and industrial PhD programmes;
 researchers from academia benefiting from short -time placements,
entrepreneurship trainings and tax credits that alleviate the costs of companies in
recruiting highly skilled personnel;
 fellowships, industrial chairs and dual path career regulations supporting the
industry researchers' mobility to academia (those measures are rarely

21

implemented on the national level, they are rather introduced by universities in a
partnership with industry);
 specific subset of measures that support the stemming of new knowledge -based
firms from research organisations, the so called spin -offs. The latter is a channel
for the mobility of university/PROs staff to the private sector as well.
Figure 5 provides a schematic representation of the types of policy instruments EU
Member States have adopted with the aim to increase knowledge transfer through short
and long term intersectoral mobility of public sector researchers to the private sector.

Figure 5 Intersectoral mobility measures by type of personnel and policy intervention

The majority of the Member States have introduced at least one measure focused on the
support of the uptake of researchers in industry and most EU -13 countries that have not
done it yet are planning such measures in the current programming period financed from
the structural funds (e.g., the Czech Republic).
The mapping shows that the most often implemented types of policy interventions are:
 Funding and regulatory support for Industrial PhDs and industrial traineeships;
 Post-doctoral researchers placements  (Industrial Post -Docs and other similar
measures) stimulating the uptake of PhDs by private sector firms/SMEs;
 Support measures for creating spin-offs.
For those types of measures available evaluations have been identified. The subsequent
chapter presents an analysis of their outcomes.

22

Table 2 Summary table of intersectoral mobility policy measures

23

6 Analysis of the impact of intersectoral mobility measures
based on evidence from the evaluations
In this section we examine the demonstrated outputs, outcomes and socio -economic
impact of the policy measures targeting intersectoral mobility. To do so, we went
through a thorough search for available evaluations and a selection process.
We focus on three main sources to assess the impact of the policy instruments:
 external evaluations;
 self-reported assessments (progress reports, internal evaluations);
 scientific literature analysing specific intersectoral mobility policies.
The retrieved documents were studied for 1) evidence on the impact of selected policy
measures, 2) methodologies used for the evaluations, and 3) lessons learnt when
implementing the measures.
The evaluations of intersectoral mobility schemes that we were able to identify (given
the language restriction our search was based mostly but not entirely on English, French
and German language sources) proved to be rather scarce. In total, we have found 19
evaluations covering nine countries (eight EU Member States and Canada) for the three
aforementioned types of measures.
Table 3. Evaluations of intersectoral mobility measures
Industrial PhD
programmes
Post-doctoral
researchers placements
Support measures for
creating spin-offs
9 evaluation reports and
surveys and two research
articles
6 evaluation reports  3 evaluations and 3
scientific articles.
UK (Industrial CASE
scheme), Denmark
(Industrial PhD
programme), France (CIFRE
fellowships), Slovenia
(Young researchers from
the business sector) and
Sweden (Industrial PhD
projects).
Austria (FEMtech Career
Paths), France (Crédit impôt
de recherche), Poland
(TEKLA+), Sweden (Flexit).
These were benchmarked
with the Canadian
experience (Industrial R&D
Fellowships) since the
design of this measure was
similar, the evaluation
appeared to be of good
quality and was publicly
available.
Austria (AplusB – Academia
plus Business), Germany
(EXIST – University-based
business start -ups) and
Belgium (FIRST Spin-off)

19 evaluations for 9 countries
Evaluation of the impact of supporting policies
a. Industrial PhDs and industrial traineeships: Innovative Doctorate Training
Policy measures promoting the linkages between business and academia through PhD
candidates' traineeships in the private sector are among the most wide spread ISM
measures in the EU28 Member States and the associated countries. They usually take
the form of an " Industrial PhD" or other type of related training/apprenticeship
programme for doctoral candidates in the business sector (i.e., "Young researchers"
programmes). One of the main features of the industrial PhD schemes is that they span

24

two cultures: the stu dents are placed in a company while at the same time they pursue
doctoral studies at a university.
Country Type of the scheme Title of the evaluation
Denmark Industrial PhD
Programme
The Industrial PhD - an effective tool for innovation
and knowledge sharing (Summary of analyses and
studies), 200722
Analysis of the Industrial PhD Programme, 201123
France CIFRE fellowships Les doctorants CIFRE : médiateurs entre laboratoires
de recherche universitaires et entreprises (Article),
200524
Enquête sur le deven ir professionnel des docteurs
ayant bénéficié du dispositif Cifre l’année 2000
(Survey), 201225
Slovenia* Young researchers
in the business
sector
Effectiveness of the actions of the Ministry of Higher
Education, Science and Technology to promote
innovation and technological development of
Slovenian companies in the years 2005-2007, 201026
ERAC Policy Mix Peer Reviews: Country Report
Slovenia, 201027
Sweden Industrial PhD
projects
Planning Industrial PhD projects in practice: speaking
both 'academia' and 'practitionese' (Article), 201128
United
Kingdom
Industrial CASE

Knowledge
Transfer
Partnerships
Evaluation of Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council (BBSRC) Industrial CASE scheme,
2012 & 2013 29 ; Natural Environment Research
Council (NERC) CASE Studentship Review30
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships (KTP) Strategic
Review, 201031
*The scheme was discontinued as a separate measure. It was merged in to a EUSF funded programme
"Strengthening R&D departments in business enterprises (KROP)"

22 http://ufm.dk/en/publications/2007/the-industrialphd-an-effective-tool-for-innovation-and-
knowledge-sharing
23 http://innovationsfonden.dk/sites/default/files/analysis_of_the_industrial_phd_programme.pdf
24 Levy Rachel. Les doctorants CIFRE : médiateurs entre laboratoires de recherche universitaires et
entreprises. In: Revue d'économie industrielle, vol. 111, 3e trimestre 2005. pp. 79-96.
25 http://www.anrt.asso.fr/fr/espace_cifre/pdf/Enquete-devenir-professionnel-docteurs-Cifre.pdf
26 The document is available in Slovenian:
http://www.arhiv.mvzt.gov.si/fileadmin/mvzt.gov.si/pageuploads/MSZS/GradivoSZT/2._seja/POR
OCILO_CRP_Ucinki_ukrepov_za_Direktorata_za_tehnologijo_MVZT.pdf
27
http://www.arhiv.mvzt.gov.si/fileadmin/mvzt.gov.si/pageuploads/pdf/znanost/ang_verzija/Sloveni
a_OMC_Report-FINAL_dec.pdf
28 DS 68-8: Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Engineering Design (ICED 11),
Impacting Society through Engineering Design, Vol. 8: Design Education, Lyngby/Copenhagen,
Denmark, 15.-19.08.2011
29http://www.bbsrc.ac.uk/documents/1306-ind-case-evaluation-report-pdf/;
http://www.bbsrc.ac.uk/documents/icase-evaluation-conclusions-pdf/
30 http://www.nerc.ac.uk/funding/available/postgrad/focused/industrial-case/case-review/
31 http://www.techuk-e.net/Portals/0/Content/ValleyofDeath/KTP%20Strategic%20Review.pdf

25

In most of the countries where evaluations of Industrial PhD programmes were found,
the measures are well -established and embedded in the policy mix. For example, UK's
Industrial CASE scheme was introduced in 1994, in France the scheme dates back to
1981 and in Denmark to 1970.
In general, the evaluations prove that the schemes are beneficial to all parties involved.
The reports focus on different outputs and impacts of measures depending on the design
of the measures. Most of the evaluations focus on the im pact on the career [prospects]
of the participants and the ir labour market situation, the benefits for the companies and
the economy. Some evaluations focus on the formal and informal interaction between
the parties involved, such as networking and further  mobility of staff (at the post -doc
level).
The following paragraphs explore the impact of the programmes reported in the
evaluations, distinguishing between the impact on individuals (PhD candidates), private
companies and public research organisations and on the R&I system as a whole. Possible
drawbacks and incentives to participate in intersectoral mobility schemes as well as
recommendations for improvement of the policies were also examined.
Quality of training
In most cases, the evaluations survey the quality of the training provided by both
industry and universities. While the "bi -cultural" aspect of the programmes is generally
praised by all, the perceptions of the training received vary. In some cases, the training
provided by academia is better appreciated compared to that provided by industry (UK's
CASE) and in other cases (e.g., Danish Industrial PhD Programme) participants tend to
favour the industrial training.
The UK's CASE survey 32  reports that similar proportions of both the students and
academic supervisors rated the quality of training as good or very good in all categories
but one (i.e., commercial and entrepreneurial awareness). The quality of training
provided by industry partners was more variable than that provided by academia, which
in general was rated more positively by participants. In addition, the evaluation raises a
potential concern, i.e. that industry placement s (or other types of interactions) are not
recognised as training by some students33.

Denmark – the industrial PhD Programme34
The Industrial PhD Programme was conceived already in 1970 as a 2 -year course and in
1989 – redesigned as it is now to a 3 -year doctoral programme. The aims of the
programme are: increasing the number of PhDs, intensifying knowledge circulation
between academia and business, promoting research with commercial perspectives, and
taking advantage of competences and research facilities in the industry.

The Danish industrial PhD programme has been evaluated regularly. High levels of
satisfaction are  observed among all the participants – candidates, universities and
industrial partners. More PhD students are satisfied with the collaboration with
enterprises (92.5% are extremely or somewhat satisfied) th an with the university
supervisor (86.4%).
All ev aluations studied draw the general conclusion that the industrial doctoral
programmes have provided the participants with the opportunity to tap into knowledge
and specific expertise from industry and provided hands-on training.

32 Evaluation of BBSRC’s Industrial CASE scheme, June 2013 – pp.17-20
33 Potential drivers, barriers and recommendations are examined to a  certain extent at the end of
the section
34 http://innovationsfonden.dk/en/application/erhvervsphd

26

Impact on individual careers and labour market
New recruits, trained by the industry, are more likely to fit the needs of the firm if
recruited by the same employer. On the other side, researchers and PhDs come with
their knowledge and represent highly skilled and qualified personnel. This contributes to
increasing the firms' absorptive capacity. Indeed, the evaluation reports provide data on
the general employment situation of the PhD students, the sector in which they are
employed, and compare their salaries to those of the PhD stu dents that have not taken
part in the scheme. Some of the reports analyse also the wider impact on the job
market.

UK – Industrial Collaborative Awards in Science and Engineering (CASE)
scheme35
UK's Industrial CASE scheme was introduced in 1994. The measu re is opened to and
used by several UK Research Councils. 36  In this report we examine the BBSRC's
Industrial CASE. The research students spend part of their time with the partner
company (between 3 and 18 months). Placements in industry are mainly in health
research related companies, which makes the comparison wi th other countries/schemes,
covering broader fields, complicated.

"The [UK's] Industrial CASE scheme [is considered to have] delivered highly skilled
workers". Also, "the scheme has enabled industry to influence student training and this
has helped ensur e that the training meets the needs of industry and the wider UK
economy."37 Only 4% of the industrial CASE students are not employed  (which does not
differ from the average unemployment of PhD holders in the UK) . Interestingly, the
majority of the students  obtained a post within the higher education sector and only a
quarter of them in industry and commerce. Still, the share of students being employed
by the industry is higher than for any other BBSRC scheme (see section on mobility and
networking below).
The outcomes of the Danish Industrial PhD programme reveal similar level of
employment among participants as in the UK Industrial CASE. Yet, a much larger share
of beneficiaries than in the UK (ca. 80%) work subsequently in the private sector. What
is more, the "Industrial PhDs earn approx. 7 -10 percent higher wages than both regular
PhDs and comparable university graduates" . The study reports that 335 new jobs have
been created as a result of the 50 Industrial PhD projects38 included in the evaluation.

UK - Knowledge Transfer Partnerships (KTP)39
In the Knowledge Transfer Partnerships (KTP) a "KBI [Knowledge Based Institution]
promotes knowledge transfer between KBIs and businesses, by placing a graduate or
higher level associate in a business to undertake a specific research project .
KTP focuses on businesses needs, increasing their capacity to innovate and their
competitiveness, thereby creating economic and wider social benefits. KTP also enables

35 http://www.bbsrc.ac.uk/skills/investing-doctoral-training/case-studentships/
36  e.g. Medical Research Council, the Economic and Social Research Council, the National
Engineering Research Council and the Science and Technology Facilities Council
37 http://www.bbsrc.ac.uk/documents/1306-ind-case-evaluation-report-pdf/
38 The public sector invested ca. DKK 70 million and the private DKK 170 million in 2006 for
approximately 90 Industrial PhD projects (The Industrial PhD - An effective tool for innovation and
knowledge sharing).
39 http://ktp.innovateuk.org/

27

KBIs to find practical applications for the knowledge they cr eate, therefore contributing
to their capacity to carry out research and to teach."40
The evaluation of the UK's KTP scheme reports that between 5,550 and 6,010 net
additional jobs were created by partnerships supported between 2001/02 and 2007/08.
On avera ge, each KTP partnership has created (or is expected to create) three jobs
excluding that of the associate.
The evaluation of the French Cifre fellowships scheme focuses mainly on the professional
future of the individual participants41.

France - CIFRE (Conventions Industrielles de Formations par la Recherche)
fellowships42
The CIFRE scheme dates back to 1981. The programme duration is similar to the one in
Denmark – 3 years. The measure is financed by the Ministry for Higher Education and
Research and is managed by the National Association for Research and Technology.

The CIFRE fellowships scheme reports that around 90% of the successful participants
find a job within six months. What is interesting is that 46% of the respondents are
employed thanks to the scheme directly in either the participating company (35%) or
the university lab (11%). Around 2/3 of the CIFRE participants are employed in the
private sector and around 25% in HEIs. 39% of the respondents confirm that their
doctorate allowed them to make "significant jumps" (usually associated with an increase
of salary) in their professional path. The salary levels of both groups are comparable
with the ones of engineers – a profession receiving high wages in France and sought by
the private companies43.

Slovenia - Young researchers from the business sector
This measure was considered a build -up on the young researchers programme with the
idea to provide PhD students with the opportunity to acquire practical experience. It was
discontinued as a stand -alone policy initiative. The measure was evaluated as part of a
bigger scope exercise assessing the schemes of the Ministry of Higher Education, Science
and Technology, covering the period 2005 -2007. The report is based on a survey among
the different participants.

As a result of the training, almost 69 % of respondents remained employed in the same
organisations in which they have been trained. Further to that, for 50% of the
participants this was their first job. There is a specific aspect of the scheme which
tackles the "brain -drain" issue and the report concludes that almost all the participants
remained in Slovenia.

40
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20140827133341/http:/www.innovateuk.org/_assets/p
df/corporate-publications/ktp%20strategic%20review%20feb%202010.pdf
41 The report used is based on surveys of two cohorts of participants from 2000 -2005 and 2006 -
2011 and whenever it was deemed suitable, a comparison was made between those groups
42 http://www.anrt.asso.fr/fr/espace_cifre/accueil.jsp#.Vzscu0bIaPw
43 It has to be noted this is a topic for discussion in France and the industrial PhD scheme is
reported to perform better than the regular ones in terms of labour market insertion.
More at: https://www.ccomptes.fr/Accueil/Publications/Publications/L-insertion-professionnelle-
des-jeunes-docteurs (Report of the Court of auditors on the professional prospects of PhD holders)

28

In fact, in some cases it is not easy to distinguish between different types of PhD
schemes in a certain country. For exampl e, compared to the level of unemployment
among PhD holders in general, the data reported do not differ from the official statistics
(Eurostat) – UK: 4% in 2009, 4.3% in 2011 and 3.9% in 2013; Denmark: 3.7% in 2009,
5.2% in 2011 and 4.6% in 2013 (levels 5-8 ISCED 2011).
However, all the evaluations suggest that the industrial PhD programmes have positive
effect on employment through the new positions opened, lowering the levels of
unemployment of the PhD graduates and shortening the periods between graduati on and
first job.
Among the notable achievements of this type of measures are better job prospects in
terms of wages and faster career paths. What is more, some of the measures report the
additional job creation effect.
We can therefore conclude that the industrial PhD programmes have a potentially
positive impact on beneficiaries' career prospects and their employment.
Companies' growth, additional funding and commercialisation
The industrial PhD programmes do not only target students but also aim at
strengthening the links between business and academia. Usually, identifying standard
financial/economic impacts of "soft" measures is not an easy task. However, the
evaluations report positive impacts on a series of outputs such as larger number of
patents, increased exports and annual sales, bigger market shares. Some panels (e.g.,
UK's KTP) go even further in their findings and consider the return of investment to be
very positive, value added and turnover grow faster for participating companies than the
average firm in the economy as a whole.
Although based on limited data, the UK's industrial CASE scheme is reported to have
triggered additional funding from the private sector partner to academics: "…36% and
41% of current and former academic supervisors, res pectively, reported that they had
obtained further funding from their CASE partner." 44  Another notable achievement,
though limited in scope, is the commercialisation of research performed. As the report
points out, "[a] small number of Industrial CASE studentships resulted in new intellectual
property or the commercialisation of research findings. However, this was not common
and it is important for BBSRC to manage industry partners’ expectations in this area." 45
In addition, t he evaluation of the UK KTP reports that partnerships supported between
2001/02 and 2007/08 have created between £4.2 and £4.6 billion new sales for
company partners and between £1.6 and £1.7 billion gross value added (GVA). "Return
on investment is positive  […] at £4.70 - £5.20 net addi tional GVA per £1 public money
invested by sponsors". The largest average GVA impact and best return on investment is
generated by partnerships with a medium sized company partner.
Interestingly, the panel evaluating the Danish Industrial PhD programme di stinguishes
between expectations and real outcomes. The section on economic effects is very telling:
between 36 and 48 percent of the enterprises expect a larger number of patents,
increased market shares, annual sales or exports. In comparison, after the end of the
project, only 26.7 percent state that the project has led to/will lead to attainment of one
or more patents. This discrepancy "may be due to the fact that the Industrial PhDs look
at whether their project resulted in a patent from a narrower per spective, while the
enterprise looks at this from a broader perspective in relation to the knowledge it has
contributed to the enterprise" 46. The large majority of the enterprises report increase in
theoretical and practical knowledge. University supervisor s acknowledge the progress in
theoretical and practical skills; development of business -relevant knowledge at the

44 http://www.bbsrc.ac.uk/documents/1306-ind-case-evaluation-report-pdf/
45 Ibid
46 http://ufm.dk/en/publications/2007/filer-2007/the-industrial-phd-programme-2007.pdf

29

universities through an Industrial PhD project; and insight into the research needs of the
business world. "A very rough estimate shows an inc reased turnover of DKK 640 million,
an increase in exports of DKK 150-200 million […]”47.
Evaluators of the Slovenian "Young researchers from the business sector" scheme have
found that companies which have benefited from the measure in comparison with the
overall development of the economy as a whole enjoy 10 percent higher annual average
growth rate of value added, 25 percent higher profit growth rate; 2 percent higher
growth rate of net turnover.

Industrial PhD projects in Sweden48
The Swedish scheme is a longstanding policy initiative, but no evaluations have been
identified. The purpose of  this measure is to promote knowledge flows between
Swedish universities and the private sector by supporting doctoral projects in
industry and commerce.

The analysis of the Swedish industrial PhD projects is based on a research article
examining three i ndividual cases. Due to the limited coverage of this article one cannot
draw general conclusions on the impact of this scheme. Nevertheless, the article reports
that the industrial PhD programme participants acquire and transfer specific knowledge
from one type of organisation to another.
It is clear that the assessments of the impact are very positive as regards to additional
funding for universities and increased growth and sales of companies. In addition, the
evaluations report on the enterprises increa sing their theoretical and practical
knowledge, academia developing a better perception of business -relevant knowledge at
the universities and insight into the research needs of the business world.
Impact on mobility and networking
The evaluations report that the programmes also have longer term impacts on the
intersectoral mobility of their beneficiaries. The mobility experience acquired during the
PhD thesis enables the participants to create a network of contacts and the students can
serve as intermediaries between public and private entities. Developing a professional
network in industry and academia is reported as an important impact and prime
motivation for participating in these schemes in the evaluations of CASE scheme, the
Danish Industrial PhD programme and the Cifre programme. The latter evaluation tracks
mobility patterns following defence of the PhD thesis and finds that, save from those
employed in large firms, (intersectoral) job mobility remains high, especially that fr om
the private sector to academia.
The CASE evaluation report finds the broadening of the professional network as one of
the main drivers for PhD students to participate. Also the majority of the Cifre
participants (64%) reported acquiring networking ski lls. In relation to their current
employment, the beneficiaries confirmed the importance of the networking as a useful
competence (75%).
The Danish Industrial PhD programme contributes to promoting collaboration and
creating networks between universities a nd enterprises. In addition, Danish industry
reports it enjoys broader contacts with partners and universities from abroad, which

47 Ibid
48
http://www.vr.se/inenglish/researchfunding/applyforgrants/callforproposals/closedgrants/industry
phdproject.5.4b1cd22413cb479b8054185.html

30

could lead eventually to the internationalisation of their activities. Academics also
confirm the measure helped in strengthening their business contacts.
The majority of the Cifre doctorates are employed in the private sector and 46% of them
have remained in the company or the university lab that participated in the programme.
Another 1/4 of the doctorate PhDs not directly engag ed by any of the Cifre partners are
recruited by another employer within three months and another 45% within six months.
By linking these two indicators – time to get a job and change in the workplace, the
evaluators conclude that the measure had a high mo bility potential. According to the
evaluation report, after eight years the number of Cifre PhDs employed in big enterprises
has remained almost unchanged, while it has decreased in SMEs. The number of former
Cifre participants working in HEIs or PROs incr eases over time, indicating mobility from
the private to the public sector. The Cifre schemes note only a modest impact on
international mobility, 85% of the total participants work in France.
To sum up, the policy measures had positive impact on mobility  and networking
activities among participants.
Drivers, barriers and recommendations
The evaluations of the British and Slovenian schemes point to the relatively heavy
workload in industry, which is difficult to balance with academia expectations
(publications of articles and thesis preparation). The UK KTP evaluation points that
academics are less likely to get involved if the participation in the programme will not
contribute to Research Assessment Exercise ratings 49. The CASE evaluation reports a
need to  balance business side expectations towards the desired outcomes, since the
primary focus is student training. The potential financial and at times heavy
administrative burden can be a disincentive for (especially smaller) companies to
participate in the r espective schemes. In Slovenia and France the evaluations point out
the relative lack of awareness of the needs of the company on the part of beneficiaries
and their supervisors, whereas the evaluations of the Danish and Swedish schemes
stress that it is important for the companies to be aware of the objectives of the scheme
and to engage in advanced preparation. Previous contacts between academia and
industrial partners are therefore important.
Conclusions
In terms of the impact on career perspectives and employment the industrial PhD
programmes are reported to represent good "value for money" initiatives. A note of
caution: the outcomes of these evaluations may not be specific to this type of measures,
but could apply also to regular PhD programmes for which no benchmark is provided.
Participating candidates acquire new skills, practical experience and improved
qualifications, thus increasing their chances on the labour market but also representing
highly qualified personnel, which contributes to increasing  the firms' "absorptive
capacity". Several evaluations report a positive impact on a series of outputs such as
larger number of patents, increased exports and annual sales, bigger market shares and
additional R&D funding from the industry.
The potential in relation to the level of mobility that these measures create is significant:
since the primary goal for this type of policy measures is to ensure an industry
placement of PhD students while pursuing their doctoral studies in a university,
intersectoral mobility represents a natural outcome of such schemes. Some evaluations
also report longer term impacts on mobility.

49 At the time of the KTP evaluation, the REFs predecessor the Research Assessment Exercise
(RAE) was in place. The RAE (now REF) is a process undertaken on behalf of four UK higher
education funding bodies which assesses the quali ty of UK research and informs the selective
distribution of institutional research funding (Jonkers & Zacharewicz, 2016).

31

Moving back and forth between the public and private sector, the researchers create a
network of contacts and serve themselves as intermedi ates between public and private
entities.
Well-designed PhD projects, previous knowledge of the partner and the development of
a research strategy by the firm are prerequisites for success of the policy measures.
Other elements that should be taken into c onsideration are linked to IP regulation,
workload and managing the expectations of the parties involved.
b. Building on Industrial PhDs - Industrial Postdocs
The programmes supporting the uptake of researchers in industry are different in nature
compared to the measures analysed in the preceding section. In general they are
designed to reduce the risk and costs involved in hiring a doctorate holder in a company.
We can distinguish among: funding for temporary employment of experts or post -doc
researchers (e.g., loans of qualified personnel from academia) with a time span ranging
from 3 months to 3 years; programmes addressing specific gaps in employment in
industry, e.g,. female employment in industry or the humanities, and employment of
social science researchers via different means (typically financing 1-3 years placements).
Additionally, we analyse the French R&D tax credits covering researchers' salaries, which
help the companies to absorb the qualified workforce and, in this way,  have an indirect
effect on the intersectoral mobility.
Country

Type of the scheme

Title of the evaluation

Austria Female students
placements in
industry
FEMtech evaluation (part on Career Paths)
2011
Poland Short placements of
academics/business
researchers from
SMEs
Tekla + - the capital of placements.
Evaluation report 2015 (regional scheme)50

Sweden SSH postdoctoral
researchers
placements in
industry
Flexit programme progress report 201351
France R&D tax credits Développement et impact du crédit d’impôt
recherche : 1983-2011 (Evaluation, 2014)52

Canada Industrial fellowships
for recent PhD
graduates
Evaluation of NSERC’s Industrial R&D
Fellowships (IRDF)53

50 http://docplayer.pl/10749085-Vi-edycja-tekla-plus-stolica-stazy.html
51 http://www.rj.se/globalassets/engelska-sidan/progress-reports/flexit-progress-report.pdf
52 http://www.ladocumentationfrancaise.fr/var/storage/rapports-publics/144000685.pdf
53 http://www.nserc-crsng.gc.ca/_doc/Reports-Rapports/Evaluations/IRDFReport2013_e.pdf

32

Building on results of Industrial PhDs - Industrial Fellowships
The evaluation of the Canadian scheme – Industrial R&D Fellowships (IRDF) –shows that
nearly all IRDF recipients were working full -time after the period of the fellowship and
the vast majority of them identified research and development as their primary work
activity. Almost half of the recipien ts were subsequently offered a job in the hosting
organization.

Canada - Industrial R&D Fellowships - Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada
The Industrial R&D Fellowships were established in 1980 to provide financial
contributions that support the most promising recent doctoral graduates to engage in
research and development in the private sector and with not for -profit and non -
governmental organizations. By minimizing the cost for companies to hire a talented
PhD graduate for a two -year period, these fellowships promote the development of
industrial research capacity (especially in small - and medium -sized companies).
Furthermore, the IRDF allows companies to consider a fellow for potential long -term
employment with reduced risk. The p rogramme was discontinued in 2014 as the
support was taken over by MITACS 54 - the single delivery agent of federal support for
postdoctoral industrial R&D fellowships.

Short placements – building awareness and trust
In Poland several projects funded from the regional structural funds facilitated the
temporary employment of scientists by companies, with the largest example being
TEKLA+. In the period 2013 -2015 this scheme had supported altogether 115 science -
industry collaborations through six months placement of researchers in SMEs and SMEs
researchers in academia (2013 -2015). The qualitative evaluation showes the general
high satisfaction of the beneficiaries with the scheme (both companies and researchers)
but does n ot provide any data on the impact of the scheme on companies'
competitiveness and innovativeness. The programme was seen as one of the means to
raise awareness in industry of the potential of academia -industry cooperation as well as
to build trust among th e actors. The short six -month time spent on exchange indeed
does not presume yielding significant tangible results such as preparing and co -authoring
a scientific publication or a patent. At least the evaluation does not report on
quantitative outcomes.

POLAND – REGIONAL STRUCTURAL FUNDS – TEKLA+
Short six -month placement of business researchers in academia and academic
researchers in industry (SMEs). In 2013 -2015, the programme financed 115
placements in Mazovia.  TEKLA+ was financed from the regional structural funds.

Addressing specific gaps in employment of researchers - pilot programmes

54  MITACS stands for Mathematics of Information Technology and Complex Systems. It is a
national, not -for-profit organization that has designed and delivered research and training
programs in Canada

33

Austria  - FEMtech Career Paths - the Austrian Federal Ministry for Transport,
Innovation and Technology
FEMtech is a programme of the Austrian Federal Ministry for Transport, Innovation and
Technology (Bundesministerium für Verkehr, Innovation und Technologie – BMVIT)
initiated in 2004 to promote women and to secure equal opportunities in research and
technology. FEMtech Career Paths aims at improving the career oppo rtunities for
(potential) entrants in companies and organisations of industrial and non -university
research. The intention is to boost the attractiveness of technical and science related
professions for women in order to increase the total number of highly qualified women.

Sweden – FLEXIT - Riksbankens Jubileumsfond
Set up in 2009 by Riksbankens Jubileumsfond (RJ), Flexit is a pilot postdoctoral
programme that seeks to improve contacts between higher education institutions
(HEIs) and the business sector on a trial basis. It targets humanities and social science
postdoctoral researchers and offers placements up to three years in the business
sector. These p lacements are composed of 75% research and 25% service in a
company with the fund financing the research-related salary costs and other expenses.

The examples of highly specific programmes (FEMtech and Flexit) are very difficult to
evaluate - they are small and the effects of the interventions are therefore also limited.
As the FEMtech evaluation shows, the programmes demand considerable efforts with
unknown impact on the actual career paths of the targeted group. Besides, several
approaches and methods are applied at the same time – industrial PhD and Master
thesis, coaching, mentoring, training and awareness raising. In total the measure has
reached 140 female students with the average support of €15.000. Those programmes
are also characterised by low i nterest from industry and the push comes rather from the
higher education side that secures the funding and identifies companies interested in the
placements rather than the other way round.
Failure cases
The analysis of the Member States schemes shows th at in some countries the schemes
were introduced but shortly afterwards closed due to the lack of interest from industry
(e.g. Poland, Lithuania and Sweden).This does not mean that the schemes do not work
as such, but probably they demand a different design to attract companies. For example,
the Polish KadTech programme, co -funding salaries of scientists temporarily employed
by business enterprises and delegated by public research organisations or higher
education institutes to carry out R&D projects, was n ot popular among applicants: only
two companies were awarded the support, and the programme was soon discontinued.
One of the explanations might be the hidden costs for the company.
The evaluation of the Swedish Flexit programme 55, where the company provide s a
mentor for the researcher, shows that the business side had to cover additional costs
from the time spent on writing an application form to the time when the senior staff is
allocated to the mentorship. The sometimes unclear expectations from the proje ct or the
difficulties in motivating the researchers are additional factors that drew back industry
from more active participation in the Flexit programme.
Another way of supporting intersectoral mobility – the French case study

55 Swedish Research Council abandoned the sche me due to lack of interest in 2014. More at:
http://vr.se/franvetenskapsradet/nyheter/nyhetsarkiv/nyheter2013/nyheter2013/ingennyutlysning
avindustridoktorandprojekt.5.7e727b6e141e9ed702b15e5.html

34

The evaluations of the Fre nch tax credit (CIR) shows that 49% of R&D costs, which
qualified for the tax credit in France, are researchers' salaries, while only 12% qualified
as external research. The tax credit is therefore one of the main policy instruments to
support the absorption of a qualified work force in French industry56.

France - CREDIT IMPOT RECHERCHE
The French tax credit regime was implemented in 1983 but revamped in 2008 to
become entirely volume based. France’s research tax credit covers 30% of all R&D
expenses up to €100 million, and 5% above this threshold. Salaries for research staff
are wholly integrated, plus 50% of R&D operating costs and 75% of investments in
R&D operations.

The evaluation of the French R& D scheme shows that the combination of schemes (in
this case the Industrial Doctorate - CIFRE with the tax credit) has the highest potential.
The tax credit can be used to complement the funding of the industrial PhD or to employ
the CIFRE recipient after his/her thesis is finalised. That means that those measures are
complementary.
In France the policy mix is designed to support the highly qualified business R&D
workforce and therefore there are little restrictions on combining the direct and indirect
funding support. The evaluation report explores the possible synergies between the R&D
tax credit and even goes further in giving concrete examples on how to cumulate
different financing sources.57

Conclusions
 In all long term placements the recipients are directly employed in the company
and only the research-related part from the salaty of the employee is reimbursed.
This creates a stronger relation between the researcher and the company.
 Short placements may increase awareness of companies of knowledge and
technology transfer activities and build trust between the actors based on
personal relationships but the evaluations do not point to significant tangible
results such as increased patenting activities or co -publications (see also Edler et
al. (2011)
 Longer post-doctoral placements create a personal relation with the company and
often result in the prolonged collaboration of the sectors and/or in the offer of a
permanent employment in the host company.
 Programmes targeting specific groups (e.g. women, SSH researchers) are mostly
pilots (for now) and too limited in scope to yield sufficient impact and thus
difficult to measure.
 Main barriers include the lack of awareness of industry, unclear expectations from
the programmes for the business, high administrative burden linked to the
application as well as additional costs for the hosting company (financial
participation but also human resources devoted to mentoring).
 Combination between different instruments coul d create synergies and this is an
avenue worth exploring in order to achieve a systemic change.

56 According to the conditions necessary to receive the CIR, salaries are indeed accounted as R&D
expenses (see the following doc, p.6 in the box:
http://www.impots.gouv.fr/portal/deploiement/p1/fichedescriptive_6914/fichedescriptive_6914.pd
f
57 Développement et impact du crédit d’impôt recherche: 1983-2011 (p. 60)

35

c. Academic entrepreneurship and spin-offs
A special case of intersectoral mobility is the creation of spin -offs by academic staff that
exploit research outcomes.  It is difficult to confine this new business creation to a strict
definition, as spin -offs vary depending on the origin and the objectives of the
entrepreneurs, their relations with the public sector research, as well as on the firms'
output (Mustar 2002). According to Mustar et al. (2006), one of the streams of literature
takes a resource-based perspective to spin -offs. Within that perspective, the category of
human resources directly relates to the issue of  intersectoral mobility as it refers to the
attributes of the personnel of the company. Usually, human resources are measured as
size of the foundin g team, background of the founders, professional management
experience, and organisational size (Mustar et al. 2006).
A commonly accepted justification for the support of spin -offs is "that economic growth
depends strongly on the development of technology transfer between public research
and industry, especially through the creation of new knowledge -based firms"  (Mustar
2002). In addition to that the creation of companies can improve the image of the public
research organisations and can increase their possibilities to attract skilled young
researchers. (Mustar 2002)
According to Clarysse et al. (2007), during the 1990s many universities in Europe had
financing difficulties and were seeking additional sources of income. Policy makers also
considered universities to be a part of the innovation process and introduced changes in
the legislation as well as policy mea sures for supporting young companies. The policy
instruments aim at  increasing the number of academic spin -offs, enhancing their quality
and their likelihood to succeed.
Mustar (2002) defines six main groups of public policies that support spin -offs from
higher education and research organisations: researchers' status, intellectual property,
training in entrepreneurship, competitions, incubators and seed capital. The policy
measures related to the researchers' status are especially relevant to the interse ctoral
mobility issue. A policy framework has to be in place in a given country, which allows the
academic staff to participate in the creation and  development of private enterprises.
Training programmes on entrepreneurship are a wide -spread instrument for  enhancing
the mobility of researchers between the scientific and the industrial sector.
Although policies supporting the creation of spin -offs are in place in the member states,
we could find just a small number of evaluations of those measures.

Austria – AplusB (Academia plus Business)58
Launched in 2002, the AplusB programme supports innovative, technology -oriented
spin-offs from the academic sector in Austria. The programme funds the so-called AplusB
centres that provide professional support for scientists in the process of turning a good
idea into a viable business. The centres were initiated by the Austrian Federal Minister of
Transport, Innovation and Technology (bmvit), and the Austrian Research P romotion
Agency (FFG).
The programme AplusB is evaluated in Tangemann et al (2010). In the report, all AplusB
supported start-ups from July 2002 to December 2009 are analysed on the basis of 1943
questionnaires. The analysis covers the pre-incubation, inc ubation and early stage
phases of the companies development.
According to the report, the AplusB objective of ensuring an increase in the number of
academic spin-offs has been achieved. It is also indicated that the likelihood of success
was increased and the reported survival rate is 96% for the covered period. At the time

58https://www.ffg.at/en/aplusb-academia-plus-business

36

when the evaluation was performed, the average age of the newly created firms was 2.5
years. The total number of the created jobs was 1323 (full time equivalents) , 72 % of
which were held by staff having university degrees. The firms were relatively small: o ne
quarter of them had six and more employees, and only 10% - more than 11 employees.
As for the average annual growth rates, two thirds of the newly created firms grow, 13%
annually double the number of their employees. 29% of the firms stagnate and 5%
reduce the number of employees. The maximum average annual growth rate with 95%
is observed in the first business year . It decreases  to 31% in the second, 28% in the
third, and to 13 % in the fourth business year. The distribution of the average annual
growth rate of turnover is as follows: 86% of the firms have a positive average annual
growth rate, 13% hav e zero growth, and 11% have a negative growth rate. Companies
that increase their turnover do not necessarily increase the number of employees.
AplusB start -ups are characterized by a high degree of knowledge input and higher
growth rates compared to newly created companies in R&D i ntensive sectors in Austria
in general (Egeln et al., 2007 in Tangeman, 2010).
The biggest barrier to the companies is funding in the early stage as venture capital is
limited. Public funding is very important for th e majority of the new companies
(Tangeman, 2010).

Germany - EXIST (University-based business start-ups)59
Launched in December 1997, EXIST is a support programme of the German Federal
Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy (BMWi). The key objectives of the programme
are to establish a culture of entrepreneurship in university teaching, research and
management for the long term; consistently translate the findings of academic research
into economic value; significantly increase the number of innovative business start -ups
and create secure new jobs in the process.

The long lasting EXIST programme has undergone a number of changes in its
development. At the beginning the programme supported exclusively institutions and
only indirectly supported individuals and companies. In March 2000, a funding line for
individuals was introduced in the form of "EXIST -SEED" (a broad approach, replaced by
the EXIST "Business Start-up Grant" programme in 2007) and another such scheme  was
introduced in May 2007 in the form of the "EXIST Transfer of Research" program me (an
approach based on excellence). (Kulicke, 2014)
The EXIST programme currently consists of three funding lines, which form its core:
(1) EXIST Culture of Entrepreneurship  supports universities in formulating and
implementing a comprehensive and sustained  university-wide strategy for
increasing entrepreneurial culture and spirit.
(2) EXIST Business Start -up Grants supports students, graduates and scientists in
preparing innovative technology and knowledge based start-up projects.
(3) EXIST Transfer of Research  funds both the resource development necessary to
prove the technical feasibility of start -up ideas based on research and the
preparation necessary to launch a business.
The development of the EXIST funding programme between 1998 and 2013 has been
evaluated in  several reports: Kulicke (2006), Becker et al. (2011), Kulicke and Kripp
(2013), Kulicke (2014).

59http://www.exist.de/EN/Home/home_node.html

37

During the long lasting development of the programme, there have been a lot of
initiatives with different priorities, funding models  and incentives schemes. Some
quantitative data excerpted from the evaluation reports can give a notion of the impact
of the EXIST programme.
The initial programme period 1998 -2005 is assessed in Kulicke (2006), which is a
predominantly qualitative evaluation. The report stresses the pioneering character of the
EXIST programme that managed to introduce the concept of academic start -ups into the
university culture. Much of the programme at this early stage was focused on creating
the right framework conditions for academic entrepren eurship. Its main focus was not to
financially support researchers in their individual start -up projects. However, EXIST -
SEED (the predecessor to the EXIST line of funding evaluated in Kulicke and Kripp
(2013)), which does directly financially supports spin-offs, already existed.
Initially, there were just five EXIST model -initiatives. EXIST SEED funding was available
from 2000. In 2002, the scope of the whole EXIST programme was extended to ten
additional transfer initiatives. EXIST -SEED funding for the t ransfer initiatives was
available from 2004 . In 2005 EXIST -SEED funding became available nationwide.
(Kulicke, 2006)
Until 2004, the total number of spin -offs in the model -initiatives was 1031, i.e., 40% of
all "supervised" (not necessarily funded) initiat ives. By 2005, the total number of spin -
offs in transfer -initiatives was 926, i.e., 26% of all "supervised" initiatives. At least 10 -
16% of the supported spin-offs failed. The size of the spin-offs created within the model-
initiatives is limited. In 2004, 3-4 employees were recruited on average in addition to
the founders. The total number of employees  in the supported companies  was
approximately 3000. In 2005, within the model -initiatives, no additional employees were
hired. The total number of employees  in the newly created firms  was approximately
1100. As for the gender balance of the applicants for the grants, 88% of the total
number of applicants were male, and 12 % female. (Kulicke, 2006)
Overall, the evaluation sees the early EXIST programme as a succ ess in so far as
awareness raising and creation of framework conditions are concerned. As regards the
actual creation of spin-offs, it is more critical, namely:
"The number of start -ups that served explicitly the transfer of scientific research results
into economic value added remained significantly below expectations. Start -ups in the
context of EXIST did result in a person -bound transfer of  technology, but only in few
cases in the form and intensity as it is intended by Key Objective 2 (Consistent
translation of scientific research results into economic value). The planned realignment
of EXIST should therefore - as recommended by Kienbaum ( 2005) – put a higher weight
on measures, which are explicitly tailored to the target group of the academic staff a nd
cover the whole process from the development of business ideas to the exploitation of
scientific research results." (Kulicke, 2006)
The study carried out in 2011 (Becker et al., 2011) considers the line of funding Transfer
of Research ( Forschungstransfer - EFT in addition to  Business Start -up Grant
(Gründerstipendium -EGS). The difference between the two lines of funding is that the
former is exclusively focused on excellent, complex and high risk spin -off projects,
whereas the latter is more general. Wi thin the Gründerstipendium, at the time of the
survey, 60.3% of the funded projects resulted in a spin -off that still existed, 31% were
still considering to set up a spin-off, 5% definitely gave up, and 4% founded a spin -off
that failed. Within the Forschu ngstransfer, at the time of the survey, 54.2% of the
funded projects resulted in a spin -off that still existed, 43% were still considering to
establish a spin-off, and 2% definitely gave up.
The survival rate of the spin-offs after two years is as follows: within Gründerstipendium,
90% out of the 78 spin -offs that responded to the survey, and within
Forschungstransfer, 100% out of the 9 spin-offs that responded to the survey. (Becker
et al., 2011)

38

As far as the patent creation is concerned, 32.9% of the spi n-offs registered patents
within the Gründerstipendium, and 43.3% within the Forschungstransfer. (Becker et al.,
2011)
In terms of  employment, 40.5% of the spin -offs hired employees (4.9 persons hired on
average) within the Gründerstipendium , and 46.7% (2.8 persons on average) – within
the Forschungstransfer. (Becker et al., 2011)
Further funding was received as follows: within Gründerstipendium, 17.7% of the spin -
offs secured additional private funding (on average 700 000 €) and 32.9% applie d for
further public funding; within Forschungstransfer, 23.3% secured additional private
funding (on average 440 000 €) and 43.3% applied for further public funding. (Becker et
al., 2011)
The evaluation carried out in 2013 (Kulicke and Kripp, 2013) report s that 752 spin -off
projects received funding between 2007 and 2011. The results of the projects are as
follows:
 realisation rate (i.e. , after one year funding period the spin -off was
realised/founded and became commercially active):  78%;
 failure rate (no spin-off was founded): 16%
 survival rate (i.e., the spin-off was still existing and commercially active in 2013):
65% of the funded projects , while out of the actually realised spin -offs 85%
survived. (Kulicke and Kripp, 2013).
In 2013, the average of the  employees in the spin -offs was 6.5 (median of 2). The
estimated total number of employees in 2013 for all still existing spin -offs out of the
founded 752 is 3000. In 2012, the turnover of the spin -offs was between 10 and 50
million euro for the top 1%, an d over 0.5 million euro for 85%. In 2013 the R&D
intensity of the spin -offs was quite high: 54% of the spin -offs invested more than 20%
of their turnover in R&D. The most important modes of financing were own financial
resources for 60% of the firms, reali sed profits for 65%, public funding for 52% and
equity financing for 29%. Within the equity financing, business angels or other private
persons were the most important sources for 72% of the firms.

Belgium - FIRST Spin -off ( "Formation et Impulsion à la Re cherche Scientifique et
Technologique" (Training and Promotion of Scientific and Technological Research)
Launched in 1999, the FIRST Spin -off programme supports projects aiming at the
development of a new product, process or service, and the undertaking of  a technical-
market feasibility study for the exploitation of the results and a business plan over five
years with the general view of launching a spin -off in the Walloon Region. The projects
must be achievable in two years with a possible extension of one year.

Table 4 below provides the number of grants awarded, as well as the budget (in
thousands of euros) allocated per year within the FIRST Spin-off programme.
Table 4. Number of grants awarded and budget (in thousands of euros) allocated within FIRST Spin-off
Year 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Number of grants 15 17 13 17 12 12 10 13 13
Budget 3386 5240 4191 5888 3880 4476 3187 3018 3046
Source: Evaluation de la politique scientifique de la Wallonie et de la Fédération Wallonie-Bruxelles 2012-2013,
Conseil Wallon de la politique scientifique (CPS)60

60 http://www.cesw.be/index.php?mact=publications,cntnt01,default,0&cntnt01what=publication&c
ntnt01alias=Rapport-du-CPS&cntnt01returnid=57&a=view

39

Between 1999 and 2012, 182 grants have been awarded out of 292 applications under
FIRST Spin -off.61 According to the evaluation of the Conseil economique et social de
Wallonie (CESW) of the scientific policy of the region 2010 -2011, more than 50 spin -offs
have been created over this period.62
According to the recommendation of the Walloon Science Policy  Council on the public
support awarded to spin-offs in Wallonia (2011) 63, the following factors may explain why
this rate is not higher:
(1) The researcher does not always have the required entrepreneurial and managerial
skills.
(2) The prospects of economic exploitation of the research results is sometimes taken
into account too late.
(3) The negotiation with the parent institution to award the project owner a license
for the exclusive and free use of research results during the first years of the
spin-off also appears too late in some cases.
Some adjustments have been implemented to the scheme, which aim at  ensuring the
quality of the supported projects and fostering the economic exploitation of the research
results:
(1) The funding is dependent on the prior identif ication of the prospects of the
potential economic exploitation of the research results via a spin-off;
(2) The funding is extended by one year and gives the possibility to hire a "business
developer" responsible for the economic exploitation of the research results.64
Conclusions
The policy instruments related to spin -offs are focused on increasing the entrepreneurial
potential of research organisations through training and professional support to scientists
in the exploitation of research results. Support is extended mainly to the pre-incubation,
incubation and the early development phase of the business venture in order to raise the
likelihood of success.  Most businesses stemming from public sector research remain
small.
The policy measures have had the following impact:
 establishing a culture of entrepreneurship in university teaching, research and
management;
 developing the potential for business ideas at universities and research
institutions in a targeted manner;
 promoting the translation of research findings into economic value;
 increasing the number of innovative business enterprises and creating new jobs,
although in general the spin-offs remain small.
The policy measures targeting academic entrepreneurship are an important component
of the innovation systems.

61  Source: DG Growth, Regional Innovation Monitor, https://ec.europa.eu/growth/tools-
databases/regional-innovation-monitor/support-measure/first-spin
62 Ibid
63 Ibid
64 Ibid

40

Evaluation methods

Table 5 summarises the methodologies used in all the evaluations analysed in t his
report. Only 3 evaluations out of 13 used a control group to control for the effects of the
interventions, including one case where the results were not robust enough to allow for
comparison. None of those control groups were used for a full -fledged counterfactual
analysis but they do still give some perspective on the additionality of the outputs of the
policy measure.

Most of the evaluations use a triangulation of quantitative and qualitative methods,
mainly surveys, programme monitoring data and interviews with beneficiaries, project
managers and other stakeholders.

Only rarely, the evaluations analysed were conduct ed with a sufficient time lag to be
able to study also the longer term outputs and impacts. Most of the measures were
evaluated just after the end of the treatment and therefore could only capture the
immediate outcomes of the measure and often concentrate d on beneficiaries satisfaction
and perceived future changes of behaviour as declared by participants.

The Industrial PhD programme in Denmark, the CIFRE fellowships in France, Industrial
CASE in the UK, Aplus B in Austria and the EXIST programme in Germa ny can be used
as good practice examples, given the frequency of evaluations and the relative
sophistication of the evaluation methods used. We should however mention that those
programmes have been in place for many years and therefore allowed for a more
systematic approach to their evaluation, whereas in many countries the programmes are
relatively new. Yet, the examples above provide a good opportunity for policy learning.

41

Table 5. Evaluation methods used in the evaluations analysed in the study
Evaluation Survey Programme
monitoring
data
Interviews Focus
groups
Case studies Control
group
Other
methods
Timeline
Industrial
PhD
Programme
DK
X

X    X
Comparison
between
employment
rates of
beneficiaries
and other PhD
holders
Based on
previous
evaluation
data
Policy measure runs since
1970 (with revamps based
on evaluations)
CIFRE
fellowships
FR
X       2000-2001 cohort
Young
researchers
in the
business
sector SI
X X X X
Industrial
PhD projects
SE
    x
Industrial
CASE UK
X X     Expert Panel
review of
data
Different timeline for
different data but core
data related to 2004-2010.
Evaluation carried out in
2012 with data gathered in
2011.

42

Evaluation Survey Programme
monitoring
data
Interviews Focus
groups
Case studies Control
group
Other
methods
Timeline
Knowledge
Transfer
Partnerships
UK
x x x
Industrial
fellowships
for recent
PhD
graduates
CA
x x x  x x
Low response
rate from
unfunded
applicants
(data not
used)
 Assessment of immediate
and intermediate impact,
analysis of 2000 -2011
programmes run in 2012.
Femtech
Career Paths
AT (part of
larger
evaluation of
Femtech
programme)
x x x    Outreach
analysis
Self-
assessment
(implementa
tion body)
Assessment of medium -
term effects and impact –
2-3 years since the set -up
of the policy measure.
FLEXIT SE
(Progress
report)
x x x     Assessment of progress –
4 years since the setup of
the policy measure
Tekla + PL x x x     Assessment of short term
effects – maximum a  year
after the placement took
place
AplusB AT x x    X
(questionnaire)
Use of
national
2002-2009

43

Evaluation Survey Programme
monitoring
data
Interviews Focus
groups
Case studies Control
group
Other
methods
Timeline
statistics
Evaluations
of policy
measures in
other
countries as
benchmark
EXIST DE x x     Use of
national
statistics

2007-2011 programme
evaluation carried out in
2013
FIRST Spin -
off BE
      Use of
national
statistics
1999-2011 time period,
evaluation carried out in
2011

44

7 Conclusions

Policies to foster intersectoral mobility are in place in almost all MS. Many of them have
been implemented for several years now, yet readily available evaluations are scarce.
The reasons for such a limited availability vary – publication issues (the evaluations are
considered "for internal use only"), lack of systematic evaluations or schemes are not
evaluated at all. In addition, language restrictions (evaluations available only in national
language) would necessitate an investment of considerable resources to build a
comprehensive collection and analysis of documents.
The limited evaluation culture also has an impact on the quality of the evaluations. Some
evaluations seek to prove  that the scheme works and report on largely positive
outcomes and effects (as initially designed and laid down in the programmes). As a
result of this, some of them measure only direct outputs of the schemes, coming short of
evaluating their broader socio-economic impact. Counterfactual evaluations are very rare
(for an exception see: Herrera et al, 2010).
Given that quite a number of measures have been  discontinued, it would be very
valuable to analyse the failure cases but so far they have been not (openly) discussed.
All the reasons above restrict the possibility to evaluate the impact of intersectoral
mobility policies, which would allow for greater policy learning.
Yet, in the small sample of the evaluations we have analysed, the evaluations provide
proof of positive impact of those measures on researchers' skills and employability . To a
lesser extent data are provided also about patent and publicati ons propensity and R&D
intensity of companies.
The strongest evidence is provided in the industrial PhD  programme evaluations where
the impact on skills and employability of PhD researchers can be clearly attested.
The analysis of the policies supporting s pin-offs provides evidence that they increase the
entrepreneurial capacity of research organisations and promot e the translation of
research results into economic value.
The policy measures build also industry awareness of knowledge transfer, increase t he
absorptive capacity  of firms  for internal and external R&D, strengthen  academia –
industry collaboration and build trust between actors.
The main barriers to the success of the schemes relate to the unclear benefits to
participating firms. , whic h furth er strengthens the  case for good impact evaluations,
administrative burden on companies as well as the additional workload linked to
integrating new people into the company.

45

References
Arnold, E., Knee, P., Brown, N., Javorka, Z., Giarracca, F., Sidiqui, S. (2012). Knowledge
Transfer from Public Research Organisations. Science and Technology Options
Assessment.
Autio, E., Kanninen, S. and Gustafsson, R. (2008). First- and second –order additionality
and learning outcomes in collaborative R&D progr ams. Research Policy 37 (2008), 59 -
76.
Becker, C., T. Grebe, T. Lübbers. (2011). Evaluation der Fördermaßnahmen „EXIST -
Gründerstipendium“ und  „EXIST-Forschungstransfer“. Gesellschaft für
Innovationsforschung und Beratung mbH, Berlin.
Chesbrough H (2003). Open Innovation: the New Imperative for Creating and Profiting
from Technology. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Clarysse, B., M. Wright, A. Locket, P. Mustar and M. Knockaert  (2007). Academic spin -
offs, formal technology transfer and capital rai sing, Industrial and Corporate Change,
Volume 16, Number 4, pp. 609-640, Oxford University Press.
Clarysse, B., Tartari, V. and Salter, A. (2011). The impact of entrepreneurial capacity,
experience and organisational support on academic entrepreneurship, R esearch Policy 40
(2011), 1084-1093.
Clarysse, B., Wright, M. and Mustar, P. (2009). Behavioural additionality of R&D
subsidies: a learning perspective, Research Policy 38 (2009), 1517-1533.
Cockburn, I. and Henderson, R. (1998). Absorptive Capacity, Coauthoring Behavior, and
the Organization of Research in Drug Discovery. Journal of Industrial Economics, XLVI
(2). 157-182.
Cohen W.M. and Levinthal D.A. (1989). Innovation and learning: two faces of R&D. The
Economic Journal 99, 569-596.
Cohen W.M. and Levinthal D.A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: a new perspective on
learning and innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly 35(1). 128-152.
Cohen W.M., Nelson R.R., Walsh J.P. (2002). Links and impacts: the influence of public
research on industrial R&D. Management Science 48(1). 1-23.
Cunningham, P. and Gök, A. (2012). The Impact and Effectiveness of Policies to Support
Collaboration for R&D and Innovation, Manchester Institute of Innovation Research.
Du, Leten and Vanhaverbeke (2014). Managing open inno vation projects with science -
based and market-based partners, Research Policy 43, 828-840.
E3M, (2012). Conceptual Framework for Third Mission Indicator Definition, Report of the
project "European Indicators and Ranking Methodology for University Third Mis sion",
http://e3mproject.eu/
Edler J, Berger M, Dinges M, Gok A (2012) The practice of evaluation in innovation policy
in Europe, Research Evaluation 21:167–182
European Commission (2011). Towards a European framework for research careers.
Fabrizio K.R. (2009). Absorptive capacity and the search for innovation. Research Policy
38, 255-267.
Finne, H., Day, A., Piccaluga, A., Spithoven, A. Walter, P. & Wellen, P. (2011). A
Composite Indicator for Knowledge Transfer. Report from the European Commission’s
Expert Group on Knowledge Transfer Indicators.
Georghiou, L. Evaluation of behavioural additionality. Concept paper.

46

Georghiou, L., (2002). Impact and additionality of innovation policy. IWT Studies 40,
57–65.
Grimaldi, R., Kenney, M. Siegel, D.S. and Wright, M. (2011). 30 years after Bayh -Dole:
reassessing academic entrepreneurship, Research Policy 40 (2011), 1045-1057.
Herrera, L. et al. (2010). Herrera, L., Munoz -Doyague, M.F., Nieto, M. Mobility of public
researchers, scientific knowledge transfer, and the firm's innovation process, Journal of
Business Research 63 (2010), 510–518.
Hirsch, C, E. Tambuyzer (2015). Innovative entrepreneurship via spin -offs of knowledge
centres, Royal Flemish Academy of Belgium.
Jonkers, K. & Zacharewicz, T., Research Pe rformance Based Funding Systems: a
Comparative Assessment, EUR 27477 EN; doi10.2791/134058
Katila R.and Ahuja G. (2002). Something old, something new; a longitudinal study of
search behaviour and new product introduction. Academy of Management Journal 45 ( 6),
1183-1194.
Katz R and Allen T (1982). Investigating the not invented here (NIH) syndrome: a look
at the performance, tenure, and communication patterns of 50 R&D projects. R&D
Management 12 (1). 7-19.
Kogut B. and Zander U. (1992). Knowledge of the firm, combinative capabilities, and the
replication of technology. Organization Science 3(3). 383-397.
Koput KW (1997). A chaotic model of innovative search: some answers, many questions.
Organization Science 8(5). 528-542.
KSV 1870 (2010). Jungunternehmer: Ge fährdete Spezies mit Mumm.
Pressemeldungvom, 12.08.2010
Kulicke, M. (2006). EXIST – Existenzgründungen aus Hochschulen. Bericht der
wissenschaftlichen Begleitung zum Förderzeitraum 1998 bis 2005 (Kurzfassung).
Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Technologie, Berlin.
Kulicke, M., Dornbusch, F., Kripp, K., Schleinkofer, M. (2012). Nachhaltigkeit der EXIST -
Förderung Gründungsunterstützung an Hochschulen, die zwischen 1998 und 2011
gefördert wurden. Bericht der wissenschaftlichen Begleitforschung zu " EXIST –
Existenzgründungen aus der Wissenschaft". Stuttgart: Fraunhofer Verlag.
Kulicke, M., K. Kripp. (2013). Ergebnisse und Wirkungen des Förderprogramms EXIST -
Gründerstipendium. Fraunhofer Institut für System und Innovationsforschung, Karlsruhe.
Kulicke, M. (2014). 15 Years of EXIST "University -based start -up programmes",
Fraunhofer Institut für System und Innovationsforschung, Karlsruhe.
Laursen K. and Salter A.J. (2006). Open for innovation: the role of openness in
explaining innovation performance amo ng UK manufacturing firms. Strategic
Management Journal 27, 131-150.
Leten B, Landoni P, Van Looy B. (2014).Science or graduates: How do firms benefit from
the proximity of universities?, Research Policy  43 (8). 1398 - 1412.
Levy Rachel (2005). Les doctorants CIFRE : médiateurs entre laboratoires de recherche
universitaires et entreprises. In: Revue d'économie industrielle, vol. 111, 3e trimestre
2005. pp. 79-96.
Martinez, C., Cruz -Castro. L., and Sanz -Menendez, L. (2015). Innovation capabilities in
the private sector: evaluating subsidies for hiring S&Tworkers in Spain. Research
Evaluation, 2015, 1–13
MORE 2 (2013). Support for continued data collection and analysis concerning mobility
patterns and career paths of researchers, Higher Education Sector Report.

47

Mustar, P. (2002). Public support for the spin -off companies from higher education and
research institutions, Proceedings of the STRATA consolidating workshop, Session 4:
New instruments for science and technology policy implementation, Unit RTD -K.2 -
"Science and technology foresight; Links with IPTS".
Mustar, P., M. Renault, M. G. Colombo, E. Piva, M. Fontes, A. Lockett, M. Wright, B.
Clarysse, N. Moray. (2006). Conceptualising the heterogeneity of research -based spin -
offs: A multi-dimentional taxonomy, Research Policy 35 (2006) 289-308.
Spithoven, A., Clarysse, B. and Knckaert, M. (2011). Building absorptive capacity to
organise inbound open innovation in traditional industries. Technovation 31 (2011), 10 -
21.
Tangemann, K., S. Vössner and S. Laim gruber (2010). Effectiveness of the Austrian
business incubator programme AplusB (Academia plus Business) – learning for future
programme design, Abstract, Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG).
Tether B.S. (2002). Who co -operates for innovation, and wh y. An empirical analysis.
Research Policy 31 (2002) 947–967
Thomson, R. and Jensen, P. A. (2010) ‘The Effects of Public Subsidies on R&D
Employment: Evidence from OECD Countries’. Melbourne Institute Working Paper Series.
Melbourne: The University of Melbourne, Working Paper No.11/10.
Vandevelde, K. (2014). Intersectoral Mobility. Report from the 2014 ERAC mutual
learning workshop on Human Resources and Mobility.
von Hippel E. (1988). The Sources of Innovation. Oxford University Press. New York.

48

Annex 1

Indicators on Knowledge Transfer and Intersectoral mobility
The purpose of this annex is to give an overview of how the countries perform in
selected, widely acknowledged knowledge transfer indicators. We conduct the ana lysis
on the basis of available indicators, which allow the widest comparison between all
countries covered in this paper. While we acknowledge the fact that a mere
quantification of KT activities may lead to a biased assessment of a KT system's
effectiveness, we do believe it is important to give a more general picture of the
countries' performance.
The annex provides information on the following indicators:
 Mobility patterns of researchers (MORE2);
 Researchers (PhDs) employed by business (BES) sector (Eurostat);
 Public-private co-publications (Scopus);
 Innovative firms cooperation patterns (CIS, Eurostat);
 Publicly performed R&D financed by the business (Eurostat).
On the next few pages we will provide justification of our selection of indicators and
depict the performance of the countries (EU28 Member States and Associated
Countries).

Mobility patterns of researchers (MORE2)
For the mobility patterns of researchers  we use as data source the MORE 2 Study 65 to
reveal patterns for the intersectoral mobility patterns across Member States. Two
indicators are of particular interest for this study: 1) intersectoral mobility during PhD
and 2) intersectoral mobility in post -PhD career. Both indicators take into account only
researchers currently working in the academic sector, who have experience subject to a
more than 3 -month intersectoral mobility period to one or several destination sectors.
The modalities of the two indicators are defined as follows:
 Work placement or internship during PhD  related intersectoral mobility
groups all the sectors different from academiathe academics into a "non -
academic sector". This makes the data more difficult to interpret thus complex to
use. The indicator covers percentage of: R1 PhD candidates and R2 (post-doctoral
researchers or(or equivalent).
 As far as post-PhD intersectoral mobility  is concerned, there is data broken
down by public/ government sector, private not -for-profit sector and  private
industry. The indicator covers the percentage of: R1 PhD candidates and R2
(post-doctoral or equivalent) PhD holders and post-PhD only for R2 (post-doctoral
researchers (or equivalent), R3 (established researchers) or R4 (leading)
researchers. Multiple destination sectors per respondent are possible.

49

Figure 6 Work placement or internship in the non-academic sector during PhD (per country of PhD)
Data: MORE2 HEI survey (2012)
Report: IDEA Consult et al, 2013. MORE2 - Support for continued data collection and analysis concerning
mobility patterns and career paths of researchers, HEI report (WP1). European Commission, DG Research and
Innovation.

Figure 7 Intersectoral mobility per country. Survey of doctorate holders currently employed in the Member
States universities that have spend more than 3 months in industry.
Data: MORE2 HEI survey (2012)
Report: IDEA Consult et al, 2013. MORE2 - Support for continued data collection and analysis concerning
mobility patterns and career paths of researchers, HEI report (WP1). European Commission, DG Research and
Innovation.

50

Figure 8 Intersectoral mobility to private industry (per country)
Data: MORE2 HEI survey (2012)
Report: IDEA Consult et al, 2013. MORE2 - Support for continued data collection and analysis concerning
mobility patterns and career paths of researchers, HEI report (WP1). European Commission, DG Research and
Innovation.

Researchers (PhDs) employed by BES (Eurostat)
The number of doctorate holder by sector of employment is a relevant indicator for this
report. Unfortunately, a full coverage of all Member States is not feasible given data
scarcity. In fact, the only source which provides harmonised information on this topic is
the OECD/UNESCO Institute for Statistics/Eurostat Careers of Doctorate Holders (CDH)
project. However, oIn fact, only half of the EU Member States (14: BE, BG, DK, ES, HR,
HU, LT, LV, MT, NL, PL, PT, R O and SI) are covered by the CDH project. To overcome
this shortcoming, we use a similar indicator instead, i.e. number of researchers by sector
of performance and as percentage of the total employment. We consider this a
reasonable proxy based on the foll owing definition: " Researchers are professionals
engaged in the conception or creation of new knowledge, products, processes, methods
and systems and also in the management of the projects concerned " (OECD Frascati
Manual, 2002). In addition, several studi es acknowledge that the employment of
university researchers is an effective way to transfer knowledge from universities to
firms (Zucker et al., 2002; Gübeli and Doloreux, 2005 ). A reasonable assumption is that
many of the researchers either have already received their doctorate or are involved in
R&D activities in order to ob tain a PhD. In any case, this indicator is linked to ISM,
because researchers are initially trained in academia and then they move to other
sectors (see supra) and also their presence in the firm unveils the absorptive capacity of
the company. Last but not  least, this indicator allows cross -country comparison at EU
level.

51

Figure 9 Countries according to the number of researchers employed in industry as share of total employment
(Eurostat, 2016)

Public-private co-publications
Public-private co -publications,scientific publications co -authored by both researchers
from academia and industry, are considered as one of the ways to measure university -
industry interactions ( Calvert and Patel, 2003 ), a proxy of the collaborations between
both ( Tijssen et al., 2012 ) or one of the co -authorship-based indicators relevant to
knowledge transfer (Abramo et al., 2009). The indicator does have certain drawb acks. It
covers only one aspect of co -authorship activities between industry and academia
(scientific papers) and leaves out other forms of collaboration (e.g. patenting); the data
is rather stable over time and is  slow to react immediately to changes in policies.
Despite the limitations described, the indicator is a useful, if partial, indicator of public
private collaboration / knowledge transfer.
For the purpose of the analysis, the indicator is elaborated on the basis of Scival (based
on Scopus data). The indicator is described as the number and/or percentage of
scholarly outputs that have been co -authored by researchers from both academic and
corporate, or industrial, affiliations. We provide the 2003 -2014 overall score (in
percentage) of academia -industry co -publications by country and field as well as the
number of public-private co-publications per thousand of researchers (FTE) of population
for 2014 (or latest year available).

52

Figure 10 Public-private co-publications per country for the period 2003-2014 (in percentage of total
publications)
Data: SciVal, Scopus based platform (last accessed 18 March 2016)

Figure 11 Public-private co-publications per country for the period 2003-2014 (per 1,000 FTE Researchers in
2014)
Data: SciVal, Scopus based platform (last accessed 18 March 2016); Eurostat*, OECD**
* Latest year available for FTE Researchers: Iceland and Turkey – 2013; Switzerland – 2012
** Latest year available for FTE Researchers: Israel - 2012

Innovative firms' cooperation patterns
The data derive from the Community Innovation Survey (CIS) 2012. The CIS (Eurostat)
is based on the Oslo Manual, 3rd edition, 2005, where innovation co-operation is defined
as active participation with other enterprises or instit utions on innovation activities. Both
partners do not need to commercially benefit. The indicator excludes pure contracting
out of work with no active co -operation with higher education institutions or public
research institutions for their innovation acti vities. This EU-wide survey is often used in
studies investigating the innovation and knowledge transfer activities of European firms
(Tether, 2002 , Frenz and Ietto -Gillies, 2009 , Cunningham and Gök, 2012 ). Although

53

most respondents still consider internally developed knowledge the most important for
the firms' capabilities to innovate, R&D carried out by other organizations and
collaborations in R&D with external actors is gaining a more prominent place (Frenz and
Ietto-Gillies, 2009). Among the motivations for industry to tap into academic knowledge
is the fact that research grows increasingly expensive. Employing a broad range of
specialised staff and experts bears high costs and companies are looking to leverage
external knowledge, including from universities and government research institutes (Tidd
et al., 1997). HEIs are considered a highly valuable source for basic and long -term
strategic research, which many firms regard as too expensive to undertake using only
their own resources (Tether, 2002).
For the purpose of our analysis we therefore picked up the 1) overall share of
collaboration (i.e. the percentage of "enterprises engaged in any type of cooperation) as
well as the 2) share of innovative companies that are engaged in the cooperation with
universities or other higher education institutions and 3) with Government, public or
private research institutes. The  CIS results should be treated with caution since it
surveys only innovative companies with more than 10 employees and a sample of
companies from a given country.

Figure 12 Types of co-operation of the enterprises (2012)
Data: Eurostat (CIS 8, 2012); data for Iceland, Israel and Switzerland are missing

Public expenditure on R&D financed by the business enterprise sector (BES)
This indicator is one of the often used measures of level of knowledge transfer. It reveals
the volume of research expenditure, financed by the business sector and performed in
the public sector, and therefore constitutes a monetary measurement of business
engagement towards academia. This indicator is particularly relevant for "consulting
activities" and " contract research" - services (outflow of knowledge) offered by
universities to external clients in exchange for funding (influx of money). Both are
usually combined with license agreement and jointly developed intellectual property
(Perkmann and Walsh, 2007 ; Perkmann and West, 2014 ). Furthermore, contract and
collaborative research are considered to be among the main mechanisms of collaboration
for R&D and innovation ( Cunningham and Gök, 2012 ). Although it is difficult to
investigate on the nature of the financed activities (active cooperation or acquisition), we

54

think that direct investments by private companies in research carried out by academia
provide clear indications of strong public-private links in R&I.
This indicator is based on Eurostat data. The "BES -financed" R&D is the amount of the
R&D directly funded by the business enterprise sector. The "public expenditure on R&D"
part includes the R&D performed by both higher  education (HERD) and government
(GOVERD) sectors. The values are expressed in both percentages of GERD and GDP.

Figure 13 BES-funded public R&D per country as % of GERD (up) and GDP (below) in 2013
Data: Eurostat* and OECD**; own calculations
* All data from Eurostat (except Israel and Turkey – OECD); latest year available for Switzerland – 2012
** Data from OECD may differ because it was calculated based on USD; latest year available for Israel – 2012

55

Annex 2
MS Industrial PhDs and industrial
traineeships Innovative Doctorate
Training
Uptake of PhDs by private sector
firms/SMEs
Academic entrepreneurship
and spin offs  and spin-ins
Public sector research
organisations: legal
framework incentives (ex.,
dual career paths for
professors)
 Title Period Title Period Title Period Title Period
Austria Young experts (before
Nachwuchsförderung)

Industrial PhD
programme
2009

2014
Young experts (before
Nachwuchsförderung)

FEMtech Career Paths

Research
Competences for
Industry
2009

2004

Ongoing
2013
AplusB 2.0
Academia plus
Business 2.0

Phoenix Award
(BMWFW)
2001/201
0-

2012

Belgium Flanders - Baekeland
Mandates

Brussels Capital: Doctiris

PRODOC Programme
active

2003

2007-
2013
Wallonia - FIRST
Higher Education
Institutes

BEWARE
FELLOWSHIPS –
Industry

R&D tax credit
1994

2014

2003
Brussels-Capital
- Spin-off in
Brussels
Launch spin off
programme

Flanders: Spin -
off Mandates
SOFI
programme
Wallonia: First
spin-off
Flanders:
Industrial
Research Fund
2006

active

56

for universities
Bulgaria Stipends for Doctoral
Students Preparing Their
Theses in a National
Company

Innovation Fund –
Industrial PhDs
2009
(closed)

ongoing
x  "Tehnostart -
Encouragement
of innovation
activity of
young people in
Bulgaria"
2014 Law on
Innovation

Planned
for 2013
Croatia Operational programme
"Human Resources
Development", Measure
3.2 "Development of
human resources in
research and
development"

Young Researchers'
Career Development
Project – Training of
Doctoral Students
2007-
2014

2015
NEWFELPRO ongoing PoC PUBLIC
(BICRO)
ongoing
Cyprus Penek – Young
Researchers of
Cyprus Programme
2009-
2010
Industry Liaison
Offices (ILOs) –
placements of
students

2010
Czech
Republic

Denmark Industrial PhD 1994 Industrial Post-doc 2011   Innovation
strategy and
PhD strategy
2012

57

Estonia DoRa Doctoral Studies
Internationalisation
Programme

DoRa Plus
2008-
2015

2016
Competence Centres 2007   In SPINNO
evaluation:
"The Ministry is
also
considering the
introduction of
a mobility
scheme and a
feasibility study
is currently
underway. Our
experience
from elsewhere
suggests that it
could be an
important
component of
the
national
innovation
system and
would
complement
SPINNO very
well."

Finland   Academy Project
funding
ongoing
France CIFRE fellowships 1981 The research Tax
Credit (CIR)
 JEU-JEI
PEPITE
programme
 Law on
Innovation and
research

Industrial
Chairs
1999

58

Germany Industrial Phds  Fraunhofer Attract
Programme
Fraunhofer Institutes
Shared Professorship
programme (KIT)
X Helmholtz
Enterprise

High-tech Start-
up Fund (High -
tech
Gründerfonds)

EXIST -
University-
Based Business
Start-Ups
2005

1997
2005
Greece   Supporting
enterprises for
recruiting high -level
scientific personnel
2007-2013 CREATION 2007 Presidential
Decree
17/2001

Hungary ERICSSON – BME, ELTE
Industrial PhDs
x Kozma László

5LET/IDEA

Industry sponsored
departments (Bosch,
Audi)

Human Resource
Development
Operational
Programme
(2014-2020)
2006-2009
2005

2005/2007

2014-2020
New Hungary
Venture Capital
Programme
2009,
2012,
2013

59

Ireland IRC Employment-based
Postgraduate Programme

 SFI Industry
Fellowship Programme

The loan of qualified
personnel (for SMEs)

Enterprise Partnership
Scheme

Elevate

SFI Short -term
Industry
Visiting Fellowship
2013

2014

Ongoing

2013-2018

2012

2013
Enterprise
Ireland New
Frontiers
Programme
ongoing Knowledge
Transfer
Ireland

Italy PhD ITalents

High level apprenticeship
contract (regions)
2015

Tax credit for hiring
"highly-qualified"
personnel
2013  2013 Legislation on
industrial
doctorate
Suppporting
mobility
legislation

Legislation on
start-ups

2013

2012-
2013
Latvia

60

Lithuania Industrial doctorates 2015-
2020
State Support for
Employment of skilled
personnel in
companies
2010-2015 Technostart and
INOVEKS

Joint initiatives

2016

Luxembourg Public-Private
Partnerships
under the AFR
x     Support for
secondment of
researchers
from the public
sector to the
private secto
2009
Malta   Loan of Qualified
Experts (for SMEs)
2009-2015
The
Netherlands
  Kenniswerkers  2009 Take off 2014 "bijzonder
hoogleraar"
(double career
of university
professors)

Poland SKILLS internships 2014-
2015
KadTech

Tekla
2010-2011
2007-2013
BRIdge Alfa 2013 Law on Higher
Education
2011
Portugal Doctoral degree grants in
enterprises BDE
2008 Mobility grants
between R&D
institutions and
enterprises or other
entities BMOB
2008   Article 30 §1 of
Decree Law No
74/2006 of 24
March 2006
2010
Romania Mobility projects PhD -
type MD

2007-
2013
secondments to SMEs

Competence centres
(NP3) planned
2007-2013

2014-2020

61

Sweden Company graduate
schools
(Företagsforskarskolor)

Industrial PhD project
(Industridoktorandprojek
t - ID-projekt)
1996

Till 2013
Development of the
Knowledge Triangle

Mobility for Growth

VINNMER

FLEXIT
2013

2012

2007-2014
  Swedish Higher
Education
Ordinance –
adjunct
professor
function

Slovakia   SUSPP 2007 -
2010
VSMP 2007-
2009

Slovenia Young researchers in the
business sector66
2007-
2010
Call for strengthening
R&D departments in
business enterprises
(KROP)

Interdisciplinary
teams in the business
sector

Mobility grants for
researchers from
public sector to enter
business enterprises
2011

2007-2010

2007-2010

Spain Industrial PhDs (PECTI)  Torres Quevedo
Programme
ongoing

EMPLEA 2015
NEOTEC

2015 Science,
Technology and
Innovation Law
(LCTI)
2011

66 Scarce info found in ERAC evaluation and a national one, focused on brain-drain

62

Spanish
Strategy for
Science,
Technology and
Innovation
2013-2020
(EESTI)

PECTI 2012 -
2016

2012
United
Kingdom
Industrial CASE

Knowledge Transfer
Partnerships (KTP)67

Doctoral Training
Centres
1994 Support to
secondments:
Knowledge Transfer
Secondments
Knowledge Transfer
Networks

Dedicated industry
fellowships (.e.g.
Royal Society)

Switzerland     CTI
Entrepreneurshi
p (formerly
Venturelab)
provides
courses and
training and is
mostly divided
into members of
universities
active

67 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/467141/KTP_Report_July_2015__1-SEP-15_.pdf

63

the Swiss
university
system is very
active in
promoting and
launching start -
up initiatives:
ETHZ (253
start-ups), EPFL
(201), the
University of
Zurich (50), the
University of
Saint Gallen
(33) and the
University of
Basel (33)

active
Israel MAGNET

Nofar
 National Program for
the Return of Israeli
Academics
 Young
Entrepreneurs

Iceland
Norway Industrial PhD scheme 2008,    New pilot
scheme for
support to
students and
PhDs who want
to engage in
entrepreneurshi
p

2016

64

Turkey Industrial Thesis
Supporting Program
(SAN-TEZ)68
2007?   Technology
Development
Zones (TDZs) -
2014? Co-Funded
Brain
Circulation
Scheme

National
Science and
Technology
Human
Resources
Strategy and
Action Plan
(2011-2016)

68 https://biltek.sanayi.gov.tr/Sayfalar/en-us/santez.aspx

65

List of figures
Figure 1 Countries according to the number of researchers employed in industry as share
of total employment (Eurostat, 2016) .................................................................... 11
Figure 2 Intersectoral mobility to private industry (per country) ................................ 12
Figure 3 Scheme of the methodological approach used for the purpose of the report ... 14
Figure 4 Countries according to the number of researchers employed in industry as share
of total employment (Eurostat, 2016) .................................................................... 16
Figure 5 Intersectoral mobility measures by type of personnel and policy intervention . 21
Figure 6 Work placement or internship in the non -academic sector during PhD (per
country of PhD) .................................................................................................. 49
Figure 7 Intersectoral mobility per country. Survey of doctorate holders currently
employed in the Member States universities that have spend more than 3 months in
industry. ............................................................................................................ 49
Figure 8 Intersectoral mobility to private industry (per country) ................................ 50
Figure 9 Countries according to the number of researchers employed in industry as share
of total employment (Eurostat, 2016) .................................................................... 51
Figure 10 Public-private co -publications per country for the period 2003 -2014 (in
percentage of total publications) ........................................................................... 52
Figure 11 Public-private co-publications per country for the period 2003 -2014 (per 1,000
FTE Researchers in 2014) ..................................................................................... 52
Figure 12 Types of co-operation of the enterprises (2012) ........................................ 53
Figure 13 BES-funded public R&D per country as % of GERD (up) and GDP (below) in
2013 ................................................................................................................. 54

66

List of tables
Table 1 Country grouping based on the number of researchers employed in the business
sector and range of intersectoral mobility measures ................................................ 17
Table 2 Summary table of intersectoral mobility policy measures .............................. 22
Table 3. Evaluations of intersectoral mobility measures ............................................ 23
Table 4. Number of grants awarded and budget (in thousands of euros) allocated within
FIRST Spin-off .................................................................................................... 38
Table 5. Evaluation methods used in the evaluations analysed in the study ................ 41

Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers to your questions about the European Union
Free phone number (*): 00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11
(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers or these calls may be billed.

A great deal of additional information on the European Union is available on the Internet.
It can be accessed through the Europa server http://europa.eu
How to obtain EU publications

Our publications are available from EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu),
where you can place an order with the sales agent of your choice.

The Publications Office has a worldwide network of sales agents.
You can obtain their contact details by sending a fax to (352) 29 29-42758.

XX-NA-xxxxx-EN-N
doi:10.2791/041776
ISBN 978-92-79-60074-6
LF-NA-28027-EN-N
