
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
A contribution to the
Open Innovation
Open Science
Open to the World
agenda
2016
Science, Research and
Innovation performance
of the EU
Research and
Innovation

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
EUROPEAN COMMISSION
Directorate-General for Research and Innovation
Directorate A— Policy Development and Coordination
Unit A.4 — Analysis and monitoring of national research policies
Contact: Marnix SURGEON
Email: Marnix.Surgeon@ec.europa.eu
 RTD-PUBLICATIONS@ec.europa.eu
European Commission
B-1049 Brussels

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Directorate-General for Research and Innovation2016
2016
European Commission
Science, Research and
Innovation performance
of the EU
A contribution to the
Open Innovation
Open Science
Open to the World
agenda

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers
to your questions about the European Union
Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11
(*) The information given is free, as are most calls (though some operators, phone boxes or hotels may charge you).
LEGAL NOTICE
Neither the European Commission nor any person acting on behalf of the Commission is responsible for the use which
might be made of the following information.
The views expressed in this publication are the sole responsibility of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the European Commission.
More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu).
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2016
PDF ISBN 978-92-79-49557-1 doi:10.2777/427046 KI-04-15-512-EN-N
Print ISBN 978-92-79-49558-8 doi:10.2777/897633 KI-04-15-512-EN-C
Cover image © European Commisison
© European Union, 2016
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.
Printed in Luxembourg

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Acknowledgements
This Report has been prepared by the Directorate General for Research and Innovation, under the
overall guidance of Director-General Robert-Jan Smits, Deputy Director-General Wolfgang Burtscher
and Director Jack Metthey.
The preparation of the Report was coordinated by Beñat Bilbao (1) and Marnix Surgeon, under the
guidance of Román Arjona, Head of Unit for Analysis and monitoring of national research policies and
DG RTD’s Chief Economist. Collection and analysis of statistics and preparation of graphs was done by
Dermot Lally and Cristina Moise. Fotini Chiou assisted with the publication of the Report.
The chapters of Part I of the Report were written by:
General economic outlook Beñat Bilbao, Stéphane Vankalck
Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows Stéphane Vankalck, Richard Deiss,
Raquel Saiz, Rossella Cravetto
Scientific, technological and innovation outputs Richard Deiss, Raquel Saiz, Rossella Cravetto
Framework conditions Diana Ognyanova
Economic and social impacts Diana Ognyanova
Part II was prepared on the basis of contributions by other Commission services and external experts:
The role of public research in economic development Slavo Radosevic
Public research and innovation policies and
investment and their evolutions since the crisis
Claire Nauwelaers
Publishing and perishing – bibliometric output
profiles of individual authors worldwide:
Ben Turner, Elena-Simona Toma,
Georgios Chorofakis
The role of well-designed framework
conditions for business investment in R&I
Daria Ciriaci
International knowledge flows Cristina Chaminade, Monica Plechero
Do research and other sources of innovation drive
productivity gains in top European R&D investors
Fernando Hervas, Sara Amoroso
High growth firms in Europe Werner Hölzl
Innovation, skills and job creation Bettina Peters
(1) Currently at The Economist

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
4
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Research and innovation are key to building
a prosperous future for the EU. They
therefore figure prominently in the Europe
2020 strategy and the European Semester
process and underpin progress towards the
10 priorities of the Juncker Commission, from
providing a new boost to jobs, growth and
investment, to developing the digital single
market and developing the Energy Union.
The EU has fantastic strengths. It is open,
diverse, and hosts excellent institutions. With Horizon 2020, the Union funds research and innovation on
an unprecedented scale. But we face three major challenges. First, we need to strongly improve our track
record in getting research results to market and technologies developed in Europe are often commercialised
elsewhere. Second, although Europe generates more scientific output than any other region in the world, we
often fall behind on the very best science. Third, Europe punches below its weight in international science
cooperation and science diplomacy.
This Report presents an in-depth indicator based analysis of the EU’s science, research and innovation
performance and provides insight into the underpinning factors and drivers. It provides extensive evidence
of the EU’s performance in relation to each of these three challenges.
The Report shows, first and foremost, that the EU’s productivity gap with the US has widened following the
economic and financial crisis and that this is linked to a relative underinvestment in R&D and an inability
to re-orient the economy towards activities with a higher knowledge content. While the Report shows that
the EU continues to be one of the world’s major players in science and technology, it also shows that the
EU’s economy needs to become more dynamic and innovation-intensive.
Open Innovation is about getting more actors involved in the innovation process and creating an ecosystem
in which innovation flourishes. Yet the evidence shows that the EU continues to be locked into a specialisation
pattern in which high-tech activities such as ICT, pharma or biotech are underrepresented. This is intimately
linked to the fact that we do not yet have the correct conditions in place to attract enough private sector
investment in innovation and for innovation-intensive businesses to grow and become major global players.
Further progress needs to be made in relation to the availability of venture capital, the reduction of heavy
product market regulations and in removing barriers to entrepreneurship and the ease of doing business.
Foreword

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
5
Foreword
Open Science is about greater collaboration, access and reuse of results and is the foundation of excellence
in science and future prosperity. Here the Report shows how continued policy efforts are paying off. The EU
is now not only the largest producer of scientific publications in the world, but has also become the largest
producer of high quality publications and is reducing the gap with the US in other metrics of scientific
quality. On the other hand, the intensity of knowledge circulation and therefore the openness of the EU’s
science system still lags behind that of its main competitors. More needs to be done to equip the EU with
a high quality science base and to strengthen the EU’s position as a global leader in open science.
Europe is a world leader in science, and this should translate into a leading voice in global debates. Europe
should also be leading the way in developing global research partnerships to address challenges in areas
like energy, health, food and water. The Report shows how the growing openness of the global research
and innovation system has enhanced the importance of international collaboration, and has become a
crucial factor in accessing new sources of knowledge and improving competitiveness. The EU is the world
leader in terms of international co-publications, but the major part of that is intra-European and in terms
of technological collaboration, the EU is not taking sufficient advantage of the emergence of China as a
technological powerhouse.
Innovation is at the basis of transforming the EU into a knowledge based economy. By providing a
comprehensive and indicators based analysis of the EU’s research and innovation performance and its
drivers, I am sure that this Report will provide policy makers across Europe with clear insights into the
challenges that lie before them.
Carlos Moedas
European Commissioner for Research, Science and Innovation

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
6
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
7
Table of contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ......................................................................................................................................................................8
INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................................................................................................12
I. THE RESEARCH AND INNOVATION LANDSCAPE IN EUROPE 15
1. General economic outlook .....................................................................................................................................................17
2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows ........................................................................................................27
3. Scientific, technological and innovation outputs ........................................................................................................68
4. Framework conditions for research and innovation ..................................................................................................87
5. Economic and social impacts ...............................................................................................................................................98
II. IN-DEPTH ANALYSIS OF KEY R&I POLICY ISSUES 115
1. The role of public research in economic development........................................................................................119
2. Public research and innovation policies and investment and their evolutions since the crisis ...... 140
3. Publishing and perishing — bibliometric output profiles of individual authors worldwide .............162
4. The role of well-designed framework conditions for business investment in R&I ...............................178
5. International knowledge flows .......................................................................................................................................203
6. Do research and other sources of innovation drive productivity gains in European Top R&D Investors? .227
7. High growth firms in Europe ................................................................................................................................................247
8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation ...............................................................................................................................276
ANNEX .....................................................................................................................................................................................................319

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
8
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
A continuing productivity challenge is
hindering the European Union (EU) from re-
taking the path towards sustainable economic
growth and the creation of high quality jobs.
The recession has emphasised the EU’s long-
term growth gap against the United States (US),
while at the same time other economies such as
South Korea or China are rapidly catching up.
The gap in per capita GDP and GDP growth
between the EU and the US is largely driven by
a gap in labour productivity, which is about 15%
lower in the EU, with the gap having increased
over the past few years. The catching-up process
of the Member States with the largest labour
productivity gap vis-à-vis the US (all in Central and
Eastern Europe) continued over the 2007-2014
period. For those Member States (except
Ireland) with a productivity level close to the
US, however, the gap vis-à-vis the US expanded
over 2007-2014.
Data presented in the Report shows that high
labour productivity and high employment rates
can coexist, although some adjustment period
with higher rates of unemployment may be
necessary when moving from a middle to a high-
income economy.
Addressing the GDP gap between the EU and
the US and thereby restoring the EU’s long term
competitiveness will therefore ultimately require
raising labour productivity. This depends in turn on
increasing multifactor productivity (MFP), which
relates to innovation and investments such as
R&D, ICT and skills development. In this respect,
it is worth noting that since the beginning of the
recession, a number of advanced EU countries
that had caught up with the US in the period
1995-2007 have started falling behind.
The EU underinvests in the basic drivers of
innovation: R&D, education, ICT
Investing in the basic driving forces of innovation,
such as in R&D, skills development or Information
and Communication Technologies (ICT) is at the
heart of transforming the EU into a knowledge
based economy.
As regards investment in R&D, some progress has
been made since the onset of the crisis, with the
EU’s R&D intensity increasing to a level of over 2%
of GDP after years of stagnation. However, the EU’s
R&D intensity remains far from the 3% target and
R&D intensity growth in countries such as China and
South Korea has been much more dynamic over the
past few years.
The EU’s public R&D sector has emerged
stronger from the crisis, as a result of continued
public investment in R&D, driven also in part by
significantly increased funding at the EU level.
The EU’s business R&D intensity has also been
on a slow upward trend since 2005, but its level
remains far from that of major competitors such as
the US or Japan and, since 2013, the gap appears
to be growing again.
The Report also shows that the level of public
investment in R&D is a key determinant of the
quality of public research. In the EU, countries
that have invested above average amounts in
public research tend to also be those having a well
performing system in terms of scientific excellence.
An adequate level of public funding is an important
precondition for a high quality science base. In this
respect, it is worrying that some Member States
with a low quality science base have reduced their
public investment levels over the past few years.
Skilled human capital is an important precondition
for moving towards a knowledge-intensive society
and economy. The EU is faced with demographic
challenges in this respect as its population ages
and fewer young people enter the labour market.
As regards public investment in education, the EU
is at a similar level as the US and outperforms
South Korea and Japan. Taking public and
private investment together, however, the EU is
outperformed by both the US and South Korea,
with a particularly large gap as regards tertiary
education. Nevertheless, it should be noted that
EU performs well in terms of the tertiary attaimnet
rate of 30-34 year olds, in the production of
Executive Summary

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
9
science and technology graduates and of new
doctoral students.
The EU’s ICT sector is not only smaller than that
of the US and Japan, its knowledge intensity is
also much lower, pointing to the fact that the EU
is a consumer, rather than a producer, of ICT goods
and services. The EU faces the risk of a lock-in
in less R&D-intensive activities and it is not fully
capturing the benefits ICT can bring to other parts
of the economy.
The EU needs to put in place better incentives
and conditions for businesses to innovate:
Open Innovation
Open innovation is about involving far more actors
in the innovation process, from researchers, to
entrepreneurs, to users, to governments and civil
society. To capitalise on the results of European
research and innovation Europe needs to create
the right ecosystems, increase investments,
and bring more companies and regions into the
knowledge economy.
The EU is still not dynamic enough in transforming
itself into a knowledge economy based on high-
tech activities and continues to be locked into a
specialisation pattern largely concentrated on
medium-high-tech sectors.
Boosting the EU’s multifactor productivity requires
a profound shift of the economic structure
towards activities with a higher knowledge content.
This, in turn, relies on putting in place a business
environment, which facilitates private sector
investments in research and innovation as well as
the creation and growth of R&D and innovation
intensive businesses which operate at the cutting
edges of science and technology.
This report highlights that the share of knowledge-
intensive activities in the EU economy (high-tech,
medium-high-tech and knowledge-intensive
services) is below that of the US and South Korea.
In addition, it is worrying to note that, although
the share is growing in the EU, it does so in a less
dynamic way than in some of its main competitors.
The EU exhibits a specialisation in medium-high-
tech sectors (e.g. automobiles and parts), with
the share of high-tech manufacturing (e.g. ICT,
pharmaceuticals, and biotech) being lower than
in the US and much lower than in South Korea.
Furthermore, the knowledge intensity of the high-
tech manufacturing sector is higher in the US and
South Korea than in the EU, which suggests that
the EU also lags behind in capturing the most
knowledge-intensive activities within this sector.
As gearing the European economy towards more
knowledge-intensive activities will ultimately
depend on a renewal of the economic fabric, it is
important to put in place framework conditions
allowing a swift reallocation of resources towards
more innovative activities and enabling new
players to enter the market.
The Report shows that the EU is lagging behind
the US and South Korea in important framework
conditions such as product market regulation,
barriers to entrepreneurship, ease of doing
business or intellectual property right protection.
Europe needs to do more to create a regulatory
environment for innovation to flourish and tune the
legislative processes to the increasingly shorter
cycles of technologies.
The EU as a whole, and all individual Member States,
also continue to lag behind the US in the amount
of available venture capital. Not only is there far
less venture capital in Europe, but venture capital
funds do not have the scale or scope to grow
companies from early stage to mid-cap and from
mid-cap to global players. While the persistent
lack of financing for innovation in the EU may be a
result of a combination of both supply (i.e. a lack
of available funding) and demand (i.e. a lack of
fundable projects), it seems that the crisis has also
deteriorated the overall situation.
A shift in the European economy towards
knowledge-intensive activities with higher added
value will require the European research and
innovation system to become more strategic in
terms of its focus areas. The Report shows that the
EU is still less specialised than the US in key strategic

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
10
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
areas such as nanosciences and nanotechnology, ICT,
materials or biotechnology. In addition, both China
and South Korea have been increasing their number
of highly cited publications in strategic fields at a
higher speed than the EU and the US. A similar pattern
applies for technological outputs.
A picture that emerges throughout the Report is the
persistence of an innovation divide across the EU,
with the Member States having joined the EU since
2004 performing, on average, at lower levels. It
should be noted, however, that the characteristics
of this innovation divide appear to be gradually
changing, with some of the newer Member States
increasing their performance substantially. In
terms of R&D intensity, for instance, Slovenia is
now ranked 6
th across the 28 Member States, and
has surpassed Belgium and France, while both the
Czech Republic and Estonia are approaching the EU
average. The Report also shows the importance of
the European Structural and Investment Funds in
financing the research and innovation systems of
the newer Member States, which will contribute to
further close the innovation divide.
The EU needs to continue improving the
quality of its science base and the intensity of
knowledge circulation: Open Science
Excellent science is the foundation of future
prosperity and openness is key to excellence. Despite
a growing number of impressive developments at
the frontier of science in Europe and an improving
position of the EU worldwide, indicators of most
excellent science show that the Europe is not top of
the rankings in certain areas.
With more than 27% of the world total, the
EU continues to be the largest producer of
scientific publications in the world, ahead of
China, which has overtaken the US. A significant
evolution since 2000 is that the EU has overtaken
the US as regards the total number of highly
cited publications.
There is evidence throughout the Report that
continued policy attention to research and
innovation and structural reforms ultimately pay off.
The continued policy attention to reform the public
research base and stimulate excellence has led the
EU to diminish the gap with the US in terms of
scientific quality whilst staying clearly ahead of
countries such as South Korea, Japan and China.
A shift towards more knowledge-intensive activities
also benefits employment. The Report shows that
employment in science and technology has been
particularly resilient during the crisis . Whilst
total employment in the EU decreased by 0.7% on
average per year between 2008 and 2013, human
resources in science and technology increased
by 2.1% per year over the same period and the
number of researchers by 2.5%.
For the public science base to be fully effective in
terms of increasing innovation performance and
delivering impact, it needs to be well connected to
the business sector and knowledge has to circulate
freely. Public-private collaboration is a key aspect
in this, in particular in an environment in which
open innovation is becoming increasingly important
and more actors are involved in the innovation
process. In this respect, the EU has made some
progress over the past few years, but its intensity
of public-private collaboration still lags behind
that of Japan, South Korea and, in particular, the
US. Further efforts are needed to stimulate such
cooperation, and the nature of the economic fabric
should be taken into account when determining the
optimal policy mix.
Moreover, the mobility of human resources is also an
important mechanism to foster knowledge circulation
between the public and the private sector. Yet here
as well, the EU is still not fully benefiting from the
embedded knowledge of researchers trained by
universities as the number of researchers employed
by the business sector is significantly lower than in
the US, Japan and South Korea.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
11
The EU needs to capitalise on its strengths in an
increasingly global context: Open to the World
Europe is a global leader in science, and this should
translate into a leading voice in global debates. To
remain relevant and competitive, Europe needs
more engagement in science diplomacy and global
scientific collaboration to enable partnerships
between regions and countries.
Challenges in areas like energy, health, food and
water are global. And Europe should be leading the
way in developing global research partnerships to
address these challenges.
While the role of the EU in the global research and
innovation system is diminishing, on most of the
indicators of research and innovation performance,
it is still second only to the US and the global
research and innovation system is becoming more
open and connected.
The world is becoming more knowledge-intensive,
more open and more interconnected, an evolution
which the crisis has only temporarily checked. All
major world regions are increasing their knowledge
investments and this has led to a fundamentally
changed global R&D landscape. The EU and the
US in 2000 still accounted for nearly two thirds of
global R&D expenditure. Their combined share has
now dropped below 50%. China, on the other hand,
has more than quadrupled its share in world R&D
expenditure over this period, increasing from below
5% in 2000 to about 20% in 2013.
The same evolution is apparent when looking
at other dimensions of the knowledge-based
economy. The number of tertiary graduates in China
has quintupled since 2001, making it now by far
the world’s largest producer of tertiary graduates.
Its share of total scientific publications increased
from 6% in 2000 to nearly 20% in 2013 and it
is also continues to bridge the gap in terms of
scientific excellence and patent applications.
Due to this changing landscape, the role
of international collaboration has further
increased and has become an important factor
in addressing sources of new knowledge and
improving competitiveness. The Report illustrates
that such collaboration also pays off: the scientific
impact of internationally co-published papers is
higher than that of papers published by single-
country authors.
The EU is the world leader in international co-
publications. However, intra-European collaboration
still represents the major part of this. On the
international scene, the US continues to be the EU’s
main partner, while the importance of China as a
strategic partner is rising.
The growing openness of the global research
and innovation system also leads to increasing
mobility of researchers. The Report shows how
this is an important mechanism for boosting the
quality of research and innovation systems, as the
scientific impact of mobile researchers is higher
than that of researchers who never move.
International technological collaborations are
also gaining increasing importance in firms’
innovation strategies, as they allow access to a
broader set of competences, knowledge and skills.
Such international technological collaboration has
intensified over the past decade in both the EU and
the US, yet in the US it has done so at a higher rate
and has now overtaken the EU in terms of the share
of patents resulting from international collaboration.
Also, in terms of technological collaboration, China
is becoming a key partner for the EU, but it appears
that the US is taking greater advantage than the EU
of the opportunities that come from collaborating
with this emerging economy.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
12
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
After several years of economic turmoil with
a double-dip recession and one of the worst
financial and economic crises in generations, the
European Union (EU) seems to have regained
economic growth, even if the recovery remains
weak and needs to solidify. The economic
recession emphasised Europe’s long-term growth
gap with the United States, and unveiled structural
weaknesses in the economy. At the same time,
some Asian competitors, e.g. South Korea, and
notably China, have increased their growth and
continue to catch up. Thus, setting the foundations
for strengthening the economic recovery and
creating sustainable high quality growth and job
creation is a priority for Europe.
The gross domestic product (GDP) gap and GDP
growth gap between the EU and the United States
is largely driven by a gap in labour productivity
that is expanding, most notably among the most
advanced European economies. Boosting labour
productivity requires national economies to boost
the amount of capital available per worker, i.e.
capital deepening, and to increase the efficiency
in which production factors are combined, i.e.
multifactor productivity.
Since the crisis, investment in capital has been low
in most EU countries, and multifactor productivity
growth has been flat or negative, except for
Ireland. Multifactor productivity growth has been
particularly poor in the most advanced European
economies, while in Japan, the United States,
and notably, South Korea, it has grown steadily
in the past few years. While there are many
factors driving multifactor productivity, for most
advanced economies, innovation and innovation-
related investments, such as R&D, ICT, or skills
development, are leading factors.
Against this backdrop, the Science, Research
and Innovation performance of the EU 2016, a
publication of the Directorate-General for Research
and Innovation of the European Commission,
assesses the European Research and Innovation
(R&I) landscape within the global context. It
identifies strengths and persistent challenges both
for the EU as a whole and for its Member States.
The report focuses on those aspects which underpin
the creation of effective and efficient R&I systems
that are able to sustain economic and productivity
growth and that generate gainful job opportunities.
The objective of this analysis is to provide sound
analytical foundations for evidence-based policy-
making and to help policy-makers, but also
researchers, businesses, and other stakeholders,
identify policy priorities both at the EU and
Member State level.
As such, the Report caters to a wide audience and
this is reflected in its structure. Part I analyses the
European R&I landscape based on a core set of
indicators and is intended to provide policy-makers
with a general overview of the key strengths and
weaknesses of the different elements of the
EU R&I system. More precisely, it analyses the role
that R&I plays in the current economic context
for the EU, the levels of investment in knowledge
creation, the knowledge flows, the scientific and
technological outputs and their specialisation in
particular fields, the soundness of the framework
conditions for effective development and uptake of
innovation, and the socioeconomic impacts in terms
of structural change of the European economy
towards more knowledge- and technology-
intensive activities.
Introduction

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
13
Part II focuses in depth on a core set of areas
that are particularly important for European R&I
by providing further data and analysis and by
using different quantitative and qualitative
methodologies. More precisely, Part II analyses the
role of research, and public research in particular,
for economic development in Member States at
different levels of technological development;
the quantitative and qualitative impacts of the
crisis for public R&D and innovation across the EU;
research excellence in Europe; the level of research
specialisation in Europe; international knowledge
flows, framework conditions for research and
innovation in the EU, high-growth innovative firms
in Europe, the impact of R&D on productivity at
the firm level, and the impacts of innovation on
employment and skills development and strategies.
Part II of the Report has benefited from the work
of academics and researchers as well as other
services of the European Commission, such as the
Joint Research Centre, Institute for Prospective
Technological Studies (IPTS), the Directorate-
General Economic and Financial Affairs, and the
European Research Council Executive Agency.
Given the scope and level of analysis, the Report
represents the most comprehensive analysis
of research and innovation in the EU and
complements other reports such as the annual
Innovation Union Scoreboard
(2), the annual EU R&D
Industrial Investment Scoreboard (3), and the annual
Innovation Union Progress at Country Level (4).
(2) http://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/innovation/facts-figures/
scoreboards/index_en.htm
(3) http://iri.jrc.ec.europa.eu/scoreboard.html
(4) http://ec.europa.eu/research/innovation-union/pdf/state-of-the-
union/2014/iuc_progress_report_2014.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Part I
The research and
innovation landscape
in Europe

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
16
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. THE RESEARCH AND INNOVATION LANDSCAPE IN EUROPE
1. General economic outlook ...............................................................................................................17
2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows ....................................................................27
3. Scientific, technological and innovation outputs ..................................................................68
4. Framework conditions for research and innovation .............................................................87
5. Economic and social impacts ........................................................................................................98

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
17
I-1. General economic outlook
1. General economic outlook
After several years of economic turmoil with
a double-dip recession and one of the worst
financial and economic crises in generations,
the European Union (EU) seems to have retaken
the path towards economic growth, even if the
recovery remains weak and needs to solidify.
Setting the foundations for strengthening the
economic recovery and creating high quality
jobs is a priority for Europe.
The European economic forecast report
(5) of
October 2015 showed that the economic recovery
in the EU was in its third year and should continue
in 2016. For the EU as a whole, real GDP is forecast
to grow by 2.0% in 2016 and 2.1% in 2017. To
a large extent, this more positive outlook is driven
by factors related to the overall decrease in energy
prices, following the drop in oil prices, the monetary
stimulus by the European Central Bank and other
EU central banks, and the euro’s exchange rate
depreciation, notably against the US dollar.
Despite these positive developments, doubts still
persist about the robustness of the recovery in
the EU, should the above mentioned tailwinds
start to fade. At the same time, new challenges
(5) http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/eeip/pdf/ip011_
en.pdf
are appearing, such as the slowdown in emerging
market economies and global trade, and
persisting geopolitical tensions.
The economic recession has emphasised Europe’s
long-term growth gap against the United States and
unveiled structural weaknesses in the EU economy.
The economic crisis has emphasised the
persistent output gap between the EU and the
United States, and the rapid catch-up of other
economies, such as South Korea or China.
The legacy of the crisis will continue to be felt
for years to come. The levels of private and
public debt in many countries remain very high
and the shortfall of investment of the past few
years, with a drop of around EUR 430 billion
since its peak in 2007
(6), has reduced economic
growth, in a context of an ageing population
that will hamper the expansion of the available
labour force. In addition, continued structural
weaknesses hindering the ability of countries
to raise their levels of productivity, as will be
presented, persist and cast doubts on the ability
of Europe to grow in the long run.
(6) http://ec.europa.eu/priorities/sites/beta-political/files/factsheet1-
why_en.pdf
 ▶ Figure I-1-1 Evolution of GDP per head of population in real terms(1), 1995-2016
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs
Note: (1)PPS€ at 2005 prices and exchange rates.
 Sci e n ce , R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n Pe rf o rm a n ce o f t h e EU 2 0 1 6
So u rce : D G R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n - U n i t f o r t h e A n a l y s i s a n d M o n i t o ri n g o f N a t i o n a l R e s e a rch Po l i ci e s
D a t a : Eu ro s t a t , D G Eco n o m i c a n d F i n a n ci a l A ﬀ a i rs
N o t e : ( 1 ) PPS€ a t 2 0 0 5 p ri ce s a n d e x ch a n g e ra t e s .

EU
U n i te d Sta te s
J a p a n
C h i n a
So u th K o r e a
0
5 0 0 0
1 0 0 0 0
1 5 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
2 5 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0
3 5 0 0 0
4 0 0 0 0
4 5 0 0 0
1 9 9 5 1 9 9 8 2 0 0 1 2 0 0 4 2 0 0 7 2 0 1 0 2 0 1 3 2 0 1 6
G D P p e r h e a d o f p o p u l a ti o n (PPS€2005)
Figure I-1-1 Evolution of GDP per head of population in real terms (1) , 1995-2016

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
18
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Within the EU, while overall slow economic growth
has characterised the 2008-2013 recession
period, large differences across Member States
emerged, creating not only an income-level
divide, but most importantly, a divide between
Member States that grew, stagnated, or followed
an economic adjustment process.
Income disparities across Member States in
Europe are well known and documented. The
divide between high-income Nordic and Western
European countries and catching-up countries in
Southern, Central, and Eastern Europe persists.
However, the economic recession also evidenced
the different ability of Member States to grow
during this period, with stark differences within
Western economies and Central and Eastern
countries. More precisely, countries such as
Germany, Sweden or Austria continued to
grow during this period, while countries such
as Greece, Spain, Portugal, Italy or Cyprus
contracted, evidencing structural weaknesses
and their inability to maintain the high levels
of prosperity achieved in previous years. In
Central and Eastern Europe, Poland and Slovakia
achieved robust growth rates, while countries
such as Hungary stagnated.
In order to improve this situation, several
Member States have engaged in a series of
structural reforms to improve the functioning of
their markets and regain fiscal stability
(7), which
in some cases have appeared to start paying
off, with above average growth rates forecast in
countries such as Spain.
(7) http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/economic_
briefs/2014/pdf/eb34_en.pdf
 ▶ Figure I-1-2 GDP per head of population, 2014 and real growth in total GDP(1), 2007-2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs
Notes:
(1)Compound annual growth calculated from GDP in PPS€ at 2005 prices and exchange rates. (2)IL: 2013. (3)IL: 2017-2013.
- 6
- 4
- 2
0
2
4
6
8
1 0
0
1 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0
4 0 0 0 0
5 0 0 0 0
6 0 0 0 0
7 0 0 0 0
8 0 0 0 0
T o ta l G D P - r e a l g r o w th (% )
GDP per head of population (current PPS€)
F i g u r e I-1-2 G D P p e r h e a d o f p o p u l a ti o n , 2 0 1 4 a n d r e a l g r o w th i n to ta l G D P ( 1 ) , 2 0 0 7-2 0 1 4
G D P p e r h e a d o f p o p u l a ti o n , 2 0 1 4 (2 ) C o m p o u n d a n n u a l r e a l g r o w th (% ) i n to ta l G D P, 2 0 0 7-2 0 1 4 (3 )
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs
Notes: (1)Compound annual growth calculated from GDP in PPS€ at 2005 prices and exchange rates. (2)IL: 2013. (3)IL: 2007-2013.
 United States
 Japan China
 EU
 South Korea Luxembourg
 Sweden Finland Malta France
 Germany
Czech Republic
 Belgium Slovakia Estonia
 Netherlands
 Bulgaria Romania Denmark Austria
 United Kingdom
 Poland
 Lithuania
 Latvia Croatia Portugal Cyprus Ireland Hungary
 Spain Greece Italy
 Slovenia Norway
 Switzerland
 Israel Turkey Iceland

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
19
I-1. General economic outlook
The GDP gap and GDP growth gap between
the EU and the United States is largely driven
by a gap in labour productivity that continues
to increase, most notably against the most
advanced European economies.
The importance of productivity as a key driver
of sustained economic growth and solidification
of the recovery in Europe has been identified by
several studies, such as ‘The Future of Productivity’
by the OECD
(8). Against this backdrop, labour
productivity in the EU is around 15 percent
lower than in the United States and this gap
has increased in the past few years. Labour
productivity in the EU grew at an average annual
rate of 0.6% from 2007 to 2014, a lower rate
(8) http://www.oecd.org/economy/the-future-of-productivity.htm
Low rates of economic growth have severe
implications on the ability of many European
economies to create new employment
opportunities, notably in those countries that have
been more severely hit by the crisis and where
current unemployment rates are unsustainable.
As a consequence of the economic downturn,
unemployment rates have increased sharply
in Europe. Only a few Member States, notably
Germany and Poland, managed to decrease their
unemployment rates, while countries such as Greece,
Spain or Cyprus saw their rates rocket to intolerably
high levels. While labour market conditions are
improving in general, and rosier economic growth
forecasts for countries such as Spain will help ease
the situation, unemployment remains unacceptably
high. Boosting gainful job opportunities remains an
overall priority for Europe, and for that, more robust
economic growth throughout the EU is needed.
than the 1.4% average of the long-term trend
from 1995 to 2014. In the United States, it
grew at 1.9%. Japan’s labour productivity also
grew faster during this period than in the EU,
albeit below the United States rates, at 0.9%,
and South Korea’s increased briskly at 3.8%,
outperforming all countries and accelerating
their convergence towards the United States.
The aggregate figures mask significant differences
across Member States. Some countries score
above the United States, such as Luxembourg, or
are close to it, such as the Netherlands, Belgium
or Ireland. Yet for many countries the gap
remains particularly wide. However, the dynamics
of the past few years have shown an increasing
 ▶ Figure I-1-3 Unemployment rates, 2014 and compound annual growth, 2007-2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs, OECD
Notes: (1)AT, UK, TR: 2013. (2)AT, UK, TR: 2007-2013; IL: 2011-2014.
-1 0
-5
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
G r o w th (% )
U n e m p l o y m e n t r a te (% )
F i g u r e I-1-3 U n e m p l o y m e n t r a te s , 2 0 1 4 a n d c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th , 2 0 0 7-2 0 1 4
U n e m p l o y m e n t r a te , 2 0 1 4 (1 ) U n e m p l o y m e n t r a te - c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 2 0 0 7-2 0 1 4 (2 )
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs, OECD
Notes: (1)GDP per hour worked in PPS€ at 2005 prices and exchange rates. (2)EU: Croatia is not included. (3)IS, NO,
CH, TR, IL, JP, KR: 2013.
 United States
 Japan
 EU
 South Korea Luxembourg
 Sweden Finland Malta France
 Germany
Czech Republic
 Belgium Slovakia Estonia
 Netherlands
 Bulgaria Romania Denmark Austria
 United Kingdom
 Poland Lithuania
 Latvia Croatia Portugal Cyprus Ireland Hungary
 Spain Greece Italy
 Slovenia Norway
 Switzerland
 Israel Turkey Iceland

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
20
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
divergence of the European leading economies
and a convergence of some of the countries in
Central and Eastern Europe that are catching-up
to the level of the US. More precisely, since the
beginning of the crisis, among the advanced
economies only Ireland managed to close part
of the gap, while for countries such as Finland,
the United Kingdom, or the Netherlands the
gap widened. This emphasises the productivity
challenge that many EU countries face, a trend
that started around the mid-1990s.
At the other end of the spectrum, several Central
and Eastern European countries such as Romania,
Poland, Bulgaria or Slovakia have managed to
outperform the United States in terms of labour
productivity growth and decreased their labour
productivity gaps with other European economies.
 ▶ Figure I-1-4 The gap in real labour productivity (GDP per hour worked(1)) between each country and
 the United States, 2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs, OECD
Notes: (1)GDP per hour worked in PPS€ at 2005 prices and exchange rates. (2)EU: Croatia is not included. (3)IS, NO, CH, TR, IL, JP, KR: 2013.
-4 0 -3 5 -3 0 -2 5 -2 0 -1 5 -1 0 -5 0 5 1 0
T u r k e y
I s r a e l
I c e l a n d
Sw i tze r l a n d
N o r w a y
R o m a n i a
B u l g a r i a
L a tv i a
H u n g a r y
Po l a n d
Es to n i a
L i th u a n i a
Po r tu g a l
Ma l ta
G r e e c e
C ze c h R e p u b l i c
Sl o v a k i a
C y p r u s
Sl o v e n i a
I ta l y
Sp a i n
F i n l a n d
U n i te d K i n g d o m
A u s tr i a
Sw e d e n
D e n m a r k
F r a n c e
G e r m a n y
I r e l a n d
B e l g i u m
N e th e r l a n d s
L u x e m b o u r g
So u th K o r e a
J a p a n
EU (2 )
G a p w i th th e U n i te d Sta te s i n r e a l l a b o u r p r o d u c ti v i ty , 2 0 1 4 (3)
F i g u r e I-1-4 T h e g a p i n r e a l l a b o u r p r o d u c ti v i ty (GDP per hour worked (1) ) b e tw e e n e a c h c o u n tr y
a n d th e U n i te d Sta te s , 2 0 1 4
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs, OECD
Notes: (1)GDP per hour worked in PPS€ at 2005 prices and exchange rates. (2)EU: Croatia is not included. (3)IS, NO,
CH, TR, IL, JP, KR: 2013.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
21
I-1. General economic outlook
Some European countries have managed
to raise their labour productivity during the
recession, but at the expense of employment
loss, which does not provide a long-term
solution to the need to raise productivity and
employment levels.
During the economic downturn, some Western
European economies such as Spain or Portugal
managed to increase their labour productivity
rates, but this was at the expense of millions of
jobs, which evidenced an inability to raise labour
productivity and boost job creation at the same
time. Among the most advanced economies,
countries such as Germany or Austria managed
to slightly raise both labour productivity and
employment at the same time, while Poland and
Romania are examples of countries that also
managed to do this among Central and Eastern
European countries.
 ▶ Figure I-1-5 The gap in compound annual real growth in labour productivity (GDP per hour worked(1))
 between each country and the United States, 2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs, OECD
Notes: (1)GDP per hour worked in PPS€ at 2005 prices and exchange rates. (2)EU: Croatia is not included. (3)IS, NO, CH, TR, IL, JP, KR: 2013.
-2 .5 -2 .0 -1 .5 -1 .0 -0 .5 0 .0 0 .5 1 .0 1 .5 2 .0 2 .5
N o r w a y
Sw i tze r l a n d
T u r k e y
I c e l a n d
I s r a e l
G r e e c e
L u x e m b o u r g
Ma l ta
F i n l a n d
I ta l y
U n i te d K i n g d o m
B e l g i u m
Sw e d e n
Sl o v e n i a
D e n m a r k
N e th e r l a n d s
F r a n c e
C y p r u s
G e r m a n y
C ze c h R e p u b l i c
A u s tr i a
Po r tu g a l
H u n g a r y
L a tv i a
I r e l a n d
Sp a i n
Es to n i a
Sl o v a k i a
B u l g a r i a
Po l a n d
 Lithuania
R o m a n i a
EU (2 )
J a p a n
So u th K o r e a
Figure I-1-5 The gap in compound annual real growth in labour productivity (GDP per hour worked(1))
between each country and the United States, 2014
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs, OECD
Notes: (1)GDP per hour worked in PPS€ at 2005 prices and exchange rates. (2)EU: Croatia is not included. (3)IS, NO,
CH, TR, IL, JP, KR: 2013.
G a p w i th th e U n i te d Sta te s i n c o m p o u n d a n n u a l r e a l g r o w th (% ) i n l a b o u r p r o d u c ti v i ty ,
2007-2013 (3)

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
22
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
There are no inherent trade-offs between high
labour productivity and high employment, even
if some adjustment periods may be necessary
to move from a middle to a high-income
economy, provided the right mix of investment
and market conditions are put in place.
The recent dynamics in the relationship between
labour productivity and unemployment rates
has cast questions about the nature of the
relationship and the existence of potential
trade-offs. In other words, do countries need to
sacrifice high levels of employment in order to
raise the productivity of the employed labour
force, or vice-versa, do countries need to
suffer low productivity rates in order to provide
employment to large segments of the population?
The evidence suggests that there is no inherent
trade-off, and there are several countries where
high levels of productivity coexist with low levels
of unemployment. At the same time, the cases
of Spain and Greece, that suffer from high
levels of unemployment and medium-low levels
of productivity, seem to suggest that in some
cases, the transition from low productivity to
higher productivity may take a temporary toll on
employment, unless the right set of conditions
are put in place that allow both to be achieved.
 ▶ Figure I-1-6 Real labour productivity(1) versus employment rates - compound annual growth, 2007-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs, OECD
Notes: (1)GDP per hour worked in PPS€ at 2005 prices and exchange rates. (2) FR, NL, AT, UK: 2007-2012. (3)EU: Croatia is not included.
EU ( 3 )
U S
J P
K R
B E
B G
C Z
D K
D E
EEI E
EL
ES
F R
I T
C Y
L V
L T
L U
H U
MT
N L
A T
PL
PT
R O
SI
SK
F I
SE
U K
I S
N O
T R
I L
- 2 .0
- 1 .0
0 .0
1 .0
2 .0
3 .0
4 .0
- 4 .0 - 3 .0 - 2 .0 - 1 .0 0 .0 1 .0 2 .0 3 .0
L a b o u r productivity ( 1 ) -c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 2 0 0 7-2 0 1 3 ( 2 )
F i g u r e I-1-6 R e a l l a b o u r p r o d u c ti v i ty ( 1 ) v e r s u s e m p l o y m e n t r a te s - c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th ,
2 0 0 7-2 0 1 3
-
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs, OECD
Notes: (1)GDP per hour worked in PPS€ at 2005 prices and exchange rates. (2)FR, NL, AT, UK: 2007-2012. (3)EU: Croatia
is not included.

CH
Em p l o y m e n t r a te s - c o m p ou n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 2 0 0 7-2 0 1 3 ( 2 )

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
23
I-1. General economic outlook
Boosting labour productivity depends on the
ability of national economies to increase
the amount of capital available per worker,
i.e. capital deepening, and the efficiency in
the combination of the production factors,
i.e. multifactor productivity. Since the crisis,
investment in capital has been low in most
EU countries, and multifactor productivity
growth flat or negative, except for Ireland.
While capital investments and multifactor
productivity in the EU advanced at a similar pace
to the United States and Japan around the turn
of the millennium, resulting in rather comparable
results in terms of labour productivity gains,
the recession of the past few years has taken a
particular high toll not only on the levels of capital
investment, as previously stated, but also on the
factors that drive multifactor productivity growth.
Countries such as Sweden, Finland, or the
United Kingdom that led and outperformed the
United States in terms of labour productivity
gains thanks to multifactor productivity increases
in the early 2000s, drastically changed patterns
during the recession with some remarkable falls
since then. Labour productivity gains have been
meagre in most Western European countries for
which data exist for this decomposition analysis.
Although some progress was achieved, such as
in Spain or Portugal, this was driven by higher
amounts of available capital per employed
worker, due to the high loss of jobs. The only
exception to this rule was Ireland, despite being
one of the first countries that was severely hit
by the downturn.
 ▶ Figure I-1-7 Labour productivity(1) versus unemployment rates, 2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs, OECD
Notes: (1)GDP per hour worked in PPS€ at 2005 prices and exchange rates. (2)AT, UK, IS, NO, CH, TR, IL, JP, KR: 2013. (3)EU: Croatia
is not included.
EU ( 3 )
U S
J P
K R
B E
B G
C Z
D K
D E
EE
I E
EL
ES
F R
I T
C Y
L V
L T
L U
H U
MT
N L
A T
PL
PT
R O
SI
SK
F I
SE
U KI S
N O
C H
T R
I L
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
5 0
5 5
6 0
0 5 1 0 1 5 2 52 0 3 0
U n e m p l o y m e n t r a te , 2 0 1 4 (2)
F i g u r e I-1-7 L a b o u r p r o d u c ti v i ty ( 1 ) v e r s u s u n e m p l o y m e n t r a te s , 2 0 1 4
L a b o u r p r o d u c ti v i ty , 2 0 1 4 ( 2 )
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs, OECD
Notes: (1)GDP per hour worked in PPS€ at 2005 prices and exchange rates. (2)AT, UK, IS, NO, CH, TR, IL, JP,
KR: 2013. (3)EU: Croatia is not included.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
24
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
During the recession, multifactor productivity
growth has been particularly poor in the most
advanced European economies, while in Japan,
the United States, and notably, South Korea, it
has grown steadily.
Long-term multifactor productivity trends
show a persistent growth gap between
the United States and Japan and the most
advanced European economies for which
data exist. In particular, it is worth noting that
since the beginning of the economic recession,
countries such as Finland or the United Kingdom
that performed relatively strongly during the
1995-2007 period, largely thanks to development
of the ICT sectors, began to trend negatively, as
was also the case for Italy and Denmark, both
countries already suffering from low multifactor
productivity growth rates since the mid-1990s,
and for the Netherlands, Belgium, France and
Sweden. Only a handful of countries managed
to slightly improve their performance, although
at much slower pace than the United States or
South Korea, countries that showed relentless
improvement in the past two decades.
 ▶ Figure I-1-8 Capital deepening, multifactor productivity and labour productivity - average annual real growth
2001-2007
2007-2011
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD, DG Research and Innovation
Notes: (1)EU 2001-2007 was estimated by DG Research and Innovation and includes: BE, DK, DE, IE, ES, FR, IT, NL, AT, PT, FI, SE, UK.
(2)EU 2007-2011 was estimated by DG Research and Innovation and includes: BE, DK, DE, IE, ES, FR, IT, NL, AT, PT, FI, SE.
- 1
0
1
2
3
4
5%
F i g u r e I-1-8 C a p i ta l d e e p e n i n g , m u l ti fa c to r p r o d u c ti v i ty a n d l a b o u r p r o d u c ti v i ty -a v e r a g e a n n u a l r e a l g r o w th 2 0 0 1-2 0 0 7
- 2
- 1
0
1
2
3
4
5%
2 0 0 7 - 2 0 1 1
C a p i ta l d e e p e n i n g Mu l ti fa c to r p r o d u c ti v i ty g r o w th L a b o u r p r o d u c ti v i ty g r o w th
South Korea
Japan
United States
EU
(1)
Sweden Finland Ireland
United Kingdom
Austria
Netherlands
Germany France Belgium Denmark Portugal
Spain Italy
Switzerland
South Korea
Japan
United States
EU
(2)
Sweden Finland Ireland Austria
Netherlands
Germany France Belgium Denmark Portugal
Spain Italy
Switzerland
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD, DG Research and Innovation
Notes: (1)EU 2001-2007 was estimated by DG Research and Innovatrion and includes: BE, DK, DE, IE, ES, FR, IT, NL, AT, PT, FI, SE, UK.
(2)EU 2007-2011 was estimated by DG Research and Innovatrion and includes: BE, DK, DE, IE, ES, FR, IT, NL, AT, PT, FI, SE.
- 1
0
1
2
3
4
5%
F i g u r e I-1-8 C a p i ta l d e e p e n i n g , m u l ti fa c to r p r o d u c ti v i ty a n d l a b o u r p r o d u c ti v i ty -a v e r a g e a n n u a l r e a l g r o w th 2 0 0 1-2 0 0 7
- 2
- 1
0
1
2
3
4
5%
2 0 0 7 - 2 0 1 1
C a p i ta l d e e p e n i n g Mu l ti fa c to r p r o d u c ti v i ty g r o w th L a b o u r p r o d u c ti v i ty g r o w th
South Korea
Japan
United States
EU
(1)
Sweden Finland Ireland
United Kingdom
Austria
Netherlands
Germany France Belgium Denmark Portugal
Spain Italy
Switzerland
South Korea
Japan
United States
EU
(2)
Sweden Finland Ireland Austria
Netherlands
Germany France Belgium Denmark Portugal
Spain Italy
Switzerland
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD, DG Research and Innovation
Notes: (1)EU 2001-2007 was estimated by DG Research and Innovatrion and includes: BE, DK, DE, IE, ES, FR, IT, NL, AT, PT, FI, SE, UK.
(2)EU 2007-2011 was estimated by DG Research and Innovatrion and includes: BE, DK, DE, IE, ES, FR, IT, NL, AT, PT, FI, SE.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
25
I-1. General economic outlook
While there are many factors driving multifactor
productivity, for most advanced economies,
innovation and innovation-related investments,
such as R&D, ICT, or skills development, are crucial.
Multifactor productivity growth can be driven
by many different factors that can range from
the functioning of the institutional set-up, the
abundance and quality of the infrastructure
network or the functioning of the markets that
allow for an efficient allocation of resources
towards more productive activities.
Therefore, structural reforms and better
regulatory and institutional frameworks are
crucial to raise the combined efficiency in
the use of labour and capital in a country. In
addition, and notably for countries that benefit
from high levels of prosperity and fairly good
framework conditions, as argued in the Global
Competitiveness Report series of The World
Economic Forum
(9), research, innovation, skills
and technological development are of paramount
importance for multifactor productivity growth.
While it is always difficult to properly measure
complex phenomena such as multifactor
productivity growth or innovation, the relationship
between private R&D investment, as a crude
proxy of innovation capacity, and multifactor
productivity growth shows a positive relationship
between the concepts.
(9) www.weforum.org/gcr
-1 .5 -1 .0 -0 .5 0 .0 0 .5 1 .0 1 .5 2 .0 2 .5 3 .0 3 .5
Sw i tze r l a n d
U n i te d K i n g d o m
F i n l a n d
I ta l y
D e n m a r k
N e th e r l a n d s
B e l g i u m
F r a n c e
Sw e d e n
Po r tu g a l
G e r m a n y
A u s tr i a
Sp a i n
I r e l a n d
J a p a n
U n i te d Sta te s
So u th K o r e a
F i g u r e I-1-9 M u l ti fa c to r p r o d u c ti v i ty -a v e r a g e a n n u a l g r o w th ,
1 9 9 5-2 0 0 7 a n d 2 0 0 7-2 0 1 2
A v e r a g e a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 2 0 0 7-2 0 1 2 (1 ) A v e r a g e a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 1 9 9 5-2 0 0 7
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Note: (1)DK, NL, PT, UK, CH: 2007-2011.
 ▶ Figure I-1-9 Multifactor productivity - average annual growth, 1995-2007 and 2007-2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Note: (1)DK, NL, PT, UK, CH: 2007-2011.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
26
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Against this backdrop, the next sections of Part I
of this Report will assess the European R&I
landscape within a global context and identifies
the strengths and persistent challenges in terms
of knowledge investments, knowledge flows,
and framework conditions for the EU and its
Member States to create effective innovation
systems able to sustain productivity, economic
growth, and gainful job opportunities.
U S
J P
K R
A T
B E
D K
D E
ES
F R
I E
I T
N L
PT
F I
SE
U K
C H
0 .0
0 .5
1 .0
1 .5
2 .0
2 .5
0 .0 0 .5 1 .0 1 .5 2 .0 2 .5 3 .0 3 .5
B u s i n e s s R D i n te n s i ty , 1 9 9 5 (1)
Mu l ti fa c to r p r o d u c ti v i ty - a v e r a g e a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 1 9 9 5-2 0 0 7
F i g u r e I-1-1 0 B u s i n e s s R & D i n te n s i ty , 1 9 9 5 v e r s u s a v e r a g e a n n u a l g r o w th i n m u l ti fa c to r
p r o d u c ti v i ty , 1 9 9 5-2 0 0 7
R2= 0.1838
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Note: (1)CH: 1996; AT: 1998.

 ▶ Figure I-1-10 Business R&D intensity, 1995 versus average annual growth in multifactor productivity, 1995-2007
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Note: (1)CH: 1996; AT: 1998.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
27
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
Investing in knowledge-generation activities, such
as R&D, skills development, or Information and
Communication Technologies (ICTs) is crucial to
support the development of inventions and enable
the development and commercialisation of new
products and services. In addition, as important
as investing in knowledge creation, is creating a
system that facilitates the effective circulation,
diffusion, and use of this knowledge. Intensive
collaboration facilitates knowledge flows across
firms and with universities and public research
organisations, which is associated with higher rates
of knowledge diffusion. Moreover, in an increasingly
multipolar world of knowledge creation, openness
and strong collaboration with foreign partners is the
key to tapping into new sources of knowledge.
Against this backdrop, this section will assess the
levels of investment in R&D in the EU, both in the
private and public sectors, its ability to foster talent
and skills, and how it fares in developing and using
ICTs to harness the benefits of the digital economy.
Finally, it will also provide an overview of the
knowledge flows, either local or international.
Investment in R&D
EU R&D investment in the global context
By setting the goal of reaching a R&D intensity
(i.e. R&D expenditure as a percentage of GDP)
of 3% GDP by 2020, as one of the five headline
targets of its Europe 2020 strategy, the EU has
put research and innovation at the heart of its
economic strategy.
The 3% target acknowledges the essential role
that R&D investments play in triggering smart
and sustainable growth and in addressing societal
challenges, as well as the fact that the EU lags
significantly behind other leading regions on this
indicator. Both public R&D and business R&D have
a role to play in this context. The public R&D system
(composed of higher education institutions and
other public organisations performing R&D) plays
a key role in generating the knowledge and talents
needed by innovative firms. But it is only through
business investment in R&D that the expected
impact of R&D can fully materialise: by generating
new, innovative and greener products, processes and
services, business R&D enables higher labour and
total factor productivity, industrial competitiveness
and efficiency in the use of resources, as well as
reduced environmental impacts. It is thus essential
that public policies, on top of aiming to strengthen
the public R&D system, also address the broader
innovation eco-system and put in place the right
framework conditions to enable business R&D and
innovation to flourish.
Against this backdrop, the first part of this chapter
will aim to assess to what extent the EU as a
whole is on track (or not) towards its R&D intensity
target. It will look successively at the expenditure
trends in the public R&D and in the business
sectors and will compare those with the trends in
other major economic powers, before synthesising
the situation of the EU vis-à-vis its target and its
place in the changing global R&D landscape. In
the second part of this chapter, progress will be
assessed and compared at the Member State
level, again in three steps: public R&D expenditure,
business R&D expenditure, and the situation vis-à-
vis the national 2020 R&D intensity targets that
most Member States have set taking into account
the specificities of their situations.
With a EU public R&D intensity reaching 0.72%
GDP in 2014 vs 0.63% in 2007, the EU public
R&D system emerges slightly stronger from
the crisis period. The major Asian economic
powers also continued to strengthen their
public R&D systems.
2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
28
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
While increases in public R&D intensity in the
2008-2009 period have been a generalised
phenomenon across the major economic powers
(with South Korea overtaking the US and Japan
in that period), trends have been more divergent
since 2011, with a decline in the US contrasting
with the significant increases in South Korea,
Japan, and China.
EU business R&D intensity has been on a quasi-
continuous and very slow positive trend since
2005. Despite a more positive trend than in the
US and Japan over the crisis period, it remains
far below the business R&D intensity of these
two countries and the 2013 figures point to a
re-increasing gap. The most striking evolutions
are, however, outside this trio with the
continued and very rapid growth of business
R&D intensity in China, which overtook the EU
in 2009, and in South Korea, which overtook
Japan in 2010.
In 2008-2009, the continued increase of public
R&D expenditure in the EU within the context of
a depressed GDP allowed a significant increase
in public R&D intensity, as visible in Figure I-2-1.
In the following years, public R&D expenditure
evolved in line with GDP, resulting in a stable
public R&D intensity. In total, with EU public R&D
intensity reaching 0.72% in 2014 vs 0.63% in
2007, the public R&D system emerges stronger
from the crisis period (for the EU as whole,
while diverging evolutions occurred at the
Member State level, as analysed below). This
represents an increase in the level of expenditure
of 15% in real terms from 2007 to 2014 (with
more than two-thirds of this increase made during
the 2007-2009 period). 69% of the increase in
public R&D expenditure over 2007-2012 is the
result of increased national public funding, while
20% came from increased ‘funding from abroad’
(the bulk of this from the EU budget: Framework
programme and Structural Funds).
 ▶ Figure I-2-1 Evolution of Public R&D intensity, 2000-2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)KR: There is a break in series between 2007 and the previous years. (2)JP: There is a break in series between 2008 and
the previous years. (3)US: (i) Government intramural expenditure on R&D (GOVERD) refers to federal or central government only;
(ii) Higher education expenditure on R&D (HERD) does not include most or all capital expenditure; (iii) There is a break in series
between 2003 and the previous years.
(4)CN: There is a break in series between 2009 and the previous years.
EU
United States(3)
Japan(2)
China(4)
South Korea(1)
Figure I-2-1 Evolution of Public R&D intensity, 2000-2014
Public R&D intensity
0.9
0.7
0.5
0.3
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies

Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)KR: There is a break in series between 2007 and the previous years. (2)JP: There is a break in series between

2008 and the previous years. (3)US: (i) Government intramural expenditure on R&D (GOVERD) refers to federal or
central government only; (ii) Higher education expenditure on R&D (HERD) does not include most or all capital
expenditure;
(iii) There is a break in series between 2003 and the previous years. (4)CN: There is a break in series between 2009 and
the previous years.

Japan (2)
EU
United States (3)
China (4)
South Korea (1)

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
29
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
With only a limited halt after the initial shock of
the crisis, EU business R&D intensity has been
on a quasi-continuous and very slow positive
trend since 2005 (when it bottomed out at
1.11% GDP), reaching 1.30% GDP in 2014. This
represents an increase in the level of expenditure
of 28% in real terms between 2005 and 2014.
A large range of manufacturing and service
sectors contributed to this increase, with ‘Motor
vehicles’ and ‘Other transport equipment’ being
the most important contributors to the increase
in business R&D expenditure over the period
from 2008-2012 on the manufacturing side, and
‘Professional, scientific and technical activities’
and ‘Computer programming, consultancy and
information service activities’ on the services
side. As analysed in Chapter 5, two phenomena
played a role; on one hand, many sectors
became more R&D-intensive (for instance
‘Other transport equipment’, but also several
low-tech sectors) and, on the other hand, some
R&D-intensive sectors (such as ‘Motor vehicles’
and ‘Pharmaceuticals’) were more resilient
throughout the crisis and increased their shares
(in value-added) in the EU economy.
The impact of the crisis on business R&D
investment has been much more important in the
US and Japan than in the EU, leading to a drop in
the business R&D intensities of these countries in
2009-2010 as shown in Figure I-2-2 (and thus
a reduction in the business R&D intensity gap of
the EU vis-à-vis the US and Japan). In real terms,
while business R&D expenditures grew by 12% in
the EU from 2007 to 2012, they grew by only 4%
in the US and declined by 6% in Japan. However,
the 2013 figures point to a significant renewed
dynamics of business R&D expenditures in the US
and Japan (+ in 5% real terms in both cases) while
in the EU we do not see any similar acceleration
(+1% in real terms in 2013, +2% in 2014).
It is, however, outside this trio that the most
striking evolutions can be seen: South Korea,
having doubled its business R&D intensity since
2000, overtook the US in 2003 and Japan in
2010. China, having trebled its business R&D
intensity since 2000, overtook the EU in 2009.
Profound structural changes in these economies
through the rapid growth of several R&D-
intensive manufacturing sectors explain these
dramatic evolutions in business R&D intensities.
Despite the positive trends in both public and
private R&D intensities over the 2007-2014
period, the EU is not on track to reach its 3%
R&D intensity target by 2020. In 2013, China
overtook the EU in terms of total R&D intensity.
 ▶ Figure I-2-2 Evolution of business R&D intensity, 2000-2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)KR: There is a break in series between 2007 and the previous years. (2)US: Business enterprise expenditure on R&D
(BERD) does not include most or all capital expenditure. (3)CN: There is a break in series between 2009 and the previous years.
Business R&D intensity
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Japan
United States (2)
China (3)
South Korea (1)
EU
Figure I-2-2 Evolution of business R&D intensity, 2000-2014
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)KR: There is a break in series between 2007 and the previous years. (2)US: Business enterprise expenditure on
R&D (BERD) does not include most or all capital expenditure. (3)CN: There is a break in series between 2009 and the
previous years.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
30
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The positive trends in both public and private
R&D intensities over the 2007-2014 period
allowed total EU R&D intensity to increase from
1.78% in 2007 to 2.03% in 2014: this contrasts
with the stagnation of EU R&D intensity over the
period from 2000-2007 (EU R&D intensity was
at 1.79% in 2000). However, the prolongation of
the 2007-2014 trend would lead the EU to miss
its 2020 3
% R&D intensity target by far: it would
result in a level of only 2.28% in 2020. In fact, in
order to meet the 2020 target of 3%, the annual
growth rate of EU R&D intensity would need
to more than triple compared to the average
growth rate over the 2007-2014 period (6.7
%
vs 1.9 %)(10). In addition, the most recent trend
seems to point to a deceleration: in 2014, for the
first time since 2007, EU R&D intensity did not
increase, with a status quo at 2.03%.
(10) While we need to bear in mind that the growth rate in R&D intensity
over the 2007-2014 period was boosted by a depressed GDP.
The world is becoming more R&D-intensive and
the relative weight of the EU in this new global
R&D landscape is decreasing, mainly due to
the rapid rise of China.
Figure I-2-4 shows the continuous increase in
R&D expenditure through which the world is
becoming more R&D-intensive: the crisis entailed
only a very temporary and limited slowdown in
this trend. While all major regions have increased
their R&D investments, the most impressive
increase is in China.
 ▶ Figure I-2-3 Evolution of R&D intensity, 2000-2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)KR: There is a break in series between 2007 and the previous years. (2)JP: There is a break in series between 2008
and the previous years. (3)US: (i) R&D expenditure does not include most or all capital expenditure; (ii) There is a break in series
between 2003 and the previous years. (4)CN: There is a break in series between 2009 and the previous years.
R&D intensity
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Japan (2)
South Korea (1)
United States (3)
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)KR: There is a break in series between 2007 and the previous years. (2)JP: There is a break in series between
2008 and the previous years. (3)US: (i) R&D expenditure does not include most or all capital expenditure; (ii) There is a
b r e a k
in series between 2003 and the previous years. (4)CN: There is a break in series between 2009 and the previous years.

Figure I-2-3 Evolution of R&D intensity, 2000-2014
China (4)
EU

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
31
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
As is visible in Figure I-2-5, this leads to a
changing global R&D landscape, where the
relative weight of the EU is decreasing. While in
2000, the EU and US together still represented
nearly two-thirds of global R&D expenditure,
in 2013, more than half the global R&D
expenditure was spent elsewhere. In 2013, the
EU represented 20.4% of total R&D expenditure
in the world, measured in PPS€ at 2005 prices
and exchange rates, down from 25.8% in 2000.
The continuously decreasing share of the EU
in world R&D expenditure is mainly due to the
rapid rise of China, which more than quadrupled
its share, from 4.6% in 2000 to 20% in 2013.
The decrease in the US share since 2000 has
even been slightly more pronounced than that
of the EU, from 37.6% to 27.2% in 2013, while
the share of the developed Asian economies
has eroded from 18.1% in 2000 to 16% in
2013 (in this group of economies, the decrease
in Japan’s share has been partly compensated
for by the increase in South Korea’s share).
 ▶ Figure I-2-4 Evolution of world GERD in real terms (PPS€ at 2005 prices and exchange rates), 2000-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD, UNESCO
Notes: (1)BR+RU+IN+ZA. (2)Elements of estimation were involded in the compilation of the data.
Figure I-2-4 Evolution of World GERD in real terms
(PPS at 2005 prices and exchange rates), 2000-2013
1250
1000
750
500
250
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
EU
United States
Developed Asian Economies
(JP+KR+SG+TW)
China
BRIS (1)
Rest of the world
PPS€2005 (billions)
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD, UNESCO
Notes: (1)BR+RU+IN+ZA. (2)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
32
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
R&D investments in the Member States
Trends in public R&D intensity over the crisis
period have been very divergent between
Member States. Remarkable growths in
public R&D intensity have been observed in
some advanced economies such as those of
Denmark and Germany and in some economies
that are catching-up, such as Estonia and the
Czech Republic. However, in Romania, Bulgaria,
Croatia and Hungary, reduced funding for
public R&D risks delaying considerably
the transformation of these countries into
knowledge-based economies.
 ▶ Figure I-2-6 Public R&D intensity, 2014 and compound annual growth, 2007-2014
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes:
(1)PT: 2008-2013. (2)EL: Greece is not included on the graph because valid data are available only for 2011-2014.
Figure I-2-6 Public R&D intensity, 2014 and compound annual growth, 2007-2014
MT
SK
LU
BG
CY
IE
HR
HU
RO
IT ES
SI UK PT
FR NL
EE
CZ
AT DE
DK
SE
FI
LV
PL BE
LT
EU
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
13
11
9
7
5
3
1
-1
-3
-5
-7
Public R&D intensity - compound annual growth (%), 2007- 2014 (1)
Public R&D intensity, 2014
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes:(1)PT: 2008-2013. (2)EL: Greece is not included on the graph because valid data are available only for
2011-2014.
 ▶ Figure I-2-5 % distribution of world GERD(1), 2000 and 2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD, UNESCO
Notes: (1)The % shares were calculated from estimated values in current PPS€. (2)BR+RU+IN+ZA. (3)JP+KR+SG+TW.
2000 2013
EU
20.4%
EU
25.8%
United States
27.2%United States
37.6%
Developed Asian
Economies (3)
16.0%
Developed Asian
Economies (3)
18.1%
China
20.0%
China
4.6%
BRIS (2)
6.2%
BRIS (2)
8.6%
Rest of the world
7.7%
Rest of the world
7.8%
 Figure I-2-5 % distribution of world GERD(1), 2000 and 2013

Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of Natio-
nal Research Policies

Data: Eurostat, OECD, UNESCO

Notes:(1)The % shares were calculated from estimated values in current PPS€.
(2)BR+RU+IN+ZA. (3)JP+KR+SG+TW.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
33
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
Many Member States which already had a relatively
strong public R&D system before the crisis continued
to increase their investments throughout the crisis
period, with notably remarkable evolutions in
Denmark and Germany, as is visible in Figure I-2-6.
Several Central and Eastern European countries (in
particular Slovakia, Estonia, and the Czech Republic)
as well as Malta also display strong growth rates in
public R&D intensity since 2007, thanks in particular
to the significant mobilisation of European
Structural Funds, as analysed in Part II. As a result,
the Estonian and Czech public R&D intensities are
now higher than the EU average.
However, the most striking -and worrying- trend
is that some Member States which already had a
public R&D intensity well below the EU average, such
as Bulgaria, Romania, Croatia and Hungary, have
experienced budget cuts in their public R&D in recent
years instead of building R&I capacities through
more investments. Furthermore, the negative
trends in some Member States with a strong public
R&I system, such as the United Kingdom, are
worrying as they risk undermining their strengths.
Finally, the below-average trends for Ireland,
Slovenia and Spain are to be noted as they are
even more negative than would appear at first
glance due to two phenomena. First, as these are
all countries that were strongly hit by the crisis and
which experienced very significant drops in GDP,
the trend in public expenditures is more negative
in real terms than in percentage of GDP. Second,
in line with what was observed at the EU level,
public R&D expenditure increased significantly in
these countries between 2007 and 2009, and thus
comparing 2014 with 2007 does not allow for one
to distinguish the more important drop compared
to 2009. Comparing 2014 to 2009, public R&D
expenditure decreased in Slovenia in real terms by
15%, in Spain by 14% and in Ireland by 14%.
Trends in business R&D intensity over the
crisis period are also divergent between
Member States. While the strongest growth rates
of business R&D intensities can be found among
the economies that are catching-up in Central
and Eastern Europe, there is also a group of
advanced economies which continue to progress
from already relatively high pre-crisis levels of
business R&D intensities (Belgium, Denmark,
Austria, Germany, and France). Negative trends
are found in various types of situations: in
Member States with very high levels of business
R&D intensities (Finland and Sweden), moderate
levels (notably Luxembourg and Spain) and very
low levels (Romania and Cyprus).
 ▶ Figure I-2-7 Business R&D intensity, 2014 and compound annual growth, 2007-2014
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes:
(1)ES, SI: 2008-2014. (2)EL: Greece is not included on the graph because valid data are available only for 2011-2014.

BG
PL
SK
LV LT MT
HR
RO
CY
EE IT
HU
CZ
IE
ES
PT
LU
UK
NL
EU FR
BE
SI
AT
DE DK SE FI
Business R&D intensity - compound annual growth (%),
2007- 2014 (1)
Business R&D intensity, 2014
0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0 2.4
 Figure I-2-7 Business R&D intensity, 2014 and compound annual growth, 2007-2014
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes: (1)ES, SI: 2008-2014. (2)EL: Greece is not included on the graph because valid data are available only for
2011-2014.
24
20
16
12
8
4
0
-4
-8
-12

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
34
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
As shown in Figure I-2-7, the strongest growth
rates of business R&D intensity over the
2007-2014 period can be observed in the
economies that are catching-up in Central and
Eastern Europe (Bulgaria, Poland, Slovakia,
Hungary and Slovenia). The situations and
developments in business R&D in this group of
countries are, however, of a diverse nature. For
instance, while foreign direct investments in R&D
play an increasing role in Poland, as reflected in
the rise of the share of foreign-affiliated R&D in
business R&D expenditure from 31% in 2007 to
45% in 2011, in Slovenia this share remained
stable (29% in 2011 vs 28% in 2007). In general,
strong growth rates from very low starting points
have to be interpreted with caution; the limited
amounts involved may be linked to a very limited
number of investments and/or may be linked to
particular sectorial phenomena instead of truly
representing the overall attractiveness of the
country in terms of R&D investments. This is the
case in Bulgaria, where the increase has been
concentrated in one sector (R&D services) and
may be linked to clinical trials carried out for
foreign pharmaceutical companies.
Positive growth rates starting from an average or
high level of business R&D investments, as seen
in several advanced EU economies (Belgium,
France, Denmark, Austria and Germany), can be
more safely interpreted as reflecting the impact
of the policies put in place to stimulate business
R&D investment, such as R&D tax incentives and
‘Competitiveness poles’ in Belgium and France,
combined with the opportunities linked to their
industrial specialisations (e.g. ‘Pharmaceuticals’
in Belgium and Denmark, ‘Motors vehicles’
in Germany). In contrast, negative trends in
several Member States on the Western side of
the EU (such as Luxembourg and Spain) put
into question the effectiveness of their policy
mixes to leverage business R&D. The two
Member States with the highest business R&D
intensities, Finland and Sweden, also experienced
negative trends, linked to the difficulties in their
ICT sectors.
Through notably increased use of R&D fiscal
incentives, the level of public support for
business R&D has increased throughout the
crisis period in many Member States.
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD (STI Scoreboard, 2015)
Notes:
(1)For ES, FR, PT, UK and NO, preliminary R&D tax incentive estimates are reported for 2013 (or closest year). For BE, IE,
ES, CH, IL and US values refer to 2012. For IS values refer to 2011. Estimates of direct funding for BE, FR, IT and PT are based on
imputing the share of direct government-funded BERD in the previous year to the current ratio of BERD to GDP. For AT, the 2011
share is used for 2013. In AT, R&D tax incentive support is included in official estimates of direct government funding of business
R&D. It is removed from direct funding estimates to avoid double counting. DE, EE, SE and CH did not provide information on
expenditure-based R&D tax incentives for 2013. For IL, the R&D component of incentives cannot be identified separately at present.
No data on the cost of expenditure-based R&D tax incentive support are available for PL. Estimates refer to the cost of incentives
for business expenditures on R&D, both intramural and extramural, unless otherwise specified. Direct support values refer only to
intramural R&D expenditures.
(2)CZ, IE, ES, FR, HU, PT, UK, NO, CH, US, JP: 2006; IT, TR: 2008; EL, NL, SK, IL, CN: Not available.
 ▶ Figure I-2-8 Public support for business R&D, 2007 and 2013(1)
Figure I-2-8 Public support for business R&D, 2007 and 2013(1)
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
%
South Korea United States
Japan China France Slovenia Hungary Belgium Austria Ireland
Czech Republic
Netherlands
United Kingdom
Sweden Portugal Denmark
Spain Estonia Germany Finland Greece Italy Poland Slovakia Iceland Israel Norway Turkey
Switzerland
Direct government funding of BERD
No breakdown available
Indirect government support through R&D tax incentives
Total ﬁnancial support, 2007 (2)
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD (STI Scoreboard, 2015)
Notes: (1)For ES, FR, PT, UK and NO, preliminary R&D tax incentive estimates are reported for 2013 (or closest year). For BE, IE, ES, CH, IL and
US values refer to 2012. For IS values refer to 2011. Estimates of direct funding for BE, FR, IT and PT are based on imputing the share of
direct government-funded BERD in the previous year to the current ratio of BERD to GDP. For AT, the 2011 share is used for 2013. In AT, R&D
tax incentive support is included in oﬃcial estimates of direct government funding of business R&D. It is removed from direct funding
estimates to avoid double counting. DE, EE, SE and CH did not provide information on expenditure-based R&D tax incentives for 2013. For IL,
the R&D component of incentives cannot be identiﬁed separately at present. No data on the cost of expenditure-based R&D tax incentive
support are available for PL. Estimates refer to the cost of incentives for business expenditures on R&D, both intramural and extramural,
unless otherwise speciﬁed. Direct support values refer only to inrtramural R&D expenditures. (2)CZ, IE, ES, FR, HU, PT, UK, NO, CH, US, JP:
2006; IT, TR: 2008; EL, NL, SK, IL, CN: Not available.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
35
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
Figure I-2-8 shows that total public support
for business R&D, composed of direct funding
(through grants, loans, procurement) and
indirect funding (through R&D fiscal incentives),
has increased in percentage points of GDP in
many Member States between 2007 and 2013.
Particularly strong increases are noticeable in
Slovenia, Belgium, Ireland, Estonia, Hungary,
France, Portugal and Austria. In all these countries
except Estonia, R&D fiscal incentives play a key
role. The amount of foregone tax revenues is even
higher than direct funding in Belgium, Ireland,
France, Portugal and the Netherlands.
While Figure I-2-9 makes visible the logical
correlation between the volume of public support
for business R&D (in percentage of GDP) and the
business R&D intensity, the interesting elements
are the outliers. For instance, in France, taking
into account a level of business R&D intensity
which is not very high, the intensity of public
support for business R&D appears to be quite
striking. On the contrary, several Member States
combined a very level of business R&D intensity
without a high level of public funding of business
R&D. It is to be noted, however, that all these
Member States display a very high level of
public R&D expenditure (see Figure 6), possibly
reflecting an approach where the support for
public R&D is seen as having a more important
role to play in fostering business R&D than (direct
and indirect) public funding for business R&D.
As shown in Figures 6, 7 and 8, Germany and
Denmark combine increased public R&D intensity
with stagnating public support for business R&D
(at a rather low level) and increased business
R&D intensity. In Germany, an important way for
the public authorities to foster business R&I is
to support public R&D organisations which are
able to provide services to businesses through
contractual research (as reflected in the volume
of R&D expenditure performed in the public
R&D system while being funded by business
representing 0.11% of GDP, the highest level in
the EU — the EU average is 0.05%).
 ▶ Figure I-2-9 Business R&D intensity versus public support for business R&D as % of GDP, 2013(1)
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD (STI Scoreboard, 2015)
Notes:
 (1)The bubble size refers to volume of tax support for business R&D, Millions USD PPP, 2013 or latest available year.
ES, FR, PT, UK, NO: Preliminary R&D tax incentive estimates reported for 2013 (or closest year). BE, FR, IT, PT: Estimates of direct
funding based on imputing the share of direct government-funded BERD in the previous year to the current ratio of
BERD to GDP. AT: 2011 share is used for 2013; R&D tax incentive support is included in official estimates of direct government
funding of business R&D. It is removed from direct funding estimates to avoid double counting.
(2)There is no breakdown availa-
ble between Government direct funding and the volume of tax support for business R&D. (3)Elements of estimation were involved
in the compilation of the data.
U S
C N
F R
J P
K R
U K
N L
B E
T R
A T
E S
I E
H U
P T
C Z N O
D K
E L
S I
F I
I T
I S
I L
P L S K
E E
D E
S E
C H
F i g u r e I - 2 - 9 B u s i n e s s R & D i n t e n s i t y v e r s u s p u b l i c s u p p o r t f o r b u s i n e s s R & D a s % o f G D P, 2 0 1 3 ( 1 )
Business R&D intensity
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
 USD 2 500 million USD 250 million USD 75 million No breakdown available (2) No incentive
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45
Total government support (direct and tax) for business R&D as % of GDP
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD (STI Scoreboard, 2015)
Notes: (1)The bubble size refers to volume of tax support for business R&D, Millions USD PPP, 2013 or latest available
year.
ES, FR, PT, UK, NO: Preliminary R&D tax incentive estimates reported for 2013 (or closest year). BE, FR, IT, PT: Estimate of
direct funding based on imputing the share of direct government-funded BERD in the previous year to the current ratio of
BERD to GDP. AT: 2011 share is used for 2013; R&D tax incentive support is included in oﬃcial estimates of direct
government funding of business R&D. It is removed from direct funding estimates to avoid double counting. (2)There is
no breakdow available between Government direct funding and the volume of tax support for business R&D. (3)Elements
of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
36
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
While the R&D intensity has increased over
the 2007-2014 period in 21 Member States,
for most Member States a very significant
acceleration in R&D intensity growth is required
to meet their national 2020 R&D intensity
targets. The situation is even more challenging
for Romania, Luxembourg, Portugal, Spain,
Sweden, Croatia and Finland, which need to
reverse a decreasing trend.
While Figure I-2-10 presents the levels of total
R&D intensity reached in each Member State in
2000, 2007 and 2014 and the national 2020
R&D intensity targets, Figure I-2-11 below
allows for a detailed assessment of the situation
for each Member State through a comparison
between the annual average R&D intensity
growth, which is required to meet its 2020
target, and the average growth over the period
from 2007-2014.
While the R&D intensity in 21 Member States
increased over the 2007-2014 period, the table
shows that for most Member States a very
significant acceleration of R&D intensity growth
is required to meet their target. The situation is
even more challenging for Romania, Luxembourg,
Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Croatia and Finland,
which need to reverse a decreasing trend. While
Denmark, Cyprus and Germany achieved or can be
expected to soon achieve their targets, the level
of ambition of these targets can be questioned.
Slovenia, Slovakia, Hungary and Belgium seem on
track to reach their target, but the sustainability
of the recent trends needs to be carefully
assessed in each case. For instance, in Hungary,
the contrasting trends in public and private R&D
intensity put into question the sustainability of
the overall growth of the R&D intensity, as the
diminishing public R&D intensity undermines the
availability of highly skilled human resources in
science and technology.
 ▶ Figure I-2-10 R&D intensity 2000, 2007, 2014 and 2020 target(1)
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes:
 (1)CZ, UK: R&D intensity targets are not available. (2)EL, SE: 2001; HR: 2002; LT, MT: 2004. (3)IE: The R&D intensity target is
2.5% of GNP which is estimated to be equivalent to 2.0% of GDP. (4)PT: The R&D intensity target is between 2.70% and 3.30%
(3.00% was assumed). (5)LU: The R&D intensity target is between 2.30% and 2.60% (2.45% was assumed). (6)DK, EL, FR, HU, NL,
PT, RO, SI, SE: Breaks in series occur between 2000 and 2014.
 EU
Finland Sweden Denmark Austria Germany Belgium Slovenia France
Czech Republic
Netherlands
United Kingdom
Ireland
(3)
Estonia Hungary Portugal
(4)
Italy
Luxembourg
(5)
Spain
Lithuania Poland Slovakia
Malta Greece Bulgaria Croatia Latvia Cyprus Romania
2014 2007 2000 (2) 2020 target
Figure I-2-10 R&D intensity 2000, 2007, 2014 and 2020 target(1)
R&D intensity
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes: (1)CZ, UK: R&D intensity targets are not available. (2)EL, SE: 2001; HR: 2002; LT, MT: 2004. (3)IE: The R&D intensity target is
2.5% of GNP which is estimated to be equivalent to 2.0% of GDP. (4)LU: The R&D intensity target is between 2.30% and 2.60% (2.45%
wasassumed). (5)DK, EL, FR, HU, NL, PT, RO, SI, SE: Breaks in series occur between 2000 and 2014.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
37
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
 ▶ Figure I-2-11 Situation of each Member State with regard to its R&D intensity target
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, Member States
Notes:
(1)HR: 2002-2014; EL, SE: 2003-2014; LT, MT: 2004-2014. (2)EL, PT, SI: 2008-2014. (3)CZ: A target (of 1%) is available only
for the public sector. (4)IE: The national target of 2.5% of GNP has been estimated to equal 2.0% of GDP. (5)LU: A 2020 target of
2.45% was assumed. (6)PT: A 2020 target of 3.00 was assumed. (7)Values in italics are estimated or provisional.
R&D intensity
2014
(provisional)
R&D intensity
target
2020
R&D intensity
compound
annual
growth (%)
2000-2014(1)
R&D intensity
compound
annual
growth (%)
2007-2014(2)
R&D intensity
compound
annual
growth (%)
required to meet
the 2020 target
2014-2020
 Belgium 2.46 3.00 +1.7 +4.2 3.4
 Bulgaria 0.80 1.50 +3.5 +9.0 11.1
 Czech Republic 2.00 :(3) +4.2 +6.3 :
 Denmark 3.08 3.00 +2.3 +3.0 Target reached
 Germany 2.84 3.00 +1.2 +2.2 0.9
 Estonia 1.46 3.00 +6.6 +4.6 12.7
 Ireland 1.55 2.00(4) +2.5 +3.3 4.4
 Greece 0.83 1.21 +2.8 +3.8 6.5
 Spain 1.20 2.00 +2.2 -0.4 8.9
 France 2.26 3.00 +0.9 +2.1 4.9
 Croatia 0.79 1.40 -1.5 -0.1 10.0
 Italy 1.29 1.53 +1.8 +1.8 3.0
 Cyprus 0.47 0.50 +5.3 +2.2 1.0
 Latvia 0.68 1.50 +3.1 +2.9 14.2
 Lithuania 1.02 1.90 +3.1 +3.5 11.0
 Luxembourg 1.24 2.30 - 2.60(5) -1.6 -3.6 12.0
 Hungary 1.38 1.80 +4.9 +5.3 4.5
 Malta 0.85 2.00 +5.6 +6.4 15.4
 Netherlands 1.97 2.50 -0.1 +1.0 4.0
 Austria 2.99 3.76 +3.3 +3.0 3.9
 Poland 0.94 1.70 +2.7 +7.5 10.5
 Portugal 1.29 2.70 – 3.30(6) +2.6 -1.9 15.1
 Romania 0.38 2.00 -0.3 -6.3 31.7
 Slovenia 2.39 3.00 +2.3 +4.5 3.9
 Slovakia 0.89 1.20 +2.4 +10.2 5.1
 Finland 3.17 4.00 -0.2 -0.8 3.9
 Sweden 3.16 4.00 -1.3 -0.4 4.0
 United Kingdom 1.72 : -0.03 +0.3 :
 EU 2.03 3.00 +0.9 +1.9 6.7

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
38
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Investment in education and skills and human
resources in science and technology
Moving towards a knowledge-intensive society
and economy increases the importance of skilled
human capital for research, innovation and
economic development. This section looks at
key demographic trends, at levels of investment
in education and training, at outcomes in terms
of educational attainment and skills, and at the
evolution of human resources in science and
technology in the EU and in key competitors.
The growing knowledge orientation of
the economy together with unfavourable
demographic trends in Europe makes
investment in skills and their lifelong upgrading
increasingly important.
The EU is facing an increasing demand for skilled
labour (as evidenced for instance by data on
unemployment rates by level of education: in 2014
in the EU unemployment rates for those with tertiary
attainment were one third of the rates for those
with low levels of educational attainment), including
researchers. The driving force behind this trend is
the continuously growing knowledge orientation of
the economy, with value chains becoming longer,
more complex and knowledge-intensive.
At the same time, current demographic developments
(see Figure I-2-12) imply a decreasing number of
young people entering the labour market in the
coming years, while the baby boomer generation
is set to retire in the next decade. The EU’s
working age population peaked in 2011, with
southern, central and eastern European countries
more affected by the shrinking labour force than
northern and western countries. At the same
time, life expectancy is continuously increasing
and the old age dependency ratio is growing,
directly (employment in health and care sector)
and indirectly (longer working life) affecting the
labour market.
The demographic shift towards fewer young people
and more elderly people presents Europe with
important challenges. Given strong investment in
excellence (US) and in basic skills (East Asia) in other
world regions, a global massification in tertiary
education and a more favourable demography
outside Europe, the EU faces growing competitive
challenges as regards the quality and quantity of its
human capital, which could endanger its traditional
comparative advantage as regards skilled labour.
Figure I-2-12 EU population age structure 2014 and 2060
Males Females
2060
2014
2060
2014
85+
80-84
75-79
70-74
65-69
60-64
55-59
50-54
45-49
40-44
35-39
30-34
25-29
20-24
15-19
10-14
5-9
0-4
25000 20000 15000 10000 5000 0 0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000
ThousandsThousands

Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research
Policies
Data: Eurostat

 ▶ Figure I-2-12 EU population age structure 2014 and 2060
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
39
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
While investment levels in compulsory education
are near the international average, the EU is still
underinvesting in tertiary education compared
to the US and South Korea. As regards tertiary
education, there are wide disparities in spending
levels between Member States, with Nordic
countries and Cyprus in the lead.
Public investment in education in the EU is at a
similar level as in the US and higher than in Japan
and South Korea (see Figure I-2-13). However,
when public and private spending are considered
together, the EU is outperformed by the US and
South Korea. There are also large differences in
spending levels between EU Member States. The
low level of spending on education in countries
such as Bulgaria and Romania is somewhat
reflected in educational outcomes, as evidenced
by the PISA study, where both countries score
1
Figure I-2-13 Expenditure on educational institutions from public and private sources as % of GDP, 2011
EU (3)
United States
South Korea
Japan
Denmark
Malta
Cyprus
Sweden
Finland
Belgium
Ireland
United Kingdom
Netherlands
Austria
Slovenia
France
Portugal
Lithuania
Estonia
Germany
Latvia
Poland
Spain
Hungary
Czech Republic
Italy
Croatia
Slovakia
Bulgaria
Romania
Iceland
Norway
Israel
Switzerland
Turkey
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Public expenditure on tertiary level (1)
Public expenditure on all levels except tertiary level (1)
Private expenditure (2)
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, O E C D
Notes: (1)EL, LU: No data available. (2)EL, LU, HU: No data available. (3)EU: Croatia is not included.

 ▶ Figure I-2-13 Expenditure on educational institutions from public and private sources as % of GDP, 2011
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes:
(1)EL, LU: No data available. (2)EL, LU, HU: No data available. (3)EU: Croatia is not included.
low, although non-financial factors also play
an important role. The big differences between
Member States in the quality of education, also
compared to spending levels, shows that there
is potential for improving educational outcomes,
for example, via mutual learning between
Member States and the identification of good
practice. Skills tests such as PISA also show
that reforms bear fruit and that it is possible to
improve outcomes considerably in the medium
term. There is a general consensus that early
investment in education has the highest returns,
since the outcomes of earlier stages of education
also determine results at later stages. High levels
of numeracy at the lower secondary level are
also important for the outcomes of learning at
the upper secondary level, including vocational
streams, and have an impact on enrolment in
science and technology studies later in life.
1
Figure I-2-13 Expenditure on educational institutions from public and private sources as % of GDP, 2011
EU (3)
United States
South Korea
Japan
Denmark
Malta
Cyprus
Sweden
Finland
Belgium
Ireland
United Kingdom
Netherlands
Austria
Slovenia
France
Portugal
Lithuania
Estonia
Germany
Latvia
Poland
Spain
Hungary
Czech Republic
Italy
Croatia
Slovakia
Bulgaria
Romania
Iceland
Norway
Israel
Switzerland
Turkey
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Public expenditure on tertiary level (1)
Public expenditure on all levels except tertiary level (1)
Private expenditure (2)
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, O E C D
Notes: (1)EL, LU: No data available. (2)EL, LU, HU: No data available. (3)EU: Croatia is not included.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
40
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
While spending on primary and secondary
education is comparable in the EU to the levels
found in North America or East Asia, there is a
marked gap in tertiary education, mainly caused
by lower levels of private spending in Europe.
Public and private spending on tertiary education
as a percentage of GDP is about 1.4 percentage
points higher in the US, compared to the EU.
The spending gap per tertiary student currently
amounts to over EUR 10 000 per year (or
about EUR 200 billion for tertiary education as
a whole). The Nordic countries and Cyprus (in
this country a large share of tertiary students
traditionally study abroad with corresponding
financing requirements) show relatively high
tertiary spending levels. Tertiary education
spending levels show significant correlation to
participation and attainment rates and also to
scientific excellence, both important factors for
research and innovation systems.
After a modest acceleration caused by the crisis,
the number of tertiary students in the EU is
currently stagnating and could, for demographic
reasons, start to decline in the near future. This
also anticipates a slower growth rate in the
number of tertiary graduates in the medium
term. The evolution of the number of science
and engineering students, after lagging behind,
has caught up since the crisis.
As tertiary participation rates approach
saturation in many Member States, and because
of shrinking cohort size, the number of tertiary
students in the EU is now stagnating at about
20 million students (see Figure I-2-14 above) and
might, for demographic reasons, start to decline
in the near future. The evolution of the number of
science and engineering students, after lagging
behind, has in recent years caught up with overall
trends. Linked to overall demographic trends, and
in particular the shrinking size of youth cohorts,
the number of students in teacher training and
education science has fallen in the recent past,
while the number of students in health and
welfare is increasing significantly.
There is still scientific debate about the optimal
number and share of university graduates in
the population and their relevance for balanced
R&I systems. However, available statistical
data show that returns to tertiary education in
terms of average earnings and employment
rates are still high, suggesting that there is
not yet an over-supply of tertiary graduates.
 ▶ Figure I-2-14 Evolution of the number of tertiary students in the EU (index 2003 = 100)
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Note: (1)Includes the total number of students from both ‘science, mathematics and computing’ and ‘engineering, manufacturing
and construction’.
1.6 million
2.5 million
6.7 million
5.1 million
20.3 million
2.9 million

Figure I-2-14 Evolution of the number of tertiary students in the EU (index 2003 = 100; ISCED 5-6)
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Total
Social sciences, business and law
Teacher training and education science
Science and engineering
(1)
Humanities and arts
Health and welfareScience, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat

Note: (1)Includes the total number of students from both 'science, mathematics and computing' and 'engineering,

manufacturing and construction'.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
41
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
However manufacturing-oriented economies,
such as Germany and Austria for example, also
traditionally rely on a strong supply of graduates
from vocational education and training.
Europe has progressed well in the past in terms
of tertiary graduates per 1 000 population, but
still lags behind the US and Japan and growth
might decline in the future.
As regards new tertiary graduates per thousand
population (see Figure I-2-15 above) the EU
performs at a similar level as the US and Japan,
but below South Korea. Differences between
Member States are significant, with several eastern
European countries (Poland, Lithuania and Slovakia)
showing high numbers of new graduates and thus
catching up on tertiary attainment. These countries
also experienced high growth rates in the past.
In terms of the absolute number of tertiary
graduates, and despite good progress, the EU has
been overtaken by China, which is now the world’s
largest producer of tertiary graduates by far.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD, UNESCO (UIS).
Note: (1) Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.
Figure I-2-16 Total number of tertiary graduates, 2000-2013
Thousands
EU
China
Japan
South Korea
United States
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
10000
9000
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
 ▶ Figure I-2-15 New graduates from tertiary education (per thousand population), 2005 and 2013
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)IL, CN: 2012. (2)LU, CN: No data available for 2005.

Figure I-2-15 New graduates from tertiary education (per thousand population), 2005 and 2013
2013 (1) 2005 (2)
South Korea United States
Japan
EU
China Poland Ireland Lithuania Slovakia
United Kingdom
Denmark France Latvia Austria Finland Belgium
Czech Republic
Bulgaria Slovenia Portugal
Malta Croatia Spain
Netherlands
Estonia Sweden Hungary Cyprus Italy
Germany Greece
Luxembourg
Iceland
Switzerland
Norway Israel TurkeyRomania
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, O E C D
Notes: (1)IL, CN: 2012. (2)LU, CN: No data available for 2005.

 ▶ Figure I-2-16 Total number of tertiary graduates, 2000-2013
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD, UNESCO (UIS)
Note:
 (1)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
42
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
In 2004, China (with a population 2.7 times the
EU total) overtook the EU in terms of the absolute
number of tertiary graduates (see Figure I-2-16
above). The number of tertiary graduates has
quintupled in China since 2001 to surpass
9 million in 2012, nearly twice the EU figure. There
was, at the same time, stagnation in the number
of tertiary graduates in Japan and South Korea,
as tertiary participation rates in these countries
are reaching saturation and demographic factors,
such as declining cohort size, come into play.
The EU has progressed more than the US, Japan
and South Korea in the share and relative
number of science and technology graduates,
but South Korea still has a higher share.
As regards science and technology graduates
(see Figure I-2-17 above) the EU countries
have progressed more since 2005 in terms of
graduates per 1 000 population than the US,
Japan and South Korea (partially as a result of
the Bologna effect of more degree levels and
more double-counting), but South Korea still has
a much higher share of S&E graduates in all
tertiary graduates and more graduates relative
to population.
 ▶ Figure I-2-17 Tertiary graduates per thousand population, 2005 and 2013
 (% share of science and technology graduates in total graduates)
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD, UNESCO (UIS)
Note: (1)CN: Data refer to total tertiary graduates per thousand population. A breakdown of the total between S&T and fields
other than S&T is not available.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD, UNESCO (UIS)
Note: (1) CN: Data refer to total tertiary graduates per thousand population. A breakdown of the total between S&T and fields
other than S&T is not available.
0
2
4
6
8
1 0
1 2
1 4
Figure I-2-17 Tertiary graduates per thousand population, 2005 and 2013
(% share of science and technology graduates in total graduates)
2005 2013 2005 2013 2005 2013 2005 2013 2005 2013
EU United States Japan South Korea China (1)
Science and technology (S&T) Fields other than S&T
22.5%
21.9%
16.8%
14.9%
21.4%
19.9%
36.8%
31.0%

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
43
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
The EU performs well in the production of new
doctoral graduates, including in the field of
science and technology. Some EU countries are
among the best performers worldwide.
understate performance since a high share of
students receive their doctoral degrees abroad.
Many eastern and southern European countries
have a relatively low production of doctoral
graduates, partially a result of a perceived lower
attractiveness of academic careers.
When it comes to new graduates at the
doctoral level (see Figure I-2-18 above), the
EU performs at the same level as the US, but
outperforms South Korea and Japan. Nordic
countries and Germany perform very well;
however, in smaller countries the data available
 ▶ Figure I-2-18 New doctoral graduates per thousand population aged 25-34, 2013
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)IS, IL: 2012. (2)PL: 2009; IS, IL: 2012.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1) IS, IL: 2012. (2)PL: 2009; IS, IL: 2012.
Figure I-2-18 New doctoral graduates per thousand population aged 25-34, 2013
Total doctoral graduates 2013 (1) Science and technology graduates (2)
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
EU
South Korea
Japan
United States
PolandIreland LithuaniaSlovakia
United Kingdom
Denmark France LatviaAustriaFinland Belgium
Czech Republic
BulgariaSlovenia Portugal
MaltaCroatia
Netherlands
EstoniaSweden Hungary CyprusItaly
Germany
Spain Greece
Luxembourg
Iceland
Switzerland
Norway Israel TurkeyRomania

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
44
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The EU has made good progress as regards the
headline target on tertiary attainment, but still
lags behind the US, Japan and South Korea in
Progress in the number of tertiary graduates
is (with some time lags) also reflected in the
evolution of the EU headline target on tertiary
attainment (of 30- 34 year olds). With a
tertiary attainment level of 38% in 2014 (see
Figure I-2-19 above), the EU is on track to reach
the headline target of 40% by 2020 and will
probably even surpass it. Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Cyprus and Ireland already have attainment rates
of over 50%. Malta, Romania and Italy still show
relatively low tertiary attainment rates. Italy has
the lowest tertiary attainment rate among OECD
countries. Despite the progress achieved, the EU
still lags behind tertiary attainment levels of the
US (46% in 2013), Japan (58%, 25-34 year olds,
2013) and Korea (68% in 2013).
Tertiary attainment is only a proxy for the
skill levels acquired. Studies show significant
differences between the skill levels of tertiary
graduates in EU countries and, therefore, a
need to focus more on the quality of education
in some countries.
As educational attainment rates in upper
secondary and tertiary education reach
saturation in many Member States, attention
must shift to the quality of education and the
acquisition of skills, especially skills relevant for
the labour market . The demographic dividend,
the declining cohort size in many countries, could
help to provide the resources for that.
attainment rates. Furthermore, differences
between EU Member States are still significant.
 ▶ Figure I-2-19 The EU headline target on the tertiary attainment of 30-34 year olds
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes: (1)LV, IT, SE: The 2020 national targets are set as averages between the values provided by the Member State
(LV: 34-36%; IT: 26-27%; SE: 40-45%). (2)DK, NL: The 2020 national targets are set at over 40%. (3)FR: The 2020 national targets
include persons aged between 17 and 33 years. (4)DE, AT: The 2020 national targets include ISCED97 level 4 attainment.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes: (1) LV, IT, SE: The 2020 national targets are set as averages between the values provided by the Member State (LV: 34-36%;
IT: 26-27%; SE: 40-45%). (2) DK, NL: The 2020 national targets are set at over 40%. (3) FR: The 2020 national targets include persons aged
between 17 and 33 years. (4) DE, AT: The 2020 national targets include ISCED4 attainment.
Figure I-2-19 The EU headline target on the tertiary attainment of 30-34 year olds
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Cyprus Ireland Sweden
(1)
United Kingdom
Estonia Finland
Netherlands
(2)
France
(3)
Denmark
(2)
Belgium Spain Poland Slovenia Austria
(4)
Latvia
(1)
Greece Hungary Croatia
Germany
(4)
Portugal Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Slovakia
Malta
Romania Italy
(1)
EU
2014 2009 2020 National target
EU 2020 target

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
45
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
The results of the OECD PIAAC study on adult skills
published in October 2013 (see Figure I-2 -20
below) show strong differences between countries
in average skill levels for people with the same
level of educational attainment. According to this
study, upper secondary graduates in Finland and
the Netherlands score, on average, higher on key
skills than tertiary graduates in countries such as
Italy, Spain, the United Kingdom and Cyprus. This
implies that there is still substantial room for
improving the level of skills acquired in tertiary
education in many Member States and that there
are good practices to learn from within the EU.
Nevertheless, results should be analysed with
care, since the skill levels of young adults might
also be influenced by factors outside education,
such as work experience, long unemployment
spells, or non-formal learning. The skill level
acquired at a tertiary level is also dependent on
the skills acquired at earlier stages of education.
As regards the increasingly important ICT
skills, the Eurostat ICT household survey (see
Figure I-2-21 below) shows for 2014 strong
differences between Member States in the
share of the population aged 15-74 with high
computer skills (individuals who have carried out
five or six out of six computer-related activities).
The Nordic countries, Estonia and Luxembourg,
perform best in this area. They also tend to have
relatively high shares of ICT start-ups. The lowest
performers in the EU as regards computer skills
among the population are Romania and Bulgaria,
countries with important software sectors, but
where low per capita incomes lead to a relatively
low household penetration of computers.
The share of individuals with high computer
skills in the EU population is tending to increase,
from 23% in 2007, to 25% in 2012, and 29% in
2014. Countries that progressed most in the last
five years include Greece, Latvia and Sweden,
while some countries even showed a decline
in the share of population with high computer
skills (the Netherlands, Hungary, Cyprus, Croatia
and Romania).
 ▶ Figure I-2-20 Mean literacy proficency scores of 16-29 year olds by highest educational attainment(1)
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD - Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)
Notes: (1)Lower than upper secondary corresponds to the International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED97) categories
1, 2 and 3C short. Upper secondary education includes ISCED 3A, 3B, 3C long and 4. Tertiary type B corresponds to ISCED 5B.
Tertiary type A corresponds to ISCED 5A and advanced research programmes correspond to ISCED 6. Where possible, foreign
qualifications are included as per their closest correspondence to the respective national education systems.
(2)EU is the
unweighted average of the available scores for Member States.

Figure I-2-20 Mean literacy proficency scores of 16-29 year olds by highest educational attainment(1)
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4
Finland
Netherlands
Flanders (Belgium)
Austria Sweden Estonia Germany Ireland
Czech Republic
England / N. Ireland (UK)
Denmark Poland Slovakia
Spain Italy Cyprus Norway
EU
(2)
Japan
United States South Korea
Tertiary-type A and advanced
research programmes
Tertiary-type B Upper secondary Lower than upper secondary
350
325
300
275
250
225
200
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD - Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC) (2012)
Notes: (1) Lower than upper secondary corresponds to the International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) categories 1, 2 and 3C short. Upper
secondary education includes ISCED 3A, 3B, 3C long and 4. Tertiary type B corresponds to ISCED 5B. Tertiary type A corresponds to ISCED 5A and
advanced research programmes correspond to ISCED 6. Where possible, foreign qualifications are included as per their closest correspondence to the
to the respective national education systems. (2)EU is the unweighted average of the available scores for Member States.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
46
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
While the population’s ICT skills are improving,
there is still a growing need for ICT professionals.
The number of ICT practitioners has, in the recent
past, been growing by about 4% per year. Growth
is fuelled by new developments such as Big Data,
the Internet of things, the Cloud, and the growth
of the app economy.
After 2005, the number of computing graduates
declined, however, reflecting (with a time lag) the
crisis of 2001, and have increased again since
2009. Nevertheless, the number of computing
graduates in the EU increased in the period
from 2007–2013 by less than 0.5% per year
on average. In many Member States, however,
it declined. As a result, there are not enough
graduates to fill the vacancies available in
this sector. According to recent Commission
estimates there could be up to 825 000
vacancies for ICT professionals in the EU by the
year 2020. Member States with a high number
of computing graduates per 1000 population
aged 25-34 include Malta (where an online
gaming cluster is developing), Denmark, and
Ireland (where many US ICT companies have
their European headquarters), while figures are
relatively low in Portugal, Luxembourg, Romania
and Italy. However, in some countries, including
Romania, the figures available tend to understate
performance since computing is often integrated
into subject areas such as mathematics.
Nevertheless, a point of concern is that the
number of computing studies graduates has
decreased since 2013 by over 10% in countries
such as Romania and Italy (see Figure I-2-22).
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Figure I-2-21 The share of individuals with high computer skills in the EU population, 2014 and
change compared to 2009
Increase Decrease
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
%
EU
Finland
Luxembourg
Denmark Sweden Estonia Lithuania Austria Portugal
Spain France
United Kingdom
Slovenia Germany Greece Latvia
Czech Republic
Netherlands
Ireland Italy Malta
Slovakia Belgium Hungary Cyprus Croatia Poland Bulgaria Romania Norway TurkeyIceland
 ▶ Figure I-2-21 The share of individuals with high computer skills in the EU population, 2014 and
 change compared to 2009
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
47
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
Employment in science and technology has been
resilient during the crisis. While total employment
declined, the number of researchers and R&D
personnel has expanded considerably since 2008.
An adequate supply of skilled human resources
is vital for the functioning of R&I systems and
for the development of science and technology-
intensive economic sectors. The EU hereby faces
increasing demographic challenges in the coming
decades with small young cohorts entering the
labour market combined with a retiring baby
boomer generation and a potential risk of sectoral
and regional bottlenecks in the supply of skilled
workers. However, rapid technological progress and
changes in workplace requirements, growing inter-
disciplinarity and a resulting low predictability of
future skills needs make planning and foresight
difficult. A certain surplus of skilled people can
stimulate economic development and innovation,
while growing internationalisation of labour
markets make regional or national skills gaps
less severe. On the other hand, there is growing
international and inter-sectoral competition for
highly skilled individuals.
The EU’s active population in 2013 (referring
to the total labour force, which includes both
employed and unemployed persons) amounted
to about 241 million, of which 215 million
were employed and 26 million unemployed
(see Figure I-2-23 below). Human resources in
science and technology (HRST), that is people with
tertiary attainment or working in an S&T field,
accounted for 117.7 million people in the EU, or
54.6% of total employment, a share that has
shown a constant increase in the past. Those
who have successfully completed tertiary-level
education (HRSTE) accounted for 42.0% of total
employment, with Ireland, Cyprus and Luxembourg
showing the highest shares, while those who have
both completed tertiary-level education and are
currently employed in an S&T occupation (HRSTC)
accounted for 21.5% of total employment. This
implies that about half of tertiary education
graduates are employed in S&T occupations.
 ▶ Figure I-2-22 Graduates in the field of computing per thousand population aged 25-34, 2013 and
 compound annual growth, 2007-2013
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes:
(1)NL, PL, EU: 2012. (2)NL, PL: 2007-2012; RO: 2008-2013; IE: 2009-2013; IT: Break in series between 2011 and
the previous years.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes: (1)NL, PL, EU: 2012. (2) NL, PL: 2007-2012; RO: 2008-2013; IE: 2009-2013; IT: Break in series between 2011
and the previous years.
Figure I-2-22 Graduates in the field of computing per thousand population aged
25-34, 2013 and compound annual growth, 2007-2013
MT
IE
DK
SK
SE
DE EU
ES
AT
CZ
HRSI
LU
PT
BG
EL
Compound annual growth (%), 2007-2013 (2)
Graduates per thousand population aged 25-34, 2013 (1)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
UK
EE
PLLV
FR
NLFI
LT
CY
HU
BE
RO
IT
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
48
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Human resources in Science and Technology have
grown faster than total employment in the past and
jobs in this area have been more resilient during
the crisis. Whilst total employment decreased on
average by 0.7% per year between 2008 and 2013,
HRST increased by 2.1% per year, or 12 million, over
the whole period, the number of scientists and
engineers by 0.9%, research personnel by 2.0% and
the number of researchers by 2.5%. This reflects
the rising educational attainment of the labour
force, as well as the shift to skill-intensive jobs and
a knowledge-intensive economy.
Quantitatively, the stock of human resources in
science and technology is still growing, partly because
of increasing attainment rates. There is no evident
overall skills gap yet, but the situation might change
in the future and there are already bottlenecks in
certain regions and sectors, such as ICT.
The share of researchers in the workforce
reflects economic structures and development
levels and is strongly correlated to the
innovation outputs of countries. Countries with
high shares of researchers in total employment
tend to also be leaders in innovation.
 ▶ Figure I-2-23 Key data on human resources in science and technology in the EU
 ▶ Figure I-2-24 Total researchers (FTE) as % of total employment, 2014(1)
Total (000s) 2014 as % of total
employment 2014
Compound annual
growth (%)
2008-2014(1)
Active population 242 511 111 0.2
Total employment (resident population concept - LFS) 217 709 100 -0.4
HRST - Human Resources in Science and Technology 120 062 55.1 2.2
HRSTE - Human Resources in Science and Technology
- Education
92 639 42.6 3.4
HRSTO - Human Resources in Science and Technology
- Occupation
74 754 34.3 0.9
HRSTC - Human Resources in Science and Technology -
Core
47 331 21.7 2.3
SE - Scientists and Engineers 16 099 7.4 1.4
Total R&D personnel (FTE) 2 756 1.3 1.9
Researchers (FTE) 1 768 0.8 2.5
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Note:
(1)Break in series between 2011 and the previous years for Human Resources in Science and Technology data (except for
the Education sub-group).
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Note:
(1)IL, CH, US: 2012; IS, TR, JP, CN, KR: 2013.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Note: (1) IL, CH, US: 2012; IS, TR, JP, CN, KR: 2013.
Figure I-2-24 Total researchers (FTE) as % of total employment, 2014(1)
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0 %
South Korea
Japan
United States
EU
China Finland Denmark Sweden France Belgium
Luxembourg
Austria Slovenia
Netherlands
Ireland Germany
United Kingdom
Portugal Greece
Czech Republic
Spain Estonia Lithuania Hungary Slovakia
Italy Poland Malta
Bulgaria Latvia Croatia Cyprus Romania
Israel Iceland Norway
Switzerland
Turkey
Researchers employed by the business sector Researchers employed by the public sector

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
49
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
In terms of researchers, as a percentage of total
employment the EU lags behind the US, Japan
and especially South Korea. This is particularly
notable when it comes to researchers employed
in the business sector (see Figure I-2-24 above).
However, compared to the US and especially
Japan, where the number of researchers
is stagnating, the EU is catching up, while
South Korea is pulling further ahead. China shows
even stronger growth; it already has the largest
number of business researchers in absolute
terms and might also soon overtake the EU in
terms of the total number of researchers. In the
EU, the Nordic countries (Finland, Denmark and
Sweden) show the highest share of researchers
in total employment and also perform well as
regards researchers employed by the business
sector. The south-eastern European countries
(Croatia, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Romania) and also
Latvia show relatively low levels, particularly
for researchers in the business sector. On the
other hand, many central and eastern European
countries (notably Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland) and
Malta are catching up in terms of researchers
and business enterprise researchers. There
is a strong correlation between the share of
researchers employed by the business sector
and innovation outputs (see Figure I-2-25 below).
The share of female researchers is still far from a
gender balance with strong differences between
European countries. The Baltic States and south-
eastern European countries have the highest
share, probably partly as a result of comparatively
unattractive salaries and career prospects.
 ▶ Figure I-2-25 Innovation Union Scoreboard index, 2015 verrus researchers (FTE) employed by business as %
 of total employment, 2014
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Note: (1)CH, US: 2012; IS, TR, JP, CN, KR: 2013.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Note: (1) CH, US: 2012; IS, TR, JP, CN, KR: 2013.
Figure I-2-25 Innovation Union Scoreboard index, 2015 versus researchers
(FTE) employed by business as % of total employment, 2014
Researchers (FTE) employed by business as %of total employment, 2014 (1)
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1
R2=0.69472
Innovation Union Scoreboard index, 2015
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
UK
DE NL IE
US
JP DK
FI
SE
KR
PT
IT
MT
CZ
ES
HU
LU
IS
BE
SI
NO
FR AT
EE
CY
SK EL
CN
HR
LV
RO
BG TR
LT
PL
CH
EU

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
50
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
 ▶ Figure I-2-26 Researchers (FTE) - Total and business enterprise, 2014
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes:
(1)IS, TR, JP, CN, KR: 2013; CH, IL, US: 2012. (2)The values refer to 2013. EU: The value was estimated from the available
data and does not include BE, FI and UK. (3)US: 2007-2012; IS, TR, JP, CN, KR: 2007-2013; CH: 2008-2012; IL: 2011-2012.

Total researchers (FTE) Business enterprise researchers (FTE)
2014(1)
(thou-
sands)
% of
female
resear-
chers(2)
Compound
annual
growth (%)
2007-2014
as % of
total
employ-
ment(3)
2014(1)
(thou-
sands)
% of
female
resear-
chers(2)
Compound
annual
growth (%)
2007-2014
as %
of total
employ-
ment(3)
as % of
total re-
searchers
(FTE)
 Belgium 46.9 : 3.7 1.0 23.8 : 4.0 0.5 50.8
 Bulgaria 13.1 50.5 2.2 0.4 3.5 43.2 14.7 0.1 26.4
 Czech Republic 36.0 24.5 3.7 0.7 18.3 14.7 5.9 0.4 50.7
 Denmark 40.6 32.6 4.3 1.5 24.2 25.6 3.4 0.9 59.5
 Germany 359.6 22.7 3.1 0.9 204.4 13.7 2.3 0.5 56.8
 Estonia 4.3 42.5 2.2 0.7 1.3 29.4 3.8 0.2 29.0
 Ireland 17.4 29.3 4.6 0.9 11.2 22.9 6.4 0.6 64.5
 Greece 29.7 38.9 6.4 0.8 4.9 27.6 7.1 0.1 16.6
 Spain 122.2 38.8 -0.1 0.7 44.6 31.1 0.8 0.3 36.5
 France 269.4 26.1 2.6 1.0 162.7 20.5 3.9 0.6 60.4
 Croatia 6.1 49.9 0.0 0.4 0.9 41.2 0.7 0.1 15.1
 Italy 126.0 36.2 4.4 0.6 52.0 21.9 6.8 0.2 41.3
 Cyprus 0.9 38.4 1.1 0.2 0.2 35.5 -0.2 0.1 20.8
 Latvia 3.7 50.5 -1.5 0.4 0.8 45.8 10.0 0.1 20.7
 Lithuania 8.6 48.4 0.3 0.7 2.0 34.0 6.3 0.2 23.1
 Luxembourg 2.5 27.3 1.9 1.0 1.0 11.1 -5.5 0.4 40.9
 Hungary 26.2 27.0 6.0 0.6 15.6 18.1 12.1 0.4 59.4
 Malta 0.9 28.5 8.9 0.5 0.5 25.4 12.0 0.3 59.8
 Netherlands 75.5 25.5 4.4 0.9 46.0 17.6 5.8 0.6 60.8
 Austria 41.0 23.0 3.8 1.0 26.1 15.7 3.8 0.6 63.7
 Poland 78.7 36.2 3.6 0.5 25.0 20.9 14.2 0.2 31.8
 Portugal 38.5 44.7 1.4 0.9 10.5 29.5 6.7 0.2 27.4
 Romania 18.1 45.2 2.9 0.2 5.2 38.8 2.0 0.1 29.0
 Slovenia 8.6 34.7 1.4 0.9 4.6 25.7 2.6 0.5 54.1
 Slovakia 14.7 41.8 2.6 0.6 2.6 19.5 7.5 0.1 17.9
 Finland 38.3 : 0.3 1.6 21.4 : -0.4 0.9 55.8
 Sweden 66.6 28.0 2.5 1.4 44.4 22.5 1.4 0.9 66.7
 United Kingdom 273.6 : 1.1 0.9 104.5 : 2.2 0.3 38.2
 EU 1 767.9 23.7 2.8 0.8 862.4 16.2 3.7 0.4 48.8
 Iceland 2.0 : 6.5 1.1 0.7 : -8.2 0.4 37.7
 Norway 29.4 : 2.7 1.1 14.5 : 2.7 0.6 49.3
 Switzerland 36.0 : 9.4 0.8 16.8 : 12.9 0.4 46.6
 Turkey 89.1 33.0 10.2 0.4 40.2 24.2 17.5 0.2 45.1
 Israel 63.7 : 15.5 1.7 53.4 : 12.6 1.5 83.7
 United States 1 265.1 : 2.2 0.9 869.0 : 1.1 0.6 68.7
 Japan 660.5 : 0.1 1.0 485.3 : 0.1 0.7 73.5
 China 1 484.0 : 7.6 0.2 922.7 : 8.6 0.1 62.2
 South Korea 321.8 : 6.4 1.3 253.4 : 7.3 1.0 78.7

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
51
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
Investment in ICT
Information and Communication Technologies
(ICT) have become not only key sectors
in modern economies, they are also fully
integrated into all economic activities,
becoming an important source of innovation,
growth and jobs.
ICTs have revolutionised the way economic
activities are organised as well as the way
individuals communicate and they have been
a source of innovation, in some cases of a
disruptive nature, in all sectors of the economy.
The economy has become increasingly digital
as ICTs are integrated into all areas of activity.
Several studies have shown the importance of
ICTs as a key source of productivity growth
(11) and
job creation. It is expected that the ICT sector in
itself will create 900 000 jobs in Europe by 2020.
ICT usage among the population in the EU is
similar to other advanced economies, notably
the United States and Japan, but large
national differences in infrastructure quality,
as measured for example by access to fixed
broadband, exists in Europe.
(11) Cardona, M., Kretschmer, T. and Strobel, T (2013), ICT and
productivity: conclusions from the empirical literature, Information
Economics and Policy, Volume 5, Issue 3, 109-125.
Developing a solid and ubiquitous ICT infrastructure
that enables fast access to digital services to
businesses and citizens is crucial for reaping the
potential benefits of ICT. EU rates of access to
fast ICT networks, as measured by the availability
of fixed broadband subscriptions, are on a similar
level compared to other advanced economies
such as the United States or Japan, but below
South Korea, one of the world ICT leaders (see
Figure I-2-27 below). However, large differences
exist across Member States, which suggests
the presence of a persistent digital divide in
the EU, with countries such as Denmark, the
Netherlands, France or the United Kingdom well
above the EU average, while lagging countries
in central and eastern Europe barely score
above China. However, some of the central
and eastern European Member States such as
Lithuania, Latvia, Romania and Bulgaria show
high fibre-to-home penetration rates, a fact that
has stimulated local IT industries, at least in the
capital cities.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
52
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The European digital divide is also reflected
in the share of the population using the
internet, where considerable differences
across Member States persist, despite a
rapid progression in countries that are
lagging behind.
The share of individuals using the internet in
Europe (see Figure I-2-28 below) remains slightly
below the levels of competitors. The differences
between EU Member States remain stark, with
the Nordic and some western European countries
being world leaders, and some countries in
central, eastern and southern Europe still
showing low levels, though they are catching up.
 ▶ Figure I-2-27 Fixed (wired) broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants, 2014
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: ITU
Note:
(1)EU: The value was derived by DG Research and Innovation.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Data: ITU
Note: (1)EU: The value was derived by DG Research and Innovation.
Figure I-2-27 Fixed (wired) broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants, 2014
South Korea
EU
(1)
United States
Japan
China
Denmark
Netherlands
France
United Kingdom
Belgium
Germany
Malta
Sweden
Luxembourg
Finland
Lithuania
Greece
Czech Republic
Austria
Estonia
Hungary
Spain
Ireland
Slovenia
Latvia
Poland
Italy
Croatia
Slovakia
Cyprus
Bulgaria
Romania
Switzerland
Norway
Iceland
Israel
Turkey
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
53
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
In global terms, a large gap between the EU and
other advanced economies exists in the share of
the ICT sector in economic output. This evidence
points to a lag in the production of ICT-related
products and services in Europe, with Europe
developing more into a consumer of ICT goods
and services, rather than a producer of them.
Since the ICT revolution that peaked in the mid-
1990s, Europe as a whole, with some notable
exceptions among the Nordic countries, has
lagged behind in the development of the ICT
sector. While in the United States and Japan,
the weight of the ICT sector is above 5% of GDP,
in the EU this share stagnates at below 4% (see
Figure I-2-29 below). This has implications for
innovation, mainly through two factors. The first
one, more direct, is that the ICT sector has been one
of the most disruptive innovative economic activities
of the past few years, where important first-mover
advantages
(12) have been reported. The second one,
in an indirect manner, refers to the speed of adoption
of ICT in other economic activities. As ICT-enabled
innovations come about not only by the production
of ICT, but also with the use, a closer presence or
collocation of the ICT sector can help speed up the
spillover effects and the reinvention of the production
and delivery of traditional products and services.
(12) https://books.google.be/books?id=-YXYAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA1
13&lpg=PA113&dq=ICT+first+mover+advantage+OECD&
source=bl&ots=dWF6Aw6FjP&sig=NMT1Cb_h7E5W-v-PA_
e6uJYySEE&hl=en&sa=X&ei=4fZvVZSVBYvA7AbykIKwBg&redir_
esc=y#v=onepage&q=ICT%20first%20mover%20advantage%20
OECD&f=false
 ▶ Figure I-2-28 Percentage of population aged 16-74(1) using the internet, 2007 and 2014
 ▶ Figure I-2-29 ICT share of GDP, 2006-2010
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: ITU
Note:
(1)CH: Population aged 14+; IL: Population aged 20+; JP: Population aged 6+; KR: Population aged 3+.
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: JRC-IPTS calculations and estimates based on EUROSTAT data, PREDICT project
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: ITU
%
Figure I-2-28 Percentage of individuals using the internet, 2007 and 2014
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2014 2007
Japan
United States South Korea
EU
China
Denmark
Luxembourg Netherlands
Sweden Finland
United Kingdom
Germany Belgium Estonia France Austria Slovakia
Czech Republic
Ireland Spain
Hungary Latvia Malta
Lithuania Slovenia Cyprus Croatia Poland Portugal Greece Italy
Bulgaria Romania Iceland Norway
Switzerland
Israel Turkey
Figure I-2-29 ICT share of GDP, 2006-2010
6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
 EU United States Japan

Science, Research and Inno vation Perf ormance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Inno vation - Unit f or the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies

Data: JRC -IPTS calculations and estimates based on EUROSTAT data, PREDICT project.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
54
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
While it is difficult to prove a causal
relationship between R&D expenditure on
ICT and the development of the sector, both
are correlated and Europe underinvests in
comparison to other advanced economies.
Private R&D investment in ICT in the EU lags
behind that of other advanced economies (see
Figure I-2-30 below). Overall, for the past few
years, private R&D intensity in the ICT sector of
companies located in the EU was less than half
that of those based in the United States or Japan.
This highlights that the EU ICT industry not only
lags behind in terms of its share in the economy,
but also that Europe’s ICT sector specialised less
in R&D intensive activities (which include, for
example, semiconductor production and software
development) compared to other advanced
economies. This can result in a potential lock-in
effect, a difficulty for Europe to become a major
player in the ICT sector, and a lack of positive
spillover effects for the application of ICT in other
sectors vof the economy.
However, there are large differences across
Member States, with Nordic countries notably
standing out and achieving investment intensities
above or near third countries such as Japan and
the United States
(13).
Further analysis on the role and importance
of ICT and R&D intensity in the ICT sector is
provided in this report under the analysis of
structural change in Europe.
(13) https://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/news/scoreboard-2014-eu-
ict-sector-and-its-rd-performance-2014
In addition to lower investments in ICT-related
R&D activities, the fragmentation of digital
markets in Europe continues to affect the
development of the sector and the ability of
ICT enabled innovations and enterprises to
develop and scale-up.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: JRC-IPTS calculations and estimates based on EUROSTAT data, PREDICT project.
Figure I-2-30 ICT R&D intensity (BERD as % of value added), 2006-2010
14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
EU United States Japan
So far, there is no genuine single market where
individuals and businesses can access and
exercise online activities under conditions of fair
competition and a high level of consumer and
personal data protection. Fragmentation hinders
the development of ICT activities in a potential
EU market of over 500 million consumers.
 ▶ Figure I-2-30 ICT R&D intensity (BERD as % of value added), 2006-2010
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: JRC-IPTS calculations and estimates based on EUROSTAT data, PREDICT project.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
55
I-1. General economic outlook
Several actions to create a truly Digital Single
Market in the EU have recently been put in place
in order to address the fragmentation and
create better conditions for the development
of the sector and for enhancing spillover to the
overall economy.
An ambitious Digital Single Market Strategy
(14),
creating the conditions for a vibrant digital
economy and society, has been agreed upon
as one of the key initiatives of the current
European Commission to support jobs, growth
and investment. This package encompasses
measures aimed at complementing the
telecommunications regulatory environment,
modernising copyright rules, simplifying rules for
consumers making online and digital purchases,
and enhancing cyber-security and mainstreaming
digitalisation. For that, the three main building
blocks are as follows.
• Better access for consumers and businesses
to online goods and services across Europe.
• Creation of the right conditions for digital
networks and services to flourish.
• Maximising the growth potential of the
European Digital Economy through more and
better investment in ICT infrastructure and
technologies.
(14) http://ec.europa.eu/priorities/digital-single-market/docs/dsm-
communication_en.pdf
Knowledge flows
Knowledge circulation is the process by which
existing and new knowledge is disseminated
throughout the economy and taken up by the
different actors of the research and innovation
systems. Collaborations between the public and
private sectors as well as collaboration with
international partners represent important sources
of knowledge transfer and knowledge circulation.
There is a positive relation between the level
of science-business collaboration and the
quality of a research and innovation system.
Although the European Union has improved
its performance slightly, it still lags behind
the United States.
Innovation is increasingly underpinned by
intensive collaborations between different actors
of the innovation process. In terms of public-
private co-publications
(15) per million population,
the United States is the world’s best performer
followed by South Korea and Japan. Although the
European Union has slightly increased its number
of public-private co-publications between 2007
and 2012, it still lags behind, in particular in
comparison with the United States.
Significant differences exist among the
Member States. Countries with higher levels of
research quality
(16) are also those with higher levels
of co-publications between public and private
sectors. While countries such as Switzerland,
Iceland, Denmark, Sweden, the Netherlands,
Belgium or Finland show strong science-business
links and perform better than the United States,
public-private co-publications are marginal
in countries such as Latvia, Bulgaria, Poland,
Romania and Malta (Figure I-2-31).
(15) The definition of the ‘private sector’ excludes the private medical
and health sector. Publications are assigned to the country/
countries in which the business companies or other private
organisations are located.
(16) See section on scientific outputs below.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
56
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
While the level of public-private cooperation is
correlated with business R&I intensity, there are
countries such as Switzerland, Denmark and the
Netherlands which perform better than expected
given their level of private R&D investments.
While there is a positive correlation between
the level of private investment and the level of
collaboration between public and private sectors,
countries such as Switzerland, Denmark, the
Netherlands and Iceland perform significantly
better than would be expected based on their
level of private investment.
To a lesser extent, in the United Kingdom,
Germany, France and Austria the business sector
collaborates more than expected with the public
sector. On the contrary, in countries such as
Finland or Slovenia the private and public sector
collaborate less than what would be expected.
In general, countries with low levels of private
investments have more difficulties in moving
above the regression line, which may be related
to the fact that public–private collaboration
in research and innovation systems needs to
be underpinned by a minimum level of private
investment to build critical mass (Figure I-2-32).
The over-performing countries show that
diversity in the levels of public-private
collaboration in Europe is not only related to
different business R&I intensities but also to
the diverse capacities of each national research
and innovation system to establish suitable
framework conditions to boost public-private
cooperation in research and innovation.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Innovation Union Scoreboard 2015
Figure I-2-31 Public-private co-publications per million population, 2007 and 2012
2012 2007
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
United States South Korea
Japan
EU
China
Denmark Sweden
Netherlands
Belgium Finland Slovenia Austria France
Luxembourg
Ireland Croatia
Italy Spain
Hungary
Czech Republic
Cyprus Estonia Greece Portugal Slovakia Lithuania
Malta
Romania Poland Bulgaria Latvia
Switzerland
Iceland Norway Turkey
United Kingdom
Germany
 ▶ Figure I-2-31 Public-private co-publications per million population, 2007 and 2012
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Innovation Union Scoreboard 2015

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
57
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
The national economic fabric plays a key
role in building collaborations between the
business sector and higher education or
public research institutions.
The intensity of public-private collaboration
varies in terms of the economic fabric of the
countries. Large companies are more likely to
engage in collaborations with higher education
or public research institutions than small- and
medium-sized enterprises. This partly explains
why economies characterised mainly by a
large number of SMEs show weaker science–
business links.
In Finland, 70% of the large firms that innovate
collaborate with the public sector, while only
20% of Finnish SMEs that innovate engage
in some form of collaboration with the public
sector. At the same time, in Slovenia and Austria,
where more than half of all large firms that
innovate collaborate with public institutions, one
innovative SME out of five engages in the same
type of collaboration (Figure I-2-33).
It is therefore clear that the nature of the economic
fabric is an important aspect to be taken into
consideration by policy-makers when designing
policy measures and framework conditions aiming
at boosting science–business links.
 ▶ Figure I-2-32 Share of public-private co-publications in total number of publications(1)
 versus business R&D intensity, 2013
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, SciVal (Elsevier) based on Scopus database
Notes:
(1)Full counting method. (2)IS: 2011; IE, CH: 2012.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, SciVal (Elsevier) based on Scopus database
Notes: (1)Full counting method. (2) IS: 2011; IE, CH; 2012.

Figure I-2-32 Share of public-private co-publications in total number of
publications(1) versus business R&D intensity, 2013
CH
EU
SI
FI
JP KR
IL
BG
PL PT CZ CNMT
ES EE HU
DK
IS
NL
NO IE
FR BE AT SE
DE
US
UKLU
IT
EL
LVCY
RO
LT
SK
HR
TR
R2=0.45155
Share of public-private co-publications in total publications, 2013 (2)
Business R&D intensity, 2013 (2)
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
58
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Human resources mobility in science and
technology is an important driver of knowledge
transfer and spillover.
Knowledge transfer involves the processes for
capturing, collecting and sharing not only explicit but
also tacit knowledge, including skills and competence.
This includes mobility of human resources in science
and technology as a critical resource and a vehicle
for success, competitiveness and growth.
Denmark, the United Kingdom, Norway, Iceland
and Switzerland show intensive flows of highly
skilled employees in science and technology
which results in a better circulation and
exchange of knowledge.
The flow of highly skilled employees in science and
technology is an important mechanism to foster
knowledge circulation. Mobility and the resulting
capacity to circulate knowledge are key parts of the
success of research and innovation systems. The
job-to-job mobility of human resources in science
and technology
(17) is used as an indicator for the
exchange and flow of knowledge in research and
innovation systems.
Although the analysis is limited by the lack of
comparable international data, the job-to-job
data show more intensive flows of such workers
in Denmark, the United Kingdom, Norway, Iceland
and Switzerland, while countries such as Italy, the
Czech Republic, Croatia, Romania and Slovakia have
systems with less intensive flows (Figure I-2-34).
The negative trend in almost all European countries
can be partially attributed to the crisis because of
a lack of opportunities in the labour market or risk-
adverse behaviour of employees.
(17) Job-to-Job mobile HRST are individuals who have changed
employers during the last year, and fulfil the condition of being
employed HRST, i.e., (i) they have successfully completed education
at the third level and are employed in any kind of job, or (ii) they are
not formally qualified as above but are employed in an occupation
where the above qualifications are normally required.
 ▶ Figure I-2-33 Enterprises cooperating with:
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2012)
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2012)
Figure I-2-33 Enterprises cooperating with:

 Finland
Slovenia
Austria
United Kingdom
Greece
Lithuania
Belgium
Hungary
Sweden
Denmark
Croatia
Czech Republic
Germany
Norway
EU
Slovakia
Ireland
France
Netherlands
Estonia
Poland
Spain
Portugal
Latvia
Luxembourg
Turkey
Italy
Malta
Romania
Cyprus
Bulgaria
Finland
Slovenia
Austria
United Kingdom
Greece
Lithuania
Belgium
Hungary
Sweden
Denmark
Croatia
Czech Republic
Germany
Norway
EU
Slovakia
Ireland
France
Netherlands
Estonia
Poland
Spain
Portugal
Latvia
Luxembourg
Turkey
Italy
Malta
Romania
Cyprus
Bulgaria
Large companies SMEs Large companies SMEs
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 700 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Universities or other higher education institutions, 2012 Government, public or private research institutes, 2012

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
59
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
Doctoral degree holders usually change jobs
more frequently in higher quality research
and innovation systems, such as Germany
or Denmark.
Knowledge flows can also be measured through
the analysis of the mobility (18) of PhD holders.
In the United States, this mobility is more
(18) Mobility in terms of changing job position.
widespread than in the European Union, where
only countries with a higher quality research and
innovation system, such as Germany and Denmark,
show significant mobility flows of PhD holders.
Poland represents a positive exception to this as
the mobility of its doctoral holders is high despite
the overall quality of its system which is below the
European average (Figure I-2-35).
 ▶ Figure I-2-34 Job-to-job mobility of human resources in science and technology (HRST), 2003 and 2013
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes:
(1)FR, NL, TR: 2006; BG: 2008; CH: 2011; IE: Not available. (2)IE, SE: Not available.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes: (1) FR, NL, TR: 2006; BG: 2008; CH:2011; IE: Not available. (2) IE, SE: Not available.

%
Figure I-2-34 Job-to-job mobility of human resources in science and technology (HRST),
2003 and 2013
2013 (2) 2003 (1)
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Denmark
United Kingdom
Lithuania Finland Cyprus Austria
Luxembourg
Slovenia Estonia
Netherlands
Germany Belgium Malta France Latvia Hungary Poland Portugal
Spain Italy
Czech Republic
Bulgaria Greece Croatia Romania Slovakia Sweden Norway Iceland
Switzerland
Turkey
 ▶ Figure I-2-35 Doctorate holders who changed jobs in the last ten years(1), 2009(2)
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD (STI Scoreboard, 2013)
Notes:
(1)EU15 total employment mobility is computed on the basis of the OECD Job Tenure Database and corresponds to the
share of 25-69 year-old employed individuals who have changed jobs in the last ten years. For ES, the sample has limited cover-
age of doctorate holders for the years 2007 and 2009.
(2)DK, PL, RO: 2008.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD (STI Scoreboard, 2013)
Notes: (1)EU15 total employment mobility is computed on the basis of the OECD Job Tenure Database and corresponds to the share of 25-69 year-old
employed individuals who have changed jobs in the last ten years. For ES, the sample has limited coverage of doctorate holders for the years 2007 and
2009. (2)DK, PL, RO: 2008.

%
Figure I-2-35 Doctorate holders who changed jobs in the last ten years(1), 2009(2)
100
80
60
40
20
0
EU15 total employment
mobility over the last 10 years
 Researchers Non-researchersAll doctorate holders
Germany Denmark Poland
Netherlands
Slovenia Portugal Latvia Hungary Lithuania Croatia Spain
Bulgaria Belgium Romania Iceland Israel Turkey

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
60
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The business sector in the European Union is
still not fully benefiting from the embedded
knowledge of researchers trained by universities.
Intersectoral mobility is an important mechanism
to foster knowledge circulation between
universities and firms. Researchers employed
by firms can easily spread the knowledge and
skills acquired in higher education institutions to
the private sector and bring them closer to the
economy. The business sectors in South Korea,
Japan and the United States profit to a larger
extent from the embedded knowledge of
researchers trained by universities. Within the
European Union, only Finland, Denmark and
Sweden perform significantly better than most
of the international competitors (Figure I-2-36).
International collaboration plays a significant
role both in improving the competitiveness of
research and innovation systems and fostering
new knowledge production worldwide.
The broader interaction between science and
technology actors at the global level might
be due to the emergence of new international
players, such as China, with large research and
innovation capacities, but also to a heightened
political focus on addressing global challenges.
Globalisation of R&I is not a new phenomenon but
it has become more and more visible, particularly
in terms of collaborative research, international
technology production and worldwide mobility
of researchers. In this context, an increasing
role of science diplomacy as a tool for better
incorporating science into global debates
addressing key political and societal challenges
can be anticipated.
Evidence shows that stronger international
collaborations clearly have a positive impact
on the overall performance of national
research and innovation systems.
The Average Relative Citations of publications (ARC)
is an indicator of the scientific impact of papers
 ▶ Figure I-2-36 Total researchers (FTE) as % of total employment, 2007 and 2014
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1) CH, IL, US: 2012; IS, TR, JP, CN, KR: 2013. (2)CH, US: 2008; IL: 2010.
0 . 0
0 . 2
0 . 4
0 . 6
0 . 8
1 . 0
1 . 2
1 . 4
1 . 6
1 . 8
2 . 0
%
F i gur e I -2 -36 Tota l r esear c h e r s (FTE) as % o f to ta l e m p l o y m e n t, 2007 a nd 2014
R esea r c h e r s e m p l o y e d b y t h e b u s i n e s s s e c t o r , 2 0 1 4 (1) R ese a r c h e r s e m p l o y e d b y t h e p u b l i c s ect o r , 2 0 1 4 ( 1 )
R esea r c h e r s e m p l o y e d b y t h e b u s i n e s s s e c t o r , 2 0 0 7 (2)
S ci e n ce , R e se a r ch a n d I n n o v a t i o n P e r f o r m a n ce o f t h e E U 20 1 6S our ce : D G
R e sear ch a n d In n o v a t i o n - U n i t fo r t h e A n a l ysi s a n d M o n i t o r i n g o f N a t i o n a l
R e se a r ch P o lici e sD a t a : E u r o st a t, OE C DN o t e s: ( 1 )C H , IL , U S : 201 2 ; IS , T R , JP , C N ,
K R : 2 013 . ( 2 )C H , U S : 2008; I L : 2010.
South Korea
Japan
United States
EU
China Austria Germany
Malta
Luxembourg
Czech Republic
Denmark RomaniaEstonia
Netherlands
United Kingdom
HungarySweden Belgium Slovakia PolandSlo
veniaF rance
Lithuania
LatviaIreland Bulgaria
Italy
PortugalFinland CyprusCroatiaSpainGreece Norway
Switzerland
IcelandIsrael T urk
ey

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
61
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
produced by a given entity (in this case, a country)
relative to the world average (19). For all R&I key
players, the ARC of international co-publications
is much higher than that of single-country
co-publications or single-author publications.
Furthermore, only the ARC of international co-
publications scores above 1 in all countries and
regions. This means that overall international co-
publications have a higher scientific impact than
the world average (Figure I-2-37).
0 . 0
0 . 5
1 . 0
1 . 5
2 . 0
Singl e a u thor publ i cati ons Singl e c o untr y c o -publ i c ations I n te r n a ti ona l c o -public a ti o n s
F i gur e I - 2 - 37 A v e r a g e R e l a t i v e C i t a t i ons ( A RC) o f publicat i ons b yt y p e o f c o - ope r a t i on, 2010
Sc ienc e , R e s earc h and Innov a t ion Pe rf o rm anc e o f the EU 2016Sourc e : D G R e s earc h
and Innov a t ion - U nit fo r the Analy s i s and M onit o ring o f N a t ional R e s earc h
Polic iesD a t a : Sc ienc e -M e t ri x (C anada), bas ed on Sc opus dat abas e
U nite d Sta te s EU South K o r e a J a p a n C h i n a
International co-publications are becoming
increasingly important in science both inside
Europe and beyond.
At a global level, the European Union shows the
highest share of international co-publications per
total number of publications
(20), closely followed
by the United States. Even though China has
increased its share of international co-publications,
it still performs at a much lower level than its
international competitors. This might partly explain
China’s lagging results in terms of highly cited
scientific publications
(21).

(19) The number of citations received by each publication is counted
for the year in which it was published and for the three
subsequent years. An ARC value above 1 means that a given
entity is cited more frequently than the world average, while a
value below 1 means the reverse.
(20) In this context, it is worth mentioning that, for each Member State,
publications with another EU Member State are considered as
international co-publications. On the contrary, at the EU 28 level, co-
publications between EU Member States are no longer counted as
international co-publications. This explains why the EU international
co-publications are below that of all major EU scientific producers.
(21) See section on scientific output below.
In the EU, the share of international publications has
increased in almost all countries between 2007 and
2013, with the exception of Luxembourg, Cyprus,
Bulgaria, Slovakia, Lithuania, Latvia and Romania.
Small countries have a higher natural propensity
to collaborate with international partners. Indeed,
Iceland, Luxembourg and Cyprus are the countries
with the highest shares of international co-
publications per total number of publications.
Although meaningful improvements are visible in
almost all European countries, important differences
still exist among the Member States. Countries such
as Austria, Belgium, Sweden and Denmark seem
to actively participate in international scientific
networks while Poland, Romania, Croatia and Latvia
still produce their scientific outputs mainly at the
national level (Figure I-2-38). As a clear correlation
between openness of research and innovation
systems and quality of scientific results exist,
countries that are still not taking full advantage
of international scientific networks should further
open their national R&I system in order to increase
their overall scientific performance.
 ▶ Figure I-2-37 Average Relative Citations (ARC) of publications by type of co-operation, 2010
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
62
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Intra-European collaboration is more important
than collaboration with non-European countries.
In almost all the Member States, at least 70%
of all international co-publications are the result
of collaborations between two or more European
countries. This percentage is even higher for
Eastern and Baltic countries while countries such
as the United Kingdom, France, Germany and
Spain are also quite active in collaborating with
non-European countries (Figure I-2-39).
%
Figure I-2-38 International co-publications as % of total number of publications(1), 2000, 2007 and 2013
2 0 1 3 2 0 0 7 2 0 0 0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Japan
United States
EU
(2)
China
South Korea
Finland
Luxembourg
United Kingdom
Netherlands
France Ireland Sweden Germany Belgium Denmark Estonia Portugal Malta Cyprus Austria Latvia
Czech Republic
Greece
Lithuania Slovakia Poland Italy
Hungary Slovenia Croatia Spain
Romania Bulgaria
Switzerland
Norway Iceland Israel Turkey
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Note: (1)Full counting method.
 ▶ Figure I-2-38 International co-publications as % of total number of publications(1), 2000, 2007 and 2013
 ▶ Figure I-2-39 Co-publications with ERA countries and with non-ERA countries as % of total international
 co-publications (1), 2013
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Note:
(1)Full counting method. (2)EU: International collaborations include intra-EU international collaborations.
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Note:
(1)Full counting method.
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
%
Figure I-2-39 Co-publications with ERA countries and with non-ERA countries as % of
total international co-publications(1), 2013
C o-p u b l i c a ti o n s w i th ER A c o u n tr i e s C o-p u b l i c a ti o n s w i th n o n-ER A c o u n tr i e s
Finland
Luxembourg
United Kingdom
Netherlands
France Ireland Sweden Germany Belgium Denmark Estonia Portugal
Malta Cyprus Austria Latvia
Czech Republic
Greece Lithuania Slovakia Poland
Italy
Hungary Slovenia Croatia Spain
Romania Bulgaria
Switzerland
Norway Iceland Israel Turkey
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Note: (1)Full counting method.

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
63
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
The United States remains the main partner in
science collaboration for the European Union.
However, the United States is profiting to a
greater extent from the emerging research
capacities of countries such as China.
In terms of international co-publications, the
United States remains the main partner of
the European Union, while China is becoming
increasingly important as a strategic partner.
While Japan collaborates equally with the EU
and the United States, South Korea and China
tend to collaborate more with the United States
than with the EU. This seems to suggest that
the United States have been able to take better
advantage of the emerging research capacities
of these economies than the European Union
(Figure I-2-40).
Despite the increasing internationalisation
of technological collaborations, Europe is not
taking full advantage of the international
networks compared to the United States.
International technological collaborations play
a key role in the innovation process by allowing
firms to access a broader set of competences,
resources and skills. Patents with foreign
co-inventors may be used as a measure of
the internationalisation of the research and
innovation system and the knowledge exchange
among R&I actors.
Technological collaboration at an international
level has intensified in the last decade both
in the United States and the European Union.
The United States has overtaken the
European Union in terms of share of patents
resulting from international collaborations and
the gap between the two countries seems to have
increased over time. Countries such as China,
South Korea and Japan rely relatively more
on their own research and innovation systems
than on international co-inventions, although in
absolute terms the number of international co-
inventions has significantly increased between
2000 and 2012
(22) (Figure I-2-41).
(22) China: from 140 (2000) to 1 598 (2012); South Korea: from 86
(2000) to 365 (2012); Japan: from 552 (2000) to 844 (2012).
 ▶ Figure I-2-40 International scientific collaborations, 2000 and 2013
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: DG Research and Innovation, based on Scopus database
Note:
(1)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.
0 %
2 0 %
4 0 %
6 0 %
8 0 %
1 0 0 %
EU U n i te d
Sta te s
J a p a n C h i n a So u th
K o r e a
EU U n i te d
Sta te s
J a p a n C h i n a So u th
K o r e a
2 0 1 3 2 0 0 0
F i g u r e I - 2 - 4 0 I n te r n a ti o n a l s c i e n ti ﬁc c o l l a b o r a ti o n s , 2 0 0 0 a n d 2 0 1 3
EU U n i te d Sta te s J a p a n C h i n a So u th K o r e a R e s t o f th e w o r l d
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: DG Research and Innovation, based on Scopus database
Note: (1)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
64
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
China is becoming a key partner in terms of
technological collaboration and the United States is
taking better advantage than the European Union
of this emerging innovative economy.
The European Union remains the main partner of the
United States as regards technological collaboration,
although the share of US-EU patents has decreased
sharply from 60% to around 45% in the period from
2000-2012. At the same time, the share of US-China
co-inventions has increased tremendously during
the same period. Europe needs to further boost its
innovation links with China in order to fully profit from
this country’s technological capacities (Figure I-2-42).
Rest of the world
China
China
EU
EU
United States
United States
South Korea
South Korea
Japan
2000
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14%
Fi gur e I - 2 - 4 1 S ha r e ( % ) o f pa t e nt s w i t h f o r e i gn c o- i nv e n t or ( s ) i n t ot a l pa t e nt a pp l i c a t on s
( W I P O P C T ) , 2 0 0 0 a n d 2 0 1 2
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Japan
 ▶ Figure I-2-41 Share (%) of patents with foreign co-inventor(s) in total patent applicatons (WIPO PCT),
 2000 and 2012
 ▶ Figure I-2-42 Patents with foreign co-inventor(s), 2000 and 2012
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
E UUnited
States
United
States
C h i n a So u th
K o r e a
J a p a n E U C h i n a So u th
K o r e a
J a p a n
2012 2000
0 %
1 0 %
2 0 %
3 0 %
4 0 %
5 0 %
6 0 %
7 0 %
8 0 %
9 0 %
1 0 0 %
F i g u r e I - 2 - 4 2 P a t e n t s w i t h f o r e i g n c o - i n v e n t o r ( s ) , 2 0 0 0 a n d 2 0 1 2
R e s t o f th e w o r l dSo u th K o r e aC h i n aJ a p a nU n i te d St a t e s
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
E U

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
65
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
Although international co-inventions have
increased overall, significant differences still
persist at the Member State level.
While the analysis of co-inventions suggests
that, at the global level, technological inventions
increasingly rely on international collaborations,
this trend cannot be clearly observed at the
Member State level (Figure I-2-43)
(23), where
significant differences across countries exist.
Indeed, the share of patents with a foreign
co-inventor ranges from 50% in Luxembourg
and Slovakia to less than 10% in Latvia.
(23) EU data in figure I-2-43 is lower than the sum of the data for all
Member States because intra-EU foreign co-inventions are not
included
Moreover, between 2000 and 2012, countries
such as Slovakia, Romania, Cyprus and Hungary
registered a strong increase in the share of
international patents while in Latvia, Lithuania
and Slovenia the share dramatically decreased.
In general, it appears that countries owning
a large share of international co-inventions
also have large multinational firms. The tax
environment is also likely to play a role in the
location of the inventions and different
technology fields may also involve different
degrees of international collaboration.
Brain circulation at an international level is an
important mechanism to boost the quality of
research and innovation systems.
The international mobility of researchers yields
positive impacts in terms of scientific quality,
innovation and growth. As clearly shown in
Figure I-2-44, the impact of authors who never
moved is lower than the scientific impact of
authors who spent some time abroad. By
contrast, returnees, as well as new inflows,
usually help increase the quality of scientific
outputs. For those countries where the outflows
show the largest impact factors, it would be vital
to put in place policies aiming to reintegrate
those researchers into their system of origin. This
might also stimulate those who remain to raise
their productivity levels.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring
of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
Figure I-2-43 International patents with foreign co-inventor as % of total number of patent applications, 2000 and 2012
2 0 1 2 - 2 0 0 0
%
South Korea
Japan
United States
EU China Austria Germany
Malta
Luxembourg Czech Republic
DenmarkRomania Estonia
Netherlands
United Kingdom
Hungary SwedenBelgiumSlovakia Poland Slo
veniaF rance
Lithuania
LatviaIreland Bulgaria
Italy
Portugal FinlandCyprus CroatiaSpainGreece Norway
Switzerland
Iceland Israel T urk
ey
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
 ▶ Figure I-2-43 International patents with foreign co-inventor(s) as % of total number of patent applications,
 2000 and 2012

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
66
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
European doctoral holders tend to choose
another Member State as their main destination.
The international mobility of researchers is a
key source of knowledge circulation among
and beyond Europe. As shown in Figure I-2-45,
European citizens holding a doctorate mainly
tend to move to another European country. This
results in the spillover generated through this
mobility remaining in Europe and reinforcing the
European research and innovation system.
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD (STI Scoreboard, 2013)
Note:
(1)International mobility of scientific researchers is inferred from authors listed in the Scopus Custom database of peer-re-
viewed scientific publications, with at least two documents over the reference period, based on changes in the location of their
institutional affiliation. Stayers maintain an affiliation in a given reference country over the period. Outflows are defined on the
basis of the first affiliation. New inflows are defined on the basis of the final affiliation and exclude individuals who “return” to
their original country of affiliation. The latter group are defined as “returnees”. A proxy measure of scientific impact for research-
ers with different mobility patterns is estimated by calculating, for each author and mobility profile, the median across the
relevant journals’ Source-Normalized Impact per Paper (SNIP) over the entire period. A SNIP impact value that is higher than one
means that the median attributed SNIP for authors of that country / category is above average.
 ▶ Figure I-2-44 Impact of scientific authors by category of mobility(1), 1996-2011F i g u r e I - 2 - 4 4 I m p a c t o f s c i e n t i ﬁc a u t h o r s b y c a t e g o r y o f m o b i l i t y ( 1 ) , 1 9 9 6 - 2 0 1 1
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD (STI Scoreboard, 2013)
Note: (1)International mobility of scientific researchers is inferred from authors listed in the Scopus Custom database of peer-reviewed scientific publications,
with at least two documents over the reference period, based on changes in the location of their institutional affiliation. Stayers maintain an affiliation in a given
reference country over the period. Outflows are defined on the basis of the first affiliation. New inflows are defined on the basis of the final affiliation and exclude
individuals who "return" to their original country of affiliation. The latter group are defined as "returnees". A proxy measure of scientific impact for researchers with
different mobility patterns is estimated by calculating, for each author and mobility profile, the median across the relevant journals' Source-Normalized Impact per
Paper (SNIP) over the entire period. A SNIP impact value that is higher than one means that the median attributed SNIP for authors of that country / category is
above average.
I m p a c t fa c t o r
0 .7
0 .5
0 .9
1 .1
1.3
1 .5
ChinaJapan
South KoreaUnited States
SwedenFinland
United Kingdom
Netherlands
Greece
Czech Republic
PolandAustria Norway TurkeyIsrael
GermanyFrance BelgiumDenmark Portugal
SpainItaly
Switzerland
Sta y e r s R e tu r n e e s N e w i n ﬂo ws O u tﬂ o w s

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
67
I-2. Investment in knowledge and knowledge flows
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD, based on OECD / UNESCO Institute for Statistics / Eurostat data collection
Notes:
(1)The data reported are for a minimum length of stay abroad to three months, except for Germany where the data
reported refer to a minimum length of six months. (2)Other economies refer to those located in Africa, America (excluding the
United States), Asia, Europe and Oceania.
 ▶ Figure I-2-45 National citizens with a doctorate having lived / stayed abroad in the past ten years(1), 2009
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
Figure I-2-45 National citizens with a doctorate having lived / stayed abroad in the past ten
years(1), 2009
%
Hungary
Malta
Portugal
Spain
Belgium
Netherlands
SloveniaIsrael CroatiaTurkey RomaniaBulgaria LithuaniaSweden Germany
Latvia
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD, based on OECD / UNESCO Institute for Statistics / Eurostat data collection.
Notes: (1)The data reported are for a minimum length of stay abroad to three months, except for Germany where
the data reported refer to a minimum length of six months. (2)Other economies refer to those located in Africa,
America (excluding the United States), Asia, Europe and Oceania.
No breakdown Report gapO t h e r e c o n o m i e s ( 2 )United-StatesEurope

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
68
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Effective and efficient research and innovation
systems are those that succeed in producing
strong scientific and technological outputs, both
in terms of quality and relevance, to address the
economic and social challenges of societies.
This section of the report assesses Europe’s
ability to boost scientific and technological
excellence as well as the evolving nature of these
results, especially in areas that are particularly
promising due to their broad applicability to
different scientific and technological fields.
Scientific outputs
As a result of an increasingly multipolar global
research landscape, a growing number of
international partners have been expanding
their scientific production. Emerging countries
such as China have become key world
players in terms of knowledge production,
while Europe remains the main producer in
terms of scientific knowledge, ahead of the
United States.
In the last decade, geographical distribution of
knowledge production has changed significantly.
While in the past it was mainly concentrated
in the United States and the European Union,
nowadays other geographical areas have
emerged as knowledge production centres. In
particular, China has increased its share of world
publications from 6% to 19.5% between 2000
and 2013, thus overtaking the United States as
the second knowledge producer worldwide. In
this changing and challenging landscape, Europe
has been able to preserve its world leadership
in terms of scientific publications (Figures I-3-1).
3. Scientific, technological and innovation outputs
 ▶ Figure I-3-1 World share of scientific publications(1), 2000 and 2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Note:
(1)Fractional counting method.
Figure I-3-1 World share of scientific publications(1), 2000 and 2013
United States,
28.2%
Japan, 8.8%
China, 6.0%
South Korea, 1.5%
EFTA, 1.7%
Israel, 0.9%
Rest of the world,
19.3%
United Kingdom, 7.2%
Germany, 6.3%
Germany, 4.5%
France, 4.6%
France, 3.2%
Italy, 3.3%
Spain, 2.3%
Netherlands, 1.7%
Sweden, 1.4%
Other Member States, 6.9%
EU, 33.7%
2000
Japan, 4.5%
United States,
19.1%
China, 19.5%
South Korea,
2.6%
EFTA, 1.4%
Israel, 0.5%
Rest of the world,
25.0% United Kingdom, 4.6%
Italy, 2.9%
Spain, 2.5%
Netherlands, 1.4%
Sweden, 0.9%
Other Member States, 7.4%
EU, 27.3%
2013
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of Natio-
nal Research Policies
Data: Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Note:
(1) Fractional counting method.

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
69
I-3. Scientific, technological and innovation outputs
The same trend can be observed while looking
at the world share of highly cited publications.
China now ranks third at the global level
only preceded by the EU and the US. In this
context of increased competition, Europe has
managed to maintain its role of key player as
well as overtake the US, thus becoming the
world leader in the production of high quality
scientific papers.
Between 2000 and 2010, China increased its
world share of highly cited publication from
2.6% to 11.9%, thus overtaking Japan as the
third producer of high quality scientific papers
at the global level. At the same time, China
has succeeded in eroding the world portion of
excellent scientific publications produced by the
EU and the US. Nevertheless, while the US has
significantly reduced their world share of highly
cited publications from 41.2% to 30.8% in a
decade, the EU has been able to better maintain
its role of key player. With its 32.1% of world
share, Europe has become the first producer
of excellent scientific papers in the world
(Figures I-3-2).
 ▶ Figure I-3-2 World share of highly cited scientific publications(1), 2000 and 2010
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Notes:
(1)Fractional counting method. (2)Scientific publications 2000, with citation window 2000-2003. (3)Scientific publications
2010, with citation window 2010-2013.
Figure I-3-2 World share of highly cited scientific publications(1), 2000 and 2010
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of Natio-
nal Research Policies
Data: Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Notes:
(1) Fractional counting method. (2) Scientiﬁc publications 2000, with citation
window 2000-2003. (3) Scientiﬁc publications 2010, with citation window 2010-2013.
United States,
41.2%
China, 2.6%
Japan, 6.2%
South Korea, 1.1%
EFTA, 2.1%
Israel, 0.8%
Rest of
the world,
12.6%
United Kingdom, 8.6%
Germany, 6.7%
France, 4.4%
Italy, 2.8%
Spain, 1.7%
Netherlands, 2.4%
Sweden, 1.7%
Other Member States, 5.0%
EU, 33.2%
2000 (2)
United States,
30.8%
China, 11.9%
Japan, 3.5%
South Korea, 2.2%
EFTA, 2.1%
Israel, 0.7%
Rest of the world,
16.7%
United Kingdom, 6.8%
Germany, 5.8%
France, 3.7%
Italy, 3.3%
Spain, 2.7%
Netherlands, 2.4%
Sweden, 1.2%
Other Member States, 6.3%
EU, 32.1%
2010 (3)

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
70
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
However, the United States still exhibits a higher
capacity to produce high-impact scientific
publications than the European Union. Even
so, the EU is closing the gap slightly, despite
large and persisting differences between
the Member States.
Even though the level of scientific quality in
the United States has remained stable overall
in recent years, it is still outperforming the
European Union in the ratio of highly cited
publications among the total number of
publications (Figure I-3-3). Japan, South Korea
and China show lower levels of high quality
scientific production; however, South Korea and
China are rapidly bridging the gap with the EU.
Looking at the European Research Area, important
differences persist among countries. Scientific
quality is concentrated in a group of leading
countries (i.e. Switzerland, the Netherlands,
Denmark, Iceland, the United Kingdom, and
Belgium), while Southern, Eastern and Baltic
countries still rank at the bottom, despite some
progress in recent years.
While all the Mediterranean countries and some
Eastern and Baltic Countries, such as Slovenia,
Estonia and Slovakia, are actively catching up,
countries such as Poland, Romania and Croatia,
which are well below the EU average in terms
of scientific quality, have only slightly improved
their performance. Moreover, worrisome trends
can be observed in Bulgaria and Latvia, the last
two countries in the ranking, where the ratio of
highly cited scientific publications out of the total
number of publications has stagnated between
2000 and 2010.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Notes:
(1)Fractional counting method; scientiﬁc publications 2000, with citation window 2000-2003.
(2)Fractional counting method; scientiﬁc publications 2010, with citation window 2010-2013.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
United States
EU
South Korea
Japan China
Netherlands
Denmark
United Kingdom
Belgium
Luxembourg
Sweden Finland Germany Ireland Austria
Italy Spain France Greece Portugal Estonia Cyprus Slovenia
Czech Republic
Malta
Lithuania Hungary Slovakia Poland Romania Croatia Bulgaria Latvia
Switzerland
Iceland Norway Israel Turkey
%
Figure I-3-3 Highly cited scientific publications, 2000 and 2010
Scientific publications within the 10% most cited scientific publications worldwide as % of total scientific publications of the country
2010 (2) 2000 (1)
 ▶ Figure I-3-3 Highly cited scientific publications, 2000 and 2010
 Scientific publications within the 10% most cited scientific publications worldwide as %
 of total scientific publications of the country
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Notes:
(1)Fractional counting method; scientific publications 2000, with citation window 2000-2003. (2)Fractional counting method;
scientific publications 2010, with citation window 2010-2013.

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
71
I-3. Scientific, technological and innovation outputs
It is evident that, despite the EU’s overall
positive trend as regards scientific output,
obtaining higher scientific quality from public
research and innovation investments remains
a key challenge for many EU Member States.
At a global level, the United States obtains
a higher ratio of highly cited publications by
investing slightly more than the European Union
(Figure I-3-4). Conversely, Japan or South Korea
show relatively low levels of scientific quality in
relation to their public investments. Those trends
give a rather fair idea of the level of productivity
of the different research systems.
In the EU, countries that invest more, such as the
Netherlands, Denmark, Finland and Sweden, also
have better systems in terms of scientific quality.
On the contrary, Eastern countries, where the
investments are still below the EU average, show
low levels of scientific excellence. Therefore, a
positive correlation between investments and
scientific quality is apparent.
It should also be noted that countries such as the
Netherlands, Switzerland, Denmark, Iceland, the
United Kingdom or Belgium perform significantly
better than what would be expected from their
public R&D investments. By contrast, countries
such as Estonia, Slovenia, the Czech Republic,
Lithuania, Poland, Croatia or Latvia are clearly
underperforming in terms of scientific quality
given their public R&D investments.
Diversity in research quality in Europe is, therefore,
partially related to the different levels of public
R&I intensity but also depends on the diverse
capacities of the national research systems to
obtain the most value from these investments.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Notes:
(1)Scientiﬁc publications within the 10% most cited scientiﬁc publications worldwide as % of total
scientiﬁc publications of the country. (2)Fractional counting method; scientiﬁc publications 2010, with
citation window 2010-2013. (3)EL: 2011.
Figure I-3-4 Highly cited scientific publications(1) versus public R&D intensity, 2010
MT
RO
SK
EL
IT
IE
LU
HU
CN
TR
PL
JP
SI
PT
EE
KR
FR NO AT
DE
SE
DK
NLCH
USIS
BEUK
EU
ES
IL
FI
LT
CZ
BG LV HR
CY
 R2= 0.47616
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2
Highly cited scientiﬁc publications, 2010 (2)
Public R&D intensity, 2010 (3)
 ▶ Figure I-3-4 Highly cited scientific publications(1) versus public R&D intensity, 2010
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Notes:
(1)Scientific publications within the 10% most cited scientific publications worldwide as % of total scientific publications of
the country. (2)Fractional counting method; scientific publications 2010, with citation window 2010-2013. (3)EL: 2011.

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
72
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The catching-up process in certain EU
Member States might be at risk of slowing
down due to the decrease in the level of
investments (Mediterranean countries) or
sustainability issues arising from a high
reliance on the Structural Funds for research
and innovation investments (Baltic and Eastern
countries). In such a context, structural reforms
aiming at improving the productivity of the
national R&I systems play a key role.
The Mediterranean countries boosted (Spain and
Portugal) or preserved (Greece and Italy) their
research and innovation investments between 2000
and 2010
(24) with a positive impact on the quality
of their scientific production (Figure I-3-5). Similar
improvements in scientific quality have, in recent
years, occurred in a number of Baltic and Eastern
European countries, such as Estonia, Slovenia,
Slovakia, and Poland, thanks to a sharp increase in
R&D activities supported by Structural Funds.
While the catching-up process might be jeopardised
by the recent negative trend in R&I investments
in Mediterranean countries, in Baltic and Eastern
countries a possible reduction of Structural Funds
in the future might affect the sustainability of their
research and innovation systems.
(24) See section on R&D Investments above.
RO
BG
SK
LV
HR
PL
LT
SI
EE
PT
ESIT
EL
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Notes:
(1)Scientiﬁc publications within the 10% most cited scientiﬁc publications worldwide as % of total
scientiﬁc publications of the country. (2)Fractional counting method; scientiﬁc publications 2010, with
citation window 2010-2013; scientiﬁc publications 2003, with citation window 2000-2003. (3)EL: 2011.
(4)EL: 2001; HR: 2002.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Highly cited scientiﬁc publications (2)
Public R&D intensity
Figure I-3-5 Highly cited scientific publications(1) versus public R&D intensity, 2000 and 2010
2010 (3) 2000 (4)
 ▶ Figure I-3-5 Highly cited scientific publications(1) versus public R&D intensity, 2000 and 2010
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Notes:
(1)Scientific publications within the 10% most cited scientific publications worldwide as % of total scientific publications of
the country. (2)Fractional counting method; scientific publications 2010, with citation window 2010-2013; scientific publications
2000, with citation window 2000-2003. (3)EL: 2011. (4)EL: 2001; HR: 2002.

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
73
I-3. Scientific, technological and innovation outputs
There is a clear need for investments in research
and innovation to be as smart and effective
as possible. This requires clear strategies at
the national level for investing in research
and innovation coupled with high quality R&I
programmes and strong institutions able to
implement those programmes. In this context, it
is vital that Member States are equipped with
framework conditions able to leverage business
investments in research and innovation
In terms of scientific specialisation, Europe
underperforms in comparison to the United States
in strategic areas such as nanosciences and
nanotechnologies, ICT, materials or biotechnology.
The United States is more specialised in
most strategic areas such as nanosciences
and nanotechnologies, ICT, materials and
biotechnology. Europe shows its strengths in
aeronautics, other transport technologies, energy,
and construction. Asian countries are still below
the EU and the US levels in all scientific areas,
with the exception of security, where China is the
world leader (Figure I-3-6).
 ▶ Figure I-3-6 Highly cited scientific publications(1) by sector, 2010(2)
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Notes:
(1)Scientiﬁc publications within the 10% most cited scientiﬁc publications worldwide as % of total
scientiﬁc publications of the country. (2)Fractional counting method; scientiﬁc publications 2010, with
citation window 2010-2013.
Figure I-3-6 Highly cited scientific publications(1) by sector, 2010(2)
Aeronautics Other transport
technologies
New production
technologies
Energy
Materials
Biotechnology
Food, agriculture
and ﬁsheries
Construction
Environment
ICT
Socio-economic
sciences
Health
Humanities
Nanosciences and
nanotechnologies
Automobiles
Security
EU United States South Korea Japan China
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Notes:
(1)Scientific publications within the 10% most cited scientific publications worldwide as % of total scientific publications of
the country. (2)Fractional counting method; scientific publications 2010, with citation window 2010-2013.

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
74
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
China and, notably, South Korea have been
increasing the number of highly cited
publications in strategic fields, such as
biotechnology or ICT, at a higher speed than
Europe and the United States.
The annual average growth of highly cited
publications clearly shows that, in recent years,
China and South Korea have focused their
efforts on a few strategic fields. Between 2000
and 2010, China has significantly improved the
quality of its scientific publications in areas
such as security, energy, and biotechnology,
whereas South Korea has increased its world
competitiveness in areas such as biotechnology,
nanosciences and nanotechnologies, and ICT.
On the contrary, Europe has a much broader
approach to science. Indeed, between 2000 and
2010, the EU increased the number of highly
cited publications in almost all scientific fields,
although at a lower speed than South Korea or
China. Therefore, a particular focus on specific
scientific areas seems to be missing. A similar
pattern applies to the United States; however,
they have not increased their highly cited
publications at the same pace as the EU and they
even show negative trends in different scientific
fields (Figure I-3-7).
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Note:
(1)Fractional counting method; scientiﬁc publications 2010, with citation window 2010-2013;
scientiﬁc publications 2000, with citation window 2000-2003.
-15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20
Nanosciences and nanotechnologies
Security
Automobiles
Energy
Food, agriculture and ﬁsheries
Humanities
Materials
Health
Environment
Aeronautics
Construction
ICT
Socio-economic sciences
Biotechnology
New production technologies
Other transport technologies
Figure I-3-7 Compound annual growth (%) of highly cited publications by FP7
thematic priorities, 2000-2010 (1)
EU United States Japan South Korea China
 ▶ Figure I-3-7 Compound annual growth (%) of highly cited publications by FP7 thematic priorities,
 2000-2010 (1)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Science-Metrix (Canada), based on Scopus database
Note:
(1)Fractional counting method; scientific publications 2010, with citation window 2010-2013; scientific publications 2000,
with citation window 2000-2003.

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
75
I-3. Scientific, technological and innovation outputs
Innovation outputs
As regards key innovation outputs the EU
performs at a similar level as the US, but is
clearly outperformed by Japan. Progress in the
EU in recent years has been slow.
Innovation outputs are broadly linked to
investment in R&D (inputs) (see Figure I-3-9
below) and correlated with GDP per capita
(productivity) and economic outcomes. However,
there are time lags and spillover effects and
economic structures also play a role. The
strong performance differences between
Member States (see Figure I-3-8 above) imply
that there is room for improvements, including
of framework conditions.
 ▶ Figure I-3-8 Innovation output indicator (EU2011 = 100), 2011, 2013 and 2014
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD, Innovation Union Scoreboard 2015, JRC
Note:
(1)EU: Two sets of values are available - values for Worldwide comparison and values for European
comparison. The values for Worldwide comparison are shown on the graph. The corresponding EU value
for European comparison for 2014 is 103.6.
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Japan
United States
EU
(1)
Sweden Ireland Germany
Luxembourg
Denmark Finland France
United Kingdom
Netherlands
Cyprus Austria Belgium Hungary Slovakia
Czech Republic
Italy Malta
Slovenia
Spain Poland Estonia Romania Greece Portugal Latvia Bulgaria Croatia Lithuania
Israel
Switzerland
Norway Iceland Turkey
Figure I-3-8 Innovation output indicator (EU2011 = 100), 2011, 2013 and 2014

2014 2011 2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD, Innovation Union Scoreboard 2015, JRC
Note:
(1)EU: Two sets of values are available - values for Worldwide comparison and values for European comparison. The values
for Worldwide comparison are shown on the graph. The corresponding EU value for European comparison for 2014 is 103.6.

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
76
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
According to the Innovation Output indicator (IOI),
which is based on four components (patents,
employment in knowledge-intensive activities,
trade in knowledge-based goods and services,
innovativeness of high growth enterprises)
and five sub-indicators the EU performs
at a similar level as the US, but is clearly
outperformed by Japan. Europe and Japan have
improved performance since 2010, while the US
performance has remained unchanged. Sweden
is the best performing EU country, followed by
Ireland and Germany. Bulgaria, Croatia and
Lithuania are the lowest EU performers. In
relative terms Cyprus and Malta have improved
most since 2010.
As regards the different components of the IOI,
Finland, Sweden and Germany perform best in PCT
patents, as shown in the section on patents below,
while south-eastern European countries perform
lowest in this field, partly as a result of a lack of
global players in patent-intensive manufacturing
sectors. The EU performs at a similar level as the
US, but is clearly outperformed by Japan.
As regards employment in knowledge-intensive
activities, the EU is outperformed by both the US
and Japan. Modern service-based economies,
such as Luxembourg and Ireland, show the best
results in the EU.
When it comes to employment in knowledge-
intensive activities
(25), the second component of
the indicator and an important economic outcome
of innovation, Luxembourg (financial services),
Ireland (financial services, software) and the
United Kingdom perform best, while south-
eastern European countries are among the lowest
performers. The EU is outperformed by both the
US and Japan.
(25) For the list of NACE sections covered by knowledge-intensive
activities and by knowledge-intensive business activities, see
Eurostat: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cache/metadata/Annexes/
htec_esms_an8.pdf
HR
TR
 R2 = 0.58679
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
4.5
Innovation Output Indicator, 2014
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, JRC
Notes:
(1)CH: 2012; TR, IL, US, JP: 2013.(2)EU: Two sets of values are available for the Innovation Output
Indicator - values for Worldwide comparison and values for European comparison. The 2014 value for
Worldwide comparison is shown on the graph. The corresponding EU value for European comparison is
103.6.
RO
MT
SK
PL
PT
EE
NO
IS CZ SI
BE US AT
FI
DK
ILJP
SE
CHDE
FR
NL
UK
IE
LU
IT
HU
EU (2)
ES
EL
LT
BG
LV
CY
R&D intensity, 2014 (1)
Figure I-3-9 Innovation Output Indicator score versus R&D intensity, 2014
 ▶ Figure I-3-9 Innovation Output Indicator score versus R&D intensity, 2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, JRC
Notes:
(1)CH: 2012; TR, IL, US, JP: 2013. (2)EU: Two sets of values are available for the Innovation Output Indicator - values for
Worldwide comparison and values for European comparison. The 2014 value for Worldwide comparison is shown on the graph.
The corresponding EU value for European comparison is 103.6.

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
77
I-3. Scientific, technological and innovation outputs
Central and eastern European countries, together
with Germany, show the best performance in
the EU in medium and high-tech exports. This
is partially a result of high exports of cars and
automobile parts.
As regards the export share of medium and high-
tech products (MHT) some eastern European
countries perform well as a result of high exports
of cars and machinery. It should hereby be noted,
that these products are often just assembled in
foreign affiliate enterprises in these countries,
while the related R&D mostly takes place in the
headquarter countries of global enterprises. The
EU slightly outperforms the US in MHT exports,
but clearly lags behind Japan.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, JRC, Innovation Union Scoreboard 2015
2014 2011 2013
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
United States
Japan
EU
Luxembourg
Ireland
United Kingdom
Sweden Malta
Netherlands
Cyprus Finland Denmark Belgium Austria Germany France Slovenia
Italy Spain
Hungary
Czech Republic
Greece Estonia Latvia Croatia Portugal Slovakia Poland Bulgaria Lithuania Romania
Israel
Switzerland
Iceland Norway Turkey
%
Figure I-3-10 Employment in knowledge-intensive activities in business industries as % of total employment ▶ Figure I-3-10 Employment in knowledge-intensive activities in business industries as % of total employment
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, JRC, Innovation Union Scoreboard 2015
2014 2011 2013
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Note:
(1)EU does not include intra-EU trade in order to facilitate international comparison. The value for
the EU for 2014 when intra-EU trade is included is 48.8%.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Japan EU
(1)
United States
Germany Slovakia Hungary
Czech Republic
France Austria
United Kingdom
Sweden
Italy
Slovenia
Luxembourg
Ireland Belgium Denmark Poland Spain
Netherlands
Romania Finland Estonia Cyprus Portugal Lithuania
Latvia Croatia Malta
Bulgaria Greece Israel
Switzerland
Turkey Norway Iceland
%
Figure I-3-11 Share (%) of medium-tech and high-tech products in total exports ▶ Figure I-3-11 Share (%) of medium-tech and high-tech products in total exports
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (COMEXP), JRC, UN (COMTRADE)
Note:
(1)EU does not include intra-EU trade in order to facilitate international comparison. The value for the EU for 2014 when
intra-EU trade is included is 48.8%.

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
78
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
As regards knowledge-intensive service exports,
the EU outperforms the US and especially Japan.
Countries with a high share of financial services
When it comes to knowledge-intensive
service exports, Ireland, Luxembourg and the
United Kingdom take the lead in the EU, a result
of high shares of financial and ICT services
exports in these countries.
As regards the innovativeness of fast-
growing enterprises, performance patterns are
different from other innovation outputs, with
good performance found both in Eastern and
Western Europe.
The final component of the IOI relates to the
innovativeness of fast-growing enterprises. Here,
Cyprus (results related to a small number of fast
growing enterprises only) and Ireland are in the
lead, since fast-growing enterprises in the two
countries are over-represented in innovative
sections of the economy. Latvia, Lithuania
and Croatia, which have a high share of fast
growing enterprises perform at a low level, since
these enterprises are concentrated in sectors
characterised by low innovation scores, such as
construction and retail.
and ICT services in their economy perform best
in the EU.
2014 2011 2013
EU
(1)
Czech Republic
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (EBOPS), JRC
Note:
(1)EU does not include intra-EU trade in order to facilitate international comparison. The value for
the EU for 2014 when intra-EU trade is included is 63.1%.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Japan
United States
Ireland
Luxembourg
United Kingdom
Denmark Germany Cyprus
Netherlands
Sweden Belgium France Greece Finland Latvia Italy
Romania Estonia Portugal Austria Spain
Hungary Poland Slovakia Slovenia Bulgaria
Malta
Lithuania Croatia Norway Israel Iceland
Switzerland
Turkey
%
Figure I-3-12 Knowledge-intensive services exports as % of total service exports ▶ Figure I-3-12 Knowledge-intensive services exports as % of total service exports
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (EBOPS), JRC
Note:
(1)EU does not include intra-EU trade in order to facilitate international comparison. The value for the EU for 2014 when
intra-EU trade is included is 63.1%.

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
79
I-3. Scientific, technological and innovation outputs
The Innovation Union Scoreboard (IUS) is another,
larger, composite indicator on innovation and
its outputs that is based on 25 indicators. The
2015 edition of the IUS shows Sweden, Denmark,
Finland and Germany as Innovation Leaders in
Europe, while Romania, Bulgaria and Latvia are in
the lowest category of modest innovators.
Technological outputs
The EU performs on a similar level in
international patent applications as the US,
but is outperformed by Japan and South Korea.
Performance differences between EU
Member States are very large.
 ▶ Figure I-3-13 Average innovativeness scores of fast growing enterprises(1)
 ▶ Figure I-3-14 Total patent applications (WIPO-PCT) per billion GDP (PPS€), 2005 and 2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
2014 2011 2013
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, JRC
Note:
(1)Imputed scores for the countries with missing data (EL, HR, IS, CH, TR, US, JP) are included.
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Japan
United States
EU
Cyprus Ireland France Germany Slovakia Denmark
Malta Sweden Austria Hungary
United Kingdom Czech Republic
Finland Poland
Luxembourg
Belgium
Netherlands
Romania Bulgaria
Italy Spain Estonia Slovenia Greece Portugal Latvia
Lithuania Croatia
Switzerland
Israel Norway Iceland Turkey
Figure I-3-13 Average innovativeness scores of fast growing enterprises(1)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, JRC
Note:
(1)Imputed scores for the countries with missing data (EL, HR, IS, CH, TR, US, JP) are included.
2013 2005
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Japan
South Korea United States
EU
China Finland Sweden Denmark Germany
Netherlands
Austria France
United Kingdom
Belgium Slovenia Ireland Italy Spain
Luxembourg
Hungary Estonia
Czech Republic
Latvia Slovakia Portugal
Malta
Lithuania Cyprus Greece Croatia Poland Bulgaria Romania
Israel
Switzerland
Iceland Norway Turkey
Figure I-3-14 Total patent applications (WIPO-PCT) per billion GDP (PPS€), 2005 and 2013

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
80
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Patents are a frequent component of composite
indicators on innovation, often used to measure
technological output. For timeliness reasons data
on applications are used rather than patents
granted. When analysing performance as regards
patent applications, structural differences of
economies have to be taken into account. Patent
propensity is linked to the share of manufacturing
in GDP (companies in the manufacturing
sector tend to patent more than service sector
companies), to the high-tech orientation of the
manufacturing sector (higher patent activity in
the high-tech sector), to the share of ICT services
(software industry is patent intensive) and to the
enterprise structure of a country (larger enterprises
tend to have a higher patent propensity). Patenting
is also linked to the location of the headquarters
of a company (R&D tends to be carried out in the
headquarter country).
Innovation leaders, such as Finland, Germany and
Sweden, are also strong performers in regard to
patents, while moderate and modest innovators,
such as Lithuania, Malta and Romania show
low levels of patenting, especially as regards
PCT patents. It will be important to reduce the
innovation divide in Europe to catch up with the
patenting level of competitors.
While Europe’s share is declining, Asian
countries, notably China, are catching up in
international patent applications.
In many European countries, the number of
international and national patent applications
has declined in the recent past, while patenting
is expanding quickly in East Asian countries.
As a result, Asian countries, especially China,
are catching up in world patent shares, while
Europe’s share is declining. The share of the US,
long in decline, has stabilised in recent years.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Japan
South Korea
United States
EU
China
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
%
Figure I-3-15 World share (%) of PCT patent applications, 2000-2013
 ▶ Figure I-3-15 World share (%) of PCT patent applications, 2000-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
81
I-3. Scientific, technological and innovation outputs
Europe is relatively efficient in translating
business R&D expenditure into technological
outputs, especially compared to the US.
However, in this respect the EU is still
outperformed by Japan.
The EU, as a whole, and most of the innovation
leaders in the EU do a relatively good job as
regards translating business R&D expenditures
into technological output (as measured by
patent applications). The Netherlands stands
out in this context with a particularly good level
of performance. On the other hand, the EU is
outperformed by Japan, which shows a high level
of patenting even when compared to its high
level of business expenditures on R&D.
The EU is less technologically specialised
than the US, Japan or South Korea. Japan
and South Korea have strengths in ICT, while
the US, in addition, has strengths in medical
technology and pharmaceuticals.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Note:
(1)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.
 R2 = 0.81134
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
Patents per billion GDP (PPS€), 2013
Business R&D intensity, 2012
Figure I-3-16 Patent applications per billion GDP (PPS€), 2013 versus business R&D
intensity, 2012
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
LV
LT
EL
RO
PL BG
HR
SK TR MT
JP
IL
KR
FI
SE
CH
DE DK
AT
US
SI
BEFREUUK
NO
IT
ES LU EE
CZPT
HU
IS
CNIE
NL
CY
 ▶ Figure I-3-16 Patent applications per billion GDP (PPS€), 2013 versus business R&D intensity, 2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Note: (1)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
82
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Specialisation patterns differ between countries
and change over time. The comparison between
2000 and 2011 (see Figure I-3-17 above)
shows less specialisation in Europe in ICT, with
a lower share compared to competitors, and
in pharmaceuticals (whose share is declining
everywhere). The data also show the growing
importance of inter-disciplinary fields and
of environmental and energy issues and the
fact that the share of patents for medical
technology is increasing in Europe, the US and
Asia. While Europe has relative strengths in
‘other technology fields’, the US has strengths
in pharmaceuticals, medical technology and ICT,
Japan and South Korea have relative strengths in
ICT and environmental technologies. In general,
the EU is less specialised than key competitors
in fields that have a high patent propensity (ICT,
biotechnology, pharmaceuticals).
Figure I-3-17 Shares of patent applications by technology fields, 2013 (exterior) versus 2000 (interior)
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
8.2%
34.5%
0.7%
6.1% 9.2%
7.3%
34.0%
5.3%
28.3%
0.7% 7.3%
5.1% 11.0%
42.3%
EU
15.2%
46.4%
1.2%
10.4%
14.2%
4.8% 7.8%
8.1%
40.9%
1.0%
10.6%
8.3%
8.2%
22.9%
8.3%
43.9%
1.3%
4.2%
10.2%
8.6%
23.5%
2.6%
42.1%
0.7%
6.2%
2.2%
12.4%
33.7%
Japan
7.5%
45.4%
0.3%
4.7%
6.4%
6.6%
29.0%
4.3%
47.2%
1.1%
5.2%
4.6%
10.6%
27.0%
South Korea
United States
Biotechnology Nanotechnology Medical technology
Pharmaceuticals Selected environment-related technologies Other technological ﬁelds
ICT
 ▶ Figure I-3-17 Shares of patent applications by technology fields, 2013 (exterior) versus 2000 (interior)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====
83
I-3. Scientific, technological and innovation outputs
As regards Community Design applications,
performance patterns also reflect factors
outside research and innovation. Some eastern
European countries perform relatively well
compared to technological innovation outputs
such as patents, showing that it is easier to
advance in non-technological outputs than
more traditional innovation outputs.
Performance in Community Designs (see
Figure I-3-18 above) is not only influenced
by the quality of the innovation system, but
also by differences in taxation and regulation.
In particular, for very small Member States
(Luxembourg, Malta) designs do not necessarily
reflect the quality of national R&I systems.
However, countries performing traditionally
well in innovation outputs, such as Sweden,
Denmark and Finland, also perform well in
Community Designs. Some eastern European
countries rank much higher in this area than in
patents, with high growth rates in recent years,
implying that it is easier to advance in this less
technology-oriented area, where costs are also
lower and time lags shorter. Nevertheless, not
all countries are grasping the opportunities
here, with several south-eastern European
countries showing low performance.
Performance in Community Trade Marks is
similar to the one shown by Community Designs
and is also affected by factors outside innovation
such as differences in taxation and regulation.
In particular, for very small Member States
(Luxembourg, Cyprus, Malta) Trade Mark
propensity does not necessarily reflect the quality
of national R&I systems. However, countries
performing traditionally well in innovation
outputs, such as Sweden, Denmark and Germany,
also perform well in Community Trade Marks. For
the other countries, performance patterns are
similar to technological outputs such as patents,
with Estonia and Spain being notable exceptions.
2014 2010
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
192.8
0
30
60
90
120
EU
Luxembourg
Denmark Sweden Austria Finland Malta
Slovenia
Netherlands
Germany Poland Belgium
Italy Cyprus
United Kingdom
France
Czech Republic
Estonia Ireland Spain
Portugal Latvia Bulgaria Lithuania Slovakia Hungary Croatia Greece Romania
Switzerland
Iceland Israel Norway Turkey
Figure I-3-18 Community Design applications per million population, 2010 and 2014
 ▶ Figure I-3-18 Community Design applications per million population, 2010 and 2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat

===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
84
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Germany, Luxembourg, Ireland — all countries
with a GDP per capita and productivity level above
the EU average — show the highest shares of
innovative enterprises (see Figure I-3-19 above),
while Bulgaria, Poland and Romania, countries
with a below EU-average GDP per capita, show
the lowest shares. The share of innovative
companies is also linked to economic structures,
with countries having a high share of medium-
high and high-tech manufacturing companies
or a high share of knowledge-intensive services
(ICT, finances) naturally showing a high share of
innovative enterprises. However, it is worrying
that the share of innovative enterprises has
declined in many EU countries since 2008-2010,
as evidenced by results of the Community
Innovation Survey, an enterprise survey. Since
innovations are linked to investment, this could
be interpreted as further evidence of investment
levels still being too low in Europe.
As regards the different types of innovation
activities, leading innovation countries perform
above the EU average both in product and
process innovations, as well as in marketing
and organisational innovations.
As regards the different types of innovation
activities (see Figure I-3-20 below), leading
innovation countries perform well both in
product and process innovations as well as in
marketing and organisational innovations of their
enterprises. Countries with overall low innovation
levels perform low in all innovation activities, but
particularly low in product innovations, which
typically require more resources to generate than
other types of innovations.
Innovative enterprises
The share of innovative enterprises is broadly
linked to GDP per capita (productivity) levels.
The share has fallen in most countries since
2008-2010.
2012 2010 (1)
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010, CIS 2012)
Note:
(1)EU: Greece is not included in the EU value for 2010.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
EU
(1)
Germany
Luxembourg
Ireland Italy
Sweden Belgium Portugal Austria France Finland Greece
Netherlands
Malta
Denmark
United Kingdom
Estonia Slovenia
Czech Republic
Cyprus Croatia Slovakia
Spain
Lithuania Hungary Latvia Bulgaria Poland Romania Turkey Norway
%
Figure I-3-19 Share (%) of innovative enterprises in total number of enterprises, 2010 and 2012 ▶ Figure I-3-19 Share (%) of innovative enterprises in total number of enterprises, 2010 and 2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010, CIS 2012)
Note:
(1)EU: Greece is not included in the EU value for 2010.

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
85
I-3. Scientific, technological and innovation outputs
Product
and / or
process
innovative
enterprises
of which: Organisation
and / or
marketing
innovative
enterprises
of which:
Product
innovative
enterprises
Process
innovative
enterprises
Orrganisation
innovative
enterprises
Marketing
innovative
enterprises
 Belgium 46.5 31.5 31.1 37.9 29.3 21.9
 Bulgaria 16.9 10.8 9.3 18.6 12.4 14.2
 Czech-Republic 35.6 25.3 24.0 31.6 20.5 22.4
 Denmark 38.2 24.8 23.0 41.8 32.2 29.5
 Germany 55.0 35.8 25.5 47.6 32.2 34.4
 Estonia 38.4 20.7 23.8 31.8 21.7 21.9
 Ireland 42.3 27.8 25.9 50.8 21.8 35.7
 Greece 34.3 19.5 25.6 45.4 30.2 36.8
 Spain 23.2 10.5 15.1 23.4 19.4 13.2
 France 36.7 24.2 24.1 42.3 34.2 25.4
 Croatia 25.0 16.4 19.0 31.8 22.9 23.5
 Italy 41.5 29.1 30.4 45.3 33.5 31.0
 Cyprus 29.8 20.9 28.2 36.1 26.1 29.5
 Latvia 19.5 10.3 12.7 23.9 16.9 16.5
 Lithuania 18.9 11.6 13.1 26.2 17.5 19.3
 Luxembourg 48.5 30.3 32.8 53.5 46.8 32.4
 Hungary 16.4 10.6 8.3 26.5 16.5 19.7
 Malta 35.9 23.9 26.4 44.4 34.7 32.6
 Netherlands 44.5 31.9 25.9 35.7 27.3 23.2
 Austria 39.3 26.6 28.7 46.1 36.4 29.5
 Poland 16.1 9.4 11.0 15.5 10.4 10.6
 Portugal 41.3 26.0 33.5 43.6 32.8 32.8
 Romania 6.3 3.4 4.6 18.8 14.1 13.8
 Slovenia 32.7 23.6 22.5 37.6 26.3 28.5
 Slovakia 19.7 14.4 13.5 27.7 18.6 19.3
 Finland 44.6 31.0 29.3 38.4 29.7 26.5
 Sweden 45.2 31.5 23.9 39.1 25.3 30.4
 United-Kingdom 34.0 24.0 14.1 39.1 34.2 16.8
 EU 36.0 23.7 21.4 37.1 27.5 24.3
 Norway 31.2 19.1 11.9 33.0 21.7 23.2
 Turkey 27.0 17.7 20.4 43.7 31.7 34.7
 ▶ Figure I-3-20 Innovation activities (% of total enterprises), 2010-2012
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2012)

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
86
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The share of innovation turnover does not
appear to be directly correlated to the share
of innovative enterprises.
As regards the share of innovation turnover
(see Figure I-3-21 below) in total turnover the
share does not appear to be directly correlated
to the share of innovative enterprises. Therefore,
it has to be taken into account that the results
relating to the share of companies is dominated
by small- and medium-sized companies, while
as regards turnover larger companies play a
bigger role, including foreign affiliates, who often
import innovations from the headquarter country.
According to the latest CIS results Slovakia has the
highest share among EU countries, which might
have to do with foreign companies producing
goods such as cars and ICT products in the
country, which are characterised by short product
cycles. On the other hand, the lowest performers
Latvia, Bulgaria and Romania also perform low in
the share of innovative enterprises.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2012)
Notes:
(1)IE: 2010. (2)EU: Ireland is not included.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
EU
(2)
Slovakia
Spain
United Kingdom
Denmark France
Czech Republic
Germany Portugal
Netherlands
Greece Cyprus Belgium Finland
Italy
Slovenia
Malta Croatia Austria Hungary Ireland
Luxembourg
Estonia Poland Sweden Lithuania
Latvia Bulgaria Romania Turkey Norway
%
Figure I-3-21 Share (%) of innovation turnover in total turnover, 2012(1)
 ▶ Figure I-3-21 Share (%) of innovation turnover in total turnover, 2012(1)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2012)
Notes:
(1)IE: 2010. (2)EU: Ireland is not included.

===== PDF_PAGE 89 =====
87
I-4. Framework conditions for research and innovation
Boosting innovation requires that framework
conditions are sound and supportive, so that
an effective allocation and reallocation of
production resources can be ensured towards
innovative activities. This requires fair levels of
competition in the producti markets, dynamic
labour markets, or well-functioning financial
institutions that ensure easier access to finance
for new firms. Open markets, a competitive and
dynamic business sector, a culture of healthy
risk-taking and creative activity, coupled with
well-functioning public institutions, including an
effective legal system, are therefore crucial for
the uptake and development of innovation. The
importance of framework conditions is such that
it has been recognised as one of the five key
policy principles for innovation under the OECD
Innovation Strategy
(26), and represents one of the
key policy priorities for the European Commission.
Against this backdrop, based on existing
indicators, this section analyses the soundness
of these framework conditions against
other advanced economies, such as the
United States, and the internal differences
across Member States. More precisely, this
section will highlight the regulatory conditions
by assessing the ease of doing business, the
levels of competition in the product markets, the
functioning of the labour markets, Intellectual
Property Protection, the level of entrepreneurial
spirit, and the ease of accessing finance, notably
for innovation activities.
Regulation and market efficiency
The regulatory framework in which businesses
operate is a key factor in their competitiveness,
growth and employment performance. Therefore,
a key objective of government policy is to ensure
(26) http://www.oecd.org/sti/OECD-Innovation-Strategy-2015-
CMIN2015-7.pdf
that the regulatory environment is simple and
creates the right incentives. One can distinguish
between general regulations affecting the
general business environment, innovation-
specific rules and incentives to innovate, and
sector-specific regulations (Pelkman & Renda
2014). This chapter focuses on the general
regulations affecting the business environment.
It is easier to do business in the United States,
Japan and South Korea than in the European Union.
While the West-East divide continues to exist in
Europe, several Eastern European countries such
as Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovenia or Latvia
have improved their regulatory environments
substantially. Southern countries affected by
the global financial crisis such as Greece, Italy,
Portugal and Spain have maintained a steady
pace of regulatory reform, which picked up in the
aftermath of the crisis.
The World Bank annual report ‘Doing Business’
ranks since 2003 countries according to
how attractive they are to companies. A key
component of the measure involves the setting
up of a fictional company in each jurisdiction
and working out how long it would take for these
companies to become incorporated, pay taxes,
etc. In total, the index contains ten components:
1. Starting a business,
2. Dealing with construction permits,
3. Getting electricity,
4. Registering property,
5. Getting credit,
6. Protecting minority investors,
7. Paying taxes,
8. Trading across borders,
9. Enforcing contracts,
10. Resolving insolvency.
4. Framework conditions for research and innovation

===== PDF_PAGE 90 =====
88
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The World Bank composite indicator shows that it
is easier to do business in the United States, Japan,
and South Korea than in the EU, although the gap
seems to be narrowing since 2010, notably against
the United States and Japan (see Figure I-4-1). Some
Eastern European economies, by actively reducing
the complexity and cost of regulatory processes
and strengthening legal institutions, are narrowing
the gap with the regulatory frontier at a faster pace
than the rest of the European Union, in their efforts
to spur business activity and attract foreign direct
investments. Poland has improved substantially,
but Slovenia, the Czech Republic, Latvia, Romania
and Croatia have all shown improvement, as well. In
2012, Poland was the economy that had narrowed
the gap with the regulatory frontier the most over
the previous year, among all 185 economies ranked
by the World Bank (World Bank 2013). This suggests
that the economic integration in the European Union
over the past decade might have been an effective
mechanism in promoting convergence. In fact,
Poland is now classified as a high-income economy,
a remarkable achievement in two decades.
Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain—all among the
economies most adversely affected by the global
financial crisis—have maintained a steady pace
of regulatory reform. The pace picked up in the
aftermath of the crisis and the trend has continued.
In 2013/14 Spain reformed in four areas of business
regulation measured by ‘Doing Business’, and Greece
in three. These economies, by actively reducing the
complexity and cost of regulatory processes and
strengthening legal institutions, are narrowing the
gap with the regulatory frontier (World Bank 2014).
In fostering entrepreneurship and lowering
the barriers to starting a business, the
United States and South Korea fare better
than the EU. Within the EU, starting a business
is the easiest in Portugal and has improved
substantially in Greece, Spain and Lithuania.
Portugal, which has the highest score on this
World Bank sub-indicator, made starting a business
easier by eliminating the requirement to report to
the Ministry of Labour (see Figure I-4-2). In Portugal,
cutting the time and cost of firm registration
increased the number of business start-ups by
17% and created about seven new jobs a month
per 100 000 inhabitants in eligible industries
(Branstetter et al. 2013). Greece made starting a
business easier by lowering the cost of registration.
In 2012, Greece introduced a simpler type of
limited liability company, called a private company,
that is cheaper to incorporate. A year later, Greece
abolished the minimum capital requirement. Spain
also made starting a business easier by simplifying
business registration through the introduction
of an electronic system that links several public
agencies. Lithuania made starting a business easier
by creating a new form of limited liability company
with no minimum capital requirement. In Poland,
entrepreneurs no longer have to register new
companies at the National Labor Inspectorate and
National Sanitary Inspectorate.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Ease of Doing Business Indicator (World Bank)
Note:
(1)EU: The value is the unweighted average of the values for the Member States.
50
60
70
80
90
100
South Korea United States
Japan EU
(1)
China
Denmark Finland
United Kingdom
Sweden Germany Estonia Ireland Austria Latvia Portugal Lithuania
Netherlands
Poland Spain France Slovakia Bulgaria Belgium Slovenia
Czech Republic
Romania
Italy
Hungary
Luxembourg
Cyprus Greece Croatia Malta Norway Iceland
Switzerland
Israel Turkey
Figure I-4-1 Ease of doing business, 2010 and 2014
2014 2010
 ▶ Figure I-4-1 Ease of doing business, 2010 and 2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Ease of Doing Business Indicator (World Bank)
Note: (1)EU: The value is the unweighted average of the values for the Member States.

===== PDF_PAGE 91 =====
89
I-4. Framework conditions for research and innovation
Several EU countries have made strides to
improve the functioning of their legal systems,
notably in important areas such as enforcing
contracts, led by Poland, or in resolving
insolvency, led by the Czech Republic. However,
several Member States continue to score very
low levels, which hampers their ability to
improve the overall business environment, and
the conditions for innovation.
Countries where it is quick and easy to enforce
contracts or wrap up failing firms are usually
more attractive to investors than places with
lethargic legal systems. Since 2009, Poland has
made the most progress in regulatory practice
in enforcing contracts (see Figure I-4-3). Poland
has benefited from implementing a case
management system, introducing an electronic
court in Lublin, deregulating the bailiff profession,
increasing the number of judges, and amending
the Civil Procedure Code. Portugal made
enforcing contracts easier by adopting a new
code of civil procedure designed to reduce court
backlog, streamline court procedures, enhance
the role of judges, and speed up the resolution of
standard civil and commercial disputes. Greece
worsened its performance in enforcing contracts
over the period 2010 to 2014 in terms of the
time needed to enforce a contract through the
Greek court system. However, recently Greece
made enforcing contracts easier by introducing
an electronic filing system for court users
(World Bank 2014).
Italy has made some progress in enforcing
contracts by regulating attorney fees and
streamlining some court proceedings, but it still
remains at the bottom of the ranking, which is
a serious impediment to entrepreneurship and
innovation. Slovenia, Cyprus, and Bulgaria have
not made substantial progress and continue to
score very low on enforcing contracts, too. Since
June 2012, Italy has reduced attorney fees
the most among all the economies measured.
Judges were given an official fee schedule to
determine attorney fees when agreements are
not reached between attorneys and clients, which
contributed to the adjustment of the market
price for legal services and cut attorney fees by
6.8 percentage points, to 15% of the value of the
claim (World Bank 2013).
 ▶ Figure I-4-2 Starting a business, 2010 and 2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Ease of Doing Business Indicator (World Bank)
Note: (1)EU: The value is the unweighted average of the values for the Member States.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Ease of Doing Business Indicator (World Bank)
Note:
(1)EU: The value is the unweighted average of the values for the Member States.
60
70
80
90
100
South Korea United States
EU
(1)
Japan China
Portugal Belgium Slovenia
Netherlands
Lithuania Ireland Finland Denmark Hungary France Latvia Sweden Romania Estonia Bulgaria
United Kingdom
Cyprus Greece Italy
Luxembourg
Poland Slovakia Croatia Germany
Czech Republic
Austria Spain Malta Norway Iceland Israel Turkey
Switzerland
Figure I-4-2 Starting a business, 2010 and 2014
2014 2010

===== PDF_PAGE 92 =====
90
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
the Czech Republic has made the most progress
in regulatory practice in resolving insolvency since
2009. A new insolvency law went into effect in
2008 and declared reorganisation the preferred
method of resolving insolvency. Liquidation and
reorganisation proceedings were streamlined,
and insolvency representatives became subject
to educational and professional requirements
as well as stricter government oversight.
Application of the new regulations identified
some inefficiencies that led to further reforms
in 2009 and 2012. By 2011, reorganisation was
the most common insolvency procedure in the
Czech Republic, and survival of distressed but
viable companies was the prevailing outcome.
By 2013, the time to complete insolvency
proceedings had fallen by 4.4 years compared
with 2008. The recovery rate of creditors in the
Czech Republic more than tripled over the past six
years (World Bank 2013). Spain made resolving
insolvency easier by introducing new rules for
out-of-court restructuring as well as provisions
applicable to pre-packaged reorganisations
(World Bank 2014).
In terms of Product market regulation, the
EU is less competition-friendly than Japan
and the United States, which hampers a
potential reallocation of resources towards
more productive, innovation-driven activities.
Triggered by the economic crisis, Greece,
Portugal, Poland and Slovakia have implemented
important reforms, but the gap still persists.
A competitive product market environment
that allows new firms to challenge incumbents,
efficient firms to grow, and inefficient ones to
exit, helps boost economic growth. The OECD
indicators of product market regulation (PMR)
measure the economy-wide regulatory and
market environments and the degree to which
policies promote or inhibit competition in areas of
the product market where competition is viable.
In Figure I-4-4, a high score corresponds to a
less competition-friendly environment compared
to the OECD average. The most competition-
friendly countries in the EU are the Netherlands,
United Kingdom, Austria and Denmark. Several
EU Member States have implemented important
reforms over the past five years, often triggered
by the economic crisis. The country with the
largest improvement in the overall PMR score is
Greece, which is still among the OECD countries
with relatively strict product market regulations,
followed by Portugal, Poland and Slovakia.
In Italy and Spain, which have also faced strong
market pressures for structural reforms since
2011, progress has been more modest (Koske
et al. 2015).
 ▶ Figure I-4-3 Enforcing contracts, 2010 and 2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Ease of Doing Business Indicator (World Bank)
Note: (1)EU: The value is the unweighted average of the values for the Member States.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Ease of Doing Business Indicator (World Bank)
Note:
(1)EU: The value is the unweighted average of the values for the Member States.
40
50
60
70
80
90
South Korea
Japan China EU
(1)
United States Luxembourg
Austria France Belgium Germany
Latvia Finland Ireland
Netherlands
Lithuania Hungary Sweden Portugal Estonia Denmark
United Kingdom Czech Republic
Romania Poland Croatia Slovakia
Spain
Bulgaria
Malta Cyprus Slovenia
Italy Greece Iceland Norway
Switzerland
Turkey Israel
Figure I-4-3 Enforcing contracts, 2010 and 2014
2014 2010

===== PDF_PAGE 93 =====
91
I-4. Framework conditions for research and innovation
Reforms over the past five years have not been
concentrated in particular fields of regulation,
but have been spread out quite evenly across
the three major regulatory domains covered by
the indicators
(27). Some countries have eased
restrictions on trade and investments (in particular,
by lifting barriers to foreign direct investment
and phasing out differential treatments of
foreign suppliers). A number of countries have
lifted barriers to entrepreneurship (in particular,
by modernising licence and permit systems,
streamlining administrative procedures for
start-ups, simplifying rules and procedures, and
improving access to information about regulation).
Finally, a number of countries have reduced the
level of state control (in particular, by removing
special voting rights and legal or constitutional
restrictions to the sale of government stakes and/
or by abolishing price controls or improving their
design) (Koske et al. 2015).
(27) The aggregated indicator is composed of 3 components:
1) State control: Public ownership, Involvement in business
operations; 2) Barriers to entrepreneurship: Complexity of
regulatory procedures, Administrative burdens on start-ups,
Regulatory protection of incumbents; 3) Barriers to trade and
investment: Explicit barriers to trade and investment, Other
barriers to trade and investment.
On the Product Market Regulation sub-
indicator ‘Barriers to entrepreneurship’, the
EU performed worse than Japan and the
United States in 2007, which hinders the
potential to entry of new players and the
dynamic changes of the enterprise community.
Overall, the EU improved its performance
between 2007 and 2013.
The lowest barriers to entrepreneurship are
found in Slovakia, the Netherlands, Italy and
Denmark (see Figure I-4-5). Poland, Slovakia, and
Greece improved substantially, but Portugal and
Hungary improved, as well.
 ▶ Figure I-4-4 Product market regulation(1), 2007 and 2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Notes: (1)A high score corresponds to a less competition-friendly environment compared to the OECD average. (2)US: Data are not
available for 2013. (3)EE, SI, IL: 2008.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Notes:
(1)A high score corresponds to a less competition-friendly environment compared to the OECD
average. (2)EE, SI, IL: 2008
2013 2007 (2)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Japan
EU
South Korea
China
United States
(2)
Netherlands
United Kingdom
Austria Denmark
Italy
Slovakia Estonia Finland Germany Portugal Hungary Belgium
Czech Republic
Spain Ireland
Luxembourg
France
Lithuania Sweden Malta
Bulgaria Latvia Poland Cyprus Romania Slovenia Greece Croatia Norway Iceland
Switzerland
Israel Turkey
Figure I-4-4 Product market regulation(1), 2007 and 2013

===== PDF_PAGE 94 =====
92
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Adjusting the level and composition of
the workforce to adapt to changing demand
conditions and technology is vital for effective
businesses operations and, therefore, for
productivity and economic growth.
For economies to thrive on innovation, labour
needs to be continuously reallocated within and
across firms and sectors. Employment protection
legislation that is too rigid has been found to
significantly decrease the ability of innovative
firms to attract resources. Stringent employment
protection legislation (EPL) hinders the redirection
of resources towards their most productive uses
and, therefore, hinders productivity growth. As a
result, EPL was found to reduce R&D expenditure,
hampering firms that engage in innovation and
need skilled personnel and complementary
resources to implement and commercialise them
(Andrews and Criscuolo, 2013).
However, job displacement entails significant
costs for the workers concerned in terms of
earning losses and the possible obsolescence
of their job-specific skills and experience. Social
costs are also important. For example, greater
financial distress associated with job loss may
entail health problems. To minimise these costs,
public policies such as unemployment benefits,
job-search assistance and active labour market
programmes are put in place by governments.
Nevertheless, these policies are financed by
the society through higher taxes. Striking an
adequate balance between allowing an efficient
reallocation of labour resources and the need to
protect employees is therefore a key priority for
policy-makers (OECD 2013). The goal should not
be to lessen workers’ insurance against labour
market risks, but rather to shift the burden of that
insurance away from firms and towards society
more widely. This is where ‘flexicurity’ type policies
— active labour market policies, unemployment
insurances — play an important role (ECB 2014).
The level of employment protection legislation
in the EU is much higher than in the US, Japan,
and South Korea. The countries which reduced
their protection of permanent workers against
individual and collective dismissals the most in
the time period from 2008-2013 are Portugal,
Greece, Spain and Slovakia.
The level of employment protection legislation
differs across EU Member States, with Germany,
Belgium and the Netherlands having the most
restrictive EPL (see Figure I-4-6). The countries
which reduced their protection of permanent
workers against individual and collective dismissals
the most in the time period from 2008-2013 are
Portugal, Greece, Spain and Slovakia.
 ▶ Figure I-4-5 Barriers to entrepreneurship(1), 2007 and 2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Notes: (1)A high score corresponds to a less competition-friendly environment compared to the OECD average. (2)US: Data are not
available for 2013. (3)EE, SI, IL: 2008.
Switzerland
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Japan
EU
South Korea
China
United States
(2)
Slovakia
Netherlands
Italy
Denmark Austria Portugal
United Kingdom
Finland Estonia Lithuania Poland Germany France Hungary Bulgaria Sweden
Luxembourg
Belgium Slovenia
Czech Republic
Greece Ireland Croatia Latvia Romania Cyprus Spain Malta Norway Iceland Israel Turkey
Figure I-4-5 Barriers to entrepreneurship(1), 2007 and 2013
2013 2007 (2)
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Notes:
(1)A high score corresponds to a less competition-friendly environment compared to the OECD
average. (2)EE, SI, IL: 2008.

===== PDF_PAGE 95 =====
93
I-4. Framework conditions for research and innovation
Furthermore, regulation on temporary forms of
employment is more restrictive in the EU than
in the US, Japan and China (see Figure I-4-7).
Estonia decreased its protection of permanent
workers against individual and collective
dismissals, while it increased the restrictions with
regard to temporary forms of employment. In
addition to reducing the protection of permanent
workers against dismissals, Greece and Spain
reduced the restrictions on temporary forms of
employment between 2008 and 2013.
 ▶ Figure I-4-6 Protection of permanent workers against individual and collective dismissals(1), 2008 and 2013
 ▶ Figure I-4-7 Regulation on temporary forms of employment(1), 2008 and 2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD (Indicators of Employment Protection)
Notes: (1)The values scale from 0 (least restrictions) to 6 (most restrictions). (2)EU: The value is the unweighted average of the
values for the available Member States. (3)CN: 2012.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD (Indicators of Employment Protection)
Notes:
(1)The values scale from 0 (least restrictions) to 6 (most restrictions). (2)EU: The value is the unweighted average of the
values for the available Member States. (3)CN: 2012.
2013 (3) 2008
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD (Indicators of Employment Protection)
Notes:
(1)The values scale from 0 (least restrictions) to 6 (most restrictions). (2)EU: The value is the
unweighted average of the values for the available Member States. (3)CN: 2012.
Switzerland
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
South Korea
EU
(2)
China Japan
United States Luxembourg
France Spain Estonia Greece Italy
Slovenia Belgium Slovakia Portugal Poland Austria
Czech Republic
Hungary Finland Latvia
Denmark Germany Ireland
Netherlands
Sweden
United Kingdom
Turkey Norway Israel Iceland
Figure I-4-7 Regulation on temporary forms of employment(1), 2008 and 2013
2013 (3) 2008
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD (Indicators of Employment Protection)
Notes:
(1)The values scale from 0 (least restrictions) to 6 (most restrictions). (2)EU: The value is the
unweighted average of the values for the available Member States. (3)CN: 2012.
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
China EU
(2)
South Korea
Japan
United States
Germany Belgium
Netherlands
Latvia France Italy
Luxembourg
Portugal Slovenia
Czech Republic
Sweden Austria Greece Poland Denmark
Spain
Slovakia Finland Hungary Ireland Estonia
United Kingdom
Turkey Iceland Norway Israel
Switzerland
Figure I-4-6 Protection of permanent workers against individual and collective dismissals(1), 2008 and 2013

===== PDF_PAGE 96 =====
94
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Intellectual property protection (IPP) in the EU
is lower than in Japan and the United States
and the trend between 2007 and 2014 is
even decreasing.
When it comes to business dynamics, innovation,
and the framework conditions enabling and
fostering them, the importance of the efficiency
of civil justice and insolvency/pre-insolvency
procedures goes hand in hand with that of
the efficiency with which intellectual property
rights are defended. European companies rely
on intellectual property rights (IPRs) to recoup
their increasingly intensive R&I but also risky
investments in innovation and the benefits
from introducing new or substantially improved
products and processes into the market, and
would prefer a form of reassurance that their
intellectual property rights will be protected in
all EU countries to the same extent. IPRs play
a crucial role in Europe’s industrial strategy;
approximately 40% of GDP and 25% of
employment are generated by IPR-intensive
industries in the EU
(28).
(28) Intellectual property rights intensive industries: contribution to
economic performance and employment in the European Union,
EPO/OHIM, September 2013
The intellectual property protection indicator of the
World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness
Index demonstrates that intellectual property
protection (IPP) in the EU is lower than in Japan
and the United States and the trend between
2007 and 2014 is even decreasing (World
Economic Forum 2014). Within the EU, there are
large disparities (see Figure I-4-8). The countries
with the highest IPP are Finland, Luxembourg,
the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and France,
while Bulgaria and Romania (the countries with
the lowest R&I performance according to the
Innovation Union Scoreboard 2015) have the
weakest intellectual property protection among
the EU countries.
Finance for innovation
Access to finance for innovation is crucial to
translate new ideas into innovations.
In order to transform new ideas into innovations
that are brought into the market, entrepreneurs
and existing companies require access to financial
resources. In some cases, these resources may
exist internally to the company; however, on
many occasions, notably for SMEs, they need
 ▶ Figure I-4-8 Intellectual property protection, 2007 and 2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Global Competitiveness Index, World Economic Forum
Note: (1)EU: The value is the unweighted average of the values for the Member States.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Global Competitiveness Index, World Economic Forum.
Note: (1)EU: The value is the unweighted average of the values for the Member States.
2014 2007
2
3
4
5
6
7
Japan
United States
EU
(1)
China
South Korea
Finland
Luxembourg
United Kingdom
Netherlands
France Ireland Austria Sweden Germany Belgium Denmark Estonia Portugal
Malta Cyprus Slovenia Latvia
Czech Republic
Greece Lithuania Slovakia Poland Italy
Hungary Croatia Spain
Romania Bulgaria
Switzerland
Norway Iceland Israel Turkey
Figure I-4-8 Intellectual property protection, 2007 and 2014

===== PDF_PAGE 97 =====
95
I-4. Framework conditions for research and innovation
to go into the financial markets to obtain the
required resources that can help them transform
their ideas into prototypes, new products, and
processes that can be brought successfully into
the market. There are many channels that can
be used to do so, and some novel methods such
as crowd-funding have gained traction in the
past few years. However, as of today, access to
finance and, notably, access to venture capital
continue to be some of the most widely used
mechanisms to finance innovation.
The financial and economic crisis has affected
the ability of firms to gain overall access to
external finance, most notably in certain
Member States.
The financial and economic crisis of the past few
years has largely affected the ease of accessing
loans in most of the developed world, including
the United States; however, the effect has been
particularly marked in the EU, and most notably
in those countries that were more severely
affected by the crisis, such as Spain, Greece,
Portugal, Ireland or Slovenia (see Figure I-4-9).
This is particularly important in instruments
that are crucial for innovation, such as venture
capital, where the negative effect has been
sharper in Europe.
Since the explosion of the financial crisis, the
volumes of venture capital investment decreased
in both the United States and Europe overall,
but the effects have been particularly marked
in the EU. The United States have suffered a
slight decrease of around 3% in terms of GDP
from 2007 to 2013, while the drop in the EU
reached nearly 10% in the same period (see
Figure I-4-10). This decrease affected all of the
innovative powerhouses in Europe, with significant
decreases in countries such as Germany, the
Netherlands, and the United Kingdom. Only a
handful of European countries, whose initial
values were very low, managed to increase their
volumes of venture capital, but the very low
levels of initial volumes make it hard to conclude
that a real and sustained improvement happened
during this period.
 ▶ Figure I-4-9 Global Competitiveness Index - ease of access to loans (scale 1 - 7 (best)), 2008-2009 and
 2013-2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Global Competitiveness Index, World Economic Forum; Executive Opinion Survey; www.weforum.org/gcr
Note:
(1)EU: The value was estimated by DG Research and Innovation.Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Global Competitiveness Index, World Economic Forum; Executive Opinion Survey; www.wefo-
rum.org/gcr
Note:
(1)EU: The value was estimated by DG Research and Innovation.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
 United States
 Japan China EU
(1)
 South Korea Luxembourg
 Sweden Finland Malta France
 Germany
Czech Republic
 Belgium Slovakia Estonia
 Netherlands
 Bulgaria Romania Denmark Austria
 United Kingdom
 Poland
 Lithuania
 Latvia Croatia Portugal Cyprus Ireland Hungary
 Spain Greece
 Italy
 Slovenia Norway
 Switzerland
 Israel Turkey Iceland
Figure I-4-9 Global Competitiveness Index - ease of access to loans (scale 1 - 7 (best)), 2008-2009 and 2013-2014
2013-2014 2008-2009

===== PDF_PAGE 98 =====
96
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The EU as a whole, and all individual
Member States, continue to lag behind the
United States in both seed and start-up, and
later stage venture capital, though strong
differences across Member States exist.
The negative evolution in recent years has
emphasised the persistent gap that continues
to exist in terms of venture capital availability
between the United States and the EU, both for
seed and start-up companies, and also for later
stage development, which is crucial for innovative
firms to grow, increasing their revenue levels,
market shares, and employment opportunities.
The size of the gap between the United States
and the EU is a 6:1 ratio, in terms of GDP.
Only a handful of small EU Member States,
notably Luxembourg, the Nordic countries and
Ireland, managed to achieve venture capital
investment levels above or close to 0.05% of
their GDP, while for all the other Member States,
venture capital investment remains low (see
Figure I-4-11). Of particular interest is the later
stage venture capital investment, where the
gap against the United States is even more
pronounced in most EU Member States.
 ▶ Figure I-4-10 Venture Capital as % of GDP - compound annual growth, 2007-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, National Venture Capital Association
Notes: (1)BG: 2008-2013. (2)EU does not include EE, HR, CY, LV, LT, MT, SI, SK.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, National Venture Capital Association
Notes:
(1)BG: 2008-2013. (2)EU does not include EE, HR, CY, LV, LT, MT, SI, SK.
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Compound annual growth (%), 2007-2013 (1)
Figure I-4-10 Venture Capital as % of GDP - compound annual growth, 2007-2013

United States
EU
(2)
Hungary Romania Greece Ireland Poland
Luxembourg
Denmark France Finland Germany Austria Belgium
Netherlands
Sweden
Italy
United Kingdom Czech Republic
Spain
Portugal Bulgaria
Switzerland
Norway

===== PDF_PAGE 99 =====
97
I-4. Framework conditions for research and innovation
While the reasons for the persistent lack
of financing for innovation in Europe may
be a combination of both supply, i.e. lack of
available funding, and demand, i.e. lack of
sufficiently robust innovation projects deemed
worthwhile to obtain funding, the financial and
economic crisis appears to have aggravated
the situation.
It is hard to disentangle the full reasons and
interrelationships behind this lack of venture
capital investment in Europe. While the lack
of financing may be one of the reasons, other
forces may also play an important role, including
the lower capacity of European entrepreneurs
or companies to develop innovative projects,
restrictive market regulations that may hinder
the ability of innovators to fully develop their
innovation, fragmentation of the European
market that can hinder the development of
sufficient lead markets for innovations, or
weaker overall framework conditions, including
insufficient access to talent or product and
labour market regulations that are too stringent,
hindering the ability of innovators to enter and
disrupt the existing markets.
In all likelihood, the solution should encompass
both supply and demand measures.
Both national and European initiatives are being
adopted to address the lack of sufficient supply
of funding for improving access to finance in
general, and for innovative projects in particular.
The Quantitative Easing policy adopted by the
European Central Bank has managed to increase
the overall availability of financing that is
improving access to finance for firms, even if
the flow and price of this access does not seem
to be homogeneous across the European Union,
due to the fragmentation of the banking system
in Europe. In addition, the European Investment
Bank (through its activities to provide financing
to support innovative SMEs), the Capital Markets
Union (which aims to create deeper and more
integrated capital markets in EU Member States),
and the European Fund for Strategic Investment
(EFSI) (that foresees enhancing the financial
support for innovative projects and programmes
such as InnovFin) are European initiatives that
aim at improving the availability of financing for
European innovations.
 ▶ Figure I-4-11 Venture Capital as % of GDP, 2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, National Venture Capital Association
Note: (1)EU does not include EE, HR, CY, LV, LT, MT, SI, SK.
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
United States
EU
(1)
Luxembourg
Denmark Sweden Ireland Finland France Belgium
United Kingdom
Germany
Netherlands
Hungary Portugal Austria Spain Poland Bulgaria
Italy
Romania Greece
Czech Republic
Switzerland
Norway
%
Figure I-4-11 Venture Capital as % of GDP, 2013
Seed and Start-up Later Stage
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, National Venture Capital Association
Note:
(1)EU does not include EE, HR, CY, LV, LT, MT, SI, SK.

===== PDF_PAGE 100 =====
98
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
5. Economic and social impacts
The quest for innovation, which is not an end goal
in itself, is justified by the economic and social
impacts that it can bring about. As mentioned in
the introduction, innovation can drive increases
in productivity and long-term sustainable growth,
and generate high-quality jobs.
In this context, this section analyses how Europe’s
economic structure is shifting towards more
knowledge-intensive activities; if high-growth
innovative firms
(29), that have been identified
as the main driver of structural changes, are
starting up and growing their operations,
what are the consequences for the creation of
productive jobs in Europe and its implications on
skills development?
Structural change
The concept of structural change refers to
the long-term dynamics of the economy,
through which the types and nature of existing
production, consumption and trade transform
through the integration of higher levels of
knowledge. A structural change towards
a more knowledge-intensive economy in
Europe is crucial for productivity growth and
competitiveness and for fostering high-quality
jobs and innovation in Europe.
(29) http://www.bruegel.org/publications/publication-detail/
publication/430-europes-missing-yollies/
Compared to other advanced economies, the
European Union’s economy is less knowledge
and technology intensive and is specialised
in medium-high-tech sectors. In the past few
years, this gap has widened even further
in comparison to the United States and
South Korea.
The value added in high-tech (HT) and medium-
high-tech (MHT) manufacturing and knowledge-
intensive services (KIS) as the percentage of total
value added in the EU is lower than in the US and
South Korea (see Figure I-5-1). Moreover, the gap
in these economies, for the 2007 to 2013 period,
is widening, despite the slight improvement
overall. Within the EU, there are vast disparities
across Member States. Luxembourg, Ireland,
Malta, and the Netherlands have the highest
share of HT, MHT manufacturing and KIS, while
Central and Eastern European countries such
as Lithuania, Romania, Latvia and Poland,
continue to lag behind. In dynamic terms, large
disparities can also be observed. Countries such
as Ireland and Malta continue to shift towards
more knowledge and technology-intensive
activities, at a similar compound annual growth
rate as Slovakia and Bulgaria, while Cyprus and
Romania show the highest growth rates. Among
those countries more seriously affected by the
recession of the past few years, in addition to the
already mentioned Ireland, only Spain seems to
have engaged in a process of economic structural
change, while Portugal, Greece or Italy, score
negative or close to zero in terms of changes.
Finally, it is worth noting the drop in Poland and
the United Kingdom, despite the robust economic
growth of the past few years.

===== PDF_PAGE 101 =====
99
I-5. Economic and social impacts
Value added in high-tech manufacturing as
percentage of total value added in the EU is
lower than in the US, and has been decreasing at
a faster pace over the time period 1995-2013.
Looking into each of the components, the
specialisation patterns become clearer. Value
added in high-tech manufacturing as percentage
of total value added in the EU in 2013 is lower
than in the US and Japan and much lower than
in South Korea (see Figure I-5-2). The long-term
gap is widening in comparison to South Korea
and the United States. This is due to the decrease
in computer, electronic, and optical products,
which decreased from 1.22% in 1997 to 0.84%
in 2012, while the share of pharmaceuticals,
medicinal chemical, and botanical products in the
EU increased from 0.77% in 1997 to 0.95% in
2012. This trend can be observed in Japan and
in the US. In the US, computer, electronic and
optical products decreased from 1.82% in 1995 to
1.51% in 2011, while pharmaceuticals, medicinal
chemical, and botanical products increased from
0.52% in 1995 to 0.72% in 2011. In South Korea,
however, the trend is the opposite.
There are vast disparities within the EU. The value
added in high-tech manufacturing as percentage
of total value added in 2013 was led by Ireland,
followed by Sweden, Slovenia, Denmark and
Hungary, although due to a lack of available data,
as will be presented below, it is difficult to determine
in which segments of the value-added chain of
these sectors these countries are specialising in.
In dynamic terms in Ireland, the value added of
pharmaceuticals, medicinal chemical, and botanical
products as percentage of total value added
increased between 1995 and 2013, while the
share of computer, electronic, and optical products
decreased during that time period, leading to an
overall negative growth rate. A negative growth rate
can also be observed in Sweden, where the shares in
both HT sectors decreased. In Denmark and Slovenia,
the share of pharmaceuticals, medicinal chemical,
and botanical products increased between 1995
and 2013, while the share of computer, electronic,
and optical products decreased. In Hungary, both
the share of pharmaceuticals, medicinal chemical,
and botanical products and the share of computer,
electronic, and optical products increased between
1995 and 2013.
 ▶ Figure I-5-1 Value added in high-tech (HT), medium-high-tech (MHT) and knowledge-intensive services (KIS)
 as % of total value added, 2013 and compound annual growth, 2007-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)JP: 2009; CH, US, KR: 2011; BE, DE, ES, IT, LV, PL, SE, UK, EU: 2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 2014. (2)JP: 2007-2009; CH, US,
KR: 2007-2011; BE, DE, ES, IT, LV, PL, SE, UK, EU: 2007- 2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 2007-2014. (3)EU: Croatia is not included.
(4)MT, SE, NO, CH, US, JP, KR: Complete data in the required breakdown were not available. (5)Elements of estimation were involved
in the compilation of the data.
0 -2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
2 0
10
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
C o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th , 2 0 0 7-2 0 1 3 (2)
% s h a r e i n to ta l v a l u e a d d e d , 2 0 1 3 (1)
F i g u r e I - 5 - 1 Va l u e a d d e d i n h i g h - te c h (H T ), m e d i u m - h i g h - te c h (M H T ) a n d k n o w l e d g e - i n te n s i v e
s e r v i c e s (K I S) a s % o f to ta l v a l u e a d d e d , 2 0 1 3 a n d c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th , 2 0 0 7 - 2 0 1 3
H T MH T K I S C o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (H T +MH T +K I S), 2 0 0 7-2 0 1 3 (2)
Japan
United States
EU
(3)
South Korea
Finland
Luxembourg
United Kingdom
Netherlands
France Ireland Austria Sweden Germany Belgium Denmark Estonia Portugal
Malta Cyprus Slovenia
Latvia
Czech Republic
Greece Lithuania Slovakia Poland Italy
Hungary
Spain
Romania Bulgaria
Switzerland
Norway Iceland
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes : (1)JP: 2009; CH, US, KR: 2011; BE, DE, ES, IT, LV, PL, SE, UK, EU: 2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 2014. (2)JP: 2007-2009; CH, US, KR: 2007-2011; BE, DE,
ES, IT, LV, PL, SE, UK, EU: 2007- 2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 2007-2014. (3)EU: Croatia is not included. (4)MT, SE, NO, CH, US, JP, KR: Complete data in the
required breakdown were not available. (5)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.

===== PDF_PAGE 102 =====
100
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The EU as a whole, and a number of European
countries depict negative CAGR in value added
in HT manufacturing as percentage of total
value added. The most significant decrease can
be observed in Malta, Lithuania and Portugal,
which all show strong decreases in particular in
computer, electronic, and optical products. This is
also the case for France, the United Kingdom, and
the Netherlands, where a negative CAGR for the
period from 1995-2007 can be observed mainly
due to decreases in computer, electronic, and
optical products. In France and the Netherlands,
pharmaceuticals, medicinal chemical, and botanical
products also demonstrate negative growth rates.
BERD intensity (business enterprise
expenditure on R&D as % of value added) in
high-tech manufacturing is higher in the US
and South Korea than in the EU, which might
suggest that the EU lags behind in terms of
the highest value added activities within these
sectors. This might hamper the EU’s ability
to foster structural change towards these
activities, although large differences across
Member States exist.
BERD intensity in the US grew between 1995
and 2012 at a higher pace than in the EU.
However, in the time period from 2007 to 2012
the trend was reversed, with the US showing
a negative growth rate (see Figures I-5-3 and
I-5-4). Within the EU, BERD intensity in high-tech
manufacturing in 2012 was by far highest in
Finland, where computer, electronic, and optical
products demonstrate very high increases
in BERD intensity (more than 50 percentage
points) between 1995 and 2012. This can be
explained by the decrease in gross value added
in computer, electronic, and optical products,
linked to the downfall of Nokia.
 ▶ Figure I-5-2 Value added in high-tech manufacturing as % of total value added, 2013 and
 compound annual growth, 1995-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)JP: 1995-2009; US, KR: 1995-2011; DE, ES, SE: 1995-2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 1995-2014; CH: 1997-2011; UK, EU:
1997-2012; IS: 1997-2013; LV: 2000-2012; BG, EE: 2000-2013; PL: 2003-2012; LT: 2005-2013. (2)JP: 2009; CH, US, KR: 2011; DE,
ES, LV, PL, SE, UK, EU: 2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 2014. (3)EU: BG, EE, HR, LV, LT, LU, PL are not included. (4)MT, SE, NO, US: Complete
data in the required breakdown were not available. (5)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.
EU (3)
B E
B G
C Z D K
D E
EE
I EEL
ES
F R
I T
C Y
L V
L T
H U
MT
N L
A T
PL
PT
R O
SI
SK
F I
SE
U K
I S
N O
C H
U S
J P
K R
-5
-4
- 3
- 2
- 1
0
1
2
3
4
5
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
F i g u r e I-5-2 Va l u e a d d e d i n h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g a s % o f to ta l v a l u e a d d e d ,
2 0 1 3 a n d c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th , 1 9 9 5-2 0 1 3
Sh a r e o f to ta l v a l u e a d d e d i n h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g (% ), 2 0 1 3 (2)
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)JP: 1995-2009; US, KR: 1995-2011; DE, ES, SE: 1995-2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 1995-2014; CH: 1997-2011;
UK, EU: 1997-2012; IS: 1997-2013; LV: 2000-2012; BG, EE: 2000-2013; PL: 2003-2012; LT: 2005-2013. (2)JP: 2009; CH, US,
KR: 2011; DE, ES, LV, PL, SE, UK, EU: 2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 2014. (3)EU: BG, EE, HR, LV, LT, LU, PL are not included.
(4)MT, SE, NO, US: Complete data in the required breakdown were not available. (5)Elements of estimation were involved in
the compilation of the data.
Sh a r e o f to ta l v a l u e a d d e d i n h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g (% ),
c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 1 9 9 5-2 0 1 3 (1)

===== PDF_PAGE 103 =====
101
I-5. Economic and social impacts
In Germany, BERD intensity has increased in
both computer, electronic, and optical products
and in pharmaceuticals, medicinal chemical, and
botanical products; however its overall BERD
intensity, as in the case of countries such as
Belgium or France, has remained far behind the
US and South Korea. Starting from a relatively
low level, BERD intensity in HT manufacturing
grew the fastest in Portugal, Poland and Slovenia
between 1995 and 2012. In Portugal, the strong
growth comes from pharmaceuticals, medicinal
chemical, and botanical products. BERD intensity
in HT manufacturing in Poland is still one of the
lowest in the EU, but growing fast, in particular
in computer, electronic, and optical products.
In Romania, Italy and Austria BERD intensity
shows negative growth rates between 1995 and
2012, mainly due to decreases in BERD intensity
in pharmaceuticals, medicinal chemical, and
botanical products. Between 2007 and 2012,
Ireland and Estonia also showed strong decreases
in BERD intensity in HT. In Ireland, a particular
strong decrease in BERD and BERD intensity can be
observed in pharmaceuticals, medicinal chemical,
and botanical products. In Estonia, the decrease
in BERD intensity was in computer, electronic, and
optical products, where BERD decreased while
value added increased significantly. In Slovakia,
both BERD and value added in HT manufacturing
decreased significantly over the time period from
2007-2012.
EU (3)
B E
C Z
D EES F R
I T
H U
A T
PL
PT
R O
SI
F I
U K
N O
U S
K R
-5
-3
-1
1
3
5
7
0 5 1 0 1 5 2 0 2 5 3 0 3 5 4 0
B ER D i n te n s i ty o f h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g - c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ),
1 9 9 5-2 0 1 2 (1)
B ER D i n te n s i ty o f h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g (% ), 2 0 1 2 (2)
F i g u r e I-5-3 B ER D i n te n s i ty o f h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g , 2 0 1 2 a n d c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th , 1 9 9 5-2 0 1 2
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)US, KR: 1995-2011; SI, FI, NO: 1995-2013; CZ: 1996-2013; UK: 1997-2012; BE, AT: 1998-2011; EU: 1998-2012;
PT: 2004-2012; RO: 2004-2013; PL: 2005-2012. (2)BE, AT, US, KR: 2011; CZ, RO, SI, FI, NO: 2013. (3)EU includes BE, CZ,
DE, ES, FR, IT, HU, AT, SI, FI, UK. (4)FR, UK: Compound annual growth was calculated from data classified by product field.
(5)NO, US: Complete data in the required breakdown were not available. (6)Elements of estimation were involved in the
compilation of the data.
 ▶ Figure I-5-3 BERD intensity of high-tech manufacturing, 2012 and compound annual growth, 1995-2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes:
(1)US, KR: 1995-2011; SI, FI, NO: 1995-2013; CZ: 1996-2013; UK: 1997-2012; BE, AT: 1998-2011; EU: 1998-2012; PT:
2004-2012; RO: 2004-2013; PL: 2005-2012. (2)BE, AT, US, KR: 2011; CZ, RO, SI, FI, NO: 2013. (3)EU includes BE, CZ, DE, ES, FR, IT,
HU, AT, SI, FI, UK. (4)FR, UK: Compound annual growth was calculated from data classified by product field. (5)NO, US:
Complete data in the required breakdown were not available. (6)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.

===== PDF_PAGE 104 =====
102
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
As previously mentioned, the EU is specialised in
MHT sectors in comparison to the United States,
and value added in MHT manufacturing as
percentage of total value added in the EU is
higher than in the US, but much lower than in
South Korea (see Figure I-5-5). Both in the EU and
in the US, the shares of total value added in MHT
demonstrate negative growth rates. However,
within the EU there are strong disparities. The
share of total value added in MHT manufacturing
is the highest in Germany, the Czech Republic
and Hungary with positive growth rates
between 1995 and 2013. In Germany, strong
increases in the share can be observed in motor
vehicles, trailers, and semi-trailers, and other
transport equipment, as well as in machinery
and equipment, while the share of chemicals
and chemical products and electrical equipment
demonstrate negative CAGRs for the years 1995-
2013. In the Czech Republic and Hungary, motor
vehicles, trailers, and semi-trailers, and other
transport equipment, machinery and equipment
and electrical equipment demonstrate increases
in their shares, while only chemicals and
chemical products show declining shares. In
the United Kingdom and Cyprus, the countries
with the strongest drop, all MHT sectors show
decreasing shares.
B E
B G
C Z
D K
D E
EE
I E
ES
F RI T
C Y
L V
L T H U
MT
N L
A T
PL
PT
R O
SI
SK
F I
SEU K EU (3)
N O U S
J PK R
-2 0
-1 6
-1 2
-8
-4
0
4
8
1 2
1 6
2 0
0 5 1 0 1 5 2 0 2 5 3 0 3 5 4 0
B ER D i n te n s i ty o f h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g , 2 0 1 2 (2)
F i g u r e I-5-4 B ER D i n te n s i ty o f h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g , 2 0 1 2 a n d c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th ,
2 0 0 7-2 0 1 2
B ER D i n te n s i ty o f h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g - c o m p o u n d a n n u a l
g r o w th (% ), 2 0 0 7-2 0 1 2 (1)
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)JP: 2007-2009; BE, AT, US, KR: 2007-2011; CZ, EE, RO, SI, NO: 2007-2013; CY, LV, LT, MT: 2008-2012; NL,
FI: 2008-2013; IE: 2009-2011; DK, UK: 2009-2012; SK: 2010-2013. (2)JP: 2009; BE, IE, AT, US, KR: 2011; CZ, EE, NL, RO, SI,
SK, FI, NO: 2013. (3)EU: EL, HR, LU are not included. (4)EE, MT, SE, NO, US: Complete data in the required breakdown were not
available. (5)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.

 ▶ Figure I-5-4 BERD intensity of high-tech manufacturing, 2012 and compound annual growth, 2007-2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes:
(1)JP: 2007-2009; BE, AT, US, KR: 2007-2011; CZ, EE, RO, SI, NO: 2007-2013; CY, LV, LT, MT: 2008-2012; NL, FI:
2008-2013; IE: 2009-2011; DK, UK: 2009-2012; SK: 2010-2013. (2)JP: 2009; BE, IE, AT, US, KR: 2011; CZ, EE, NL, RO, SI, SK, FI,
NO: 2013. (3)EU: EL, HR, LU are not included. (4)EE, MT, SE, NO, US: Complete data in the required breakdown were not available.
(5)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.

===== PDF_PAGE 105 =====
103
I-5. Economic and social impacts
Despite the EU’s specialisation in MHT, BERD
intensity in MHT manufacturing is higher in
the US than in the EU, suggesting that Europe
might be lagging in those activities that require
higher levels of technological development.
BERD intensity in MHT manufacturing is higher
in the US than in the EU. Between 1995 and
2012, BERD intensity in the EU grew slightly
faster than in the US, as demonstrated by
the Compound Annual Growth rate (see
Figure I-5-6). However, between 2007 and
2012 the growth rate in the EU was lower than
in the United States (see Figure I-5-7). This can
be explained by a decrease in value added of
MHT in the US between 2007 and 2011, while
BERD increased during that time period. Another
possible explanation is that within MHT, the US
is specialised in those activities that require
higher levels of technological development. In
the US, the MHT sector which demonstrates an
increase in BERD intensity is machinery and
equipment, which more than doubled between
1995 and 2012. BERD intensity in motor
vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers, and other
transport equipment increased substantially
between 1995 and 2009 and then declined
again strongly. Only electrical equipment shows
a negative growth rate.
Most EU Member States show a positive
evolution of their BERD intensities in MHT
manufacturing between 1995 and 2012. Only in
Romania did BERD intensity show a significant
EU (3)
B E
B G
C Z
D K
D E
EE
I E
EL
ES
F R I T
C Y
L V
L T
L U
H U
MT
N L
A T
PL
PT R O
SI
SK
F I
SE
U K
I S N O C H
U S
J P
K R
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
0 2 4 6 8 1 0 1 2 1 4
Sh a r e o f to ta l v a l u e a d d e d i n m e d i u m-h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g (% )
- c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 1 9 9 5-2 0 1 3 (1)
Sh a r e o f to ta l v a l u e a d d e d i n m e d i u m-h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g (% ), 2 0 1 3 (2)
F i g u r e I-5-5 Va l u e a d d e d i n m e d i u m-h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g a s % o f to ta l v a l u e a d d e d , 2 0 1 3a n d c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th ,
1 9 9 5-2 0 1 3
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)JP: 1995-2009; US, KR: 1995-2011; DE, ES, SE: 1995-2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 1995-2014; CH: 1997-2011;
UK, EU: 1997-2012; IS: 1997-2013; LV: 2000-2012; BG, EE, LU: 2000-2013; PL: 2003-2012; LT: 2005-2013. (2)JP: 2009; CH,
US, KR: 2011; DE, ES, LV, PL, SE, UK, EU: 2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 2014. (3)EU: BG, EE, HR, LV, LT, LU, PL are not
included. (4)SE, NO, CH, US: Complete data in the required breakdown were not available. (5)Elements of estimation were
involved in the compilation of the data.
 ▶ Figure I-5-5 Value added in medium-high-tech manufacturing as % of total value added, 2013 and
 compound annual growth, 1995-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes:
(1)JP: 1995-2009; US, KR: 1995-2011; DE, ES, SE: 1995-2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 1995-2014; CH: 1997-2011;UK, EU:
1997-2012; IS: 1997-2013; LV: 2000-2012; BG, EE, LU: 2000-2013; PL: 2003-2012; LT: 2005-2013. (2)JP: 2009; CH, US, KR: 2011;
DE, ES, LV, PL, SE, UK, EU: 2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 2014. (3)EU: BG, EE, HR, LV, LT, LU, PL are not included. (4)SE, NO, CH, US:
Complete data in the required breakdown were not available. (5)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.

===== PDF_PAGE 106 =====
104
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
drop, due to increases in value added and
decreases in BERD. Between 2007 and 2012,
Malta and Cyprus also showed negative growth
rates. Within the EU, Sweden and France
have the highest BERD intensities in MHT
manufacturing, followed by Denmark, Austria,
Finland and Germany. In Sweden, all MHT
sectors show increases in BERD intensity. While
the highest BERD intensity is in motor vehicles,
the highest growth rate in BERD intensity could
be observed for electrical equipment. In France,
all MHT sectors demonstrate increases in BERD
intensity with motor vehicles, trailers, and
semi-trailers, with other transport equipment
having the highest BERD intensity and electrical
equipment showing the highest growth rate in
BERD intensity. In Germany, the highest and
increasing BERD intensity between 1995 and
2013 is in motor vehicles, trailers and semi-
trailers, and other transport equipment. Positive
growth can also be observed in machinery
and equipment, while electrical equipment
and chemicals and chemical products have
decreasing BERD intensities. The growth rate
in BERD intensity in MHT manufacturing is the
highest in Portugal (1995-2012), with increases
in all MHT sectors, and in Bulgaria (2007-2012).
Starting from a very low level, BERD in MHT in
Portugal increased rapidly between 2004 and
2012, while value added in MHT decreased.
 ▶ Figure I-5-6 BERD intensity of medium-high-tech manufacturing, 2012 and compound annual growth,
 1995-2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes:
(1)US, KR: 1995-2011; SI, FI, NO: 1995-2013; CZ: 1996-2013; UK: 1997-2012; BE, AT: 1998-2011; EU: 1998-2012; PT: 2004-
2012; RO: 2004-2013; PL: 2005-2012. (2)BE, AT, US, KR: 2011; CZ, RO, SI, FI, NO: 2013. (3)EU includes BE, CZ, DE, ES, FR, IT, HU, AT,
SI, FI, UK. (4)FR, UK: Compound annual growth was calculated from data classified by product field. (5)NO, US: Complete data in the
required breakdown were not available. (6)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.
EU (3)B E
C Z D E
ES
F R
I T
H U A T
PL
PT
R O
SI
F I
U K
N O
U S
K R
- 1 2
- 8
- 4
0
4
8
1 2
1 6
0 2 4 6 8 1 0 1 2 1 4 1 6
B ER D i n te n s i ty o f m e d i u m-h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g
- c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 1 9 9 5-2 0 1 2 (1)
B ER D i n te n s i ty o f m e d i u m-h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g (% ), 2 0 1 2 (2)
F i g u r e I-5-6 B ER D i n te n s i ty o f m e d i u m-h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g , 2 0 1 2
a n d c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th , 1 9 9 5-2 0 1 2
Sci e n ce , R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n Pe rf o rm a n ce o f t h e EU 2 0 1 6
So u rce : D G R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n - U n i t f o r t h e A n a l y s i s a n d M o n i t o ri n g o f N a t i o n a l R e s e a rch Po l i ci e s
D a t a : Eu ro s t a t , O EC D
N o t e s: ( 1 )U S, KR : 1 9 9 5 -2 0 1 1 ; SI , F I , N O : 1 9 9 5 -2 0 1 3 ; C Z : 1 9 9 6 -2 0 1 3 ; U K: 1 9 9 7 -2 0 1 2 ; BE, A T : 1 9 9 8 -2 0 1 1 ; EU : 1 9 9 8 -2 0 1 2 ;
PT : 2 0 0 4 -2 0 1 2 ; R O : 2 0 0 4 -2 0 1 3 ; PL : 2 0 0 5 -2 0 1 2 . ( 2 )BE, A T , U S, KR : 2 0 1 1 ; C Z , R O , SI , F I , N O : 2 0 1 3 . ( 3 )EU i n cl u d e s BE, C Z ,
D E, ES, F R , I T , H U , A T , SI , F I , U K. ( 4 )F R , U K: C o m p o u n d a n n u a l g ro w t h w a s ca l cu l a t e d f ro m d a t a cl a s s i ﬁe d b y p ro d u ct ﬁe l d .
( 5 )N O , U S: C o m p l e t e d a t a i n t h e re q u i re d b re a kd o w n w e re n o t a v a i l a b l e . ( 6 )El e m e n t s o f e s t i m a t i o n w e re i n v o l v e d i n t h e
co m p i l a t i o n o f t h e d a t a .

===== PDF_PAGE 107 =====
105
I-5. Economic and social impacts
BERD intensity is correlated with value added
in HT and MHT, with both reinforcing each other.
Many EU countries managed to increase value
added of HT and MHT in their economies and,
at the same time, increase their BERD intensity.
BERD intensity is correlated with value added in
HT and MHT. However, EU countries are positioned
differently (see Figure I-5-8). Some countries
have margins to increase their R&D intensity
within the existing economic sector structure,
while others need to simultaneously push through
complementary policy measures to change the
sector composition of their economies, favouring
industry segments in which demand for research
and skilled labour is high.
 ▶ Figure I-5-7 BERD intensity of medium-high-tech manufacturing, 2012 and compound annual growth,
 2007-2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes:
(1)JP: 2007-2009; BE, AT, US, KR: 2007-2011; CZ, EE, RO, SI, NO: 2007-2013; CY, LT: 2008-2012; NL, FI: 2008-2013; IE:
2009-2011; BG, DK, UK: 2009-2012; SK: 2009-2013; MT: 2010-2012. (2)JP: 2009; BE, IE, AT, US, KR: 2011; CZ, EE, NL, RO, SI, SK, FI,
NO: 2013. (3)EU: EL, HR, LV, LU are not included. (4)BG, EE, SE, NO, US: Complete data in the required breakdown were not available.
(5)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.
B E
B G
C Z
D K
D EEE I E
ES
F R
I T
C Y
L T
H U
MT
N L
A T
PL
PT
R O
SI
SK
F I
SE
U K
EU (3)
N O
U S
J P
K R
-1 6
-1 2
-8
-4
0
4
8
1 2
1 6
2 0
2 4
2 8
3 2
0 4 8 1 2 1 6 2 0
B ER D i n te n s i ty o f m e d i u m-h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g
- c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 2 0 0 7-2 0 1 2 (1)
B ER D i n te n s i ty o f m e d i u m-h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g , 2 0 1 2 (2)
F i g u r e I-5-7 B ER D i n te n s i ty o f m e d i u m-h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g , 2 0 1 2 a n d c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th ,
2 0 0 7-2 0 1 2
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)JP: 2007-2009; BE, AT, US, KR: 2007-2011; CZ, EE, RO, SI, NO: 2007-2013; CY, LT: 2008-2012; NL, FI: 2008-2013;
IE: 2009-2011; BG, DK, UK: 2009-2012; SK: 2009-2013; MT: 2010-2012. (2)JP: 2009; BE, IE, AT, US, KR: 2011; CZ, EE, NL, RO,
SI, SK, FI, NO: 2013. (3)EU: EL, HR, LV, LU are not included. (4)BG, EE, SE, NO, US: Complete data in the required breakdown
were not available. (5)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.

===== PDF_PAGE 108 =====
106
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The economic crisis might have triggered
structural changes in the EU and the United States
and increased the importance of HT and MHT
sectors in their economies.
In the EU, between 1998 and 2012, among all
HT and MHT sectors only pharmaceutical products
increased their shares in total value added (see
Figure I-5-9)
(30). Electrical equipment, machinery
and equipment, motor vehicles and other
transport equipment, and computer, electronic
(30) The size of the bubble for each sector is determined by the weight
of the sector in the total value added (2012) of all of the sectors
on the graph.
and optical products did not increase their share
in value added but demonstrated increases in
BERD. However, looking at the time period from
2008 to 2012, motor vehicles and pharmaceutical
products increased their shares in total value
added (see Figure I-5-10). It is possible that these
sectors turned out to be more crisis-resistant.
Machinery and equipment, computers, electronic
and optical products, electrical equipment, and
other transport demonstrate increases in BERD
between 2008 and 2012.
 ▶ Figure I-5-8 BERD intensity versus value added in high-tech (HT) and medium-high-tech (MHT)
 manufacturing as % of total value added, 2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes:
(1)JP: 2009; IS, CH, US, KR: 2011; DE, IE, ES, LV, PL, SE, UK, EU: 2012. (2)EU: Croatia is not included. (3)MT, SE, NO, CH, US:
Complete data for value added in the required breakdown were not available. (4)Elements of estimation were involved in the
compilation of the data.
EU (2)
B E
B G
C Z
D K D E
EE
I E
EL
ES
F R
I T
C Y
L V L T
L U
H U
MT
N L
A T
PL
PT
R O
SI
SK
F I SE
U K
I S
N O
C H
U S
J P
K R
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0 5 1 0 1 5 2 0
B ER D i n te n s i ty , 2 0 1 3 (1)
Va l u e a d d e d i n H T p l u s MH T m a n u fa c tu r i n g a s % o f to ta l v a l u e a d d e d , 2 0 1 3 (1)
F i g u r e I-5-8 B ER D i n te n s i ty v e r s u s v a l u e a d d e d i n h i g h-te c h (H T ) a n d
m e d i u m-h i g h-te c h (M H T ) m a n u fa c tu r i n g a s % o f to ta l v a l u e a d d e d , 2 0 1 3
Sci e n ce , R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n Pe rf o rm a n ce o f t h e EU 2 0 1 6
Source: D G R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n - U n i t f o r t h e A n a l y s i s a n d M o n i t o ri n g o f N a t i o n a l R e s e a rch Po l i ci e s
Data: Eu ro s t a t , O EC D
Notes : ( 1 ) JP: 2 0 0 9 ; I S, C H , U S, KR : 2 0 1 1 ; D E, I E, ES, L V , PL , SE, U K, EU : 2 0 1 2 . ( 2 ) EU : C ro a t i a i s n o t i n cl u d e d . ( 3 ) M T , SE, N O ,
C H , U S: C o m p l e t e d a t a f o r v a l u e a d d e d i n t h e re q u i re d b re a kd o w n w e re n o t a v a i l a b l e . ( 4 ) El e m e n t s o f e s t i m a t i o n w e re
i n v o l v e d i n t h e co m p i l a t i o n o f t h e d a t a .
Corr. = 0.623
R2 = 0.388

===== PDF_PAGE 109 =====
107
I-5. Economic and social impacts
 ▶ Figure I-5-9 Evolution of R&D intensity and industrial structure(1) in the EU(2)(3), 1998-2012
 ▶ Figure I-5-10 Evolution of R&D intensity and industrial structure(1) in the EU(2), 2008-2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes:
(1)High-tech and medium-high-tech sectors (NACE Rev. 2 - 2 digit level) are shown in red. (2)EU includes BE, CZ, DE, ES, FR, IT, HU, AT
SI, FI, UK. (3)FR, UK: Product Field classification was used for BERD. (4)Elements of estimation were involved in the complilation of the data.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes:
(1)High-tech and medium-high-tech sectors (NACE Rev. 2 - 2 digit level) are shown in red. (2)EU: Croatia is not included.
(3)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.
El e c tr i c i ty , g a s & w a te r
F o o d p r o d u c ts , b e v e r a g e s &
to b a c c o
Ma c h i n e r y & e q u i p m e n t
Mo to r v e h i c l e s
F a b r i c a te d m e ta l p r o d u c ts
C h e m i c a l s & c h e m i c a l
p r o d u c ts
Ph a r m a c e u ti c a l p r o d u c ts
C o m p u te r , e l e c tr o n i c
& o p ti c a l p r o d u c ts
El e c tr i c a l e q u i p m e n t
R u b b e r & p l a s ti c s
F u r n i tu r e & o th e r
m a n u fa c tu r i n g
R e p a i r & i n s ta l l a ti o n o f
m a c h i n e r y & e q u i p m e n t
B a s i c m e ta l s
O th e r n o n-m e ta l l i c
m i n e r a l p r o d u c ts T e x ti l e s , w e a r i n g
a p p a r e l , l e a t h e r
O th e r tr a n s p o r t e q u i p m e n t
Pa p e r & p a p e r p r o d u c ts
Pr i n ti n g & r e c o r d e d m e d i a
W o o d & c o r k (e x c e p t fu r n i tu r e );
s tr a w & p l a i ti n g m a te r i a l s
C o k e & r e ﬁn e d p e tr o l e u m
p r o d u c ts
-1 0
-6
-2
2
6
1 0
1 4
1 8
-8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4
B ER D i n te n s i ty - c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 2
Sh a r e o f v a l u e a d d e d i n to ta l v a l u e a d d e d - c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 2
F i g u r e I-5-1 0 Ev o l u ti o n o f R & D i n te n s i ty a n d i n d u s tr i a l s tr u c tu r e(1)i n th e EU(2), 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 2
Sci e n ce , R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n Pe rf o rm a n ce o f t h e EU 2 0 1 6
So u rce : D G R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n - U n i t f o r t h e A n a l y s i s a n d M o n i t o ri n g o f N a t i o n a l R e s e a rch Po l i ci e s
D a t a : Eu ro s t a t , O EC D
N o t e s: ( 1 )H i g h -t e ch a n d m e d i u m -h i g h -t e ch s e ct o rs (N A C E R e v . 2 - 2 d i g i t l e v e l ) a re s h o w n i n re d . ( 2 )EU : C ro a t i a i s n o t i n cl u d e d . ( 3 )El e m e n t s o f e s t i m a t i o n
w e re i n v o l v e d i n t h e co m p i l a t i o n o f t h e d a t a .
C o n s tr u c ti o n
C o n s tr u c ti o n
El e c tr i c i ty , g a s & w a te rMo to r v e h i c l e s & o th e r
tr a n s p o r t e q u i p m e n t
F o o d p r o d u c ts , b e v e r a g e s &
to b a c c o
Ma c h i n e r y & e q u i p m e n t
F a b r i c a te d m e ta l p r o d u c ts
F u r n i tu r e & o th e r
m a n u fa c tu r i n g & r e p a i r &
i n s ta l l a ti o n o f m a c h i n e r y &
e q u i p m e n t
C h e m i c a l s & c h e m i c a l
p r o d u c ts
El e c tr i c a l e q u i p m e n t
C o m p u te r e l e c tr o n i c &
o p ti c a l p r o d u c ts
Ph a r m a c e u ti c a l p r o d u c ts
R u b b e r & p l a s ti c s
B a s i c m e ta l s
O th e r n o n-m e ta l l i c m i n e r a l
p r o d u c ts
T e x ti l e s , w e a r i n g a p p a r e l ,
l e a th e r
Pa p e r & p a p e r p r o d u c ts
Pr i n ti n g & r e c o r d e d m e d i a
W o o d & c o r k (e x c e p t
fu r n i tu r e ); s tr a w & p l a i ti n g
m a te r i a l s
C o k e & r e ﬁn e d p e tr o l e u m
p r o d u c ts
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
1 0
-3-6 0 3
B ER D i n te n s i ty - c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 1 9 9 8-2 0 1 2
Sh a r e o f v a l u e a d d e d i n to ta l v a l u e a d d e d - c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 1 9 9 8-2 0 1 2
F i g u r e I-5-9 Ev o l u ti o n o f R & D i n te n s i ty a n d i n d u s tr i a l s tr u c tu r e(1) i n th e EU(2) (3), 1 9 9 8-2 0 1 2
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)High-tech and medium-high-tech sectors (NACE Rev. 2 - 2 digit level) are shown in red. (2)EU includes BE, CZ, DE, ES, FR, IT, HU, AT SI, FI, UK. (3)FR,
UK: Product Field classification was used for BERD. (4)Elements of estimation were involved in the complilation of the data.

===== PDF_PAGE 110 =====
108
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
In the US, between 1995 and 2011, only
pharmaceutical products demonstrate increases
in value added, as well as in BERD (see
Figure I-5-11) (31). Machinery and equipment
and computers, electronics and optical products
demonstrate increases in BERD. For the time
period from 2008-2011, pharmaceuticals, motor
(31) The size of the bubble for each sector is determined by the weight
of the sector in the total value added (2011) of all of the sectors
on the graph.
vehicles, computers, and electronic and optical
products demonstrate increases in their shares,
but have not been able to increase BERD intensity
at the same time (see Figure I-5-12). Electrical
equipment and machinery and equipment show
increases in BERD and decreases or stagnation
in value added.
 ▶ Figure I-5-11 Evolution of R&D intensity and industrial structure(1) in the United States, 1995-2011
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Notes:
(1)‘Chemicals and chemical products’, ‘Pharmaceutical products’: 1995-2009; ‘Construction’: 1996-2011. (2)High-tech and
medium-high-tech sectors(NACE Rev. 2 - 2 digit level) are shown in red. (3)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation
of the data.
C o n s tr u c ti o n
El e c tr i c i ty , g a s & w a te r
C o m p u te r , e l e c tr o n i c &
o p ti c a l p r o d u c ts
F o o d p r o d u c ts , b e v e r a g e s &
to b a c c o
Mo to r v e h i c l e s & o th e r
tr a n s p o r t e q u i p m e n t
C o k e & r e ﬁn e d p e tr o l e u m
p r o d u c tsC h e m i c a l & c h e m i c a l
p r o d u c ts
Ma c h i n e r y & e q u i p m e n t
F a b r i c a te d m e ta l p r o d u c ts
W o o d , p a p e r , p r i n ti n g &
r e p r o d u c ti o n o f r e c o r d e d
m e d i a
F u r n i tu r e , o th e r
m a n u fa c tu r i n g & r e p a i r &
i n s ta l l a ti o n o f m a c h i n e r y &
e q u i p m e n t
Ph a r m a c e u ti c a l p r o d u c ts
R u b b e r & p l a s ti c s
B a s i c m e ta l s
El e c tr i c a l e q u i p m e n t
O th e r n o n-m e ta l l i c m i n e r a l
p r o d u c ts
T e x ti l e s , w e a r i n g
a p p a r e l , l e a th e r
- 1 4
- 1 0
- 6
- 2
2
6
- 8 - 6 - 4 - 2 0 2 4 6 8
Sh a r e o f v a l u e a d d e d i n to ta l v a l u e a d d e d - c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 1 9 9 5-2 0 1 1
(1)
F i g u r e I-5-1 1 Ev o l u ti o n o f R & D i n te n s i ty a n d i n d u s tr i a l s tr u c tu r e(1)i n th e U n i te d Sta te s , 1 9 9 5-2 0 1 1
Sci e n ce , R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n Pe rf o rm a n ce o f t h e EU 2 0 1 6
So u rce : D G R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n - U n i t f o r t h e A n a l y s i s a n d M o n i t o ri n g o f N a t i o n a l R e s e a rch Po l i ci e s
D a t a : O EC D
N o t e s : ( 1 )' C h e m i ca l s a n d ch e m i ca l p ro d u ct s ' , ' Ph a rm a ce u t i ca l p ro d u ct s ' : 1 9 9 5 -2 0 0 9 ; ' C o n s t ru ct i o n ' : 1 9 9 6 -2 0 1 1 . ( 2 )H i g h -t e ch a n d m e d i u m -h i g h -t e ch s e ct o rs
(N A C E R e v . 2 - 2 d i g i t l e v e l ) a re s h o w n i n re d . ( 3 )El e m e n t s o f e s t i m a t i o n w e re i n v o l v e d i n t h e co m p i l a t i o n o f t h e d a t a .

B ER D I n te n s i ty - c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 1 9 9 5-2 0 1 1 (1)

===== PDF_PAGE 111 =====
109
I-5. Economic and social impacts
Value added in Knowledge-Intensive Services
(KIS) as percentage of total value added in
the EU is lower than in the US. In the time
period from 1995-2013, it has grown at the
same pace as in the US. However, in more
recent years (2007-2013) it has been growing
at a lower rate.
Overall, value added in KIS in the EU increased
between 2007 and 2013. It is the highest in
Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands and Ireland.
The strongest growth rates can be seen in Malta
and Romania (1995-2013) and Cyprus and
Ireland (2007-2013), (see Figures I-5-13 and
I-5-14).
 ▶ Figure I-5-12 Evolution of R&D intensity and industrial structure(1) in the United States, 2008-2011
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Notes: (1)High-tech and medium-high-tech sectors (NACE Rev. 2 - 2 digit level) are shown in red. (2)Elements of estimation were involved
in the compilation of the data.
El e c tr i c i ty , g a s & w a te r
C o m p u te r , e l e c tr o n i c &
o p ti c a l p r o d u c ts
F o o d p r o d u c ts , b e v e r a g e s &
to b a c c o
C o k e & r e ﬁn e d p e tr o l e u m
p r o d u c ts
Ma c h i n e r y & e q u i p m e n t
C h e m i c a l & c h e m i c a l
p r o d u c ts
F a b r i c a te d m e ta l p r o d u c ts
Ph a r m a c e u ti c a l p r o d u c ts
F u r n i tu r e & o th e r
m a n u fa c tu r i n g
O th e r tr a n s p o r t e q u i p m e n t
Mo to r v e h i c l e s
R u b b e r & p l a s ti c p r o d u c ts
Pa p e r & p a p e r p r o d u c ts
B a s i c m e ta l s
El e c tr i c a l e q u i p m e n t
O th e r n o n-m e ta l l i c m i n e r a l
p r o d u c ts
Pr i n ti n g & r e c o r d e d m e d i a
T e x ti l e s , w e a r i n g a p p a r e l ,
l e a th e r
W o o d & c o r k (e x c e p t
fu r n i tu r e ); s tr a w & p l a i ti n g
m a te r i a l s
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
-30
-20
-10
-1 0 -5 0 5 1 0
B ER D I n te n s i ty - c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 2 0 0 8- 2011
Sh a r e o f v a l u e a d d e d i n to ta l v a l u e a d d e d - c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 1
F i g u r e I-5-1 2 Ev o l u ti o n o f R & D i n te n s i ty a n d i n d u s tr i a l s tr u c tu r e(1)i n th e U n i te d Sta te s , 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 1
Sci e n ce , R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n P e rf o rm a n ce o f t h e EU 2 0 1 6
So u rce : D G R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n - U n i t f o r t h e A n a l y s i s a n d M o n i t o ri n g o f N a t i o n a l R e s e a rch Po l i ci e s
D a t a : O EC D
N o t e s: ( 1 )H i g h -t e ch a n d m e d i u m -h i g h -t e ch s e ct o rs (N A C E R e v . 2 - 2 d i g i t l e v e l ) a re s h o w n i n re d . ( 2 )El e m e n t s o f e s t i m a t i o n w e re i n v o l v e d i n t h e co m p i l a t i o n
o f t h e d a t a .
C o n s tr u c ti o n

===== PDF_PAGE 112 =====
110
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
 ▶ Figure I-5-13 Value added in knowledge-intensive services (KIS) as % of total value added, 2013 and
 compound annual growth, 1995-2013
 ▶ Figure I-5-14 Value added in knowledge-intensive services (KIS) as % of total value added, 2013 and
 compound annual growth, 2007-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes: (1)US, KR: 1995-2011; BE, DE, ES, IT, SE: 1995-2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 1995-2014; JP: 1996-2009; CH: 1997-2011;
UK, EU: 1997-2012; IS: 1997-2013; LV: 2000-2012; BG, EE, LU: 2000-2013; PL: 2003-2012; LT: 2005-2013. (2)JP: 2009; CH, US,
KR: 2011; DE, ES, LV, PL, SE, UK, EU: 2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 2014. (3)EU: BG, EE, HR, LV, LT, LU, PL are not included.
(4)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Notes:
(1)JP: 2007-2009; CH, US, KR: 2007-2011; BE, DE, ES, IT, LV, PL, SE, UK, EU: 2007- 2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 2007-2014.
(2)JP: 2009; CH, US, KR: 2011; BE, DE, ES, IT, LV, PL, SE, UK, EU: 2012; CZ, MT, NL, AT, FI, NO: 2014. (3)EU: Croatia is not included.
(4)Elements of estimation were involved in the compilation of the data.
EU (3)
B E
B G
C Z D K
D EEE
I E
EL
ES
F R
I T
C Y
L V
L T
L U
H U
MT
N L
A T
PL
PT
R O
SISK
F I
SE U KI S
N O
C H
U S
J P
K R
2 0 2 5 3 0 3 5 4 0 4 5 5 0 5 5 6 0
Va l u e a d d e d i n k n o w l e d g e-i n te n s i v e s e r v i c e s (K I S) a s % o f to ta l
v a l u e a d d e d - c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 1995-2 0 1 3 (1)
Va l u e a d d e d i n k n o w l e d g e-i n te n s i v e s e r v i c e s (K I S) a s % o f to ta l v a l u e a d d e d , 2 0 1 3 (2)
F i g u r e I-5-1 3 Va l u e a d d e d i n k n o w l e d g e-i n te n s i v e s e r v i c e s (K I S) a s % o f to ta l v a l u e a d d e d , 2 0 1 3
a n d c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th , 1 9 9 5-2 0 1 3
Sci e n ce , R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n Pe rf o rm a n ce o f t h e EU 2 0 1 6
So u rce : D G R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n - U n i t f o r t h e A n a l y s i s a n d M o n i t o ri n g o f N a t i o n a l R e s e a rch Po l i ci e s
D a t a : Eu ro s t a t , O EC D
N o t e s: ( 1 )U S, KR : 1 9 9 5 -2 0 1 1 ; BE, D E, ES, I T , SE: 1 9 9 5 -2 0 1 2 ; C Z , M T , N L , A T , F I , N O : 1 9 9 5 -2 0 1 4 ; JP: 1 9 9 6 -2 0 0 9 ; C H : 1 9 9 7 -2 0 1 1 ;
U K, EU : 1 9 9 7 -2 0 1 2 ; I S: 1 9 9 7 -2 0 1 3 ; L V : 2 0 0 0 -2 0 1 2 ; BG , EE, L U : 2 0 0 0 -2 0 1 3 ; PL : 2 0 0 3 -2 0 1 2 ; L T : 2 0 0 5 -2 0 1 3 . ( 2 )JP: 2 0 0 9 ; C H , U S,
KR : 2 0 1 1 ; D E, ES, L V , PL , SE, U K, EU : 2 0 1 2 ; C Z , M T , N L , A T , F I , N O : 2 0 1 4 . ( 3 )EU : BG , EE, H R , L V , L T , L U , PL a re n o t i n cl u d e d .
( 4 )El e m e n t s o f e s t i m a t i o n w e re i n v o l v e d i n t h e co m p i l a t i o n o f t h e d a t a .
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Va l u e a d d e d i n k n o w l e d g e-i n te n s i v e s e r v i c e s (K I S) a s % o f to ta l
v a l u e a d d e d - c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th (% ), 2007-2 0 1 3 (1)
Va l u e a d d e d i n k n o w l e d g e-i n te n s i v e s e r v i c e s (K I S) a s % o f to ta l v a l u e a d d e d , 2 0 1 3 (2)
EU (3)
B EB G
C Z
D K
D E
EE
I E
EL
ES
F R
I T
C Y
L V
L T
L U
H U
MT
N L
A T
PL
PT
R O
SI
SK
F I
SE
U K
I S
N O
C H
U S
J P
K R
2 0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
2 5 3 0 3 5 4 0 4 5 5 0 5 5 6 0
F i g u r e I-5-1 4 Va l u e a d d e d i n k n o w l e d g e-i n te n s i v e s e r v i c e s (K I S) a s % o f to ta l v a l u e a d d e d , 2 0 1 3
a n d c o m p o u n d a n n u a l g r o w th , 2 0 0 7-2 0 1 3
Sci e n ce , R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n Pe rf o rm a n ce o f t h e EU 2 0 1 6
So u rce : D G R e s e a rch a n d I n n o v a t i o n - U n i t f o r t h e A n a l y s i s a n d M o n i t o ri n g o f N a t i o n a l R e s e a rch Po l i ci e s
D a t a : Eu ro s t a t , O EC D
N o t e s: ( 1 )JP: 2 0 0 7 -2 0 0 9 ; C H , U S, KR : 2 0 0 7 -2 0 1 1 ; BE, D E, ES, I T , L V , PL , SE, U K, EU : 2 0 0 7 - 2 0 1 2 ; C Z , M T , N L , A T , F I , N O : 2 0 0 7 -2 0 1 4 .( 2 )JP: 2 0 0 9 ; C H , U S, KR : 2 0 1 1 ; BE, D E, ES, I T , L V , PL , SE, U K, EU : 2 0 1 2 ; C Z , M T , N L , A T , F I , N O : 2 0 1 4 . ( 3 )EU : C ro a t i a i s n o t i n cl u d e d .( 4 )El e m e n t s o f e s t i m a t i o n w e re i n v o l v e d i n t h e co m p i l a t i o n o f t h e d a t a .

===== PDF_PAGE 113 =====
111
I-5. Economic and social impacts
The EU is lagging far behind the US in HT sectors
such as ICT but also lags in pharmaceuticals
and biotech, while being strongly specialised
in MHT sectors such as automobiles and parts.
The sectoral composition of R&D-intensive
enterprises based on data from the EU Industrial
R&D Scoreboard confirms the finding that
R&D-intensive enterprises in the EU are more
specialised in MHT sectors, while R&D-intensive
enterprises in the US are more specialised in
HT sectors. This specialisation has been reinforced
between 2005 and 2013. R&D investments in
the HT sectors in the EU have decreased from
41% to 39% between 2005 and 2013 while the
same share has increased from 69% to 74% in
the US (see Figure I-5-15). The EU is lagging far
behind the US in ICT-related sectors, but also in
pharmaceuticals and biotech, while the share of
aerospace and defence is higher in the EU than
in the US.
The share of R&D investments in MHT sectors in
the EU remained stable at 46% between 2005
and 2013 while it decreased from 27% to 21%
in the US. The EU shows a strong specialisation in
automobiles and parts, and its share has increased
slightly, while in the US the share of automobiles
and parts decreased. To a lesser degree, the EU
also shows some specialisation in electronics and
electrical equipment, compared to the US.
 ▶ Figure I-5-15 Sectoral composition of R&D intensive enterprises in the EU and the United States, 2005 and 2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: EU Industrial R&D Scoreboard, 2014
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: EU Industrial R&D Scoreboard, 2014

I C T r e l a te d
O th e r h i g h-te c h
A u to m o b i l e s & p a r ts
C h e m i c a l s
O th e r
m e d i u m-
h i g h-te c h
E U 2 0 1 3
3 9 %
9 %
6 %
4 6 %
I C T r e l a te d
C h e m i c a l s
O th e r
m e d i u m -
h i g h - te c h
U n i t e d S t a t e s 2 0 1 3
4 % 1 %
7 4 %
2 1 %
I C T r e l a te d
O th e r h i g h-te c h
El e c tr o n i c &
e l e c tr i c a l
e q u i p m e n t
C h e m i c a l s
O th e r
m e d i u m-h i g h-
te c h
O th e r
m e d i u m-h i g h-
te c h
E U 2 0 0 5
6 %
7 %
4 1 %
4 6 %
Ph a r m a . &
b i o te c h .
Ph a r m a . &
b i o te c h .
I C T r e l a te d
A e r o s p a c e
& d e fe n c e
A e r o s p a c e
& d e fe n c e O th e r
h i g h-te c h
El e c tr o n i c &
e l e c tr i c a l
e q u i p m e n t
C h e m i c a l s
U n i t e d S t a t e s 2 0 0 5
3 % 1 %
6 9%
2 7 %
Ph a r m a . &
b i o te c h .
Ph a r m a . &
b i o te c h .
El e c tr o n i c &
e l e c tr i c a l
e q u i p m e n t
El e c tr o n i c &
e l e c tr i c a l
e q u i p m e n t
A u to m o b i l e s
& p a r ts
A u to m o b i l e s
& p a r ts
A u to m o b i l e s
& p a r ts
O th e r
h i g h-te c hA e r o s p a c e
& d e fe n c e A e r o s p a c e
& d e fe n c e
High-tech Medium-high-tech Medium-low-tech Low-tech

===== PDF_PAGE 114 =====
112
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
REFERENCES
Andrews D, Criscuolo C (2013). Knowledge-based
capital, innovation and resource allocation, OECD
Economics Department Working Papers No 146.
Branstetter, Lee G., Francisco Lima, Lowell J. Taylor
and Ana Venâncio. (2013). ‘Do Entry Regulations
Deter Entrepreneurship and Job Creation? Evidence
from Recent Reforms in Portugal.’ The Economic
Journal (July 16). http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1111/ecoj.12044/abstract
Canton E, Grilo I, Monteagudo J, Pierini F and
Turrini A (2014): ‘The role of structural reform for
Adjustment and Growth’ ECFIN Economic Briefs,
European Commission, Brussels
ECB (2014). Structural reforms: learning the right
lessons from the crisis, Economic conference, Riga
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2014/
html/sp141017.en.html
European Commission (2015): ‘European Economic
Forecast. Spring 2015’, European Economy 2/201,
Luxembourg
European Investment Bank (2014): ‘Investment
Plan for Europe. Factsheet 1. Why does the EU need
an Investment Plan?’, European Investment Bank,
Luxembourg, 2014
Jacques Pelkmans and Andrea Renda (2014) .
Does EU regulation hinder or stimulate innovation.
http://www.ceps.eu/system/files/No%2096%20
EU%20Legislation%20and%20Innovation.pdf
Koske I. et al. (2015). The 2013 update of the
OECD’s database on product market regulation:
Policy insights for OECD and non-OECD countries.
OECD Economics Department Working Papers,
No 1200, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1787/5js3f5d3n2vl-en
OECD 2015: ‘OECD Innovation Strategy 2015: An
agenda for policy action’, OECD, Paris
OECD (2013). OECD Employment Outlook 2013.
Schwab K and Xala-i-Martin, X (2014): ‘The
Global Competitiveness Report, 2015’. The World
Economic Forum, Cologny-Geneva
Veugelers R and Cincera M (2010): ‘Europe’s
missing yollies’, Bruegel Policy Briefing, Brussels
World Bank (2014). Doing Business 2015. Going
Beyond Efficiency. Comparing Business Regulations
for domestic firms in 189 Economies. A World Bank
Group Flagship Report.
World Bank (2013). Doing Business 2014:
Understanding Regulations for Small and Medium-
Size Enterprises.
World Economic Forum (2014). Global
Competitiveness Report.

===== PDF_PAGE 115 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 116 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 117 =====
Part II
In-depth analysis of
key R&I policy issues

===== PDF_PAGE 118 =====
116
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
TABLE OF CONTENTS
II. IN-DEPTH ANALYSIS OF KEY R&I POLICY ISSUES
1. The role of public research in economic development 119
1.1 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................................................... 119
1.2 Public R&D: Role, effects and benefits ...................................................................................................................120
1.2.1 Challenges related to measuring the returns from R&D investments and the specificity
of public R&D ...................................................................................................................................................................................120
1.2.2 Private and social returns to R&D ..........................................................................................................................................121
1.2.3 Explaining the lower rates of return to public R&D .......................................................................................................121
1.2.4 Types of benefits of public R&D: Beyond econometric approaches ....................................................................122
1.3 Public R&D in the context of the EU28 ..................................................................................................................123
1.3.1 Trends in public and private R&D ...........................................................................................................................................124
1.3.2 Business funding of public R&D .............................................................................................................................................126
1.4 Role of public research in technology upgrading ..............................................................................................128
1.5 Industry — Public R&D links in the EU ...................................................................................................................131
1.6 Conclusions: How to harness the potential of public R&D to support economic development .....136
2. Public research and innovation policies and investment and their evolutions
since the crisis 140
2.1 Background ........................................................................................................................................................................... 140
2.2 Evolution of public investments in R&I over the crisis period .....................................................................143
2.3 New orientations for R&D policies and structural reforms of R&I systems in the wake
of the crisis ...........................................................................................................................................................................155
2.4 Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................................................159
3. Publishing and perishing — bibliometric output profiles of individual
authors worldwide 162
3.1 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................................................... 162
3.2 Overall output and citation impact of individual authors .............................................................................162
3.3 Overall output and citation impact of individual authors by country .....................................................166
3.4 What is the overlap between authors and researchers counted in international statistics?.......174
3.5 Conclusions ..........................................................................................................................................................................176
4. The role of well-designed framework conditions for business investment in R&I 178
4.1 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................................................... 178
4.2 Why do well designed framework policies allow productive and innovative firms to thrive? ....179
4.3 Business environment for R&I: anticompetitive market regulations and red tape barriers have
pervasive effects ...............................................................................................................................................................181
4.3.1 Business dynamics: empirical evidence ..............................................................................................................................182
4.3.2 Business environment for R&I: Regulation in product and labour markets and red tape barriers ........185
4.3.3 Business environment for R&I: Judicial and Insolvency frameworks ...................................................................192
4.3.4 Business environment for R&I: access to finance ..........................................................................................................195
4.4 The low EU adoption of ICT in EU services: a possible consequence of stricter market
regulation and lower reallocation efficiency? .....................................................................................................196
4.5 Conclusions ..........................................................................................................................................................................197

===== PDF_PAGE 119 =====
117
II. In-depth analysis of key R&I policy issues
5. International knowledge flows 203
5.1 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................................................... 203
5.2 International knowledge flows through trade .....................................................................................................204
5.3 International research and technological collaboration .................................................................................208
5.3.1 Trends ...................................................................................................................................................................................................209
5.3.2 Impact of international research collaboration — Is the increasing internationalisation of research
collaboration positive or negative for Europe? ................................................................................................................213
5.4 International mobility of researchers ......................................................................................................................214
5.4.1 Main trends — Is the international mobility increasing or decreasing?
Is Europe gaining or losing talent? ........................................................................................................................................214
5.4.2 Is the international mobility of researchers positive or negative for Europe? ................................................216
5.5 R&D foreign direct investments .................................................................................................................................217
5.5.1 General trend — Is Europe gaining or losing importance in the global flows of cross border R&D? ...217
5.5.2 Impact — Are the new trends positive or negative for Europe? ............................................................................220
5.6 Conclusions ..........................................................................................................................................................................221
6. Do research and other sources of innovation drive productivity gains
in European Top R&D Investors? 227
6.1 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................................................... 227
6.2 R&D Investments And Firm’s Productivity ............................................................................................................228
6.2.1 The determinants of Productivity and Efficiency ..........................................................................................................228
6.2.2 Evidence from corporate top R&D investors ...................................................................................................................230
6.2.2.1 Description of the Data ...........................................................................................................................................................230
6.2.2.2 Analyses and Results ...............................................................................................................................................................234
6.2.2.3 Additional Evidence from European R&D investors ..................................................................................................236
6.3 Other Factors Influencing the R&D-Productivity Link ......................................................................................238
6.3.1 The impact of multinationality and industrial diversification on the R&D/productivity link .....................238
6.3.2 Cooperation, R&D and productivity .......................................................................................................................................240
6.3.3 Beyond R&D: investment in other intangible assets and productivity ................................................................240
6.3.4 Conclusions: How To Increase The Gains From Firm’s R&D Investments In Europe? ...................................242
7. High growth firms in Europe 247
7.1 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................................................... 247
7.2 The dynamics of new high growth firms: What do we know?.....................................................................247
7.3 High growth firms in Europe: country-specific determinants ......................................................................251
7.3.1 European high growth firms and the economic crisis ..................................................................................................251
7.4 High growth firms in Europe: start-up dynamics, competitiveness and R&I
at the sectorial level ........................................................................................................................................................258
7.4.1 International competitiveness and HGF shares ..............................................................................................................260
7.4.2 Indicators of innovation activities and HGF shares .......................................................................................................262
7.5 Research and innovation behaviour of high growth firms ............................................................................263
7.6 Research and innovation policies for new HGFs ................................................................................................268
7.6.1 Framework conditions are of central importance…. ......................................................................................................268
7.6.2 But also the creation of opportunities for HGFs. ............................................................................................................268
7.6.3 And what about R&I policies? ..................................................................................................................................................269
7.7 Appendix ................................................................................................................................................................................ 269

===== PDF_PAGE 120 =====
118
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation 276
8.1 Introduction: background and policy context .......................................................................................................276
8.2 The role of skills for innovation ..................................................................................................................................276
8.2.1 Skills development in Europe ...................................................................................................................................................277
8.2.2 Skills and innovation at the country level ..........................................................................................................................284
8.2.2.1 Generic skills and innovation ................................................................................................................................................284
8.2.2.2 Field-specific skills and innovation ....................................................................................................................................285
8.2.2.3 Skills usage and innovation...................................................................................................................................................286
8.2.3 Skills as drivers of innovation and innovation success ...............................................................................................293
8.3 Effects of innovation on employment growth ....................................................................................................298
8.3.1 Employment trends in sectors differing in technology intensity .............................................................................298
8.3.2 Potential transmission channels of product, process and organisational innovation ..................................301
8.3.3 Evidence on employment effects of innovation .............................................................................................................303
8.4 Innovations as source for skill upgrading and job polarisation in Europe .............................................306
8.4.1 Evidence on skill upgrading and job polarisation in Europe ......................................................................................306
8.4.2 Skills Development Outlook ......................................................................................................................................................309
8.5 Conclusions ..........................................................................................................................................................................313

===== PDF_PAGE 121 =====
119
II-1. The role of public research in economic development
1. The role of public research in economic development
Slavo Radosevic
University College London
There is considerable variation in the level of technological development across the EU’s
Member States, which in turn means that the role of research and development (R&D)
in furthering their development differs significantly depending on the country’s position
in relation to the technology frontier. This calls for a differentiated understanding of the
drivers of technological upgrading and, thus, for a differentiated understanding of the role
of R&D in this process. In this context, we explore in more detail the role of public R&D, a
topic that has not been subject to systematic review.
We start with a review of the literature on the effects of public R&D on productivity
and growth. We summarise the main stylised facts and show that our understanding
of the benefits of public R&D is limited, and that a broader approach is needed which
takes account of a wider range of benefits from public R&D. Specifically, we explore
these issues in the context of Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) and Southern Europe
as two EU ‘catching-up’ regions. We show that the links between science and industry
in these regions are stronger than is commonly assumed, but that we need a better
understanding of the nature of these links and their intensity.
1.1 Introduction
Research and technological development, both
public and private, are important long-term drivers
of growth and economic development. Historical
evidence shows that public research, in interaction
with firms, constitutes one of the main drivers of
catch-up processes (Mazzoleni and Nelson, 2007)
and that technology development and innovation
are the outcomes of intensive interaction between
market actors and public sources of knowledge
(Mazzucato, 2011).
However, the relationship between public and
private R&D changes in the course of economic
development. As national income increases,
the share of R&D conducted and funded by the
business sector also increases. During this process,
the role of public R&D changes. From initially
facilitating the absorptive capacity of domestic
industry and other sectors (agriculture, health,
defence and education), public R&D increasingly
contributes to a further technology upgrading of
the Business Enterprise Sector (BES).
The benefits of public R&D are not always
obvious to all policy actors. As the level of public
R&D is the outcome of a political process with
arguments centring on the benefits of public
R&D, which includes both measurable economic
benefits to the business sector and difficult-to-
measure benefits such as quality of life, health,
security, etc., these benefits need to be well
known and well understood.
In this chapter, we explore the role of public R&D
from a long-term growth perspective, with special
reference to the less developed EU countries and
regions. For countries that operate close to, or
at, the technology frontier and where growth is
based on R&D and innovation, the role of public
R&D in reducing technological uncertainties and
building a body of knowledge to support future
growth seems obvious. However, in the case of
economies that are behind the technology frontier
and where business sector demand for public R&D
is weaker, the role of public R&D is not always
obvious or well understood. This is a particularly
important policy issue for the CEE and Southern
EU economies, which are major recipients of
EU Structural Funds directed mostly towards
supporting R&D and innovation activities.
The special focus on the less developed EU
countries is justified by the fact that these
countries need to address specific challenges
in their catch up processes. Their business
sectors are typically of low R&D intensity, and

===== PDF_PAGE 122 =====
120
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and technology
imports play an important Part In their technology
upgrading, which calls for a different role for
public R&D.
In Section 2, we provide a brief review of the
literature on the effects and benefits of public
R&D. We summarise the major stylised facts that
emerge from this research and discuss its policy
relevance. Section 3 discusses the role of public
R&D in the EU with special reference to the CEE
and South EU economies. We highlight similarities
and differences in public and private R&D across
three EU ‘mega regions’: EU South (Greece, Cyprus,
Malta, Portugal, Spain and Italy), EU CEE (‘new’
Member States from CEE), and the ‘EU North’ (the
remaining EU12 developed economies).
1.2 Public R&D: Role, effects and
benefits
Historical evidence shows that catching-up, to
a large extent, depends on an effective public
research and higher education system (Mazzoleni
and Nelson, 2007). The effects of R&D have
been explored in depth by measuring its benefits
based on rates of return or output elasticities
with respect to R&D as inputs. We provide a brief
review of this literature, focusing in particular on
the benefits derived from public R&D.
1.2.1 Challenges related to measuring
the returns from R&D investments
and the specificity of public R&D
Measuring the returns to public R&D investment
poses a number of particular challenges. First,
R&D activities lead to intangible knowledge
and ideas, which are known to be non-rivalrous
and non-excludable. For private actors, patent
protection is aimed at delaying free use or
imitation, thus enabling innovators to capture
a fair share of the rents from their inventions.
Publicly funded research, on the other hand,
is aimed at stimulating the generation of
knowledge which becomes a public good that is
shared widely.
Second, public R&D investments in health, quality
of life, environment, social protection, defence,
etc., are aimed at broader socioeconomic impacts
that do not increase GDP directly. This means
that such R&D investments should be treated in
a different way even though they do contribute to
providing a basis for a range of private activities
in these areas (Sveikauskas 2007).
Third, the benefits from R&D are not limited to the
original investors, but also accrue for competitors,
other firms, suppliers, customers and to society
at large. For example, private returns to the firms
that initiated research may be negative, but other
firms can build on these results which might lead
to R&D with high social returns.
A conventional argument for public investment
in R&D and, especially, public support for private
R&D, is based on the assumption of poor
appropriability from private investment in R&D.
It is assumed that the difficulty for firms to
appropriate all the benefits of their R&D activities
is the main cause of private underinvestment in
R&D, which, in turn, justifies public R&D or public
support for private R&D.
Measuring the rates of return from R&D is
based on a production function logic which
treats R&D as an input along with capital and
labour. This approach has the advantage that it
can be used to generate quantitative estimates
of how much R&D contributes to growth.
Research on measuring the private returns to
R&D has received impetus with the availability
of large datasets and panel data econometrics
which address the issues of simultaneity and
unobservable factors that are inherent in such
data. The most recent comprehensive survey was
carried out by Hall et al. (2010).
In a nutshell, while it is clear that public R&D
plays an important role in economic growth
and convergence, its effects on growth are not
easy to demonstrate. Estimates of the effects
of public R&D are rather scarce, and much less
reliable than those related to private R&D.

===== PDF_PAGE 123 =====
121
II-1. The role of public research in economic development
1.2.2 Private and social returns to R&D
Hall et al. (2010) conclude that, due to the
stochastic nature of R&D outcomes, there is no
single private ‘rate of return’. Nevertheless, there
is agreement that estimates of the private and
social rates of return to privately funded R&D
are large and positive for many countries, falling
mostly in the range of (10%) 20% to (30%) 50%
(Hall et al., 2010; Nadiri, 1993).
The social returns to R&D are large and exceed
the private returns by a substantial margin
(Griliches, 1995): 50% to 100%. Sveikauskas
(2007) provides a review of the evidence on rates
of return and suggests that the private return
to R&D is around 25%, while the social return
is 65%. The social returns are almost always
substantially greater than the private returns and
frequently are unequal among trading partners
and industries. This is confirmed by a recent
meta-survey by Kokko et al. (2015).
At the macro level, an OECD (2004) study
shows that there is a clear positive link between
private sector R&D intensity and growth of per
capita gross domestic product (GDP) in the
OECD economies. However, there is no clear-cut
relationship between public R&D activities and
growth, at least in the short term (OECD, 2004).
The authors explain these results, pointing to
the specificity of public R&D, i.e., important
interactions between public and private R&D as
well as difficult-to-measure benefits from public
R&D (e.g., defence, energy, health and university
research) (OECD, 2004).
Bouis, Duval and Murtin (2011) provide an
update to this work based on a large sample
of 40 countries over a more recent period. The
results of their growth regressions show that
expenditure on R&D has a positive effect on
output per capita, as suggested by previous
studies based on a smaller sample of countries.
However, the estimated coefficient is significantly
lower than in previous studies (0.06 compared to
0.15 in the 1980s and 1990s).
At the country level, Kokko et al. (2015) review
the literature on the growth effects of R&D
investment with special reference to the EU. They
conduct a meta-analysis and conclude that the
growth effects of R&D do not differ between the
US and the EU, which includes high and low R&D
spending countries. However, they show that the
relationship is less significant in all specifications.
They suggest that better utilisation of R&D
investments in the US compared to the EU is due
to lower private sector investment and weaker
public-private sector linkages.
1.2.3 Explaining the lower rates of
return to public R&D
A stylised fact in econometric research on
spillovers is that the rates of return to public
R&D are lower or less significant than in the
case of private R&D (32) (see Griliches, 1986;
Levy and Terleckyj, 1989; Lichtenberg and
Siegel, 1991; Mansfield, 1980; Nadiri and
Mamuneas, 1994 and references cited in Hall
et al. 2010; Sveikauskas, 2007; and Kokko
et al., 2015). However, we should bear in mind
that this stylised fact holds if public R&D
investments are considered to be identical
in nature to private investments, which is a
somewhat dubious assumption.
Apart from this important caveat, the
explanations for the lower rates of public
R&D differ. First, the conventional explanation
is that private firms may be less efficient if
their R&D is based on public funding or if this
funding is used to support ‘far from the market’
research. Second, government R&D may be in
areas that are far from the market (defence) or
operate in a mixed mode such as in the case
of health. Third, the aim of public R&D is rather
to generate indirect and not direct benefits,
by establishing a basis for R&D activities by
firms and public organisations (universities,
hospitals, etc.). Fourth, it is often claimed that
public R&D is directed towards more risky areas
with reduced rates of return. However, when
the research is successful, the returns to basic
(32) There is a dearth of evidence on rates of return or elasticities of
public R&D with respect to growth and productivity, for countries
behind the technology frontier. See the survey by Hall et al.
(2010) and the literature review in this chapter.

===== PDF_PAGE 124 =====
122
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
R&D can be higher than the returns to applied
or developmental research (Griliches, 1986; Link,
1981; Mansfield, 1980). Fifth, there may be
government overinvestment, which can lead to
‘overcrowding’ and lower returns. The EU’s smart
specialisation policy is aimed at avoiding exactly
this kind of problem.
1.2.4 Types of benefits of public R&D:
Beyond econometric approaches
Although econometrics dominates assessments
of the effects of R&D, including public R&D,
the complexity of the relationship between
public R&D and growth demands alternative
approaches. Econometric approaches are based
on a simple production function model of the
R&D system. They assume that R&D inputs and
outputs can be reduced to information. However,
the evidence shows that the links between
publicly funded R&D and industry are more
complex and, to a large extent, indirect. On this
basis, Martin et al. (1996) and Salter and Martin
(2001) (see also Martin and Tang, 2006) develop
a classification of the benefits of public research,
which demonstrates the variety and complexity
of its impacts. Salter and Martin (2001: 520)
distinguish the following types of benefits:
1. Increasing the stock of useful knowledge;
Public R&D increases the stocks of
knowledge available to firms. Publications
represent important sources of learning for
firms in sectors such as pharma, but it is
knowledge, not just information, that is of
most value to firms. Since public research
is far from the market it stimulates and
enables firms to focus on near-to-the-
market research, acting as a complement
rather than a substitute. This requires
familiarity with the most recent published
work, and informal contacts, joint R&D and
networking (Arundel et al., 1995).
2. Training skilled graduates;
Skilled graduates in many industries are seen
as the primary benefit flowing to firms. They
bring complex problem solving skills, new
methodologies and the capacity to perform
R&D. This transfer varies across areas and
is dependent on where key competencies in
specific technology areas reside.
3. Creating new scientific instrumentation
and methodologies;
Instrumentation drives scientific progress
(De Sola Price and Bedini, 1967). The
development of new instrumentation and
methodologies is an important outcome of
public R&D, and is especially significant in
some sectors.
4. Forming networks and stimulating social
interaction;
Industries are social communities, and
effective technology networking in industry
includes academic networks. Links with
academia are important for industries
that are directly dependent on science.
Also, in industries where graduates are
an important source of new knowledge,
networking may be more informal based on
alumni networks. In some sectors, networks
are maintained largely through attendance
at exhibitions and conferences. Martin and
Salter (2001) review the literature on the
localised nature of R&D collaborations,
which are reflections of geographical,
cultural or institutional proximity.
5. Increasing the capacity for scientific and
technological problem-solving;
The problem solving capabilities in the
public R&D sector complement its role of
provider of general scientific knowledge.
This expertise is embodied in individual
contracts and collaborations between
universities, public research organisations
(PROs) and individual firms, and is frequent
in applied R&D areas.
6. Creating new firms.
The creation of new firms through spinoffs
is generally seen as one of the major and
desirable benefits of public R&D. However,
despite the policy hype it would seem to

===== PDF_PAGE 125 =====
123
II-1. The role of public research in economic development
be a less important benefit of public R&D
(Brown and Mason, 2014).
In this section, we have discussed the difficulty of
demonstrating, in an unambiguous quantitative
manner, the benefits of public R&D. This difficulty
is related to the methodological assumptions in
the econometric approaches commonly used,
which are unable to capture the specific features
of R&D, and especially public R&D.
However, the available literature clearly shows
that there is a market failure justifying public
support for R&D. Work on the effects of R&D
shows that the social rates of return on R&D
are much higher than the rates of private R&D
investment, which suggests substantial under-
investment in R&D by the private sector. If we
take the differences in the private and social
rates of return to R&D at face value, then
as Griffith (2000: 11) points out ‘we should
optimally be spending on R&D a share of GDP
two to four times larger than we are currently’.
The significant gap between the private and
social rates of return on R&D is in line with
the market failure model which considers the
reluctance of entrepreneurs to invest in new
knowledge for fear that knowledge will ‘leak
out’ and, thus, not be fully appropriated, to be
a major problem.
1.3 Public R&D in the context of the
EU28
In this section, we explore the trends in and the
role of public R&D and interaction between public
and private R&D in the context of the EU28. The
EU is one the world’s most developed regions.
However, this ignores the substantial differences
in R&D and innovation capacities across the
EU28 countries. For the purposes of this chapter,
three EU28 ‘mega-regions’ will be defined:
• North: Sweden, Finland, Austria, Germany,
Denmark, Belgium, Luxemburg, France,
the Netherlands, Ireland, UK
• South: Italy, Spain, Portugal, Malta, Greece,
Cyprus
• CEEC: Slovenia, Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Lithuania, Slovakia, Poland, Croatia,
Latvia, Bulgaria, Romania
The differences in capacities between these
mega-regions are illustrated in Figure II-1-1,
which shows the differences between the
three EU regions in terms of GERD per capita,
transnational patents and S&T papers, in 2013.
 ▶ Figure II-1-1 Gross domestic expenditure on R&D (GERD), transnational patents and S&T articles
 per inhabitant in the three EU ‘mega-regions’
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, WIPO, World Bank
GERD per inhabitant
PPS€
2013
Transnational Patents
per million population
2012
S&T articles
per million population
2013
 EU - North 723 228 727
 EU - South 203 36 356
 EU - CEE 197 13 249

===== PDF_PAGE 126 =====
124
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
1.3.1 Trends in public and private R&D
The share of GERD funded by national
governments has been continuously declining
across the OECD since the beginning of the
1980s. This is usually ascribed to the ending of
the Cold War and strained budgetary conditions,
but it seems that this trend has a deeper
structural basis. The decline started before
1989 and seems to be unrelated to budgetary
conditions and economic growth. The decline in
the share of government funding started in the
1980s, while at the same time the overall GERD/
GDP share has been rising in most countries. This
is due largely to increased R&D in the business
sector, which accounts for the majority of
expenditure in the OECD countries. However, the
decline in the share of government funded GERD
halted at the turn of century and now appears to
have stabilised.
Figure II-1-3 shows this overall trend for the
OECD countries disaggregated across different
countries and the three EU regions defined
above. In the EU North and US, the decline in
government funded R&D has halted and its share
is gradually increasing again. The trend is similar
in Korea and, after 2008, in Japan. China shows
a continuously declining share of government
funded R&D, but an increasing overall GERD. In
Russia, the role of government funding increased
after 1999. EU CEE and EU South show higher
shares of government funding compared to EU
North, differences that we explore in greater
detail later.
 ▶ Figure II-1-2 R&D intensity and share of GERD funded by government (%) in OECD countries, 1981-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
% share of GERD funded by government
R&D intensity
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
25
30
35
40
45
1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013
R&D intensity (GERD as % of GDP)
Share of GERD funded by government (%)
Figure II-1-2 R&D intensity and % share of GERD funded by government in OECD countries, 1981-2013

===== PDF_PAGE 127 =====
125
II-1. The role of public research in economic development
Next, we look at changes in relative funding
of GERD across the four institutional sectors.
The biggest increases in R&D funding can be
observed in the Business Enterprise Sector in the
EU and other countries. The biggest increases in
higher education funding can be found in North
EU. South EU and CEE EU have invested more
in the higher education than in the government
sector and so the government sector share
continues to be in decline. Korea has increased
its investment per capita in both the government
and higher education sector quite considerably.
 ▶ Figure II-1-3 Share of GERD funded by government (%), 1981-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
EU - CEE
EU - South
48,1
EU - North
Japan
South Korea
Turkey
United States
China
Russian Federation
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013
%
Figure II-1-3 Share of GERD funded by government (%), 1981-2013

===== PDF_PAGE 128 =====
126
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
1.3.2 Business funding of public R&D
The funding of public R&D by the business
sector is one way to measure the intensity
of public-private interactions. The share of
business funding used to support public R&D
points to the importance of external R&D in an
R&I system and the role of PROs and higher
education institutions in company’s innovation
activities. Figures II-1-5 and II-1-6 show that
the share of business sector funding going to
public R&D is slightly higher in EU South and
much higher in EU CEE compared to EU North.
This may be due to weaker business R&D which
relies more on public R&D to compensate for its
own low R&D capabilities.
 ▶ Figure II-1-4 GERD by sector per head of population in PPS€ at 2005 prices and exchange rates -
 difference between 2011 and 1991 in absolute values
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
EU - CEE EU -
North
EU -
South
Turkey Russian
Federa-
tion
United
States
Japan South
Korea
 Business enterprise 75.8 263.1 139.0 36.0 44.2 205.7 231.5 496.6
 Government 16.0 18.9 10.6 9.1 25.8 31.0 8.0 59.6
 Higher Education 36.4 94.5 43.0 26.0 9.2 62.6 -24.2 70.1
 Private non-profit 0.5 0.7 6.3 : 0.2 21.3 -17.3 11.9
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
EU - CEE EU - North EU- South Turkey Russian
Federation
United States Japan South Korea
PPS€ (at 2005 prices and exchange rates)
Figure II-1-4 GERD by sector per head of population in PPS€ at 2005 prices and exchange rates - diﬀerence between 201 1 and 1991 in absolute values
Business enterprise Government Higher Education Private non-proﬁt

===== PDF_PAGE 129 =====
127
II-1. The role of public research in economic development
There are quite substantial differences in reliance on
public R&D between the EU CEE and the EU North.
This is largely due to the strong reliance of two Baltic
States (Lithuania and partly Latvia) on university
R&D and the reliance on PROs in Romania. However,
when looking at median values, EU CEE is still more
reliant on public R&D than the EU North while the
EU South lies somewhere in between (Figure II-1-6).
A higher share of business funding going to public
R&D would be expected in economies with a high
share of large firms with more linkages to public R&D.
In addition, external R&D-industry links are more
developed in more science-intensive sectors such
as semiconductors, computers, communications
equipment, drugs, organic chemicals, plastics,
petroleum refining, pulp and paper (Klevorick et al.,
1995; Cohen et al., 2002). However, these are all
areas where EU CEE and EU South tend not to have
comparative advantages (see Radosevic and Yoruk,
2014). Their economies are dominated by medium
and small sized enterprises and comparatively
smaller shares of large enterprises. So, the higher
relative intensity of public R&D-enterprise sector
links in the EU CEE noted above suggests that the
nature of these links may be different. Demand from
firms for the services of public R&D organisations is
not less intensive in less developed EU economies,
but it is probably different in nature.
 ▶ Figure II-1-5 Share of business enterprise funding of R&D going to public (government and higher education)
 sector R&D, 2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
 ▶ Figure II-1-6 Share of business enterprise funding of R&D going to public sector R&D, 2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Government Higher education Total
Average
 EU - CEE 6.9% 6.9% 13.8%
 EU - South 2.2% 3.6% 5.8%
 EU - North 2.5% 2.1% 4.7%
Median
 EU - CEE 3.1% 3.0% 6.3%
 EU - South 1.3% 2.5% 4.4%
 EU - North 1.4% 1.8% 3.3%
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Lithuania
Latvia Romania Bulgaria Croatia Slovakia Hungary Poland Estonia Slovenia
Czech Republic
Greece Cyprus Spain Italy
Portugal
Malta
Netherlands Luxembourg
Germany
United Kingdom
Belgium Austria Finland France Sweden Denmark Ireland
%
Figure II-1-5 Share of business enterprise funding of R&D going to public (government and higher education) sector R&D, 2012
Government Higher education

===== PDF_PAGE 130 =====
128
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
1.4 Role of public research in technology
upgrading
The latest research on public R&D, in countries
that are catching up, shows that the role of
public R&D can be understood only in relation to
firms’ changing capabilities (Albuquerque et al.,
2015). So, in order to fully understand the role
of public R&D, we need to take account of the
evolution of the capabilities of both local public
R&D (Eun et al., 2006; Liefner and Schiller, 2008)
and of local firms.
In the early stages of catch up what matters
is not only firms and their links to FDI but also
their links with universities and PROs, which are
important for linking the national innovation
system to international flows of science and
technology. For example, Ribeiro et al. (2015,
Table 8.6) show that more than half (64%) of
the institutional citations in US firms’ patents
are to domestic organisations. Domestic sources
account for 39% of institutional citations in
Europe, and 26% in Japan. The pattern is
different for countries that are catching up, e.g.,
in the case of China only 6% of citations were
from domestic sources.
This illustrates the importance of foreign sources
of knowledge for development, and the greater
shift towards domestic sources as countries
upgrade technologically and the importance of
local sources of knowledge increases. Thus, it is
important to assess the quality of the R&D and
innovation infrastructure, which should adjust
over time to the technological upgrading of firms.
Figure II-1-7 presents a subjective assessment of
the quality of R&D and innovation infrastructure
in the EU, which shows big differences among
the three EU regions.
 ▶ Figure II-1-7 Quality of R&D and innovation infrastructure(1) in the EU, 2014-15
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: World Economic Report, Global Competiveness Report Database
Note:
(1)Based on a subjective assessment of the business community and calculated as average quality of education, availability
of scientists and engineers, availability of research and training services, and quality of scientific research institutions.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: World Economic Report, Global Competiveness Report Database
Note:
(1) Based on a subjective assessment of the business community and calculated as average quality
of education, availability of scientists and engineers, availability of research and training services, and
quality of scientiﬁc research institutions.
3.4
3.7 3.7 3.6 3.6 3.5 3.4 3.4 3.3 3.3 3.3
2.9
4.7
5.2
4.8 4.7 4.6 4.5
4.2
5.3
6.0
5.6 5.6 5.5 5.5 5.2 5.2 5.2 5.1 5.0 4.9
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
 EU - CEE Lithuania Estonia
Czech Republic
Slovenia Hungary Poland Latvia Romania Croatia Slovakia Bulgaria
 EU - South
Portugal Cyprus Spain Italy Malta Greece
 EU - North
Finland Belgium
Netherlands
United Kingdom
Germany Sweden Ireland France Denmark Austria
Luxembourg
Figure II-1-7 Quality of R&D and innovation infrastructure (1) in the EU, 2014-15

===== PDF_PAGE 131 =====
129
II-1. The role of public research in economic development
Figure II-1-8 shows that there has been a
quite intensive process of expansion of higher
education in EU CEE. The annual rate of increase
in the number of graduates per 1000 population
aged 20-29 was 7.1% in EU CEE, 5.2% in EU
South and 3.6% in EU North in the period from
1998-2012. This has led to a situation where,
on average, EU CEE now has more graduates per
1000 population aged 20-29, than EU North.
This may have effects on the capacity of
universities to facilitate technology upgrading of
the economy. In EU CEE, the large increases in
the number of university students are putting a
strain on universities’ knowledge generation and
knowledge utilisation functions (Radosevic and
Kriuacione, 2007). Coupled with limited budgets,
this has endangered the balance between the
three university missions of teaching, research
and knowledge exchange. It would seem that,
despite individual success stories, universities
are not the key promoters of linkages in the
national innovation systems of CEECs.
Figure II-1-7 shows that, particularly in EU
CEE, firm upgrading is constrained not only by
factors internal to the firm, but also by the poor
quality of the R&D and innovation infrastructure.
These indices suggest that in EU CEE the public
R&D infrastructure is not yet adjusted to firms’
technology upgrading needs. The infrastructure
quality in EU South appears to be better.
Historical experience shows that in order for public
R&D to contribute to catch-up, its research was
oriented towards ‘an actual or potential user-
community’ and R&D programmes were geared
‘to help solve problems, and advance technology,
relevant to a particular economic sector’ (Mazzoleni
and Nelson, 2007: 1525). Also, research conducted
outside universities, in dedicated application-
oriented laboratories, typically played an important
role in this process (Mazzoleni and Nelson, 2007:
1526). In view of this experience it is important to
note that PROs seem to be losing their position in
public R&D systems in the EU and especially in EU
CEE and EU South (Figure II-1-4). This evolution may
be worrying given the increasing need for mission
oriented R&D related to ‘grand challenges’ for which
universities are not necessarily the best equipped.
 ▶ Figure II-1-8 Total graduates (ISCED 5-6) per thousand population aged 20-29, 1998-2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: EurostatScience, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
EU - CEE
EU - South
EU - North
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Figure II-1-8 T otal graduates (ISCED 5-6) per thousand population aged 20-29, 1998-2012

===== PDF_PAGE 132 =====
130
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The structure of innovation expenditures across
the EU shows significant differences across the
three EU regions (Figure II-1-9). Innovation in EU
CEE and EU South consists more of acquisition
of new machinery, equipment and software, and
relatively little of R&D activities. This would be
expected given the lower share of continuously
active R&D firms in EU CEE and EU South. It also
suggests that demand for external R&D and,
thus, for public R&D is relatively less intensive in
the EU periphery compared to EU North.
Figure II-1-10 decomposes expenditures on R&D
into in-house R&D and external R&D. We are
interested in whether the share of external R&D is
significantly different across the three regions. In
terms of averages, the differences are small (17%
to 22%). In terms of the median share of external
R&D, the more developed the region the higher
the share (13% CEE, 18% South and 22% North).
However, there seem to be no significant regional
differences in the balance between enterprises’
internal vs. external R&D activities, which suggests
that, despite a lower share of R&D active enterprises
in less developed EU regions, the proportion of R&D
expenditures on external R&D is similar.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
 ▶ Figure II-1-10 Distribution (%) of R&D expenditure between in-house R&D and external R&D, 2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
 ▶ Figure II-1-9 Structure of innovation expenditure, 2010-2012
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
EU - CEE Croatia Slovenia Hungary Estonia Romania Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Poland Lithuania Slovakia Latvia
EU - South
Spain
Portugal
Italy Greece Malta Cyprus
EU - North
Finland Austria
Netherlands
France
Luxembourg
Denmark Sweden Belgium Ireland
United Kingdom
Germany
Figure II-1-9 Structure of innovation expenditure, 2010-2012
Expenditure on the acquisition of machinery, equipment and so/ftware Expenditure on R&D Other expenditure
Expenditure on in-house R&D Expenditure on external R&D
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
EU - CEE Bulgaria Slovakia Lithuania
Latvia Estonia Croatia Hungary Slovenia Poland Romania
Czech Republic
EU - South
Portugal Cyprus Greece Malta Italy Spain
EU - North
France
Germany
Luxembourg
United Kingdom
Austria Sweden Finland Denmark Belgium
Netherlands
Ireland
Figure II-1-10 % distribution of R&D expenditure between in-house R&D and external R&D, 2012

===== PDF_PAGE 133 =====
131
II-1. The role of public research in economic development
1.5 Industry — Public R&D links in the EU
Innovation surveys are important for understanding
the role of public R&D and the nature of industry-
public R&D links in the EU. Public R&D is an
information input for innovation activity. A better
understanding of the innovation process in the
EU gives some idea of the relationships between
firms and public R&D across the EU.
Innovation frequency differs significantly across
the three EU regions (see Figure II-1-11 and
Figure II-1-12). Innovation frequency is higher in
EU North compared to EU CEE although there is
less difference with EU South. Presumably, the
higher share of inventors is representative of a
potentially higher demand for public R&D.
An important feature of the innovation processes
in the EU periphery compared to the developed
EU12, is the share of enterprises which engage in
continuous in-house R&D activity. Figure II-1-13
shows the average shares of such enterprises
based on three innovation surveys (2008, 2010
and 2012), in terms of regional averages. It can
be seen that it is not only the higher shares
of innovators, but also higher shares of firms
continuously engaged in R&D that differentiate
the three EU regions.
 ▶ Figure II-1-11 Share of innovative firms(1) in total firms (%), 2010-2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Note: (1)Data on innovation refer to core innovation activities which exclude Sectors: A (Agriculture, forestry and fishing)
and N (Administrative and support service activities).
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
 ▶ Figure II-1-12 Descriptive statistics based on shares of innovative enterprises, 2010-2012
 EU - North EU - South EU - CEE
 Max 67% 56% 48%
 Min 50% 34% 21%
 Range (max-min) 17% 22% 27%
 Median 54% 52% 33%
 Average 56% 48% 34%
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Note: (1)Data on innovation refer to core innovation activities which exclude Sectors: A (Agriculture,
forestry and ﬁshing) and N (Administrative and support service activities).
34
48 47 44
38
34 33 32 30
27
23 21
48
56 55 52 51
42
34
56
67 66
59 56 56 54 53 53 51 51 50
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
EU - CEE Estonia Slovenia
Czech Republic
Croatia Slovakia Lithuania Hungary Latvia Bulgaria Poland Romania EU - South
Italy
Portugal Greece Malta Cyprus Spain
EU - North Germany
Luxembourg
Ireland Sweden Belgium Austria France Finland
Netherlands
Denmark
United Kingdom
%
Figure II-1-1 1 Share (%) of innovative ﬁrms (1) in total ﬁrms (%), 2010-2012

===== PDF_PAGE 134 =====
132
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
In 2012, the share of firms with continuous R&D
activity was twice as high in the EU North as
compared to the EU periphery (see Figure II-1-14).
Also, the share of enterprises that engage in
external R&D is significantly higher in EU North
compared to EU South and EU CEE. Differences
in other types of innovation activity are less
pronounced. The biggest difference is in the
frequency of R&D active firms and the extent to
which they are engaged in external R&D activities.
EU North has more continuously R&D active firms
and more frequent engagement in external R&D
activities, a significant part of which consists of
agreements with public R&D organisations.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
 ▶ Figure II-1-13 Share (%) of enterprises engaged continuously in in-house R&D activities - average 2008-2012
 ▶ Figure II-1-14 Share (%) of enterprises involved in different types of innovation activity, 2012
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
18
35
26
22 21 20 19
15 14
12
10
4
20
29
26
23
17 16
8
34
45
41 39
34
30 29 28 28
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
EU - CEE Slovenia
Czech Republic
Hungary Lithuania Estonia Slovakia Romania Poland Croatia Latvia Bulgaria
EU - South
Spain Italy Malta Greece Portugal Cyprus
EU - North Netherlands
Finland France Belgium Germany
Luxembourg
Austria Sweden
%
Figure II-1-13 % share of enterprises engaged continuously in in-house R&D activities - average 2008-2012
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
20 22 20
72
24
40
22 20 19
65
20
46
41
32
35
65
28
46
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Enterprises engaged
continuously in in-
house R&D activities
Enterprises engaged
occasionally in in-
house R&D activities
Enterprises, engaged
in external R&D
activities
Enterprises engaged
in acquisition of
machinery, equipment
and so/ftware
Enterprises engaged
in acquisition of other
external knowledge
Enterprises engaged
in training for
innovation activities
%
Figure II-1-14 Share (%) of enterpises involved in diﬀerent types of innovation activity , 2012
EU - CEE EU - South EU - North

===== PDF_PAGE 135 =====
133
II-1. The role of public research in economic development
A simple correlation analysis suggests that the
correlation between enterprises with continuous
in-house R&D activities and those engaged in
external R&D activities is 0.76, which suggests
that these two activities are complementary.
The different sources of information for
innovation can be categorised as: S&T
information (conferences, trade fairs and
exhibitions; scientific journals and trade/technical
publications), public science organisations
(universities and government, public or private
research institutes), value chains (clients and
customers; suppliers of equipment and materials)
and business sources (professional and industry
associations; consultants and commercials labs).
Figure II-1-15 depicts the percentages of firms
that consider specific sources of information
as highly important across different groups.
It shows that, on average, the importance
of external sources of information is slightly
higher in the EU North compared to EU South,
and considerably higher than in EU CEE. Also,
value chains are the most frequent source of
information followed by conferences, exhibitions
and journals (Figure II-1-16). Public R&D and
business sources are less important sources of
information. However, the indirect importance
of public R&D as an important generator of
R&D knowledge through journals and other
publications, and participation in conferences
and professional associations should be noted.
If this indirect or ‘spillover role’ of public R&D
is included, the importance of public R&D for
innovation processes in the enterprise sector is
much higher. Finally, the importance of different
sources of information is very similar across
countries and across regions.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Note:
(1)SE: Information on public scientific organisations is not available.
 ▶ Figure II-1-15 Share (%) of enterprises that consider information from different external sources
 as highly important for innovation, 2012
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Note:
(1) SE: Information on public scientiﬁc organisations is not available.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
Poland Hungary Slovakia Bulgaria Croatia Romania Lithuania Estonia Malta
Portugal
Spain Greece Italy
Austria Belgium Germany Netherlands
Finland
Luxembourg Sweden
(1)
Figure II-1-15 Share (%) of enterprises that consider information from diﬀerent external sources as highly important for innovation, 2012
S&T Information Public R&D Value chain Business

===== PDF_PAGE 136 =====
134
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
In summary, innovation surveys show that the
frequency of innovators is higher in the developed
part of the EU compared to EU CEE and South.
The share of continuous R&D innovators is also
much higher in EU North and, accordingly, a
higher proportion of them engage in external
Finally, we examine firms’ assessments of whether
they regard public R&D (universities and PROs) as
highly important sources of innovation. Data from
innovation surveys shows that there are no major
differences in that respect across the three EU
regions, and that those differences that do exist
are largely intra-regional. The overall importance of
public R&D is surprisingly similar across the three
mega regions in terms of both PROs and universities
(Figure II-1-17). So, similar to the proportions of
R&D expenditure on external R&D across countries
and regions, we do not observe a lower frequency
of importance of external sources of information
including public R&D organisations across the
different regions. This picture of the importance of
public R&D seems to be a permanent feature since
there are no significant changes across the most
recent three innovation surveys.
R&D. The share of R&D expenditure is also much
higher in EU North compared to EU CEE and EU
South. In the latter regions, much innovation
expenditure is for acquisition of equipment,
machinery and software.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
 ▶ Figure II-1-16 Percentage of enterprises considering information from different external sources
 as highly important for innovation, 2012 (median)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
 ▶ Figure II-1-17 Share (%) of firms that consider public and private research institutes and
 higher education institutes as important sources of information for innovation, 2012
 S&T information Public R&D Value chain Business Total
 EU - CEE 14.9% 7.1% 32.1% 8.3% 62.4%
 EU - South 16.2% 7.1% 41.7% 11.2% 76.2%
 EU - North 16.7% 7.5% 45.5% 9.5% 79.2%
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
EU - CEE Poland Romania Hungary Lithuania Slovakia Estonia Bulgaria Croatia
EU - South
Spain
Portugal
Malta Cyprus Greece Italy
EU - North
Austria Finland Germany Belgium
Netherlands Luxembourg
%
Figure II-1-17 Share (%) of ﬁrms that consider public and private research institutes and
higher education institutes as important sources of information for innovation, 2012
Higher education institutes Public and private research institutes

===== PDF_PAGE 137 =====
135
II-1. The role of public research in economic development
of 7% for the three EU regions. Also, there is no
significant difference between developed and
developing countries in the ranking by firms of
the importance of sources of innovation (33).
Such evidence questions the notion that in
catching up countries public-business R&D links
are missing or weak. In our view, this assumption
arises because the relation between public R&D
and the business sector has been reduced to
the mere commercialisation of R&D. This report
provides evidence to support the view that science-
industry links in less developed parts of the EU are
not less intensive, but they are different.
In the EU context, the difference in the nature of
the science-industry links between EU North, EU
CEE and EU South is sufficient to merit further
attention. There seem to be fewer upstream and
research cooperation links, and more downstream
S&T and innovation services links. Figure II-1-18
shows that the intensity of upstream cooperation
in the form of joint publications between PROs/
universities and the business sector are a much
less developed form of cooperation in the EU CEE
and EU South compared to the EU North. However,
there is a process of convergence underway: the
number of co-publications per million population
increased in 2007-2014 by 54% in CEE EU, 42%
in EU South and 16% in EU North.
(33) E.g., correlation of the importance of sources of information for
innovation between the US and India is 0.886 (Al Albuquerque
et al., 2015, Table 5.6).
However, differences with respect to the share
of external R&D expenditure and the frequency
of importance of PRO and universities as sources
of information for innovation, are much smaller
and are not significant across the three regions.
So, despite lower R&D intensity of innovation
activities and lower intensity of demand for
external R&D, the less developed EU regions
have similar expenditure shares for external
R&D. Also, information or knowledge from
external R&D providers such as PROs and higher
education institutions is equally important for EU
CEE, EU South and EU North.
The above suggests that the usual argument
that science-industry links in less developed
regions of the EU are less intensive does not
bear close scrutiny. It is usually assumed that
science-industry links are quite undeveloped
in catching up contexts. However, Albuquerque
et al. (2015) and evidence from the EU would
tend to disprove this assumption. Evidence from
innovation surveys in catching up economies
shows that innovative firms regard universities
as highly important sources of information,
to a similar or even higher extent than in
developed countries. For example, in the 2008
Brazilian innovation survey, 6.8% of innovative
firms regarded universities as highly important
sources of information (Albuquerque et al.,
2015), which is very close to the median value
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Innovation Union Scoreboard
 ▶ Figure II-1-18 Public-private co-publications per million population, 2007-2011
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Innovation Union Scoreboard
0
50
100
150
200
250
EU - CEE Slovenia
Czech Republic
Hungary Croatia Estonia Slovakia Lithuania Romania Poland Bulgaria Latvia
EU - South
Italy Spain Cyprus Portugal Greece Malta
EU - North Denmark Sweden
Netherlands
Finland Belgium Austria
United Kingdom
Germany France
Luxembourg
Ireland
Figure II-1-18 Public-private co-publications per million population, 2007-201 1
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

===== PDF_PAGE 138 =====
136
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
important for firms in less developed EU regions.
This is in line with new evidence on science-
industry links (Albuquerque, 2015; Schiller and
Lee, 2015). Science-industry links are important
at all stages of economic development, but
similarly intensive links should not be mixed up
with similarities or differences in their nature.
The first policy message from our analysis is
that there is a need to redress the balance in
the importance of channels of interaction and
the benefits of public R&D in the less developed
EU. Commercialisation and the aim of creation
of new firms through public R&D has been over-
estimated as a growth enhancing factor in the
less developed EU economies, compared to other
channels (Brown and Mason, 2014). Similar to
other emerging economies (Albuquerque et al,
2015), the policy focus on commercialisation is
too narrow in the context of CEE and South EU.
The establishment of technology transfer offices
to promote the commercialisation of existing
inventions in a linear way should not be the
major policy focus in this area. Such programmes,
which are modelled on different contexts, ignore
the needs of local firms and the capabilities of
local public R&D organisations, which are much
more focused on S&T problem solving.
The second important policy issue is whether
countries will be able to develop specific roles
for PROs as opposed to universities. As countries
upgrade technologically, it might seem that
the role of universities increases and the role
of PROs decreases. However, new challenges
related to climate change and energy transition
may require a much greater role for more
narrowly focused PROs (Mazzucato, 2015). It will
be important for EU CEE and EU South to identify
technology and mission-specific roles for their
PROs. More advanced technology upgrading will
require good support for small- and medium-
sized, technology-intensive enterprises and firms.
Some countries have plans to try to replicate the
Fraunhofer model in response to this need.
1.6 Conclusions: How to harness the
potential of public R&D to support
economic development
Our review of the literature on the role of public
R&D in development shows that it is difficult to
demonstrate its benefits in an unambiguous,
quantitative manner. We reviewed various
benefits of public R&D, and the differentiated
role of public R&D in development in the context
of the EU, which includes a diversity of R&D and
innovation activities. Scattered, unsystematic
evidence allows only tentative conclusions about
the benefits of public R&D which differ across
different groups of countries according to their
technological development and distance from the
technology frontier. The benefits of public R&D
have a somewhat different ordering in catching
up countries when compared to technology
frontier economies.
Although we do not have systematic evidence
of these benefits, training of skilled graduates
is probably the most important benefit from
public R&D in the less developed EU. The quality
of higher education is especially important for
‘knowledge-based industrialisation’ and has been
rather overlooked in the process of ‘massification’
of higher education that occurred in the first
decade of 2000 (Dakowska and Harmsen, 2015).
Also, increasing scientific and technological
problem solving capacity should be high on the
policy agenda. At the same time, we observe
a gradual, but increasing pressure towards the
achievement of scientific excellence, which is
not always locally relevant. Funding criteria tend
to be based on academic output, which does
not contribute to improved local relevance. The
challenge for policy is how to prioritise locally
relevant but internationally excellent R&D (see
Radosevic and Lepori, 2009).
The evidence in this chapter casts doubt on the
commonly held view that relationships between
PROs and universities and industry are less

===== PDF_PAGE 139 =====
137
II-1. The role of public research in economic development
REFERENCES
Albuquerque, E., Wilson, S., Kruss, G. Lee, K.
(eds) (2015) Developing National Systems of
Innovation: University–Industry Interactions in
the Global South, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham.
Arnold, E. (2004), A Systems World Needs Systems
Evaluations., Research Evaluation
Salter, A.J., and Martin, B.R. (2001) The economic
benefits of publicly funded basic research: a critical
review Research Policy 30 2001. 509–532.
Arundel, A., Van de Paal, G. and Soete, L. (1995)
PACE Report: Innovation Strategies of Europe’s
Largest Firms: Results of the PACE Survey for
Information Sources, Public Research, Protection of
Innovations, and Government Programmes. Final
Report, MERIT, University of Limburg, Maastricht
Bouis, R., Duval, R. and Murtin, F. (2011) ‘The
Policy and Institutional Drivers of Economic
Growth Across OECD and Non-OECD Economies:
New Evidence from Growth Regressions’, OECD
Economics Department Working Papers, No 843,
OECD Publishing. doi: 10.1787/5kghwnhxwkhj-en
Brown, R., and Mason, C. (2014) Inside the high-tech
black box: a critique of technology entrepreneurship
policy. Technovation, 34(12), pp. 773-784.
(doi:10.1016/j.technovation.2014.07.013)
Cohen, W.M, Nelson, R.R. and Walsh, J.P. (2002)
Links and impact: the influence of public research
on industrial R&D, Management Science, Vol 48,
No 1, January: pp.1-23.
Dakowska, D. and Harmsen, R. (2015)
Laboratories of reform? The Europeanization
and internationalization of higher education
in Central and Eastern Europe, European
Journal of Higher Education, 5:1, 4-17, DOI:
10.1080/21568235.2014.977318
de Sola Price, D. and Bedini, S.A. (1967)
‘Instrumentation,’ in Technology in Western
Civilization, ed. Melvin Kranzberg and Carroll W.
Pursell, Jr. (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Eun, J. -H., Lee, K. Wu, G. (2006) Explaining the
‘University-run enterprises’ in China: A theoretical
framework for university–industry relationship in
developing countries and its application to China,
Research Policy 35 (2006) 1329–1346.
Griffith, R. (2000) How important is business R&D
for economic growth and should the government
subsidise it? The Institute for Fiscal Studies, Briefing
Note No 12.
Griliches, Z. (1986). ‘Productivity, R&D, and basic
research at the firm level in the 1970s’. American
Economic Review 76, 141–154.
Griliches, Z., 1995. R&D and productivity.
In: Stoneman, P. Ed.., Handbook of Industrial
Innovation. Blackwell, London, pp. 52–89.
Guellec, D. and van Pottelsberge de la Potterie,
B. (2004), ‘From R&D to Productivity Growth: Do
the Institutional Settings and the Source of Funds
of R&D Matter?’ Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
Statistics (July 2004), pp. 353-378
Hall, B., Mairesse, J. and Mohnen, P. (2010)
‘Measuring the Return to R&D,’ Handbook of the
Economics of Innovation, Chapter 24, B. H. Hall
and N. Rosenberg (eds.), Elsevier-North Holland,
pp. 1033- 1082.
Izsak, K., P. Markianidou and S. Radosevic (2014)
Convergence of National Innovation Policy Mixes
in Europe — Has It Gone Too Far? An Analysis of
Research and Innovation Policy Measures in the Period
Klevorick, A., Levin, R., Nelson, R.R. and Winter, S.
(1995). On the sources and significance of inter-
industry differences in technological opportunities.
Research Policy, 24(2), 185–205.
Kokko, A,, Gustavsson Tingvall, P. and Videnord, J.
(2015) The Growth Effects of R&D Spending in the
EU: A Meta-Analysis, Discussion Paper, No 2015-
29, April 22, 2015, http://www.economics-ejournal.
org/economics/discussionpapers/2015-29

===== PDF_PAGE 140 =====
138
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Laranja, M., E. Uyarra, and K. Flanagan, 2008.
Policies for science, technology and innovation:
Translating rationales into regional policies in a
multi-level setting. Research Policy, 37, pp.823-835.
Levy, D. and Terleckyj, N. (1989). ‘Problems
identifying returns to R&D in an industry’.
Managerial and Decision Economics 1–2, 43–49.
Lichtenberg, F.R. and Siegel, D.S. (1991) . ‘The
impact of R&D investment on productivity-new
evidence using linked R&D-LRD data’. Economic
Inquiry XXIX, 203–228.
Link, A.N. (1981). ‘Basic research and productivity
increase in manufacturing: Some additional
evidence’. American Economic Review 71 (5),
1111–1112.
Liefner, I. and Schiller, D. (2008) . Academic
capabilities in developing countries — a conceptual
framework with empirical illustrations from
Thailand. Research Policy, 37, 276–293.
Marsili, O., 2001 . The anatomy and evolution
of industries: technical change and industrial
dynamics. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham
Mansfield, E. (1980) . ‘Basic research and
productivity increase in manufacturing’. American
Economic Review 70, 863–873.
Martin, B., Salter, A., Hicks, D., Pavitt, K., Senker,
J., Sharp, M. and von Tunzelmann, N., 1996.
The Relationship between Publicly Funded Basic
Research and Economic Performance: A SPRU
Review. HM Treasury, London.
Martin, B.R. and Tang, P. (2006) The Benefits from
Publicly Funded Research, An Independent Report
commissioned and coordinated by The University
of Manchester Intellectual Property Limited (UMIP),
SPRU, Sussex University.
Mazzoleni, R. and Nelson, R. (2007) Public research
institutions and economic catch-up, Research Policy
36 (2007) 1512–1528.
Mazzuccato, M. (2011) The Entrepreneurial State,
Demos, London
Mazzuccato, M. (2015) A mission-oriented
approach to building the entrepreneurial state,
Innovate UK, Technology Strategy Board, November,
London
Metcalfe, J.S. (1995) The economic foundations
of technology policy: equilibrium and evolutionary
perspective. In: Stoneman, P. Ed.., Handbook of
Industrial Innovation. Blackwell, London.
Schmoch, U., 1997. Indicators of the relations
between science and technology. Scientometrics
38: 1., 103–116.
Nadiri, M.I. (1993). Innovations and Technological
Spillovers. National Bureau of Economic Research,
NBER Working Paper 4423
Nadiri, M.I. and Mamuneas, T.P. (1994) ‘Effects of
public infrastructure and R&D capital on the cost
structure and performance of US manufacturing
industries’. Review of Economics and Statistics 76
(1), 22–37.
Narin, F., Hamilton, K. and Olivastro, D. (1997)
The linkages between US technology and public
science. Research Policy 26, 317 — 330
OECD (2004) Understanding Economic Growth ,
OCED_ Palgrave Macmillan, New York.
Pavitt, K. (1991) What makes basic research
economically useful? Research Policy 20, 109–119.
Park, W.G. (1995) ‘International R&D Spillovers and
OECD Economic Growth’, Economic Inquiry, Vol. 33,
pp. 571-91.
Radosevic, S. and Yoruk, E. (2014) Are there global
shifts in world science base? Analysis of catching up
and falling behind of world regions, Scientometrics,
June, 101, pp. 1897-1924
Radosevic, S., Savic, M. and Woodword, R. (2010)
Knowledge-based entrepreneurship in central
and eastern Europe: results of a firm level based
survey, In Malerba, F. (ed) Knowledge-Intensive
Entrepreneurship and Innovation Systems,
Routledge, p.198-218.

===== PDF_PAGE 141 =====
139
II-1. The role of public research in economic development
Radosevic, S. and Kriaucioniene, M. (2007) The
role of higher education in a national innovation
systems in Central and Eastern Europe, In Higher
Education and National Development: Systems in
Transition, Routledge.
Radosevic, S. and Lepori, B. (2009) Public research
funding systems in central and eastern Europe:
between excellence and relevance: introduction
to special section Science and Public Policy, 36(9),
November 2009, pages 659–666.
Ribeiro, L. Britto, G., Kruss, G. and Albuquerque,
E. (2015) Global interactions between firms and
universities: a tentative typology and an empirical
investigation, In Albuquerque, et al. (2015) op cit
Rosenberg, N. (1990) Why do firms do basic
research with their own money? Research Policy
19, 165–174.
Schiller, D. and Lee, K. (2015) Are university–
industry links meaningful for catch up? A
comparative analysis of five Asian countries, In
Albuquerque et al. (2015), op cit
Sveikauskas, L. (2007) R&D and Productivity
Growth: A Review of the Literature, Bureau of Labor
Statistics Working Paper 408
Xu, B. and Wang, J. (1999) ‘Capital Goods Trade
and R&D Spillovers in the OECD’ Canadian Journal
of Economics (November 1999), pp. 1258-1274.

===== PDF_PAGE 142 =====
140
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Claire Nauwelaers
2.1 Background
This chapter analyses the evolution of public
investments and policies for research and
innovation in the European Union over the crisis
period. The key question is whether the crisis —
started in 2008, but with long-lasting effects —
is associated with shifts in intensity and direction
of public investments in R&I. It also looks at how
the situation differs between EU Member States.
Economic and policy context
The Union as a whole, and European Member States
individually, face important development
challenges, exacerbated by the crisis. Decreasing
consumption and investment trends, coupled with
high uncertainty, result in weak economic growth
and meagre jobs creation; the priority placed on
fiscal consolidation restricts the scope for policy
interventions in reaction to the crisis; and mounting
societal challenges — in particular an ageing
population and environmental pressures — place
new constraints on public budgets (due to rising
expenditures for health and pensions, the need for
enhanced investments and incentives to address
environmental threats, etc.). The increasingly
open competition on globalising markets, and the
growing role, in international value chains, of new
actors from emerging economies reinforce the
pressure on economic actors on the ‘old continent’.
In particular, the crisis has a deep — though uneven
— impact on firms’ innovation investments; since
that impact is stronger in countries with less
developed R&I systems, there is a danger that
the catching-up process that started before the
recession in these countries may be slowed down
or even stopped (Filippetti and Archibugi 2010).
Thus, while the EU economy as a whole has started
its journey on a recovery path in the years following
2008, most Members States are still struggling
with slow growth, incomplete economic recovery,
and possible structural bottlenecks to growth (e.g.,
due to brain drain).
The importance of research and innovation
as an engine for maintaining and reinforcing
the competitiveness of Europe on the global
scene is undisputed. With Europe 2020, the
European Union has set an ambitious strategy
to support growth and jobs creation in all parts
of its territory, in a difficult and globally open
environment. Within this strategy, research and
innovation take a prominent role: ‘Building an
Innovation Union’ is one of its flagship initiatives.
The 2014 Commission Communication ‘Research
and innovation as sources of renewed growth’
(34)
acknowledges this role in past periods, and
points towards a reinforced role for post-crisis
recovery. The European Union authorities have
diffused the message that ‘growth-friendly
consolidation’, namely budgetary consolidation
that places a premium on maintaining — and
even increasing — those public expenditures
that contribute to an environment conducive to
growth and employment, is the way forward.
R&D and innovation is only one of those growth-
friendly domains, but it has a crucial role to
support European competitiveness in a medium-
term perspective. Further boosting the assets of
European economies — world-class innovative
companies, development of cutting-edge key
technologies and excellent research capacity —
lies at the top of European Union policy agenda.
Such a priority is also visible in the European Union
Cohesion Policy. In the 2014-2020 programming
period, the Community Guidelines foresee a
concentration of investments on four priorities:
Research and innovation, ICT, competitiveness of
SMEs, and low carbon economy. One third of the
total EU budget is dedicated to Cohesion policy
with a strong drive towards its contribution to
the Europe 2020 goals, making it ‘the first EU
investment for growth and jobs’. Member States
and Regions are incentivised to develop new
approaches — in the form of smart specialisation
strategies — to shift their regional development
policies towards the promotion of innovation
concentrated in knowledge-based, future-
oriented activity domains.
(34) COM (2014) 339 final.
2. Public research and innovation policies and
investment and their evolutions since the crisis

===== PDF_PAGE 143 =====
141
II-2. Public research and innovation policies and investment and their evolutions since the crisis
The Commission’s policy agenda acknowledges
that a full economic recovery fuelled by research
and innovation is the responsibility of both the
Members States and the European authorities.
The ‘European Semester’ process and the National
Reform programmes in each Member State are
the main manifestations of this interaction
between European-level and national-level
authorities, in view of raising the contribution of
research and innovation to economic growth. In
this dialogue, ‘improving the quality of research
and innovation strategy development and the
policy-making process’ is one of three reform
axes identified by the Commission for completing
the European Research Area. With the economic
crisis and the financial consolidation process,
there is a pressing need for governments to get
more benefits from each euro invested in R&I;
therefore, the orientation and mix of policies
targeting the R&I system is becoming a crucial
issue for governments, in addition to the quantity
of public funds invested in this field.
The quantitative and qualitative aspects of
public R&I investments
The initial focus of EU policy on a R&D input
indicator — the 3% Barcelona target for GERD/
GDP — has been progressively complemented
by an increasing attention to the outputs of R&D
and the contribution of the latter to economic
development of the Union through innovation. A
new innovation output indicator was developed at
the EU level for this purpose and the Innovation
Union Scoreboard covers innovation enablers,
activities and outputs.
Hence, this shared agenda between the EU
and Member States, targeting investments in
research and innovation as a way out of the
crisis, has two dimensions:
1. A quantitative dimension
The European Union, as a whole, and
Member States individually, are committed
to raise their investments in R&D to
specific values (3% of the GDP by 2020
for the EU, and specific values for each
Member State, defined according to their
individual situation). While most of these
investments should be realised by the
private sector, the role of public sector
investment is also important to reach such
targets, both directly and indirectly through
stimulation of private R&D investment.
Maintaining, and even increasing, such
public investments in times of fierce
budgetary constraints is the challenge.
The quantitative dimension of
public investments in research and
innovation is monitored regularly by the
European Commission and the OECD, and
in individual Member States by Ministries
and Statistical offices using methods
and indicators aligned with OECD and
EU frameworks. The adoption of 3%
Barcelona target has generated analyses
of budget trajectories and scenarios to
reach this investment target, both at EU
and Member State levels. In parallel, studies
have empirically investigated the size of
private rates of return of R&D, the social
rate of return, and the contribution of R&D to
total factor productivity: such studies provide
the justification for the importance of R&D
and of associated public investments for
economic growth (Griliches 1979, Grossman
and Helpman 1991), and for the estimation
of ‘optimal’ R&D/GDP ratios.
2. A qualitative dimension
Different types of public investments have
different impacts and provide different
contributions to the evolution towards
a more knowledge-intensive European
economy. Depending on target groups,
objectives of the R&I activities, mode of
distribution for the funds, etc. different
parts of national research and innovation
systems will be affected, and the nature
of the impact of these public investments
on national R&I performance will vary.
An increased attention to innovation
in addition to R&D has also broadened
the scope of relevant policies. These
differences in orientations and priorities
are enshrined in R&I policies which receive
in-depth attention in all Member States as
growth-enhancing strategies.

===== PDF_PAGE 144 =====
142
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The qualitative analysis of public R&I
investments has a long tradition in
science policy research. An evolution took
place from ‘market failures’ approaches
considering fundamental, disciplinary
research, driven by researchers’ curiosity,
towards justifications for funding science
that is, at the same time, of a fundamental
nature and providing solutions to societal
demands, i.e., research in ‘Pasteur’s
quadrant’ (Stokes 1997). Interest has also
shifted from ‘Mode 1’ to a ‘Mode 2’ type
of research, i.e., towards research taking
place in a broader transdisciplinary, social
and economic context (Gibbons et al.
1994). Such an evolution points towards an
increasing orientation of science systems
towards strategic goals and the production
of knowledge with societal relevance.
With the wider adoption of the ‘innovation
systems’ conceptual framework, the public
sector has an additional role as a facilitator
of system interactions, leading notably
to the establishment of research-driven
networks and clusters involving both the
public and private actors in the system
(relying on a ‘systemic failure rationale’).
Those justifications for public investments
in R&I give rise to new trends and new
organisations which take increasingly
diverse configurations (Borras and Edquist
2014, Lepori et al. 2007). Current work
underlines that there is no ideal model
for such policies. Rather, policies have
to address well-identified bottlenecks in
research and innovation systems, and to
capitalise on their specific assets. This places
a high premium on the ‘right configuration’
of investments as well as on implementing
adequate reforms of the R&I systems.
These new orientations do not necessarily
translate to changing money flows.
Work has also been carried out around the
issue of complementarity between different
types of policies in the broad R&D domain,
generally concluding that there is a need to
build policies carefully in order to take into
account all elements of the R&I system
(Mohnen and Röller 2005). A range of
literature also covers issues in relation with
a deepening and widening of the scope of
policies relevant for innovation (Borras 2009).
The introduction of the systemic perspective
and of new public management techniques
in innovation policy-making are viewed as
responsible for this double phenomenon;
the implementation of new and more
sophisticated policy instruments (deepening)
along with an expansion of the realm of
action for innovation policy (widening).
Recently, interesting attempts have been
made to characterise, in detail, the content
of national ‘policy mixes’ for innovation
(Izsak 2014), exploiting policy databases
established by the European Commission,
which depict new trends and enlighten
similarities and differences between EU
Member States’ policy approaches. This
work highlights: 1) the importance of
differences in shape and performance of
individual countries’ research innovation
systems for the direction of policies;
2) the persistence of policy profiles over
time and 3) the lack of correspondence
between the innovation levels of countries
and the types of policy mixes.
Organisation of the chapter
This chapter examines the two aforementioned
dimensions of public investments in R&I,
analysing: a) how far the EU as a whole, its
28 Member States, and competitor countries,
have used public investments in R&D as counter-
cyclical strategy since the start of the crisis
(Section 2); and b) what changes did occur in the
nature of such investments and what reforms
have been implemented in the research and
innovation systems along with the evolution of
public investments (Section 3). Section 4 draws
policy-oriented conclusions from the analysis.

===== PDF_PAGE 145 =====
143
II-2. Public research and innovation policies and investment and their evolutions since the crisis
2.2 Evolution of public investments in
R&I over the crisis period
As put in evidence in the first part of this report,
two major phenomena have taken place since
2007 in Europe, with respect to public support
for R&D. First, the use of fiscal incentives as
a governmental instrument to support R&D
investments has grown significantly, with more
Member States using this instrument and
considerable increases in volume of funds in
several countries. Second, EU-level funding
(Structural Funds and Framework programme
funds) plays an increasingly important role in
complementing domestic public funding sources
for research and innovation. Those two trends
have an important impact on the overall landscape
of public funding for R&I and need to be taken into
account to get a full picture of trends.
This section analyses first, the situation in terms
of fiscal incentives for R&D in Europe; second,
the role of Structural Funds and EU Research
funds; and third, the evolution of domestic public
investment in research.
R&D tax incentives in EU Member States
As already indicated in Part 1, chapter 2 of
this report, in a significant number of EU
Member States, R&D tax incentives are used in
addition to direct funding schemes to support
business R&D. Nine European countries have
introduced R&D tax incentives since 2008, and
these add up to those countries that traditionally
make use of such an instrument.
These amounts of foregone State revenues
are not included in Government Budget
Appropriations or Outlays on Research and
Development (GBAORD), and hence, for these
countries, the latter indicator provides a
downward biased picture of public investments in
R&D. This is especially true for the Netherlands,
Portugal, Ireland, France, Belgium, and the
United Kingdom, where foregone tax revenues
due to R&D tax incentives equal or exceed the
amounts of public money allocated to companies
through direct funding in 2012. In a range of
other countries, tax incentives also play an
important role in supporting R&D, though the
amounts disbursed through tax incentives are
lower than direct government funding: Denmark,
Austria, Hungary, Slovenia, Czech Republic and
Spain (Figure II-2-1). Thus, for 12 out of 28
Member States, R&D tax incentives play either
an important or a dominant role in addition to
direct funding of business R&D.
All 12 Member States except Spain are making
an increased use of such tax incentives during
the crisis years (Figure II-2-2). The increase in
foregone tax revenues due to R&D incentives
between 2006 and 2011 is even spectacular
in France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Ireland,
Portugal and Slovenia.

===== PDF_PAGE 146 =====
144
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
 ▶ Figure II-2-1 R&D tax incentives for business and government direct funding for business R&D,
 as % of GDP, 2012
 ▶ Figure II-2-2 R&D tax incentives as % of GDP, 2006 and 2011
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45
Slovakia
Poland
Luxembourg
Italy
Finland
Germany
Denmark
Estonia
Sweden
Portugal
Spain
United Kingdom
Ireland
Czech Republic
Hungary
Netherlands
Austria
Belgium
France
Slovenia
Figure II-2-1 R&D tax incentives for business and government direct funding for business R&D, as % of GDP, 2012
Direct funding Indirect funding (R&D tax incentives)
2006 2011
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35 %
Figure II-2-2 R&D tax incentives as % of GDP, 2006 and 2011
France Belgium
Netherlands
Ireland Slovenia Portugal Hungary Austria
United Kingdom Czech Republic
Denmark
Spain

===== PDF_PAGE 147 =====
145
II-2. Public research and innovation policies and investment and their evolutions since the crisis
However, there are no reliable time-series on the
use of R&D tax incentives that would document
possible substitution effects between direct and
indirect support to R&D in Member States. In
Belgium, such a substitution effect is not likely
to be present as R&D tax incentives fall under
the realm of federal policy, while direct support
to R&D is mostly in the hands of the Regions
and Communities, which take decisions on
independence from the federal state. Therefore,
in this country, complementarity between the two
modes of funding for R&D is likely to be present.
The reverse is likely to be true for a centralised
country such as the Netherlands, where an
explicit choice has been made to primarily
support R&D through tax incentives rather than
through direct funding. The case of France is
interesting in that the spectacular increase in
use of R&D tax incentives since 2008 has been
accompanied by an increase in absolute amounts
of GBAORD in 2008 and 2009, followed by a
decline in GBAORD since 2011, while tax credit
money continued to increase. This suggests at
least a partial substitutive effect in the ‘austerity’
period. One main argument in favour of the use
R&D tax incentives is its simplicity, neutrality
and stability (compared to direct funding modes
which tend to change over time as they follow
new strategies and direct funds towards specific
sectors, agents or goals, and often involve more
cumbersome procedures to access funds). This
acts as a disincentive to use tax credits for R&D
to adjust for changing economic cycles.
In a growing number of EU Member States, R&D
tax incentives provide additional governmental
support to R&D, and the use of these incentives
tends to increase over the crisis period, either
complementing or substituting direct public
support to R&D.
European Funds for R&D as a complement to
national public funding
In addition to direct and indirect public funding to
R&D, EU Member States receive resources from the
EU level for their investments. Two main sources
are available, with very different modalities, to
complement national funding for R&D:
1. EU Framework Programme money
distributed under the EU Research and
Innovation policy, flowing directly to
research performers in EU countries, based
on a highly selective process relying on
research excellence criteria, favouring
actors and countries with high research
capacities and endowments;
2. EU Structural Funds under the EU
Cohesion policy, flowing to Member States
and regions, based on partnership
agreements between Member States and
the European Commission, and calculated
on the basis of economic development
indicators favouring lagging regions.
With respect to EU Framework Programmes,
total funding has increased between FP6
(2000-2006) and FP7 (2007-2013). The absolute
amounts of allocated funding differ significantly
between countries, the main beneficiaries being all
old Member States: the UK, Netherlands, Germany,
France, Denmark and Italy, as well as Spain and
Sweden to a lesser extent (Figure II-2-3).
The overall contribution of these EU funds to
public R&D spending in EU countries is significant
in some countries (Figure II-2-4). The seven
Member States for which FP7 funds are the largest
contributors in comparison with GBAORD include
new Member States and countries with weak public
R&D intensity as depicted in Part 1, chapter 2: Malta
(where FP7 money exceeds 20% of GBAORD),
Greece, Cyprus, Latvia, Slovenia, and Bulgaria; an
exception is Estonia, which has a high R&D intensity
compared to all other countries. Three countries with
more advanced research and innovation systems,
namely Ireland, Belgium and the Netherlands, also
see their GBAORD complemented with substantial
amounts of research funds from EU origin.
EU funds from Research Programmes flow
mainly to large old Member States with high
R&D capacity, but the contribution of these
funds to public funding for R&D is substantial
in several small new Member States with low
public R&D intensity.

===== PDF_PAGE 148 =====
146
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
 ▶ Figure II-2-3 Contribution of the EU Framework Programmes for R&D to the Member States,
 FP6 (2000-2006) and FP7 (2007-2011)
 ▶ Figure II-2-4 Contribution of the FP7 (2007-2013) EU Framework Programme for R&D
 to the Member States(1) as % of total GBAORD, 2007-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: DG Research and Innovation
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: DG Research and Innovation, Eurostat
Note:
(1)The Member States are ranked in terms of increasing R&D intensity.
FP7 FP6
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: DG Research and Innovation
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000
Malta
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Slovakia
Croatia
Cyprus
Estonia
Bulgaria
Romania
Slovenia
Czech Republic
Hungary
Poland
Portugal
Ireland
Finland
Greece
Denmark
Austria
Sweden
Belgium
Spain
Netherlands
Italy
France
United Kingdom
Germany
euro (millions)
Figure II-2-3 Contribution of the EU Framework Programmes for R&D to the Member States, FP6 (2000-2006) and FP7 (2007-2011)
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: DG Research and Innovation, Eurostat
Note:
(1)The Member States are ranked in terms of increasing R&D intensity.
0 5 10 15 20 25
Finland
Sweden
Denmark
Germany
Austria
Slovenia
France
Belgium
Estonia
Netherlands
Czech Republic
Ireland
United Kingdom
Portugal
Luxembourg
Spain
Hungary
Italy
Poland
Lithuania
Malta
Slovakia
Croatia
Greece
Latvia
Bulgaria
Romania
Cyprus
%
Figure II-2-4 Contribution of the FP7 (2007-2013) EU Framework Programme for R&D to the Member States(1) as % of total GBAORD, 2007-2013

===== PDF_PAGE 149 =====
147
II-2. Public research and innovation policies and investment and their evolutions since the crisis
Concerning European Structural Funds
for RDTI, an important shift towards higher
priority in R&D and innovation has taken place
between the programming periods 2000-2006
and 2007 -2013, making them an important
additional budgetary source available to
Member States to support R&D.
Categories of Structural Funds expenditures
differ between the two programming periods,
making data not strictly comparable from
one period to another. Different definitions of
Research and Innovation in Structural Funds exist
in various documents, evaluations and analyses,
often resulting in a much broader coverage than
activities considered under GBAORD. Keeping this
limitation in data in mind, Structural Funds data
have been analysed using the codes identified
in Figure II-2-5, to compare figures between
the two periods. The growth in importance of
Structural Funds between 2000-2006 and
2007-2013 for public funding for RDTI is very
significant. The share of funds allocated to R&D
and innovation trebled, shifting from 4.8% in
the first period to 14.6% in the second period.
This growth provides important complementary
resources to Member States’ domestic budgetary
spending on R&D.
However, the priority placed by Member States
on RDTI within their Structural Funds’ operational
programmes varies a lot, from less than 5% in
Bulgaria to close to 35% in Luxembourg from
2007-2013 (Figure II-2-6). This proportion
correlates well, but not perfectly, with their
position in the Innovation Union Scoreboard. With
the exception of Luxembourg, it is innovation
leaders who place the highest priority on RDTI,
while modest and moderate innovators (with the
exception of Portugal, Italy and Spain) display
low priority rates. Despite those lower priority
rates, the bulk of Structural Funds devoted to
RDTI (in absolute terms) still go to modest and
moderate innovators (Figure II-2-7), and those
countries are also the ones for which Structural
Funds constitute a sizeable contribution to public
R&D funding, as compared to domestic efforts
captured in GBAORD (Figure II-2-8).
 ▶ Figure II-2-5 Codes used in Structural Funds policy for R&D and innovation
Topic 2000-2006 2007-2013
Public research 181: Research projects based in
universities and research institutes
01: R&TD activities in research centres
Research infrastructure 183: RTDI Infrastructure 02: R&TD infrastructure and centres of
competence in a specific technology
Innovation eco-system (business
innovation and technology transfer)
182: Innovation and technology
transfers, establishment of networks
and partnerships between businesses
and/or research institutes
03: Technology transfer and
improvement of cooperation networks
04: Assistance to R&TD, particularly
in SMEs (including access to R&TD
services in research centres)
18: Research, technological
development and innovation (RTDI)
07: Investment in firms directly linked
to research and innovation
09: Other measures to stimulate
research and innovation and
entrepreneurship in SMEs
Training and human potential 184: Training for researchers 74: Developing human potential in
the field of research and innovation,
in particular through post-graduate
studies

===== PDF_PAGE 150 =====
148
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The orientation towards RDTI in Structural Funds
is likely to be even stronger in all Member States
in the period from 2014-2020, thanks to the
pressure from European Authorities to develop
strategies oriented towards knowledge-based
development, a focus on RDTI priority, and a
drive towards smart specialisation strategies
exploiting knowledge and innovation assets in
regions to fuel growth and jobs creation in new
activities. For those less developed regions, which
will again receive the lion’s share of Structural
Funds, the potential leverage effect of these
funds is therefore substantial, in view of their
relative size compared to GBAORD.
 ▶ Figure II-2-6 Share (%) of Structural Funds allocated to RTDI, 2007-2013
 ▶ Figure II-2-7 Structural Funds allocated to RTDI in the EU broken down by category
 in the Innovation Union Scoreboard, 2007-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: DG Regional and Urban Policy
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: DG Regional and Urban Policy
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: DG Regional and Urban Policy
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Belgium Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Denmark Germany Estonia Ireland Greece Spain France Croatia
Italy Cyprus Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Hungary
Malta
Netherlands
Austria Poland Portugal Romania Slovenia Slovakia Finland Sweden
United Kingdom
%
Figure II-2-6 Share (%) of Structural Funds allocated to RTDI, 2007-2013
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: DG Regional and Urban Policy
Modest and moderate
innovators
Innovation
leaders
Innovation
followers
Figure II-2-7 Structural Funds allocated to RTDI in the EU broken down by category in
the Innovation Union Scoreboard, 2007-2013

===== PDF_PAGE 151 =====
149
II-2. Public research and innovation policies and investment and their evolutions since the crisis
An analysis of the composition of Structural Funds
devoted to RDTI in 2007-2013 identifies a growing
differentiation of strategies between EU regions,
and an increasing diversification of measures
implemented (European Commission 2011). While
these Funds tended originally to fund classical
RTD infrastructure and projects in public research
centres, the range of activities targeted by the
Funds has become more diverse, also including
support for the innovation ecosystem and business
innovation. Overall, investments in public research
and in research infrastructure only represented
one-third of Structural Funds allocations to R&D
for the EU28 from 2007-2013 (Figure II-2-9).
 ▶ Figure II-2-8 Shares (%) of GBAORD, Structural Funds allocated to RTDI, and FP7 funds(1), 2007-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: DG Research and Innovation, DG Regional and Urban Policy, Eurostat
Note: (1)The coverage of R&D differs between GBAORD and Structural Funds for RTDI.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: DG Research and Innovation, DG Regional and Urban Policy, Eurostat
Note:
(1)The coverage of R&D diﬀers between GBAORD and Structural Funds for RTDI.
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
United Kingdom
Sweden
Finland
Slovakia
Slovenia
Romania
Portugal
Poland
Austria
Netherlands
Malta
Hungary
Luxembourg
Lithuania
Latvia
Cyprus
Italy
Croatia
France
Spain
Greece
Ireland
Estonia
Germany
Denmark
Czech Republic
Bulgaria
Belgium
Figure II-2-8 % shares of GBAORD, Structural Funds allocated to RTDI, and FP7 funds(1), 2007-2013
GBAORD 2007-2013 Structural Funds 2007-2013 for RTDI FP7 total

===== PDF_PAGE 152 =====
150
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
EU Structural Funds constitute a growing
source of public Funds for RDTI, especially in
those countries that are the largest recipients
of these funds. Modest and moderate
innovators still have an opportunity to grasp
the concept of placing more strategic priority
on RDTI in the use of the funds as a recovery
device from the crisis.
Domestic public funding to R&D
This section analyses the evolution of GBAORD
for the EU as a whole. The analysis distinguishes
between pre-crisis period (2005-2008); a
‘stimulus’ period located just after the peak of the
financial crisis, during which many countries were
implementing recovery packages (2009-2010);
and a so-called ‘austerity’ period (2011-2013).
Figure II-2-10 displays the evolution of
GBAORD
(35) aggregated for all Member States
of the European Union. This is the main proxy
traditionally used to capture efforts devoted by
national governments to supporting research and
innovation. However, important caveats should
be placed with respect to GBAORD as an indicator
(35) GBAORD is used rather than a government-funded part of
GERD. Even if the latter captures actual expenditures rather
than budgetary allocations which might not correspond to real
expenditures, GBAORD illustrates policy intentions, and more
recent data are available.
of public investment to support research and
innovation:
1. As discussed above, two other types of public
expenditures also support R&D. First, tax
credits for R&D provide indirect support to
R&D and, therefore, a decrease in GBAORD
may not indicate a decrease in government
support for R&D for those countries making
significant use of this indirect form of
support, e.g., the increase in (foregone
revenues due to) R&D tax incentives
between 2009 and 2013 for France alone is
of a similar size as the difference between
the top level GBAORD in 2009 and the 2013
GBAORD for the whole EU. Second, EU funds
(Structural Funds and Research Funds) also
contribute — sometimes heavily, as shown
in the previous figures — to supporting R&I
in Member States;
2. The GBAORD indicator captures research
and innovation in a narrow sense, as it does
not cover support to non-technological or
organisational innovation;
 ▶ Figure II-2-9 Composition of Structural Funds allocated to RTDI, 2007-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: DG Regional and Urban Policy
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: DG Regional and Urban Policy
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
EU
Slovakia
Slovenia
Romania
Poland
Malta
Hungary
Lithuania
Latvia
Estonia
Czech Republic
Bulgaria
Figure II-2-9 Composition of Structural Funds allocated to RTDI, 2007-2013
Public research Research infrastructure Innovation eco-system Human potential

===== PDF_PAGE 153 =====
151
II-2. Public research and innovation policies and investment and their evolutions since the crisis
3. Another caveat to be borne in mind when
looking at GBAORD figures is the one
mentioned in Section 1; measuring the
quantity of public expenditures is only
one side of the coin. Quality, direction
and effectiveness of those expenditures
are crucial to reach the intended goal of
ensuring growth and employment thanks to
enhanced R&I;
4. Significant differences exist between
Member States in terms of the evolution of
their GBAORD.
Data on public R&D expenditures and on public
support to business R&D presented in Part 1/
chapter 2 already showed clearly that total public
efforts for R&D in the EU in 2012/2013 were
much higher than in 2007. This is confirmed by
the GBAORD-based approach, as EU28 GBAORD
is higher in 2013 than in 2007. On top of this,
there is a massive increase in tax incentives
and in funding from the EU budget as shown in
the two previous sections, which adds up to the
GBAORD data in the latter part of the period.
However, this overall development at an
aggregate level takes place in different phases:
after strong growth in the years before the
crisis, governments of the EU Member States
have maintained a positive growth trend in their
GBAORD between 2008 and 2010, during the
‘stimulus’ period. After stabilisation in 2011,
these expenditures dropped in 2012 in line with
increased pressures for fiscal consolidation
(the so-called ‘austerity’ period), and started
to grow again in 2013; however, they did not
regain the high level seen from 2010-2011.
EU Member States, taken as a whole, face
difficulties in prioritising investments in R&D as
an exit to crisis strategy.
However, those fluctuations take place in a quite
narrow margin, compared to the amounts that
have been discussed when the other data sets
were analysed above.
The EU28 GBAORD is higher in 2013 than in
2007. This evolution took place in different
phases; first, continuation (after the outbreak
of the financial crisis) of the trend to increase
public efforts for R&D (and thus despite the
crisis), then slowdown and more recently a kind
of breathlessness; for the EU as a whole, seen
from a GBAORD perspective only, the so-called
‘smart fiscal consolidation’ process seems to
vanish. Public support for R&D is, however,
present in a number of Member States through
tax incentives and EU-level funds, which may
compensate for these worrying trends.
 ▶ Figure II-2-10 Total government budget appropriations or outlays for R&D (GBAORD) - EU, 2005-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
EU
75000
80000
85000
90000
95000
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
euro (millions)
Figure II-2-10 Total government budget appropriations or outlays for R&D (GBAORD) - EU, 2005-2013

===== PDF_PAGE 154 =====
152
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The situation in terms of evolution of GBAORD in
the EU differs from that of the main competitor
countries (Figures II-2-11 and II-2-12):
• The United States appears as a country
that did not use public investments in R&D
as a counter-cyclical strategy. The drop in
GBAORD after 2009 is severe, as is the drop
in priority placed on R&D in governmental
budget. The latter share shifted from 2.65%
in 2009 to 2.21% in 2012, i.e., a decrease
of 16% over the period while, for the EU28,
that decrease was limited to 3%. It should,
however, be noted that the priority on R&D in
US budgets was more than double that of the
EU in 2005 (respectively, 2.75% and 1.20%)
and is still much higher in the US than in the
EU in 2012 (respectively, 2.21% and 1.22%).
• Japan has maintained a priority on R&D
within its public investments in R&D after an
initial drop in 2009. The priority placed on
R&D in the Japanese governmental budget
was on a downward trend since 2005 and
dropped by 4% between 2008 and 2009;
however, it has slightly increased since then.
Japan, too, is characterised by a higher
share of R&D expenses within governmental
expenditures than in the EU (respectively,
1.85% and 1.22% in 2012).
• South Korea is the most striking case of a
country that has (at least until 2011, the year
for which the latest data are available) seen
its public efforts to invest in R&D positively
affected by the crisis. Both absolute values
of GBAORD and their share in public budgets
have increased steadily since 2008. The
latter share has even reached 3.5% in 2011,
a much higher ratio compared to EU28, the
US and Japan, and a high 17% increase from
2008, quite the opposite trend as in the US.
Amongst the competitors, the US, Japan and
South Korea, the latter is the only country
that clearly placed a higher priority on R&D in
governmental budgets in the wake of the crisis.
The drop was most severe in the US but all
three countries still place a higher priority on
R&D than is the case for the EU (when GBAORD
is taken as the sole indicator).
 ▶ Figure II-2-11 Total GBAORD - EU, United States, Japan and South Korea, 2005-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
EU
United States
Japan
South Korea
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
euro (millions)
Figure II-2-11 Total GBAORD - EU, United States, Japan and South Korea, 2005-2013

===== PDF_PAGE 155 =====
153
II-2. Public research and innovation policies and investment and their evolutions since the crisis
The above aggregated figures for EU28’s public
investments in R&D, seen from the angle of
GBAORD, hide a large variation across EU
Member States:
• The 15 Member States subject to high fiscal
consolidation pressure
(36) have experienced
an important (16%) drop in their total
GBAORD between 2008 and 2013, while
the other countries have maintained an
increase in absolute value (+ 10% over the
same period, with a stable situation over
2010-2012) (Figure II-2-13). The difference
between the two groups of countries is
even more obvious when looking at the
evolution of the share of GBAORD in their
public budgets in comparison with the EU28
(36) Those are: LV, RO, CY, IE, HU, GR, PT, ES, BU, CZ, EE, IT, LT, PL, SK.
This is based on Veugelers (2014), who defines countries with
high (low) fiscal consolidation pressure as those countries with
an above (below)-median cumulative change in their structural
primary balance since the year in which consolidation started (the
year with the lowest negative structural primary balance in the
period from 2008-2010).
average (Figure II-2-14). While a process of
convergence in the degree of priority placed
on R&D in public budgets was at play until
2008, strong diverging trends took place
between 2008 and 2010. Since 2011, a
reverse trend has started, but the gap in
priority on R&D between the two types of
countries is still wide. It should, once more,
be emphasised that these trends only
concern GBAORD data; since there is a large
overlap between the list of countries with
high fiscal consolidation pressure and the
list of countries which are large recipients
of EU Structural Funds, a substitution effect
may exist between the two types of public
investments in some countries.
 ▶ Figure II-2-12 Total GBAORD as % of general government expenditure - EU, United States, Japan and
 South Korea, 2005-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
EU
United States
Japan
South Korea
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
%
Figure II-2-12 Total GBAORD as % of general government expenditure - EU, United States, Japan and South Korea, 2005-2013

===== PDF_PAGE 156 =====
154
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
• Aggregating Member States under categories
as defined by the Innovation Union
Scoreboard (37), we see that the Innovation
Leaders category is the only category
maintaining and even increasing its priority
on R&D in public expenditures over the crisis
period; an improvement is taking place for
Innovation Followers since 2013, the year
when the priority placed on R&D in public
budgets in these countries started to rise
(37) Innovation leaders: SE, DK, FI, DE. Innovation followers : SI, FR, UK,
EE, CY, IE, AT, BE, NL, LU. Moderate innovators: PL, LT, HR, MT, SK,
HU, GR, PT, ES, CZ, IT. Modest innovators: LV, RO, BG.
again; while the priority placed by Modest
and Moderate Innovators started to stabilise
between 2012 and 2013 (Figure II-2-15).
A rising trend would however be needed
if Modest and Moderate Innovators have
to close the gap with countries with better
performing research and innovation systems:
data do not allow to state whether the strong
increase in Structural Funds devoted to R&D
is sufficient to meet this challenge.
 ▶ Figure II-2-13 Total GBAORD for EU Member States subject to high and low fiscal consolidation pressures,
 2005-2013
 ▶ Figure II-2-14 Total GBAORD as % of general government expenditure for EU Member States subject
 to high and low fiscal consolidation pressures - difference with EU average, 2005-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Low ﬁscal consolidation
EU
High ﬁscal consolidation
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
80000
90000
100000
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
euro (millions)
Figure II-2-13 Total GBAORD for EU Member States subject to high and low fiscal consolidation pressures, 2005-2013
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
High ﬁscal consolidation
Low ﬁscal consolidation
-0.35
-0.30
-0.25
-0.20
-0.15
-0.10
-0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Figure II-2-14 Total GBAORD as % of general government expenditure for EU Member States
subject to high and low fiscal consolidation pressures - difference with EU average, 2005-2013

===== PDF_PAGE 157 =====
155
II-2. Public research and innovation policies and investment and their evolutions since the crisis
• While aggregating Member States under
categories as defined by the Innovation
Union Scoreboard provides a handy way to
summarise trends, caution should be taken in
drawing conclusions from these figures; there
is also an important diversity of situations
within each of those categories, as shown in
Part 1, chapter 2 ‘Investments in R&D’, with
e.g., Malta and the Czech Republic, despite
being ‘moderate innovators’ investing strongly
in R&D (notably thanks to the use of Structural
Funds) while others do not (such as Bulgaria
and Romania); or some leaders continuing
to considerably strengthen their public R&D
even in recent years (e.g., Germany, Denmark),
while others do not (e.g., Finland).
The crisis has a larger impact on GBAORD in
those countries that already invested less
in R&D and had weaker innovation systems
before the crisis. It is not clear whether the
support from Structural Funds is sufficient to
compensate for weak GBAORD investments.
There is a large amount of diversity in national
developments and, in fact, huge divergences
inside each of the various Innovation Union
Scoreboard groups of countries.
2.3 New orientations for R&D policies
and structural reforms of R&I
systems in the wake of the crisis
Composition of RDTI policy mixes
As mentioned at the start of the chapter,
the evolution in amounts of public funding
for R&D (though GBAORD, tax incentives
or EU funds) is insufficient to appreciate
the quality of those expenditures and their
effectiveness in contributing to knowledge-based
competitiveness. In this section, recent trends in
R&D policies are analysed to capture changing
orientations for R&D policies and structural
reforms of R&I systems over the crisis period.
The aim is understand trends that are not
necessarily visible in, but lie behind existing
indicators and data. The analysis exploits
qualitative studies of policy developments,
 ▶ Figure II-2-15 Total GBAORD as % of general government expenditure - EU Member States
 according to their position in the Innovation Union Scoreboard, 2005-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
EU
Innovation leaders
Innovation followers
Moderate and modest
innovators
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
%
Figure II-2-15 Total GBAORD as % of general government expenditure - EU Member States
according to their position in the Innovation Union Scoreboard, 2005 -2013

===== PDF_PAGE 158 =====
156
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
based mainly on (OECD 2014) and
(European Commission 2014a). These sources
rely on:
1. Surveys and questionnaires used both
by OECD (the biennial STI Outlook
questionnaires) and by the European Union
(ERAWATCH), addressed to policy-makers
for the former and to national experts for
the latter;
2. Country-specific analyses, based on
database of policies (in the case of
the European Union, the Trendchart/
Erawatch database, and the OECD
Innovation Policy Platform) and on policy
assessments (European Semester and
Country Specific Recommendations in the
European Commission, OECD peer reviews
and country analyses).
EU Member States have all incorporated R&D
and innovation into their National Reform Plans,
and introduced measures and policies aiming at
raising effectiveness of public spending on R&D.
The analysis of trends in research and innovation
policies in European countries indicates that these
policies are characterised by five main strategic
axes, all aiming to address bottlenecks and
reinforce performance of research and innovation
systems, and get better results from money
invested in this policy domain (Figure II-2-16).
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: Claire Nauwelaers
 ▶ Figure II-2-16 Main trends in priorities for research and innovation policies in European countries
1. Improving excellence and quality of public research and higher education
• Raising the share of performance-based funding allocations to PROs and universities and/or introducing new
assessments and funding criteria reflecting research performance
• Reforming the public research base through reorganisation, mergers, etc. in view of fostering inter-disciplinary
research and higher critical masses
• Reinforcing the autonomy of research institutions
• Increasing incentives for research conducted in international cooperation
• Providing better conditions and incentives for attracting international research talent
• Improving quality and relevance of higher education
2. Raising relevance and contribution of public research for society
• Focusing investments in public research on specific priorities, i.e., areas of societal relevance
• Increasing the share of cooperative research (between public and private research actors)
• Establishing and reinforcing bridging mechanisms between public and private research
3. Shift towards demand- and user-driven innovation policies
• Supporting the establishment of joint poles and clusters bringing together innovation actors in knowledge-based
domains of competitive advantage (or smart specialisation)
• Public procurement for innovation
• Supporting absorptive capacities in the business sector, and particularly for SMEs
• Supporting knowledge-based start-ups and high growth enterprises
4. Improving framework conditions for innovation
• Improving finance for innovation (loans, guarantees, venture capital) and establishing close-to-market innovation
funding mechanisms
• Establishing or modifying tax incentive schemes for R&D
• Improving innovation culture
5. Improving governance and strategic policy intelligence for research and innovation
• Developing practices and tools, adjusting policy cycles towards evidence-based policies
• New institutions and governance mechanisms for RDTI policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 159 =====
157
II-2. Public research and innovation policies and investment and their evolutions since the crisis
EU Member States have introduced measures
and policies aiming at raising effectiveness of
public spending to R&D focusing on improving
excellence in public research and higher
education; raising the contribution of public
research for society; supporting demand- and
user-driven innovation; improving framework
conditions for innovation and improving
governance and strategic policy intelligence
for research and innovation.
All EU Member States, across all types, tend
to cover all the elements of the menu for
contemporary policies depicted in Figure II-2-16.
However, the priority between the strategic axes
and their components varies. It is not possible
to measure objectively, based on budgetary
data, the relative importance placed on priorities
or their components: first, because some of
them (e.g., those involving regulatory changes,
reorganisations, changes from generic to
thematic research, or changes in implementation
modalities) do not translate in budgetary figures;
and second, because the budgetary weights of
the various elements differ due to the nature of
public intervention (e.g., expenses for scientific
infrastructure, where the public sector acts as
the investor, are more costly than policies with a
stimulus character such as cluster policies, where
the role of public intervention is that of facilitator).
The conclusions of this overview are in line with
those reached by (Izsak et al. 2014), based on
an exploitation of data included in the European
Inventory of Research and Innovation Policy
measures. In that study, the relative presence of
six types of instruments
(38) has been compared
across Member States, leading to the definition
of five types of policy mixes. The policy mixes
represent different combinations of policy
orientations towards business R&D, Science
or commercialisation of R&D; improvement in
framework conditions; and importance of Structural
funds. There is, however, no clear correspondence
(38) The following typology of policy instruments is used in the
analysis by (Izsak et al. 2014): (1) public R&D, including
competitive research and centres of excellence; (2) industry-
science collaboration, including collaborative research, cluster
policies and competence centres where both the industry and
academic sector are involved; (3) knowledge and technology
transfer, including technology transfer and spin-off measures;
(4) business-RDI, including direct support to business R&D and
business innovation; (5) tax incentives; and (6) venture capital
funds (state-backed).
between the various types of policy mixes and
the level of innovation performance of countries;
countries at very different performance levels are
classified into the same policy mix groups. The
same conclusion can be drawn with respect to the
severity of fiscal consolidation pressures; countries
under high pressure are dispersed across all policy
mix types. Also, the policy mixes display a high
level of stability between the pre- and post-crisis-
periods 2004-2008 and 2009-2012. A hypothesis
that those Member States which are at the lower
end of the innovation performance spectrum
have seen their policies moving towards policies
favouring absorption and diffusion of knowledge,
while Members States at the higher end of the
innovation spectrum would place a higher priority
on knowledge creation, is not supported by this
analysis either.
Institutional versus project-based funding
For a few EU countries, GBAORD data are
available by funding mode, i.e., institutional
funding or project-based funding. The later mode
of funding is typically allocated in a competitive
way. Figure II-2-17 displays the situation for
two countries which are moderate innovators
with high fiscal consolidation pressure. Portugal
shifts towards a higher priority on institutional
funding at the expense of project funding, while
the reverse situation holds for Greece. Amongst
countries in a more favourable situation
(innovation leaders or followers with low fiscal
consolidation pressure), Germany and France
have a much larger part of GBAORD allocated
to institutional rather than project funding,
and France displays a particularly low share
of project-based GBAORD (Figure II-2-18). In
the Netherlands, the situation is stable, with a
relatively high share of project funding compared
to the two other countries. There are countries
which display an unusual situation of using
project-based funding more intensively than
institutional funding, such as Ireland and the
Czech Republic (Figure II-2-19). While as such,
these differences cannot be directly interpreted
in terms of effectiveness of the research funding
system, they show that there is a large amount
of diversity in choices made to support public and
private R&D in Member States, partly reflecting
the size of the public research system.

===== PDF_PAGE 160 =====
158
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
 ▶ Figure II-2-17 GBAORD by funding mode (institutional or project-based) - Greece and Portugal, 2008-2014
 ▶ Figure II-2-18 GBAORD by funding mode (institutional or project-based) - Germany, France and
 the Netherlands, 2008-2014
 ▶ Figure II-2-19 GBAORD by funding mode (institutional or project-based) - Czech Republic and Ireland, 2008-2014
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
EL - institutional
EL - project-based
PT - institutional
PT - project-based
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
euro (millions)
Figure II-2-17 GBAORD by funding mode (institutional or project-based) - Greece and Portugal, 2008-2014
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
CZ - institutional
CZ - project-based
IE - institutional
IE - project-based
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
euro (millions)
Figure II-2-19 GBAORD by funding mode (institutional or project-based) - Czech Republic and
Ireland, 2008-2014
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
DE - institutional
DE - project-based
NL - institutional
NL - project-based
FR - institutional
FR - project-based
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
euro (millions)
Figure II-2-18 GBAORD by funding mode (institutional or project-based) - Germany, France and
the Netherlands, 2008-2014

===== PDF_PAGE 161 =====
159
II-2. Public research and innovation policies and investment and their evolutions since the crisis
A more detailed analysis at the country level is
needed to identify the real weight of some policy
trends which are present in the policy mixes (e.g.,
supporting absorptive capacities in SMEs can be
done through anecdotal policy instruments or be
included more pervasively in a range of policies),
their precise configuration (similar instruments
such as clusters cover very different realities in
different environments), and most importantly,
their effectiveness in addressing the particular
bottlenecks, or boosting the best potential in
research and innovation systems.
EU Member States of different types (in terms
of innovation performance and severity of
fiscal consolidation pressure) tend to display
similarity in overall policy mixes. The devil lies
in the details of concrete features as regards
the relevance and effectiveness of policy
mixes for improving individual research and
innovation systems.
2.4 Conclusion
As a whole, the EU Members States’ governments
have increased their domestic expenditures
on R&D (measured through the GBAORD)
between 2007 and 2013. But this overall trend
hides different phenomena. First, a contrasted
evolution over the crisis period with an increase
of such expenditures during and just after
the height of the crisis, then a stabilisation,
and finally an apparent difficulty for such
investments to regain strength and truly act
as growth-enhancing devices. Second, a huge
diversity across Member States; their individual
situation does not correlate well with the status
of their innovation system.
But the most important argument in this paper
is that, beyond those trends in domestic public
funding for R&D, two important changes are
taking place in this landscape, which are the
increased and more widespread use of tax
incentives to complement (or replace) direct
support to R&D in some Member States, and an
important shift in the use of Structural Funds
for this purpose, which is especially important
for less developed regions. Those two combined
trends blur the picture given by GBAORD
data only, and change the situation in many
Member States that are either complementing
their domestic direct funds with indirect R&D
support, or making intensive use of Structural
Funds for R&D, or both.
Structural Funds represent an untapped
opportunity for those countries that are the
largest beneficiaries of such Funds, to redress the
balance in public spending in favour of RDTI. The
development of smart specialisation strategies,
if taken seriously, is a new opportunity to further
counteract some worrying trends in public
policies, especially in less advanced regions. But
this would require addressing existing barriers in
terms of ‘strategic absorption capacity’ in these
Member States. This is notably the case for more
complex measures (beyond bricks and mortar),
which are progressively dominating the policy
scene, as evidenced by the policy trends analysis
in this paper.
EU funds for research also partly compensate for
low public investments in R&D in a number of
Member States, especially those countries which
have low public expenditures on R&D. But the
big amounts from the EU Research Framework
programme continue to be channelled into large,
old, research-intensive Member States.
Public funding for R&D, covering all the variety
of forms, is necessary and important, but
not sufficient. New types of policy measures
which are going beyond the mere funding
of research activities and capacities in a
linear mode, encompass a large variety of
types of interventions that are taken up by
all Member States. This calls for tailor-made
policy mixes. Faced with an enlarged EU menu
of policies for RDTI, each Member State needs
to develop its own mix, adapted to its own
strengths and opportunities, and addressing its
specific bottlenecks and deficiencies. Thus, the
effectiveness in the use made of this public
money is as important as the quantity of funds
made available through direct and indirect
government funding, including EU funds.

===== PDF_PAGE 162 =====
160
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
REFERENCES
Borras, S. (2009), The Widening and Deepening
of Innovation Policy: What Conditions Provide for
Effective Governance?, Circle Electronic Working
Paper Series.
Borras, S. and Edquist, C. (2014), Innovation Policy
for Knowledge production and R&D: the investment
portfolio approach, Circle Electronic Working Paper
Series, N°21.
Edler, J., Cunningham, P., Gök, A. and Shapira, P.
(2013), Impacts of Innovation Policy: Synthesis and
Conclusion, Nesta Working Paper 13/21 (London:
National Endowment for Science, Technology and
the Arts).
European Commission (2011), Cohesion Policy
and Regional Research and Innovation Potential,
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.
European Commission (2011 and 2013) ,
Innovation Union Competitiveness Report,
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the
European Union.
European Commission (2014a), Research and
Innovation Performance in the EU: Innovation
Union Progress at Country Level, Luxembourg:
Publications Office of the European Union.
European Commission (2014b), Innovation Union
Scoreboard, Luxembourg: Publications Office of the
European Union.
European Commission (2013), ERAWATCH
Analytical Country Reports.
European Commission Annual Growth Survey
Staff Working Documents and National Reform
programmes.
Filippetti A. and Archibugi, D. (2010), Innovation in
Times of Crisis: The Uneven Effects of the Economic
Downturn across Europe, Munich Personal RePEc
Archive, No 22084.
CPB, CASE, ETLA and IHS (2015), A Study on R&D
Tax Incentives, DG TAXUD Taxation paper 52.
Gibbons, M., C. Limoges, H. Nowotny, S.
Schwartzman, P. Scott, P. and Trow, M. (1994),
The New Production of Knowledge: The Dynamics
of Science and Research in Contemporary Societies,
SAGE, London.
Griliches, Z. (1979), ‘Issues in Assessing the
Contribution of Research and Development to
Productivity Growth’, Bell Journal of Economics,
92-116.
Grossman, G. and Helpman, E. (1991), Innovation
and Growth. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Izsak, K., Markianidou, P., Lukach, R., Wastyn,
A. (2013), The Impact of the Crisis on
Research and Innovation Policies, Study for the
European Commission DG Research by Technopolis
Group Belgium and Idea Consult.
Izsak, K., Markianidou, P. and Radosevic, S.
(2014), Convergence of National Innovation Policy
Mixes in Europe: Has It Gone Too Far? An Analysis
of Research and Innovation Policy Measures in the
Period 2004, Journal of Common Market Studies,
p.1-17.
Lepori, B., P. van den Besselaar, M. Dinges, B.
Poti, E. Reale, S. Slipersaeter, J. Theves and B.
van der Meulen (2007), ‘Comparing the Evolution
of National Research Policies: What Patterns of
Change’, Science and Public Policy 34(6): 372-388.
Lepori, B., Masso, J. Jabecka, J., Sima, K. and
Ukrainski, K. (2009), ‘Comparing the Organization
of Public Research funding in Central and Eastern
European Countries’, Science and Public Policy
36(9): 667-681.
Mohnen, P. and L.-H. Röller (2005),
Complementarities in Innovation Policy, European
Economic Review, 49(3 or 4), 1431-1450.

===== PDF_PAGE 163 =====
161
II-2. Public research and innovation policies and investment and their evolutions since the crisis
OECD (2012 and 2014), OECD STI Outlook, OECD
publishing Paris.
OECD online Innovation Policy Platform (www.
oecd.org/innovation/policyplatform).
OECD (2009), Policy Responses to Economic
Crisis. Investing in Innovation for Long-Term
Growth, Paris: OECD, http://www.oecd.org/
dataoecd/59/45/42983414.pdf.
Stokes, D.E. (1997) , Pasteur’s Quadrant: Basic
Science and Technological Innovation, Washington
DC: Brookings Institution.
Veugelers, R. (2014) , Undercutting the Future?
European Research spending in Times of Fiscal
Consolidation, Bruegel Policy Contribution, 2014-6.

===== PDF_PAGE 164 =====
162
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
3. Publishing and perishing — bibliometric output
profiles of individual authors worldwide
Ben Turner, Elena-Simona Toma,
Georgios Chorofakis (39)
European Research Council Executive Agency
3.1 Introduction
Policymakers analyse and compare the
performance of national research systems
on the basis of input indicators such as
total R&D expenditure, percentage of GDP
spent on R&D and number of researchers,
and output indicators such as the number
of patents and the number of scientific
publications and citations. However, without
a good understanding of the relationship
between these inputs and outputs
policymakers are likely to make incorrect or
simplistic policy choices.
Therefore, this chapter looks at the
productivity of individual ‘authors’ in
different countries using bibliometric
data. The analysis confirms, on a much
larger scale, previous findings which have
suggested that a small proportion of
scientists are responsible for producing
the great majority of scientific output.
For example, just 10% of authors were
associated with 82% of all the publications
recorded in the Scopus database from
2000-2010. An even smaller proportion
of authors are associated with the great
majority of highly cited publications. For
example, during the same period, less than
3% of authors were associated with 82% of
all the top 10% publications produced and
less than 1% were associated with 74%
of all the top 1% publications produced.
Furthermore, the chapter provides a
breakdown of the location of these authors
by region and country.
Finally, the chapter examines if this output
data can be linked to the data on the number
(39) Currently at Barcelona Institute of Economics
of ‘researchers’ in different countries
which are commonly used in comparative
international statistics.
Policymakers need to be aware of and
understand the reasons for the ‘fat-tailed’
distribution that we see in terms of the
output and citation impact of individual
researchers both between and within
countries if they wish to understand and
potentially improve the performance of
national research systems.
3.2 Overall output and citation impact
of individual authors
Many previous studies going back to the
1920s (40) have looked at the productivity of
scientists. A typical finding is that less than 6%
of publishing scientists produce about 50% of all
papers (41). However, many of the classic studies
on this question are now rather dated and most
existing studies have used small data sets of
scientists from specific countries or institutions,
publishing in specific fields or journals. Many
previous studies have also focussed on trying to
identify ‘top performing scientists’.
This chapter attempts to see if these earlier
results still hold using a much larger, modern
data set and looks at productivity across all
quantiles and not just the top. It also looks at
productivity differences between authors working
in different regions and countries. The aim is to
help policymakers improve their understanding
of research systems in order to be able to make
better policies.
The average output of individual authors in terms of
publications is very low but this masks a remarkable
variability. The top 10% most productive authors
were associated with 82% of all the publications
produced during the period while 50% of authors
were associated with just a single publication.
For the years 2000-2010 worldwide there
(40) The Frequency Distribution of Scientific Productivity, Lotka 1926.
(41) Little Science, Big Science. Price, 1963.

===== PDF_PAGE 165 =====
163
II-3. Publishing and perishing — bibliometric output profiles of individual authors worldwide
are 12.8 million distinct scientific publications
recorded in the Scopus database with 9.47 million
associated distinct authors (42).
Of these authors, the top 1% most productive
authors (97 000 authors with 58 publications or
more each) were associated with over 5 million
publications or 40% of all the publications
produced during the period. The top 10% most
productive authors (1.07 million authors with 11
or more publications each) were associated with
(42) The Scopus Author ID is known not to be perfectly accurate in
terms of individual identification but is considered reliable enough
to be used as a tool for bibliometrics. Accuracy evaluation of
Scopus Author ID based on the largest funding database in Japan.
Kawashima and Tomizawa, 2015.
over 10 million publications or 82% of all the
publications produced during the period. Only
2% of authors (197 000) published at least one
publication in each year of the period.
In the same period, 50% of authors were
associated with just a single publication, while
80% of authors (7.23 million) were associated
with four or fewer publications in this period. See
Figure II-3-1 below.
A relatively high proportion of authors were
associated with highly cited publications. 24%
of authors were associated with at least one
publication in the top 10% of the most highly
cited publications in the world. However, most
of these authors were associated with just one
such publication, while 10% of these authors
were associated with 82% of all the top 10%
publications produced during the period.
The expert judgment of scientists in the field
is necessary to properly assess the scientific
importance of a particular publication, and even
then the real significance of papers may not
become apparent for many years. However, the
number of times a publication is cited by other
publications is widely considered to be useful proxy
for assessing the potential significance or impact of
a particular publication or body of publications
(43).
For the years 2000-2010, of the over nine million
distinct authors recorded in the Scopus database
worldwide, 24% (2.23 million authors) were
associated with at least one publication in the
top 10% of the most highly cited publications
in the world (1.52 million publications). However,
most of these authors were associated with just
one such publication, while 10% of these authors
(261 000) were associated with 82% of all the
top 10% of publications produced during the
period. See Figure II-3-2 below.
(43) Unless otherwise stated, the analysis of citations in this chapter is
based on looking at the number of citations to each publication by
Scopus class in the year of publication and the three subsequent
years (taking into account citations up to 2013 for 2010 publications).
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Scopus database
 ▶ Figure II-3-1 Global output of world authors
Percentile Number of authors Number of publications per
author
Total cumulative number
of publications
99 96 876 58 and over 5 092 574
95 410 488 21 to 57 9 054 620
90 563 514 11 to 20 10 560 087
80 1 171 276 5 to 10 11 623 288
64 2 507 865 2 to 4 12 344 194
50 4 721 641 1
Total 9 471 660 12 801 440

===== PDF_PAGE 166 =====
164
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Similarly, for the years 2000-2010, while 5% of
authors (476 000) were associated with at least
one publication in the top 1% of most highly cited
publications in the world (161 000 publications)
most were associated with just one, while 10%
of them (63 000) were associated with 74% of
all the top 1% publications produced during the
period. See Figure II-3-3 below.
A very significant proportion of authors were
associated with publications which received no
citations during either the three year citation
window after publication or for the whole period
analysed. Almost half of all authors produced at
least one publication which was not cited in the
relevant citation window. 18% of authors were
associated with publications which received no
citations in the whole period from 2000-2013.
In contrast, around 22% of authors (2 million
authors with 3.5 million associated publications)
received no citations for any of their publications
in the year of publication or the three subsequent
years. Indeed, none of the publications of 18%
of authors (1.75 million authors with 2.47 million
associated publications) received any citations in
the whole period from 2000-2013. Besides, almost
half of all authors produced at least one publication
which was not cited in the relevant citation window.
See Figure II-3-4 below.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Scopus database
 ▶ Figure II-3-3 Output of authors associated with the top 1% of highly cited publications
Percentile Number of authors Number of top 1%
publications per author
Total cumulative number of
publications
99 4 833 18 and over 38 660
95 21 079 7 to 17 90 292
90 37 253 4 to 6 119 504
80 109 094 2 to 3 146 422
64 303 635 1
Total 475 894 160 981
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Scopus database
 ▶ Figure II-3-2 Output of authors associated with the top 10% of highly cited publications
Percentile Number of authors Number of top 10%
publications per author
Total cumulative number
of publications
99 22 664 33 and over 531 008
95 101 278 12 to 32 1 045 440
90 137 200 7 to 11 1 241 008
70 805 281 2 to 6 1 466 680
52 1 167 416 1
Total 2 233 839 1 515 226

===== PDF_PAGE 167 =====
165
II-3. Publishing and perishing — bibliometric output profiles of individual authors worldwide
It is possible that some of these publications
will go on to be cited in the future. Some papers,
so called ‘sleeping beauties’, can lie dormant
for years before experiencing a sudden spike in
citations as they are discovered and recognised as
important. However, this happens rarely and the
rate at which papers acquire citations generally
declines after an initial period of growth
(44).
There is a strong correspondence between the
most productive authors and the most highly
cited authors.
In theory it is possible that the productivity and
quality of production of individual authors is
independent. It is true that some authors associated
with a small number of publications or even a single
publication can nonetheless be associated with
highly cited or very highly cited papers. For example,
around 40 000 authors were associated with a
single publication and that publication was one of
the top 1% most highly cited publications.
(44) ‘Sleeping beauty’ papers slumber for decades — Nature, May 2015.
At the opposite end of the spectrum, it is also true
that some of the most productive authors are
not associated with any of the most highly cited
publications. 23% of the top 10% most productive
authors are not associated with any publications in
the top 10% most highly cited.
However, in practice there is a strong, if not
linear, relationship between quantity and quality
of production. For example, 4 585 of the 4 833
authors (95%) in the top 1% for most highly cited
publications are also in the top 1% for general
productivity. Similarly, 255 918 of the 261 142
authors (98%) in the top 10% most productive in
terms of top 10% most highly cited publications are
also in the top 10% for general productivity.
Conversely, 92% of authors with only one
publication do not have any publications in the top
10% most highly cited publications, and 83% of
the authors with 10 or fewer publications have no
publications in the top 10% of those most highly
cited. See Figure II-3-5 below.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Scopus database
 ▶ Figure II-3-4 Authors associated with uncited publications
Number of authors
with at least one
paper not cited in
window
Percentage of
authors with at
least one paper not
cited in window
Number of
authors with no
paper cited in
window
Percentage of
authors with no
paper cited in
window
Number of
authors with
no paper cited
2000-2013
Percentage of
authors with
no paper cited
2000-2013
4 583 920 48.40% 2 090 040 22.10% 1 745 862 18.40%
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Scopus database
 ▶ Figure II-3-5 Authors by overall output and output by percentile rank class
Number of
publications
by author
% of authors with number of publications in selected quantiles
18 and
over
top 1%
pub
7 to
17 top
1%
pub
2 to 6
top 1%
pub
1 top
1% pub
at least
1 pub in
top 1%
at least 1 pub
in top 10%
but none in
top 1%
at least 1 pub
in top 50%
but none in
top 10%
no pub in
top 50%
Total
58 and over 4 585 12 925 28 504 15 775 64% 34% 3% 0.05% 96 876
21 to 57 248 7 179 57 589 63 908 31% 54% 14% 0.3% 410 488
11 to 20 902 30 834 57 685 16% 51% 32% 1% 563 514
5 to 10 73 21 550 67 946 8% 37% 49% 7% 1 171 276
2 to 4 7 870 57 690 3% 18% 53% 26% 2 507 865
1 40 631 1% 7% 36% 56% 4 721 641
Total 4 833 21 079 146 347 303 635 475 894 1 757 945 3 855 160 3 382 661 9 471 660

===== PDF_PAGE 168 =====
166
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
In summary, at the global level there appears to
be a core group of around one million ‘productive
authors’ that were responsible for around 82% of
the publications during the period from 2000-2010.
Furthermore, within this group there are progressive
tiers of authors with increasingly higher levels of
productivity in terms of both quantity and ‘quality’.
Ultimately, we find that just 97 000 authors were
associated with 40% of the world’s publication
output. In terms of quality, just 261 000 authors
were associated with 82% of all the top 10%
publications and just 63 000 authors were
associated with 74% of all the top 1% publications
produced during the period. At the other end of the
scale, a very significant majority of authors were
associated with very little output and much of this
output was not only not highly cited but uncited.
The next section will look at the distribution of
these authors by region and country.
3.3 Overall output and citation impact
of individual authors by country
It is difficult to precisely replicate the analysis
above in terms of the output of authors by
country because many authors have institutional
affiliations in more than one country associated
with their publications. Furthermore, it is the most
productive authors that are more likely to have
institutional affiliations in multiple countries. For
example, 79% of the most productive 1% of
authors and 50% of the most productive 10%
of authors have institutional affiliations in more
than one country during the period analysed.
In addition, around 9% of authors have no
institutional affiliation in the database and, in
some cases, an author can have institutional
affiliations in more than one country on a single
publication. See Figure II-3-6 below.
Nonetheless, the average ‘productivity’ (in terms
of publications recorded in the major citation
databases) of authors working in different
countries is shown in Figure II-3-7 below.
We can see that there are some significant
differences. For example, the percentage of authors
in a country which is in the top 10% most productive
authors worldwide (authors with at least 11
publications from 2000 — 2010) varies from 2%
in Malta to 13.7% in Italy. However, this table needs
to be treated with caution, because as explained
above many of the most productive authors (those
with institutional affiliations in multiple countries)
do not appear on this table which explains why
the world average is higher than that for most
countries and why the EU average is higher than
that for most of the EU Member States. It also
explains why the publications per author do not
vary that much from the world average of 1.35.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Scopus database
Note:
(1) * = less than 0.05%.
 ▶ Figure II-3-6 Number of affiliated countries by author output
Number of publications
by author
Number of countries in which the author has an institutional affiliation(1)
0 1 2 3 4 5 > 5
58 and over * 21% 26% 21% 13% 8% 11%
21 to 57 0.2% 43% 33% 15% 6% 2% 1%
11 to 20 0.4% 59% 29% 9% 2% 0.5% 0.3%
5 to 10 1% 73% 21% 4% 1% 0.1% *
2 to 4 2% 86% 11% 1% 0.1% * *
1 6% 93% 1% * * * *

===== PDF_PAGE 169 =====
167
II-3. Publishing and perishing — bibliometric output profiles of individual authors worldwide
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Scopus database
 ▶ Figure II-3-7 Output of authors by country
Country Pub total
(whole)
Pub total
(fractional)
Author
total
Pubs per
author
Author
at least
58 pubs
(1%)
Author
at least
11 pubs
(10%)
% authors
at least
58 pubs
% authors
at least
11 pubs
Belgium 159 733 105 253 92 275 1.73 1 169 9 424 1.27 10.2
Bulgaria 24 121 16 534 15 417 1.56 29 1 193 0.19 7.7
Czech Republic 91 431 65 674 56 941 1.61 371 5 952 0.65 10.5
Denmark 115 088 75 216 64 579 1.78 587 6 471 0.91 10.0
Germany 941 459 680 563 600 543 1.57 6 388 56 729 1.06 9.4
Estonia 10 632 7 065 6 720 1.58 18 587 0.27 8.7
Ireland 54 400 36 962 35 997 1.51 170 2 686 0.47 7.5
Greece 101 620 76 162 73 096 1.39 490 7 148 0.67 9.8
Spain 416 457 316 037 330 603 1.26 2 043 30 367 0.62 9.2
France 671 406 484 566 433 177 1.55 3 762 49 317 0.87 11.4
Croatia 32 614 25 836 24 721 1.32 42 2 247 0.17 9.1
Italy 491 797 365 673 338 747 1.45 3 817 46 515 1.13 13.7
Cyprus 4 716 2 593 2 742 1.72 4 144 0.15 5.3
Latvia 4 146 2 722 3 311 1.25 4 185 0.12 5.6
Lithuania 13 088 10 062 9 058 1.44 10 601 0.11 6.6
Luxembourg 2 558 1 213 1 867 1.37 2 80 0.11 4.3
Hungary 62 333 42 175 40 799 1.53 219 3 843 0.54 9.4
Malta 1 224 774 985 1.24 0 24 0.00 2.4
Netherlands 285 254 195 510 169 658 1.68 2 163 17 442 1.27 10.3
Austria 108 163 70 202 66 846 1.62 570 6 694 0.85 10.0
Poland 201 065 154 587 118 931 1.69 710 12 743 0.60 10.7
Portugal 68 889 48 243 46 035 1.50 301 4 224 0.65 9.2
Romania 42 790 31 050 32 015 1.34 74 2 081 0.23 6.5
Slovenia 28 353 21 082 15 227 1.86 92 1 542 0.60 10.1
Slovakia 31 460 21 902 20 928 1.50 59 1 809 0.28 8.6
Finland 103 038 73 367 57 626 1.79 692 6 832 1.20 11.9
Sweden 207 981 141 129 114 897 1.81 955 11 726 0.83 10.2
United Kingdom 997 902 726 413 599 488 1.66 4 668 53 331 0.78 8.9
EU 4 508 638 3 798 565 3 004 981 1.50 30 654 348 700 1.02 11.6
Iceland 6 030 3 205 4 097 1.47 12 291 0.29 7.1
Norway 86 612 57 782 50 001 1.73 284 4 707 0.57 9.4
Switzerland 211 534 130 073 127 678 1.66 1 215 11 475 0.95 9.0
Serbia 16 105 11 191 14 067 1.14 10 919 0.07 6.5
Turkey 195 452 169 034 131 002 1.49 595 16 951 0.45 12.9
Ukraine 56 297 42 158 38 228 1.47 85 2 518 0.22 6.6
Israel 128 978 95 506 76 946 1.68 547 8 055 0.71 10.5
Russian Federation 328 775 263 624 212 043 1.55 1 217 20 648 0.57 9.7
United States 3 630 971 2 964 479 2 391 800 1.52 21 195 238 114 0.89 10.0
Japan 943 241 798 440 782 358 1.21 8 928 82 389 1.14 10.5
China 1 384 493 1 244 334 1 090 507 1.27 10 576 94 789 0.97 8.7
South Korea 289 856 239 088 225 755 1.28 2 208 23 543 0.98 10.4
India 406 411 355 507 311 680 1.30 1 453 23 854 0.47 7.7
Brazil 280 904 225 390 306 366 0.92 1 067 17 829 0.35 5.8
World 12 801 440 12 801 440 9 471 660 1.35 96 876 1 070 878 1.02 11.3

===== PDF_PAGE 170 =====
168
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
the EU, Japan and China by the average percentile
rank class of their publications.
However, it is possible to look at the overall
citation impact of authors with institutional
affiliations in different countries. This is shown
in Figure II-3-8 and II-3-9 below.
We can see that there are significant differences.
For example, the percentage of authors in a country
which are associated with at least one publication
in the top 10% most highly cited in the world varies
from 6.5% in the Ukraine to 35% in the Netherlands
compared to a world average of 23.6%. Many of
the EU Member States and countries associated
to the Framework Programme do well on this
comparison and rank above the world average. The
Netherlands, Switzerland and Denmark occupy the
first three positions. The US is ranked fourth, above
all the larger EU Member States (Germany, UK,
France and Italy) which account for the bulk of EU
publications (60%), and therefore ranks higher than
the EU overall. On this measure, nearly all Southern
and Eastern EU Member States (EU13 plus Spain,
Portugal and Greece) as well as Luxembourg rank
below the world average.
In the bottom quantiles, we see that the percentage
of authors in a country that received no citations
in the period from 2000 — 2013 for any of their
publications produced during 2000 — 2010 varies
from 35.7% in Ukraine to 7.6% in Israel compared
to a world average of 18.4%. On this measure,
Romania, Bulgaria, Malta, Latvia, Croatia, Slovakia,
Hungary and Poland are the EU Member States that
rank below the world average.
One way to show both output and citation impact
together is to use the I3 indicator whereby
publications are weighted according to their
percentile rank class
(45). Figure II-3-11 shows the
publications and the I3 indicator for each country
(the percentiles were categorised in six rank classes).
In addition, in order to normalise this data, each
country’s share of world I3 is divided by its share
of world publications. On this ranking, it is again
the smaller Northern European countries which
perform best along with the US. The Netherlands,
Switzerland, Denmark, Iceland and Sweden all
rank above the US on this measure. Based again
on I3, this time calculated for each author in the
country, Figure II-3-10 shows a visualisation of the
percentage of authors in the Netherlands, the US,
(45) How to analyse percentile impact data meaningfully in
bibliometrics. Bornmann, 2013.
Country Pub total
(whole)
Pub total
(fractional)
Author total
Netherlands 285 254 195 510 169 658
Switzerland 211 534 130 073 127 678
Denmark 115 088 75 216 64 579
United States 3 630 971 2 964 479 2 391 800
Sweden 207 981 141 129 114 897
Finland 103 038 73 367 57 626
Belgium 159 733 105 253 92 275
United Kingdom 997 902 726 413 599 488
Iceland 6 030 3 205 4 097
France 671 406 484 566 433 177
Germany 941 459 680 563 600 543
Italy 491 797 365 673 338 747
Norway 86 612 57 782 50 001
EU 4 508 638 3 798 565 3 004 981
Austria 108 163 70 202 66 846
Israel 128 978 95 506 76 946
Ireland 54 400 36 962 35 997
World 12 801 440 12 801 440 9 471 660
Portugal 68 889 48 243 46 035
Luxembourg 2 558 1 213 1 867
Spain 416 457 316 037 330 603
Estonia 10 632 7 065 6 720
South Korea 289 856 239 088 225 755
Greece 101 620 76 162 73 096
Cyprus 4 716 2 593 2 742
Japan 943 241 798 440 782 358
Slovenia 28 353 21 082 15 227
Hungary 62 333 42 175 40 799
Czech Republic 91 431 65 674 56 941
Turkey 195 452 169 034 131 002
Poland 201 065 154 587 118 931
India 406 411 355 507 311 680
China 1 384 493 1 244 334 1 090 507
Romania 42 790 31 050 32 015
Lithuania 13 088 10 062 9 058
Brazil 280 904 225 390 306 366
Bulgaria 24 121 16 534 15 417
Slovakia 31 460 21 902 20 928
Malta 1 224 774 985
Latvia 4 146 2 722 3 311
Croatia 32 614 25 836 24 721
Serbia 16 105 11 191 14 067
Russian
Federation
328 775 263 624 212 043
Ukraine 56 297 42 158 38 228
 ▶ Figure II-3-8 Quality of production of individual
 authors by country (top quantiles)
First part

===== PDF_PAGE 171 =====
169
II-3. Publishing and perishing — bibliometric output profiles of individual authors worldwide
 ▶ Figure II-3-8 Quality of production of individual authors by country (top quantiles)
Second part
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Scopus database
Country Pub 1%
(w)
Author
with pub
1%
Pub 10%
(w)
Author
with pub
10%
Pub 50%
(w)
Author
with pub
50%
% authors
with top
1%
% authors
with top
10%
Netherlands 7 539 14 274 58 762 59 465 201 468 130 620 8.4 35.0
Switzerland 6 427 11 527 44 395 43 481 144 364 95 196 9.0 34.1
Denmark 2 951 5 392 22 650 21 891 80 767 49 232 8.3 33.9
United States 88 092 203 384 669 721 797 542 2 424 311 1 798 369 8.5 33.3
Sweden 4 303 6 922 36 019 36 507 144 549 89 503 6.0 31.8
Finland 1 938 3 399 17 010 18 204 70 945 44 667 5.9 31.6
Belgium 3 453 6 175 28 224 28 378 105 294 67 254 6.7 30.8
United Kingdom 22 283 42 120 176 560 181 507 658 217 437 770 7.0 30.3
Iceland 183 371 1 078 1 174 4 088 3 017 9.1 28.7
France 11 395 24 447 99 122 123 774 406 152 305 380 5.6 28.6
Germany 18 271 38 420 148 363 171 508 575 132 419 640 6.4 28.6
Italy 8 162 19 874 71 165 96 604 303 086 241 657 5.9 28.5
Norway 1 585 2 410 13 961 14 060 58 559 37 221 4.8 28.1
EU 65 289 171 549 615 078 822 456 2 677 873 2 087 190 5.7 27.4
Austria 2 108 3 426 17 026 18 124 67 702 47 053 5.1 27.1
Israel 2 315 3 825 19 422 20 827 83 024 57 377 5.0 27.1
Ireland 1 078 1 625 8 734 9 157 35 385 25 848 4.5 25.4
World 160 981 475 894 1 515 226 2 233 839 6 998 609 6 088 999 5.0 23.6
Portugal 966 1 509 9 260 10 241 42 874 31 225 3.3 22.2
Luxembourg 35 61 383 398 1 591 1 231 3.3 21.3
Spain 5 733 12 061 54 784 69 639 245 699 203 615 3.6 21.1
Estonia 157 211 1 337 1 409 6 389 4 755 3.1 21.0
South Korea 2 931 6 826 31 250 46 306 165 577 150 345 3.0 20.5
Greece 1 125 1 821 11 985 14 505 60 105 49 091 2.5 19.8
Cyprus 65 60 692 529 3 005 1 854 2.2 19.3
Japan 9 034 23 741 94 955 150 228 506 580 492 084 3.0 19.2
Slovenia 294 468 2 700 2 762 15 087 9 638 3.1 18.1
Hungary 750 995 6 070 6 739 31 861 23 874 2.4 16.5
Czech Republic 822 1 332 7 793 8 970 42 883 32 730 2.3 15.8
Turkey 1 070 2 848 12 634 18 903 87 072 80 195 2.2 14.4
Poland 1 442 2 144 13 195 14 668 84 214 63 287 1.8 12.3
India 2 206 4 695 27 275 38 186 175 802 159 954 1.5 12.3
China 8 257 18 677 93 118 133 013 558 038 523 354 1.7 12.2
Romania 233 1 312 2 627 3 722 17 345 15 080 4.1 11.6
Lithuania 92 106 909 1 042 6 292 5 290 1.2 11.5
Brazil 1 747 4 459 19 334 33 918 131 932 165 804 1.5 11.1
Bulgaria 139 193 1 675 1 702 10 175 7 405 1.3 11.0
Slovakia 227 344 2 018 2 177 13 026 10 444 1.6 10.4
Malta 26 21 118 101 603 517 2.1 10.3
Latvia 36 37 311 337 1 948 1 762 1.1 10.2
Croatia 213 263 1 756 2 379 12 754 13 178 1.1 9.6
Serbia 81 130 952 1 275 6 750 7 153 0.9 9.1
Russian
Federation
1 597 3 413 14 812 16 876 95 695 78 531 1.6 8.0
Ukraine 176 375 2 536 2 496 18 380 14 516 1.0 6.5

===== PDF_PAGE 172 =====
170
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
 ▶ Figure II-3-9 Quality of production of individual authors by country (bottom quantiles)
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Scopus database
Country Pub total
(whole)
Pub total
(fractional)
Author total Pub non-
cited in 3y
window (w)
Author with
at least one
pub non-
cited 3y
Author non-
cited in 3y
window
% authors
non-cited 3y
Ukraine 56 297 42 158 38 228 28 903 28 213 17 790 46.5
Russian
Federation 328 775 263 624 212 043 167 191 160 707 94 141 44.4
Romania 42 790 31 050 32 015 17 281 20 255 11 495 35.9
China 1 384 493 1 244 334 1 090 507 586 167 704 927 397 112 36.4
Bulgaria 24 121 16 534 15 417 8 934 10 072 5 321 34.5
Malta 1 224 774 985 423 509 333 33.8
Latvia 4 146 2 722 3 311 1 330 1 868 1 007 30.4
Croatia 32 614 25 836 24 721 13 357 15 520 7 754 31.4
Slovakia 31 460 21 902 20 928 10 807 12 111 6 141 29.3
Serbia 16 105 11 191 14 067 4 979 7 697 3 583 25.5
India 406 411 355 507 311 680 137 165 172 133 88 190 28.3
Hungary 62 333 42 175 40 799 17 322 20 857 10 501 25.7
Poland 201 065 154 587 118 931 68 836 69 733 31 779 26.7
World 12 801 440 12 801 440 9 471 660 3 525 024 4 583 920 2 090 040 22.1
Czech Republic 91 431 65 674 56 941 27 705 29 484 13 966 24.5
Slovenia 28 353 21 082 15 227 8 522 8 181 3 706 24.3
Luxembourg 2 558 1 213 1 867 540 686 423 22.7
Lithuania 13 088 10 062 9 058 4 246 4 951 2 224 24.6
Spain 416 457 316 037 330 603 95 028 152 946 75 045 22.7
Brazil 280 904 225 390 306 366 75 811 133 831 70 502 23.0
Japan 943 241 798 440 782 358 241 579 365 723 167 221 21.4
Turkey 195 452 169 034 131 002 61 083 71 230 27 528 21.0
Germany 941 459 680 563 600 543 210 483 235 512 115 217 19.2
EU 4 508 638 3 798 565 3 004 981 1 048 059 1 317 204 601 099 20.0
Austria 108 163 70 202 66 846 22 278 26 163 12 174 18.2
Cyprus 4 716 2 593 2 742 1 025 1 049 509 18.6
France 671 406 484 566 433 177 154 152 182 275 77 700 17.9
Portugal 68 889 48 243 46 035 13 598 19 228 8 297 18.0
Greece 101 620 76 162 73 096 22 678 31 452 12 871 17.6
Italy 491 797 365 673 338 747 99 206 149 385 54 154 16.0
South Korea 289 856 239 088 225 755 65 281 96 339 38 045 16.9
Belgium 159 733 105 253 92 275 29 597 34 008 14 783 16.0
Switzerland 211 534 130 073 127 678 35 785 41 361 18 963 14.9
United Kingdom 997 902 726 413 599 488 192 163 211 979 95 366 15.9
United States 3 630 971 2 964 479 2 391 800 666 444 799 501 351 234 14.7
Ireland 54 400 36 962 35 997 9 972 12 411 5 398 15.0
Norway 86 612 57 782 50 001 13 781 16 541 7 150 14.3
Estonia 10 632 7 065 6 720 2 025 2 678 948 14.1
Netherlands 285 254 195 510 169 658 43 285 54 427 22 198 13.1
Iceland 6 030 3 205 4 097 929 1 141 545 13.3
Finland 103 038 73 367 57 626 15 904 20 337 7 504 13.0
Denmark 115 088 75 216 64 579 16 117 19 731 8 053 12.5
Sweden 207 981 141 129 114 897 29 543 35 069 13 509 11.8
Israel 128 978 95 506 76 946 23 794 26 556 9 904 12.9
First part

===== PDF_PAGE 173 =====
171
II-3. Publishing and perishing — bibliometric output profiles of individual authors worldwide
 ▶ Figure II-3-9 Quality of production of individual authors by country (bottom quantiles)
Country Pub
non-cited
2000-2013
Author
non-cited
2000-2013
% authors
non-cited
2000-2013
Ukraine 22 062 13 648 35.7
Russian
Federation 124 427 70 796 33.4
Romania 13 764 9 583 29.9
China 451 016 317 617 29.1
Bulgaria 6 720 4 168 27.0
Malta 294 245 24.9
Latvia 977 817 24.7
Croatia 9 931 5 864 23.7
Slovakia 7 846 4 609 22.0
Serbia 3 645 2 866 20.4
India 92 819 62 084 19.9
Hungary 12 225 7 915 19.4
Poland 48 872 23 064 19.4
World 2 466 083 1 745 862 18.4
Czech Republic 20 124 10 373 18.2
Slovenia 5 995 2 751 18.1
Luxembourg 401 334 17.9
Lithuania 3 070 1 619 17.9
Spain 65 484 54 769 16.6
Brazil 47 027 46 056 15.0
Japan 167 002 117 322 15.0
Turkey 40 129 19 270 14.7
Germany 154 400 87 951 14.6
EU 724 775 433 024 14.4
Austria 15 678 8 885 13.3
Cyprus 661 359 13.1
France 107 303 55 380 12.8
Portugal 8 835 5 776 12.5
Greece 14 524 8 780 12.0
Italy 67 036 38 850 11.5
South Korea 42 329 25 623 11.3
Belgium 20 086 10 454 11.3
Switzerland 25 118 13 782 10.8
United
Kingdom 122 716 63 316 10.6
United States 429 832 234 322 9.8
Ireland 6 227 3 502 9.7
Norway 8 448 4 699 9.4
Estonia 1 254 628 9.3
Netherlands 28 546 15 269 9.0
Iceland 609 358 8.7
Finland 9 783 5 028 8.7
Denmark 10 119 5 470 8.5
Sweden 18 061 8 743 7.6
Israel 13 682 5 835 7.6
Second part

===== PDF_PAGE 174 =====
172
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Scopus database
 ▶ Figure II-3-10 Percentage of authors by average percentile rank class of publications
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Scopus database
Figure II-3-10 Percentage of authors by average percentile rank class of publications
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
% Dutch authors
Netherlands
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
% US authors
United States
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
% EU authors
EU
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
% Japanese authors
Japan
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
% Chinese authors
China

===== PDF_PAGE 175 =====
173
II-3. Publishing and perishing — bibliometric output profiles of individual authors worldwide
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Scopus database
 ▶ Figure II-3-11 Publication output of countries weighted by percentile rank class
Country Pub total
(whole)
Pub total
(fractional)
Ratio pub to
World (whole)
I3 (PR6) Ratio I3 (PR6)
to World
Ratio I3 /
Ratio pub
Netherlands 285 254 195 510 0.022 118 198 0.027 1.23
Switzerland 211 534 130 073 0.017 86 983 0.020 1.22
Denmark 115 088 75 216 0.009 47 075 0.011 1.21
Iceland 6 030 3 205 0.000 2 397 0.001 1.18
Sweden 207 981 141 129 0.016 82 377 0.019 1.17
United States 3 630 971 2 964 479 0.284 1 435 778 0.333 1.17
Finland 103 038 73 367 0.008 40 305 0.009 1.16
Belgium 159 733 105 253 0.012 62 329 0.014 1.16
United Kingdom 997 902 726 413 0.078 389 352 0.090 1.16
Norway 86 612 57 782 0.007 33 471 0.008 1.15
Ireland 54 400 36 962 0.004 20 658 0.005 1.13
Israel 128 978 95 506 0.010 48 222 0.011 1.11
Austria 108 163 70 202 0.008 40 336 0.009 1.11
Luxembourg 2 558 1 213 0.000 949 0.000 1.10
Germany 941 459 680 563 0.074 348 372 0.081 1.10
Cyprus 4 716 2 593 0.000 1 743 0.000 1.10
Italy 491 797 365 673 0.038 179 675 0.042 1.08
France 671 406 484 566 0.052 244 525 0.057 1.08
Portugal 68 889 48 243 0.005 24 913 0.006 1.07
EU 4 508 638 3 798 565 0.352 1 606 099 0.372 1.06
Spain 416 457 316 037 0.033 146 994 0.034 1.05
Estonia 10 632 7 065 0.001 3 747 0.001 1.05
Greece 101 620 76 162 0.008 35 229 0.008 1.03
South Korea 289 856 239 088 0.023 97 759 0.023 1.00
Japan 943 241 798 440 0.074 307 743 0.071 0.97
Slovenia 28 353 21 082 0.002 9 170 0.002 0.96
Hungary 62 333 42 175 0.005 19 950 0.005 0.95
Malta 1 224 774 0.000 389 0.000 0.94
Czech Republic 91 431 65 674 0.007 27 850 0.006 0.90
Lithuania 13 088 10 062 0.001 3 923 0.001 0.89
Latvia 4 146 2 722 0.000 1 242 0.000 0.89
Brazil 280 904 225 390 0.022 83 124 0.019 0.88
Turkey 195 452 169 034 0.015 56 413 0.013 0.86
India 406 411 355 507 0.032 116 904 0.027 0.85
Bulgaria 24 121 16 534 0.002 6 933 0.002 0.85
Poland 201 065 154 587 0.016 57 136 0.013 0.84
Slovakia 31 460 21 902 0.002 8 891 0.002 0.84
China 1 384 493 1 244 334 0.108 389 245 0.090 0.83
Serbia 16 105 11 191 0.001 4 502 0.001 0.83
Romania 42 790 31 050 0.003 11 684 0.003 0.82
Croatia 32 614 25 836 0.003 8 881 0.002 0.81
Ukraine 56 297 42 158 0.004 14 342 0.003 0.76
Russian Federation 328 775 263 624 0.026 81 355 0.019 0.73

===== PDF_PAGE 176 =====
174
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
3.4 What is the overlap between
authors and researchers counted
in international statistics?
The analysis in this chapter has been based
on the ‘authors’ recorded in Scopus. However,
international comparative statistics are usually
based on the number of full time equivalent
(FTE) ‘researchers’ based in a country. One might
expect that these two groups would overlap
significantly. This is, after all, the assumption
behind using scientific publications and citations
as an output of a country’s researchers. However,
as we will see below, there is likely to be little
overlap between ‘authors’ and ‘researchers’.
Based on the definitions used by the major
international statistical bodies, there are
considered to be over seven million full time
equivalent researchers in the world
(46). What is
their relationship with the 9.47 million distinct
authors recorded worldwide in the Scopus
database from 2000 — 2010?
The term ‘researcher’ covers many different
roles and activities.
The term ‘researcher’ covers many different roles
and activities. From university academics and
scientists engaged in long-term basic research at
large research infrastructures to more mission-
orientated researchers at government labs,
from corporate employees carrying out market-
orientated development work to the staff of
high-tech SMEs pursuing technology transfer or
product and process innovation.
In order to understand the scientific production
of countries it is necessary to try to identify a
core group of researchers that might be expected
to produce scientific publications.
Firstly, we know that overall most researchers
are in the private sector and that scientific
publications are typically produced by public
sector researchers.
(46) Researchers FTE in 2007. Unesco Science Report 2010.
For the OECD countries as a whole, 60% of
researchers were in the business enterprise
sector in 2011, although the percentage does
vary considerably by country (47).
In 2012 in the US, 14% of all publications
were produced by industry and the private
non-profit sector while 76% were produced by
the academic sector. The rest were produced
by the federal government, Federally Funded
Research and Development Centers, and state
and local governments
(48).
In 2005, midway through the period under
consideration, there were 733 000 public sector
researchers FTE in the EU
(49). In the same year,
there were 320 600 scientific publications
recorded in the Scopus database (28% of the
world total) with associated EU authors.
In the same year, there were 278 000 public
sector researchers in the US and there were
268 800 scientific publications recorded in the
Scopus database with associated US authors.
We can therefore see that even public sector
researchers as a whole are not on average very
prolific in terms of producing publications.
The public sector itself is very diverse.
However, the public sector itself is very diverse.
Public research is, broadly speaking, performed in
either Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) or Public
Research-performing Organisations (PROs) and both
of these sectors contain a very diverse range of
institutions of different sizes, budgets and missions.
The main mission of HEIs is, of course, to teach,
with some also carrying out research. In certain
systems such as the US, the UK and Switzerland
HEIs are differentiated between institutions
that largely have a teaching role and those
with a greater research focus, and most public
research is performed at a relatively small
number of research-intensive HEIs. For example,
in the UK 15% of HEIs (the 24 Russell Group
(47) Main Science and Technology Indicators 2014, OECD.
(48) Science and Engineering Indicators 2014, NSF.
(49) IUCR 2013 Introduction, EC.

===== PDF_PAGE 177 =====
175
II-3. Publishing and perishing — bibliometric output profiles of individual authors worldwide
universities) receive 74% of UK universities’
research grant and contract income and award
60% of doctorates (50). In other systems HEIs
are relatively undifferentiated and a higher
proportion of public research is performed in
dedicated PROs.
Europe has around 3 000 HEIs, of which 1 400 are
research-active (47%), and 171 in 21 countries
are highly research-intensive (6%) in terms of
scientific production
(51). In 2012, around 40% of EU
researchers were in the Higher Education sector (52).
By contrast, out of around 3 300 degree-awarding
bodies in the US (which comprise a broader range
of institutions than the European universities), only
about 215 award postgraduate degrees. There
are also fewer than 100 recognised research
intensive universities in the US
(53). The bulk of R&D
expenditures in the United States are concentrated
among this small number of research-intensive
institutions, and the extent of this concentration
has remained very consistent over the last two
decades, even as the identity of the institutions
in the top groups has changed. In Financial Year
2012, the top 10 institutions in terms of R&D
performance accounted for 18.0% (18.8% in FY
1989), the top 20 for 30.6% (32.5%), and the top
100 for 78.8% (82.0%)
(54).
PROs can be classified as scientific research
institutes, government laboratories, or
Research and Technology Organisations (RTOs).
The former are mainly associated with basic
research while the latter mainly carry out
applied research and technical development.
Government laboratories engage in technical
norms, standardisation or metrology, testing or
other specific missions and duties.
There are around 150 large PROs in Europe
with over 50 researchers or 100 affiliated staff
members
(55) such as the Max Planck Institutes
in Germany, the CNRS in France, CNR in Italy
and CSIC in Spain, as well as large parts of
(50) Russell Group Profile October 2014.
(51) IUCR 2011 Part II Chapter 1, EC.
(52) Main Science and Technology Indicators 2014, OECD.
(53) Developing a knowledge flagship: the European Institute of
Technology, EC 2006.
(54) Science and Engineering Indicators 2014, NSF.
(55) IUCR 2011 Part II Chapter 1.
the Science Academies in Central and Eastern
European countries. In 2012, around 12% of EU
researchers were in the Government sector (56).
The proportion of public research performed in
HEIs and PROs is an important differentiating
feature of national research systems. For
example, in 2011 around 36% of the public sector
researchers in Germany were in the Government
sector (54 000 compared to 94 000 in the
Higher Education sector). 27% of public sector
researchers in France were in the Government
sector, 30% in Italy, 27% in Spain and 26% in
Poland. In contrast, Switzerland had just 2%
of public sector researchers in the Government
sector and the UK had 5%. Equivalent figures are
not available for the US but less than 5% of total
US researchers were in the Government sector
in 2000
(57).
Comprehensive data on the main activities
and tasks of researchers working at PROs is
not available. However, in 2007, 54% of the
researchers working for PROs in the Government
sector in Germany worked for institutions with
basic research as one of their main activities
and tasks (the Max Planck Institutes and the
Helmholz and Leibniz Associations)
(58). The other
PROs in Germany, the Federal, regional and local
research establishments and also the Fraunhofer
Association did carry out some basic research but
were more orientated towards applied research,
technology transfer to enterprises, consultancy
to public authorities and other roles.
The publishing practices in different scientific
disciplines, especially in the social sciences
and humanities, are also very different.
It is also well known that the publishing practices
in different scientific disciplines are very different.
In particular, the social sciences and humanities
produce a greater proportion of scientific
publications that are not journal articles, and
have a greater tendency to publish in languages
other than English and in journals with a national,
rather than international, distribution. This means
that the output of social sciences and humanities
(56) Main Science and Technology Indicators 2014, OECD.
(57) Main Science and Technology Indicators 2014, OECD.
(58) IUCR 2011 Part II Chapter 1.

===== PDF_PAGE 178 =====
176
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
scholars will be highly underrepresented in the
major citation databases.
The number of FTE researchers broken down by
field of science is available for some countries. For
example, in Germany in 2005 29% of researchers
in the HE sector were classified as being in the
field of social sciences or humanities
(59). For Italy,
Spain, Poland, Romania, Sweden and Denmark the
figures were, respectively, 35%, 40%, 34%, 11%,
23%, and 32%.
For the same year in Germany, 14% of
researchers in the Government sector were
classified as being in the field of social sciences
or humanities
(60). For Italy, Spain, Poland,
Romania, and Denmark the figures were,
respectively, 14%, 9%, 10%, 34%, and 21%.
The core group of researchers that might be
expected to produce scientific publications is
likely to be around a quarter of the overall
number of researchers.
Based on the considerations above, we should
therefore expect that only a small proportion of
the seven million total researchers in the world
will be producing a large proportion of all the
publications which are recorded in the major
citation databases. The primary ‘publication
active’ researchers will be those public sector
researchers working at the research active HEIs
and those PROs with basic research as a main
task or activity. This proportion could be around
25% of the total number of researchers and
this could help explain why a small proportion
of authors is associated with the vast majority
of the publications recorded in Scopus in the
period from 2000 — 2010 (1.07 million authors
with 11 or more publications over the period and
another 1.17 million authors with five or more).
The first lesson from the discussion above is that
policymakers should be careful when talking about
‘research’ and ‘researchers’ in general terms and
they should not look at publications as the output
of national research systems. The publications
recorded in the major citation databases and the
knowledge embedded in them are produced by a
(59) Science, technology and innovation in Europe 2009, Eurostat.
(60) Science, technology and innovation in Europe 2009, Eurostat.
relatively small sub-set of researchers working at
a specific sub-set of research institutions.
This is not to say that the many researchers who are
not associated with many, or any, of these recorded
publications are not productive. Rather they are
engaged in different types of activity (including, for
many of them, teaching) which need to be assessed
in different ways and with different metrics.
3.5 Conclusions
This analysis confirms previous findings but
uses a much larger, and up to date, set of
data. The production of individual authors in
terms of publications recorded in the major
citation databases is extremely varied and that
production also varies greatly in terms of its
impact and significance as measured by citations.
This analysis confirms many previous findings.
The output of individual authors in terms of
publications recorded in the major citation
databases is extremely varied. Indeed, the
productivity of individual authors seems to
follow something like an inverse square law.
This analysis also confirms that production
varies greatly in terms of its impact and
significance as measured by citations.
Previous studies have also shown that the
proportion of the scientific workforce that
maintains a continuous uninterrupted stream
of publications each and every year over many
years is very limited
(61) . Furthermore, the
citation impact of the publications produced
by researchers in different countries has been
shown to be highly variable (62).
At first glance, the very large differences that exist
in output and citation impact between individuals,
the low overall productivity of authors, and the
very significant tail of uncited publications and
authors may seem surprising or disappointing.
Scientific publications report the findings of
original experimental and theoretical work in
appropriate scientific journals. Furthermore,
the publication of the results of research is an
(61) ‘Estimates of the Continuously Publishing Core in the Scientific
Workforce’ Ioannidis et al. 2014.
(62) ‘The European Union, China, and the United States in the top-
1% and top-10% layers of most-frequently cited publications:
Competition and collaborations.’ Bornman et al. 2014.

===== PDF_PAGE 179 =====
177
II-3. Publishing and perishing — bibliometric output profiles of individual authors worldwide
essential part of the scientific method and has
been since the birth of modern science.
However, it is likely that many of the recorded
authors were never involved in research as their
main activity or were involved only for a brief
period, and thus contributed only on an ad hoc
basis to a single publication or a small number of
publications. It is also the case that the number
of authors per publication has been steadily
increasing, going from 2.48 in 1981 to 5 in
2012
(63). In particular, we know that ‘the majority
of people undertaking a PhD will end up in careers
outside scientific research’ in the long-term
(64).
It is also the case that, by definition, researchers
are looking to discover new facts about the
phenomenon they choose to explore. There is no
guarantee beforehand that they will be able to do
this or, even if they do, that their results will be
of significance or interest to other researchers. If
two researchers of equal talent set out to explore
two different areas it may be that one of those
areas will turn out to be productive in terms of
publishable results and the other might not.
One obvious way to explain the very large
differences in output and citation impact between
individuals would be to suggest that some
researchers are naturally more productive than
others because of their talent. This intuition could
be said to be behind the policy of concentrating
research funding on an elite group of the most
productive (or ‘excellent’) researchers or institutions.
A further implication of this model is that the
effect of simply increasing the amount of
research funding and the number of researchers
would not necessarily be positive. There may be a
diminishing rate of return which sets in as more,
less productive, researchers start to be funded.
Scientific research looking into the determinants of
research productivity has not been abundant, but
is gradually receiving more attention
(65). However,
we can readily see that the very large differences
in productivity and quality between researchers
(63) Single-Author Papers. Science Watch 2013.
(64) The Scientific Century, Royal Society 2010.
(65) The Great Divide in Scientific Productivity. Why the Average
Scientist Does Not Exist. Kelchtermans and Veugelers, 2008.
in different countries cannot be explained by the
distribution of natural talent (even if we take into
account that some systems are able to attract
significant numbers of talented researchers from
abroad)
(66). Therefore, the institutional frameworks
in which researchers operate and, in particular, the
levels of funding are likely to be highly significant
in determining these differences.
Further criticism of the ‘excellence’ model comes
from those who believe that scientific productivity
is subject to accumulated advantage (67), or the
‘Mathew effect’ (68), whereby small initial differences
between researchers in talent, networks or, indeed,
luck can turn into very large differences in terms of
funding, recognition, publications, citations, prizes
and high profile roles received by researchers over
the course of a career as ‘the rich become richer’
(some studies estimate that there might indeed be
such an effect but that it is relatively small)
(69).
This second view implies that opportunities to
develop an independent research programme
and research funding should be more evenly
distributed (in particular to researchers in the
early stages of their careers) and that more
emphasis should be paid to qualitative over
quantitative measures of research output.
In conclusion, countries and institutions that wish
to improve their level of scientific production will
need to ensure the right institutional framework
and an adequate level of funding. However, given
that the resources which any society is willing to
devote to research will be limited, it is also clear
that measures to select and attract the most
productive researchers are likely to be a key part
of any framework.
(66) In Switzerland and the UK, more than four out of ten doctoral
students are international students. A number of other countries,
including New Zealand, Australia, the United States, Ireland,
Sweden, and Canada, have relatively high percentages (more
than 20%) of doctoral students who are internationally mobile.
Education at a Glance: 2012. OECD.
(67) The Economics of Science. Stephan, 1996.
(68) The Matthew Effect in Science. Merton 1968.
(69) Matthew: Effect or Fable? Azoulay et al. December 2012.

===== PDF_PAGE 180 =====
178
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Daria Ciriaci
European Commission Directorate-General for
Economic and Financial Affairs
4.1 Introduction
As emphasised in the European Commission’s
Investment Plan for Europe (70), a key priority at
the current economic juncture is to implement
the necessary structural reforms that promote
investment as an engine of productivity, growth,
and a source of productive jobs.
In line with this, in addition to the creation of
a new European Fund for Strategic Investment
(EFSI) and the establishment of a pool of
viable projects, the Investment Plan proposes
an ambitious roadmap for removing regulatory
barriers to investment
(71). Clearly, this involves
taking actions to boost structural reforms
both at EU and country level, with the aim to
improve the functioning of labour and product
markets and the framework conditions in which
economic actors operate. The idea behind this is
that providing greater regulatory predictability,
removing barriers to investment across Europe
and further reinforcing the Single Market, i.e.,
creating optimal framework conditions, will
unlock the full potential of investments in Europe.
This also applies to business investments in R&D;
taking measures to leverage private investment
favouring supportive framework conditions may
unlock their full potential. In fact, the efficacy of
the wider innovation system often hinges upon the
quality of framework conditions and the capacity to
ensure an innovation-friendly environment in both
more and less R&D intensive parts of the economy.
(70) http://ec.europa.eu/priorities/jobs-growth-investment/plan/index_
en.htm
(71) Among the priorities of the 2015 Work Programme, the
European Commission is committed to lightening the regulatory
load while keeping high levels of social, health and environmental
protection and consumer choice, cutting unnecessary red tape
or administrative burdens, while at the same time bringing the
benefits that citizens expect. The EC proposes measures to further
deepen the Single Market for goods and services, and to develop a
truly connected Digital Single Market.
EU business R&D investment is still far away
from the target set in the 2012 Barcelona council
(2/3 of the EU2020 target of 3% should be
represented by private investment in R&D), and
lags significantly behind the US. In addition, since
the crisis started, this EU-US gap in business
R&D has increased; in 2008, EU business
expenditures in R&D represented almost 80% of
the US expenditures, but in 2012 (the latest year
for which data on the US are available) this value
is 69.4%. In terms of business R&D intensity, the
EU-US gap in 2012 is 1.29% versus 1.96%.
Moreover, cross-country heterogeneity in BERD
intensities among Member States is high and,
although sectoral differences among them partly
contribute to explain it, tends to persist even after
controlling for MSs’ sectoral specialisation. This
means that there are Member States that, ceteris
paribus, present a lower level of private investment
in R&D than others (and vice versa) irrespective
of their structural characteristics. What is more
problematic, since the mid-1990s the rate of
return-to-R&D of firms from European countries
has been generally lower than that of their US
counterparts (Hall et al., 2009). Both intensity of
investment and its efficiency are thus lower.
Remaining cross-country heterogeneity in
BERD intensities could be then explained by
differences in business environments that,
combined with different conditions to accessing
finance, differences in human capital and
skills availability, market potential and other
demand-side bottlenecks, prevent private R&D
investments in the EU from increasing and
converging towards similar intensities and, more
specifically, toward the target set during the
aforementioned 2012 Barcelona council.
Therefore, in the following, the focus will be on
the role and likely impact of (product and labour)
market regulation, red tape barriers, judicial and
insolvency frameworks and access to finance
4. The role of well-designed framework conditions
for business investment in R&I

===== PDF_PAGE 181 =====
179
II-4. The role of well-designed framework conditions for business investment in R&I
on business investments in R&D. The first four
framework condition aspects, when investments
in R&D are considered, tend to be less emphasised
than those related to skills availability, IPR regimes
and access to finance, which are more commonly
discussed when considering the conditions for
efficient R&D systems.
Clearly, this is not to say that emphasising the
role of human resources and skills for innovation
are not as important, but simply that this chapter
focuses on a different narrative. It has been
shown that skills availability and mismatch is
still a key bottleneck in some MSs. In addition
to generating new knowledge, higher skill levels
raise economies’ absorptive capacity and ability
to perform incremental innovation (Toner, 2007).
Human capital can also contribute indirectly to
innovation through the spillovers generated by
skilled workers, who diffuse their knowledge
throughout their workplace and the wider
environment and spur faster accumulation of
human capital by other workers through their
interactions. In this regard, what this chapter
aims to do, for instance, is stress that in the
presence of stringent employment protection
legislation, this reallocation of resources may be
less efficient, harming the most innovative and
productive firms and sectors, which would need
these resources to undertake their innovative
projects and grow.
In a nutshell, the analysis shows that framework
conditions for business R&D vary considerably
across European countries and confirm the room
for policy action; the need for the completion of
the Single market, harmonisation, and further
reform efforts appear rather obvious.
The rest of the chapter is organised as follows.
Section 1 briefly explains why well designed
framework policies may enhance business
investment in R&D and innovation. Section 2
presents the available empirical evidence on
business dynamics in the EU and highlights
the main trends in (product and labour) market
regulation, judicial and insolvency efficiency and
access to finance. Section 3 uses the narrative
developed in previous sections to interpret the
well-known EU low adoption of ICT in services.
Section 4 presents the conclusion.
4.2 Why do well designed framework
policies allow productive and
innovative firms to thrive?
Economic theory suggests that structural
reforms and improvements in institutional
quality can lead to better resource allocation and
greater productive capacity, foster catch-up, and
encourage entrepreneurship and innovation. In
line with this, factors affecting the ease of entry
to, and exit from, a market and growth such as
the level of product and labour market regulation,
bankruptcy laws and the efficiency of the judicial
system and access to finance, all deeply affect
firms’ strategic behaviour, investment choices,
productivity and growth prospects.
The removal of entry and other regulatory
barriers favours the entry of new, young firms
in protected sectors. This entails the reduction
of excessive rents and provides incumbents with
incentives to make their production processes
more efficient (see, among others, Nicoletti and
Scarpetta, 2003; Syverson, 2011; Christiansen,
Schindler, and Tressel, 2013; OECD, 2013; Prati,
Onorato, and Papageorgiou, 2013; Restuccia
and Rogerson, 2013; EC, 2014). Gains from
more efficient production and increases in
firm-level productivity in the liberalised sectors
would, in turn, spread throughout the economy,
due to the role of these sectors in providing
intermediate inputs to other sectors (OECD,
2015; Ciriaci et al., 2015; EC, 2014; Canton
et al., 2014). Concurrently, bankruptcy legislation
and judicial efficiency shape the exit margin,
further facilitating the reallocation of resources
towards the most efficient firms, which is
further enhanced in the presence of efficient
employment protection legislation.
In particular, the link between product market
regulations (PMR) and innovation has to be found
in the fact that reforms to PMR, especially those
reducing entry barriers, can spur innovation via:
i) more entry, as young firms have a comparative
advantage in radical innovation and more entry
may pressure incumbents to innovate
(72); ii) greater
market discipline, which improves management
performance and scope for technology adoption;
(72) The nature of this effect will vary with a firm’s distance to the
frontier (Aghion and Griffith, 2005).

===== PDF_PAGE 182 =====
180
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
and iii) easier and cheaper access to inputs, which,
because of easier reallocation, raises the returns
to investment in knowledge-based capital such
as investment in R&D, innovation and technology
development, training and education of workers,
internal organisation structures, customer and
institutional networks, marketing, and software
and information technology. Therefore, reforms
aiming at increasing business dynamics via the
entry (but also the exit) channel may contribute to
stronger market selection and post-entry growth,
thereby enhancing the ability of firms to achieve
sufficient scale to enter global markets. However,
as suggested by Aghion et al. (2002), although
competition may increase the incremental profit
from innovating, it may also reduce innovation
incentives for laggards. That is why, according
to the authors, the relationship between product
market competition and innovation has an
inverted U-shape
(73). Competition may increase
the incremental profits from innovating (thereby
encouraging R&D investments aimed at ‘escaping
competition’) and it will do so to a larger extent in
industries in which oligopolistic firms face more
similar production costs (in the so-called ‘neck-
and-neck’ industries)
(74).
In addition, for economies to thrive on innovation,
labour needs to be reallocated within and across
firms and sectors as labour may not be initially
efficiently allocated and/or labour-saving
technologies, that may generate temporary
unemployment, may be introduced. In these cases,
a stringent employment protection legislation
(EPL) may hinder the redirection of resources
towards their most productive uses and, hence,
productivity growth and impede on a quicker
match of labour supply and demand. According
to the OECD, EPL reduces R&D expenditure,
hampering firms engaging in innovations and
needing skilled personnel and complementary
resources to implement and commercialise
them (Andrews and Criscuolo, 2013). Not
(73) The economic model developed by the authors also suggests that
(i) the equilibrium degree of technological neck-and-neckness
among firms should decrease with product market reforms, (ii) the
higher the average degree of neck-and-neckness in an industry,
the steeper the inverted-U relationship and that (iii) firms may
innovate more if subject to higher debt-pressure, especially at
lower levels of product market reforms.
(74) A firm with lower unit costs is referred to as the technological
leader in the corresponding industry, and when both firms have
the same unit costs they are referred to as neck-and-neck firms.
See Aghion et al. (2002).
surprisingly, the Global Competitiveness Report
(World Economic Forum, 2014) ranks restrictive
labour regulations (which include EPL) as not
necessarily being the most problematic factor
for engaging in business; 22.7% of respondents
cite restrictive labour regulations and 18.6% cite
an inadequately educated workforce; 12% cite
an inefficient government bureaucracy (12.0%).
At the same time, bankruptcy regimes can foster
experimentation with risky technologies if they
do not sanction business failure too much. In this
regard, while almost all Member States have formal
in-court restructuring proceedings, the options of
informal and/or hybrid restructuring are limited
in many cases (Ciriaci et al., 2015). This scarce
availability of less costly out-of-court procedures is
a problem, particularly for smaller companies, given
that the costs of legal proceedings are to some
extent fixed and, in many cases, not affordable.
This incomplete insolvency framework may push
some solvent firms in (actual or foreseen) financial
difficulties, into formal insolvency proceedings and,
ultimately, premature liquidation. This leads in turn
to the closure of potentially viable firms, creating
financial and non-financial losses (including
avoidable job destruction), borne by firms’ creditors,
shareholders, employees, and public authorities
across the EU. In line with these arguments, the
OECD (2015) stresses that lowering the cost to
close a business increases the ability of economies
to learn from new innovation at the technology
frontier and the size of national frontier firms.
The incentive to invest in innovation will also be
affected by the efficiency of the judicial system
(EC, 2014; Lorenzani and Lucidi, 2014). A well-
functioning civil justice system that guarantees
legal certainty and proper contract enforcement
is mostly relevant for innovative firms given the
higher than average risk generally associated with
investment in R&D and given the importance, in
such a field, of copyright protection and intellectual
property rights. Reforms such as rationalising the
organisation of courts, fostering investment in
in-court ICT, and introducing incentives to reduce
excessive litigation rates (for instance by enhancing
the use of alternative dispute resolution methods),
are all found to positively affect the efficiency of

===== PDF_PAGE 183 =====
181
II-4. The role of well-designed framework conditions for business investment in R&I
4.3 Business environment for R&I:
anticompetitive market regulations
and red tape barriers have
pervasive effects
If we adapt the context of R&I investment to President
Juncker’s political guidelines — according to which
jobs, growth and investment will only return to
Europe if we create the right regulatory environment
and promote a climate of entrepreneurship and job
creation — this implies an environment where:
(i) competition increases the supply of new
ideas and incentivises frontier firms to
innovate and produce new technology and
non-frontier firms to catch-up;
(ii) well-functioning markets diffuse and
facilitate its wider adoption;
(iii) resources are rapidly reallocated from less
efficient and failing firms to more efficient
and growing ones;
(iv) there are financial incentives for
entrepreneurs to undertake risky projects.
Unfortunately, only a very limited number of
Member States have so far embraced a systemic
approach to reviewing their R&I policies and
identifying the bottlenecks that need to be
overcome to create a business environment in
which innovative firms are more likely to invest
and grow
(76). Regulation within product, labour,
and land markets limits possible business models,
raises the cost of R&I investment, and slows down
market forces that can incentivise firms to adopt
more productive routines and practices.
In the following, we present and comment on the
empirical evidence on business dynamics and
highlight the main trend in (product and labour)
market regulation, judicial and insolvency efficiency,
and access to finance, with the aim of emphasising
the high degree of heterogeneity existing in the EU
and the extent to which these differences contribute
to differences in the innovation-friendliness of the
EU business environment.
(76) Europe 2020 targets: research and development.
 http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/pdf/themes/15_research__
development.pdf
civil justice and, through it, to enhance entry rates
and favour the exit of less successful firms, the
resources of which can be then reallocated among
surviving firms.
It is also worth noting that the World Economic
Forum (2014) includes an indicator of perceived
judicial independence among its competitiveness
indicators. Well-functioning judiciaries could
guarantee security of property rights and contract
enforcement, in turn reinforcing economic
agents’ incentives to save and invest, as well as
entrepreneurship in a broader sense, not least by
dissuading opportunistic behaviour and reducing
transaction costs. This is likely to promote
competition, innovation, and growth (Lorenzani
and Lucidi, 2014).
In addition, it is the existence of a competitive
market that allows translating process innovation,
mismatch lower unit labour costs of production,
into lower output prices (Bogliacino and Vivarelli,
2012). This decrease in output prices, however,
is not the end of the process. On the one hand,
lower prices encourage additional demand for
products, additional production and, henceforth,
higher employment. However, given that this price
effect is not immediate, in the period between
the observed decrease in production costs and
the resulting fall in prices, excess profits and
excess income may be accumulated. Whereas
excess profits may be invested, excess income
may result in higher consumption, and hence
higher employment, or the so-called income
effect (Freeman et al., 1982; Freeman and Soete,
1987; Katsoulacos, 1986). On the other hand,
as the effect of innovation might not always
be job-friendly, competitive labour and product
markets might favour a quicker reallocation
of labour resources among firms and across
sectors, reducing a possible negative impact of
innovation on employment and/or favouring and
helping to reduce the mismatch between labour
demand and supply
(75).
(75) This view is also supported, for instance, by the EC (2013) that
emphasized that, among the factors discouraging firms from
investing in R&D and other intangible assets, a ‘difficult to
understand’ regulatory framework is one of the main bottlenecks,
along with the high cost of the investment and the limited public
financial support for them, and an unfavourable tax treatment.
EC (2013), Flash Eurobarometer 369, Investing in Intangibles:
Economic Assets and Innovation Drivers for Growth.

===== PDF_PAGE 184 =====
182
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
4.3.1 Business dynamics: empirical
evidence
As previously stressed, the creation of new
businesses and the decline or market exit of less
productive firms are often regarded as key to
business dynamism and economic growth (77). It
could be argued, indeed, that entry into a market
is one of the key elements of the transmission
mechanism through which product market
reforms ultimately affect productivity; the entry
of new firms, or the threat of it, induces existing
firms to become more efficient by setting their
prices closer to marginal costs, reducing mark-
ups through reallocation of resources within the
firm, and investing in innovation. In addition, less
productive firms are supposed to be pushed out
of the market, while more efficient ones grow
and gain market share, thus leading to further
efficiency gains
(78).
The theoretical reasons behind the aforementioned
expectations on the relevance of firm entry and
exit for innovation and productivity can be better
grasped considering that their direct impacts on it
can be decomposed into several effects. The first
effect is due to a process of internal restructuring
(‘within effect’); the productivity of firms in the
industry increases because of internal factors,
such as organisational change, new technologies,
or reallocation of inputs. The second effect regards,
instead, the so-called external restructuring, which
represents a reallocation of resources among
firms via a process of creative destruction with
the exit of the least efficient firms or via a shift
in market shares towards most efficient firms.
Related to these ideas are creative destruction
models of economic growth (Aghion and Howitt,
1992), according to which new firms play a crucial
(77) As a matter of fact, the existence of a positive link between the
process of entry, reallocation of resources (within and between
sectors) and macroeconomic growth is established in the
economic theoretical and empirical literature. For instance, the
entry of very high productive firms in a certain market may favour
productivity-enhancing investment by incumbents interested
in and trying to preserve their market power. Moreover, firms
experiencing higher than average productivity growth are likely
to gain market shares if the productivity gain goes along with
upsizing, whereas they will lose market shares if their gain was
driven by a process of restructuring associated, instead, with
downsizing. Scarpetta et al., 2002.
(78) Ciriaci (2015).
role in developing innovations. Innovators replace
old firms and earn monopoly profits until a new
innovation comes along. Barnes, Haskell and
Maliranta (2001) found substantial within effects
for the OECD; Baily, Hulten and Campbell (1992)
found similar results for the US manufacturing
firms between 1972 and 1988; and so do
Griliches and Regev (1995) for the Israeli industry
over 1979-1988. There are also studies that
decompose aggregate productivity growth into the
contributions of entrants, incumbents, and those
who exit, and show that the process of firm entry
and exit plays a role in reallocating resources
from low to higher productivity units (Scarpetta
et al., 1992; Foster et al., 1998, Baldwin and Gu,
2003). At the same time, firm entry rates tend
to be higher in industries with higher output and
employment growth (Brandt, 2004), a result that
might be related to the aforementioned positive
impact of firm entry on productivity.
According to recent analysis, the EU’s business
research and development deficit in R&D
intensity relative to the US can be virtually
entirely accounted for by the EU having fewer
young leading innovators (yollies). Even more
importantly, EU yollies are less R&D intensive,
a feature largely explained by their different
sectoral composition and ability to take up
technological opportunities that create radical
changes (Cincera and Veugelers, 2013). This
is also in line with the evidence presented in
Bartelsman et al. (2009), according to which
entry and exit dynamics as well as survival
patterns seem to have a similar pattern in
the EU and US, whereas there are remarkable
differences regarding the growth performance of
surviving firms.

===== PDF_PAGE 185 =====
183
II-4. The role of well-designed framework conditions for business investment in R&I
Therefore, while in the case of the specialisation
pattern the room for effective policy action in the
short to medium term is limited (a change in EU
yollies’ R&D intensity would require a change in
sectoral specialisation), the lower number of yollies
could be a more feasible short-term policy target.
This is likely due to different business conditions
and a regulatory environment that is not friendly
to young innovative firms
(79). More favourable
conditions for younger and smaller firms/start-
ups exist in the US, where, as a matter of fact,
successful (unsuccessful) firms grow (shrink)
faster than in the EU. In terms of innovation and
competition, recent research (Bartelsman et al.,
2013) also shows that the size of entering and
exiting firms tends to be smaller in the US than
in Europe. Also, successful young firms tend to
(79) See, among others, Klapper, L., Quesada Delgado J.M. (2009),
The impact of the business environment on the business creation
process, Policy Research Working Paper Series 4937, The
World Bank; Nicodeme G., and Sauner-Leroy, J.B., (2004), Product
market reforms and productivity: a review of the theoretical and
empirical literature on the transmission channels, ECFIN Economic
papers, n. 218.
expand relatively more quickly in the US than
elsewhere (80). In this regard, as emphasised by
van Stel et al., (2007), when it comes to increasing
the rates of new firm formation and subsequent
wealth creation, policy-makers are faced with
a central choice; they can either follow a low
regulation route, as done, for instance, in the US,
or follow a high ‘‘support’’ route, which in the past
has been the traditional route in the EU. The low
regulation route focuses on enabling the starting
of a business to take place as quickly and cheaply
as possible and on minimising the number, and
severity, of regulations upon that business whilst it
is trading. The alternative policy is for government
to provide ‘‘support’’ to new and small firms in the
form of information, advice, training, or finance to
new firms or existing small firms.
(80) This has been identified as another cause of the innovation gap
with the EU. Bartelsman, E.J., J. Haltiwanger and S. Scarpetta
(2013), ‘Cross-Country Differences in Productivity: The Role of
Allocation and Selection’, American Economic Review, vol. 103(1).
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes:
(1)The number of enterprise births divided by the number of active enterprises in the reference period. (2)EE, IE, CY, LT: 2010.
 ▶ Figure II-4-1 Birth rate(1) of enterprises by sector, 2011(2)
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes:(1)The number of enterprise births divided by the number of active enterprises in the reference period. (2)EE, IE,
CY, LT: 2010.
Figure II-4-1 Birth rate(1) of enterprises by sector, 2011(2)
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Birth rate
 Industry ConstructionMarket services Retail trade
Lithuania
Latvia Slovakia Portugal Denmark Poland
United Kingdom
Estonia
Netherlands
Bulgaria France
Czech Republic
Romania Slovenia Finland Hungary
Luxembourg
Germany
Spain Sweden
Italy
Austria Ireland Belgium Cyprus Malta

===== PDF_PAGE 186 =====
184
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
As shown in Figure II-4-1, birth rates (the ratio
between the number of new firms that enter
the sth sector between t and t+1 and the total
number of firms (incumbent and entrant) in
sector s at time t ) across Member States vary
significantly. These tend to be significantly lower
than the average in industry sectors (also likely
because of different sectoral firms’ optimal
scales), or those mainly investing in business
R&D (the same applies to death rates). The
range of variation among birth rates in industry
is 1.91% (observed in Malta) — 18% (observed
in Lithuania), with an EU median of 7.6%.
If we consider the sum of birth and death rates,
the so-called churn rate, the range of variation
across EU MSs decreased, but is still large
(Figure II-4-2), with an EU median of 13%.
In a recent publication, the OECD has also shown
that, in OECD countries, business dynamism is
declining; the share of start-ups (defined as the
fraction of firms which are from 0 to 2 years old
among all firms) has declined sharply over the
period from 2001-2010 (Criscuolo et al., 2014)
in all 18 of the OECD countries analysed in the
study (Figure II-4-3).
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes:
(1)The number of enterprise births divided by the number of active enterprises in the reference period. (2)The number of
enterprise deaths divided by the number of active enterprises in the reference period.
 ▶ Figure II-4-2 Churn rate (birth rate(1) plus death rate(2)) of enterprises by sector, 2011
United Kingdom
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes:(1)The number of enterprise births divided by the number of active enterprises in the reference period. (2)The
number of enterprise deaths divided by the number of active enterprises in the reference period.
Figure II-4-2 Churn rate (birth rate(1) plus death rate(2)) of enterprises by sector, 2011
Birth rate plus death rate
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Market services Industry Construction Retail trade
Latvia Portugal Slovakia Denmark Bulgaria Hungary
United Kingdom
Romania
Czech Republic
Netherlands
Finland Spain
Germany
Luxembourg
France Slovenia
Italy
Sweden Austria Belgium Malta

===== PDF_PAGE 187 =====
185
II-4. The role of well-designed framework conditions for business investment in R&I
Recent efforts in the EU have been concerted on
fostering the functioning of the Single Market
(Single Market Acts I and II) and ensuring a
pro-competitive environment in Europe, to
complete the Banking Union and to streamline
legislation and reduced regulatory burdens
(for instance, with the REFIT Initiative) and the
priority given to reducing red tape barriers and
excessive regulation in the investment plan are
all policy initiatives that will go in the direction of
increasing entry rates.
4.3.2 Business environment for R&I:
Regulation in product and labour
markets and red tape barriers
Among the several factors affecting firms’
decision regarding entry, product market
regulations stand out as having a considerable
influence (Cincera and Galgau, 2005). Scarpetta
et al. (2002) found that the overall product
market regulation level and, in particular,
administrative barriers to start-ups, have a
significant negative impact on firm entry.
Accordingly, Ciriaci (2014) estimated the impact
of changes in the administrative cost of starting
a business on entry dynamics in 17 European
member countries during the period from
2004-2011 and found a significant negative
impact of the level of red tape barriers on entry
dynamics at the sectoral level.
Notwithstanding the agreement on the key
role of business dynamics for productivity and
innovation, and despite recent reform efforts,
some countries are still lagging behind in terms of
product market regulation. The main data source
of cross-country comparable information on the
level of product market regulation is the OECD’s
Product Market Regulation (PMR) composite
indicator
(81), whose value spans from 0 to 6 (a
(81) The OECD’s PMR translates policy action into a quantitative
indicator. Though comprehensive and rich, its construction
has some limitations. For instance, the indicator does not
capture all the regulatory barriers in each sector covered, but a
selection of them; therefore it provides a partial approximation
of the regulatory framework in each country. Moreover, the
information on regulatory structures and policies is collected
through a questionnaire sent to governments and, therefore,
does not reflect the opinion of the private sector. Finally, the
PMR captures the ‘de jure’ policy settings while not reflecting, for
instance, the way in which regulations are applied by authorities,
even though enforcement can have a considerable impact on
the level of competition. Even so, the PMR indicator provides
a comparable picture of the regulatory framework across
countries. For detailed information about the OECD indicators
and their components see: http://www.oecd.org/eco/reform/
indicatorsofproductmarketregulationhomepage.htm .
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: Criscuolo et al., 2014
 ▶ Figure II-4-3 Share of start-ups in all firms in manufacturing, construction and non-financial business
 services sectors, averaged over three-year periods

===== PDF_PAGE 188 =====
186
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
low value corresponds to light regulation) and
that translates policy action into a quantitative
indicator. Figure II-4-4 reports the value of the
PMR index in 2013 (the cut-off date for reforms
to be considered in the 2013 PMR index is
December 2012), and of its components, for
the EU MSs and EU’s main competitors, and
Figure II-4-4 shows the change in the level of
regulation made by EU Member States since
2008, which might be considered a proxy of
their reforms effort, relating the PMR value in
2008 with the difference between the 2008 and
2013 values.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Note: (1)IE: 2012.
 ▶ Figure II-4-4 PMR index and its components, 2013(1)
PMR Barriers
to en-
trepre-
neurship
Com-
plexity
of regu-
latory
proce-
dures
Licence
and
per-
mits
system
Commu-
nication
and
simplifi-
cation of
rules and
proce-
dures
Adminis-
trative
burdens
on start-
ups
Adminis-
trative
burdens
for
corpora-
tions
Adminis-
trative
burdens
for sole
proprie-
tor firms
Barriers
in
services
sectors
Regu-
latory
protec-
tion of
incu-
mbents
Legal
barriers
to
entry
Anti-
trust
exemp-
tions
Barriers
in
network
sectors
Belgium 1.39 1.78 1.47 2.00 0.94 2.53 2.20 1.00 4.40 1.34 1.50 0.00 2.52
Bulgaria 1.57 1.70 2.23 3.33 1.13 1.82 1.80 0.80 2.86 1.05 0.46 0.00 2.69
Czech Republic 1.39 1.82 2.49 4.00 0.97 2.11 1.80 0.80 3.72 0.86 0.20 0.00 2.39
Denmark 1.22 1.26 1.28 2.00 0.57 1.30 1.20 0.00 2.69 1.20 0.80 0.58 2.22
Germany 1.29 1.66 2.00 2.67 1.33 1.62 1.00 0.20 3.65 1.38 0.40 1.40 2.34
Estonia 1.29 1.56 2.06 4.00 0.11 1.83 1.60 0.60 3.28 0.79 0.21 0.00 2.17
Ireland 1.45 1.98 3.37 5.33 1.40 1.49 1.40 0.20 2.86 1.07 0.72 0.00 2.50
Greece 1.74 1.91 2.07 4.00 0.15 2.37 1.80 1.40 3.91 1.30 1.10 0.00 2.79
Spain 1.44 2.10 2.83 4.67 0.99 2.34 1.60 1.40 4.01 1.15 1.30 0.00 2.14
France 1.47 1.68 1.57 2.00 1.15 2.16 2.00 0.60 3.89 1.32 1.14 0.00 2.81
Croatia 2.08 1.99 2.00 4.00 0.00 2.98 2.60 2.75 3.60 0.97 0.67 0.00 2.25
Italy 1.26 1.22 0.52 0.67 0.38 2.14 1.60 0.20 4.62 1.01 0.48 0.00 2.56
Cyprus 1.65 2.09 2.90 4.67 1.13 2.05 1.40 1.40 3.36 1.32 0.50 0.89 2.57
Latvia 1.61 2.03 2.67 5.33 0.00 2.40 2.20 1.60 3.40 1.04 0.50 0.00 2.61
Lithuania 1.52 1.57 1.56 2.00 1.13 1.97 1.80 1.00 3.11 1.17 0.96 0.00 2.56
Luxembourg 1.46 1.71 1.41 2.67 0.15 2.40 1.40 1.20 4.60 1.33 0.67 0.00 3.33
Hungary 1.33 1.69 0.90 0.67 1.13 2.68 2.40 1.40 4.25 1.50 1.45 0.82 2.22
Malta 1.57 2.18 2.85 4.00 1.70 2.13 2.40 1.20 2.80 1.57 1.08 0.50 3.13
Netherlands 0.92 1.19 1.08 2.00 0.16 1.25 1.40 0.00 2.34 1.26 1.15 0.00 2.62
Austria 1.19 1.31 1.02 2.00 0.05 2.01 1.80 0.20 4.04 0.89 0.20 0.00 2.47
Poland 1.65 1.64 1.36 2.67 0.06 2.58 2.40 1.00 4.34 0.96 0.20 0.00 2.69
Portugal 1.29 1.35 0.41 0.00 0.82 2.48 1.80 2.00 3.63 1.16 1.57 0.00 1.92
Romania 1.69 2.06 2.00 4.00 0.00 2.91 2.60 2.20 3.92 1.28 0.64 1.14 2.07
Slovenia 1.70 1.81 2.33 4.67 0.00 1.97 2.20 0.40 3.31 1.13 0.90 0.00 2.48
Slovakia 1.29 1.15 0.46 0.00 0.91 2.09 1.60 0.80 3.86 0.90 0.40 0.00 2.31
Finland 1.29 1.55 1.63 2.67 0.59 1.74 1.20 1.20 2.83 1.26 0.90 0.00 2.89
Sweden 1.52 1.71 2.77 4.67 0.87 1.45 1.40 1.00 1.94 0.92 0.80 0.00 1.95
United
Kingdom
1.08 1.49 2.46 4.67 0.25 1.36 0.80 0.20 3.07 0.64 0.60 0.35 0.97
EU 1.44 1.69 1.85 3.05 0.64 2.08 1.76 0.96 3.51 1.13 0.77 0.20 2.43
United States . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan 1.41 1.67 1.83 2.67 1.00 1.54 1.20 0.00 3.41 1.65 1.07 0.53 3.34
China 2.86 3.13 3.65 4.67 2.63 4.11 4.20 4.60 3.53 1.63 0.93 0.00 3.94
South Korea 1.88 1.87 2.00 4.00 0.00 1.87 1.80 0.80 3.01 1.73 1.21 0.53 3.47

===== PDF_PAGE 189 =====
187
II-4. The role of well-designed framework conditions for business investment in R&I
The range of variation of the PMR index in
2013 is 0.92(Netherlands)-2.08(Croatia), and
confirms that there is room for further effort;
many Member States are far away from the best
performers (the Netherlands and the UK). Overall,
regulation appears particularly strict in the case
of licences and permits and in services and
network sectors. Barriers to entry are relatively
higher than the EU average in 15 Member States,
with Malta, Spain, Cyprus, Romania, Latvia and
Croatia being among those with higher levels
and also registering at higher than EU average
levels of complexity with regard to regulatory
procedures. Concurrently, the administrative
burdens on start-ups are significantly higher
than the EU average in Croatia, Hungary, Poland,
Belgium and Portugal.
OECD’s Product Market Regulation indicator ranges
from 0 to 6, where 6 represent a very restrictive
level of regulation. Reform effort is measured as
the difference in the Product Market Regulation
indicator between 2008 and 2013.
However, it is also worth stressing that, overall, a
significant number of labour and product market
reforms were introduced at the national level to
boost economic activity and competitiveness,
especially as a response to the crisis, and
regulatory barriers have decreased in the
majority of EU countries. In general, reform effort
has been the largest in countries under financial
stress, where accumulated vulnerabilities,
amplified by the lack of reform efforts in the
years before the crisis, hampered the ability
of these economies to adjust (Figure II-4-5).
Member States with relatively more restrictive
regulation in product markets at the beginning
of the crisis exhibit, on average, an intensified
reform effort afterwards.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: European Commission, OECD
Note: (1)OECD’s Product Market Regulation (PMR) indicator ranges from 0 to 6, where 6 represents a very restrictive level of regulation.
Reform effort is measured as the difference in the Product Market Regulation (PMR) indicator between 2008 and 2013.
 ▶ Figure II-4-5 Reform efforts(1) in EU Member States during the crisis, 2008-2013
Figure II-4-5 Reform eﬀorts(1) in EU Member States during the crisis, 2008-2013
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: European Commission, OECD
Note: (1)OECD's Product Market Regulation (PMR) indicator ranges from 0 to 6, where 6 represents a very restrictive level of
regulation. Reform eﬀort is measured as the diﬀerence in the Product Market Regulation (PMR) indicator between 2008 and
2 0 1 3 .
Reform eﬀort (diﬀerence in PMR between 2008 and 2013), 2008-2013
-0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
PMR (Product Market Regulation indicator), 2008
2.5
2.3
2.1
1.9
1.7
1.5
1.3
1.1
0.9
0.7
0.5
IE
ES
SI
HU
IT
SK
PT
PL
EL
LU
FR
FI
NL
SE
CZ
EE
UK
BE
DE DK
AT

===== PDF_PAGE 190 =====
188
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Notwithstanding, the average level of
employment protection legislation (EPL) is higher
in the EU than in the US, Japan and South Korea
and continues to present a high level of EU cross
country heterogeneity, with the UK as the best
performer, as shown by the EPL index of the
OECD reported in Figure II-4-7.
Clearly, these high regulatory barriers in product
markets also translate to higher entry and exit
costs; in some MSs there is a generally more than
average onerous business environment
(82), which
significantly and negatively affects business
dynamics (83). In this case, the main source of
cross-country information is the World Bank
Doing Business dataset
(84).
(82) World Bank (2013), Doing Business 2014: Understanding
Regulations for Small and Medium-Size Enterprises.
(83) See Ciriaci, D. (2014) Business dynamics and red tape barriers,
European Economy Economic Papers, 532. World Bank (2013),
Doing Business 2014: Understanding Regulations for Small and
Medium-Size Enterprises.
(84) This homogeneous data source has the main advantage of
allowing cross-country comparison in a field where available
(and comparable across time and countries) data is very limited
and should be considered a measure of the level of business
regulations in a MS. This presents quantitative indicators on the
regulations that apply to firms at different stages of their life
(regulations for starting a business, dealing with construction
permits, acquiring electricity, registering property, acquiring
credit, protecting investors, paying taxes, trading across borders,
enforcing contracts and resolving insolvency). Therefore, it records
all procedures officially required, or commonly done in practice,
for an entrepreneur to start up and formally operate an industrial
or commercial business, as well as the time and cost to complete
them and the paid-in minimum capital requirements.
The same applies in the case of the labour
market reform efforts made since the onset
of the crisis, which also responded to the need
to modernise labour market institutions, with
the average reform intensity over the sample
period being higher in countries characterised,
on average, by a higher unemployment rate (see
Figure II-4-6).
Figure II-4-6 Unemployment rate in 2008 and subsequent labour market reform eﬀorts(1), 2008-2013
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: European Commission
Note: (1)Reform eﬀort proxied by a non-weighted count of the number of measures undertaken. Calculated from the
European Commission's LABREF dataset.

 Unemployment rate, 2008
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Labour market reform eﬀorts, 2008-2013
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
MT
PT
BE
EL
ES
HU FR
LTBG
LV
SK
UK
IT
LU
NL
PL
CZ
CY DK
SI
SE
HR
DE
FI
RO
IE
EE AT
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: European Commission
Note: (1)Reform effort proxied by a non-weighted count of the number of measures undertaken. Calculated from the
European Commission’s LABREF dataset.
 ▶ Figure II-4-6 Unemployment rate in 2008 and subsequent labour market reform efforts(1), 2008-2013

===== PDF_PAGE 191 =====
189
II-4. The role of well-designed framework conditions for business investment in R&I
If we focus on the quantitative indicators proxying
the level of regulation for starting a business,
we find, for instance, that if an entrepreneur
wants to start a new business in Spain, he or
she has to go through ten separate procedures,
while doing so in Slovenia requires only two,
with a cost of 4.6% of per capita income in
Spain and a null cost in Slovenia (Figure II-4-8).
As shown in Figure II 4-8 below, the cost, number
of procedures, and days needed to start a
business differ substantially among EU countries,
with cost peaks observed in Italy, Poland, and
Cyprus and time peaks observed in Malta (more
than 34 days to start a new business), Austria,
the Czech Republic, Luxembourg, and Bulgaria.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
 ▶ Figure II-4-7 Employment protection legislation (EPL), 2013
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Figure II-4-7 Employment protection legislation (EPL), 2013
EPL index
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
China
EU
South Korea
Japan
United States
Germany Belgium
Netherlands
Latvia France Italy
Luxembourg
Portugal Slovenia
Czech Republic
Sweden Austria Greece Poland Denmark
Spain
Slovakia Finland Hungary Ireland Estonia
United Kingdom

===== PDF_PAGE 192 =====
190
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
However, in this case the reform effort since the
crisis is visible, especially in Portugal and Spain as
shown in Figure II-4-9, which reports the absolute
difference between the number of procedures and
the number of days needed to start a business,
and the cost in 2008 and in 2014.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: World Bank - Doing business, 2015
 ▶ Figure II-4-8 Time and cost needed to start doing business in EU countries in 2008 and in 2014
Procedures (number) Time (days) Cost (% of income per capita)
2008 2014 2008 2014 2008 2014
 Belgium 3 3 4.0 4.0 5.2 5.0
 Bulgaria 4 4 49.0 18.0 2.0 0.8
 Czech Republic 9 9 20.0 19.0 9.6 8.0
 Denmark 4 4 6.0 5.5 0.0 0.2
 Germany 9 9 17.5 14.5 5.6 8.8
 Estonia 5 4 6.5 4.5 1.7 1.4
 Ireland 4 4 13.0 6.0 0.3 0.3
 Greece 15 5 19.0 13.0 22.5 2.2
 Spain 10 6 61.0 13.0 14.9 4.6
 France 5 5 6.5 4.5 1.0 0.9
 Croatia 8 7 22.5 15.0 10.1 3.5
 Italy 6 5 10.0 5.0 18.5 14.1
 Cyprus 6 6 8.0 8.0 14.1 12.6
 Latvia 5 4 15.5 12.5 2.3 3.6
 Lithuania 7 3 26.0 3.5 2.7 0.7
 Luxembourg 6 6 25.0 18.5 6.5 2.0
 Hungary 4 4 5.0 5.0 8.4 8.3
 Malta - 11 - 34.5 - 11.0
 Netherlands 6 4 8.0 4.0 5.9 5.0
 Austria 8 8 25.0 22.0 5.1 0.3
 Poland 10 4 31.0 30.0 17.5 12.9
 Portugal 5 3 4.5 2.5 6.5 2.3
 Romania 5 5 9.0 8.0 3.5 2.1
 Slovenia 5 2 19.0 6.0 0.1 0.0
 Slovakia 6 7 17.5 11.5 3.3 1.5
 Finland 3 3 14.0 14.0 1.0 1.1
 Sweden 3 3 16.0 16.0 0.6 0.5
 United Kingdom 6 6 10.5 6.0 0.8 0.3

===== PDF_PAGE 193 =====
191
II-4. The role of well-designed framework conditions for business investment in R&I
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: World Bank - Doing business, 2015
Note:
(1)Reform effort is calculated as the absolute difference between the indexes’ values in 2008 and 2014.
 ▶ Figure II-4-9 Reform effort(1) in reducing the time and cost of doing business in EU countries between
 2008 and 2014
Procedures (number) Time (days) Cost (% of income per
capita)
 Belgium 0 0.0 0.2
 Bulgaria 0 31.0 1.2
 Czech Republic 0 1.0 1.6
 Denmark 0 0.5 -0.2
 Germany 0 3.0 -3.2
 Estonia 1 2.0 0.3
 Ireland 0 7.0 0.0
 Greece 10 6.0 20.3
 Spain 4 48.0 10.3
 France 0 2.0 0.1
 Croatia 1 7.5 6.6
 Italy 1 5.0 4.4
 Cyprus 0 0.0 1.5
 Latvia 1 3.0 -1.3
 Lithuania 4 22.5 2.0
 Luxembourg 0 6.5 4.5
 Hungary 0 0.0 0.1
 Netherlands 2 4.0 0.9
 Austria 0 3.0 4.8
 Poland 6 1.0 4.6
 Portugal 2 2.0 4.2
 Romania 0 1.0 1.4
 Slovenia 3 13.0 0.1
 Slovakia -1 6.0 1.8
 Finland 0 0.0 -0.1
 Sweden 0 0.0 0.1
 United Kingdom 0 4.5 0.5

===== PDF_PAGE 194 =====
192
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
4.3.3 Business environment for R&I:
Judicial and Insolvency frameworks
Business dynamics, entrepreneurship, and
reallocation are also favoured in the presence of
an efficient insolvency framework, limiting the
economic and social consequences of bankruptcy
for entrepreneurs (provided that business failure is
not due to fraud or dishonest behaviour; Fan and
White, 2003, European Commission, 2011). Indeed,
relaxing the legal consequences of insolvency could
promote entrepreneurship (European Commission,
2003), by providing entrepreneurs with partial
insurance against the consequences of failure
(Jackson, 1985; Adler, Polack and Schwartz, 2000;
Lee et al., 2007). This could be particularly relevant
for the more innovation-oriented entrepreneurs,
given the higher risk of R&D investment.
For instance, differences in insolvency regimes
across MSs may contribute to explain differences
in the ‘speed’ at which resources are released;
it takes less than six months for a firm to be
resolved in Ireland, for example, while it takes
about four years in Slovakia (Figure II-4-10).
In this regard, it is also worth noting that the later
a business initiates restructuring proceedings, the
higher the costs of restructuring and the lower the
management powers as well as the success rate
(85).
(85) To further address some of these inefficiencies, the
European Commission issued in March 2014 a Recommendation
setting out a series of common principles for national insolvency
frameworks, whose aim is to encourage restructuring of viable
businesses in financial distress at an early stage, as opposed to
insolvency and liquidation, and to encourage a second chance for
entrepreneurs.
Including an option to intervene early (in a pre-
insolvency phase) increases the chances of survival
for an ailing company and minimises the costs of
the restructuring for the economy as a whole.
In this regard, as shown in Ciriaci et al. (2015b),
the uniformity of approach is limited in the EU,
which is also characterised by high heterogeneity
in the efficiency of pre-insolvency frameworks
(86).
It ranges from a minimum of 0.05 observed in
Bulgaria to a maximum level of 0.85 found in
the UK (the range of the efficiency indicator is
0-1 and higher levels of the index indicate higher
efficiency; see Figure II-4-11).
The poor performance of Bulgaria is a combination
of very low chances to restructure debt to
sustainable levels, of the fact that no debt
restructuring is possible, and of the lack of incentives
for debtors to enter a pre-insolvency procedure,
among other factors. High levels of efficiency are
found in Portugal and Italy as a result of their recent
reforms, which position themselves close to the UK’s
performance. Lower levels of efficiency are found,
by contrast, in Slovakia, Hungary, and Croatia.
The overall performance of these three countries is,
in particular, due to the relatively lower ease and
availability of engaging in preventive proceedings
and the higher direct and indirect costs of preventive
restructuring procedures observed.
(86) The methodology adopted in this paper consists in constructing
quantitative indicators of efficiency of preventive restructuring
frameworks for EU Member States based on the comparison of
legal provisions of 27 EU Member States’ insolvency frameworks,
which have been assessed according to 12 dimensions and was
provided by the EC Directorate-General for Justice. Qualitative
information on the selected dimensions has been judgmentally
converted into ordinal variables, i.e., variables whose increasing
order reflects increasing efficiency of the rescue and recovery
frameworks in the Member States. See also European Commission
(2014), Commission recommendation on a new approach to
business failure and insolvency, 12.3.2014 C (2014) 1500 final.

===== PDF_PAGE 195 =====
193
II-4. The role of well-designed framework conditions for business investment in R&I
In this regard, it must also be stressed that
the aforementioned efficiency scores do not
reflect the efficiency of the implementation of
pre-insolvency frameworks, but only their ex-
ante efficiency from a legal point of view
(87).

(87) For methodological details, see Ciriaci et al., (2015a).
Clearly, the efficiency of the outcomes of these
procedures could still face bottlenecks related
to, for example, judicial efficiency or the lack of
required expertise among legal practitioners.
Enforcing contracts Resolving insolvency
Time
(days)
Cost
 (% of claim)
Procedures
(number)
Time
(years)
Cost
 (% of
estate)
Recovery rate
(cents on the
dollar)
 Belgium 505 17.7 26 0.9 3.5 89.1
 Bulgaria 564 23.8 38 3.3 9.0 33.2
 Czech Republic 611 33.0 27 2.1 17.0 65.6
 Denmark 410 23.3 35 1.0 4.0 87.5
 Germany 394 14.4 31 1.2 8.0 83.4
 Estonia 425 21.9 35 3.0 9.0 39.3
 Ireland 650 26.9 21 0.4 9.0 87.7
 Greece 1 580 14.4 38 3.5 9.0 34.3
 Spain 510 18.5 40 1.5 11.0 71.3
 France 395 17.4 29 1.9 9.0 77.2
 Croatia 572 13.8 38 3.1 14.5 30.5
 Italy 1 185 23.1 37 1.8 22.0 62.8
 Cyprus 735 16.4 43 1.5 14.5 70.5
 Latvia 469 23.1 27 1.5 10.0 48.2
 Lithuania 300 23.6 31 2.3 10.0 43.6
 Luxembourg 321 9.7 26 2.0 14.5 44.0
 Hungary 395 15.0 34 2.0 14.5 40.2
 Malta 505 35.9 40 3.0 10.0 39.6
 Netherlands 514 23.9 26 1.1 3.5 88.9
 Austria 397 18.0 25 1.1 10.0 82.6
 Poland 685 19.4 33 3.0 15.0 57.0
 Portugal 547 13.8 34 2.0 9.0 72.2
 Romania 512 28.9 34 3.3 10.5 30.7
 Slovenia 1 270 12.7 32 2.0 4.0 50.1
 Slovakia 545 30.0 33 4.0 18.0 54.4
 Finland 375 13.3 33 0.9 3.5 90.2
 Sweden 321 31.2 31 2.0 9.0 76.1
 United Kingdom 437 39.9 29 1.0 6.0 88.6
 United States 420 30.5 34 1.5 8.2 80.4
 China 453 16.2 37 1.7 22.0 36.0
 ▶ Figure II-4-10 Enforcing contracts and resolving insolvency, 2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: World Bank - Doing business, 2015

===== PDF_PAGE 196 =====
194
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Regarding this, in the aftermath of the crisis, a
number of EU countries have undertaken reforms
meant to remove bottlenecks hindering the
smooth functioning of civil justice, also in light
of the European Semester exercise (Lorenzani
and Lucidi, 2014)
(88). This reform effort,
complementing in many cases other reforms
in the areas of business environment, product
and service markets, mostly aimed at reducing
the length of civil and commercial trials as well
as the backlog of pending cases, in order to
increase the efficiency of civil justice procedures
alongside judicial independence and quality
(EC, 2014; Lorenzani and Lucidi, 2014).
However, when it comes to business dynamics,
innovation and to the framework conditions
enabling and fostering them, the importance of
the efficiency of civil justice and insolvency/pre-
insolvency procedures goes hand in hand with
that of the efficiency with which intellectual
property rights are defended. European
companies rely on intellectual property rights
(IPRs) to recoup their increasingly R&I-intensive
but also risky investments in innovation and the
benefits from introducing new or substantially
improved products and processes into the
market; they would like to be reassured that
(88) Namely, in the context of the 2013 cycle of European Economic
governance, ten MSs received a recommendation in the field of judicial
system (BG, ES, HU, IT, LV, MT, PL, RO, SI, SK). In particular, four (IT,
LV, SI, SK) were recommended to promote mediation and alternative
dispute resolution mechanisms in order to reduce litigation rates.
their intellectual property rights will be protected
in all EU countries to the same extent. IPRs
indeed play a crucial role in Europe’s industrial
strategy; approximately 40% of GDP and 25%
of employment are generated by IPR-intensive
industries in the EU.
If creators only have access to national titles, the
same right may be treated differently in different
Member States and national judges may have
different views on the same right. Companies
are sometimes forced to apply for the same right
in each Member State (e.g., national validation
of patents) and this administrative and cost
burden absorbs resources that could otherwise
be available for investing in R&D and innovation.
This situation does not favour the smooth
functioning of the single market.
The benefits of the EU single market can only
materialise if it has also an IP system that allows
a single market for innovation to prosper. In this
context, the Unitary Patent package
(89), put into
force in 2015, contributes substantially to a
modern IP system, which will bring considerable
advantages and will offer an additional tool to EU
(89) The need for a unitary patent was agreed upon as one of the five
key actions of the Single Market Act I (SMA I). The implementation
of the Unitary Patent and Unified Patent Court is a clear
example in this sense. This package consists of three elements:
(i) a Regulation creating a European patent with unitary effect
(or ‘unitary patent’); (ii) a Regulation establishing a language
regime applicable to the unitary patent; and (iii) an international
agreement among Member States setting up a single and
specialised patent jurisdiction (the ‘Unified Patent Court’).
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Ciriaci et al., (2015a)
 ▶ Figure II-4-11 Overall efficiency of the pre-insolvency framework, 2013
DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
United Kingdom
Portugal
Italy Greece France Sweden Spain
Romania Germany
Latvia Belgium Finland Cyprus Estonia
Luxembourg Netherlands
Austria MaltaIreland Poland Lithuania Denmark
Czech Republic
Slovenia Croatia Hungary Slovakia Bulgaria
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Ciriaci et al., (2015a)
Figure II-4-11 Overall efficiency of the pre-insolvency framework, 2013
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

===== PDF_PAGE 197 =====
195
II-4. The role of well-designed framework conditions for business investment in R&I
innovative companies that want to market their
products throughout the single market.
The Unitary Patent will give innovators and creators
access to broader territorial protection at lower costs,
trigger a reduction of red tape for companies and
make it easier for companies to access the single
market and internationalise their activities. It also
fosters technological transfer and dissemination of
knowledge and boosts creativity across Europe.
By creating a unified system, the legislation will
change the way patents are granted and enforced in
Europe
(90). Under the new system, a unitary patent
will be immediately effective and enforceable in the
new ‘Unified Patent Court’, with decisions on validity
and infringement being directly binding throughout
the participating Member States. Therefore, the
unitary patent will be a third option for companies or
inventors seeking patent protection in Europe. It will
be a further tool in the inventor’s toolbox in addition
to national patents and ‘classical’ European patents,
which needs to be validated in each State for which
it has been granted (i.e., it has no unitary effect).
4.3.4 Business environment for R&I:
access to finance
Resource reallocation is also linked to several
other policies. For instance, it is favoured in
those MSs where channelling financing to
innovative firms is more effective (91). In simple
words, reallocation of resources works with well-
functioning financial markets in the sense that
resources are channelled from less productive
(innovative) to more productive (innovative) firms.
In this respect, the consensus on the fact that the
high barriers to accessing finance and the lack
of investment resources severely hamper the
innovation performances of European industry
is broad. Unfortunately, finance for growth is
exposed to a series of market failures related to
the intrinsic risk of R&D and innovation activities,
(90) At present, patents are granted centrally by the European Patent
Office but result in a bundle of national patents which have to be
enforced separately in each European Union Member State. This
country-by-country enforcement can result in increased litigation
costs, delayed proceedings and conflicting decisions.
(91) A feature strongly influenced by the high fragmentation of the
venture capital market in Europe. See Veugelers, R. (2011), ‘Mind
Europe’s early-stage equity gap’, Bruegel Policy Contribution 2011/18,
December 2011. Indeed, this is now part of the wider agenda of the
European Commission of building a capital market union.
the difficulties of reaping their benefits, and
the asymmetric information permeating the
relationship between borrowers, lenders, and equity
investors. Credit rationing and suboptimal levels of
innovation investments are some of the well-known
consequences of these failures.
The interplay of specific economic characteristics —
higher/lower shares of small and medium size firms
and of medium-/low-tech sectors compared to its
main competitors — and institutional conditions
— differences in Member States bank-based
financial systems and lower/higher capitalised stock
exchanges — may make the funding shortfall for
innovative projects in some European countries
particularly acute. In particular, high-tech start-ups
and young innovative SMEs are those more severely
financially constrained in various phases of their
development, a major barrier to their growth.
In fact, a company can generally gather its capital
from two sources, equity and debt, as well as
internal finance, a channel, the latter, particularly
relevant for large firms. However, whereas large
multinational companies are usually provided with
finance by large banks and big finance companies (in
addition to shareholders and lenders), younger and
smaller firms, which use finance as the fuel needed
to pass through a variety of growth stages, are more
likely than them to face financial constraints. They
face them in their seed and start-up phase, due to
the investment risk associated with new, young and
innovative business projects that still need to find
their way to the market and where public research
grants stop and private finance might be attracted,
They face them, though, also during their expansion
phase, when innovative firms with high potential
lack access to growth finance, in particular from
venture capital funds. Finally, both large and small
innovative firms often face a shortage of higher risk
loans to complement venture capital
(92).
(92) As recently as in June 2014, a new generation of EU financial
instruments and advisory services was launched to help innovative
firms access finance more easily, through a joint initiative of the EC
and the European Investment Bank Group (EIB and EIF). InnovFin —
EU Finance for Innovators is the financial instrument under which
the EU promotes a range of debt and equity products and advisory
services in order to effectively give a boost to the availability of
finance for research and innovation activities in Europe. It consists of
a range of tailored products — from guarantees for intermediaries
that lend to SMEs to direct loans to enterprises — helping support the
smallest to the largest R&I projects in the EU and countries associated
to Horizon 2020, the new EU research programme for 2014-20.
InnovFin builds on the success of the Risk-Sharing Finance Facility,
developed under the seventh EU framework programme for research
and technological development (FP7), which helped provide over
€11 billion of finance to 114 R&I projects worth more than €30 billion.

===== PDF_PAGE 198 =====
196
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
in productivity performance gap from the 1990s
onwards between the EU and the US (94).
Clearly, the reasons behind this trend could be
several, but two are particularly relevant in the
current economic context and, in particular, in the
light of the third pillar of Juncker’s investment
plan and the need to complete the Single Market.
The first reason is the relatively closed nature of
services markets within Europe and, especially
in some MSs, which slows down the diffusion of
new technologies. According to recent analysis,
the innovation impact of the vertical sectoral
integration of knowledge-intensive business
services (KIBS) into manufacturing (defined as the
extent to which manufacturing sectors acquire
KIBS innovative knowledge — R&D — through
production-based flows to satisfy their final
demand), is significantly positive (Ciriaci et al.,
2015b). These highly specialised and innovative
services perform key activities in innovation
systems (e.g., Muller and Zenker, 2001; Tether,
2005), and act as knowledge carriers with respect
to other sectors, especially manufacturing ones,
working as ‘innovation propellers’ at the system
level (Castellacci, 2008). Those industries which
integrate R&D embodied in KIBS production flows
(94) Foster, N., Poschl, J., Rincon-Aznar, A., Stehrer, R., Vecchi, M. and
Venturini, F. (2013), ‘Reducing productivity and efficiency gaps:
The role of knowledge assets, absorptive capacity and institutions’,
in European Competitiveness Report, DG Enterprise and Industry,
European Commission.
In this regard, Figure II-4-12 reports the GDP
share of venture capital for early stage firm
development in 15 European countries (those
for which data were available) in 2007 and
2013 and shows that, in general, venture capital
availability, after the crisis started, decreased
in the majority of the countries, with some
exceptions such as Ireland, Romania, the UK,
Austria and Bulgaria). However, in these latter
cases, with the exception of Ireland, the 2007
share of venture capital for early stage firms was
very low both in relative and absolute terms. All
In all, this data confirm the increasing need for
this form of financing, which, along with more
traditional financial channels, suffered from the
economic crisis.
4.4 The low EU adoption of ICT in EU
services: a possible consequence
of stricter market regulation and
lower reallocation efficiency?
A recurrent stylised fact in the empirical literature
on innovation is that some EU Member States
have adopted information and communication
technologies at a slower pace than others, in
particular in the services sector
(93). This very
same difference in the adoption of ICT is often
recalled as the main reason for the difference
(93) See for example Gomez-Salvador, R., A. Musso, M. Stocker and J.
Turunen (2006), ‘Labour productivity developments in the euro
area’, ECB Occasional Paper No 53, October 2006.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
 ▶ Figure II-4-12 Early stage venture capital (seed and start-up) as % of GDP, 2007 and 2013
DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat

%
Figure II-4-12 Early stage venture capital (seed and start-up) as % of GDP, 2007 and 2013
 2007 2013
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00
Denmark Poland Belgium France Ireland Germany Finland Portugal
Spain
Netherlands
Romania
United Kingdom
Italy
Austria Greece Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Sweden

===== PDF_PAGE 199 =====
197
II-4. The role of well-designed framework conditions for business investment in R&I
more intensively and extensively are industries
with greater inventive efforts and higher quality
patents (Ciriaci et al., 2015b). To the extent
to which regulation limits competition in the
service sector, and especially in professional
services such as KIBS, it limits their productivity
and the efficiency of knowledge interaction
with manufacturing which occurs through both
disembodied and embodied flows of codified
and tacit knowledge. More in general, increased
productivity growth in services with strong
forward linkages with the rest of the economy
would translate into increased competitiveness
for the industries using services inputs.
Given the relative importance of services in our
economies and their increasing vertical integration
with the rest of the economy
(95), this has an
impact on total productivity growth and calls for
the completion of the single market in services
(96).
Unfortunately, efforts in the direction of liberalising
them have been limited relative to the efforts done
by Member States in other sectors.
The second reason could be found in the relative
rigidity of national labour markets. Fundamental
organisational restructuring is often needed to
reap the productivity gains from adopting new
technology, for instance, due to the automation
of certain tasks. This implies that firms need
some degree of flexibility to reallocate workers
to different tasks, which in turn requires them to
have access to adequate initial and vocational
training — something that some EU countries
have been able to do better than others
(97).
As part of this process, resources reallocation
is inevitable, given the fact that firms need to
restructure, and to focus resources where they
are most productive. Unfortunately, the empirical
evidence suggests that there are important
differences in the extent to which capital and
(95) See, among others, Bourlés, R., Cette G., Lopez J., Mairesse,
J. and Nicoletti, G. (2012), ‘Do product market regulations in
upstream sectors curb productivity growth? Panel data evidence
for OECD countries’, Review of Economics and Statistics, MIT
Press, vol. 95(5); Ciriaci, D. and Palma D. (2012), To what extent
are knowledge intensive business services contributing to
manufacturing? A sub-system analysis, IPTS WP on Corporate R&D
and Innovation, n. 2/2012.
(96) Directive 2006/123/EC Directive on services in the internal Market.
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/services/services-dir/index_
en.htm.
(97) See: http://www.cedefop.europa.eu/en/information-services/vet-in-
europe-country-reports.aspx.
labour flow to innovative firms. For example,
according to a recent OECD analysis (98), a 10%
increase in the patent stock is associated with
an increase in the typical firm’s capital stock of
about 3% in Sweden and the United States; 1.5%
in the United Kingdom and Germany; and 0.5%
in Italy and Spain. Notably, these cross-country
differences tend be driven by younger firms.
These are those that are most likely to introduce
radical innovations, and more affected by diverse
degrees of administrative costs, regulations, and
access to finance.
In line with previous arguments in favour of
policies supporting resources reallocation, it is
worth emphasising that the same product and
labour market reforms that would spur innovation
(and its adoption), would also favour a better
resource allocation. For instance, employment
protection legislation that is too rigid is believed
to significantly decrease the ability of innovative
firms to attract resources
(99).
4.5 Conclusions
The starting point of this chapter has been
the consideration that favourable framework
conditions stimulate firms to engage in innovation
and R&D, and support the diffusion of innovations
throughout the economy. In particular, it has
focussed on the role and likely impact of product
and labour market regulation, red tape barriers,
judicial and insolvency frameworks and access
to finance on the level of business investment in
R&D, through their effects on business dynamics
(i.e., on a firm’s entry, exit and growth), which may
contribute to stronger market selection and post-
entry growth, thereby enhancing the ability of
firms to achieve sufficient scale to enter global
markets and their incentives to innovate.
However, notwithstanding the agreement on the
key role of business dynamics for productivity
(98) Andrews, D., C. Criscuolo and C. Menon (2013), ‘Do Resources Flow
to Innovative Firms? Cross-Country Evidence from Firm-Level
Data’, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, forthcoming.
(99) Andrews, D., C. Criscuolo (2013), ‘Knowledge-based capital,
innovation and resource allocation’, OECD Economics Department
Working Papers No 146. As stressed by the ECB, this is not an
argument to lessen workers’ insurance against labour market
risks. Rather it is an argument to shift the burden of that
insurance away from firms and towards society more widely. See
ECB (2014), Structural reforms: learning the right lessons from the
crisis, Economic conference, Riga http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/
key/date/2014/html/sp141017.en.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 200 =====
198
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
and innovation, and despite recent reform
efforts, some EU countries are still lagging
behind in terms of product and labour market
regulation. To thrive on innovation, labour needs
to be reallocated within and across firms and
sectors (as it may not be efficiently allocated
and/or labour-saving technologies have been
introduced). In this regard, the relatively stringent
employment protection legislation found in some
Member States may limit this capacity (or make it
less efficient) and harm the most innovative and
productive firms and sectors, which would need
these resources to undertake their innovative
projects and grow. In addition, in the presence
of employment protection stringency, displaced
workers may suffer longer unemployment spells.
Clearly, as emphasised, the level of business
investment in R&D can also be affected by the
efficiency of the judicial system and of the
bankruptcy regime. In this regard, the analysis
has confirmed a high level of cross-country
heterogeneity in the EU which may imply, ceteris
paribus , differences in the extent to which
countries are likely to foster experimentation
with risky technologies. This is more likely to
happen in countries with a more efficient judicial
system and high recovery rates, and which do
not sanction business failure too much. The
same applies to countries where younger and
smaller innovative firms have an easier access to
capital for their seed and start-up phase where
public research grants stop and private finance
might be not forthcoming. Due to the investment
risk associated with new, young and innovative
business projects that still need to find their way
to the market, these firms are those more likely
to be financially constrained and to also face a
lack of financial resources for their expansion
phase, in particular from venture capital funds.
Therefore, addressing the causes of MSs
relative underinvestment in R&I requires a
serious commitment by Member countries to
truly investigate the respective country-specific
bottlenecks that prevent private R&I investment
to converge towards higher levels. It also calls for
additional effort at the EU level to improve the
business environment and complete the single
market
(100). By removing barriers to the free
circulation of people, goods, services and capital,
the Single Market allows firms to operate on a
bigger scale, thereby enhancing their capacity
to innovate, to invest, become more productive
and generate jobs. Strengthening competition,
improving the working of price signals and
lowering entry barriers are usually important
incentives for investors, the importance of which
for R&I investment is not emphasised enough.
Moreover, the empirical evidence suggests that,
although conducive framework conditions and
a dynamic and healthy business environment
are key prerequisites for any innovation system,
they are particularly important for the more
technologically weak European countries. Overall,
the empirical evidence shows that stringent
product and labour market regulation and costly
and lengthy procedures to start a business,
inefficient judicial systems and insolvency
frameworks, and limited access to finance tend
to go hand in hand. To these bottlenecks, we
must add insufficient knowledge and human
capital and weak technological capabilities at the
firm level, sectoral specialisation patterns, and
the absence of critical firm size.
Finally, although not the focus of this chapter,
there is no doubt that the adoption and diffusion
of new technologies leads to new employment
opportunities, not only for individuals endowed
with skills that complement them, but also
indirectly by improving the overall performance
of those sectors and firms that become more
innovative and/or productive, stimulating
growth which in turn increases consumption
(100) In this regard, it is also important to note that avoiding stifling
innovation and competitiveness with too prescriptive and too
detailed regulations is particularly relevant when it comes to
small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).

===== PDF_PAGE 201 =====
199
II-4. The role of well-designed framework conditions for business investment in R&I
and investment. At the same time, investment
in education continues to be a necessary pre-
condition for achieving better employment
prospects as well as a redesign of education
policies to better match skill demand and supply.
As the erosion of middle-skill employment due to
technological progress
(101), which is increasingly
emphasised by the empirical literature, has also
been extending, increasingly, to higher skill levels,
leads to the question of which type of skills will
be most demanded in the future, remaining a
complement to technology rather than being
substituted by it, and with a stronger focus on
adaptability and flexibility of skills.
(101) In the last two decades jobs requiring medium levels of skills
appear to have lost importance relative to those at the bottom and
at the top of the skill distribution. Among the possible drivers of
this job polarisation, recent advances in computing and information
and communication technologies are considered as a main cause
(Autor et al., 2006). In particular, digitalisation and automation
are deemed to have increasingly replaced labour in more routine
occupations (such as, for example, clerical office work, crafts and
trade, or plant and machine assembly operations) while advances in
communication technologies have increasingly allowed offshoring
of such tasks (from high income to lower income countries). At
the same time, both high-paying jobs involving more abstract
tasks (such as managerial occupations, engineering, or intellectual
professions), and low-paying jobs involving non-routine service
tasks (related, for example, to personal care, travel, catering,
etc.) have benefited from the same technological advances in
terms of increased productivity and/or increased demand for their
services (Goos et al., 2014). These employment developments are
consistent with the increased wage dispersion observed in the last
two decades (OECD, 2011): highly-skilled workers at the top of
the distribution have reaped the benefits of increased productivity,
while wages at the middle of the distribution have been stagnating
due to a fall of labour demand.

===== PDF_PAGE 202 =====
200
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
REFERENCES
Aghion, P., Griffith, R., (2005). Competition and
Growth. Reconciling Theory and Evidence, Springer.
Aghion P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R.,
Howitt, P., (2002), Competition and Innovation:
An Inverted U Relationship, NBER Working Paper
No 9269.Andrews, D., Criscuolo, C. and Menon, C.
(2013), Do Resources Flow to Innovative Firms?
Cross-Country Evidence from Firm-Level Data,
OECD Economics Department Working Papers,
forthcoming.
Andrews, D., Criscuolo, C. (2013), Knowledge-based
Capital, Innovation and Resource Allocation, OECD
Economics Department Working Papers No 146.
Audretsch, D.B., Lehmann, E., Keilback M., (2006),
Entrepreneurship and Economic Growth, Oxford
University Press.
Autor, D. H. (2014), Polanyi’s Paradox and the
Shape of Employment Growth, Paper prepared
for Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas, Jackson Hole
Conference, August 22, 2014.
Bartelsman, E.J., Scarpetta, S., Schivardi, S. (2003),
Comparative Analysis of Firm Demographics
and Survival: Micro-Level Evidence for the OECD
Countries, OECD Economics Department Working
Paper No 348, OECD, Paris.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., Mullainathan (2004), How
Much Should We Trust Difference in Differences
Estimates, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
119, No 1, pp. 249-275.
Bogliacino F., Vivarelli, M. (2012), The Job Creation
Effect of R&D Expenditures, Australian Economic
Papers, 51 (2), 96-113.
Bourlés, R., Cette G., Lopez J., Mairesse, J. and
Nicoletti, G. (2012), ‘Do Product Market Regulations
in Upstream Sectors curb Productivity Growth?
Panel Data Evidence for OECD Countries’, Review
of Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, vol. 95(5).
Brandt, N., (2004), Business Dynamics and Policies,
OECD Economic Studies, n. 38.
Bunch, D. and R. Smiley (1992), Who Deters Entry?
Evidence on the Use of Strategic Entry Deterrents,
Review of Economics and Statistics, 74(3), pp. 509-21.
Canton, E., Ciriaci, D., Solera, I. (2014), The
Economic Impact of Professional Services’
Liberalization, European Economy Economic
papers, n. 533.
Chang, H.L., Tang, F.F. (2001), An Empirical Study
on Strategic Entry Barriers in Singapore, Asia-Pacific
Journal of Management, 18(4), pp. 503-517.
Cincera, M., Galgau, O. (2005), Impact of Market
Entry and Exit on EU Productivity and Growth
Performance, ECFIN Economic Papers, n. 222.
Ciriaci, D., Lorenzani, D., Pontuch, P. (2015a) ,
The Economic Impact of Rescue and Recovery
Frameworks, European Economy Economic papers,
forthcoming.
Ciriaci, D., Montresor, S., Palma, D., (2015b), Do
KIBS make Manufacturing More Innovative? An
Empirical Investigation for 4 European Countries,
Technological forecasting and Social Change.
Ciriaci, D (2014), Business Dynamics and Red Tape
Barriers, European Economy Economic papers, n. 532.
Ciriaci, D., Palma D. (2012), To What Extent are
Knowledge-intensive Business Services contributing
to Manufacturing? A Sub-system Analysis, IPTS WP
on Corporate R&D and Innovation, n. 2/2012.
Christiansen, L., Schindler, M., Tressel, T.
(2013), Growth and Structural Reforms: A New
Assessment,’ Journal of International Economics,
Vol. 89, pp. 347–56.
Connell, W. (2014), The Economic Impact of Late
Payments, European Economy Economic Papers 531.
European Commission (2014), Market Reforms at
Work in Italy, Spain, Portugal and Greece, European
Economy 5.

===== PDF_PAGE 203 =====
201
II-4. The role of well-designed framework conditions for business investment in R&I
European Commission (2013), Flash Eurobarometer
369, Investing in Intangibles: Economic Assets and
Innovation Drivers for Growth.
European Commission (2005) , Impact of Market
Entry and Exit on EU Productivity and Growth
Performance, European Economy 222.
Foster, N., Poschl, J., Rincon-Aznar, A., Stehrer,
R., Vecchi, M. and Venturini, F. (2013), ‘Reducing
Productivity and Efficiency Gaps: The Role of
Knowledge Assets, Absorptive Capacity and
Institutions’, in European Competitiveness Report,
DG Enterprise and Industry, European Commission.
Freeman, C., Clark, J., Soete, L. (1982). Unemployment
and Technical Innovation. London: Pinter.
Freeman, C., Soete, L. (1987), Technical Change
and Full Employment. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Gomez-Salvador, R., A. Musso, M. Stocker
and J. Turunen (2006), ‘Labour Productivity
Developments in the Euro Area’, ECB Occasional
Paper No 53, October 2006.
Goos, M., Manning, A., and Salomons, A. (2014),
‘Explaining Job Polarization: Routine-Biased
Technological Change and Offshoring’, American
Economic Review, Vol. 104, No 8, August 2014.
Hall, B. H., Mairesse, J., Mohen, P. (2009),
Measuring the Returns to R&D, in ‘The Handbook of
the Economics of Innovation’, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Hause, J., Du Reitz, G. (1984), Entry, Industry
Growth and the Micro-Dynamics of Industry Supply,
Journal of Political Economy, 92(4), pp. 733-757.
Kessides, I. (1990a). ‘Towards a Testable Model of
Entry: A Study of the US Manufacturing Industries’,
Economica, 57(226), pp. 219-238.
Kessides, I. (1990b). ‘Market Concentration,
Contestability and Sunk Costs’, Review of
Economics and Statistics, 72(4), pp. 614-622.
Klapper, L., Quesada Delgado, J.M. (2009),
The Impact of the Business Environment on the
Business Creation Process, Policy Research Working
Paper Series 4937, The World Bank.
Lorenzani, D., Lucidi F. (2014), The Economic
Impact of Civil Justice Reforms’, European Economy
Economic Papers 530.
Moulton, B. (1990), An Illustration of a Pitfall in
Estimating the Effects of Aggregate Variables on
Micro Units, Review of Economics and Statistics,
Vol. 72, No 2, pp. 334-338.
Nicodeme, G., Sauner-Leroy, J.B., (2004), Product
Market Reforms and Productivity: A Review of the
Theoretical and Empirical Literature on the Transmission
Channels, ECFIN Economic papers, n. 218.
Nicoletti, G., Scarpetta S., 2003, Regulation,
Productivity and Growth: OECD Evidence, Economic
Policy, Vol. 18, No 36, pp. 9–72.
Scarpetta, S., Hemmings, P., Tressel, T., Woo J. (2002),
The Role of Policy and Institutions for Productivity
and Firm Dynamics: Evidence from Micro and
Industry Data, Economic Working Paper (2002)15,
OECD: Paris.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD), (2013), Economic Policy
Reforms 2013: Going for Growth. Paris: OECD
Publishing.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) (2011), Divided We Stand:
Why Inequality Keeps Rising. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Prati, A., M.G. Onorato, and C. Papageorgiou, 2013,
Which Reforms Work and under What Institutional
Environment? Evidence from a New Data Set on
Structural Reforms, Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 95, No 3, pp. 946–68.
Restuccia, D., and Rogerson, R., 2013,
‘Misallocation and Productivity,’ Review of Economic
Dynamics, Vol. 16, No 1, pp. 1–10.
Singh, S., Utton, M., and Waterson, M. (1998),
Strategic Behaviour of Incumbent Firms in the UK,
International Journal of Industrial Organization,
16(2), pp. 229-251.

===== PDF_PAGE 204 =====
202
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Toner, P. (2007), Skills and Innovation — Putting
Ideas to Work, Background paper on VET and
Innovation for the NSW Board of Vocational
Education and Training, New South Wales
Department of Education and Training, Sydney.
van Stel. A., Storey, D.J., Thurik, A.R., (2007), The
Effect of Business Regulations on Nascent and
Young Business Entrepreneurship, Small Business
Economics 28:171–186.
Veugelers, R. (2011) , Mind Europe’s Early-stage
Equity Gap, Bruegel Policy Contribution 2011/18,
December 2011.
World Economic Forum (2014), Global
Competitiveness Report.
World Bank (2013), Doing Business 2014:
Understanding Regulations for Small and Medium-
Size Enterprises.

===== PDF_PAGE 205 =====
203
II-5. International knowledge flows
Cristina Chaminade, Monica Plechero
Circle, Lund University, Sweden
5.1 Introduction
It is well known that international knowledge
flows are positively related to the innovation
performance of firms (Fitjar and Rodríguez-Pose,
2013; Gertler and Levitte, 2005). Empirical
evidence shows that local knowledge needs to
be complemented with international sources of
knowledge for innovation (Giuliani et al., 2005). In
fact, most innovative products or services are the
result of combining knowledge across different
geographical scales (Strambach and Klement,
2012) and most valued patents or publications
(in terms of citations) tend to be the result of
international knowledge links (OECD, 2014).
Until very recently, the international flows of
knowledge were highly confined to neighbouring
countries (intra-Europe) and other Triad countries
(the US and Japan) (Castellacci and Archibugi, 2008)
but this has been gradually changing (Chaminade
et al., 2014). For example, less than one-third of EU
R&D offshoring projects are directed towards other
European countries. The bulk of such investment
is actually directed to non-European countries,
with China and India being the main recipients of
R&D offshoring, followed by developed countries
(the US for example) and other South-East Asian
countries, such as Brazil and Russia (Castellani and
Pieri, 2013). This requires a change of perspective.
Understanding the extent of the changes in the
geography of these international knowledge flows
as well as the possible impact of that change is
paramount and will be discussed in this chapter.
This chapter aims at understanding how
international knowledge flows in Europe have been
developing over time and discuss their main drivers
and impacts. Of particular interest is to discuss the
importance of intra-European knowledge flows vis-
a-vis knowledge flows with non-European countries.
The chapter will distinguish between different types
of mechanisms for the acquisition and transfer
of knowledge. Knowledge can be exchanged
internationally intentionally through market
transactions, formal and informal networks and
foreign direct investments, and unintentionally
through networks and the mobility of human
capital (also referred to as spillovers) (Chaminade
et al, 2015):
• Knowledge exchanged through market
mechanisms such as trade can be both
embodied in artifacts (machinery and
equipment) and disembodied (patents). The
exports of high-tech goods and services
can provide a first indication of the trade of
knowledge embedded in goods and services.
Global input-output tables can also provide
an indication of the trade flows between one
country and the rest of the world as well
as the value that is captured by individual
countries. The international knowledge flows
through trade will be discussed in section 5.2.
• Knowledge can be exchanged through formal
and informal networks. Networks are
characterised by reciprocal, preferential and
mutually supportive interactions (Powell 1990).
In networks one party depends on the resources
controlled by another and they are highly based
on trust. Mechanisms such as R&D contracts,
R&D alliances or research consortia are examples
of formal networks for knowledge creation
while epistemic communities or communities of
practice are examples of mechanisms through
which knowledge is transferred in informal
networks. The international knowledge flows
through research and technological collaboration
will be discussed in section 5.3.
• Knowledge flows may also happen when
the individuals holding that knowledge
move creating unintentional spillovers of
knowledge. Spillovers tend to occur often in
close geographical proximity although they
can also take place across large geographical
distances, for example though international
mobility of researchers (Rosenkopf and
Almeida 2003). The drivers of international
5. International knowledge flows

===== PDF_PAGE 206 =====
204
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
mobility of human capital — including the
international mobility of researchers — are
varied and include personal motivations as well
as institutional frameworks. The international
knowledge flows through the mobility of
researchers will be discussed in section 5.4.
• Finally, knowledge flows internationally
through foreign direct investments
particularly –but not exclusively- cross-
border R&D investments. The investment
of national companies abroad is a form of
hierarchy as it relates to functions that the
firm has located offshore and over which it
exerts control. The international knowledge
flows through R&D cross-border investments
will be discussed in section 5.5.
For each section, we will start with a general
overview of trends, paying particular attention
to how Europe is positioned with respect to
its competitors. Then, we will investigate the
importance of intra versus extra European flows
of knowledge and generally discuss the expected
impact of the observed trends
(102).
(102) The extent of the analysis is subject to data availability.
5.2 International knowledge flows
through trade
5.2.1 Overall trends
The aim of this section is to discuss how Europe
is positioned in terms of the global trade of
knowledge embedded in high-tech products
and knowledge-intensive services. Of particular
interest is to investigate if international
fragmentation is increasing or decreasing and
what share of value is still kept in Europe.
Figures II-5-1 and II-5-2 show the evolution of high
technology exports in absolute and relative terms
from the EU to the rest of the world in comparison
with a selection of countries. In absolute terms
(Figure II-5-1), the EU portrays the largest volume
of high technology exports in terms of value
(million US $) as compared to the other blocks. In the
years after the economic crises (2009 to 2011) the
volume of high technology exports increased while the
US, Japan and South Korea´s value of high technology
exports has stagnated since 2009. Interestingly China
has gained momentum and has reduced the gap with
the European Union in the same period.
 ▶ Figure II-5-1 High-technology exports(1) (current US$), 2007-2012
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: World Development Indicators
Notes:
(1)High technology exports are products with high R&D intensity, such as in aerospace, computers, pharmaceuticals,
scientific instruments, and electrical machinery. (2)EU does not include intra-EU exports.
C h i n a
EU ( 2 )
I n d i a
J a p a n
So u th K o r e a
U n i te d Sta te s
0
1 0 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0 0
4 0 0 0 0 0
5 0 0 0 0 0
6 0 0 0 0 0
7 0 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 7 2 0 0 8 2 0 0 9 2 0 1 0 2 0 1 1 2 0 1 2
U S$ (m i l l i o n s )
F i g u r e I I-5-1 H i g h-te c h n o l o g y e x p o r ts( 1 )(c u r r e n t U S$ ), 2 0 0 7-2 0 1 2
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: World Development Indicators
Notes: (1)High technology exports are products with high R&D intensity, such as in aerospace, computers, pharmaceuticals,
scientific instruments, and electrical machinery. (2)EU does not include intra-EU exports.

===== PDF_PAGE 207 =====
205
II-5. International knowledge flows
The EU is performing better in terms of exports
of knowledge-intensive services (KIS) (103) both in
absolute and relative terms, as shown in Figures
II-5-3 and II-5-4. In absolute terms the EU is
(103) Commercial knowledge-intensive service exports consist of
communications, business services, financial services, and
computer and information services.
However, the situation is slightly different when
the analysis is made in relative terms — that
is looking at the proportion of exports of high-
tech products over the total manufacturing
exports. As can be observed in Figure II- 5-2,
the European Union has one of the lowest
percentages of exports of high-tech products
over the total manufacturing exports, only above
India. In the last years we can observe that the
gap with the US and Japan has reduced but this
is mostly due to the significant drop of the US
rather than improved performance by the EU.
China continues to outperform the US, Japan and
the EU since 2008, catching up with South Korea
in the last period considered. The observed good
performance of China can be explained either as
a result of higher domestic added value or as
reflecting high volumes of high-tech imports that
are further assembled and distributed worldwide,
as will be discussed later on.
followed by the US and much below by India
(reflecting their strong capabilities in software
and IT services), China, Japan and, lastly, by
South Korea.
 ▶ Figure II-5-2 High-technology exports(1) as % of manufactured exports, 2007-2012
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: World Development Indicators
Notes: (1)High technology exports are products with high R&D intensity, such as in aerospace, computers, pharmaceuticals,
scientific instruments, and electrical machinery. (2)EU does not include intra-EU exports.
C h i n a
EU ( 2 )
I n d i a
J a p a n
So u th K o r e a
U n i te d Sta te s
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
2 0 0 7 2 0 0 8 2 0 0 9 2 0 1 0 2 0 1 1 2 0 1 2
%
F i g u r e I I-5-2 H i g h-t e c h n o l o g y e x p o r t s(1)a s % o f m a n u f a c t u r e d e x p o r t s , 2 0 0 72 0 1 2 -
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: World Development Indicators
Notes: (1)High technology exports are products with high R&D intensity, such as in aerospace, computers, pharmaceuticals,
scientific instruments, and electrical machinery. (2)EU does not include intra-EU exports.

===== PDF_PAGE 208 =====
206
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
In relative terms, India is substantially above
all other countries considered. It is followed by
the EU who has been able to maintain a stable
proportion of exports of knowledge-intensive
services after the crises. Intra-EU flows of
knowledge-intensive services have remained
above extra-European flows although the later
have been growing steadily since 2007, gradually
closing the gap with the intra-European flows, as
Figure II-5-5 shows.
 ▶ Figure II-5-3 Exports of commercial knowledge-intensive services(1) (current US$), 2007-2012
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: WTO data based on ’Trade in commercial services, 1980-2013 (BPM5)’
Notes: (1)Commercial knowledge-intensive services include communications, computer and information services, financial
services, and other business services. (2)EU does not include intra-EU exports.
C h i n a
EU ( 2 )
I n d i a
J a p a n
So u th K o r e a
U nited States
0
5 0 0 0 0
1 0 0 0 0 0
1 5 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0 0
2 5 0 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0 0
3 5 0 0 0 0
4 0 0 0 0 0
4 5 0 0 0 0
5 0 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 7 2 0 0 8 2 0 0 9 2 0 1 0 2 0 1 1 2 0 1 2
U S$ (m i l l i o n s )
F i g u r e I I-5-3 E x p o r t s o f c o m m e r c i a l k n o w l e d g e-i n t e n s i v e s e r v i c e s(1) ( c u r r e n t ( U S $ ) , 2 0 0 7-2 0 1 2
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: WTO data based on' Trade in commercial services, 1980-2013 (BPM5)'
Notes: (1)Commercial knowledge-intensive services include communications, computer and information services,
financial services, and other business services. (2)EU does not include intra-EU exports.

===== PDF_PAGE 209 =====
207
II-5. International knowledge flows
 ▶ Figure II-5-5 Exports of commercial knowledge-intensive services(1) (current US$) - intra-EU and extra-EU,
 2008-2012
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: WTO data based on ’Trade in commercial services, 1980-2013 (BPM5)’
Note:
(1)Commercial knowledge-intensive services include communications, computer and information services, financial services,
and other business services.
0
1 0 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0 0
4 0 0 0 0 0
5 0 0 0 0 0
6 0 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 8 2 0 0 9 2 0 1 0 2 0 1 1 2 0 1 2
U S$ (m i l l i o n s )
F i g u r e I I-5-5 E x p o r t s o f c o m m e r c i a l k n o w l e d g e-i n t e n s i v e s e r v i c e s(1)( c u r r e n t U S $ ) -i n t r a-E U a n d e x t r a-E U ,
2 0 0 8-2 0 1 2
i n tr a-EU e x tr a-EU
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: WTO data based on' Trade in commercial services, 1980-2013 (BPM5)'
Note: (1)Commercial knowledge-intensive services include communications, computer and information services,
financial services, and other business services.
 ▶ Figure II-5-4 Exports of commercial knowledge-intensive services(1) as % of total exports
 of commercial services, 2008-2012
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: WTO data based on ’Trade in commercial services, 1980-2013 (BPM5)’
Notes:
(1)Commercial knowledge-intensive services include communications, computer and information services, financial
services, and other business services. (2)India: Computer and other business services have been estimated by UNCTAD-WTO. (3)EU
does not include intra-EU exports.
C h i n a
EU ( 3)
I n d i a (2)
J a p a n
So u th K o r e a
U n i te d Sta te s
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
2 0 0 8 2 0 0 9 2 0 1 0 2 0 1 1 2 0 1 2
%
F i g u r e I I-5-4 E x p o r t s o f c o m m e r c i a l k n o w l e d g e-i n t e n s i v e s e r v i c e s(1)a s % o f t o t a l e x p o r t s o f c o m m e r c i a l s e r v i c e s ,
2 0 0 8-2 0 1 2
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: WTO data based on' Trade in commercial services, 1980-2013 (BPM5)'
Notes: (1)Commercial knowledge-intensive services include communications, computer and information services,
financial services, and other business services. (2)India: Computer and other business services have been estimated
by UNCTAD-WTO. (3)EU does not include intra-EU exports.

===== PDF_PAGE 210 =====
208
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
5.2.2 Impact
Looking exclusively at the exports of high-tech
products or knowledge-intensive services does
not tell us what the domestic contribution to
those international knowledge flows is. High
volumes of exports of high-tech products or
services from the EU do not imply that those
high technology products or services have been
developed in the EU, only that they are exported
from the EU. So the critical question is which
added value is generated in Europe and whether
that value generation is the result of knowledge
intensive activities.
The very recent global input-output tables
and related analyses provide a very fine-
grained analysis of the positioning of the EU in
comparison to other countries in the world and
its competitive advantage in terms of knowledge
content in trade. The analysis of the global
input-output data clearly shows an increasing
fragmentation of global value chains, which
implies a higher share of foreign added value
in the added value within Europe (Timmer et al.,
2014; Los et al., 2015).
Looking at the intra-EU flows versus extra-EU,
Los et al. (2015) shows that geographical
proximity or belonging to a trade block or single
market, like the EU, still explains a great deal of
the observable geographical patterns of global
value chains. However, they also point out that,
since 1995, global fragmentation has progressed
much faster than intra-EU fragmentation. In
other words, the shares of added value outside
the EU are rapidly increasing for all products,
including high-tech, which suggests a move
towards more global knowledge flows embedded
in global value chains.
Using global input-output data, Timmer et al.
(2014) show that, generally, there is a decrease
in the content of low skilled human capital in all
manufacturing activities worldwide which points
to a global technological shift in manufacturing
and a general technological upgrading. However,
there are also clear differences between blocks
- for example between Europe and China - with
regards to the most relevant production factor.
While in Europe manufacturing activities are
based on high-skilled workers (that is, they
are more knowledge-intensive), the activities
conducted in China are mainly capital intensive
thus showing an enhanced specialisation in high-
skills labour in (high income) European countries.
In other words, what these results suggest is
that the knowledge component (proxied by
the importance of qualified human capital) of
European trade is generally increasing — that
is- it relates to all industries and not only the
high-tech manufacturing or high-tech services
discussed above.
Furthermore, in terms of what factors in the
innovation systems affect how much value
is captured by a country, the analysis of the
global input-output data (van der Marel, 2015)
reveals that high endowment of qualified human
capital plus high internet connectivity, high R&D
spending in terms of GDP and better innovation
climate are associated with higher participation
in global value chains and higher value capture.
5.3 International research and
technological collaboration
The trade of knowledge-intensive business and
services is one of several mechanisms that
firms and other organisations use to acquire
knowledge. Knowledge also flows through
collaborative networks.
This section will look at the patterns of research
and technological collaboration across national
borders. It will investigate the patterns of
intra-EU collaboration versus international
collaboration (Van Looy et al., 2014). Using co-
patenting data (technological collaboration) and
the European community innovation survey data
(research collaboration), we will present and
discuss the patterns of international collaboration
for innovation attending to the location of the
partner as well as the type of linkage for all
EU countries. The data will also allow us to
investigate the importance of intra-EU research
collaboration versus networks outside Europe, in
particular the US, China and India.

===== PDF_PAGE 211 =====
209
II-5. International knowledge flows
This increased internationalisation of
technological collaboration can also be
observed in the EU. Figure II-5-7 shows the
evolution in the number of domestic inventions,
foreign inventions and combined in the EU
between 1980 and 2010 measured through
patent applications in the PATSTAT database.
An increasing tendency in the proportion of
international technological collaboration
over time can clearly be observed although
the majority of patent applications
continue to be domestic.
5.3.1 Trends
Technological collaboration
Technological collaboration at the
international level captured by the percentage
of patents with foreign co-inventors has
intensified in the last few decades (Paci and
Batteta, 2003) while the percentage of patents
with only domestic investors has suffered
a persistent decline since the early eighties
(Van Looy et al., 2014).
Prato and Nepelski (2012) map the international
technological collaborations by looking at
worldwide patent data between 1990 and 2007
using the PATSTAT data base at the European
Patent Office. Their comparison of the networks
in 1990 and 2007 shows remarkable differences
in the network configuration in the two periods.
Clearly, in 1990 international technological
collaborations were dominated by the US, Japan
and the EU. In 2007, the US continued to play
a prominent role in the network, in terms of
degree centrality, closeness centrality, strength
and betweenness centrality but the 2007
network of international technological
collaborations is much denser — with 125
countries, compared with the 79 in 1996 —
and with new actors, notably South Korea, China
and other East Asian countries playing a much
more active role. See Figure II-5-6 below.
 ▶ Figure II-5-6 Evolution of international technological collaborations by number of nodes and links,
 1990-2007
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: De Prato and Nepelski (2014) based on PATSTAT database, version 2010
0
1 0 0
2 0 0
3 0 0
4 0 0
5 0 0
6 0 0
7 0 0
8 0 0
9 0 0
1 0 0 0
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
1 2 0
1 4 0
1 9 9 0 1 9 9 5 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 5 2 0 0 7
N u m b e r o f l i n k s
N u m b e r o f n o d e s
F i g u r e I I-5-6 Ev o l u ti o n o f i n te r n a ti o n a l te c h n o l o g i c a l c o l l a b o r a ti o n s b y n u m b e r o f n o d e s a n d l i n k s , 1 9 9 0-2 0 0 7
N u m b e r o f n o d e s N u m b e r o f l i n k s
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: De Prato and Nepelski (2014) based on PATSTAT database, version 2010

===== PDF_PAGE 212 =====
210
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
A further analysis of the location of the foreign
partners reveals that most of the international
technological collaboration in Europe is within
EU27. The proportion of patents combining
inventors from the EU and outside the EU are
truly scarce (Van Looy et al., 2014). This result is
highly coherent with the literature. Geographical
distance with the technological partner plays
a very important role in the establishment of
technological linkages (Paci and Batteta, 2003).
One of the main characteristics of networks
in general is their reciprocal, preferential and
mutually supportive character (Powell, 1990). The
basic assumption of network is that of mutual
dependence (Chaminade, 2015) and requires
the firm and the partner to adhere to a certain
structure of exchange (Laursen and Salter, 2014).
As compared with knowledge exchange through
markets of spillovers, networks are reciprocal
-that is bi-directional and long-term- and based
on trust. On the other hand, trust is facilitated
by geographical and institutional proximity.
This is why the probability of establishing
technological collaboration linkages is
higher between countries in close proximity.
The size of the market as well as degree of
innovativeness
(104) also plays an important
role as a driver for the formalisation of
technological collaboration networks via co-
patenting (Prato and Nepelski, 2012) as well
as for patent citations (Paci and Batteta, 2003).
The likelihood of establishing international
technological networks through co-patenting is
inversely related to the innovative capacity of
the country measured through GERD as % of
GDP, as can be observed in Figure II-5-8 below.
Generally, the higher the research intensity
of the country, the lower the percentage of
international co-patenting. Countries with lower
research intensity depend more on international
technological collaboration while those countries
closer to the technological frontier depend less
on international co-patenting.
(104) Measured by patents.
 ▶ Figure II-5-7 Evolution in the share of inventions by location of the inventor(1), 1980-2010
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Van Looy et al (2014)
Notes:
(1)All patent applicants (EPO) are EU applicants. (2)Domestic only: All inventors are from the same country as the applicant.
(3)Intra-EU only: At least one inventor is from a different country than the applicant but all inventors are in the EU. (4)Combined: At
least one inventor is from the EU and one from outside the EU. (5)Outside EU only: All inventors are from outside the EU.
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
1 9 8 0
1 9 8 1
1 9 8 2
1 9 8 3
1 9 8 4
1 9 8 5
1 9 8 6
1 9 8 7
1 9 8 8
1 9 8 9
1 9 9 0
1 9 9 1
1 9 9 2
1 9 9 3
1 9 9 4
1 9 9 5
1 9 9 6
1 9 9 7
1 9 9 8
1 9 9 9
2 0 0 0
2 0 0 1
2 0 0 2
2 0 0 3
2 0 0 4
2 0 0 5
2 0 0 6
2 0 0 7
2 0 0 8
2 0 0 9
2 0 1 0
%
F i g u r e I I-5-7 Ev o l u ti o n i n th e s h a r e o f i n v e n ti o n s b y l o c a ti o n o f th e i n v e n to r( 1 ) , 1 9 8 0-2 0 1 0
D o m e s ti c o n l y (2 ) I n tr a-EU o n l y (3 ) C o m b i n e d (4 ) O u ts i d e EU o n l y (5 )
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Van Looy et al (2014).
Notes: (1)All patent applicants (EPO) are EU applicants. (2)Domestic only: All inventors are from the same country as the applicant. (3)Intra-EU only: At least one inventor is from
a different country than the applicant but all inventors are in the EU. (4)Combined: At least one inventor is from the EU and one from outside the EU. (5)Outside EU only: All
inventors are from outside the EU.

===== PDF_PAGE 213 =====
211
II-5. International knowledge flows
The countries with the lowest percentage of
firms collaborating for innovation with European
-and generally international- partners is to be
found in Italy, Spain and Portugal, all moderate
innovators
(105). At the other side of the spectrum
we find followers such as Cyprus, Slovakia, Estonia
and Belgium with more than 30% of the innovative
firms collaborating with other European partners
for innovation. Interestingly, the innovation leaders
(Sweden and Finland in this graph) are the ones
that collaborate more with the US as well as with
other international partners (among which are
Japan and the Asian tigers).
(105) Based on the Innovation Union Scoreboard, Member States are
classified into four performance groups: Innovation leaders (DK, FI,
DE and SE), Innovation followers (AT, BE, CY, EE, FR, IE, LU, NL, SI,
UK), ‘Moderate innovators’ (HR, CZ, EL, HU, IT, LT, MT, PL, PT, SK, ES)
and ‘Modest innovators’ (BG, LV, RO).
Research collaboration
Another way of looking at international
collaboration in innovation is to use the
Community Innovation Survey (CIS) data. The CIS
asks innovative firms to indicate with whom they
collaborated in innovation. Figure II-5-9 plots the
percentage of innovative firms that collaborate
with national partners, European partners and
other international partners. Despite the high
variability among European countries, it can clearly
be seen that European firms tend to collaborate
with national and European partners, thus
confirming the results obtained in the analysis of
patent data. For Sweden, Finland and to a lesser
extent Belgium, Austria, Lithuania and Slovakia,
collaboration with US partners is important.
 ▶ Figure II-5-8 International co-patenting (%)(1) versus R&D intensity, 2012
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD, Eurostat
Note:
(1)Patent applications to the EPO by application date - % share of patents with foreign co-inventor(s).
A T
B E
B G
H R
C Y
C Z
D K
EE
F IF R
D E
EL H U
I E
I TL V
L T
L U
MT
N LPL
PTR O
SK
SI
ES
SEU K
y = -6.7698x + 40.454
R² = 0.1599
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
0 .0 0 .5 1 .0 1 .5 2 .0 2 .5 3 .0 3 .5
i n te r n a ti o n a l c o-p a te n ti n g (% )
R & D i n te n s i ty
F i g u r e I I-5-8 I n t e r n a t i o n a l c o-p a t e n t i n g ( % )(1)v e r s u s R & D i n t e n s i t y , 2 0 1 2
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD, Eurostat
Note: (1)Patent applications to the EPO by application date - % share of patents with foreign co-inventor(s).

===== PDF_PAGE 214 =====
212
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
As a general trend, the percentage of firms that
collaborate with China and India for innovation
has gradually been decreasing, particularly
between the 2010 survey (data corresponding
to 2008-2010) and the 2012 survey (data from
2010-2012). See Figure II-5-10. For example, for
Sweden –which was the country with the highest
percentage of firms collaborating with China and
India for innovation- the percentage has dropped
from 7.29% in 2008 to 5.8% in 2012. Among the
reasons that can explain this recent trend there
is the high degree of complexity of coordinating
research projects across geographical distances,
particularly with partners with high institutional
distance, which entail higher costs which
tend to offset the potential benefits of the
collaboration (Castellani and Pieri, 2013). When
the coordination costs are too high, firms may
be inclined to substitute or at least decrease the
amount of networks in favour of other forms of
coordination (offshoring) where they may exert
higher control.
 ▶ Figure II-5-9 % shares of innovative firms that collaborate for innovation - broken down by country
 of partner, 2010-2012
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat - Community Innovation Survey 2012
Note:
(1)Europe includes the EU and the following associated countries: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Iceland, Kosovo,
Liechtenstein, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Norway, Serbia, Switzerland and Turkey.
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
%
F i g u r e I I-5-9 % s h a r e s o f i n n o v a ti v e ﬁr m s th a t c o l l a b o r a te fo r i n n o v a ti o n -b r o k e n d o w n b y c o u n tr y o f p a r tn e r , 2 0 1 0-2 0 1 2
N a ti o n a l Eu r o p e (1 ) U n i te d Sta te s C h i n a a n d I n d i a O th e r s
Cyprus Slovakia Belgium AustriaEstonia
Luxembourg
Malta
Portugal SpainLatvia Poland France Italy
Lithuania Finland Sweden Hungary
Czech Republic
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat - Community Innovation Survey 2012
Note: (1)Europe includes the EU and the following associated countries: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Iceland, Kosovo, Liechtenstein, The Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Norway, Serbia, Switzerland and Turkey.

===== PDF_PAGE 215 =====
213
II-5. International knowledge flows
5.3.2 Impact of international research
collaboration — Is the increasing
internationalisation of research
collaboration positive or negative
for Europe?
International networks are not substituting local or
domestic networks but rather complement each
other. European firms actively combine knowledge
sources on different spatial scales and from
various channels and sources in their innovation
process (Grillitsch & Trippl, 2013; Trippl et al., 2009;
Fitjar and Rodríguez-Pose 2013). International
collaboration for innovation can complement
local and regional networks in sustaining firms’
innovative performance and the generation of
‘non-incremental’ innovations (Bathelt et al., 2004;
Belussi et al., 2010; Chang, 2009; Gertler & Levitte,
2005; MacKinnon et al., 2002; McKelvey et al.,
2003; Moodysson, 2008; Ponds et al., 2007).
For European firms, international innovation
networks are found to be significant for new to
the world or radical product innovation (Nieto and
Santamaria, 2007) but their final impact depends
on a variety of factors, including the type and
location of the partner or the size of the country.
Regarding the types of partners, the impact
on the innovation performance is higher when
the firm collaborates with international users
(Harirchi and Chaminade, 2014; Laursen, 2011)
and suppliers (Fitjar and Rodríguez-Pose, 2013).
In terms of the size of the country, the degree of
international collaboration has a positive impact
in small countries but the impact is not significant
for innovative firms in large countries. This result
reveals that small countries tend to rely much
more on international sources of technology
and innovation than large countries except if the
country is a technological leader, with high R&D
intensity, something that is also observable in the
previous figures (Ebersberger et al.).
Furthermore, combining domestic and
international partners for innovation does not
yield similar results in all industries. Although
not reported here, both data on technological
networks (co-patenting) as well as on research
networks (research collaboration) reveal that
there is a high variability in the geographical
spread of innovation networks by industry
with traditional sectors showing a more localised
pattern of linkages than high-tech industries
(Ebersberger et al.; Paci and Batteta, 2003).
 ▶ Figure II-5-10 % shares of European(1) innovative firms that collaborate for innovation -
 broken down by partner, 2008-2012
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat - Community Innovation Survey 2008, 2010, 2012
Note: (1)Europe includes the EU, EFTA and EU candidate countries. However, the number of countries included in Europe varies
between the three versions of the CIS.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat - Community Innovation Survey 2008, 2010, 2012
Note: (1)Europe includes the EU, EFTA and EU candidate countries. However, the number of countries included in Europe varies
between the three versions of the CIS.
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
N a ti o n a l Eu r o p e (1 ) U n i te d Sta te s C h i n a a n d I n d i a O th e r s
%
F i g u r e I I-5-1 0 % s h a r e s o f E u r o p e a n(1)i n n o v a t i v e ﬁr m s t h a t c o l l a b o r a t e f o r i n n o v a t i o n -b r o k e n d o w n b y p a r t n e r ,
2 0 0 8-2 0 1 2
2 0 0 8 2 0 1 0 2 0 1 2

===== PDF_PAGE 216 =====
214
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
High-tech manufacturing industries based on
scientific knowledge tend to display a higher
propensity to establishing international networks
and additionally current evidence suggests
that the impact on innovation of combining
international and domestic collaboration for
innovation is also higher in high-technology
manufacturing industries (Ebersberger et al.).
5.4 International mobility of researchers
Employee mobility is one of the most important
mechanisms for the transfer of knowledge
across geographies and organisations since tacit
knowledge is sticky in nature and does not flow
easily unless the individuals possessing them
move. Within the group of knowledge intensive
workers, researchers are probably one of the most
important collectives. Understanding the trends in
the international mobility of researchers and its
impact is complex. Their international mobility
can be traced by looking at particular groups:
scientists, doctorate holders, ‘star scientists’,
as well as using a variety of indicators — from
bibliometrics, patent analysis or mobility of R&D
personnel- to specific surveys like the one recently
conducted by the OECD and Eurostat on the career
of doctorate holders (OECD, 2014).
5.4.1 Main trends — Is the international
mobility increasing or decreasing?
Is Europe gaining or losing talent?
Despite the diversity in data sources, the analysis
of the trends in the international mobility of
the different collectives of researchers and
its impact tends to show a similar picture:
internationalisation is low but it is
increasing and this yields positive impacts
in terms of scientific quality (OECD, 2014),
innovation (Maliranta et al., 2009; Marx, 2011;
Song et al., 2003; Trippl, 2009, 2011) and
growth (Suriñach and Moreno, 2012).
With few exceptions, the general trend in the EU is
towards an increasing proportion of foreign-born
scientists in the EU states. However, as Figure II-
5-11 shows, with the exception of Luxembourg,
the proportion of foreign scientists is still rather
low and, aside from Sweden, Latvia, Estonia,
Cyprus, the UK, Austria, Ireland and Luxembourg
the average of foreign-born human resources in
science and technology over the total is lower
than 10%.
 ▶ Figure II-5-11 Foreign-born HRSTC(1) as % of total HRSTC, 2005, 2007, 2009
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat - Community Innovation Survey 2008, 2010, 2012
Note:
(1) The Human Resources for Science and Technology Core (HRSTC) population comprises those people who have completed
third-level education in an S&T field of study (HRSTE) who also have an S&T occupation (HRSTO). Population from 25 to 64 years.
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
%
F i g u r e I I-5-1 1 F o r e i g n-b o r n H R S T C(1)a s % o f t o t a l H R S T C , 2 0 0 5 , 2 0 0 7 , 2 0 0 9
2 0 0 5 2 0 0 7 2 0 0 9
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat - Community Innovation Survey 2008, 2010, 2012
Note: (1)The Human Resources for Science and Technology Core (HRSTC) population comprises those people who have completed third-level education in
an S&T field of study (HRSTE) who also have an S&T occupation (HRSTO). Population from 25 to 64 years
Luxembourg
Ireland Austria
United Kingdom
Cyprus Estonia Latvia Sweden Belgium Portugal France
Netherlands
Norway Denmark
Italy
Lithuania
Czech Republic
Slovenia Hungary Greece Finland Slovakia PolandSpain

===== PDF_PAGE 217 =====
215
II-5. International knowledge flows
Proximity plays a crucial role in the mobility
patterns. Looking at international mobility
of scientists, Franzoni et al. (2012) found that
most moves tend to happen within neighbouring
countries. For example, Germany is the most likely
host of inbound scientists from the Netherlands,
Belgium, Denmark, Sweden and Switzerland.
Similar results were also found by Miguélez et al.
(2009) with regards to the mobility of inventors
looking at the affiliation of inventors in patent
applications in the patent cooperation treaty (PCT).
With regards to the mobility to far distant countries,
Franzoni et al. (2012) found that language and
cultural proximity may play a role (for example,
Latin American countries in relation to Spain and
Portugal) but also –and to a higher extent- the
quality and prestige of foreign research and higher
education organisations (for example, top ranked
American universities like Stanford, Yale or the MIT).
A similar pattern is observed when looking at the
percentage of doctorate holders that have lived
or stayed abroad in the past 10 years by country
of destination. Figure II-5-12 clearly shows that
doctorate holders tend to choose another
country in EU27 as their main destination,
thus pointing to the importance of European
academic networks and the academic market.
The data also shows significant differences between
European countries in the internationalisation
patterns of doctoral holders, with Sweden and
Germany (innovator leaders) portraying very
low numbers of international mobility in sharp
contrast with Malta, Hungary and Spain (all three
moderate innovators) with at least one fourth of
the doctorate holders with international experience.
An interesting case is Latvia, a modest innovator
with very low levels of mobility. These differences
are partly explained by the availability of career
opportunities in the country of the PhD. However,
they are also due to strong institutional differences
in the academic environment between countries as
well as general mobility patterns in the respective
countries. For example, in Germany the mobility is
somehow penalised by the academic community
in terms of career opportunities while in other
countries, like France or Finland, PhD graduates in
certain universities are highly encouraged to work
in another university in the country or abroad for a
couple of years after PhD graduation before they
can be hired in the same university from which
they graduated.
 ▶ Figure II-5-12 % share of doctorate holders who have lived or stayed abroad in the past ten years
 by country of citizenship and by region of stay, 2009
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD, UNESCO
Note:
(1)EU: Croatia is not included.
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
%
F i g u r e I I-5-1 2 % s h a r e o f d o c to r a te h o l d e r s w h o h a v e l i v e d o r s ta y e d a b r o a d i n th e p a s t te n y e a r s b y c o u n tr y o f c i ti z e n s h i p
a n d b y r e g i o n o f s ta y , 2 0 0 9
EU (1 ) U n i te d Sta te s O th e r e c o n o m i e s o r u n k n o w n B r e a k d o w n n o t a v a i l a b l e
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD, UNESCO
Note: (1)EU: Croatia is not included.
Malta
Hungary Spain Portugal Belgium
Netherlands
Slovenia Bulgaria Romania Lithuania Sweden Latvia Germany

===== PDF_PAGE 218 =====
216
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
What the previous data shows is that there is not
any evidence yet to believe that there is a loss
of talent in Europe as a whole- at least when
it comes to the mobility of doctorate holders. The
international mobility of scientists, in general, and
of doctorate holders tends to be mainly intra-EU
mobility, which means that the spillovers generated
through the mobility of these groups of knowledge-
workers tend to remain in the EU. It should be noted,
however, that the nature of the data
(106) does not
provide any clues about trends. Whether the
importance of intra-EU mobility of PhD holders has
increased or decreased over time and particularly
after the crises remains to be studied.
However, one special group of scientists is
portraying a different international mobility pattern:
the collective of star scientists
(107). Recent data
shows that Europe has been suffering from a
net loss of star scientists with a high negative
migration balance with the US which cannot be
compensated with the entry of star scientists from
Central and Easter Europe (Schiller and Revilla
(2010) cf Suriñach and Moreno, 2012). These results
are similar to those obtained by Maier et al. (2007).
Using data on highly cited researchers worldwide
they found that all countries in Europe showed a
negative migration balance except France and
Switzerland. Worldwide, the major net receiver of
star scientists is the US, which hosts two-thirds of
all highly cited researchers in the world.
(106) The data comes from a survey conducted in 2010 in collaboration
between the EU and the OECD. Hitherto no longitudinal data is
available.
(107) Both Schiller and Revilla (2010) as well as Maier et al. (2007)
define star scientists as those researchers that are most
frequently cited in their discipline which are identified by ISI web
of knowledge (ISI HighlyCited.com).
5.4.2 Is the international mobility of
researchers positive or negative
for Europe?
The international mobility of scientists yields,
in general, a positive impact both on the host
and on the home region. International mobility
is associated with higher scientific impact,
higher innovation performance and higher
growth that go beyond the region in which the
scientists are located.
By looking at changes in the affiliation of authors
in journal articles, the OECD (2014) tracked the
international mobility patterns of scientists
as well as the impact of the move in terms of
citations and concluded that the citations of
the scientists who move internationally can be
up to 20% higher than those that stay in the
same place or country. Figure II-5-13 shows
the different citation impact of researchers that
have stayed in the same country between 1996
and 2011 (Stayers ), compared to returnees,
new inflows and outflows. Clearly outflows, new
inflows and returnees have the highest impact in
terms of citations while the lowest impact is for
publications of scientists that have remained in
the same place.

===== PDF_PAGE 219 =====
217
II-5. International knowledge flows
Similarly, the existing literature has well established
the positive impact of the international mobility
of doctorate holders in terms of knowledge
transfer. The so-called brain circulation may indicate
higher career instability — particularly in the research
and higher education sectors where mobility rates are
the highest- but it generates benefits to both home
and host countries (Edler et al. 2011). Furthermore,
brain drain may be offset by inflows of doctorate
holders, thus the net results may be positive for the
country (Auriol and Freeman, 2013).
The positive impact of the international mobility
is particularly clear for star scientists (Suriñac and
Moreno, 2011). Using data on the mobility of star
scientists, Trippl (2011) provides evidence on a
positive relationship between the mobility of star
scientists and knowledge networks in the host region
as well as between the host and the home regions.
Backward linkages to the home region often remain
active (Schiller and Diez, 2010) thus pointing out to
the bi-directional (or even multidirectional) nature
of their knowledge linkages. Star scientists are
often engaged in academic collaboration, research
projects with firms, co-patenting or licensing to local
firms, more often than non-mobile researchers,
although some of these collaborations are sporadic
(Trippl, 2011). In this respect, the observed negative
flow of star scientists from the EU to mainly the US
does not necessarily mean a net loss for the EU in
terms of impact, thus so far the linkages with the
European home country are maintained.
5.5 R&D foreign direct investments
5.5.1 General trend — Is the EU gaining
or losing importance in the global
flows of cross border R&D?
The fDi Markets database provides information
on the number of cross-border greenfield
investment projects announced during the period
2003-2012, including information on countries of
origin and destination, nature of the investment
and industries around the world in the period
between 2003-2012. fDi Markets classifies the
investment events according to the main business
activities thus making it possible to distinguish
investments related to manufacturing from
those related to ‘R&D’ or ‘Design, development
and testing’ (DDT). This data allows us to analyse
the patterns of technology-driven investments
and their potential differences with other forms
of offshoring (for example manufacturing)
Researchers have long assumed that R&D tends to co-
locate with production facilities (Liu et al., 2013). While
this may be true in some cases (Ernst, 2010), it is not
in all, particularly in technology intensive industries
(Audretsch and Feldman, 1996; Mariani, 2002).
 ▶ Figure II-5-13 Impact factor of scientific publications by mobility patterns of scientists, 1996-2011
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
0 .0
0 .5
1 .0
1 .5
F i g u r e I I . 5 . 1 3 I m p a c t fa c to r o f s c i e n ti ﬁc p u b l i c a ti o n s b y m o b i l i ty p a tte r n s o f s c i e n ti s ts , 1 9 9 6-2 0 1 1
Sta y e r s R e tu r n e e s N e w i n ﬂo w s O u tﬂ o w s
I m p a c t fa c to r
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD
Canada Turkey
Russian Federation
Austria
United States United Kingdom
Switzerland
Germany
BrazilSweden Belgium Portugal
Chile
Argentina
South Africa
France
Netherlands
NorwayDenmark
Italy SpainIsrael
Australia Honk Kong Singapore
Chinese Taipei New Zealand South Korea Czech Republic
Mexico IndiaGreeceFinland ChinaPolandJapan

===== PDF_PAGE 220 =====
218
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The following tables provide some evidence in this
direction. They show cross-border investments in DDT
and R&D activities by area of origin and destination,
including projects in manufacturing activities as a
benchmark (Castelli and Castellani, 2013). The first
thing that can be appreciated is that the amount of
cross-border R&D and DDT projects is substantially
lower than the number of manufacturing. However,
the data also reveals substantial differences in the
patterns of internationalisation of R&D and DDT with
respect to manufacturing.
Figures II-5-14 and II-5-16 show that cross-
border investments in R&D-related activities are
less bound by geographic distance than projects in
manufacturing activities. For example, while intra-
Europe investments in manufacturing account
for 47.7% of all cross-border investments of
Multinational Corporations (MNCs) from Western
Europe, this share drops to 36.1% in the case of
DDT projects and 37.3% for R&D (Chaminade
et al., 2014). The evidence is consistent with some
recent econometric studies showing that geographic
distance between the home and host country may be
less of an obstacle for R&D-related projects than it is
for manufacturing. This is because companies may
need to locate R&D investments in distant locations
to gain access to specific knowledge which they
would not be able to access otherwise (Castellani
et al., 2013, Chaminade and de Fuentes, 2012).
 ▶ Figure II-5-14 Cross-border investment projects in R&D-related and manufacturing activities,
 by country of origin, January, 2003 - August, 2012
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Castelli and Castellani (2013)
DDT R&D Manufacturing
Rank Country
Number
of
projects
%
share Rank Country
Number
of
projects
%
share Rank Country
Number
of
projects
%
share
1 United
States 1 804 45.3 1 United
States 1 351 42.7 1 United
States 5 369 17.6
2 Germany 386 9.7 2 Germany 287 9.1 2 Japan 4 332 14.2
3 United
Kingdom 278 7.0 3 Japan 253 8.0 3 Germany 3 689 12.1
4 Japan 274 6.9 4 France 163 5.2 4 France 1 678 5.5
5 France 219 5.5 5 United
Kingdom 162 5.1 5 United
Kingdom 1 427 4.7
6 India 131 3.3 6 Switzerland 119 3.8 6 Italy 1 055 3.5
7 Switzerland 114 2.9 7 China 97 3.1 7 Switzerland 1 031 3.4
8 Netherlands 84 2.1 8 South Korea 79 2.5 8 South Korea 939 3.1
9 Canada 77 1.9 9 Netherlands 75 2.4 9 Netherlands 799 2.6
10 Sweden 51 1.3 10 Canada 70 2.2 10 Chinese
Taipei 717 2.3
11 China 50 1.3 11 India 65 2.1 11 Canada 708 2.3
12 Spain 48 1.2 12 Sweden 57 1.8 12 Spain 699 2.3
13 Finland 46 1.2 13 Finland 40 1.3 13 China 635 2.1
14 South Korea 44 1.1 14 Italy 38 1.2 14 Sweden 632 2.1
15 Denmark 36 0.9 15 Denmark 38 1.2 15 India 605 2.0
Other
countries 338 8.5 Other
countries 268 8.4 Other
countries 6 239 20.4
TOTAL 3 980 100 TOTAL 3 162 100 TOTAL 30 554 100
 Top 5 2 961 74.4 Top 5 2 216 70.1 Top 5 16 495 54.0
 Top 10 3 418 85.9 Top 10 2 656 84.0 Top 10 21 036 68.8
 Top 15 3 642 91.5 Top 15 2 894 91.5 Top 15 24 315 79.6
 Top 20 3 787 95.2 Top 20 3 031 95.9 Top 20 26 530 86.8
Herfindhal
Index 0.231 Herfindhal
Index 0.208 Herfindhal
Index 0.097

===== PDF_PAGE 221 =====
219
II-5. International knowledge flows
The EU as origin of the investments
Looking only at investments from the EU,
Castellani and Pieri (2013) show that most of
the R&D offshoring projects of European firms
are directed towards non-European countries
and only less than one fourth are intra-European
investments. Figure II-5-15 shows that the main
non-European recipients of R&D offshoring from
the EU are China and India, then the US, Japan
and Canada, which together account for 19.90%,
further followed by other South-East-Asian
countries. Other emerging economies, which
include important destinations such as Brazil
and Russia, also attract a considerable number
of projects.
The relative importance of China and India as
recipients of R&D investments by European firms can
be explained by looking at both push and pull factors.
On the one hand for European firms, investments
in R&D abroad are motivated by the access to
knowledge and markets, particularly accessing
qualified human resources that are not available in
the numbers or quality in the home European regions
(Borras and Haakonsson, 2010). Since knowledge is
very unevenly distributed across space (Asheim and
Gertler, 2005; Malecki, 2010) firms strategically
target specific countries and specific regions where
that knowledge is located. Offshoring of R&D is used
as a mechanism to access ubiquitous knowledge
across distance (Liu et al., 2013). On the other hand,
the combination of very large growing markets
together with a rapid accumulation of technological
capabilities (Altenburg et al., 2008) has made China
and India very attractive destinations for R&D
related investments, particularly in certain regions
like Beijing, Shanghai or Bangalore (Chaminade and
Vang, 2008; Crescenzi et al., 2012).
Europe as recipient of investments
Europe is also an important recipient of cross-
border R&D investments from abroad. Although
most of the R&D and DDT related investments
worldwide go to China, India and the US, European
countries such as the UK, Germany and France are
not far behind. In fact, four European countries are
among the top 10 destinations of DDT projects and
five of them are among the top 10 of R&D projects.
See Figure II-5-16.
 ▶ Figure II-5-15 Cross-border investments from the EU by region of destination and by nature of
 the investments, 2003-2012
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Chaminade et al. (2014) based on Castellani and Pieri (2013)
DDT R&D Manufacturing
 EU15 21.3% 27.4% 19.5%
 EU12 10.1% 6.2% 16.1%
 Other EU 2.0% 2.5% 4.8%
 Developed (United States, Canada, Japan) 18.7% 19.9% 13.4%
 South-East Asia 7.6% 9.0% 4.5%
 South Korea 1.2% 1.8% 0.7%
 Brazil 3.1% 2.6% 3.7%
 China 11.2% 13.5% 11.5%
 India 13.7% 8.3% 6.3%
 Russian Federation 1.5% 2.2% 6.0%
 South Africa 0.6% 1.1% 0.7%
 Rest of the world 9.0% 5.5% 12.8%
 Total number 156 725 12 665

===== PDF_PAGE 222 =====
220
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Europe is an important destination of Chinese
and Indian investments abroad. The analysis of
all investments by emerging multinationals in
Europe indicates that the EU represents 31% of
all the outward FDI from China to the world and
33% of Indian outward FDI (Chaminade, 2015). A
recent study on the technology driven investments
by emerging multinationals in Europe reveals
that the investments are attracted to particular
technological poles — for example, automotive to
Germany, renewable energies to Denmark and ICT
more widely spread (Chaminade, 2015).
5.5.2 Impact — Are the new trends
positive or negative for Europe?
The existing literature suggests that there is a
positive impact between R&D offshoring and
firm performance. Piscitello and Santangelo
(2009) find that there is a positive impact of
offshoring of R&D towards BRICS countries (108)
on the knowledge production of OECD based
firms, including European firms. However, the
final impact is mediated by a series of factors —
particularly the time past after the investment,
the managerial capabilities to learn from the
environment and manage transnational projects
or the ability to choose successful R&D projects,
all of which influence the cost-effectiveness of
the cross-border R&D investment (Castellani and
Pieri, 2013; Chaminade, 2015).
The analysis of offshoring R&D projects by
European multinationals conducted by Castellani
and Pieri (2013) reveals that offshoring of
R&D activities has a positive impact in terms
of productivity growth of European regions.
Offshoring regions have a higher productivity
growth relative to non-offshoring regions,
(108) Plus Korea, Singapore and Taiwan.
 ▶ Figure II-5-16 Cross-border investment projects in R&D-related and manufacturing activities, by country of
 destination, January, 2003 - August, 2012
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Castelli and Castellani (2013)
DDT R&D Manufacturing
Rank Country
Number
of
projects
%
share Rank Country
Number
of
projects
%
share Rank Country
Number
of
projects
%
share
1 India 809 20.3 1 China 534 16.9 1 China 4 969 16.3
2 China 511 12.8 2 India 466 14.7 2 United
States 2 776 9.1
3 United
States 316 7.9 3 United
States 249 7.9 3 India 1 879 6.1
4 United
Kingdom 261 6.6 4 United
Kingdom 187 5.9 4 Russian
Federation 1 323 4.3
5 Germany 140 3.5 5 Singapore 151 4.8 5 Brazil 1 061 3.5
6 Singapore 115 2.9 6 France 126 4.0 6 Poland 963 3.2
7 Brazil 99 2.5 7 Germany 108 3.4 7 Mexico 959 3.1
8 Canada 94 2.4 8 Ireland 106 3.4 8 Thailand 941 3.1
9 Spain 91 2.3 9 Spain 90 2.8 9 France 872 2.9
10 France 90 2.3 10 Canada 83 2.6 10 United
Kingdom 834 2.7
TOTAL 3 980 100 TOTAL 3 162 100 TOTAL 30 554 100
 Top 5 2 037 51.2 Top 5 1 587 50.2 Top 5 12 008 39.3
 Top 10 2 526 63.5 Top 10 2 100 66.4 Top 10 16 577 54.3
 Top 15 2 868 72.1 Top 15 2 408 76.2 Top 15 20 145 65.9
 Top 20 3 132 78.7 Top 20 2 638 83.4 Top 20 22 443 73.5
Herfindhal
Index 0.076 Herfindhal
Index 0.071 Herfindhal
Index 0.051

===== PDF_PAGE 223 =====
221
II-5. International knowledge flows
but the effect of R&D offshoring is slightly
decreasing with the number of investments.
Further analysis by country of destination
indicates that the effect is larger and significant
in the case of R&D offshoring toward South-
East-Asian countries and also positive in the
case of R&D investments towards China. On the
other hand, regions which are offshoring R&D
intensively towards India experience significantly
lower productivity growth rates. One possible
explanation for these results may lie in the types
of projects. While R&D projects to South East
Asia are disproportionally concentrated in high-
tech manufacturing (43% of all R&D projects in
the area are in these manufacturing industries),
R&D offshoring towards India is much more
concentrated in knowledge-intensive services
(52%). As recent evidence seems to suggest
coordinating global value chains in services is
much more complex than in manufacturing and
the benefits of offshoring may be offset by
the high costs resulting from managing these
complex value chains (Castellani and Pieri, 2013).
What the existing evidence seems to suggest
is that offshoring of R&D tends to complement
–rather than substitute- R&D conducted in
Europe. However, the benefits from these
potential complementarities are not similar for
all industries. Piscitello and Santangelo (2009)
found that firms in high-tech industries benefit
more clearly from complementarities between
domestic and offshored R&D to BRICS
(109), while
firms in low tech industries seem to benefit
largely from the R&D offshored to BRICS (and
not so much from the domestic).
In the case of inward investments in R&D
into Europe a recent study based on a survey
undertaken in Germany and Italy on MNEs from
advanced countries (AMNEs) and emerging
countries (EMNEs) investing in the machinery
industry (Giuliani et al., 2014) found that
investments by EMNEs are, in fact, more likely
to involve local innovation networks in the host
countries and create win-win situations in terms
of mutual learning than in the case of technology-
driven investments by advanced country
multinationals (Giuliani et al., 2014). Although
(109) Plus Korea, Singapore and Taiwan.
one should be cautious with generalisations, these
results indicate a positive impact or, at least, to a
not generalised predatory behaviour by emerging
multinationals investing in technology in Europe.
5.6 Conclusions
In this chapter, we have analysed different
mechanisms that facilitate the international
exchange of knowledge in Europe, from the
trade of high-tech products and services to
the mobility of human capital, research and
technological collaboration and offshoring of
R&D. The previous sections point out some clear
trends.
The EU is still performing well in terms of
exports of knowledge intensive goods and
services in a global perspective although we
have observed in recent years that China and
the US are closing the gap with the EU in terms
of knowledge-intensive products and services,
respectively. Second, the analysis of the global
value chains suggests that the European
component of those exports is also very high.
Third, the rate of globalisation of value chains
is accelerating and it is much faster than the
fragmentation at the EU level. This means that
although being part of the EU is still important
for trading knowledge intensive products, the
shares of added value outside the EU and the
number of countries participating in the global
chain are rapidly increasing. While maintaining
the volume of high-tech exports is important, in
the long-term it is even more crucial to retain the
largest share of value added.
Along the global value chain, advanced countries
are specialising in skill-intensive activities
like design, R&D or marketing, while emerging
economies like China are capital and labour-
intensive (Timmer et al., 2914; Van der Marel,
2015). This suggests that Europe’s competitive
advantage in this increasing global fragmentation
of production and trade is based on its innovation
performance widely defined (not only R&D).
While traditional trade policies such as removing
tariffs, facilitating administrative procedures

===== PDF_PAGE 224 =====
222
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
and regulating the single market are effective in
promoting the access to global value chains, a
different set of policies is needed for upgrading the
value chain towards higher added value activities.
The analysis of the new global input-output data
shows that investments in innovation (R&D, training
of human capital, innovation climate) as well as ICT
infrastructure are crucial. This suggests a very tight
link between innovation and trade which demands
high levels of coordination between these two
traditionally separated policies.
The analysis reveals that proximity matters
significantly for the mobility of human capital
as well as for the establishment of collaborative
networks. Both mechanisms are adequate for the
transmission of tacit knowledge, requiring face-to-
face interaction and trust and are facilitated not only
by geographical but also by institutional proximity.
In both cases, intra-Europe knowledge flows are
more important that extra-Europe knowledge
flows, thus pointing to the role of the European
market facilitating these forms of exchange. This is
particularly clear in the case of some followers and
moderate innovators like Hungary, Portugal, Spain
or Lithuania for which technological collaboration
and, in some cases, international mobility of
doctorate holders is important.
Looking at the main motivations for moving to
a different country may provide some useful
information for the design of policies to attract
scientists in Europe. The mobility of scientists
could be related to scientific, economic, cultural
and personal factors (Schiller and Diez, 2010).
Both in the case of outbound mobility of scientists
in general (Franzoni et al., 2012), doctorate
holders in particular (Auriol and Freeman, 2013) or
star scientists (Schiller and Diez, 2010), academic
factors are the most important reasons for moving
abroad, followed by economic and job-related
factors and, to a lesser extent, family or personal
reasons
(110). However, being close to family and
friends or being in an environment with a similar
culture gains importance in the decision to return
to the home region (Franzoni et al., 2012; Schiller
and Diez, 2010).

(110) The study of Franzoni et al. focuses only on five scientific
disciplines: biology, chemistry, earth and environmental sciences
and materials science.
This has important policy implications. Attracting
talent from abroad as well as retaining local talent
in Europe, particularly in the case of star scientists,
depends largely on the quality of the research
and education facilities (outstanding faculties,
colleagues or research teams) and attractive
working conditions (including good research
environments). This can explain the lower mobility
observed in countries like Germany and Sweden
(both innovation leaders) and the higher mobility
of scientists from moderate innovation countries.
Currently, the majority of the programs to facilitate
mobility are targeting the economic dimension
of mobility (European Commission, 2014) — for
example by providing funding to study abroad
which may not be a sufficient incentive for the
mobility unless the other two conditions (quality of
the research and education facilities and attractive
working conditions) are met.
The patterns of offshoring of R&D as well as
trade networks are rather different- more global
than intra-European. In other words, trade and
investment networks are more dispersed globally
than mobility of human capital and research
and technological networks. These findings
are coherent with those obtained by Cassi et al.
(2012); Castelli and Castellani (2013); and Prato
and Nepelski (2012) who also found that trade
and investments are less bounded geographically
than other forms of knowledge networks.
Policy action towards internationalisation of
innovation activities has to be very aware that,
while offshoring of R&D tends to yield positive
impacts, differences across industrial sectors
and countries of origin and destination are
important. While the internationalisation of
R&D and other innovation activities related to
manufacturing may have a positive impact in
terms of productivity growth of the home country,
offshoring of R&D related to knowledge-intensive
services can be more problematic.
On the other hand, the relatively lower
organisational problems in high-tech
manufacturing and the concentration of cutting

===== PDF_PAGE 225 =====
223
II-5. International knowledge flows
edge technologies developed in South-East Asian
countries, contribute to a potentially positive
association of offshoring R&D to this regions and
the productivity growth of EU regions.
Investment decisions are affected by a wider array
of policies and barriers which are typically unrelated
with trade issues (Los et al., 2015; World Economic
Forum (Wef), 2012). Other investment-related
policies — ranging from competition, trade and
intellectual property rights to environmental and
labour market policies — have a greater impact on
technology-driven FDI (Chaminade and Rabelotti,
2015). Difficulties in obtaining short-term business
visas for the mobility of personnel, capital restrictions
or limitations to move capitals between Europe and
the home country are some of the non-traditional
investment barriers mentioned by several investors
in Europe, headquartered in an emerging country
(Chaminade, 2015). Additionally, some countries,
like Germany, have restrictions to the access to IP
in cases of acquisition
(111), which is one of the main
reasons causing delays, increases in costs and often
requiring changes in the investor strategy. If policy-
makers want to influence R&D related investments
into Europe a much wider set of policies is needed
— one that goes beyond traditional trade regimes
and includes, for example, provisions for the mobility
of human capital, the management of intellectual
property rights and that facilitates the establishment
of local linkages with European firms.
(111) The investor must acquire the 100% of the company.

===== PDF_PAGE 226 =====
224
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
REFERENCES
Altenburg, T., Schmitz, H., Stamm, A., 2008 .
Breakthrough? China’s and India’s Transition from
Production to Innovation. World Development 36.
Asheim, B.T., Gertler, M.S., 2005. The Geography
of Innovation: Regional Innovation Systems, in:
Fagerberg, J., Mowery, D. And Nelson, R. (Eds.)
(Ed.), The Oxford handbook of innovation. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, pp. 291-317.
Audretsch, D.B., Feldman, M.P., 1996. R&D Spillovers
and the Geography of Innovation and Production.
The American Economic Review 86, 630-640.
Auriol, L.M.M., Freeman, R.A., 2013. Careers of
Doctorate Holders: Analysis of Labour Market and
Mobility Indicators’, in: Oecd (Ed.), OECD Science,
Technology and Industry working papers. OECD
Publishing.
Borras, S., Haakonsson, S., 2010. European
Firm’s reasons for taking part of Global Innovation
Networks INGENIUS Policy Brief.
Cassi, L., Morrison, A., Ter Wal, A.L.J., 2012. The
Evolution of Trade and Scientific Collaboration
Networks in the Global Wine Sector: A Longitudinal
Study Using Network Analysis. Economic Geography
88, 311-334.
Castellacci, F., Archibugi, D., 2008. The Technology
Clubs: The Distribution of Knowledge across
Nations. Research Policy 37, 1659-1673.
Castellani, D., Pieri, F., 2013. R&D offshoring
and the Productivity Growth of European Regions.
Research Policy 42, 1581-1594.
Castelli, C., Castellani, D., 2013. The
internationalisation of R&D: Sectoral and
Geographic Patterns of Cross-border Investments.
Economia e Politica Industriale.
Chaminade, C., 2015. Technology-driven FDI by
emerging Multinationals in Europe. Lund University
Lund. www.globinn.lu.se/category/reports
Chaminade, C., Castellani, D., Plechero, M.,
2014. The emergence of China and India as New
Innovation Powerhouses- Threat or Opportunity,
in: Entreprenörskapförum (Ed.), Globalization.
Entreprenörskapförum, Stockholm.
Chaminade, C., Vang, J., 2008. Globalisation of
Knowledge Production and Regional Innovation
Policy: Supporting Specialized Hubs in the
Bangalore Software Industry. Research Policy 37,
1684-1696.
Crescenzi, R., Rodríguez-Pose, A., Storper, M.,
2012. The Territorial Dynamics of Innovation in
China and India. Journal of Economic Geography
12, 1055-1085.
Ebersberger, B., Herstad, S.J., Iversen, E., Kirner, E.,
Som, O., 2011. Open Innovation in Europe: Effects,
Determinants and Policy.
Ernst, D., 2010. Upgrading through Innovation in
a Small Network Economy: Insights from Taiwan’s
IT industry. Economics of Innovation and New
Technology 19, 295-324.
European Commission (2014) The Researchers
Report. http://ec.europa.eu/euraxess/pdf/research_
policies/Researchers%20Report%202014_
FINAL%20REPORT.pdf. Accessed in June 2015.
Fitjar, R.D., Rodríguez-Pose, A., 2013. Firm
Collaboration and Modes of Innovation in Norway.
Research Policy 42, 128-138.
Franzoni, C., Scellato, G., Stephan, P., 2012.
Foreign-born Scientists: Mobility Patterns for 16
Countries. Nature biotechnology 30, 1250-1253.
Gertler, M.S., Levitte, Y.M., 2005. Local Nodes in
Global Networks: The Geography of Knowledge
Flows in Biotechnology Innovation. Industry and
Innovation 12, 487-507.
Giuliani, E., Gorgoni, S., Günther, C., Rabellotti, R.,
2014. Emerging Versus Advanced Country MNEs
investing in Europe: A Typology of Subsidiary
Global–local Connections. International Business
Review 23, 680-691.

===== PDF_PAGE 227 =====
225
II-5. International knowledge flows
Giuliani, E., Rabelotti, R., Van Dijk, M.P., 2005.
Clusters facing Competition: The Importance of
External Linkages. Ashgate Publishing, Aldershot
and Burlington.
Grose, T., Randolph, S., 2014. Europe and the Bay
Area.
Harirchi, G., Chaminade, C., 2014. User-producer
Interaction and the Degree of Novelty of Inovations:
a global perspective. World Development 57, 19-31.
Laursen, K., 2011. User-producer Interaction as a
Driver of Innovation: Costs and Advantages in an
Open Innovation Model. Science and Public Policy
38, 713-723.
Laursen, K., Salter, A.J., 2014. The Paradox of
Openness: Appropriability, External Search and
Collaboration. Research Policy 43, 867-878.
Liu, J., Chaminade, C., Asheim, B., 2013. The
Geography and Structure of Global Innovation
Networks: A Knowledge Base Perspective. European
Planning Studies 21, 1456-1473.
Los, B., Timmer, M.P., Vries, G.J., 2015. How Global
are Global Value Chains? A New Approach to
Measure International Fragmentation. Journal of
Regional Science 55, 66-92.
Malecki, E.J., 2010. Everywhere? The Geography
of Knowledge*. Journal of Regional Science 50,
493-513.
Maliranta, M., Mohnen, P., Rouvinen, P., 2009. Is
Inter-firm Labor Mobility a Channel of Knowledge
Spillovers? Evidence from a Linked Employer–
Employee panel. Industrial and corporate change
18, 1161-1191.
Mariani, M., 2002. Next to Production or to
Technological Clusters? The Economics and
Management of R&D Location. Journal of
Management and Governance 6, 131-152.
Martin, R., Moodysson, J., 2013. Comparing
Knowledge Bases: On the Geography and
Organization of Knowledge sourcing in the Regional
Innovation System of Scania, Sweden. European
Urban and Regional Studies 20, 170-187.
Marx, M., 2011. The Firm Strikes Back Non-
compete Agreements and the Mobility of Technical
Professionals. American Sociological Review 76,
695-712.
Miguélez, E., Serrano, R.M., I Caralt, J.S., 2009.
Scientists on the Move: Tracing Scientists’ Mobility
and its Spatial Distribution. Documents de Treball
(IREA), 1.
Oecd, 2014. Researchers on the Move: The Impact
of Brain Circulation, in: Reports, S. (Ed.). OECD, Paris.
Paci, R., Batteta, E., 2003. Innovation Networks
and Knowledge flows across the European Regions.
Piscitello, L., Santangelo, G., 2009. Does R&D
offshoring Displace or Strengthen Knowledge
Production at Home? Evidence from OECD countries.
Powell, W., 1990 . Neither Market nor Hierarchy.
Research in Organizational Behaviour 12, 295-336.
Prato, G., Nepelski, D., 2012. Global Technological
Collaboration Network: Network Analysis of
International Co-inventions. The Journal of
Technology Transfer, 1-18.
Saxenian, A.-L., 1994. Regional Advantage: Culture
and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route 128.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Schiller, D., Diez, J.R., 2010. Local embeddedness
of Knowledge Spillover Agents: Empirical Evidence
from German Star Scientists. Papers in Regional
Science 89, 275-294.
Song, J., Almeida, P., Wu, G., 2003. Learning–by–
Hiring: When Is Mobility More Likely to Facilitate
Interfirm Knowledge Transfer? Management
Science 49, 351-365.
Strambach, S., Klement, B., 2012. Cumulative and
Combinatorial Micro-dynamics of Knowledge: The
Role of Space and Place in Knowledge Integration.
European Planning Studies 20, 1843-1866.
Suriñach, J., Moreno, R., 2012 . Introduction:
Intangible Assets and Regional Economic Growth.
Regional Studies 46, 1277-1281.

===== PDF_PAGE 228 =====
226
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Trippl, M., 2009. Islands of Innovation and
Internationally Networked Labor Markets. Magnetic
Centers for Star Scientists?
Trippl, M., 2011. Scientific Mobility and Knowledge
Transfer at the Interregional and Intraregional
Level. Regional Studies, 1-15.
Unctad, 2014. World Investment Report 2013.
Global Value Chains. Investment and Trade for
Development, in: Unctad (Ed.). Unctad, Geneva.
Van Looy, B., Song, X., Callaert, J., Peeters, H.,
2014. Intra-European Cooperation compared to
International Collaboration. Measurement and
Analysis of Knowledge and R&D Exploitation Flows,
assessed by patent and licensing data 2014.
World Economic Forum (Wef), 2012. The Shifting
Geography of Global Value Chains: Implications
for Developing Countries and Trade Policy. World
Economic Forum, Davos.

===== PDF_PAGE 229 =====
227
II-6. Do research and other sources of innovation drive productivity gains in European Top R&D Investors?
Fernando Hervas, Sara Amoroso
European Commission, Joint Research Centre
(Institute for Prospective and Technological Studies)
6.1 Introduction
There is long-standing consensus among
experts and policy-makers that one of Europe’s
main impairments to make progress towards
sustainable economic growth is its sluggish
evolution of productivity. For example, Europe's
labour productivity growth continues to be on
the decline in the aftermath of the crisis. This
is the continuation of nearly three decades of
slowdown which result in an increasing gap
between the EU and the US. Evidence also shows
that one of the main growth detractor factors
for the EU economy in the period 2008-2013
has been total factor productivity (TFP), which
decreased 0.7 percent in the EU27
(112).
(112) Van Ark (2014).
The existing literature and empirical evidence
show that causes of this productivity slowdown
in Europe may be related to lower investment
levels in ICT and in other intangible assets (R&D,
skills, organisational capital), particularly in the
services sector. Both ICT and intangible assets
are interrelated and determine effectiveness in
translating investments into development and
adoption of new technologies and into successful
innovations.
Since the establishment of the 3% R&D intensity
target
(113) back in 2002, EU policy-makers have
strived to design and implement appropriate
policy measures to hit this target. According to
official science and technology statistics, one of
Europe’s main weaknesses lies in the level of R&D
financed and implemented by the business sector
(Business Enterprise Expenditure on R&D– BERD-
indicator). Therefore, finding the appropriate
measures to incentivise and support the level of
R&D investment financed by the business sector
remains a major policy challenge.
(113) A policy response to the need for sustainable growth in the EU
has been to set a quantitative target of 3% for the intensity of
the R&D investment efforts made in the economy by all economic
agents in relation to GDP. While both the public and the business
sectors should contribute to it, there is an indication that in
reaching such a target the latter should bear the heaviest share,
ideally two thirds of the total investment effort.
6. Do research and other sources of innovation drive
productivity gains in top European R&D investors?
 ▶ Figure II-6-1 The gap in productivity growth rates - annual compound growth in GDP per person employed(1),
 2001-2012
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Sources: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies, JRC - Knowledge for
Growth Unit
Data: OECD
Note:
(1)US dollar PPPs at constant 2005 prices.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Sources: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies,
 JRC - Knowledge for Growth Unit
Data: OECD
Note: (1) US dollar PPPs at constant 2005 prices.
Figure II-6-1 The gap in productivity growth rates - annual compound growth in GDP per
person employed(1), 2001-2012
1.8%
1.6%
1.4%
1.2%
1.0%
0.8%
0.6%
0.4%
0.2%
0.0%
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Japan
Euro area
United States

===== PDF_PAGE 230 =====
228
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Beyond the need to increase the amount of
money invested in R&D, policy-makers and
business leaders should also pay attention to the
returns obtained from such investments. Evidence
shows that the translation of R&D and innovation
investments into higher levels of productivity,
better firm performance and ultimately long-
term prospects of sustainable economic growth
are far from automatic. A better understanding
of such transmission mechanisms and of the
conditions (both internal and external to the
firm) needed to ensure appropriate levels of R&D
investment returns is therefore very relevant for
policy-makers in charge of designing specific
incentives and financial support instruments to
increase business R&D.
This chapter provides an overview of the
empirical evidence of the link between R&D
investments and productivity at a firm level,
using data from a sample of the world’s top
R&D investors
(114), representing more than
90% of the R&D financed and implemented by
the business sector worldwide. Such evidence
shows that the impact of investment in R&D
on labour productivity, technical efficiency and
ultimately on a firm’s overall performance varies
among sectors and firms, which calls for the
establishment of differentiated support policies.
In addition, results show that there are indirect
effects of R&D on productivity which cannot be
considered in isolation from a broader concept
of non-technological innovations, which leads to
the need for firms to combine R&D investments
with investments in other intangibles and for
policy-makers to create the right conditions to
allow such indirect effects on productivity to take
place –e.g., internationalisation and cooperation.
The chapter is organised as follows. We first
analyse the direct link between R&D investments
and firms’ productivity and efficiency. Second, we
look at the indirect link between R&D investments
and productivity through the consideration of other
related factors such as the degree of a firm’s
internationalisation, the level of cooperation among
firms and investments in other intangible assets
beyond R&D, like training or design. We conclude
by summarising the main policy implications.
(114) Annual reports and datasets of the EU Industrial R&D Investment
Scoreboard are available at: http://iri.jrc.ec.europa.eu/scoreboard.html.
6.2 R&D Investments and firm’s
productivity
This section is organised into two parts. The
first part reviews, although not exhaustively, the
general empirical findings of the seminal papers
examining the R&D-performance link. The second
part collects the main results of studies reporting
evidence on how R&D increases the overall
performance of R&D intensive companies, largely
confirming the findings of the first part and
extending them to account for firm heterogeneity.
6.2.1 The determinants of Productivity
and Efficiency
A voluminous amount of literature has been
devoted to investigating the effects of R&D
investment on economic performance of
companies, sectors and countries. The knowledge
capital model of Griliches (1979) has been the
starting point for both ‘production function’
and ‘distance to frontier’ approaches, and has
remained a cornerstone of the productivity
literature for more than 25 years. Stemming
from the seminal theoretical work of Griliches,
empirical works have commonly found that
R&D activities, such as R&D and innovation
investments, make a significant contribution
to enhancing firms’ productivity. The estimated
overall average elasticities range from 0.01% to
0.17%
(115) and the rate of returns (116) range from
0.10% to 0.43%, depending on the measurement
methods and the data used. Griliches and
Mairesse (1981), Cuneo and Mairesse (1983)
and Hall and Mairesse (1995) empirically
validated the relationship between productivity
and the level of R&D investments and found that
R&D firms have higher R&D returns and higher
productivity compared to non-R&D performing
firms (Klette, 1996).
(115) R&D elasticity is the degree of responsiveness of output or
productivity to changes in the level of R&D. For example, an
elasticity of R&D to productivity that equals 0.17 means that for a
1% increase in R&D investment, the productivity increases 0.17%.
(116) The rate of R&D returns is the elasticity of output or productivity
growth rate with respect to R&D growth.

===== PDF_PAGE 231 =====
229
II-6. Do research and other sources of innovation drive productivity gains in European Top R&D Investors?
Productivity measures the economy’s ability
to utilise its physical and human resources to
generate output and income. Many approaches
can be used to calculate productivity. The two
most commonly used measures of productivity
are partial factor productivity, such as labour
productivity, usually measured as the volume
of output per hour worked, and multi-factor
productivity or total factor productivity (TFP).
TFP is the portion of output not explained
by the amount of inputs used in production.
TFP plays a critical role when trying to assess
economic fluctuations and economic growth as
it is an encompassing indicator of the overall
improvement of the economy. In fact, the level
of TFP not only indicates how intensely the inputs
are utilised in production, but it also captures
the influence of improvements in production-
related factors such as skills, technology, and
management practices that are not incorporated
in official capital and labour measures.
TFP represents the so-called spillovers or
externalities that create societal benefits, arising
from returns on inputs that go beyond those that
can be internalised by the investor. For these
reasons, it is the only sustainable source of long-
term economic growth (van Ark, 2014).
At the firm level, when discussing the economic
performance of companies, it is common to
describe them as being more or less ‘efficient’
or ‘productive’. While the term productivity
refers to the volume of output produced by one
or more inputs, the term efficiency relates to
the comparison between observed and optimal
values of output and input. This typically involves
the comparison between the observed output to
maximum potential output obtainable from the
input, or to minimum potential input required to
produce the output, or some combination of the
two. Technically efficient companies may still be
able to increase their productivity, by for example
exploiting economies of scale. As changing
the scale of production and operations can be
difficult to achieve quickly, both efficiency and
productivity can be given long-run interpretations.
The methods used to derive measures of
efficiency and productivity can be classified
into two main groups. The first group of
econometric techniques consists of TFP indexes
and production functions models which are
often applied to panel-data and provide
measures of technical change and TFP. The
underlining assumption of this method is that
all firms are assumed to be technically efficient.
The second group of methods includes data
envelopment analysis (DEA) and the stochastic
frontiers approach, and provides measures of
relative efficiency and technical change (when
panel-data is available). The estimation of
best practice technology is still achieved from
a production function, where it is assumed
that the ‘best’ companies in the sample are
producing in a technically efficient way.
 ▶ Box 1 Productivity and efficiency: Differences and measures
Also, evidence shows that the impact of
publicly funded R&D on productivity is
somewhat smaller than private R&D (Griliches,
1986; Levy and Terleckyj, 1983) but still
positive, excluding the possibility of a crowding
out effect of governmental R&D (Scott, 1984).
Other studies have confirmed the positive
direct impact of government R&D and in
some cases that the long-run impact of public
research is higher than the private, especially
when the private R&D intensity is high (Guellec
and van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, 2001
and 2004). Public R&D can therefore be very
valuable to the economy, particularly in a
context of high business R&D intensity.
Some empirical studies assessed the causal link
between R&D and productivity. It seems that R&D
is causing TFP (Rouvinen, 2002) and that, despite
some evidence of feedback effects, the causation
runs mainly from R&D to TFP (Franzen, 2003).
Among the studies investigating the R&D-
productivity link, it is possible to distinguish
various strands of research which derive from the
classical knowledge capital model of Griliches.

===== PDF_PAGE 232 =====
230
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
In particular, the heterogeneity across sectors
and the differences among countries have been
some of the most explored. The empirical work
of Bart Verspagen (1995) showed what the other
studies have confirmed, i.e., the R&D elasticity is
especially higher for firms in high-technological
sectors than in medium- and low-technological
sectors. In the same article, the author also
reported the lack of statistically significant
difference across nine OECD countries. The same
exercise has been applied to compare the returns
to R&D between Germany and Sweden (Lööf
et al. 2004) and between the US and France
(Hall and Mairesse, 1996). These studies reach
the same conclusion of similar results across the
countries examined.
Other studies concerning the presence of intra-
firm and intra-country spillovers and technological
opportunity derive from the work of Griliches (1979)
and Jaffe (1986). Jaffe defined technological
opportunity as the exogenous variation in the
state of technology (costs and the difficulty of
innovation in different technological areas). In his
article, he quantified the impact of technological
opportunity and the spillovers of R&D to other
firms. He found that the elasticity of R&D to
profits is increased by the R&D of technologically
similar firms, and that the involuntary spillovers
of knowledge lower the profits and market value
of low R&D-intensive firms. The impact of R&D
spillovers across countries is somehow less
clear. In fact, while Lichtenberg (1992) achieved
the main conclusion that countries benefit more
from their own R&D, Griffith et al. (2004), with a
cross-country and cross-sector analysis, showed a
positive impact of R&D spillovers from frontier to
non-frontier countries.
More recently, the heterogeneity among firms’
productivity has received a lot of attention. From
the theoretical model of Melitz (2003) on trade
and productivity, a growing empirical literature
has documented that firm-level differences in
productivity, export status, size, R&D, technology,
ownership status, and other characteristics are
crucial to understanding differences in firms’
returns to R&D (Aw et al. 2011). Dorazelski and
Jaumandreu (2013) relaxed the linear R&D capital
accumulation assumption of Griliches (1979 and
subsequent works), by modelling the interactions
between current and past investments in
knowledge in a flexible fashion. Allowing R&D
and productivity to be endogenous, they find that
the impact of current R&D on future productivity
depends crucially on current productivity.
Additionally to the firm, sector and country
heterogeneity, the link between R&D and
productivity is subject to nonlinearity. The
empirical study of Kancs and Siliverstovs (2012),
based on the sample of world top R&D investors
(EU R&D Scoreboard data), reported evidence
of this nonlinear effect of R&D. A more detailed
description of this and other evidence obtained
analysing this sample is included in later sections.
6.2.2 Evidence from top corporate R&D
investors
Productivity measures based on sector- or
country-level data cannot take into account
the widely observed heterogeneity in size, age,
production technologies and productivity levels
of producers. The advantage of relying on firm
data is that it allows analysing such company
heterogeneity. In addition, micro-data can provide
a deeper understanding of firm dynamics, i.e.,
the reallocation of resources arising from the
expansion and contraction of existing firms, as
well as entry and exit of firms.
In this Section, the main findings from
studies carried-out by authors working
at the Joint Research Centre of the
European Commission (EC-JRC) on the impact
of R&D on productivity using firm level data on
world top R&D investors are reported.
6.2.2.1 Description of the Data
The EU R&D Scoreboard presents a ranking of
the world companies that invest the most in
R&D and analyses them on the basis of a series
of economic and financial indicators. The 2500
world top R&D investors analysed in the 2014
EU R&D Scoreboard edition represent more than
90% of the total expenditure on R&D financed
and performed by the business sector worldwide.
The EU R&D Scoreboard panel data set contains
economic and financial information indicators
(e.g., R&D investment, net sales, operating

===== PDF_PAGE 233 =====
231
II-6. Do research and other sources of innovation drive productivity gains in European Top R&D Investors?
profits, employees, market capitalisation) (117)
as well as information on the structure of the
subsidiaries of the 2 858 most important R&D-
intensive firms worldwide from 2004 to 2012.
Data is organised at three digit level sector, using
the Industry Classification Benchmark (ICB), as
well as at geographical level, according to the
location of the company’s headquarters.
(117) The data set is compiled from companies’ annual reports and
accounts. In order to maximize the completeness and to avoid
double counting, the consolidated group accounts of the ultimate
parent company are used. Companies which are subsidiaries of
another company are not considered separately. Where consolidated
group accounts of the ultimate parent company are not available,
subsidiaries are however included. In case of a demerger, the full
history of the continuing entity is included, whereas the history of
the demerged company goes only back as far as the date of the
demerger to avoid double counting. In case of an acquisition or
merger, the estimated figures for the year of acquisition are used
along with the estimated comparative figures if available.
Figure II-6-2 reports the average number of
employees across world regions and by sector
group. The largest companies belong to low-
tech industrial groups and are located in the
Brazil, Russia, India and China (BRIC) countries,
Switzerland, and other countries (RoW), while the
smallest companies are in the European and US
high-tech sectors (7.8 and 9.2 thousand employees,
respectively). In general, the more technological
intensive, the smaller the companies are, except
for Japanese companies that have very similar
company sizes across the different sector groups.
Figure II-6-3 reports some of the main statistics
such as the average capital per employee,
R&D stock per employee, labour productivity
(measured as net sales per employee) and the
number of companies by sector group. The
capital and R&D stocks are calculated from
the annual capital and R&D expenditures using
the perpetual inventory method with a fixed
depreciation rate of 10%. Low and medium-low
tech firms are the more capital intensive, and
also the more productive. Figure II-6-4 shows
the same statistics across world regions. Europe
appears to be the region with the highest sales
per employee and capital intensity.
 ▶ Figure II-6-2 Average number of employees in knowledge intensive companies by sector (thousands)(1)
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Sources: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies, JRC - Knowledge for
Growth Unit
Data: EU R&D Scoreboard, 2004-2014
Note:
(1)Average values (or calculations) covering the period 2004-2012.
Sector World Region
EU Japan United States Rest of the world Average across
geographical
areas
 High 7.8 18.6 9.2 12.7 10.2
Medium-high 19.8 18.9 22.8 21.2 20.4
Medium-low 43.2 16.6 34.4 37.7 35.1
Low 46.6 13.5 18.3 65.0 40.5
Average across
all sectors 22.1 18.0 14.7 23.2

===== PDF_PAGE 234 =====
232
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies,
High-tech Medium-high-tech Medium-low-tech Low-tech
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Sources: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies,
 JRC - Knowledge for Growth Unit
Data: EU R&D Scoreboard, 2004-2014
Note: (1) Average values (or calculations) covering the period 2004-2012.
Figure II-6-3 Capital, net sales and R&D stock per employee and total companies by sector group(1)
(1195)
(1145)
(95)
(318)
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Capital per employee
euro (thousands)
Net sales per employee R&D stock per employee
(number of companies in brackets)
 ▶ Figure II-6-3 Capital, net sales and R&D stock per employee by sector group(1) (number of companies in brackets)
 ▶ Figure II-6-4 Capital, net sales and R&D stock per employee by world region(1) (number of companies in brackets)
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Sources: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies, JRC - Knowledge for
Growth Unit
Data: EU R&D Scoreboard, 2004-2014
Note:
(1)Average values (or calculations) covering the period 2004-2012.
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Sources: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies, JRC - Knowledge for
Growth Unit
Data: EU R&D Scoreboard, 2004-2014
Note:
(1)Average values (or calculations) covering the period 2004-2012.
EU United States Japan Rest of the world
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Sources: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies,
 JRC - Knowledge for Growth Unit
Data: EU R&D Scoreboard, 2004-2014
Note: (1) Average values (or calculations) covering the period 2004-2012.
Figure II-6-4
(1005)
(794)
(443)
(610)
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Capital per employee Net sales per employee R&D stock per employee
euro (thousands)
Capital, net sales and R&D stock per employee by world region (1)
(number of companies in brackets)

===== PDF_PAGE 235 =====
233
II-6. Do research and other sources of innovation drive productivity gains in European Top R&D Investors?
On the other hand, the R&D intensity of firms
located in the US is the highest. The panel data
set also contains information on the number
and location of the subsidiaries and branches.
Figure II-6-5 reports the absolute numbers
of national subsidiaries and international
subsidiaries in the EU, US and Japan by sector
group. Top European R&D investing companies
tend to locate their high and medium-high
tech subsidiaries abroad rather than nationally.
The reverse pattern is adopted by Japanese
companies, while US firms have a more
homogenous distribution of their high-tech
companies and a higher concentration of
domestic low-tech ones. In absolute numbers,
the European companies in the R&D Scoreboard
sample have many more international
subsidiaries than the US and Japan, while
Japanese firms locate their affiliates mainly in
their home country.
The data set also contains data on cost of
raw material, and measure of TFP can be
retrieved
(118). Figure II-6-6 presents a comparison
between the estimated measure of firm-level
TFP and the aggregate R&D investment growth
rate. It seems that the TFP trend over time picks
up the same dynamic of the R&D growth rate,
confirming the link between productivity and
R&D investment.
(118) The TFP is measured as the residual from the estimation of a
dynamic Cobb-Douglas production functions using the Blundell
and Bond (2000) estimator.
 ▶ Figure II-6-5 Number of national and international subsidiaries by sector group(1)
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Sources: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies, JRC - Knowledge for
Growth Unit
Data: EU R&D Scoreboard, 2004-2014
Note:
(1)Average values (or calculations) covering the period 2004-2012.
DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies,
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Sources: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies,
 JRC - Knowledge for Growth Unit
Data: EU R&D Scoreboard, 2004-2014
Note: (1) Average values (or calculations) covering the period 2004-2012.

Figure II-6-5 Number of national and international subsidiaries by sector group(1)
600
500
400
300
200
100
0 United StatesJapanEU United StatesJapanEU
National subsidiaries International subsidiaries

High Medium-high Medium-low Low

===== PDF_PAGE 236 =====
234
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The strong relationship between R&D and
productivity could also be the key to understand
the productivity gap between Europe and its core
competitors in the last two decades.
Additional to the institutional characteristics
of the EU economy (such as the regulation of
product and factor markets, or efficiency of
the legal and institutional systems), and/or
by the industrial structure of the EU economy,
this gap can also be the result of some intrinsic
characteristics of EU firms and of their strategies.
6.2.2.2 Analyses and Results
Using the EU R&D Scoreboard panel data,
Castellani and Schubert (2014) investigated
the role of R&D investment and the extent to
which R&D explains the gap with respect to
US and Japan. In general, their results confirm
the notion that R&D is extremely important
for the generation of competitive advantage
not only measured in terms of productivity, as
already found in earlier contributions, but also in
terms of technological efficiency. In fact, when
controlling for R&D the observable efficiency and
productivity gaps with the US largely disappear.
The study of Castellani and Schubert (2014) first
provides an overview of the efficiency
(119) and
productivity (120) differences across regions and
sectors. They find that the efficiency/productivity
gaps are most clearly observable in two sectors,
namely services and high-tech manufacturing.
This could be due to the fact that Japan and the US
are more specialised in services (in particular the
US) and high-tech than most European countries.
Japanese firms are both more productive and
efficient than European ones after controlling
for time, sector, and other confounding factors.
Compared to the EU, the US definitely displays
a productivity advantage, which however is
much smaller than the one between Japan
and Europe. Having provided evidence on the
size of the regional efficiency and productivity
differences as well as the sectors they originate
from, the study investigates whether these
differences arise from higher (or lower) levels
of overall R&D spending, or from the countries
superior (or inferior) abilities to transform a given
amount of R&D into gains concerning efficiency
(119) The technical efficiency is derived using the Order-m estimator
proposed by Cazals et al. (2002).
(120) Castellani and Schubert (2014) opt for labour productivity (net
sales per employee) as it is simpler to deal with due to the
amount of missing data in the variables needed to compute TFP.
 ▶ Figure II-6-6 The link between total factor productivity (TFP) and R&D investment (annual growth rates)(1)
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Sources: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies, JRC - Knowledge for
Growth Unit
Data: EU R&D Scoreboard, 2004-2014
Note:
(1)Average values (or calculations) covering the period 2004-2012.
DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies,
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Sources: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies,
 JRC - Knowledge for Growth Unit
Data: EU R&D Scoreboard, 2004-2014
Note: (1) Average values (or calculations) covering the period 2004-2012.
Figure II-6-6 The link between total factor productivity (TFP) and R&D investment(1)
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
-2%
-4%
-6%
-8%
-10%
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
R&D investment rate TFP

===== PDF_PAGE 237 =====
235
II-6. Do research and other sources of innovation drive productivity gains in European Top R&D Investors?
or productivity. Results confirm the positive
relationships between R&D and efficiency and
productivity, respectively.
When analysing the impact of R&D on labour
productivity, it is interesting to distinguish
between the direct impact on production (scale
effect) and the indirect impact obtained via
technological efficiency. While technological
efficiency helps companies to reduce the
distance with respect to benchmark companies
using similar levels of input, the impact on
production measures scale effectiveness, i.e.,
the capacity of firms to establish an efficient
scale for their operations. The results referring
to these decompositions (see Figure II-6-7) show
that the two transmission channels are of similar
magnitude, with the scale effect being in general
slightly more important (54%). Via this direct
channel, R&D could help smaller firms to grow
(via product innovation) and reach an efficient
scale. Comparing regions, the impact of R&D
investments on labour productivity is higher for
the US (an average of 0.83 points of the labour
productivity increase is due to R&D investments
— for the EU is 0.57, for Japan 0.64 and for the
rest of the world 0.44). In addition, results show
that 34% of the US productivity is driven by R&D,
where this Figure is about 30% for Japan and
about 25% for the EU.
In addition to the different channels through which
R&D contributes to productivity and efficiency
gains, it is important to recognise that Europe can
hardly be conceived as a region with homogenous
industrial structures. Thus to speak of ‘European’
efficiency or productivity gaps might be misleading,
or at the very least hide important differences
under a perspective that focuses on averages.
A comparative analysis of companies located in
European Southern states (Spain, Greece, Italy
and Portugal) with companies located in the
rest of the EU shows that companies located in
these Southern countries are less efficient, while
productivity levels are similar. However, results
are different when we look at the capacity of firms
to translate R&D into efficiency and productivity.
In this case, companies located in Southern EU
MS show similar capacity to transform R&D into
efficiency but the gains on productivity are half
the one observed for companies located in other
MS. This means that productivity gains for firms
in Southern EU countries come from sources
different than R&D. This result is consistent
with the industrial structure of these countries,
dominated by medium and low-tech sectors.
As the relevant analyses described above have
shown, productivity gains in these sectors are
driven by investments in physical capital rather
than by investments in R&D. The importance
of R&D investment for such sectors lies more
in the reduction of inefficiencies. The policy
 ▶ Figure II-6-7 Decomposition of the R&D effect on productivity(1)
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Sources: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies, JRC - Knowledge for
Growth Unit
Data: EU R&D Scoreboard, 2004-2014
Note:
(1)Average values (or calculations) covering the period 2004-2012.
EU United States Japan Rest of the world
Total effect 0.57 0.83 0.64 0.44
Direct effect
(scale effect) 0.31 0.45 0.35 0.24
Indirect effect
(tech. efficiency) 0.26 0.38 0.29 0.20
Difference
95%-5%-quantile 2.27 2.41 2.17 3.24
Relative change due
to R&D 25.11 34.44 29.49 13.58
% Direct effect 54.39 0.54 0.55 0.55

===== PDF_PAGE 238 =====
236
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
implications of these findings are discussed in
the conclusions chapter.
An empirical analysis of Kancs and Silverstovs
(2012), performed on a panel of 1 129 companies
from OECD countries taken from the EU R&D
Scoreboard for the years 2006 and 2007,
confirms previous theoretical and empirical works
showing that current and past investments in R&D
do not have to increase firm productivity linearly;
this is due to complementarities, economies
of scale in the accumulation of knowledge and
obsolescence of some of the previously acquired,
the importance of absorptive capacity and
critical mass. It also looks at the argument that
productivity of R&D investment may be sensitive
to the level of technological sophistication (i.e.,
cumulative R&D investments done in the past).
Such impact can be positive (higher productivity)
because of the so-called ‘standing on shoulders’
effect, or negative due to the so-called ‘fishing
out’ effect (the discovery of new ideas gets more
difficult after prior R&D has helped to discover the
easiest ones).
The study looks at two questions: how R&D
investments affect firm productivity at different
levels of technological sophistication; and what
the inter-sectoral productivity differences are
with respect to such response of productivity
to R&D. The results suggest that: (i) the impact
of R&D investment on productivity increases
with the degree of technological sophistication
(R&D intensity) of the firm, ranging from -0.02
to 0.33, (ii) the relationship is nonlinear and only
after a certain critical mass of R&D is reached,
the productivity growth is significantly positive;
(iii) sectoral differences are important, and
firms in high-tech sectors not only invest more
but also get more productivity gains from their
R&D investment.
These results advocate for differentiated R&D
investment and support measures that take into
consideration firm heterogeneity. It calls for a
combination of measures to stimulate the level
of R&D investments in high and medium-tech
sectors with measures aiming at reinforcing the
absorptive capacity and allocation efficiency of
R&D investment in low-tech sectors.
An analysis of Montresor and Vezzani (2015)
quantifies the R&D impact on a firm’s production
output and compares it with the impact of other
input factors (labour and physical capital), using
a sample of more than 1 000 top R&D investors
from the EU R&D Scoreboard for the period
2002-2010. The methodology applied (quantile
estimation of the firm’s production function)
brings interesting results showing important
differences across sizes and sectors. Knowledge
capital (R&D) is the most important factor to
explain output growth only for high-tech sectors.
In this case returns to scale do not decrease even
for the largest companies. In these high-tech
sectors, technical progress (i.e., the increase of a
firm’s production output that is not explained by
the increase of its production inputs over time)
remains positive and stable across all sizes
(about 1.6% per year).
For medium and low-tech sectors, physical
capital appears to be a more important factor to
increase a firm’s output, while technical progress
starts to be positive after a certain size has been
reached and increases as firm size increases (see
Figure below).
Results show that labour exhibits constant
returns across all sizes of companies in medium
and low-tech sectors, hence labour substitution
issues seem to take place there. This is not
observed for high-tech sectors where labour
seems to be substituted by physical capital and
knowledge as firm size increases.
6.2.2.3 Additional Evidence from European
R&D investors
An additional set of analyses was performed on
the basis of an unbalanced longitudinal database
of 577 top European R&D investors over the
period 2000-2005, constructed from data taken
from the R&D Scoreboard and the Value Added
Scoreboard elaborated by the UK Department of
Trade and Industry (DTI)
(121).
(121) The UK R&D Scoreboard was an annual publication elaborated from
1991 to 2010 and can be considered as the precursor of the EU R&D
Scoreboard published by the European Commission since 2004.

===== PDF_PAGE 239 =====
237
II-6. Do research and other sources of innovation drive productivity gains in European Top R&D Investors?
Ortega et al. (2011) studied the R&D-productivity
link, and found that the elasticity of productivity
with respect to the knowledge stock increases
monotonically from low to high-tech sectors
(from 0.03-0.05 up to 0.14-0.17). A reverse
pattern emerges in relation to the physical
capital-productivity link, i.e., higher impact for
low, medium and high-medium tech sectors than
for high-tech ones. This suggests the importance
of embodied technological change for all
sectors except for high-tech where R&D and
new products are key factors for technological
progress.
Measuring the technical inefficiency of
individual firms using the stochastic frontier
technique, Kumbhakar et al. (2012) were able to
separate efficiency gains/losses (moves towards
or away from the frontier) from shifts in the
production possibility (i.e., technical change and
shifts or changes of shape of the frontier). Also,
the study refrained from assuming a common
technology for all firms in the sample, and
estimated group-specific technology levels (low,
medium-high and high tech).
Results from this study show that the overall
elasticity of labour productivity to R&D investments
is positive (between 0.09 and 0.13) and increases
steadily from low to high-tech (0.16-0.18 in the
later — meaning a 10% increase in R&D stock
leads to 1.6-1.8% in productivity). Physical
capital also increases labour productivity, but this
is more concentrated in low and medium-high
tech, and is not significant for high-tech. In terms
of efficiency, high R&D-intensive and capital-
intensive companies are likely to operate closer
to the technological frontier. When distinguishing
between sectors, higher impact is found for high-
tech sectors. Looking at firm-specific technical
efficiency (TE) estimates, results show that the
highest impact of R&D on efficiency is found
for low tech sectors, where a larger number of
companies show low TE (see Figure II-6-7 and
II-6-8). This suggests companies in these sectors
are underinvesting in R&D.
Such findings lead to interesting policy relevant
messages. Targeted R&D support in high and
medium-tech sectors can help economies to
promote technological change (outward shift of
the frontier) and help companies to create and
conquer new markets. R&D support in low tech
sectors can help companies to reduce inefficiency
and business to remain competitive.
 ▶ Figure II-6-8 Technical Efficiency by R&D intensity groups
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: Kumbhakar et al. (2012)

===== PDF_PAGE 240 =====
238
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Different emphasis and selection of adequate
instruments in R&D support (e.g., R versus D, size
of projects, etc.) in accordance to sectors needs
and broader policy objectives (e.g., long-term
technological progress vs. survival/revitalisation
of ‘older’/less R&D intensive industries) seems
therefore the right approach for policy design.
Finally, the results of the previous study are
confirmed: while in low tech-sectors investment
in physical capital is more effective than R&D
to increase production efficiency and labour
productivity, the opposite is true for high-tech
sectors.
6.3 Other Factors Influencing the
R&D-Productivity Link
In this section, the analysis of the relationship
between R&D and productivity is extended by
taking stock of recent empirical evidence on a
series of factors that indirectly affect such a
link: the degree of a firm’s internationalisation,
the level of cooperation with other firms and
the firm’s investment in other intangible assets
(beyond R&D), like training or design.
6.3.1 The impact of multinationality
and industrial diversification on
the R&D/productivity link
There is convincing evidence that productivity
and R&D intensity are significantly higher
in multinational firms, as opposed to purely
domestic firms. The positive relationship between
internationalisation and firm performance is
indirect and highly context-dependent. Indeed,
multinationality per se has no impact on firm
value, but it enhances the value of R&D or
advertising spending (Morck and Yeung, 1991).
The lack of a direct effect of multinationality
on firm performance may be explained by the
fact that geographical dispersion increases
organisational complexity and thereby amplifies
the costs of offshoring. Moreover, R&D intensity,
product diversification, country of origin, firm age,
and firm size significantly affect the performance
gains attributable to internationalisation (Bausch
and Krist, 2007).
The link between industrial diversification and
firm productivity/performance has attracted
substantial research, but the evidence is not
unequivocal. The analysis of Castellani and
Schubert (2014) tested to what extent firm’s
internationalisation strategies affect productivity
differences across world regions, and if they can
moderate the R&D-productivity link.
The study has been carried-out using the same
panel of top R&D investors (from the EU R&D
Scoreboard). The focus of the study is mainly on
geographical diversification, which is used as a
proxy for internationalisation of production and
other firm activities (or multinationality)
(122), and
industrial concentration, both within national
borders and abroad. For the purpose of this
study, a set of indicators of geographical and
sectoral diversification has been constructed
using additional information on the subsidiaries
structure of these companies, as provided by the
Ownership Database of Bureau van Dijk. Results
show that a firm’s multinationality is positively
correlated with the firm’s R&D investments and
negatively correlated with its productivity. In fact,
(122) Unfortunately, the authors were not able to distinguish firms
internationalizing production or rather other firm activities, such as
sales or R&D. This is on the agenda for an extension of this work.
 ▶ Figure II-6-9 Descriptive statistics on firm-level technical efficiency (as illustrated in Figure II-6-8)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Sources: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies, JRC - Knowledge for
Growth Unit
Data: Kumbhakar et al. (2012)
Efficiency (TE) Number of
observations
Mean STDV Min Max
 Whole sample
 High-tech
 Medium-tech
 Low-tech
1 787
600
671
516
0.822
0.819
0.870
0.732
0.1597
0.1473
0.1182
0.2086
0.145
0.161
0.284
0.041
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.970

===== PDF_PAGE 241 =====
239
II-6. Do research and other sources of innovation drive productivity gains in European Top R&D Investors?
while multinationality creates incentives to invest
in R&D, it also creates organisational complexity
that may dampen productivity. This pattern is
accentuated in medium-tech R&D sectors as in
such industries the learning opportunities are
more limited, so the organisational costs may
outweigh the benefits from internationalisation.
At the same time, multinationality boosts the
productivity effect of investments in R&D, by
enabling firms to reap higher benefits from
international operations, possibly allowing them
to absorb more knowledge from foreign markets.
On the other hand, industrial concentration has
no significant correlation with firm productivity,
but it is positively correlated with R&D intensity.
Indeed, a firm exploring activities in different
sectors abroad will have a higher incentive to
invest in R&D. This is consistent with the idea
that these firms need to put substantial efforts
into leveraging learning opportunities stemming
from international activities. However, these
efforts may end up increasing organisational
costs, and thus lowering productivity.
Based on the same data, a new study of
Castellani et al. (2015) analyses in more
detail the different channels through which
multinationality can affect firm’s productivity and
differentiates the effects of multinationality on
productivity at the intensive margin (how large
is the share of international activities) and at the
extensive margin (how much are multinational
activities dispersed). The results show that while
multinationality always increases incentives
for investing in R&D, only multinationality at
its intensive margin contributes to greater
productivity (geographical dispersion appears
at some point to be detrimental). These findings
qualify previous evidence based on an analysis
of a sample of European top R&D investors
taken from the 2009 edition of the EU R&D
Scoreboard
(123). In that study, results indicated a
positive impact of globalisation on a firm’s R&D
productivity, particularly for European companies
with a higher share of subsidiaries in North
America.
(123) Cincera M. and J. Ravet (2011).
 ▶ Figure II-6-10 A Scheme for a Multinationality-Productivity Model
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Castellani et al. (2015)

===== PDF_PAGE 242 =====
240
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
6.3.2 Cooperation, R&D and productivity
Greater competition, the demand for higher-
quality customised products and services, and
fast delivery are just a few of the characteristics
that shape the organisation of many industries.
In this setting, rarely does a single company have
the full range of expertise needed for prompt and
cost-effective innovation. As a consequence, there
is a growing awareness that R&D and innovation
rely crucially on networks of cooperative agents.
In fact, the lack of cooperation among European
organisations could be one of the factors that
hindered European economic growth (Morgan,
1997, p492). McCann and Ortega-Argiles (2013,
p416) suggest that the ‘transatlantic productivity
gap’ from the 1990s onwards may have been ‘due
to the more limited ability of EU industries and
firms to adopt and to adapt to new technology
and innovations emerging from different sectors.’
Hence, a European economy where firms,
universities, and other organisations are better
connected through richer collaborative networks
may contribute to innovation, productivity growth,
and economic prosperity.
Among the benefits of cooperation, the empirical
literature has identified a number of advantages.
R&D Cooperation can enable the participants to
accelerate existing research activities in order
to quickly create new knowledge. Partners of a
R&D alliance may benefit from cooperation by
accessing a pool of complementary knowledge
and assets. Collaborative R&D may allow
partners to internalise the inherent spillovers
(such as the threat of imitation which might
reduce the incentives of individual firms to
engage in research). Lastly, cooperating on R&D
allows sharing the costs and risks of innovation
(Aschhoff and Schmidt, 2008).
Studies on R&D cooperation have not only
investigated the rational and determinants of
cooperation, but also evaluated the effects of
cooperation on performance. Belderbos et al.,
(2004) investigated the impact of cooperation
on either growth of innovative sales, or growth
of labour productivity. They observed that
cooperation with competitors and suppliers helps
improve labour productivity, while cooperation
with universities and competitors helps create
new-to-the-market sales. Amoroso (2014), using
a sample of Dutch manufacturing firms, reports
a higher level of TFP for cooperative companies
and higher TFP growth for the innovative ones.
Moreover, allowing TFP to be dependent on firms’
past choices of R&D, innovation and cooperation,
a positive relationship between R&D cooperation
and TFP is found.
6.3.3 Beyond R&D: investment in other
intangible assets and productivity
Investment in R&D is only part of a firm’s
innovative efforts. Turning knowledge and new
discoveries into new processes, products and
services is indeed a complex process requiring
multiple and interrelated tangible (e.g., machinery,
laboratories) and intangible resources. At a
macroeconomic level, there is evidence showing
the increasing importance of investments in
intangible capital for aggregated productivity
growth in the US, Europe and Japan
(124) .
Macro-level studies rely on a classification
of intangible assets that distinguishes three
main categories (125): computerised information
(software and databases), innovative property
(R&D, mineral exploration, entertainment and
artistic originals, design and other development
costs) and economic competencies (branding,
which includes marketing and advertising, training
and organisational capital). This classification is
a point of reference for microeconomic studies
which identify three main groups of expenditures
relevant for innovation: (1) those related to R&D
activities, (2) those that underlie organisational
practices including customer satisfaction,
product quality, design and brand reputation
and (3) those related to human capital, such as
investments in personal skills and training.
The literature showing a link between innovation
expenditures and productivity at a firm level is
also broad
(126) and confirms that innovation leads
to a better revenue per employee performance.
(124) Corrado, C., J. Haskel, C. Jona-Lasinio and M. Iommi (2013).
(125) Corrado et al. (2005).
(126) See Mohnen, P. and Hall, B. (2013) for a review.

===== PDF_PAGE 243 =====
241
II-6. Do research and other sources of innovation drive productivity gains in European Top R&D Investors?
And this is the case for all the types of innovation
considered: product, process, organisational and
marketing innovations. Measuring to what extent
the different intangible expenditure categories
of firms (e.g., R&D, software, design, branding,
training) account in total firm’s productivity
impact remains a challenge, as well as the
measurement of the complementarity between
R&D and other innovation expenditures
(127). One
important obstacle is the availability of proper
data at company level. Existing evidence informs
on the complementarity between different types
of innovation, particularly about the importance
(127) See Montresor, S., G. Perani and A. Vezzani (2014) for a
detailed discussion on the definition of intangible assets, its
conceptualisation and the challenges related to its measurement,
accounting and disclosure at company level.
of combining product innovation with marketing
and organisational innovation (128).
An analysis carried-out by the European Commission
(JRC) based on company data from the
Community Innovation Survey (129) shows that a
firm’s innovation-driven investments in training,
design and marketing have a strong impact on
that firm’s innovative performance, measured
as the share of sales coming from new products
over total sales (see Figure II-6-11).
(128) Mohnen, P. and Hall, B. (2013).
(129) Ciriaci, D. and F. Hervás (2012).
While the results show that economies of
scale are important for training and marketing
expenditures, suggesting barriers for SMEs, this is
not the case for design expenditures. In addition,
the impact of design on innovative sales is not
affected by the firm R&D intensity, which makes
it a cost-efficient innovation driver for both SMEs
and less R&D intensive firms.
 ▶ Figure II-6-11 Impact of training, marketing and design expenditures on innovative sales
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Sources: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies, JRC - Knowledge for
Growth Unit
Data: Ciriaci, D., F. Hervás (2012), Eurostat - CIS3 1998-2000
DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies,
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Sources: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies,
 JRC - Knowledge for Growth Unit
Data: Ciriaci, D., F.Hervás (2012), Eurostat - CIS3 1998-2000.

Figure II-6-11 Impact of training, marketing and design expenditures on innovative sales
8%
7%
6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%
Training Marketing Design

===== PDF_PAGE 244 =====
242
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
6.3.4 Conclusions: How To Increase The
Gains From Firm’s R&D Investments
In Europe?
This section takes stock of the main findings
related to the impact of R&D and innovation
investments on a firm’s productivity obtained
from the analysis of top global R&D investors.
Main policy-relevant conclusions are identified
in order to inform policy intervention and
public support to business R&D and innovation
investments in Europe.
From the analysis of the direct link between R&D
investments and firm’s productivity, the following
empirical evidence deserves to be highlighted:
• There is evidence of a positive direct link
between R&D and labour productivity at
the firm level, with higher returns to R&D
investments in high-tech sectors. In low R&D
intensive sectors, investments in physical
capital have a higher impact on labour
productivity.
• Different measures of productivity (labour,
total factor productivity, efficiency) and
different methodologies (accounting
approach, technological frontier) confirm the
robustness of the finding of positive R&D
returns, especially for companies operating
in high-tech sectors.
• Returns to R&D investment in the form of
productivity increases are nonlinear: returns
are positive only after a minimum critical
mass is reached and the degree of impact
increases as the R&D intensity of the firm
increases.
• Efficiency (optimal use of resources) is the
only channel for productivity improvements in
low-tech sectors. In high-tech sectors, shifts
of the technological frontier (technological
progress) also matter.
• Knowledge capital (R&D) is the more
important factor to explain output growth
only for high-tech sectors and, in this case,
returns to scale do not decrease even for the
largest companies.
This evidence clearly makes the case for
business R&D support policies and instruments
capable of differentiating across sectors and
companies, given the nonlinearity of the impact
of R&D investment on a firm’s productivity and
the differences in the returns depending on
the R&D intensity of the firm. In addition, R&D
support policies in high- and medium/high-tech
sectors may promote the technological change
that is sought for the EU’s medium and long-
term competitiveness (shift of the technological
frontier). R&D support for less intensive R&D
sectors and companies can help to increase
efficiency and to allow companies to overcome
the crisis and remain competitive, while the best
channel in these sectors to boost productivity
and output growth is through investments in
physical capital.
The comparative analysis of the R&D-productivity
link in R&D intensive companies based in the EU
against companies located in the US and Japan,
provides the following results:
• Much of the productivity gap observable
for the firms located in Europe is actually
attributable to lower R&D spending. In
addition, results indicate that 34% of the
US productivity is driven by R&D, while this
Figure is about 30% for Japan, and about
25% for the EU.
• At the same time, there seems to be some
evidence that firms in some parts of the world
are more successful in reaping the benefits
from R&D than others, in particular as
concerns labour productivity: European firms
are less able than the US and Japanese firms.

===== PDF_PAGE 245 =====
243
II-6. Do research and other sources of innovation drive productivity gains in European Top R&D Investors?
• Likewise, top Southern European R&D
investors are less able to transform R&D into
productivity than their counterparts in the
rest of Europe. At the same time, they display
at least an equal labour productivity which
suggests that their source of competitiveness
lies elsewhere.
These results, first of all confirm the importance
of effective national and EU-level policy support
for business R&D, to keep and, where necessary,
restore the competitive advantage of leading
European R&D investing firms. Second, the
evidence that firms show different levels of
capacity to translate R&D into productivity
depending on their location, suggests that not
only the level of spending is important but also
that firms are able to make use of it. For policy,
this suggests that a non-differentiating focus on
R&D levels as a means to promote growth and
competitiveness will probably miss the needs of
firms or industries which have not yet developed
R&D capabilities to the same degree as others.
In addition, these differences may be due to
institutional problems in the home countries (e.g.,
innovation or investment unfriendly regulation)
which very often go hand in hand with the lack
of genuine R&D-related capabilities possessed
by the firms.
Finally, the evidence confirms the relevance of
other factors having an influence on the R&D-
productivity link:
• The degree of multinationality of top
R&D investors (measured in terms of
number and geographical dispersion of
subsidiaries), a proxy for the degree of firms’
internationalisation, has a positive effect on
firms’ R&D investment levels. In addition, it
increases firms’ capacity to translate R&D
into productivity.
• At the same time, the link between
multinationality and productivity is negative,
particularly when it is based on a higher
geographical dispersion. This probably
reflects the negative impact of the resulting
organisational complexity.
• Evidence shows a higher level of productivity
for cooperative companies and a higher
productivity growth for the innovative ones.
Moreover, allowing the productivity to be
dependent on firms’ past choices of R&D,
innovation, and cooperation, a positive
relationship between R&D cooperation and
TFP is found.
• Investment in other intangible assets such as
job training, design and marketing positively
affects firms’ innovativeness, particularly
when combined with R&D investment.
These results confirm the need to accompany
business R&D support measures with a broader
set of innovation policies aiming at increasing
the capacity of companies to translate R&D
into productivity gains, as well as to translate
these investments into successful innovative
products and services. The collaborative and
usually multinational nature of the European
level innovation support is, in this respect, clearly
an important element, because it facilitates
knowledge and capability transfer across firms
and countries. Likewise, the widening in scope
of support instruments is important, in order
to cover the whole innovation chain, from more
basic research until development and market
launch investments for new products.

===== PDF_PAGE 246 =====
244
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
REFERENCES
Ciriaci, D., F. Hervás (2012): ‘Bridging Ideas with
Markets — The Impact of Training, Marketing and
Design on Innovation’. IPTS Policy Brief. Institute of
Prospective Technological Studies, Joint Research
Centre, European Commission.
Corrado C., Hulten C. and Sichel S. (2005) ,
‘Measuring Capital and Technology: An Expanded
Framework,’ in C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger, and
D. Sichel (Eds.), Measuring Capital in the New
Economy, Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 65,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Cuneo, Philippe & Jacques Mairesse, 1984 .
‘Productivity and R&D at the Firm Level in French
Manufacturing,’ NBER Chapters, in: R&D, Patents,
and Productivity, pages 375-392 National Bureau
of Economic Research, Inc.
Doraszelski, Ulrich & Jordi Jaumandreu, 2013.
‘R&D and Productivity: Estimating Endogenous
Productivity,’ Review of Economic Studies, Oxford
University Press, vol. 80(4), pages 1338-1383.
Frantzen, Dirk. ‘The Causality between R&D and
Productivity in Manufacturing: An International
Disaggregate Panel Data Study.’ International
Review of Applied Economics 17.2 (2003): 125-146.
Garcia Torres, A. (2011): The Relevance
of Marketing in the Success of Innovations,
IPTS Working Papers on Corporate R&D and
Innovation, 2011-9. Institute of Prospective
Technological Studies, Joint Research Centre,
European Commission.
Griffith, Rachel, Stephen Redding, and John
Van Reenen. 2004, ‘Mapping the Two Faces of
R&D: Productivity Growth in a Panel of OECD
industries.’ Review of Economics and Statistics
86.4: 883-895.
Griffith, Rachel, Stephen Redding, and John
Van Reenen. 2003, ‘R&D and Absorptive Capacity:
Theory and Empirical Evidence*.’ The Scandinavian
Journal of Economics 105.1: 99-118.
Amoroso, Sara, 2014. ‘The Hidden Costs of
R&D Collaboration,’ JRC-IPTS Working Papers on
Corporate R&D and Innovation 2014-02, Institute
of Prospective Technological Studies, Joint
Research Centre, European Commission.
Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts, and Daniel Yi Xu.
2011. ‘R&D Investment, Exporting, and Productivity
Dynamics.’ American Economic Review, 101(4):
1312-44.
Castellani, D. and T. Schubert. 2014. ‘Technical
Efficiency, Productivity, R&D and Multinationality.
Evidence from the EU Industrial R&D Scoreboard’.
Final report for tender JRC/SVQ/2013/J.2/0010/NC.
Institute of Prospective Technological Studies, Joint
Research Centre.
Castellani, D., S. Montresor, T. Schubert, A.
Vezzani — Up-coming in 2015. ‘Multinationality,
R&D and Productivity: Evidence from the Top R&D
Investors Worldwide’ JRC-IPTS Working Papers on
Corporate R&D and Innovation 2015-?, Institute of
Prospective Technological Studies, Joint Research
Centre, European Commission.
Cincera, M. and Julien Ravet, 2011. ‘Globalisation,
Industrial Diversification and Productivity Growth in
Large European R&D Companies,’ JRC-IPTS Working
Papers on Corporate R&D and Innovation 2011-01,
Institute of Prospective Technological Studies, Joint
Research Centre. European Commission.
Ciriaci, D. (2011): Intangible Resources: The
Relevance of Training for European Firms’
Innovative Performance, IPTS Working Papers on
Corporate R&D and Innovation, 2011-6. Institute of
Prospective Technological Studies, Joint Research
Centre, European Commission.
Ciriaci, D. (2011): Design and European Firms’
Innovative Performance: Evidence from European
CIS Non-Anonymous Data, IPTS Working Papers on
Corporate R&D and Innovation, 2011-8. Institute of
Prospective Technological Studies, Joint Research
Centre, European Commission.

===== PDF_PAGE 247 =====
245
II-6. Do research and other sources of innovation drive productivity gains in European Top R&D Investors?
Griliches, Zvi. 1979. ‘Issues in Assessing the
Contribution of Research and Development to
Productivity Growth,’ Bell Journal of Economics, The
RAND Corporation, vol. 10(1), pages 92-116, Spring.
Griliches, Zvi. ‘Productivity, R and D, and Basic
Research at the Firm Level in the 1970’s.’ The
American Economic Review (1986): 141-154.
Griliches, Zvi & Jacques Mairesse, 1981 .
‘Productivity and R and D at the Firm Level,’ NBER
Working Papers 0826, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc.
Griliches, Zvi & Mairesse, Jacques, 1983. ‘Comparing
Productivity Growth: An Exploration of French and U.S.
Industrial and Firm Data,’ European Economic Review,
Elsevier, vol. 21(1-2), pages 89-119.
Hall, Bronwyn H., and Jacques Mairesse. 1995,
‘Exploring the Relationship between R&D and
Productivity in French Manufacturing Firms.’ Journal
of econometrics 65.1 (1995): 263-293.
Harhoff, Dietmar, 1998. ‘R&D and Productivity
in German Manufacturing Firms,’ Economics of
Innovation and New Technology, Taylor & Francis
Journals, vol. 6(1), pages 29-50.
Jaffe, A.B., 1986. Technological Opportunity and
Spillover of R&D: Evidence from Firms, Patents,
Profits and Market Value. The American Economic
Review 76(15), 984 — 1001.
Kancs, d’Artis and Boriss Siliverstovs, 2012.
‘R&D and Non-Linear Productivity Growth
of Heterogeneous Firms,’ JRC-IPTS Working
Papers JRC77247, Institute for Prospective and
Technological Studies, Joint Research Centre.
European Commission.
Klette, Tor Jakob. 1996, ‘R&D, Scope Economies,
and Plant Performance.’ The RAND Journal of
Economics pp. 502-522.
Klette, Tor Jakob & Samuel Kortum, 2004.
‘Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation,’
Journal of Political Economy, University of Chicago
Press, vol. 112(5), pages 986-1018, October.
Kumbhakar, S. & Raquel Ortega-Argilés, Lesley
Potters, Marco Vivarelli and Peter Voigt, 2010.
‘Corporate R&D and Firm Efficiency: Evidence from
Europe’s Top R&D investors,’ Journal of Productivity
Analysis (2012, 37)
Lichtenberg, Frank R. 1992, R&D Investment and
International Productivity Differences. No w4161.
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lööf, Hans, Bettina Peters, and Norbert Janz.
‘Innovation and Productivity in German and
Swedish Manufacturing Firms: Is There a Common
Story?.’ Problems & perspectives in management 2
(2004): 184-204.
Loof, Hans & Almas Heshmati, 2006. ‘On the
Relationship between Innovation and Performance:
A Sensitivity Analysis,’ Economics of Innovation and
New Technology, Taylor & Francis Journals, vol.
15(4-5), pages 317-344.
Mairesse, Jacques, and Bronwyn H. Hall.
1996 Estimating the Productivity of Research
and Development: An Exploration of GMM
Methods using Data on French & United States
Manufacturing Firms. No w5501. National bureau
of economic research,
Mairesse, J. and P. Mohnen, 2001, To Be or Not
To Be: An Exercise in Measurement, NBER Working
Paper 8644, Cambrige.
Melitz, Marc. 2003. ‘The Impact of Trade on Intra-
Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity.’ Econometrica 71: 1695-1725.
Mohnen, P. and B. Hall, 2013. ‘Innovation and
Productivity: An Update’. Eurasian Business Review,
3(1) 2013.
Montresor, S., G. Perani and A. Vezzani (2014)
‘How do Companies ‘Perceive’ their Intangibles?
New Statistical Evidence from the INNOBAROMETER
2013’. JRC-IPTS Technical Report, Institute for
Prospective and Technological Studies, Joint
Research Centre. European Commission.

===== PDF_PAGE 248 =====
246
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Ortega-Argilés, Raquel, Lesley Potters, and Marco
Vivarelli. 2011 ‘R&D and Productivity: Testing
Sectoral Peculiarities using Micro Data.’ Empirical
Economics 41.3: 817-839.
Rouvinen, Petri. 2002, ‘R&D-Productivity Dynamics:
Causality, Lags, and ‘Dry Holes’.’ Journal of Applied
Economics 5.1 pp. 123-156.
Scott, J.T., 1984. Firm versus Industry Variability
in R&D Intensity. In: Acs, Z., Audretsch, D. (Eds.),
Innovation and Technical Change, University of
Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Van Ark, B. 2014. ‘Total Factor Productivity:
Lessons from the Past and Directions for the
Future’. Working Paper Research No 271. National
Bank of Belgium.
Verspagen, Bart. 1995, ‘R&D and Productivity: A
Broad Cross-Section Cross-Country Look.’ Journal
of Productivity Analysis 6.2: 117-135.
Vezzani, A. and S. Montresor, 2013. ‘The
Production Function of Top R&D Investors:
Accounting for Size and Sector Heterogeneity with
Quantile Estimations,’ Research Policy 44 (2015)

===== PDF_PAGE 249 =====
247
II-7. High growth firms in Europe
Werner Hölzl
WIFO (Austrian Institute of Economic Research)
7.1 Introduction
In recent years, a large number of contributions
have shown that a small number of high growth
firms (HGFs) contribute disproportionally to job
creation. The growing body of literature shows
that most of these enterprises are young, small
and innovative. The nexus between age, size,
innovation and rapid growth emphasises the
importance of entrepreneurial dynamism for
economic growth and structural change.
For this reason policy-makers in Europe have
shown increased interest in HGFs in the recent
years. The European Commission announced in the
Communication ‘Europe 2020 Flagship Initiative
Innovation Union’ to design ‘future EU research and
innovation programmes to ensure simple access
and stronger involvement of SMEs, in particular
those with a high growth potential’ (EC 2010). The
Horizon 2020 programmes include an emphasis on
SMEs, among them the aim to support European
innovative SMEs to become leading enterprises.
The employment contribution of high growth firms
also constitutes one of the four components of
the new innovation output indicator that is used to
measure the impact and pillars of innovation across
Member States (EC 2013).
In the aftermath of the economic crisis in Europe,
countries face the challenge to embark on a new
sustainable growth path and to create jobs. HGFs
can provide an important contribution to this
task, as they are innovative and disproportionally
create jobs. However, the empirical evidence
on high growth firms is still fragmentary. This
hinders the formulation of effective policies
aiming to increase the number of high growth
firms. For this reason this chapter presents an
overview on the existing knowledge regarding
the state of HGFs in Europe and provides novel
evidence on European HGFs.
The evidence on HGFs shows that there are
striking differences across EU Member States
with regard to HGF presence. These differences
are related to differences in aggregate
economic performance, institutions, innovation
and technology as well as to entrepreneurial
ecosystems. Framework conditions that support
the reallocation of market shares to more
productive companies are important for the
emergence and the number of HGFs in a country.
However, framework conditions may not be
enough. Entrepreneurial opportunities do not
emerge out of the blue but require appropriate
knowledge bases and are often dependent on
local spillovers.
The evidence on the innovation behaviour of
HGFs shows a strong context-dependency related
to country comparative advantages and industry
affiliation. Policies to mobilise HGFs therefore
need to be broad-based and specific at the
same time. Thus, existing R&I policies that target
ambitious research projects at the firm level and
the generation of differentiated knowledge bases
can also provide effective support for HGFs.
7.2 The dynamics of new high growth
firms: What do we know?
The interest in HGFs is associated with a
shift of industrial and innovation policies
towards growth-oriented enterprise policies
as emphasised by Mason and Brown (2014).
HGFs contribute to productivity growth, job
creation and promote innovation, export-
orientation and internationalisation. The most
important direct contribution of HGFs is their
disproportional employment generation (Coad
et al. 2014). There is now ample evidence for a
large number of European Countries (e.g., Storey
1994, Anyadike-Danes et al. 2009, Henrekson
and Johansson 2010) that a small number of
fast growing firms create a large share of jobs.
These studies show that around 3 to 6 percent
of the fastest growing firms generate up to
7. High growth firms in Europe

===== PDF_PAGE 250 =====
248
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
70% of new jobs in established firms. However,
many of these studies used different definitions
for HGFs, different datasets and terminology
(cf. Henrekson and Johansson, 2010) which
makes a comparison of the alternative findings
difficult
(130). In addition, different concepts have
been proposed that are quite similar from a
policy perspective to the concept of HGFs.
For example, Cincera and Veugelers (2013)
introduced the term young leading innovators
(yollies) in their analysis of the differences
between US and European leading innovators.
Based on their findings they argue that the
observed R&D deficit within the European Union
relative to the United States can be traced back
to the fact that Europe has a lower number of
yollies and that European leading innovators
have a lower R&D intensity than US leading
innovators. From a conceptual perspective
yollies are quite different from HGFs. Yollies are
defined in terms of age not of growth. However,
from a policy perspective the yollies and HGFs
are quite close. The above-average presence
of HGFs and Yollies in an economy signals
economic dynamics, reallocation of market
shares to more efficient firms and the presence
and efficient use of knowledge resources in
an economy. Figure II-7-1 presents a selected
list of different definitions of HGFs and labels
for fast-growing firms that are used in the
literature and in this chapter.
Unfortunately, much of the evidence on high
growth firms is fragmentary. Many studies use
different methodologies to identify HGFs in an
economy which makes it difficult to compare
(130) Coad et al. (2014) argue that the controversies about the
definitions of HGFs in the academic literature are related to the
fact that economic and management theory does not provide
much guidance on how to measure HGFs.
results over time and across countries. However,
there is mounting evidence about robust
regularities of HGFs at the firm level (cf. Coad
et al. 2014, Henrekson and Johansson 2010)
(131).
The most important insight from this literature is
that only a subset of firms grows fast and that
most firms have modest (or even zero) growth
rates. Thus HGFs are important drivers of job
creation and economic growth. Most studies
show that that the majority of HGFs are small
and medium-sized enterprises (with less than
50 employees), but that they are well established
(over five years old). Although HGFs are young,
most HGFs are not start-ups (Mason and Brown
2014). And there also exists an important subset
of older and larger HGFs (e.g., Acs et al. 2008,
Hölzl 2014). Mason and Brown (2014) emphasise
that the fact that most HGFs are established
enterprises has not been taken into account in the
design of many growth-oriented enterprise policies
that aim at foster HGFs. Most policies target start-
ups in high technology sectors (e.g., OECD 2010,
Empirica et al. 2013a, 2013b). In these sectors
market failures related to uncertainty and risk of
entrepreneurial projects are likely most pressing.
However, the evidence also shows that HGFs are
distributed across all sectors, with no identifiable
bias towards high technology industries (e.g.,
Bleda et al. 2013, Anyadike-Danes et al. 2009,
Daunfeldt et al. 2015). If anything, HGFs are
overrepresented in service sectors, especially in
knowledge-intensive services (Henrekson and
Johansson 2010) that offer high market potential
for new ideas and new ways of doing business
compared to manufacturing industries where
sunk costs related to set-up costs and tangible
capacities are high (Hölzl 2015).
(131) The use of the OECD-Eurostat definition of HGFs by statistical
offices and the increased use of this definition by researchers
increased the comparability of results across studies.

===== PDF_PAGE 251 =====
249
II-7. High growth firms in Europe
Many studies show that high growth at the firm
level does, on average, not persist over time
(Parker et al. 2010, Daunfeldt and Halvarson
2015). Most HGFs are HGFs once in their lifetime.
But HGFs display a better growth performance
even after their high growth phase compared
to non-HGFs (Hölzl 2014) and recent evidence
by Ciraci et al. (2013) indicates that the
employment growth of innovative HGFs is more
persistent than growth of non-innovative HGFs.
In this regard a message from the firm-level
literature on HGFs is that it is very difficult to
target potential HGFs on an ex ante basis without
extensive (and likely expensive) screening and
due diligence processes (Coad et al. 2014). This
should not come as a surprise, since the firm
growth literature emphasises the importance of
heterogeneity at the firm level and further shows
that firm growth is highly idiosyncratic (e.g., Coad
2009). It is well known that enterprise growth
is complex and largely context-dependent.
Businesses in different markets are confronted
with different competitive market environments,
different entrepreneurial ecosystems, and
different framework conditions, have different
capabilities and make use of different business
models and innovation strategies.
While it is very difficult to find determinants
that allow one to identify HGFs at the firm level
on an ex-ante basis, available evidence also
shows that there are important differences in
the presence of HGFs and firm growth dynamics
across countries (e.g., Bravo-Biosca 2010, OECD
2014). Figure II-7-2 presents the distribution of
HGF firm shares and HGF employment shares
across EU28 Member States with the exception
of Greece. Here we identify HGFs with the HGF
(10%) definition which measures firm growth
over a three year period and defines those firms
as HGFs that have an annualised growth rate of
10% or more over this three year period and had
more than 10 employees at the beginning of the
period. The enterprise share is calculated as the
ratio of HGFs to number of firms with more than
10 employees at the end of the period.
 ▶ Figure II-7-1 Definitions and terminology related to the phenomenon of high growth firms
Terminology and abbreviation Use in literature Use in Chapter
High growth firms/
enterprises
HGFs different definitions (e.g. top 1% or 5% of
the fastest growing firms. Eurostat-OECD
defintion. Birch index)
denotes firms that are HGFs according to
the Eurostat-OECD definition - annualized
growth rate of 20% or 10% over a three
year period: HGF (10%) denotes use of
the 10% growth requirement. HGF (20%)
use of the 20% growth requirement
Gazelles - different definitions, sometimes used as
synonym for HGFs; Eurostat and OECD
(2007) define gazelles as young HGFs
(less than 5 years of age)
not used in the chapter
High impact firms HIF Acs et al. (2008) define HIF as firms
whose sales have at least doubled over
a four-year period and which have an
employment growth quantifier of two or
more over the same period. Gives some
weight to absoute growth.
not used in the chapter
Young leading innovators Yollies Cincera and Veugelers (2013): large R&D
intensive firms that were founded after
1975
used as in Cincera and Veugelers (2013)
Young highly innovative
companies
YICs Schneider and Veugelers (2010): new,
small, and high R&D intensive firms
not used in the chapter
Super high growth firms - denotes high growth firms that display
persistent high growth over longer time
periods. («Apples» and «Googles»).
not used in the chapter
Hidden champions - denotes usually larger firms (> 50 Mio.
€ turnover or > 500 employees) that
are unknown to the larger public but are
among the (world) market leaders in
their (sub)markets
not used in the chapter

===== PDF_PAGE 252 =====
250
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Figure II-7-2 shows stark differences across
countries. The lowest HGF (10%) share is
recorded for Romania (2.4%) followed by Croatia
(3.4%) while Slovakia (13.8) and Sweden (13.6%)
recorded the largest shares of HGFs. With regard
to employment in HGFs, the lowest shares are
again observed for Romania and Croatia (both
6.0%) while the largest are recorded for Slovakia
(20.6%) and Lithuania (19.6%).
 ▶ Figure II-7-2 High growth firms (10%), 2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat; WIFO calculations
 HGF (10%)
enterprise share
HGF (10%)
employment share
Belgium 8.6 8.2
Bulgaria 10.4 17.7
Czech Republic 11.7 19.2
Denmark 10.7 13.6
Germany 12.1 14.2
Estonia 7.1 12.7
Ireland 6.9 :
Greece : :
Spain 8.0 10.3
France 10.4 14.7
Croatia 3.4 6.0
Italy 5.8 9.7
Cyprus 6.4 6.7
Latvia 11.7 16.3
Lithuania 11.4 19.6
Luxembourg 9.6 9.4
Hungary 10.7 16.1
Malta 9.9 8.7
Netherlands 10.0 12.3
Austria 7.0 8.6
Poland 8.9 16.0
Portugal 7.9 12.9
Romania 2.4 6.0
Slovenia 7.9 9.6
Slovakia 13.8 20.6
Finland 10.4 :
Sweden 13.6 17.5
United Kingdom 11.7 17.2
Norway 10.5 12.0

===== PDF_PAGE 253 =====
251
II-7. High growth firms in Europe
related to the size distribution of firms or their
age distribution but to the growth performance
of firms, echoing the results by Bartelsman et al.
(2009). However, Andrews and Cigano (2014) find
that more productive firms are likely to account
for a much larger share of employment in the US
and some northern European countries than in
Continental and Southern European economies.
This novel evidence suggests that the presence of
HGFs provides an indication of the efficiency of
the process of resource allocation that is pivotal
for structural change and economic growth.
The lack of yollies and HGFs in many European
countries may signal weaknesses. The lack of
HGFs is unlikely to be purely the result of missing
innovation projects and low start-up rates.
The huge differences across countries suggests
that country-wide institutions, entrepreneurial
framework conditions, regulations as well as the
relative specialisation patterns and the economy-
wide ability to profit from radical technological
revolution capabilities matter most and may
be reflected in the share of HGFs. Countries
such as Italy, Portugal and Spain show below-
average HGF enterprise shares (10%) and HGF
employment shares (10%).
7.3 High growth firms in Europe:
country-specific determinants
While the evidence on HGFs at the national level
is often fragmentary, the cross-country evidence
is (still) largely missing. Only a few studies (e.g.,
Bravo-Biosca et al. 2013) provide evidence on
cross-country differences and determinants of
HGFs across countries. In order to fill this gap
this chapter presents indicative evidence on the
state on HGFs in the EU28 countries with special
reference to the impact of the economic crisis on
HGFs and the link between country capabilities
and the presence of HGFs.
7.3.1 European high growth firms and
the economic crisis
In aftermath of the economic crisis in Europe,
HGFs are often considered to be an important
ingredient in growth strategies that allow
countries to embark on a sustainable growth
path and to create new jobs. However, HGFs can
The differences across countries are striking.
These differences may be related to differences
in the ability to generate successful high-
potential entrepreneurial ventures. But given
the evidence that highly productive firms coexist
with low productivity firms even within narrowly-
defined sectors (e.g., Syverson 2014), research
has emphasised resource misallocation as an
important source of productivity differentials.
This research has established that cross-
country differences in productivity may be
linked to the heterogeneity in firm performance
within industries (Andrews and Cigano 2014,
Bartelsman et al. 2013, Hsieh and Klenow
2009). This strongly suggests that differences
in HGFs may be related to differences in the
ability of economies to direct resources to the
most productive firms. HGFs may thus play an
important role in fostering economic growth that
goes beyond the direct impact of job generation.
HGFs are thought to have above average levels
of productivity growth (e.g., Du and Temouri,
2015) and above average innovation-intensity
and a strong export orientation. Thus HGFs
promote economic growth and structural change
at the aggregate level by providing ‘an important
Schumpeterian stimulus with economies by
increasing competition, promoting innovation and
increasing the efficient resource allocation within
economies’ (Mason and Brown 2014).
However, cross-country evidence on HGFs is still
largely missing. One of the few studies that
provides evidence is Bravo-Biosca (2010). Using
a dataset of 11 countries for the time period
2002 to 2005, Bravo-Biosca (2010) shows that
higher HGF shares and more dynamic firm growth
is associated with higher productivity growth at
the country level. He also shows that European
countries exhibit, on average, a higher share of
slow-growing and stagnant firms when compared
to the US. However, the evidence for the US shows
declining HGF shares over the time period 1994-
2012 (Clayton et al. 2013). Also the evidence
by Haltiwanger et al. (2014) and Decker et al.
(2014) suggests that the business dynamics
also slowed down in the US n high-technology
industries. This is confirmed by the comparative
evidence provided by Criscuolo et al. (2014) who
show that the main differences in firm dynamics
between the US and European countries is not

===== PDF_PAGE 254 =====
252
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
also be affected by the economic crisis. While
many studies of firm growth over the business
cycle show that the growth rate of firms with
extreme growth events is only weakly correlated
with the business cycle (Higson et al. 2002, 2004;
Hölzl and Huber 2014), evidence on HGF shares
clearly suggests that HGF shares are affected by
demand developments (e.g., Hölzl 2011).
Unfortunately, time series on the country level
are not yet available for all EU28 countries. The
HFG (10%) indicators depicted in Figure II-7-2
have a short time dimension. However, Eurostat
provides time series data for HGF (20%) shares
for 10 EU Member States (CZ, EE, ES, HU, IT, LT,
LU, PT, RO, SI) for the time period 2008-2012.
This data allows for studying the impact of the
economic crisis (and business cycles) on the share of
high growth firms
(132). A readily available measure
of short-run economic performance is the gap
between actual and potential GDP (potential GDP
is the maximum amount an economy can turn out
when it is most efficient, i.e. at full capacity)
(133). For
the EU28 as a whole, the output gap fell from a level
of +2.7% in 2007 to a -3.4% in 2009 during the
financial crisis. For the Baltic states, values as high
as -10% were recorded during this time. After the
crisis in 2009, the gap closed for many countries but
economic activity remained below the production
potential for most of the EU Member States. For
most of the Southern Member States the output
gap increased again in a second dip in 2012. Thus,
for many countries in the sample the time period
under consideration covers a period of economic
downturn. As high growth firm shares are calculated
(132) Here, it is important to note that a different HGF definition is used.
However, two HGF definitions (HGF (10%) and HGF (20%) are closely
related. The correlation of the HGF (10%) with the HGF (20%) share
for the year 2012 at the NACE (rev. 2) two-digit breakdown shows
a strong cross-sectional correlation of 0.82 for the 10 countries. At
the NACE rev. 2 one-digit breakdown the correlation is even stronger
(0.89). For this reason, the results reported for the HGF (20%) share
should also provide indication on HGFs in general, and the HGF (10%)
measure that is used in the remainder of the chapter.
(133) Data on the output gap is from the Ameco database (series
AVGDP) that measures the output gap at 2010 market prices.
using a three-year period also the output gap was
aggregated over three years for the purpose of
providing evidence on the impact of the crisis on
high growth firm shares.
Figure II-7-3 presents the results of a simple
regression of the output gap on high-growth firm
shares at the NACE (rev. 2) one-digit and two-digit
breakdown. Country and industry dummies are used
to control for fixed country and industry effects.
The regressions do not utilise the complete panel
structure of the data because missing observations
are recorded for some timer series. Different types of
regressions have been run checking the robustness
of the results (country-industry dummies, using
every second year observation), also two different
levels of aggregation for the output gap have been
used. The results reported in Figure II-7-3 are quite
similar across the specifications and the NACE
breakdowns. There is a clear relationship between
the output gap and the share of high growth firms:
an output gap (economic crisis or business cycle
downturn) is associated with a lower share of HGFs,
while an economic expansion is associated with a
larger share of HGFs. We also present results for
the entry rate to put the results for the HGF (20%)
share into perspective. The average impact of the
economic crisis on the entry rate was of similar
magnitude in terms of percentage point changes
(columns (5) and (10) in Figure II-7-3). However,
the entry rate is, on average, more than twice the
magnitude of the HGF (20%) share. Thus the impact
of the crisis on HGFs is likely to be more severe than
for other indicators of business dynamics such as
start-up rates.

===== PDF_PAGE 255 =====
253
II-7. High growth firms in Europe
The estimated coefficients on the output gap
variables reported in Figure II-7-3 can be
interpreted as percentage point change in the HGF
(20%) share when the output gap changes by 1%.
Figure II-7-4 summarises the results of equations
(3) and (8) for the one-digit and two-digit NACE
(Rev. 2) breakdowns, respectively. According to
these estimates the share of high growth firms
(20%) is, on average, reduced by an output gap
of -5% by approximately 0.8 percentage points.
This is a substantial number as the unweighted
mean of the HGF (20%) share in the two-
digit sample is 3.9%. However the standard
deviation of 4.94 suggests that there is much
heterogeneity across industries.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies, JRC - Knowledge for
Growth Unit
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs; WIFO calculations
Notes:
(1)Countries used in the regression analysis: CZ, EE, ES, IT, LT, LU, HU, PT, RO, SI. (2)t-values are in parentheses; * and **
denote statistical significance at the 5% and the 1% level. respectively.
 ▶ Figure II-7-3 Regression (1)(2) of output gap on HGF (20%) share, 2007-2012
Variable

NACE rev. 2 one-digit industries NACE rev. 2 two-digit industries
HGF (20%) share of enterprises Entry
rate
HGF (20%) share of enterprises Entry
rate
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
Output gap
3-year average
0.202**
(9.574)
0.203**
(12.248)
0.237**
(10.579)
0.154**
(5.076)
0.157**
(6.191)
0.203**
(5.560)
Output gap
2-year average
0.167**
(8.279)
0.164**
(5.754)
OG 0.187**
(4.557)
0.168**
(7.389)
Country
dummies
y y y y
Industry
dummies
y y y y
Country x
industry dummies
y y y y y y
Every second
year observation
y y
Observations 630 630 630 357 705 2 404 2 404 2 404 1 362 2 669
R-squared 0.52 0.50 0.76 0.81 0.69 0.22 0.23 0.57 0.62 0.68

===== PDF_PAGE 256 =====
254
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Figure II-7-5 presents the results at the sectoral
level using the NACE (rev. 2) two-digit breakdown
and the Eurostat taxonomies of knowledge-
intensive services and technological intensity in
manufacturing industries. The second column
presents unweighted sectoral averages of the
HGF (20%) share for the year 2012 and the
third column presents the percentage change of
the HGF share (20%) to a one percent change
in the output gap for the 10 countries for which
time series information on the HGF (20%)
share is available. Service sectors — with the
exception of low knowledge intensive market
services — have, in general, a markedly higher
HGF (20%) share than manufacturing industries.
The reaction to the output gap in the third panel
of Figure II-7-5 shows the strongest impact for
the low knowledge-intensive market services
followed by the manufacturing industries (except
low-technology manufacturing) that are generally
considered to be more sensitive to business cycle
influences than service industries (e.g., Hölzl,
Kaniovski, Reinstaller, 2015). This is likely related
to the fact that the economic downturn in many
of the countries also led to a substantial decline
in consumption that affected domestic oriented
low-knowledge-intensive market services more
severely than during normal business cycle
downturns, where consumption remains relatively
smooth compared to other economic aggregates.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs; WIFO calculations
Notes:
(1)Countries used in the analysis: CZ, EE, ES, IT, LT, LU, HU, PT, RO, SI. (2)The lines are based on the results on Figure II-7-3
in column (4) for one-digit industry and column (8) for two-digit industry. The output gap refers to three-year averages. The time
period covered is 2007-2012.
 ▶ Figure II-7-4 Estimated average change in percentage points of the share in high growth firms (20%)
 in relation to changes in the output gap(1)(2)
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Aﬀairs; WIFO calculations
Notes:
(1)Countries used in the analysis: CZ, EE, ES, IT, LT, LU, HU, PT, RO, SI. (2)The lines are based on the
results on Table II-7-3 in column (4) for one-digit industry and column (8) for two-digit industry. The
output gap refers to three-year averages. The time period covered is 2007-2012.
-2,5
-2,0
-1,5
-1,0
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
-12 -11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Figure II-7-4 Estimated average change in percentage points of the share in high growth firms (20%)
in relation to changes in the output gap(1)(2)
change in HGF share (20%) - one digit change in HGF share (20%) - two digit

===== PDF_PAGE 257 =====
255
II-7. High growth firms in Europe
In summary, HGF dynamics at the country level
are affected by business cycles and economic
shocks, also in knowledge-intensive and
technology-intensive sectors. During economic
downturns there are a lower number of HGFs
that can support innovation and investment as
potential HGFs face demand shortages that do
not allow them to transform themselves into
actual HGFs. A message to take away from this
is that economic policy should assure access
to finance for potential HGFs in economic
downturns, so that firms with high growth
potential can be retained and reach their growth
potential in the economic recovery.
High growth firms and country capabilities
The striking differences in HGF (10%) shares
across EU Member States documented in
Figure II-7-2 suggests that country capabilities
related to institutions, regulations, labour skills
and innovation capabilities are important drivers
of the differences in HGFs share dynamics.
Indicators of institutions and capabilities at the
country level are often interrelated and highly
correlated among each other. This presents a
challenge to the analysis of country-level country
capabilities. Simple scatter plots and regression
analysis are unlikely to be informative for
uncovering robust associations between these
country capability indicators and HGF shares
at the country level. For this reason principal
component analysis is used. Principal component
analysis allows for the constructing of new
summary variables that capture and summarise
different aspects of national capabilities. The
set of variables used is depicted in Figure II-
7-6. The first three indicators (Government
effectiveness, regulatory quality and rule of
law) capture broad institutional characteristics
and the efficiency of public administration of
countries. The second set of indicators captures
innovation capabilities related to R&D (R&D
intensity and researcher intensity). The third
set of indicators captures education outputs
(labour force with upper secondary education
and labour force with tertiary education). The
indicator on FDI inflows (in% of GDP) measures
the attractiveness of a country for foreign direct
investment. The manufacturing share (% GDP)
and the employment share in industry indicate
the manufacturing base of a country that is
generally considered to be a determinant of
competitiveness. Trade in services (% of GDP)
covers the export share of services of countries
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation – Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs; WIFO calculations
Notes:
(1)Countries used in the analysis: CZ, EE, ES, IT, LT, LU, HU, PT, RO, SI. (2)The percentage change of the HGF share (20%)
when the output gap changes by one percentage point is derived from sector regressions using the NACE rev. 2 2-digit industry
breakdown. All regressions use time and industry dummies. The output gap coefficients are significant at the 1% level of statistical
significance with the exception of the coefficient for low technology manufacturing which is statistically significant at the 5% level.
 ▶ Figure II-7-5 HGF (20%) shares and the effect of the output gap at the sectoral level, 2012(1)(2)
HGF (20%) share Percentage change of the HGF (20%) share when the
output gap changes by one percentage point
High-tech and medium high-tech
manufacturing 2.8% 5.9%
Medium low-tech manufacturing 2.8% 7.8%
Low-tech manufacturing 2.2% 2.1%
Knowledge-intensive financial services 5.1% 5.8%
Knowldege-intensive market services 4.8% 3.9%
Knowledge-intensive high-tech services 5.1% 4.4%
Low knowldege-intensive market services 2.8% 8.3%

===== PDF_PAGE 258 =====
256
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
and can be considered as a country characteristic.
We also use broad variables related to the financial
system (domestic credit to the private sector by
banks and stock market capitalisation) as the
effectiveness of the financial system is of high
importance for potential high growth firms. Last
but not least we use the indicator of complexity of
exports derived from the product space literature.
This indicator captures latent information on both
the depth and the breadth of the knowledge base
of countries that are associated with their exports
(for details see Box 1).
Figure II-7-18 in the appendix presents the
results of the principal component analysis using
time-aggregated indicators for the period 2009
to 2012. The analysis leads to the identification
of three distinct principal components that
summarise the information contained in the
14 indicators of country capabilities. The
components are ranked according to their ability
to explain most of the variations in the data.
The three components have an interpretation
that is quite clear:
• Principal component 1 (PC1) can be
interpreted as a stage of development
indicator that combines institutional quality
with high innovative capacity. The factor
loadings and the correlation analysis in
Figure II-7-18 show that PC1 is highly
correlated with the governance indicators,
R&D intensity, researcher intensity and
complexity of exports. This confirms that
institutional variables and R&D indicators
are highly correlated at the country level.
The first principal component explains
around 40% of the total variation of the
14 indicators of country capabilities.
• Principal component 2 (PC2) captures the
industrial base as it is strongly correlated to
the variables manufacturing share (% of GDP),
employment in industry and labour force with
upper secondary education. Interestingly PC2
(manufacturing base) is weakly negatively
correlated to knowledge indicators such
as R&D intensity and researcher intensity
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
 ▶ Figure II-7-6 Variable list for analysing the relationship between high growth firm shares and indicators of
 country capabilities
Variable Source
Government effectiveness Worldwide governance indicator database, World Bank
Regulatory quality Worldwide governance indicator database, World Bank
Rule of Law Worldwide governance indicator database, World Bank
R&D intensity Eurostat
Researcher intensity (per millon people) Eurostat
Labour force with upper secondary education Eurostat
Labour force with tertiary education Eurostat
FDI flows (% of GDP) World Bank
Manufacturing share (% of GDP) Eurostat
Employment in industry (% of total employment) Eurostat
Trade in services (% of GDP) Eurostat
Domestic credit to private sector by banks (% of GDP) World Bank
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP) World Bank
Complexity of Exports WIFO calculations (Reinstaller et al. 2012)

===== PDF_PAGE 259 =====
257
II-7. High growth firms in Europe
and strongly negatively correlated to the
governance indicators and the labour force
with tertiary education, as well as the indicator
measuring domestic credit to the private
sector by banks (% of GDP). This suggests that
PC2 primarily captures the low technology
and medium-low technology manufacturing
activities. This principal component accounts
for 26% of the total variation of the 14
indicators of country capabilities.
• Principal component 3 (PC3) is an indicator of
FDI inflows and trade in services. Interestingly
the correlation analysis shows that PC3 is
largely independent of institutional quality
that is often emphasised in the literature.
This principal component accounts for 11%
of the total variation of the 14 indicators of
country capabilities.
Figure II-7-7 shows the relationship between
the HGF share (10%) in 2012 and the summary
indicators of country capabilities identified
with the principal component analysis. At the
macroeconomic level only the first principal
component (‘institutions and knowledge’) shows
a significant relationship to the country HGF
share (10%). The other two components do not
show a strong relationship to the HGF indicator.
This analysis clearly confirms that HGF shares
are related to differences in institutions and
innovation capabilities. HGFs do not thrive in
an institutional vacuum but need appropriate
framework conditions and an appropriate
entrepreneurial ecosystem. However, the
results also indicate that principal component 2
(‘industrial base’) and principal component 3 (‘FDI
inflows and trade in services’) show no strong
relationship to HGF shares for the countries in
the analysis at the country level.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, DG Economic and Financial Affairs; WIFO calculations
 ▶ Figure II-7-7 Principal components of country capabilities and country HGF (10%) shares, average values
 for 2009 to 2012
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, World Bank, BACI database; WIFO calculations
Figure II-7-7 Principal components of country capabilities and country HGF (10%)
shares, average values for 2009 to 2012

0
5
10
15
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5
HGF (10%) share
Institutions and knowledge
Principal component 1 -
institutions and knowledge
AT BE
BG
CY
CZ DE
DK
EE ES
FI FR
HR
HU
IE IT
LT LV
NL
PL PT
RO
SE
SI
SK
UK
0
5
10
15
-4 -2 0 2 4
HGF (10%) share
Industrial base
Principal component 2 -
industrial base
AT
BE BG
CY
CZ
DE
EE
ES
FR
HR
HU
IE
IT
PL PT
RO
SE
SI
SK
UK
0
5
10
15
-2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5
HGF (10%) share
FDI inﬂows and trade in services
Principal component 3 -
FDI inﬂows and trade in services
NL
DK FI LT
LV
AT
BE
BG
CY
CZ DE
DK
EE
ES
FI
FR
HR
HU
IE
IT
LT LV
NL PL
PT
RO
SE
SI
SK
UK

===== PDF_PAGE 260 =====
258
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
7.4 High growth firms in Europe:
start-up dynamics, competitiveness
and R&I at the sectorial level
There is considerable heterogeneity of HGF (10%)
shares across countries and sectors that is likely
associated with differences in firm dynamics, in
international competitiveness of countries (at the
industry level) and differences in innovativeness.
Indicators of start-up dynamics and HGFs
shares
The emergence of high growth firms is often
put in relationship with business dynamics, i.e.,
the entry and exit of new firms. It is well known
that entry and exit rates are different across
sectors and countries. One determinant of entry
rates are administrative entry barriers such as
International trade is an important factor
that helps to explain differences in economic
structure and performance across countries
(Matsuyama 2009). Drivers of this process are
innovation, i.e., the creation of new varieties
of products, market selection and changes in
demand at the product level. The fact that the
product mix exported by countries provides an
indicator of competitiveness of countries has
been emphasised in a series of contributions by
Hidalgo et al. (2007), Hidalgo and Hausmann
(2009) and Felipe et al. (2012). They show
that the process of economic development of
countries is related to changes in the product
mix of a country that is exported. The overall
complexity and sophistication of a country’s
export products is a key indicator which is closely
associated with technological, economic and
institutional capabilities at the country level. In
the long run differences in abilities to accumulate
capabilities to produce new improved products
can explain differences in country performance.
In the present analysis we use two indicators
derived from this literature to study its
relationship to high growth firms at the -industry-
country level. The first indicator is the complexity
score associated with the export mix. The product
complexity score (short complexity) can be
interpreted as capturing latent information on
both the depth (capability to produce exclusive
products due to high levels of accumulated
knowledge) and the breadth of the knowledge
base (capability to produce many products with
different knowledge bases) needed to produce
products in a specific product class or sector. The
product complexity score is constructed using
network methods on the basis of information on
how many countries produce specific products
and on how diversified the trade-structure of
these countries is. For details on the calculation
of the indictor see e.g., Reinstaller et al. (2012).
The second indicator is the revealed GDP per
capita of the actual export mix at the industry
level of a country which can be interpreted as a
measure for the implicit productivity of the export
basket of a country. This indicator was proposed
by Hausmann, Hwang and Rodrick (2007) and
based on the idea that the growth performance is
related to the specialisation in specific products
or product categories. The indicator is calculated
in two steps: First, the implied productivity of a
product is calculated as export-weighted GDP per
capita across countries. Implied productivities are
then aggregated at the industry-country level
using export weights of products associated with
the specific export mix.
The data to construct these indicators comes
from the BACI database on bilateral trade
flows compiled by CEPII. It contains data for
232 countries and economies and 5 109 product
categories. A detailed description of the data is
provided by Gaulier and Zignago (2010).
 ▶ Box 1 The complexity of exports and the product space literature

===== PDF_PAGE 261 =====
259
II-7. High growth firms in Europe
the cost and time to set up a new enterprise.
This aspect has received much attention. These
administrative entry barriers are likely to be
relevant for service sectors, where regulatory
entry barriers, ‘red tape’, and product market
regulation are important obstacles to self-
employment and firm growth. However, a large
part of entry barriers are structural and related
to the competitive interaction in markets.
Advertising, high capital intensity and cumulative
R&D can create sunk costs and entry barriers
(e.g., Sutton 1998, Dosi 2007). This complicates
the relationship between business dynamics and
high growth firms. It might not necessarily be
true that higher entry- or turnover rates (share
of entry and exit over all firms in an industry or
economy) increase the number of high growth
firms. The structure of entry seems to be
more relevant than the number of entrants. In
industries with high entry barriers only ‘higher
quality’ and more ambitious entrepreneurial
projects will be realised because of the higher
cost of entry. Hölzl (2015) documents that higher
sunk costs are associated with a higher share
of stable firms, a lower rate of reallocation
of market shares but not with a lower overall
productivity growth in Austrian manufacturing
industries. The evidence on the relationship
between entry and turnover rates and the HGF
(10%) share depicted in Figure II-7-8 confirms
this view. For service industries (both knowledge-
intensive sectors and low-knowledge intensive
sectors) there is a positive association between
entry and turnover rates and the share of high
growth firms, while for manufacturing industries
(both high-technology and low-technology
sectors) the relationship between entry and
turnover rates and the share of HGFs (10%) is
negative. This implies that, in comparison to the
number of entrants or the turnover of firms, the
structure of entry and exit is more relevant for
the development of successful high growth firms.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat; WIFO calculations
Note:
(1)Industry values are unweighted averages across countries.
 ▶ Figure II-7-8 Entry and turnover rates and HGF (10%) shares at sector level(1), average values for 2009 to 2012
KIS LKIS High-Tech Low-Tech
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat; WIFO calculations
Note:
(1)Industry values are unweighted averages across countries.
Figure II-7-8 Entry and turnover rates and HGF (10%) shares at sector level(1), average values for 2009 to 2012
H50
H51
J58 J59
J60
J61
J62
J63
K64
K65
K66
M69
M70 M71
M72
M73
M74
M75
N78
N80
G45
G46
G47
H49
H52
H53
I55
I56
L68
N77 N79
N81
N82
S95
6
9
12
15
18
6 9 12 15 18
HGF (10%) share
Entry rate
Service industries - entry rate
C20-C21
C26-C27 C28
C10-C12
C15
C16
C19
C22
C23
C24-C25
C31-C32
C33
4
6
8
10
12
4 6 8 10 12
HGF (10%) share
Entry rate
Manufacturing industries - entry rate
H50
H51
J58 J59
J60
J61
J62
J63
K64
K65
K66
M69
M70
M71
M72
M73
M74
M75
N78
N80
G45
G46
G47
H49
H52
H53
I55 I56
L68
N77 N79
N81
N82
S95
6
9
12
15
18
10 15 20 25 30 35
HGF (10%) share
Turnover rate
Service industries - turnover rate
C20-C21
C26-C27
C28
C10-C12
C15
C16
C19
C22
C23
C24-C25
C31-C32
C33
4
6
8
10
12
8 10 12 14 16 18 20
HGF (10%) share
Turnover rate
Manufacturing industries - turnover rate

===== PDF_PAGE 262 =====
260
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Figure II-7-9 depicts the relationship between
entry and turnover rates at the country level. As
expected from the heterogeneous results at the
industry level (Figure II-7-8) the relationship is
generally weak.
The findings imply that policies should focus
primarily on creating framework conditions and
entrepreneurial ecosystems for potentially fast
growing firms. This is in line with the evidence
that there is little difference with regard to entry
rates between most European Countries and the
US, the big difference is about post-entry growth
processes of firms between Europe and the US
(Bartelsman et al. 2009, Criscuolo et al. 2014).
Policies to support the emergence of high growth
firms should not focus on supporting start-
ups alone, they should target both ambitious
entrants and ambitious established enterprises
and focus on the development of differentiated
knowledge-bases and capabilities that allow
valuable entrepreneurial experimentation and
support thereby the emergence of HGFs.
International competitiveness and HGF shares
International trade allows firms to tap into markets
outside their home market. For this reason the
internationalisation of innovative SMEs ranks high
on the policy agenda in Europe. In particular, in small
countries firms can reach their growth potential
only by exporting. The product space literature
(Hidalgo and Hausmann 2009 and Hidalgo
et al. 2007, Hausmann et al., 2007) allows for
extracting indicators from trade data that provide
information about the economic development and
competitiveness at the country and industry level.
These indicators capture the knowledge-base of a
country or sectors. Such indicators have been used
to study structural change of productive structures
for the EU Member States (Reinstaller et al. 2012).
Here, two indicators are used to study the link
between HGFs and international competitiveness.
The first indicator is the complexity score of the
export mix (short complexity) that captures the
depth and the breadth of the knowledge base of
economies or industries in an economy. While
the change over time of this indicator allows for
assessing the upgrading of productive structures
or stasis in development across countries and
sectors, here we focus on complexity as a measure
of competitiveness. A high score of complexity
shows that the products exported rely on many
competences and are relatively unique in the world
market, i.e., there are only few exporters in the
world. The second indicator we use is the revealed
GDP per capita associated with the export mix of a
country or sector.
Figure II-7-10 presents the relationship between the
complexity indicator and the HGF (10%) shares. The
values for complexity are averaged over the 2009
— 2010 period. The HGF (10%) shares in 2012 and
the complexity scores are aggregated at the industry
level — panel (a) — and at the country level —
panel (b). It depicts both the complexity and the
revealed productivity of the export mix. The results
show that the complexity scores have a higher
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat; WIFO calculations
 ▶ Figure II-7-9 Entry and turnover rates and HGF (10%) shares at country level, average values for 2009 to 2012
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat; WIFO calculations
Figure II-7-9 Entry and turnover rates and HGF (10%) shares at country level, average values for 2009 to 2012
AT
BE
BG
CY
CZ DE
DK
EE
ES
FI FR HU
IE
IT
LT
LU
LV
MT NL
NO
PL PT
RO
SE
SI
SK
UK
2
6
10
14
8 16 24 32 40
HGF (10%) share
Turnover rate
Turnover rate
AT
BE
BG
CY
CZ DE
DK
EE ES
FI FR
HR
HU
IE
IT
LT
LU
LV
MT NL
NO
PL
PT
RO
SE
SI
SK
UK
2
6
10
14
4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
HGF (10%) share
Entry rate
Entry rate

===== PDF_PAGE 263 =====
261
II-7. High growth firms in Europe
relationship with the HGF (10%) shares both on
the aggregated industry and the country level. The
industry results confirm that sectors with a higher
complexity score, implying a broader and deeper
knowledge base in the industry, are associated with
a higher share of HGFs (20%) (Colombelli et al.
2014).. The revealed GDP to produce the export
mix also shows a positive association. This evidence
suggests product baskets that are associated with a
higher implied productivity and a higher complexity
offer more opportunities for HGFs.
At the country level, the association between
complexity and the share of HGF (10%) is less
clear than at the industry level but substantially
stronger than the association with the implicit
productivity of the export mix. The available
evidence (Reinstaller et al. 2012) also suggests
that the complexity score is a better indicator of
competitiveness in the sense of structural change
and upgrading of production structures.
Overall, these results suggest that the
improvement of international competitiveness
by upgrading productive structures is also
associated with an economic process where HGFs
are the carriers of such a change. However, the
upgrading potential is unevenly distributed across
countries because it is deeply rooted in current
capabilities and the industrial specialisation
of countries. The investment focus of the
European Commission on specific technologies
such as key enabling technologies is important
as such technologies tend to be more complex.
They draw on large and different knowledge bases
and foster the emergence of new entrepreneurial
opportunities. At the same time, the heterogeneity
in competitiveness at the country level may
require support of the development of productive
structures and a diversification of knowledge
bases to support structural change and innovative
HGFs in less advanced regions in Europe.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, World Bank, BACI database; WIFO calculations
Note:
(1)Industry values are unweighted averages across countries.
Figure II-7-10 Relationship between trade-based measures of economic development and high growth firms (10%) at industry(1) and
country level, average values for 2009 to 2012
0
4
8
12
16
-2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
HGF (10%) share
Complexity
Complexity
(a) Industries (aggregated across countries)
(b) Countries (aggregated across industries)
C10 C11
C12
C13
C14
C15
C16 C17 C18
C19
C20
C21
C22
C23
C24 C25
C26
C27
C28
C29
C30
C31
C32
0
4
8
12
16
10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000
HGF (10%) share
Revealed GDP to produce export mix
Revealed GDP to produce export mix
AT
BE
BG
CY
CZ DE
DK
EE ES
FI FR
HR
HU
IE
IT
LT
LV
MT NL PL PT
RO
SE
SI
SK
UK
0
4
8
12
16
-0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
HGF (10%) share
Complexity
Complexity
0
4
8
12
16
15000 20000 25000 30000 35000
HGF (10%) share
Revealed GDP to produce export mix
Revealed GDP to produce export mix
C10 C11
C12
C13
C14
C15
C16
C17 C18
C19
C20
C21
C22
C23
C24 C25
C26
C27
C28
C29
C30
C31 C32
AT
BE
BG
CY
CZ DE
DK
EE ES
FI FR
HR
HU
IE
IT
LT
LV
MT
NL
PL
PT
RO
SE
SI
SK
UK
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, World Bank, BACI database; WIFO calculations
Note:
(1)Industry values are unweighted averages across countries.
 ▶ Figure II-7-10 Relationship between trade-based measures of economic development and high growth firms
 (10%) at industry(1) and country level, average values for 2009 to 2012

===== PDF_PAGE 264 =====
262
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Indicators of innovation activities and
HGF shares
Research and innovation is an important source
of new knowledge and central to the creation
of new competences at the country level. The
evidence on the sectoral distribution of HGFs
reviewed so far suggests that most high growth
firms are in knowledge-intensive services, but also
that high-technology sectors have a larger share
of high growth firms than low technology sectors
Daunfeldt et al 2015). Most formal innovation
activities related to R&D and patents are located in
manufacturing industries, while service industries
have, in general, a lower R&D and patent intensity.
Figure II-7-11 confirms that there is a positive
association between R&D intensity and HGF (10%)
shares for the manufacturing sector at the industry
(aggregated across countries) and at the country
levels (aggregated across industries), respectively.
The left panel of Figure II-7-11 also shows that
most industries cluster on the left side of the
diagram. Only a few industries are on the right
side of the diagram with a very high R&D-intensity.
But those industries with a high R&D intensity
display an above average share of HGFs. This
suggests that mobility barriers associated with
R&D (cf. Figure II-7-8) are compensated by larger
opportunities to grow. The result by Ciraci et al.
(2013) is relevant to explain these patterns. They
show that firms with innovation activities have a
higher probability to achieve sustained high growth.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD; WIFO calculations
Note:
(1)Industry values are unweighted averages across countries.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: EPO, OECD; WIFO calculations
Note:
(1)Industry values are unweighted averages across countries.
 ▶ Figure II-7-11 R&D intensity and HGF (10%) shares at industry(1) and country level, average values for
 2009 to 2012
 ▶ Figure II-7-12 Patent intensity (patents per 1000 employees) and HGF (10%) shares at industry level(1),
 average values for 2009 to 2012
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD; WIFO calculations
Note:
(1)Industry values are unweighted averages across countries.
Figure II-7-11 R&D intensity and HGF (10%) shares at industry(1) and country level, average values for 2009 to 2012
L68
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0 3 6 9 12 15 18
HGF (10%) share
R&D intensity
Industries
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
HGF (10%) share
R&D intensity
Countries
B
C10-C12
C13-C15
C16
C17-C18
C19
C20-C21
C22
C23
C24-C25
C26-C27
C28
C29-C30
C31-C32
C33
DE F
I G
H
J58
J59-J60
J61
J62-J63
K M72
Mx72
N
AT
BE
BG
CY
CZ DE
DK
EE
ES
FI FR HU
IT
LT LV
MT NL
NO
PL
PT
RO
SE
SI
SK
UK
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: EPO, OECD; WIFO calculations
Note:
(1)Industry values are unweighted averages across countries.
Figure II-7-12 Patent intensity (patents per 1000 employees) and HGF (10%) shares at industry level(1), average values for 2009 to 2012
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0 2 4 6 8
HGF (10%) share
Patent intensity (count)
All countries
C14
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0 4 8 12 16
HGF (10%) share
Patent intensity (count)
Innovation leaders and followers
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
HGF (10%) share
Patent intensity (count)
Moderate and modest innovators
C10
C12
C13
C14
C15
C16
C19
C20
C21
C22
C23
C24
C25
C26
C27
C28
C29
C30
C31
C32 C10
C11
C12
C13
C15
C16
C17
C18
C19
C20
C21
C22
C23
C25
C26
C27
C28
C29
C30
C31
C32 C10
C11
C12
C13
C14
C15 C16 C17
C19
C20
C21
C22
C23
C24
C25
C26
C27 C28
C29
C30
C31 C32 C18
C17
C18 C11 C24

===== PDF_PAGE 265 =====
263
II-7. High growth firms in Europe
Figure II-7-12 presents evidence on the
relationship between patent intensity and HGFs.
Patenting is highly concentrated in certain
industries, because in different technological fields
patents have a different importance to protect
new knowledge. For high-growth entrepreneurial
ventures patents can play a very important role
in order to attract external sources of financing,
as patents can be more easily analysed in due
diligence processes and provide a formal right
of protection against the commercialisation of
the innovation by other firms. On the other hand,
extensive patent networks can hinder the entry
of new ambitious firms because patenting may
increase the cost of activity. In such a case one
would expect a negative relationship between
patenting and the HGF share. The evidence in
Figure II-7-12 suggests that there is generally
a weak positive relationship between patents
and the share of HGFs (10%). The relationship is
stronger for the countries classified as innovation
leaders and innovation followers according to the
Innovation Union Scoreboard than for countries
classified as moderate or modest innovators. This
mirrors the links established earlier that HGFs
are more innovative in economies where the
appropriate broad knowledge-base is available.
This is especially true for high-technology sectors.
Overall the evidence suggests that for high-
technology industries patenting is associated with
a higher HGF (10%) share.
However, innovation and patent intensity does not
necessarily need to be strongly associated with
the presence of HGFs. The evidence for firms in
the biotechnology industry that covers products
related to DNA/RNA, proteins and other molecules,
cell and tissue culturing and engineering or
bioinformatics. In this industry high growth firms
may be underrepresented because most biotech
firms aim at patenting products or processes and
to sell their patent (or their company) to a large
chemical or drug company. Growth might then be
realised in the company that acquires the patent
(or the firm). However, the evidence provided in
Figures II-7-7 and II-7-8 also shows that, despite
the recent acquisition boom of large firms, there
are still many technological opportunities that
are open for small and young firms that can
render them high growth enterprises (cf. Hölzl and
Friesenbichler 2008).
7.5 Research and innovation
behaviour of high growth firms
Until now we used shares of HGFs at the country
and industry level to provide evidence on
HGFs in Europe. However, industry and country
information may not tell the whole story. There is
sample evidence that there are innovative firms
in low-technology and low knowledge-intensive
industries and firms without innovation activities
in high-technology and knowledge-intensive
industries. Innovation activities are largely firm-
specific, therefore the use of industry indicators
can be problematic as firm-specific information
is masked. The Community Innovation Survey
micro data at the safe centre at Eurostat allows
looking at the innovation behaviour of HGFs and
non-HGFs in more detail.
This data allows studying the innovativeness of
HGFs and potential differences in the innovation
behaviour between HGFs and non-HGFs. This
data allows going beyond the straightjacket
of identifying the innovativeness of HGF by
using industry averages. The analysis provides
evidence as to whether HGFs are different from
non-HGFs in their innovation behaviour.
Enterprises can be grouped according to their
innovation activities and three types of firms can
be distinguished (e.g., Hölzl and Janger 2014):
• R&D innovators: The subset of innovative
firms that perform their own R&D activities.
• Non-technology innovators: Innovative firms
that do not perform their own R&D
• Non-innovators: Firms that do not perform
innovation activities.
Innovative firms introduced a new or significantly
improved product or process and/or have ongoing
innovation projects. The distinction between R&D
innovators and non-technology innovators is
based on the fact that, in comparison to non-
technological innovation, R&D activities are
generally more costly and uncertain but provide
— if successful — a stronger firm-specific
competitive advantage. The evidence by Ciraci
et al. (2013) shows that intramural R&D activities

===== PDF_PAGE 266 =====
264
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
tend to stabilise a firm’s growth pattern over
time. Innovative HGFs are more likely to repeat
high growth episodes in comparison to HGFs that
do not perform R&D in-house.
Figure II-7-13 reports the results for country
groups and broad sectors. The distribution across
country groups and across industries shows
marked differences. HGFs in innovation leader and
innovation follower countries are more likely to be
R&D innovators than HGFs in countries belonging
to the group of moderate or modest innovators,
and these differences are lager in manufacturing
industries than in services. This suggests that the
competitive advantage of HGFs is not independent
from the comparative advantages at the country
level (cf. Hölzl 2009). R&D active HGFs are more
numerous in countries where R&D and innovation
is a central source of competitive advantage.
However, the distribution of HGFs across innovator
types crucially depends on the industry of activity.
Both the industry and the country context matter.
HGFs in high technology industries are much
more likely to be R&D innovators than firms
located in manufacturing, knowledge-intensive
market services or the service sector as a whole.
This evidence is interesting, as it clearly shows
that the innovativeness of HGFs is context-
specific. It depends on the country and industry
of activity
(134).
(134) Results from quantile regressions (not reported here) confirm
the importance of country-dependency of R&D in an even more
pronounced way. Being a R&D innovator in manufacturing
industries in innovation leader and innovation follower countries
is statistically significantly and positively associated with higher
firm growth, while in moderate and modest innovator countries
the association becomes negative even for very high firm growth
rates. However, for moderate growth rates there is a positive
association for both country groups.
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat - CIS micro data accessed at the Eurostat safe centre
Note:
(1)The percentage values are averages for the CIS 2010 and the CIS 2012 survey waves.
IL = Innovation leader; IF = Innovation follower; MI = Moderate or modest innovator.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
IL+IF MI+MI IL+IF MI+MI IL+IF MI+MI IL+IF MI+MI
High technology Manufacturing KIBS Services
%
Figure II-7-13 HGFs - distribution by innovator type across broad sectors (%)(1)
R&D innovators Non-tech. innovators Non-innovators
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat - CIS micro data accessed at the Eurostat safe centre
Note:
(1)The percentage values are averages for the CIS 2010 and the CIS 2012 survey waves.
IL = Innovation leader; IF = Innovation follower; MI = Moderate or modest innovator.
 ▶ Figure II-7-13 HGFs - distribution by innovator type across broad sectors (%)(1)

===== PDF_PAGE 267 =====
265
II-7. High growth firms in Europe
A second question that can be answered using
firm-level data is whether the innovation
behaviour of HGFs is different from non-
HGFs. Figure II-7-14 shows the shares of R&D
innovators for broad sectors and for the two
country groups used in the report. The results
clearly indicate that the differences in R&D
innovator shares are much larger between the
different sector groupings than between HGFs
and non-HGFs. The innovativeness of HGFs
Knowledge and information sources are important
for the innovation process within firms. Knowledge
and information obtained from different sources
differs to some extent. Otherwise, firms could
substitute knowledge from one source with
knowledge from other sources without any
impact on the innovation process. Academic
research provides knowledge that is essential to
industrial innovation activities, but in general does
not provide much information that is relevant
for the applied set of problems on which firms
tend to focus in their innovation projects. Thus,
agreements and collaborations with universities
provide firms with access to scientific knowledge,
while agreements with other firms typically focus
on the development side of R&D. Customers and
suppliers provide yet other sorts of knowledge
that are highly relevant for successful innovation
projects. In this chapter information sources are
grouped in four distinct groups:
• Information sources that are internal to the
enterprise or the enterprise group.
• Market sources of information from suppliers,
clients from the private sector, clients from
the public sectors, enterprises from the same
industry and, last but not least, information
from consultants an d commercial labs.
• Information sources related to research such
as government and other research institutes,
universities and other higher education
institutions as well as scientific journals and
technical publications.
depends not primarily on their HGF status but
on industry affiliation. Firms in high technology
manufacturing are more likely to perform R&D
activities than firms in other industries; therefore,
HGFs in high technology manufacturing
industries are likely to be more R&D active than
HGFs in other sectors. The lowest number of
R&D innovators is found in the low-knowledge
intensive market services among both HGFs and
non-HGFs.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat - CIS micro data accessed at the Eurostat safe centre
Note:
(1)The percentage values are averages for the CIS 2010 and the CIS 2012 survey waves.
 ▶ Figure II-7-14 R&D innovator shares for different groups of sectors(1)
 Innovation leaders and innovation
followers
Moderate and modest Innovators
HGF non-HGF HGF non-HGF
High-technology manufactuing 58% 58% 41% 41%
Medium high-technology manufacturing 45% 51% 30% 38%
Medium low-technology manufacturing 25% 28% 15% 18%
Low-technology manufacturing 24% 23% 13% 10%
Knowledge-intensive market services 28% 20% 27% 21%
Knowledge-intensive financial services 26% 23% 11% 13%
Knowledge-intensive high-technology services 49% 43% 43% 39%
Low knowledge-intensive market services 9% 8% 5% 5%

===== PDF_PAGE 268 =====
266
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
• Other sources related to professional and
industry associations and conferences, trade
fairs and exhibitions.
In this analysis we concentrate only on innovative
firms (innovative HGFs and innovative non-HGFs)
as in the Community Innovation Survey only firms
with innovation activities are asked the question on
the importance of different knowledge for innovation
activities. Figure II-7-15 reports the evidence at the
country group level for the CIS 2012. The assessment
of the importance of the different knowledge sources
is very similar across HGFs and non-HGFs within
the same country group. The differences between
HGFs and non-HGFs are small and in most cases
statistically not significant. When testing for the
significance a matching algorithm was used that
assures that industry affiliation, firm size and country
affiliation of HGFs and non-HGFs are matched
(135).
The results for the CIS 2012 reported in Figure II-
7-15 suggest that the main differences between
HGFs and non-HGFs concern information sources
related to research. HGFs assess information sources
from universities and journals as slightly more
important than non-HGFs. However, the differences
are small even if they are statistically significant.
(135) We used the coarsened exact matching algorithm proposed by
Iacus et al. (2011) to control for the potentially confounding
effects of country, industry and size that could drive differences.
If HGs would be small firms and non-HGFs large established R&D
performers evidence on raw data could be misleading. Matching
allows one to compare similar firms and to provide more precise
information on the differences between HGFs and non-HGFs.
The results for the CIS 2010 (not reported here)
show quantitatively different but qualitatively very
similar patterns. The most striking differences are
for internal knowledge sources, where statistically
significant results are observed for the CIS 2010
survey wave but not for the CIS 2012. Overall, the
most important information source for innovation
for both HGFs and non-HGFs are information sources
internal to the enterprise or enterprise network,
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat - CIS 2012 micro data accessed at the Eurostat safe centre; WIFO calculations
Note: (1)The degree of importance has been rescaled: A value of 0 indicates «not used», a value of 0.333 indicates «low importance», a
value of 0.666 indicates «medium importance» and the maximum value of 1 «high importance». NS indicates that the difference is not
statistically significant. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, the 5% and the 1% level of significance, respectively.
 ▶ Figure II-7-15 Information sources for innovative activities across country groups(1)
Innovation leaders and innovation followers Moderate and modest innovators
HGF non-HGF Difference HGF non-HGF Difference
Internal 0.71 0.68 NS 0.62 0.63 NS
Market 0.42 0.39 NS 0.42 0.42 0.01*
SSUP 0.52 0.48 NS 0.59 0.58 NS
SCLPR 0.57 0.53 0.03** 0.50 0.50 0.01*
SCLPU 0.26 0.24 0.02* 0.25 0.25 -0.01*
SCOM 0.45 0.43 NS 0.41 0.41 NS
SINS 0.29 0.27 NS 0.34 0.34 0.01**
Research 0.27 0.25 0.03*** 0.26 0.25 0.02***
SUNI 0.27 0.26 0.03*** 0.23 0.23 0.02***
SGMT 0.16 0.14 NS 0.18 0.17 NS
SJOU 0.38 0.35 0.03*** 0.37 0.36 NS
Other 0.38 0.36 NS 0.37 0.35 NS
SCON 0.46 0.43 NS 0.43 0.41 NS
SPRO 0.30 0.28 0.02* 0.32 0.30 NS

===== PDF_PAGE 269 =====
267
II-7. High growth firms in Europe
indicating that innovation projects require a strong
internal base of knowledge in order to be able to
absorb external knowledge. Also important are
market-related knowledge sources such as clients
and customers from the private sector and suppliers.
Figure II-7-16 presents the results at the level
of industry groupings. Differences between HGFs
and non-HGFs can be observed in high technology
manufacturing in particular, where HGFs assess many
information sources to be more important than non-
HGFs. However, the differences between HGFs and
non-HGFs are quite small compared to the level of
the assessment, except perhaps the assessment of
importance of universities as a source of knowledge.
However, even for HGFs in high-technology sectors
sources of information internal to the enterprise and
market sources of information related to clients,
suppliers, competitors, sources of information from
journals and technical publications as well as other
information from conferences are ranked higher than
universities as sources of innovation. This clearly
suggests that universities and research are relevant
for innovative HGFs but that universities are not a
primary information sources for innovative HGFs. It
is also important to see that the differences between
HGFs and non-HGFs are much smaller than the
differences among HGFs across the different industry
groupings. This suggests that HGFs are embedded
in industry-specific innovation systems and have
quite similar innovation processes than non-HGFs
that are located in the same industries. The evidence
on differences between HGFs and non-HGFs with
regard to the most valuable cooperation partner is
also instructive in this respect. Figure II-7-19 in the
appendix again shows that the assessment of the
most valuable cooperation partner depends largely
on the industry context.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat - CIS 2012 micro data accessed at the Eurostat safe centre; WIFO calculations
Note:
(1)The degree of importance has been rescaled: A value of 0 indicates «not used», a value of 0.333 indicates «low importance», a
value of 0.666 indicates «medium importance» and the maximum value of 1 «high importance» . NS indicates that the difference is not
statistically significant. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, the 5% and the 1% level of significance, respectively.
 ▶ Figure II-7-16 Information sources for innovative activities across industry groupings(1)
Information
source

High-tech
maufacturing
Medium high-tech
manufacturing
Low and medium
low-tech
manufacturing
Knowledge-
intensive services
Low knowledge-
intensive services
Mean
HGF
Difference
between
HGF and
non-HGF
Mean
HGF
Difference
between
HGF and
non-HGF
Mean
HGF
Difference
between
HGF and
non-HGF
Mean
HGF
Difference
between
HGF and
non-HGF
Mean
HGF
Difference
between
HGF and
non-HGF
Internal 0.72 0.01** 0.71 NS 0.63 NS 0.75 0.01* 0.59 NS
Market 0.44 0.03*** 0.41 NS 0.42 NS 0.45 NS 0.40 NS
SSUP 0.55 0.03* 0.56 0.02* 0.61 NS 0.50 NS 0.57 NS
SCLPR 0.62 0.03** 0.54 NS 0.53 NS 0.59 NS 0.46 NS
SCLPU 0.26 NS 0.25 NS 0.24 NS 0.35 NS 0.24 NS
SCOM 0.46 NS 0.40 NS 0.42 NS 0.47 0.01* 0.39 NS
SINS 0.33 0.03* 0.32 NS 0.32 NS 0.34 NS 0.33 NS
Research 0.35 0.04*** 0.27 NS 0.24 NS 0.32 NS 0.21 NS
SUNI 0.37 0.06*** 0.28 0.01* 0.22 NS 0.32 0.02* 0.16 NS
SGMT 0.22 0.03** 0.15 0.01* 0.16 NS 0.22 NS 0.14 NS
SJOU 0.45 NS 0.37 NS 0.35 NS 0.43 NS 0.32 NS
Other 0.43 NS 0.36 -0.02* 0.36 NS 0.39 NS 0.35 NS
SCON 0.54 0.03* 0.43 -0.01* 0.43 NS 0.46 NS 0.40 NS
SPRO 0.32 NS 0.30 NS 0.28 NS 0.31 NS 0.30 NS

===== PDF_PAGE 270 =====
268
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
There are, of course, limits to this evidence as
all countries are grouped together and not much
can be said about the quality of information
that HGFs and non-HGFs obtain from the
different information sources. However, this new
evidence suggests that there is a strong context-
dependency in innovation activities of HGFs
with regard to country-specific and industry-
specific attributes. Except for high technology
manufacturing industries the differences of using
different information sources between HGFs
and non-HGFs are negligible and even for high
technology manufacturing the differences are
quite small. From this, it follows that innovation
processes of HGFs do not systematically differ
from non-HGFs in the same industry. This suggests
that many of the innovation policies that target
ambitious research projects at the firm level and
foster the generation of new knowledge bases
will, in principle, also be effective for supporting
HGFs, if such policies are effectively embedded in
the entrepreneurial ecosystem.
7.6 Research and innovation policies
for new HGFs
The findings collected in this chapter provide
new evidence on HGFs in Europe. To summarise
the findings:
• HGFs are affected by economic downturns.
• HGFs shares at the country and industry
level are positively associated with
research and innovation activities and
international competitiveness.
• HGFs shares are only weakly associated
with entry rates and firm turnover rates
(especially in manufacturing)
• The innovation behaviour of HGFs is context-
specific and not systematically different from
non-HGFs that operate in the same country and
industry. This context-dependency is related to
country-specific comparative advantages and
industry-specific innovation processes.
In addition, the literature on HGFs emphasises
that HGFs are often already established firms
and that they are difficult to target on an ex-
ante basis. HGFs are also important drivers of
resource reallocation and can thereby promote
structural change in economies.
7.6.1 Framework conditions are of central
importance…
In order to foster the emergence of HGFs
broad framework conditions that support the
reallocation of market shares to more productive
companies need to be in place. Frictions related
to regulations and policies that hamper the
processes of reallocation of resources to more
efficient uses hold HGFs back. Not only product
market regulations fall into this category but
also the appropriate development of financial
systems and the general efficiency of the public
administration and the rules of law that are
more systemic in nature and more difficult to
achieve. At the EU level barriers that affect the
functioning of the Single European Market are
of central relevance for HGFs. Thus one element
is the promotion of a growth-oriented business
environment with regulations that promote
economic growth, including public administration
efficiency (e.g., Friesenbichler et al. 2014,
Cuaresma et al. 2014, Bravo-Biosca et al. 2013).
7.6.2 But also the creation of opportunities
for HGFs
However, framework conditions are not enough
to support the emergence of HGFs and to ensure
that HGFs are the carriers of structural change.
Conducive framework conditions are necessary
but not sufficient for HGFs to emerge. But
simply creating supportive framework conditions
for start-ups through grants and subsidies is
also likely to be inefficient (Mason and Brown
2014). Such policies may have a value in the
start-up phase but lose their effectiveness when
firms become established and networking and
customer interaction become more important.
Localised spillovers, knowledge bases and
information networks become even more central
in the post-entry growth phases of enterprises
where customers play a more important role
than in the start-up phase.
The context-dependency of the innovation
behaviour of HGFs together with the evidence that

===== PDF_PAGE 271 =====
269
II-7. High growth firms in Europe
HGF shares are closely related to international
competitiveness documented in this chapter
strongly emphasises that HGFs can only thrive in
ecosystem that provide appropriate knowledge
bases and local spillovers. Entrepreneurial
opportunities do not emerge out of thin air. HGFs
often emerge in response to disruptive technical
change. In order to profit from such changes
appropriate knowledge bases need to be in
place. Entrepreneurial opportunities emerge in
environments with appropriate knowledge bases
and are often dependent on local spillovers. This
suggests that HGFs can support structural change
towards new sectors but in order to do so they
can only start by building on existing academic
and industrial knowledge bases. In this respect
policies to foster HGFs are closely related to policy
initiatives that support ‘smart specialisation’,
or better ‘smart diversification’. These concepts
emphasise that structural change is, most of the
time, a cumulative process and that it is very
difficult to develop new specialisation patterns
out of the blue. This presents a particular problem
for countries in which industrial restructuring
is necessary. The emergence of HGFs requires
appropriate policies and institutions.
On the one hand, a picture emerges that policies
to mobilise HGFs to drive industrial restructuring
should be conceived in a broad way and cover
such different areas as education policies,
research, technology and innovation policies
that allow the emergence of entrepreneurial
opportunities. On the other hand, such policies
should take into account the specific market
failures (framework conditions) and specific
systemic failures (creation of new opportunities,
interaction of different actors in the innovation
system or the entrepreneurship ecosystem). This
view should guide policy-making, as it is well
known that policies that target such failures
have, in general, a larger impact than policies
that try to replicate elements of existing success
stories such as Silicon Valley in environments
that are not suited for such transplants.
7.6.3 And what about R&I policies?
The finding that HGF shares are higher in R&I
intensive and knowledge-intensive sectors points
directly to the importance of R&I policies to support
the emergence of HGFs. Research and innovation
policies are also instrumental for supporting the
development and diversification of knowledge
bases at the European, national and regional
levels, respectively. Together with the evidence
on the innovation behaviour of HGFs and the
arguments that HGFs are difficult to target, this
suggests that it might not be necessary to support
HGFs through new instruments. By contrast, many
of the innovation policies that target ambitious
research projects at the firm level and foster the
generation of differentiated knowledge bases will,
in principle, also be effective for supporting HGFs,
as long such policies are effectively embedded in
the specific entrepreneurial ecosystem and do not
simply foster incumbent R&D performers.
7.7 Appendix
A1. Data sources
For the analysis presented in this chapter, the
definition of HGFs proposed by Eurostat and the
OECD (2007) is used. Accordingly, we define HGFs
as firms that achieved an annualised growth rate
of 20% (original formulation) or 10% (as used
for the new Innovation Output Indicator (IOI))
over a consecutive three year time period. The
population of firms is restricted to enterprises
that had at least 10 employees at the beginning
of the time of measurement, in order to capture
only firms that contributed substantially to
employment generation.
Data for both definitions is published by Eurostat
and the OECD. The Entrepreneurship indicator
program dataset in Eurostat's corporate
demography database provides time series
data for HGFs at the country level using the
20 percent growth threshold (HGF (20%)). A
drawback of this dataset is that time series data
are only available for a limited set of countries
(consistent time series data is only available for
CZ, EE, ES, HU, IT, LT, LU, PT, RO and SI).
The second dataset captures high growth
enterprises (growth by 10% or more). Here,
information on the number of HGFs and the
employment in HGFS using the 10 percent growth
threshold is available (HGF (10%)). Data is available
for all EU28 countries except Greece. Numbers and

===== PDF_PAGE 272 =====
270
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
employment in the population of firms with at least
10 employees are not available in this dataset. In
order to construct HGF shares data on the number
of firms with at least 10 employees from the
Structural Business Statistics (Annual enterprise
statistics by size class) has been added
(136). While
information on HGFs is also available for 2013,
the latest information on the share of firms with
at least 10 employees is for 2012. Therefore, the
analysis is limited to the HGF (10%) share in 2012.
(136) Data is available up to the year 2012. If the 2012 value was not
available past values have been used to estimate the number of
firms with at least 10 employees in 2012.
A2. Country groups and industry groupings
The country grouping is based on the distinction
between innovation leaders, innovation
followers, and moderate and modest innovators
in the Innovation Union Scoreboard (European
Innovation Scoreboard). For the CIS data is not
available for all countries. Figure II-7-17 provides
an overview on the data coverage.
Country Country group CIS 2012 CIS 2010 HGF
BE Belgium Innovation Follower ✓
BG Bulgaria Modest Innovator ✓ ✓ ✓
CZ Czech Republic Moderate Innovator (✓) ✓ ✓
DK Denmark Innovation Leader ✓
DE Germany Innovation Leader ✓ (✓) ✓
EE Estonia Innovation Follower ✓ ✓ ✓
IE Ireland Innovation Follower ✓ ✓
EL Greece Moderate Innovator
ES Spain Moderate Innovator ✓ ✓ ✓
FR France Innovation Follower (✓) ✓ ✓
HR Croatia Moderate Innovator ✓ ✓ ✓
IT Italy Moderate Innovator ✓ ✓ ✓
CY Cyprus Innovation Follower ✓ ✓ ✓
LV Latvia Modest Innovator ✓ ✓ ✓
LT Lithuania Moderate Innovator ✓ ✓ ✓
LU Luxembourg Innovation Follower (✓) ✓ ✓
HU Hungary Moderate Innovator ✓ ✓ ✓
MT Malta Moderate Innovator ✓
NL Netherlands Innovation Follower ✓
AT Austria Innovation Follower ✓
PL Poland Moderate Innovator ✓
PT Portugal Moderate Innovator ✓ ✓ ✓
RO Romania Modest Innovator ✓ ✓ ✓
SI Slovenia Innovation Follower ✓ ✓ ✓
SK Slovakia Moderate Innovator ✓ ✓ ✓
FI Finland Innovation Leader ✓
SE Sweden Innovation Leader ✓ ✓
UK United Kingdom Innovation Follower ✓
NO Norway Innovation Follower (✓) ✓ ✓
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
 ▶ Figure II-7-17 Countries classified by group with data coverage in CIS

===== PDF_PAGE 273 =====
271
II-7. High growth firms in Europe
The industry grouping follows the Eurostat
aggregations of technology-intensive
manufacturing industries based on NACE Rev.
2 and the Eurostat aggregations of services
according to knowledge intensive activities.
Details can be found at the Eurostat homepage:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cache/metadata/DE/
htec_esms.htm.
A3. Principal component analysis
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, World Bank. BACI database; WIFO calculations
Notes:
(1)Data are averages for the years 2009 to 2012. (2)Correlation coefficients above 0.8 are highlighted in orange.
 ▶ Figure II-7-18 Principal components capturing important characteristics of country capabilities(1)
Factor loadings Correlation(2)
PC1 PC2 PC3 Unexplained PC1 PC2 PC3
Government effectiveness 0.36 0.13 -0.01 0.08 0.95 -0.49 0.19
Regulatory quality 0.35 0.15 0.09 0.12 0.92 -0.40 0.30
Rule of Law 0.37 0.14 0.01 0.05 0.97 -0.48 0.22
R&D intensity 0.30 0.32 -0.10 0.11 0.91 -0.19 -0.06
Researcher intensity (per
million people) 0.29 0.27 -0.13 0.21 0.86 -0.25 -0.08
Labour force with upper
secondary education -0.21 0.38 0.12 0.27 -0.28 0.85 -0.22
Labour force with tertiary
education 0.26 -0.21 0.22 0.32 0.51 -0.63 0.59
FDI flows as % of GDP 0.03 -0.16 0.61 0.20 -0.01 -0.03 0.88
Manufacturing share
(% of GDP) -0.15 0.44 0.29 0.17 -0.08 0.86 0.01
Employment in industry
(% of total employment) -0.28 0.29 0.12 0.20 -0.50 0.87 -0.23
Trade in services
(% of GDP) 0.14 -0.18 0.58 0.13 0.23 -0.25 0.93
Domestic credit to private
sector by banks (% of GDP) 0.26 -0.33 -0.03 0.24 0.42 -0.85 0.34
Stock market capitalization
(% of GDP) 0.28 -0.03 -0.23 0.36 0.66 -0.61 -0.06
Complexity of Exports 0.24 0.35 0.21 0.19 0.80 0.04 0.27

===== PDF_PAGE 274 =====
272
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
A.4 Most valuable innovation partners for
HGFs and non-HGFs

Other enterprises
within the enterprise
group
Suppliers
Clients or customers
(private sector)
Clients or customers
(public sector)
Competitors or other
enterprises in your
sectors
Consultant and
commercial labs
Universities
Government and
private research
institutes
No answer
Innovation leader and innovation follower countries
High-technology
manufacturing
non-HGF 7% 7% 9% 0% 4% 1% 7% 3% 62%
HGF 3% 6% 11% 2% 1% 4% 7% 4% 63%
Medium-high-
technology
manufacturing
non-HGF 9% 8% 10% 1% 1% 2% 6% 3% 60%
HGF 12% 5% 12% 0% 4% 1% 5% 2% 59%
Medium-low and
low-technology
manufacturing
non-HGF 7% 10% 8% 0% 2% 2% 3% 2% 66%
HGF 5% 10% 6% 1% 1% 1% 3% 3% 70%
Knowledge-
intensive services
non-HGF 9% 6% 10% 1% 2% 2% 4% 1% 65%
HGF 6% 5% 9% 1% 4% 4% 4% 2% 64%
Low knowledge-
intensive services
non-HGF 7% 12% 4% 1% 3% 2% 1% 0% 70%
HGF 5% 11% 3% 3% 3% 2% 2% 0% 71%
 Moderate innovator and modest innovator countries
High-technology
manufacturing
non-HGF 8% 5% 5% 0% 1% 2% 7% 5% 67%
HGF 8% 6% 8% 0% 2% 3% 4% 4% 63%
Medium-high-
technology
manufacturing
non-HGF 10% 5% 4% 0% 2% 3% 5% 5% 67%
HGF 10% 7% 5% 1% 3% 4% 5% 3% 62%
Medium-low and
low-technology
manufacturing
non-HGF 5% 6% 3% 0% 1% 2% 3% 4% 76%
HGF 4% 5% 4% 0% 2% 2% 2% 3% 78%
Knowledge-
intensive services
non-HGF 8% 7% 6% 1% 3% 3% 6% 4% 62%
HGF 10% 8% 7% 1% 4% 2% 6% 4% 58%
Low knowledge-
intensive services
non-HGF 4% 6% 2% 0% 1% 2% 2% 2% 80%
HGF 4% 7% 1% 1% 1% 2% 2% 1% 82%
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat - CIS 2012 micro data accessed at the Eurostat safe centre; WIFO calculations
 ▶ Figure II-7-19 Most valuable innovation partner for innovation activities

===== PDF_PAGE 275 =====
273
II-7. High growth firms in Europe
REFERENCES
Ciriaci, D., Moncada-Paternò-Castello, P. and
Voigt, P. Innovation and Job Creation: A Sustainable
Relation?, IPTS Working Papers on Corporate R&D
and Innovation 01/2013
Clayton et al. (2013). High-Employment-Growth
Firms: Defining and Counting Them. Monthly Labor
Review. Bureau of Labor Statistics. June 2013.
Coad, A. (2009) The growth of firms, Edward Egar:
Cheltenham.r
Coad, A., Daunfeldt, S.-O., Hölzl, W., Johansson,
D. and Nightingale, P., (2014), ‘High-Growth
Firms: introduction to the Special Section’, Ind Corp
Change, 23(1), pp. 91–112.
Colombelli A., Krafft J., Quatraro F., (2014).
Colombelli A., Krafft J., Quatraro F., (2014). High-
growth firms and technological knowledge:
do gazelles follow exploration or exploitation
strategies? Industrial and Corporate Change, 23
(1), 261–291.
Criscuolo, C. Gal, P., Menon, C. (2014) The
Dynamics of Employment Growth: New Evidence
from 18 Countries, OECD Science, Technology and
Industry Policy Paper No 14.
Cuaresma, J. C., Oberhofer, H. and Vincelette, G.
A., (2014), ‘Institutional Barriers and Job Creation
in Central and Eastern Europe’, IZA Journal of
European Labor Studies, 3(1), pp. 3.
Daunfeldt, S. and Halvarsson, D. (2015). Are High-
Growth Firms One-Hit Wonders? Evidence from
Sweden, Small Business Economics, Springer, vol.
44(2), pages 361-383
Daunfeldt, S., Elert, N. and Johansson, D. (2015).
Are High-Growth Firms Overrepresented in High-
Tech Industries?, Working Paper Series 1062,
Research Institute of Industrial Economics.
Daunfeldt, S., Elert, N. and Johansson, D. (2015).
Are High-Growth Firms Overrepresented in High-
Tech Industries? Industrial and Corporate Change
(Oxford University Press), in press
Acs, Z. J., W. Parsons and S. Tracy (2008),
‘High Impact Firms: Gazelles Revisited,’ Office
of Advocacy Working Paper, U.S. Small Business
Administration.
Andrews, D. and F. Cigano (2014) Public Policy and
Resource Allocation: Evidence from Firms in OECD
Countries, Economic Policy, 29(78): 253-296.
Anyadike-Danes, M., K. Bonner, M. Hart and C.
Mason (2009), Measuring Business Growth: High-
Growth Firms and their Contribution to Employment
in the UK, NESTA, London.
Bartelsman, E., Haltiwanger and J., Scarpetta, S.,
(2009), Measuring and Analyzing Cross-country
Differences in Firm Dynamics, in: Dunne, T., Jensen,
J. and Roberts, M. (eds) Producer Dynamics,
University of Chicago Press.
Bartelsman, E., Haltiwanger and J., Scarpetta, S.,
(2013), ‘Cross-Country Differences in Productivity:
The Role of Allocation and Selection’, American
Economic Review, 103(1), pp. 305–334.
Bleda, M., Morrison, K. and Rigby, J. (2013) The
Role and Importance of Gazelles and Other Growth
Firms for Innovation and Competitiveness, in Cox,
D. and Rigby, J. (Eds) Innovation Policy Challenges
for the 21
st Century, pp. 36-63, Routledge, London.
Bravo-Biosca, A. (2010). Growth Dynamics:
Exploring Business Growth and Contraction in
Europe and the US. Research Report. London:
NESTA.
Bravo-Biosca, A., C Criscuolo, and C. Menon
(2013), ‘What Drives the Dynamics of Business
Growth?’ OECD Science, Technology and Industry
Policy Papers, No 1, OECD Publishing. Doi:
10.1787/5k486qtttq46-en
Cincera, M. and Veugelers, R. (2013) Young
Leading Innovators and the EU’s R&D Intensity
Gap, Economics of Innovation and New Technology
22(2), 177-198.

===== PDF_PAGE 276 =====
274
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Decker, R., Haltiwanger, J, Jarmin, R. and Miranda,
J. (2014). The Secular Decline in Business
Dynamism in the U.S. Unpublished Manuscript:
University of Maryland, 2014b.
Dosi, G. (2007). Statistical Regularities in the
Evolution of Industries. A Guide through Some
Evidence and Challenges for the Theory. In F.
Malerba and S. Brusoni (Eds.), Perspectives on
Innovation. Cambridge University Press.
Du, J. and Temori, Y. (2015) High-Growth Firms and
Productivity: Evidence From the United Kingdom,
Small Business Economics, 44: 123–143.
Empirica, Diologic, FHNW (2013a). Policies in
Support of High-Growth Innovative Enterprises,
Deliverable 3-1: Characterisation of innovative
high-growth firms, An Initiative by the
European Commission, DG Research and Innovation.
Empirica, Diologic, FHNW (2013b). Policies in
Support of High-Growth innovative Enterprises,
Deliverable 3-2: Policy Measures to Improve the
Conditions for the Growth of Innovative Enterprises,
An Initiative by the European Commission, DG
Research and Innovation.
European Commission (2010) Europe 2020 Flagship
Initiative Innovation Union, COM(2010) 546.
European Commission (2013) Measuring Innovation
Output in Europe, Towards a New Indicator,
COM(2013)624 and SWD(2013)325.
Eurostat-OECD (2007), Eurostat-OECD Manual
on Business Demography Statistics, Office for
Official Publications of the European Communities,
Luxembourg.
Felipe, J., Kumar, U., Abdon, A., and Bacate,
M., (2012), ‘Product Complexity and Economic
Development’, Structural Change and Economic
Dynamics, 23, pp. 36-68.
Friesenbichler, K., Fritz, O., Hölzl, W., Misch, F.,
Streicher, G. and Yeter, M. (2014) The Efficiency
of EU Public Administration in Helping Firms Grow,
Background Report for the Competitiveness Report
of DG Enterprise and Industry (Framework Contract
ENTR/2009/033), Vienna.
Gaulier, G., Zignago, S., ‘BACI: International Trade
Database at the Product-level.’, CEPII Working
Paper No 2010-23, 2010.
Hausmann, R., Hwang, J., Rodrik, D., ‘What You
Export Matters’, Journal of Economic Growth, 2007,
12(1), pp. 1–25.
Henrekson, M. and Johansson, D., (2010), ‘Gazelles
as Job Creators: A Survey and Interpretation of the
Evidence’, Small Bus Econ, 35(2), pp. 227–244.
Hidalgo, C. A., Hausmann, R., (2009), ‘The Building
Blocks of Economic Complexity’, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States,
106(26), pp. 10570–10575.
Hidalgo, C. A., Klinger, B., Barabasi, L., Hausmann,
R., (2007), ‘The Product Space Conditions the
Development of Nations’, Science, 317, pp. 482–
487.
Higson, C., S. Holly and P. Kattuman, 2002. The
Cross-Sectional Dynamics of the US Business Cycle:
1950- 1999. Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, 26(9-10): 1539-1555.
Higson, C., S. Holly, P. Kattuman and S. Platis,
2004. The Business Cycle, Macroeconomic Shocks
and the Cross-Section: The Growth of UK Quoted
Companies. Economica, 71(282): 299-318.
Hölzl and Janger (2014) Distance to the Frontier
and the Perception of Innovation Barriers Across
European Countries, Research Policy, 43(4), pages
707-725.

===== PDF_PAGE 277 =====
275
II-7. High growth firms in Europe
Hölzl W. and Huber P. (2014) Firm Level Job
Creation Rates Over the Business Cycle, Asian
Economic and Financial Review, 4(6), 837-852.
Hölzl, W. and K. Friesenbichler (2008), Final Sector
Report Gazelles. Europe Innova Sector Report.
Hölzl, W. (2014) Persistence, Survival and Growth:
A Closer Look at 20 Years of Fast-Growing Firms
in Austria. Industrial and Corporate Change, 23(1):
199-231
Hölzl, W. (2015) Sunk Costs and the Speed of
Market Selection, Journal of Evolutionary Economics
25(2), 323-344.
Hölzl, W. Kaniovski, S. and Reinstaller, A. (2015)
The Exposure of Technology and Knowledge Intense
Sectors to the Business Cycle, Bulletin of Applied
Economics, 2015, 2(1), 1-20.
Hölzl, W., (2009), ‘Is the R&D Behaviour of Fast-
growing SMEs Different? Evidence from CIS III Data
for 16 Countries,’ Small Business Economics, 33:
59-75.
Hölzl, W., (2011), ‘Unternehmenswachstum im
internationalen Vergleich’, WIFO-Monatsberichte,
84(8), pp. 557–567.
Hsieh, C.-T. and Klenow, P. J., (2009), ‘Misallocation
and Manufacturing TFP in China and India’, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), pp. 1403–
1448.
Iacus, S. M., G. King, and G. Porro. 2011.
‘Multivariate Matching Methods That Are Monotonic
Imbalance Bounding.’ Journal of the American
Statistical Association 106 (493): 345-361.
Mason, C. and R. Brown, (2014), ‘Entrepreneurial
Ecosystems and Growth oriented entrepreneurship,’
Background paper for the OECD LEED workshop,
The Hague.
Matsujama, K., (2009), ‘Structural Change
in an Interdependent World: A Global View of
Manufacturing Decline’, Journal of the European
Economic Association, 7, pp. 478-486.
OECD (2010), High-growth Enterprises: What
Governments Can Do to Make a Difference, OECD,
Paris.
OECD (2014) Entrepreneurship at a Glance, OECD:
Paris.
Parker S.C., Storey D.J., van Witteloostuijn A., (2010),
‘What Happens to Gazelles? The Importance of
Dynamic Management Strategy,’ Small Business
Economics 35, 203-226.
Reinstaller, A., Hölzl, W., Kutsam, J., and Schmid, C.,
(2012), ‘The Development of Productive Structures
of EU Member States and their International
Competitiveness’, Report prepared under
Specific Contract No SI2-614099 implementing
the Framework Contract ENTR/2009/033.,
European Commission, DG Enterprise and Industry,
Brussels.
Storey D.J., (1994), Understanding the Small
Business Sector, Routledge: UK.
Sutton, J., (1998), Technology and Market
Structure, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Syverson, C. , ‘The Importance of Measuring
Dispersion in Firm-level Outcomes’, IZA World of
Labour, 2014, 53, S.1-10.

===== PDF_PAGE 278 =====
276
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Centre for European Economic Research
8.1 Introduction: background and
policy context
Whereas the theoretical and empirical literature
agrees upon the positive impact of innovation
on productivity growth (see Hall et al. 2010
for a survey), the evidence is less clear for
employment growth. From a theoretical point
of view there are different channels through
which innovation affects employment, some
being labour-increasing and others being labour-
saving. Hence, it is an empirical question whether,
and to what extent, innovation creates jobs or
whether it leads to ‘jobless’ growth or even to
labour displacement. It has been argued that
the strong positive link between value creation
through productivity growth and job creation has
been weakened and has led to jobless growth
since the economic crisis of 2009 (Brynjolfson
and McAfee 2012).
An interesting issue is the policy debate on the
effects of innovation on employment growth
as it relates to the role of skills. On the one
hand, certain skills like engineering skills,
mathematical or management skills, skills
in software development and multimedia or
more general competences in problem-solving,
communication and literacy are needed to
develop inventions and foster innovation and
as a potential result also stimulate employment
growth. The EU acknowledges the important role
of skills in the Agenda for New Skills and Jobs,
another flagship initiative within the Europe
2020 strategy. Skills development forms one of
the four main areas of this Agenda. The EU aims
at increasing the proportion of 30-34 year old
people with a tertiary degree to 40% by 2020
and at promoting vocational training, continuing
training and lifelong learning to equip people with
the skills needed to succeed in the labour market
of today and tomorrow. Against this backdrop,
understanding and measuring the type of skills
needed to foster innovation becomes crucial.
On the other hand, innovation might not only
have a quantitative effect on overall employment
but also a qualitative effect. The use of new
technologies in production, the introduction of
new products or organisational changes might
also change the skill requirements of firms and
thus the skill structure of the labour force (skill-
biased technological change). This might have
strong effects on the job market and requires a
change in the skills supply. Understanding this
phenomenon would also help to better grasp
the ability of countries to generate higher value-
added jobs and potentially reduce the time span
for an efficient reallocation of the work force.
Against this backdrop, this chapter studies the
complex relationship between skills, innovation
and employment growth. It summarises the main
findings from the literature and provides recent
empirical evidence for European countries on the
following three key questions:
1. What is the role of skills for innovation?
2. What is the effect of innovation on overall
employment growth?
3. How does innovation affect skill demands?
8.2 The role of skills for innovation
Skills refer to productive assets of the workforce
that are acquired through learning activities
(Toner 2011). Thus, the key question is: what
makes skills productive for innovation? The
evolutionary theory has argued that innovative
capabilities are a decisive factor in explaining
innovation (Nelson and Winter 1982). Innovative
capabilities can be defined as different degrees
of knowledge accumulation and different
efficiencies in the innovative search process
(Dosi 1988). Hence firms’ innovative capabilities
are primarily determined by human capital,
i.e., by the knowledge, skills, and creativity of
their employees. That is, skills are necessary to
identify and assess the firm-specific knowledge
stock in order to generate new knowledge and
innovation. But skills are also necessary to
identify the value of new external information
8. Innovation, skills and job creation
Bettina Peters

===== PDF_PAGE 279 =====
277
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
from the environment and to assimilate and
apply it to commercial ends in what is called an
absorptive capacity (Cohen and Levinthal 1989).
It has also been argued that the higher stock of
knowledge increases the speed of learning and
developing higher order problem-solving skills
leading to a higher functional flexibility of high-
skilled workers (Toner 2011). A related argument
is that individuals with high levels of education
adopt new technologies and innovations faster
than individuals with lower levels of education
(Kim 2002). This greater functional flexibility
of persons with high educational attainment
in consumption and production should also be
beneficial at the macro level as they are better
able to cope with rapid structural change, e.g.,
induced by technological progress (Toner 2011).
Despite the fact that the importance of skills and
skill formation is acknowledged throughout the
innovation literature, there is surprisingly little
empirical evidence on the role of skills and skill
formation on developing innovation (Tether et al.
2005, Edquist 2005) and on (innovation-induced)
productivity growth. One reason for this gap in
the literature is the difficulty of operationalising
and measuring the complex concept of skills.
One rather simple solution is to proxy skills by using
the formal education level of the workforce like the
share of workers with high levels of educational
attainment (people with a tertiary degree).
Empirical studies have generally confirmed that
a higher share of high-skilled workers increases
the likelihood of introducing new products and
processes
(137) or productivity (Black and Lynch
2001, Bartelsman et al. 2014). As an alternative,
the number or proportion of R&D employees has
been used as an indicator for innovative capabilities
and skills mainly capturing engineering and science
skills. A limitation of this approach is that it neglects
skills of the non-R&D workforce. It furthermore
neglects that R&D is not the only way for an
enterprise to introduce new products and processes,
and using R&D indicators tends to lead to an
underestimation of innovation activities in small
and medium-sized firms as well as service sector
firms (Brouwer and Kleinknecht 1997). In addition,
(137) For instance, Peters (2009) found that a 1% increase in the share
of highly skilled personnel raises the probability of innovating by
about 0.6 percentage points for German firms.
or instead, of formal education, investments in
training have been used as an alternative indicator
for skills (e.g., Corrado et al 2008). Peters (2009)
find a positive impact of training on innovation
measured both in terms of innovation input and
innovation output. In terms of productivity effects,
the evidence is more mixed. While Deardon et al.
(2006) for the UK and Konings and Vanormelingen
(2009) for Belgium find a significant productivity
premium of training, Black and Lynch (1996 and
2001) find no impact of training on productivity
for US firms. However, measures like training
investments do not reveal what types of skills are
addressed with training activities.
Against this backdrop and potential measurement
limitations, the following section 2.1. aims at
summarising recent trends in skills development
across European countries. Section 2.2 relates
different skill measures to innovation indicators
at the country level while section 2.3. shows
novel firm-level evidence for what types of skills
are important for stimulating innovation and
innovation success in European firms.
8.2.1 Skills development in Europe
This section sketches some stylised facts in the
recent development of skill formation in Europe
using the indicator on human resources in science
and technology (HRST) (138). The HRST indicator is
a broader and better concept than the share of
high-skilled workers as it combines education and
occupation tasks. HRST refers to those persons
who fulfil one or the other of the following
conditions: (i) successfully completed education
at the third level
(139) or (ii) employed in a Science
and Technology (S&T) occupation where the above
qualifications are normally required (140).
(138) HRST data are obtained from the EU Labour Force Survey (LFS).
(139) People who have successfully completed a tertiary level education
relates to ISCED97 — levels 5A, 5B and 6 (until 2013) and from
2014 onwards to ISCED2011- levels 5 to 8.
(140) Based on the tasks and duties undertaken in the job, the
International standard classification of occupations (ISCO)
organises jobs into a clearly defined set of groups. S&T
occupations refer to group 2 (professionals like science and
engineering professionals, health professionals, teaching
professionals, business and administration professionals,
information and communications technology professionals,
legal, social and cultural professionals) and 3 (technicians and
associate professionals like science and engineering associate
professionals, health associate professionals, business and
administration associate professionals, legal, social, cultural and
related associate professionals, information and communications
technician). Managers (group 1) are not included.

===== PDF_PAGE 280 =====
278
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Figure II-8-1 shows the overall development of
human resources in science and technology in
Europe for the period 2000-2013. We observe a
clear steady upskilling trend in Europe. In 2013,
37.1% of the European population aged between
25 and 64 had completed a tertiary degree or
worked in an S&T occupation. The Figure shows
that, in 2007, the HRST-proportion among women
had surpassed the one for men but overall there
are only small differences between men and
women. Compared to 2010 when the Innovation
Union and Agenda for New Skills and Jobs were
launched, the HRST proportion demonstrates
a remarkable increase by three percentage
points, but the target of 40% tertiary attainment
of 30-34 year olds has not yet been reached.
Compared to 2000 this proportion has increased
by 10 percentage points, which corresponds to
a growth of 35.4%. In absolute numbers this
translates to an increase from 70.8 million to
102.4 million people (+ 44.6%).
This tremendous upskilling trend is driven by
both components though the formal education
contributed more to this development. The
labour supply of high skilled people measured
by the share of population aged between 25
and 64 having a tertiary degree has grown by
nearly 50% from 18.9% in 2000 to 28.3% in
2013. The increase in S&T occupations where
the above qualifications are normally required
is somewhat smaller with 29.2%. At the same
time, the proportion of persons without a tertiary
degree working in a non-S&T occupation has
declined from 72.6 to 62.9%. Furthermore,
while the development in both indicators is very
similar for the period 2000-2007, we observe an
increasing gap from 2008 onwards. While the
share of the population with a tertiary degree
is still steadily rising, the growth in the S&T
occupation has slowed down from 8.9% in the
period 2008-2011 to 1.2% from 2011-2013.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes:
(1)Total population with tertiary degree and / or employed in an S&T occupation where these qualifications are normally
required (age: 25-64 years). (2)EU27: 2000-2007; EU28: 2008-2013.
 ▶ Figure II-8-1 Human resources in science and technology (HRST)(1) in the EU(2) as % of total population
 aged 25-64, 2000-2013
T o ta l
Ma l e
F e m a l e
T e r ti a r y
S& T
T e r ti a r y a n d S& T
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
2 0 0 0 2 0 0 1 2 0 0 2 2 0 0 3 2 0 0 4 2 0 0 5 2 0 0 6 2 0 0 7 2 0 0 8 2 0 0 9 2 0 1 0 2 0 1 1 2 0 1 2 2 0 1 3
% s h a r e o f H R ST i n to ta l p o p u l a ti o n a g e d 2 5-6 4
F i g u r e I I-8-1 H u m a n r e s o u r c e s i n s c i e n c e a n d te c h n o l o g y (H R ST )( 1 )i n th e EU( 2 ) a s % o f to ta l p o p u l a ti o n a g e d 2 5-6 4 , 2 0 0 0-2 0 1 3
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes: (1)Total population with tertiary degree and / or employed in an S&T occupation where these qualifications are normally
required (age: 25-64 years). (2)EU27: 2000-2007; EU28: 2008-2013.

===== PDF_PAGE 281 =====
279
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
European countries exhibit a relatively large
heterogeneity with respect to human resources in
science and technology (HRST) ranging in 2013
from 53.2% in Luxemburg and 49.9% in Sweden
to 25.9% in Portugal and 19.8% in Romania
(Figure II-8-2). This country heterogeneity is partly
driven by differences in education systems but also
by industry differences. Not surprisingly, innovation
leaders like Sweden, Finland and Denmark are
among the countries that demonstrate the
highest share of human resources in science
and technology. An exception is Germany where
the education system is characterised by a well-
established dual system combining general
transferable skills and structured learning on
the job supportive for providing technical skills.
The increasing upskilling trend, however, is
observed in all European countries, except for
Lithuania (-2.9 pp). In particular, countries like
Luxemburg (+ 24 pp), Ireland (+ 18.8 pp), the
UK (+ 16.1 pp), Cyprus (+ 13.6 pp) and France
(+ 12.7 pp) have substantially raised their human
resources in science and technology, in particular
the degree of people having a tertiary degree.
Differences in the speed to upskill the workforce
have furthermore reduced the heterogeneity
with respect to human resources in science and
technology across Europe
(141).
(141) Heterogeneity is measured by the coefficient of variation which
has declined from 0.289 in 2000 to 0.238 in 2013.
Manufacturing has benefitted more from the
substantial skill increase in the workforce than
services (Figure II-8-3). In manufacturing, the
proportion of total persons employed with a
tertiary degree and/or employed in an S&T
occupation where the above qualifications are
normally required has increased from 29.6%
in 2008 to 34.1% in 2013 (+ 4.5 pp) which
corresponds to a growth rate of 15.2%. Services
which are characterised by a much higher input
level of human resources in science and technology
in general have also intensified their skill input
but to a lesser extent (from 49.1% to 52.9%,
i.e., growth rate: 7.7%). Despite high starting
levels, we observe the strongest upskilling trend
in Europe in skill-intensive sectors like high-tech
manufacturing and knowledge-intensive services.
In 2013, nearly four out of five employees in skill-
intensive sectors have a tertiary degree or work in
S&T occupations (+ 5.5 pp).
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes:
(1)Total population with tertiary degree and / or employed in an S&T occupation where these qualifications are normally
required (age: 25-64 years). (2)HR: 2002-2013. (3)LT: The share for Lithuania decreased from 43.2% in 2000 to 40.3% in 2013.
 ▶ Figure II-8-2 Human resources in science and technology (HRST)(1) by country as % of total population
 aged 25-64, 2000-2013
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
% s h a r e o f H R ST i n to ta l p o p u l a ti o n a g e d 2 5-6 4
F i g u r e I I-8-2 H u m a n r e s o u r c e s i n s c i e n c e a n d te c h n o l o g y (H R ST )( 1 )b y c o u n tr y a s % o f to ta l p o p u l a ti o n a g e d 2 5-6 4 , 2 0 0 0-2 0 1 3
I n c r e a s e 2 0 0 0-2 0 1 3 (2 )
2 0 0 0
EU
Finland
Luxembourg
United Kingdom
Netherlands
France Ireland Austria Sweden Germany Belgium Denmark Estonia Portugal
Malta Cyprus Slovenia Latvia
Czech Republic
Greece
Lithuania
(3)
Slovakia Poland Italy
Hungary Croatia Spain
Romania Bulgaria
Switzerland
Norway Iceland

 Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes: (1)Total population with a tertiary degree and / or employed in an S&T occupation where these qualifications are normally
required (age: 25-64 years). (2)HR: 2002-2013. (3)LT: The share for Lithuania decreased from 43.2% in 2000 to 40.3% in 2013.

===== PDF_PAGE 282 =====
280
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
European countries also exhibit a relatively large
heterogeneity with respect to the education
fields in which persons obtain their tertiary
degree (Figure II-8-4). Education fields, which are
likely to be particularly important for innovation,
are science, mathematics and computing as
well as engineering, manufacturing including
processing and construction like architecture
and building
(142). The UK has by far the largest
proportion of tertiary educated persons in science,
mathematics and computing (14.4%), followed
by a large group of countries (Luxembourg, Spain,
France, Italy, Poland, Malta, Island, Czech Republic
(142) The classification is based on the ISCED1997 classification. The
residual group contains the following fields: education; humanities
and arts; social sciences, business and law; health and social
services; services; agriculture and general programmes (EF0-EF3,
EF6-EF8).
and Cyprus) exhibiting a share between 10
and 9%. In contrast, countries like Germany,
Austria, Finland, Estonia, Romania, Lithuania
and the Czech Republic have a much stronger
education profile in engineering, manufacturing
and construction, all countries demonstrating a
corresponding share of 20% and above. Taking
both indicators together, Germany, Romania,
Austria, and Finland are leading countries in the
skill endowment of tertiary graduates as regards
science, mathematics and computing as well as
engineering, manufacturing and construction.
T o ta l
H T a n d K I S
T o ta l Ma n u fa c tu r i n g
H T a n d MH T
T o ta l Se r v i c e s
K I S
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
2 0 0 8 2 0 0 9 2 0 1 0 2 0 1 1 2 0 1 2 2 0 1 3
% of t ot a l e m p l oy m e n t
F i g u r e I I-8-3 H u m a n r e s o u r c e s i n s c i e n c e a n d te c h n o l o g y (H R ST ) i n th e EU -e m p l o y m e n t r a te s( 1 )b y s e c to r( 2 ), 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 3
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes: (1)Percentage of total employed persons with a tertiary degree and/or employed in and S&T occupation where these
qualifications are normally required (age: 25-64 years). (2)HT: High-technology manufacturing; MHT: Medium-high-technology
manufacturing; KIS: Knowledge-intensive services.
 ▶ Figure II-8-3 Human resources in science and technology (HRST) in the EU - employment rates(1) by sector(2),
 2008-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes:
(1)Percentage of total employed persons with a tertiary degree and/or employed in an S&T occupation where these
qualifications are normally required (age: 25-64 years). (2)HT: High-technology manufacturing; MHT: Medium-high-technology
manufacturing; KIS: Knowledge-intensive services.

===== PDF_PAGE 283 =====
281
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
However, the fact that tertiary attainment levels
strongly differ between countries has to be taken
into account (see Figure II-8-5). Countries with
high tertiary graduation and attainment levels
hence perform relatively better at given shares
of graduates in maths, science and technology.
As regards the new graduates in science,
mathematics and computing or in engineering,
manufacturing and construction per 1 000
population aged 25-34 the UK, Ireland and
France are the leading EU countries. Romania,
which performs well in the share of such
graduates in the adult population, performs only
at an average level as regards this indicator.
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
%
F i g u r e I I-8-4 H u m a n r e s o u r c e s i n s c i e n c e a n d te c h n o l o g y (H R ST )( 1 )w i th a te r ti a r y d e g r e e i n s c i e n c e , m a th e m a ti c s
a n d c o m p u ti n g o r i n e n g i n e e r i n g , m a n u fa c tu r i n g a n d c o n s tr u c ti o n a s % o f to ta l p e r s o n s (a g e d 2 5-6 4 )
w i th a te r ti a r y d e g r e e , 2 0 1 3( 2 )
Sc i e n c e , m a th e m a ti c s a n d c o m p u ti n g En g i n e e r i n g , m a n u fa c tu r i n g , a n d c o n s tr u c ti o n
Finland
Luxembourg
United Kingdom
Netherlands
France Ireland Austria Sweden Germany Belgium Denmark Estonia Portugal
Malta Turkey CyprusSlovenia Latvia
Czech Republic
Greece Lithuania Slovakia Poland Italy
Hungary Croatia Spain
Romania Bulgaria
Switzerland
Norway Iceland
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes: (1)Total population with a tertiary degree and/or employed in an S&T occupation where these qualifications are normally
required. (2)UK: 2010.
 ▶ Figure II-8-4 Human resources in science and technology (HRST)(1) with a tertiary degree in science,
 mathematics and computing or in engineering, manufacturing and construction as % of total
 persons (aged 25-64) with a tertiary degree, 2013(2)
 ▶ Figure II-8-5 Graduates in science, mathematics and computing per thousand population aged 25-34, 2010(1)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes:
(1)Total population with a tertiary degree and/or employed in an S&T occupation where these qualifications are normally
required. (2)UK: 2010.
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Note:
(1)FR: 2009; LU: 2011.
0
2
4
6
8
1 0
1 2
F i g u r e I I-8-5 G r a d u a t e s i n s c i e n c e , m a t h e m a t i c s a n d c o m p u t i n g p e r t h o u s a n d p o p u l a t i o n a g e d 2 5-3 4 , 2 0 1 0( 1 )
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, OECD
Note: (1)FR: 2009; LU: 2011.
EU
Finland
Luxembourg
United Kingdom
Netherlands
France Ireland IsraelAustria Japan
South KoreaUnited States
Sweden Germany Belgium Denmark Estonia Portugal
Malta Cyprus Slovenia Latvia
Czech Republic
Greece LithuaniaSlovakia Poland Italy
Hungary Croatia Spain
Romania Bulgaria
Switzerland
Norway TurkeyIceland

===== PDF_PAGE 284 =====
282
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The growth in the overall number and proportion
of persons with a tertiary degree over time has
also led to shifts in the distribution of education
fields over time (Figure II-8-6). Except for the
Baltic countries and Portugal, we observe in all
countries an increase in the absolute number
of persons with a tertiary degree in these two
areas between 2008 and 2013. However, for the
majority of countries this nevertheless comes
along with a decline in the relative proportion of
persons with a degree in science and engineering,
indicating that other education fields have
benefitted more from the increased upskilling
efforts than these two areas. The strongest
fall is observed for Portugal and Romania with
more than eight percentage points. However, in
both countries this fall is mitigated by an overall
increase in the number of tertiary graduates.
Only Finland, Sweden, the Netherlands, Turkey,
Italy and Greece have substantially expanded the
proportion of persons with a degree in science
and engineering.
An important question is whether Europe
has invested in the right skills or whether it
is confronted with labour shortages and skill
mismatch in specific areas. A recent study by
Reymen et al. (2015) has investigated labour
market shortages in the European Union. Their
key finding is that the EU28 as a whole does
not currently suffer from quantitative labour
shortages. In most European countries (except
for AT, BE, DE and the UK) the labour market
tightness, i.e., the ratio of open vacancies to job
seekers, has fallen compared to 2008, making it
less likely for job seekers to find a new job. An
increasing number of employees find it difficult
to get a position that is adequate for their
qualification level, implying that the matching
 ▶ Figure II-8-6 Human resources in science and technology (HRST)(1) with a tertiary degree in science,
 mathematics and computing or in engineering, manufacturing and construction as % of total
 persons (aged 25-64) with a tertiary degree - change 2008-2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes:
(1)Total population with tertiary degree and/or employed in an S&T occupation where these qualifications are normally
required. (2)UK: 2008-2010.
-8 .8 -8 .1
-6 .3
-6 .3
-5 .1
-5 .0
-4 .3
-4 .1
-2 .8
-2 .5
-2 .5
-2 .2
-2 .1
-1 .6
-1 .5
-1 .3
-1 .2
-0 .8
-0 .7
-0 .7
-0 .7
-0 .4
-0 .4
0 .0
0 .1
0 .2
0 .9
0 .9
1 .0
1 .4
1 .6
2 .7
-1 0 .0 -8 .0 -6 .0 -4 .0 -2 .0 0 .0 2 .0 4 .0
Po r tu g a l
R o m a n i a
Sw i tze r l a n d
L i th u a n i a
L a tv i a
Es to n i a
Sl o v a k i a
L u x e m b o u r g
A u s tr i a
I r e l a n d
Po l a n d
B e l g i u m
C ze c h R e p u b l i c
G e r m a n y
B u l g a r i a
H u n g a r y
Sp a i n
C y p r u s
C r o a ti a
Ma l ta
Sl o v e n i a
D e n m a r k
F r a n c e
I c e l a n d
N o r w a y
U n i te d K i n g d o m
I ta l y
G r e e c e
T u r k e y
N e th e r l a n d s
Sw e d e n
F i n l a n d
C h a n g e i n p e r c e n ta g e p o i n ts b e tw e e n 2 0 0 8 a n d 2 0 1 3 ( 2 )
F i g u r e I I-8-6 H u m a n r e s o u r c e s i n s c i e n c e a n d te c h n o l o g y (H R ST )( 1 )w i th a te r ti a r y d e g r e e i n s c i e n c e , m a th e m a ti c s
a n d c o m p u ti n g o r i n e n g i n e e r i n g , m a n u fa c tu r i n g a n d c o n s tr u c ti o n a s % o f to ta l p e r s o n s (a g e d 2 5-6 4 ) w i th a te r ti a r y
d e g r e e -c h a n g e 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 3
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Notes: (1)Total population with tertiary degree and/or employed in an S&T occupation where these qualifications are normally
required. (2)UK: 2008-2010.

===== PDF_PAGE 285 =====
283
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
process between open positions and job seekers
has become less efficient. They conclude that
there is currently a relative shortage of medium-
level qualifications and a relative over-supply of
employees with low levels of qualifications.
Although there is no evidence for European-wide
skill shortages in general, specific occupations
can be identified as bottleneck occupations
for which employers have larger problems in
recruiting persons. In a recent report by the
European Commission (2014), the following Top
10 occupational groups facing bottlenecks at
the EU level have been identified (Figure II-8-7).
In particular, European countries suffer from
a lack of supply in regard to metal, machinery
and related trade workers as well as science
and engineering professionals, ICT and health
professionals. The report also reveals that skill
mismatch is the main reason for the bottleneck
occupations. Given that employers have
difficulties in filling vacant jobs, far more than
90% indicate that the applicants lack relevant
skills in the case of science and engineering
and ICT professionals. With about 78%, this
proportion is somewhat lower as regards metal,
machinery and trade related workers. Only about
50% of employers indicate a lack of skills as the
main reason for bottlenecks as regards health
professionals. Here, working conditions and
preferences of applicants play an almost equally
important role and restrain job seekers from
accepting job offers.
To summarise, Europe has experienced a strong
upskilling trend in recent years, mainly coming from
a growing proportion of persons having completed
a tertiary education. This trend is observed across
nearly all the countries and across all sectors.
However, this upskilling trend is not unified across
education fields. In most of the countries, we
observe a rise in the absolute number of persons
with a tertiary degree in science and engineering;
however, there has been a decline in the relative
importance. To what extent Europe might benefit
from these changes in skills development in terms
of more and better future innovations will be
explored in the next two sections.
 ▶ Figure II-8-7 Top 10 occupational groups facing bottlenecks at EU level(1)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: European Commission (2014)
Note:
(1)Data collection varies across countries and is based on surveys and / or expert interviews.
2 3
2 2
2 0
2 1
1 8
2 2
1 4
1 3
1 6
1 2
5 3
4 8
4 7
4 5
4 1
3 2
2 9
1 4
2 1
2 0
0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0
Me ta l , m a c h i n e r y a n d r e l a te d tr a d e w o r k e r s
Sc i e n c e a n d e n g i n e e r i n g p r o fe s s i o n a l s
I C T p r o fe s s i o n a l s
H e a l th p r o fe s s i o n a l s
B u i l d i n g a n d r e l a te d tr a d e w o r k e r s , e x c l u d i n g e l e c tr i c i a n s
Pe r s o n a l s e r v i c e w o r k e r s
Sc i e n c e a n d e n g i n e e r i n g a s s o c i a te p r o fe s s i o n a l s
Sa l e s w o r k e r s
D r i v e r s a n d m o b i l e p l a n t o p e r a to r s
F o o d p r o c e s s i n g , w o o d w o r k i n g , g a r m e n t a n d o th e r
F i g u r e I I-8-7 T o p 1 0 o c c u p a ti o n a l g r o u p s fa c i n g b o ttl e n e c k s a t EU l e v e l( 1 )
N u m b e r o f c o u n tr i e s r e p o r ti n g s h o r ta g e s N u m b e r o f b o ttl e n e c k v a c a n c i e s r e p o r te d
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: European Commission (2014).
Note: (1)Data collection varies across countries and is based on surveys and / or expert interviews.

===== PDF_PAGE 286 =====
284
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
8.2.2 Skills and innovation at the country
level
In order to shed light on the relationship between
skills and innovation at the country level, three
different sets of skills indicators are used here:
• Generic skills in numeracy, literacy and
problem-solving
• Field-specific skills
• Skills employed by enterprises
Though these different skill measures are
interrelated, they capture different aspects of
skills and as such they have different advantages
and limitations.
8.2.2.1 Generic skills and innovation
The first set of indicators measures generic
numeracy, literacy and problem-solving skills
within the population. Skills in numeracy, literacy
and problem-solving are measured on a country
level by separate indices derived from the OECD
PIAAC 2012 survey. The survey assesses the
proficiency of adults in the age group 16 — 65
in literacy, numeracy and problem solving in
technology-rich environments (OECD, 2015, p. 1).
It collects comprehensive information on reading-
and numeracy-related activities of respondents,
the use of information and communication
technologies at work and in everyday life, and on
a range of generic skills, such as collaborating
with others and organising one’s time, required
of individuals in their work (OECD, 2015, p.1).
Based on the information, indicators depicting
the proficiency in literacy, numeracy and problem
solving were compiled by the OECD. In addition, a
general skills index was computed by taking the
average over the three separate PIAAC indices.
The main advantage of these four indicators is
that they measure generic skills in the population
which might be as important for developing
innovations as field-specific knowledge.
Furthermore, this indicator is comparable across
different OECD countries, among others the US,
Japan and South Korea, though is not available
for all European countries
(143). Innovation is
measured by the number of patent applications
per 100 000 population
(144).
Figure II-8-8 depicts three striking results:
• In general, skills in numeracy and literacy
are more dispersed across countries than
problem-solving skills.
• All three generic skill measures are positively
correlated to the number of patent applications.
• This relationship is particularly strong
between problem-solving skills and
innovation and weakest for numeracy skills
and innovation.
• The performance of Japan, Sweden and
Finland is outstanding. All three countries
show the highest values in all three types
of generic skills and innovation. These three
countries are followed by Germany, Denmark,
the Netherlands and South Korea which
perform similarly in terms of generic skills
and patent applications.
Unfortunately, information on generic skills in
the population is only available for the 2012
cross-section and hence developments over time
cannot be assessed yet.
(143) PIIAC surveyed approximately 166 000 adults in 24 countries.
(144) Data on population was downloaded from https://stats.oecd.org/
Index.aspx?DataSetCode=POP_FIVE_HIST on May 18th 2015. Data
on patent applications was downloaded from http://stats.oecd.org/
Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB on May 18
th 2015.

===== PDF_PAGE 287 =====
285
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
8.2.2.2 Field-specific skills and innovation
In contrast to generic skills, Figure II-8-9
assesses the role of field-specific knowledge
for innovation. The focus is on tertiary-educated
persons in science, mathematics and computing
–education fields likely to be particularly
important for innovation. Since both figures
only concentrate on European countries, we use
the proportion of innovative firms instead of
patent applications as a measure for innovation.
A virtue of this approach is that the innovation
indicator measures innovations along different
dimensions, i.e., both technological (product and
process) innovations as well as non-technological
(organisational and marketing) innovations are
included
(145). Both skill indicators relate to the
year 2010 whereas the proportion of innovative
firms refers to the period 2010-2012 in order to
mitigate endogeneity problems.
(145) Patents have been criticized as being a poor yardstick for
innovative outcome (Scherer 1965, Griliches 1990) as not all
inventions are patented and not all patented inventions lead to
marketable innovations. Additionally, patents not only represent
the outcome of the innovation process but also serve as an
instrument to protect the returns of innovation and hence are
subject to strategic considerations of firms. Nevertheless, patents
have been used in section 2.2.1 since no comparable Figure on the
proportion of innovative firms is available for the US.
A T
C Z
D K
EE
F I
F R
D E
I EI T
J P
N L
N O
PL
K R
SK
ES
SE
U S
U K
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
2 4 0 2 5 0 2 6 0 2 7 0 2 8 0 2 9 0 3 0 0
Pa te n t a p p l i c a ti o n s p e r 1 0 0 0 0 0 p o p .
I n d e x v a l u e
L i te r a c y i n d e x
A T
C Z
D K
EE
F I
F R
D E
I EI T
J P
N L
N O
PL
K R
SKES
SE
U S
U K
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
2 4 0 2 5 0 2 6 0 2 7 0 2 8 0 2 9 0 3 0 0
Pa te n t a p p l i c a ti o n s p e r 1 0 0 0 0 0 p o p .
I n d e x v a l u e
N u m e r a c y i n d e x
A T
C Z
D K
EE
F I
D E
I E
J P
N L
N O
PL
K R
SK
SE
U S
U K
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
2 4 0 2 5 0 2 6 0 2 7 0 2 8 0 2 9 0 3 0 0
Pa te n t a p p l i c a ti o n s p e r 1 0 0 0 0 0 p o p .
I n d e x v a l u e
Pr o b l e m s o l v i n g i n d e x
A T
UK
C Z
D K
EE
F I
F R
D E
I EI T
J P
N L
N O
PL
K R
SK
ES
SE
U S
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
2 4 0 2 5 0 2 6 0 2 7 0 2 8 0 2 9 0 3 0 0
Pa te n t a p p l i c a ti o n s p e r 1 0 0 0 0 0 p o p .
I n d e x v a l u e
Sk i l l s i n d e x
Figure II-8-8 Relationship between generic skills and patent applications(1), 2012
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD: PIAAC 2012 and patent database; own calculation.
Note: (1)Patent applications filed under the PCT with priority year 2012 per 100000 inhabitants.
 ▶ Figure II-8-8 Relationship between generic skills and patent applications(1), 2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: OECD: PIAAC 2012 and patent database; own calculation
Note:
(1)Patent applications filed under the PCT with priority year 2012 per 100 000 inhabitants.

===== PDF_PAGE 288 =====
286
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Figure II-8-9 confirms that there is a positive,
though not very strong, relationship between
countries’ endowment with human capital in
science, mathematics and computing and the
introduction of innovations. This relationship,
however, turns out to be rather weak at the
country level. Surprisingly, all innovation
leaders according to the Innovation Union
Scoreboard 2015 (Finland, Sweden, Denmark
and Germany) show high scores on innovation
but disproportionate low shares in persons
with a tertiary degree in science, mathematics
and computing. No clear picture emerges for
innovation follower countries. While the UK,
France, Luxemburg and Belgium have a very
strong profile in sciences that exceeds innovation
leader countries by far, Austria, Slovenia and the
Netherlands are comparable to the innovation
leaders in terms of the proportion of tertiary-
educated persons in science but turn out to be
less innovative.
8.2.2.3 Skills usage and innovation
Important new insights into the relative
importance of different types of skills for
innovation can furthermore be gauged from the
Community Innovation Surveys in 2010 (CIS
2010). In addition to various innovation indicators,
the CIS 2010 included a special question on
creativity and skills. All — and not only innovative
— firms were asked whether they have employed
in-house or contracted from external sources
skills related to eight different areas or whether
these skills were not relevant. These eight skill
indicators can be broadly classified into five skill
groups: First, technical and scientific skills which
capture skills in engineering and applied sciences
as well as in mathematics, statistics and database
management; second, design skills which refer
to activities like designing objects and services
but which also include graphical arts, layout,
advertising; third, multimedia skills which combine
skills in multimedia and web design, fourth, skills
in software development and, finally, market-
related skills like market research. Figure II-8-10
provides an overview on the skills indicators in CIS.
 ▶ Figure II-8-9 Persons with a tertiary degree in science, mathematics, and computing as % of total persons
 (aged 25-64) with a tertiary degree, 2010 versus share of innovative firms in total firms (%)(1),
 2010-2012
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (HRST and CIS 2012)
Note: (1)Red: innovation leaders; Yellow: innovation followers; Blue: moderate innovators; Green: modest innovators; Grey: no
classification in Innovation Union Scoreboard.
EU
B E
B G
C Z
D K
D E
EE
I E
EL
ES
F R
H R
I T
C Y
L V
L T
L U
H U
MT
N L A T
PL
PT
R O
SI
SK
F I
SE
U K
N O T R
y = 0.0283x + 6.8917
R² = 0.0183
4
6
8
1 0
1 2
1 4
1 6
2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 7
0
Sc i e n c e , m a th e m a ti c s , a n d c o m p u ti n g - % s h a r e
o f to ta l te r i ta r y d e g r e e s , 2 0 1 0
I n n o v a to r s , 2 0 1 0-2 0 1 2 (% )
F i g u r e I I-8-9 Pe r s o n s w i th a te r ti a r y d e g r e e i n s c i e n c e , m a th e m a ti c s , a n d c o m p u ti n g a s % o f to ta l p e r s o n s (a g e d 2 5-6 4 )
w i th a te r ti a r y d e g r e e , 2 0 1 0 v e r s u s s h a r e o f i n n o v a ti v e ﬁr m s i n to ta l ﬁr m s (% )( 1 ), 2 0 1 0-2 0 1 2
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (HRST and CIS 2012)
Note: (1)Red: innovation leaders; Yellow: innovation followers; Blue: moderate innovators; Green: modest innovators;
Grey: no classification in Innovation Union Scoreboard.

===== PDF_PAGE 289 =====
287
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
The merit of CIS skill indicators is that they
allow for a much more fine-grained analysis of
the relationship between skills and innovation
than the education-related skills data in the
previous section. In particular, more detailed
information is available for different types of
modern IT and computing skills like multimedia,
web design, database management or software
development which will be particularly important
for exploiting the potential of big data and
industry 4.0 applications. One limitation of the
CIS data is that the question on skills was not
mandatory and is only available for a subset of
20 European countries (plus Norway, Iceland,
Serbia and Turkey) in particular, countries like
Germany, the UK, Finland and the Netherlands
have not collected this type of information.
Figure II-8-11 depicts the proportion of
enterprises that have used technical and
scientific skills separately for innovators and
non-innovators in each country. Most strikingly,
we find that in all observed European countries
innovators employed workers having skills
in engineering and applied sciences as well
as in mathematics, statistics and database
management more often than non-innovators.
This confirms the positive finding from the last
subsection on science and mathematics but
also highlight a positive relationship between
engineering and innovation. Furthermore, the
Figure reveals no clear pattern with respect to
the relative importance of both types of skills
across European countries. Whereas innovative
enterprises in France, Ireland, Romania, Slovenia,
Bulgaria, Estonia (and Norway and Turkey) have
a stronger focus on engineering and applied
sciences, mathematics, statistics and database
management are more often employed in the
other countries.
 ▶ Figure II-8-10 Classification of skill usage in the Community Innovation Survey, 2010 (CIS 2010)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
Skill group Skill indicators
Technical and scientific skills Engineering and applied sciences
Mathematics, statistics and database management
Design skills Design of objects and services
Graphical arts, layout, advertising
Multimedia skills Multimedia
Web design
Software skills Software development
Market skills Market research

===== PDF_PAGE 290 =====
288
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Relating the proportion of innovators that have
employed engineers and applied scientists to
the innovation performance rating of the country
(4: innovation leader, 3: innovation follower,
2: moderate innovator, 1: modest innovator) we
furthermore corroborate a positive correlation of
about 0.220 (Figure II-8-16). That is, in countries
with a higher innovation performance ranking
firms have used technical and scientific skills more
frequently (and probably also more efficiently).
This correlation is also positive but smaller at
about 0.181 between the usage of mathematics,
statistics and database management and a
country’s innovation performance.
Similarly, Figure II-8-12 highlights a positive
relationship between the usage of design skills
and innovation. In all countries innovators have
employed workers having skills in designing
objects and in graphical arts and layout more
frequently than non-innovators. Furthermore,
Figure II-8-17 reveals that, in all countries
(except Turkey), skills in graphical arts, layout and
advertising, i.e., skills which are mainly important
for the commercialisation of (new) products, are
more often employed by innovators than skills
needed for designing (new) products. But both
types of design skills are more frequently used
by innovators than technical and scientific skills.
One might think that this is mainly driven by
services; however, the same pattern emerges for
manufacturing firms.
In addition, the figures reveal a strong correlation
between the country’s innovation performance
index and its design-related skill usage. With
correlation coefficients of about 0.484 (design of
objects and services) and 0.446 (graphical arts,
layout and advertising), the correlations between
design and innovation performance index turn
out to be more than twice as large as between
the usage of technical and scientific skills and
the innovation performance index.
 ▶ Figure II-8-11 % shares of innovators and of non-innovators making use of technical and scientific skills(1),
 2008-2010
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
Notes:
(1)Blue triangle: % shares of innovators and non-innovators that have used skills in engineering and applied sciences in the
period 2008-2010. (2)Red square: % shares of innovators and non-innovators that have used skills in mathematics, statistics and
database management in the period 2008-2010.
B E
B GC Z
EE
I E
F R
H R
I T
C Y
L T
H U
MT
A T
PL
PT
R O
SI
SK
SE
I S
N O
R S
T R
B E
B G
C Z
EE
I E
F R
H R
I T
C Y
L T
H U
MT
A T
PL
PT
R O
SI
SK
SE
I SN OR S
T R
1 5
2 5
3 5
4 5
5 5
6 5
5 1 0 1 5 2 0 2 5 3 0 3 5 4 0
I n n o v a to r s (% )
N o n-i n n o v a to r s (% )
F i g u r e I I-8-1 1 % s h a r e s o f i n n o v a to r s a n d o f n o n-i n n o v a to r s m a k i n g u s e o f te c h n i c a l a n d s c i e n ti ﬁc s k i l l s( 1 ), 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 0
En g i n e e r i n g / A p p l i e d s c i e n c e s Ma th e m a ti c s / Sta ti s ti c s / D a ta b a s e m a n a g e m e n t
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
Notes: (1)Blue triangle: % shares of innovators and non-innovators that have used multimedia skills in the period 2008-2010. (2) Red square:
% shares of innovators and non-innovators that have employed web design skills in the period 2008-2010.

===== PDF_PAGE 291 =====
289
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
As already mentioned, CIS data allow for a
fine-grained analysis of different modern
IT skills like multimedia, web design and
software development as well. Figure II-8-13
and Figure II-8-14 take a detailed look on the
usage of multimedia, web design and software
development by innovators and non-innovators.
Like for the other skills, we find innovators
to employ all three types of skills much more
frequently than non-innovators.
Furthermore, Figure II-8-17 depicts that web
design is the most often used skill type among
innovators in 10 out of the 23 countries, e.g., in
Sweden, France, Ireland and Czech Republic. In
seven countries like in Italy, Belgium, Estonia,
Slovenia and Cyprus, innovative enterprises put
the strongest focus on software development.
Compared to web design and software
development, firms have employed workers with
multimedia skills less frequently. However, at
the country level we find the strongest positive
correlation between multimedia skill usage and
the innovation performance ranking (0.639). That
is, countries with a high proportion of multimedia-
using firms have a disproportionately high
innovation performance ranking. The correlation
is almost equally high between the usage of web
design and innovation performance (0.631). The
correlation between the proportion of enterprises
developing software and the innovation
performance ranking is somewhat lower (0.403)
and thus similar to design.
 ▶ Figure II-8-12 % shares of innovators and of non-innovators making use of design skills(1), 2008-2010
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
Notes:
(1)Blue triangle: % shares of innovators and non-innovators that have used skills related to the design of objects and
services in the period 2008-2010. (2)Red square: % shares of innovators and non-innovators that have used graphical arts, layout
and advertising skills in the period 2008-2010.
B E
B G
C Z
EE
I E
F R
H R
I T
C Y
L T
H U
MT
A T
PL
PT
R O
SI
SKSE
I S
N O
R S
T R
B E
B G
C Z
EE
I E
F R
H R I T
C Y
L T
H U
MT
A T
PL
PT
R O SI
SK
SE
I S
N O
R S
T R
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
5 1 0 1 5 2 0 2 5 3 0 3 5 4 0 4 5 5 0
I n n o v a to r s (% )
N o n-i n n o v a to r s (% )
F i g u r e I I-8-1 2 % s h a r e s o f i n n o v a to r s a n d o f n o n-i n n o v a to r s m a k i n g u s e o f d e s i g n s k i l l s( 1 ), 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 0
D e s i g n o f o b j e c ts a n d s e r v i c e s G r a p h i c a l a r ts , L a y o u t, A d v e r ti s i n g
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
Notes: (1)Blue triangle: % shares of innovators and non-innovators that have used skills related to the design of objects and services in the period
2008-2010. (2)Red square: % shares of innovators and non-innovators that have used graphical arts, layout and advertising skills in the period 2008-2010.

===== PDF_PAGE 292 =====
290
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Finally, Figure II-8-15 examines the importance
of skills related to market research. These skills
refer, e.g., to the ability of developing a strategic
vision of marketing as a way to tackle business
problems, the mastery of marketing knowledge
and tools to business opportunities, the ability
to plan, design and implement strategies or the
ability to collect, organise, and interpret data at
a regional, national, or global scale to determine
potential sales of a product, service, or retail
facilities. The results clearly demonstrate that
innovative enterprises have a stronger focus on
the use of market research related skills than
non-innovative firms. In most of the countries,
market-related skills are more often used by
enterprises than technical and scientific skills.
However, they are less frequently employed
than skills related to multimedia, web design
or software development. Only in two of the
moderate innovator countries, Bulgaria and
Romania, do market-related skills represent the
dominant skill mode.
 ▶ Figure II-8-13 % shares of innovators and of non-innovators making use of multimedia skills(1), 2008-2010
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
Notes: (1)Blue triangle: % shares of innovators and non-innovators that have used multimedia skills in the period 2008-2010.
(2)Red square: % shares of innovators and non-innovators that have employed web design skills in the period 2008-2010.
B E
B G
C Z
EE
I E
F R
H R
I T
C Y
L T
H U
MT
A T
PL
PT
R O
SI
SK
SE
I S
N O
R S
T R
B E
B G
C Z
EE
I E
F R
4 6 .5 3
I T
C YL TH UMT
A T
PL
PT
R O
SI
SK
SE
I S
N O
R S
T R
1 5
2 5
3 5
4 5
5 5
6 5
7 5
8 5
5 1 0 1 5 2 0 2 5 3 0 3 5 4 0 4 5 5 0
I n n o v a to r s (% )
N o n-i n n o v a to r s (% )
F i g u r e I I-8-1 3 % s h a r e s o f i n n o v a to r s a n d o f n o n-i n n o v a to r s m a k i n g u s e o f m u l ti m e d i a s k i l l s( 1 ),
 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 0
Mu l ti m e d i a W e b d e s i g n
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
Notes: (1)Blue triangle: % shares of innovators and non-innovators that have used multimedia skills in the period 2008-2010. (2) Red square:
% shares of innovators and non-innovators that have employed web design skills in the period 2008-2010.

===== PDF_PAGE 293 =====
291
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
 ▶ Figure II-8-14 % shares of innovators and of non-innovators making use of software skills, 2008-2010
 ▶ Figure II-8-15 % shares of innovators and of non-innovators making use of market research skills, 2008-2010
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
%
F i g u r e I I-8-1 4 % s h a r e s o f i n n o v a to r s a n d o f n o n-i n n o v a to r s m a k i n g u s e o f s o /ftw a r e s k i l l s , 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 0
I n n o v a to r s N o n-i n n o v a to r s
Estonia NorwayBelgium Cyprus Slovakia IrelandSloveniaAustria Serbia Italy
HungarySweden Malta
Portugal
Czech Republic
Croatia Poland TurkeyRomaniaLithuania BulgariaIcelandFrance
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
%
F i g u r e I I-8-1 5 % s h a r e s o f i n n o v a to r s a n d o f n o n-i n n o v a to r s m a k i n g u s e o f m a r k e t r e s e a r c h s k i l l s , 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 0
I n n o v a to r s N o n-i n n o v a to r s
Estonia Norway Belgium CyprusSlovakia Ireland Slovenia AustriaSerbia Italy
HungarySweden Malta
Portugal
Czech Republic
Croatia PolandTurkey Romania Latvia BulgariaIceland France
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)

===== PDF_PAGE 294 =====
292
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
In contrast to the findings for the other skill types,
it turns out that the usage of market research
skills is negatively correlated with the innovation
performance ranking (-0.089). This result is not
only driven by the modest innovators Bulgaria
and Romania. The correlation remains negative
when taking them out. However, this negative
pairwise correlation does not necessarily imply
that skills in market research negatively impact
innovations since the calculation neglects the
use of other skills. Another drawback of these
simple cross-country correlations between the
share of different skills used by firms and the
innovation performance ranking is that such
an analysis does not control for other firm- or
industry-specific variables which might drive
both indicators. The following section will hence
continue with an econometric approach.
 ▶ Figure II-8-16 Correlation between countries' skill usage and innovation performance ranking(1)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010), Innovation Union Scoreboard 2015
Note:
(1)Correlation coefficient between the proportion of innovators that have used a specific skill type and the innovation
performance ranking based on the Innovation Union Scoreboard 2015. Innovation performance ranking: 4: Innovation leader, 3:
Innovation follower, 2: Moderate innovator, 1: Modest innovator.
0 .2 2 0
0 .1 8 1
0 .4 4 6
0 .4 8 4
0 .6 3 9
0 .6 3 1
0 .4 0 3
-0 .0 8 9
-0 .2 -0 .1 0 .0 0 .1 0 .2 0 .3 0 .4 0 .5 0 .6 0 .7
En g i n e e r i n g / Ap p l i e d Sc i e n c e s
M a t h e m a t i c s / S t a t i s t i c s / Da t a b a s e
D e s i g n o f o b j e c ts a n d s e r v i c e s
G r a p h i c a l a r ts , l a y o u t, a d v e r ti s i n g
Mu l ti m e d i a
W e b d e s i g n
So /ftw a r e d e v e l o p m e n t
Ma r k e t r e s e a r c h
F i g u r e I I-8-1 6 C o r r e l a ti o n b e tw e e n c o u n tr i e s ' s k i l l u s a g e a n d i n n o v a ti o n p e r fo r m a n c e r a n k i n g( 1 )
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010), Innovation Union Scoreboard 2015
Note: (1)Correlation coefficient between the proportion of innovators that have used a specific skill type and the innovation performance
ranking based on the Innovation Union Scoreboard 2015. Innovation performance ranking: 4: Innovation leader, 3: Innovation follower,
2: Moderate innovator, 1: Modest innovator.

===== PDF_PAGE 295 =====
293
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
8.2.3 Skills as drivers of innovation
and innovation success
This section makes use of firm-level CIS data
in order to provide novel empirical insights into
the role of different types of skills for innovation.
The CIS is a survey that is based on a common
questionnaire administered by Eurostat and
national statistical offices in all EU Member States.
The methodology of CIS is based on the definition
laid down in the OECD/Eurostat Oslo Manual (latest
edition: OECD, 2005). CIS collects information
at the firm level. The target population covers
all legally independent enterprises with at least
10 employees in manufacturing, mining, energy
and water supply and selected services. Original
firm-level data have been accessed at Eurostat’s
safecenter. In total, the following analyses
comprises information for about 78 741 firms
from 16 countries (BG, CY, CZ, EE, FR, HR, HU, IT, LT,
LV, NO, PT, RO, SE, SI, SK); slightly more than half
of the observations stem from West European
enterprises (40 942) and 37 799 observations
stem from East Europe.
 ▶ Figure II-8-17 Skill usage of innovators - % shares of innovators that have used a specific skill type(1),
 2008-2010
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
Note: (1)Red: most often used skill type; grey: second most used skill type; blue: third most used skill type.
Engineering
/ Applied
Sciences
 Mathematics /
Statistics /
Database
management
Design of
objects and
services
Graphical
arts, layout,
advertising
Multimedia Web design Software
development
Market research
 Belgium 36.8 36.6 46.4 57.7 48.0 69.3 72.0 40.5
 Bulgaria 27.5 21.3 28.7 31.3 21.5 35.3 34.3 38.1
 Czech Republic 28.5 33.7 44.4 66.7 48.2 80.0 59.1 55.6
 Estonia 55.4 54.5 40.7 49.7 25.5 56.1 70.7 48.7
 Ireland 37.1 35.8 54.8 63.4 46.6 71.3 61.2 51.5
 France 31.4 29.3 42.7 53.1 44.3 57.5 49.8 37.3
 Croatia 34.2 39.0 46.2 50.5 34.0 46.5 59.2 45.5
 Italy 24.2 30.9 40.3 48.9 31.9 45.6 59.6 35.9
 Cyprus 50.2 59.7 59.0 74.8 35.2 68.9 78.3 58.2
 Lithuania 28.6 38.1 49.9 62.0 31.1 63.7 53.8 50.9
 Hungary 40.1 43.6 30.5 58.1 35.4 62.2 60.6 48.7
 Malta 31.5 32.1 45.0 53.6 43.7 61.3 57.6 43.1
 Austria 34.5 40.5 55.2 78.3 49.7 72.4 65.1 40.2
 Poland 20.9 30.9 40.0 54.1 32.8 63.1 51.7 40.8
 Portugal 23.7 27.2 40.2 55.3 34.8 48.1 53.8 26.9
 Romania 35.1 32.0 46.7 48.2 34.3 42.7 52.3 56.2
 Slovenia 49.3 39.6 42.8 49.6 37.9 61.3 62.8 45.2
 Slovakia 38.9 50.0 56.4 73.8 54.2 72.1 62.7 67.2
 Sweden 37.6 41.3 54.8 69.9 50.1 76.2 61.0 50.2
 Iceland 31.9 36.6 46.5 49.7 37.7 48.8 46.0 39.4
 Norway 44.2 37.9 54.0 67.3 44.7 71.5 67.5 47.2
 Switzerland 29.4 36.3 43.8 46.6 31.5 57.0 60.4 54.2
 Turkey 49.1 34.7 52.5 50.9 41.6 65.1 50.9 64.8

===== PDF_PAGE 296 =====
294
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
In order to better understand the role of specific
skills for the innovation process, we adopt an
econometric approach. This helps to identify
those skills that are necessary to reap the
benefits that innovation can bring alone, as well
as to enable a smooth transition of the workforce
to new and more productive activities. As a
result, it also allows for deriving more targeted
guidelines for policy regarding how to foster
innovation by improving relevant skills.
In the first step, we estimate the propensity to
innovate
*inno is the latent innovation propensity that
is not directly observed. Instead we only observe
in the data whether the firm has innovated or
not ( inno ). Hence, we estimate the likelihood
of being an innovator by using a probit model.
In order to capture the skill effect on different
types of innovation, we use five different
innovation indicators:
• Product innovation (PD) which refers to the
introduction of new or significantly improved
products or services in the period 2008-2010;
• Market novelties (PD-Market) which denote
product innovations that are new to the market;
• Firm novelties (PD-Firm) which describe product
innovations that are new to the firm but not
to the market as a whole, i.e., firm novelties
describe adoption or imitation activities;
• Process innovation (PC) which refers to the
introduction of new or significantly improved
production process, distribution method or
supporting activity in the period 2008-2010;
• Organisational innovation (Orga) which
denote a new organisational method,
business practice (including knowledge
management), workplace organisation
or new external relations in the period
2008-2010 that have not been previously
used by the enterprise.
skilltype denotes the eight different skill
types explored in subsection 2.2.3. As control
variable
x , we included the initial firm size in
2008 (log number of employees), two dummies
for whether the firm belongs to a domestic or
foreign group (reference: domestic unaffiliated
firms), the innovation intensity (innovation
expenditure per sales), a dummy for whether
the enterprise has co-operations and a set of
industry and country dummies.
Figure II-8-18 depicts the marginal effects of the
eight different skill variables on the likelihood of
innovating. Most strikingly, nearly all skill types
significantly foster innovation, though there is
a large heterogeneity in the marginal effects
across skill types and innovation types.
Engineering skills are particularly important for
developing new products. Employing workers
with engineering and applied scientific skills
increases the likelihood of introducing new
products by 5.8 percentage points
(146). With a
marginal effect of 3.5 and 3.8 pp. engineering
skills are equally important for firm and market
novelties. Engineering skills are less important
for boosting process innovation (+ 1.8 pp) and
show no significant association with introducing
organisational innovation. In contrast, after
controlling for firm-, country and industry-
specific characteristics, skills in mathematics,
statistics and database management only
weakly stimulate innovation. The findings
suggest no significant impact on the introduction
(146) We cannot rule out reverse causality, i.e., firms that want to
innovate employ more engineers. In order to deal with this type
of endogeneity, an instrumental variable approach would be
appropriate. However, the data does not include appropriate
instruments for the skill measures. Hence, results should be
interpreted as correlations rather than as a causal effect.

===== PDF_PAGE 297 =====
295
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
of new products. However, the use of these skills
is associated with a large rise in organisational
innovation and likewise in process innovation.
Not surprisingly, design skills have a large impact
on the introduction of new products. Employing
workers with skills in designing objects and
services increases the likelihood of introducing
new products by 11.6 percentage points. The
marginal effect is slightly larger for firm novelties
than for market novelties. This marginal effect
is even larger than for engineering and applied
science. Somewhat surprising is its relatively large
impact on process and organisational innovation,
however, this might reflect that design activities
lead to the introduction of new products which
in turn involve major changes in the production
technology or in the way of organising workplaces
or businesses practices. In contrast to design
skills, skills in graphical art, layout or advertising
have a much smaller impact on the likelihood of
introducing new products or processes.
While multimedia, web design and software
development belong to the group of skills most
often employed by enterprises, their marginal
impact on product innovation is smaller than
the one of engineering and design. Among
the three types, web design and software
development abilities foster product innovation
to a similar extent. The stimulating effect of
multimedia skills, however, turns out to be
much smaller. Outstanding is the large impact
software skills exert on the introduction of new
production technologies and organisational
methods. Employing workers with software skills
increases the likelihood of getting a process
and organisational innovation by 11.1 and
10.7 percentage points, respectively.
 ▶ Figure II-8-18 Marginal effect of skill usage on the likelihood of innovating(1)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
Note: (1)The graph shows the marginal effects at mean values of the eight different skill variables (and all other explanatory var-
iables). The marginal denotes e.g. the change in the predicted probability of getting a product innovation (PD) when a firm uses
engineering skills compared to when it does not use them (in percentage points). All effects are significant at least at the 5%
significance level except for the effect of engineering on process innovation which is significant only at the 10% level and striped
bars denote insignificant marginal effects. Results for control variables have been omitted for presentation.
7 .6
1 0 .7
5 .8
3 .3
5 .4
4 .6
8 .1
1 .1
2 .2
1 1 .1
2 .5
2 .3
2 .3
4 .9
2 .2
1 .8
1 .8
3 .1
3 .5
0 .6
3 .0
7 .0
0 .5
3 .8
2 .3
3 .2
3 .0
2 .0
1 .7
5 .7
-0 .8
3 .5
3 .7
5 .0
5 .3
2 .5
3 .4
1 1 .6
-0 .4
5 .8
-2 0 2 4 6 8 1 0 1 2
Ma r k e t r e s e a r c h
So /ftw a r e d e v e l o p m e n t
W e b d e s i g n
Mu l ti m e d i a
G r a p h i c a l a r ts
D e s i g n
Ma th e m a ti c s / Sta ti s ti c s / D a ta b a s e m a n a g e m e n t
En g i n e e r i n g
F i g u r e I I-8-1 8 M a r g i n a l e ﬀe c t o f s k i l l u s a g e o n th e l i k e l i h o o d o f i n n o v a ti n g( 1 )
Pr o d u c t i n n o v a ti o n Ma r k e t n o v e l ty F i r m n o v e l ty Pr o c e s s i n n o v a ti o n O r g a n i s a ti o n a l i n n o v a ti o n
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
Note: (1)The graph shows the marginal effects at mean values of the eight different skill variables (and all other explanatory variables). The marginal
denotes e.g. the change in the predicted probability of getting a product innovation (PD) when a firm uses engineering skills compared to when it
does not use them (in percentage points). All effects are significant at least at the 5% significance level except for the effect of engineering on
process innovation which is significant only at the 10% level and striped bars denote insignificant marginal effects. Results for control variables
have been omitted for presentation.

===== PDF_PAGE 298 =====
296
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Market research skills also increase the likelihood
of introducing new products, processes and
organisational methods. The size of the effect
is similar to the effect of graphical arts, layout
and advertising. For instance, employing
workers with skills in market research raises the
propensity to develop and launch new products
by 3.7 percentage points. Surprisingly, market
research skills are also associated with a large
stimulating effect on organisational innovation.
One potential explanation could be that market
research activities allow firms to identify new
business opportunities in more distant places.
In order to exploit these new opportunities firms
might set up new external relationships which
count as organisational innovations.
Market novelties, as a measure for more radical
innovation, are particularly fostered by employing
design skills, followed by engineering skills and
abilities in software development and web design.
For process innovation, we find a very similar effect
in magnitude of about 2-2.5 percentage points for
all skill types with the exception of the outstanding
effect of software skills. Skills in software
development, mathematics, statistics and database
management as well as in market research are
main drivers of organisational innovation.
Is it important for innovation whether firms
employ workers with certain skills in-house
or are they equally innovative when they lack
these skills internally and buy in such skills
from external sources? Figure II-8-19 shows
the change in the likelihood of getting a market
or firm novelty when we split the skill usage in
internal and external use. Four key findings can be
summarised: First, in terms of fostering innovation
it is important that firms employ workers with
engineering skills and abilities in mathematics,
statistics and database management in-house.
Firms that have employed these skills from
external sources do not show a higher likelihood
of introducing new products. This is consistent
with the finding that firms need absorptive
capacities in order to benefit from external
knowledge and transfer it to new applications
(Cohen and Levinthal 1989). Second, both
internal and external skills in designing objects
increase the likelihood of innovating; however,
firms that have employed these skills in-house
are much more innovative. Surprisingly, we find
the opposite result for skills in multimedia and
web design. Firms that are short of these modern
IT skills and that have decided to buy in these
skills from external specialists are able to benefit
from this strategy by increasing their propensity
to innovate by 2.5-4 percentage points. Fourth,
concerning the use of software skills there are
hardly any differences between employing these
skills internally or externally.

===== PDF_PAGE 299 =====
297
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
To what extent do skills also affect innovation
performance and hence the benefits firms can
reap from innovation activities? To answer this
question, we use a Tobit model which investigates
the impact of skill usage on the share of sales
with new products, market novelties or firm
novelties. We use the same control variables as
for the probit models. Figure II-8-20 reports the
impact of skill on innovation performance. The
empirical evidence shows strong positive effects
of all skill types on innovation performance. In
contrast to the findings at the country level, the
largest effect on the share of sales due to new
products by far stems from design activities,
followed by software development, engineering,
market research and web design
(147). The latter
four skill types exert a similar effect on the share
of sale with new products ranging between 0.75
and 0.55. The effect is still positive but smaller
for skills related to multimedia or arts and layout.
Only skills in mathematics, statistics and database
management have not (yet) boosted innovation
performance. This is consistent with the finding
that so far these skills have been mainly used for
process and organisational innovation.
(147) Note that the innovation performance indicator that we use at
the country level was different. It was the ranking of countries in
terms of their innovation performance which is based on a wide
range of different innovation indicators.
 ▶ Figure II-8-19 Marginal effect of internal and external skill usage on the likelihood of market and firm novelties(1)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
Note:
(1)The graph contains the marginal effects at mean values of the eight different skill variables when they are used in-house and
sourced externally. Striped bars denote insignificant marginal effects. Results for control variables have been omitted for presentation.
1 .5
2 .7
3 .8
2 .6
2 .1
2 .9
0 .1
1 .4
3 .6
2 .3
0 .5
0 .7
2 .4
8 .2
2 .3
4 .9
2 .8
2 .7
3 .0
3 .1
1 .7
2 .5
-2 .2
-0 .1
1 .8
2 .5
0 .4
1 .6
0 .9
6 .5
2 .6
4 .9
-4 .0 -2 .0 0 .0 2 .0 4 .0 6 .0 8 .0 1 0 .0
Ma r k e t r e s e a r c h
So /ftw a r e d e v e l o p m e n t
W e b d e s i g n
Mu l ti m e d i a
G r a p h i c a l a r ts
D e s i g n
M a t h e m a t i c s / S t a t i s t i c s / D a t a b a s e m a n a g e m e n t
En g i n e e r i n g
F i g u r e I I-8-1 9 M a r g i n a l e ﬀe c t o f i n te r n a l a n d e x te r n a l s k i l l u s a g e o n th e l i k e l i h o o d o f m a r k e t a n d ﬁr m n o v e l ti e s( 1 )
Ma r k e t – i n te r n a l Ma r k e t – e x te r n a l F i r m – i n te r n a l F i r m – e x te r n a l
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
Note: (1)The graph contains the marginal effects at mean values of the eight different skill variables when they are used in-house and sourced
externally. Striped bars denote insignificant marginal effects. Results for control variables have been omitted for presentation.

===== PDF_PAGE 300 =====
298
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
8.3.1 Employment trends in sectors
differing in technology intensity
In this subsection we aim at investigating
whether sectors that differ in their technology
and knowledge intensity demonstrate different
employment trends. Figure II-8-21 depicts
the employment growth rate for EU28, the US
and Japan for knowledge-intensive activities
in business industries (KIABI (148)). Knowledge-
intensive activities are identified based on a level
of tertiary educated persons in business industries.
An activity is classified as knowledge intensive if
employed tertiary educated persons (according to
ISCED97, levels 5+6) represent more than 33% of
the total employment in that activity
(149).

(148) For the economic activities included in knowledge intensive
activities in business industries see: Eurostat: http://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/cache/metadata/Annexes/htec_esms_an8.pdf
(149) The definition is built based on the average number of employed
persons aged 25-64 at aggregated EU27 level in 2008 and 2009
according to NACE Rev. 2 at 2-digit, using EU Labour Force Survey
data. This includes the following 2-digit NACE codes: 09, 19, 21,
26, 51, 58-66, 69-75, 78-79, 90.
To summarise, this section has impressively
shown that skills in general have a positive impact
on innovation activities. Skills increase both
the likelihood of innovating but also innovation
performance. However, we find a non-negligible
heterogeneity across different types of skills as
well as on different types of innovation activities.
8.3 Effects of innovation on
employment growth
The last section has demonstrated that Europe
has experienced a strong upskilling trend in recent
years and that skills in general have a positive
impact on innovation activities. Innovations,
however, are not an end in themselves but are
aimed at improving firms’ competitiveness
and performance. Since employment is key to
business and overall economic development, this
section investigates to what extent innovations
are conducive to overall employment growth.
 ▶ Figure II-8-20 Impact of skills on innovation performance(1)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (CIS 2010)
Note: (1)Tobit regression. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively. Control variable not reported.
Impact on sales share by skills type: PD PD-Market PD-Firm
Engineering 0.064*** 0.050*** 0.060***
(0.006) (0.006) (0.007)
Mathematics / Statistics / Database management -0.007 -0.007 -0.005
(0.006) (0.006) (0.006)
Design 0.150*** 0.121*** 0.127***
(0.006) (0.006) (0.006)
Graphical arts 0.035*** 0.022*** 0.048***
(0.006) (0.006) (0.007)
Multimedia 0.029*** 0.040*** 0.011*
(0.006) (0.006) (0.007)
Web design 0.055*** 0.048*** 0.037***
(0.006) (0.006) (0.007)
Software development 0.074*** 0.068*** 0.058***
(0.006) (0.006) (0.006)
Market research 0.063*** 0.056*** 0.053***
(0.006) (0.006) (0.006)

===== PDF_PAGE 301 =====
299
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
Even during the recent economic crisis, employment
growth has been positive in knowledge-intensive
activities in Europe in most of the years, except
for 2010 and 2013. Absolute employment has
grown in these sectors from 28.9 million in 2008
to 29.3 million in 2013. This corresponds to an
overall growth of 1.7% over the six-year period
(see Figure II-8-22). At the same time, overall
employment has suffered from the severe
economic crisis and has declined in EU28 by 2.7%
from 222.9 million in 2008 to 216.9 million in
2013. The fact that employment growth is higher
in knowledge-intensive activities indirectly indicates
that innovation stimulates employment in Europe.
However, Figure II-8-22 also reveals a large
heterogeneity in employment growth in
knowledge-intensive activities across Europe
since 2008. In 18 out of 28 European countries
absolute employment figures have grown over
the period 2008-2013 whereas 10 countries
exhibit negative growth rates. Growth ranges from
+20% in Luxemburg to -12.2% in Spain. For the
three largest economies in Europe, we observe
a positive employment growth of about 2.2% in
Germany, 3.1% in France and 6.7% in the UK.
How does Europe perform in knowledge-
intensive activities compared to major
competitors? Compared to the US and Japan,
Europe demonstrates a lower employment
proportion in knowledge-intensive activities
(2013: 13.8%) than the US (2013: 17.2%) and
Japan (2013: 16.1%). Furthermore, compared
to the US employment growth has been lower
in knowledge-intensive activities (US: +6.2%
for the period 2009-2013). However, Europe’s
development in knowledge-intensive activities is
much better than in Japan which has suffered
great employment losses in these areas
(-11.5%)
(150).
(150) Data sources: Labour Force Survey (LFS) for JP and Current
Population Survey (CPS) for the US. Data refer to the number of
persons employed in economic sectors according to JSIC Rev.12
and aged 15-64 years old in JP and to age group 16 years old
using US NAICS 2007 classification of economic activities. A 1-to-
1 correspondence between classification systems is not always
possible and might affect results. However, this should not affect
growth rates over time.
 ▶ Figure II-8-21 Growth (%) in total employment in the EU and in employment in knowledge-intensive activities in
 business industries (KIABI), 2008-2014(1)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Note:
(1)US: KIABI not available for 2008-2009; JP: KIABI not available for 2010-2011 and 2011-2012; EU: Total employment not
available for 2013-2014.
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
2 0 0 9 2 0 1 0 2 0 1 1 2 0 1 2 2 0 1 3 2 0 1 4
A n n u a l e m p l o y m e n t g r o w th (% )
F i g u r e I I-8-2 1 G r o w th (% ) i n to ta l e m p l o y m e n t i n th e EU a n d i n e m p l o y m e n t i n k n o w l e d g e-i n te n s i v e a c ti v i ti e s
i n b u s i n e s s i n d u s tr i e s (K I A B I ), 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 4( 1 )
EU -T o ta l e m p l o y m e n t EU - K I A B I U n i te d Sta te s - K I A B I J a p a n - K I A B I
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Note: (1)US: KIABI not available for 2008-2009; JP: KIABI not available for 2010-2011 and 2011-2012; EU: Total employment not
available for 2013-2014.

===== PDF_PAGE 302 =====
300
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
The KIA definition is solely based on the share
of tertiary educated persons within sectors. In
order to take the technology intensity of sectors
more directly into account, the traditional sectoral
approach can be used. This approach classifies
manufacturing industries according to their
technological intensity (R&D expenditure/value
added) into high-technology (M_HTC), medium
high-technology (M_M-HTC), medium low-
technology (M_M-LTC) and low-technology (M_LTC)
industries. Services are aggregated into knowledge-
intensive services (S_KIS) and less knowledge-
intensive services (S_LKIS) based on the share of
tertiary educated persons at NACE 2-digit level.
Knowledge-intensive services are further split into
high-technology knowledge-intensive services
(S_KIS_HTC), market knowledge-intensive services
(S_KIS_MKT) and other knowledge-intensive
services (S_KIS_OTH)
(151).
Figure II-8-23 depicts employment trends
over the period 2008-2013. For the aggregate
(151) For more details, see http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cache/metadata/
Annexes/htec_esms_an3.pdf.
 ▶ Figure II-8-22 Growth (%) in employment in knowledge-intensive activities in business industries (KIABI)
 between 2008 and 2014(1)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Note:
(1)TR, US: 2009-2014.
- 1 4 .3
- 1 1 .4
- 1 0 .5
- 4 .1
- 3 .3
- 2 .1
- 1 .9
- 0 .2
0 .0
0 .0
0 .3
1 .8
1 .9
2 .6
3 .1
3 .8
5 .0
5 .3
6 .0
7 .3
8 .7
8 .7
9 .0
1 0 .4
1 0 .7
1 0 .9
1 3 .3
1 4 .6
1 4 .8
1 5 .4
2 0 .2
2 1 .8
2 8 .0
3 9 .6
4 6 .1
- 1 5 - 5 5 1 5 2 5 3 5 4 5
G r e e c e
J a p a n
Sp a i n
I ta l y
Sl o v a k i a
F i n l a n d
D e n m a r k
N e th e r l a n d s
I r e l a n d
I c e l a n d
G e r m a n y
H u n g a r y
C r o a ti a
B u l g a r i a
EU
Po r tu g a l
Sl o v e n i a
B e l g i u m
F r a n c e
U n i te d Sta te s
L i th u a n i a
C ze c h R e p u b l i c
A u s tr i a
Sw e d e n
U n i te d K i n g d o m
C y p r u s
Es to n i a
L a tv i a
R o m a n i a
Sw i tze r l a n d
Po l a n d
N o r w a y
Ma l ta
L u x e m b o u r g
T u r k e y
%
F i g u r e I I-8-2 2 G r o w th (% ) i n e m p l o y m e n t i n k n o w l e d g e-i n te n s i v e a c ti v i ti e s i n b u s i n e s s i n d u s tr i e s (K I A B I )
b e tw e e n 2 0 0 8 a n d 2 0 1 4( 1 )
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
Note: (1)TR, US: 2009-2014.

===== PDF_PAGE 303 =====
301
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
effects of innovation might also be outweighed
by other factors driving employment, like
differences in demand or general productivity
trends across sectors. The fact that this diverging
pattern generally emerges for manufacturing
and service industries speaks in favour of
this interpretation. High tech manufacturing
employment might also be affected by a general
shift from manufacturing to services and by
outsourcing functions in manufacturing to the
service sector so that innovation induces more
employment in services than in manufacturing.
of high-technology sectors in manufacturing
and services in Europe, we observe a similar
total growth in employment over the period
2008-2013 (+ 1.5%) as for the KIA definition.
Figure II-8-23, however, additionally reveals that
only high-technology service industries benefitted
in terms of employment growth (+ 5.4%). High-
technology manufacturing industries on the
contrary follow a diverging trend and suffered
great losses in employment during the period
(-7.4). This result, however, does not necessarily
imply that innovation harms employment in high-
technology manufacturing. Positive employment
-1 4 .8
-1 1 .3
-8 .5
-7.4
-2 .7
-0 .4
1 .5
4 .0
4 .1
5 .4
7 .9
-1 5-20 -1 0 -5 0 5 1 0
L o w-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g
Me d i u m-l o w-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i g
Me d i u m-h i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g
H i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g
T o ta l
L o w k n o w l e d g e-i n te n s i v e s e r v i c e s
H i g h-te c h m a n u fa c tu r i n g a n d s e r v i c e s
O th e r k n o w l e d g e-i n te n s i v e s e r v i c e s
K n o w l e d g e-i n te n s i v e s e r v i c e s
H i g h-te c h k n o w l e d g e-i n te n s i v e s e r v i c e s
Ma r k e t k n o w l e d g e-i n te n s i v e s e r v i c e s
Em p l o y m e n t g r o w th , 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 3 (% )
F i g u r e I I-8-2 3 G r o w th (% ) i n e m p l o y m e n t i n th e EU b y te c h n o l o g y i n te n s i ty s e c to r b e tw e e n 2 0 0 8 a n d 2 0 1 3
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat
8.3.2 Potential transmission channels of
product, process and organisational
innovation
In order to identify the effects of innovation on
employment, this section takes a more direct
and structural approach. The question how
innovation affects overall employment growth is
non-trivial since various channels exist through
which different kinds of innovation may destroy
existing jobs (displacement effects) or may
create new jobs (compensation effects) (see
e.g., Katsoulacos 1986). In addition, different
types of innovation such as product, process or
organisational innovation influence employment
via different channels. Figure II-8-24 sketches
the main channels.
 ▶ Figure II-8-23 Growth (%) in employment in the EU by technology intensity sector between 2008 and 2013
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat

===== PDF_PAGE 304 =====
302
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Employment
growth
Product
innovation
Process / orga.
innovation
Productivity effect of PD (-)
New products require less (or
more) labor input
Productivity effect of PC (-)
Less labor input for a given
output
Direct Demand Effect (+)
New products increase overall demand
Indirect Demand Effect (+/-)
Increase in demand of existing
complementary products (+) /
Decrease in demand of existing
substitutes (-)
Price Effect (+)
Cost reduction passed on to price
expands demand
Product innovation boosts employment growth
mainly via increasing demand. Demand for the
new product can either be the result of an overall
market expansion, or it may come at the expense
of displacing products of competing firms
(152).
But on the other side, indirect demand effects on
the innovative firm’s existing products have to
be taken into account as well as the possibility
that the new products might (partially or totally)
replace the existing ones (cannibalisation
effect). In the case of complementary demand
relationships, however, the new product will
cause demand for existing products to rise
as well, and an additional employment effect
occurs. Finally, the same amount of output of
the new product may be produced at higher
or lower productivity levels compared to the
existing product. That is, the new product may
imply a change in production methods and input
mix, which could either reduce or increase labour
input. This effect is called productivity effect
of product innovation (Harrison et al., 2008).
At the industry level, additional employment
effects are likely to take place in competing
firms or in upstream and downstream firms.

(152) Therefore, the size of this effect depends on the demand elasticity,
the existence of substitutes and the reactions of competitors (see
Garcia et al., 2004).
Employment effects of process innovation are
closely related to productivity changes. New
production processes most often lead to labour
productivity improvements since they allow firms
to produce the same amount of output with less
labour input. The size of this effect depends on the
specific production technology and direction of the
technological change. While technology advances
of this type foster job destruction, they reduce
marginal production costs and open up possibilities
for price reductions. In a dynamic perspective,
lower prices enable the innovator to gain from
increasing product demand while alleviating the
employment losses or even reversing them. The
magnitude of this compensating indirect price
effect is determined by the amount of price
reduction, the price elasticity of demand and the
competitive environment. An inelastic product
demand, for instance, does not cause a price
reduction to be sufficiently demand-inducing.
Thus, the direct effect’s negative employment
impact cannot be outweighed. Only the demand of
price elastic products can sufficiently increase as
a response to price reductions. Price elastic goods
are primarily traded on competitive markets. The
transmission channels of organisational innovation
are similar to those for process innovation.
 ▶ Figure II-8-24 Effects of product, process and organisational innovation on employment
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: Own representation.

===== PDF_PAGE 305 =====
303
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
8.3.3 Evidence on employment effects
of innovation
One of the very early firm-level studies finds
product innovations to boost employment in
Germany (Entorf and Pohlmeier 1990). This
positive relationship has been confirmed
afterwards by many studies using different
indicators, covering different time periods and
countries (see e.g., Brouwer et al. 1993, König
et al. 1995, Van Reenen 1997, Smolny 1998,
Garcia et al. 2004, Hall et al. 2008, Peters 2008,
Lachenmaier and Rottmann 2011, Leitner et al.
2011, Dachs and Peters, 2014, Damijan et al.
2014, Harrison et al., 2014). In a nutshell, the
econometric evidence impressively highlights that
product innovating firms create more jobs than
non-product innovating firms. This means that the
employment-inducing effects outweigh the labour
displacement effects for product innovations.
However, no such conclusion can be drawn for
process innovations as the empirical evidence for
the effect of process innovations is ambiguous.
Entorf and Pohlmeier (1990), Van Reenen (1997),
Jaumandreu (2003) and Hall et al. (2008) find
no significant effect of process innovations on
employment. In contrast, the results of Peters
(2008), Dachs and Peters (2014), Harrison
et al. (2014) and Damijan et al. (2014) disclose
a negative relationship between process
innovations and employment
(153). Moreover, König
et al. (1995), Leitner et al. (2011), Greenan and
Guellec (2000) and Lachenmaier and Rottmann
(2011) report a significant positive employment
impact of process innovations. In addition, the
latter two analyses find process innovations to
create more jobs than product innovations.
The majority of empirical studies have focused
on technological innovations. Non-technological
innovations such as organisational innovations
have rather been neglected, which is partially
due to measurement problems (Lam 2005,
(153) Damijan et al. (2014) find a negative impact of process innovation
in manufacturing but no effect in services.
Armbruster et al. 2008). In the last decade,
however, organisational innovations have
received significant attention in the literature
on ICT investments and productivity. It was
shown that ICT investments and organisational
innovations are complementary and increase
productivity (see e.g., Brynjolfsson and Hitt 2000,
2003, Bresnahan et al. 2002, Bertschek and
Kaiser, 2004, Gera and Gu 2004), not only in
the ICT sector (Ichinowski et al. 1997, Black and
Lynch 1996, 2004, Polder et al. 2010). Empirical
evidence has also shown that organisational and
technological innovations are complementary
(Schmidt and Rammer 2007, Polder et al., 2010)
though the direction of that relationship is not
precisely identifiable. Technological innovations
either pave the way for organisational changes
(Henderson and Clark 1990; Deneels 2002) or
organisational innovations act as a driver for
the implementation of technological innovations
(Lokshin et al. 2009). Only a few empirical studies
have actually examined potential employment
effects of organisational innovations (Evangelista
and Vezzani 2011, Vivarelli 2012). The results
are inconclusive and seem to depend on the
type of organisational change and the sector
(Peters et al. 2013). Organisational changes like
shifts towards more flexible organisations or
transfers of responsibilities significantly decrease
net employment growth rates (Greenan 2003,
Bauer and Bender 2004). In contrast to these
negative employment impacts, team work induces
employment to increase (Bauer and Bender 2004).
In a recent study, Peters et al. (2014) examined
the impact of product, process and organisational
innovation on employment growth at the firm
level for 26 European countries over the period
1998-2010. In order to better understand the role
that business cycles play in generating employment
growth from innovation, they separately estimated
the relationship between innovation and
employment growth for four phases of the business
cycle. They decomposed average employment

===== PDF_PAGE 306 =====
304
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
growth into the contribution of five different
sources which are depicted in Figure II-8-25:
• The contribution of general trends in
productivity in the production of old products
not attributable to a firm’s own process,
product or organisational innovation,
which captures employment effects of
training, improvements in the human
capital endowment, corporate restructuring,
acquisitions of firms, productivity effects
from spillovers, etc.;
• The contribution of process innovation
such as the introduction of new production
technologies, new technologies in logistics,
etc., applied in the production of old products;
• The contribution of organisational innovation
such as new ways of workplace organisation,
quality standards for suppliers;
• The contribution from the real growth of
output (demand) in old products for firms
that do not introduce any new products;
• The net contribution of product innovation.
This effect includes increases in the demand
for new products, but also increases or
decreases in the demand for the old
product depending on whether old and new
products within the same firm substitute or
complement each other.
(154)
Their findings corroborate that product innovation
fosters employment growth in European
countries, i.e., product innovation creates much
more employment due to the demand effect
than it destroys due to the productivity effect
and substitution effects between old and new
products. This positive impact has been found in
all phases of the business cycle except for the
recession period in manufacturing. This positive
employment effect of product innovation is
strongest in boom periods which confirms the
assumption that market acceptance for new
products and the potential for demand expansion
and extra-normal profits is higher during
upswings and booms of the business cycle,
leading to a stronger demand effect and larger
employment creation from product innovation
during upturn and booms than during downturn
or recessions.
(154) The employment effect that stems from an increase in demand
for new products depends on three factors: the share of firms
engaged in innovation, the innovation success measured as sales
growth due to new products, and the way innovation success is
translated into employment growth which means whether there is
a potential productivity effect associated with new products.

===== PDF_PAGE 307 =====
305
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
In upturns, booms and downturns, however,
the largest contribution to employment growth
does not stem from product innovation but from
the demand for old products. This completely
changes in the recession where old products
are the largest burden for employment growth.
Indeed in manufacturing the contribution of
product innovation has also become negative
because output from new products does not grow
fast enough to compensate demand losses in old
products. However, the loss in demand and, as a
result, in employment (-2.5%) is much smaller
than for non-product innovators (-9%). In this
sense product innovation has an employment
stabilising effect and keeps employment
losses limited in a recession. In services, the
product innovation even fosters employment
in the recession period. These detailed findings
mostly explain the overall employment trend in
manufacturing and services in Europe shown in
the previous section.
 ▶ Figure II-8-25 Contribution of innovation to employment growth over four phases of the business cycle in
 Europe (1), 1998-2010(2)
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat, Peters et al (2014)
Notes: (1)Europe includes IS and NO and all EU Member States with the exceptions of IE, AT, PL and UK. (2)The number on top of each bar
is the overall employment growth rate. The calculations are based on CIS 3, CIS 4, CIS 2006, CIS 2008 and CIS 2010.
Figure II-8-25 Contribution of innovation to employment growth over four phases of the business cycle in Europe(1),
1998-2010(2)
- 1 .4
- 5 .6
- 2 .8
7 .4
- 0 .2 - 0 .2- 0 .7
0 .3
- 0 .4
- 0 .2
5 .6
8 .4
4 .3
- 9 .0
2 .7
5 .2
2 .6
- 2 .5
-1 5
-1 0
-5
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
U p tu r n B o o m D o w n tu r n R e c e s s i o n
M a n u f a c t u r i n g
G e n e r a l p r o d u c ti v i ty tr e n d i n p r o d u c ti o n o f o l d p r o d u c ts G r o s s e ﬀe c t o f p r o c e s s i n n o v a ti o n s r e l a te d to o l d p r o d u c ts
G r o s s e ﬀe c t o f o r g a n i za ti o n a l i n n o v a ti o n s O u tp u t g r o w th d u e to o l d p r o d u c ts
N e t c o n tr i b u ti o n o f p r o d u c t i n n o v a ti o n
G e n e r a l p r o d u c ti v i ty tr e n d i n p r o d u c ti o n o f o l d p r o d u c ts G r o s s e ﬀe c t o f p r o c e s s i n n o v a ti o n s r e l a te d to o l d p r o d u c ts
G r o s s e ﬀe c t o f o r g a n i za ti o n a l i n n o v a ti o n s O u tp u t g r o w th d u e to o l d p r o d u c ts
N e t c o n tr i b u ti o n o f p r o d u c t i n n o v a ti o n
8 . 2 3 . 4 -4 . 45 . 9
2 .9
-2 .4
6 .3
-0 .1 0 .1
-0 .7
0 .7
-0 .4
0 .1
7 .9 1 1 .4
8 .8
-4 .7
2 .6
5 .2
3 .2
0 .2
-1 0
-5
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
U p tu r n B o o m D o w n tu r n R e c e s s i o n
Se r v i c e s
1 2 . 6 1 1 . 7 9 . 2 1 . 9
-5 .4
-0 .2

===== PDF_PAGE 308 =====
306
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Results further show that process and
organisational innovation lead to job
losses. However, compared to other factors,
displacement effects of process and
organisational innovation are small and of
minor importance for employment growth. This
confirms findings of Peters et al. (2013) who only
find weak evidence of organisational innovation
to impact employment growth in European
service firms.
(155)
8.4 Innovations as source for skill
upgrading and job polarisation in
Europe
8.4.1 Evidence on skill upgrading and
job polarisation in Europe
Maybe even more important than the total
employment effect of innovation is the impact
of technological change on the demand for
heterogeneous labour and skills. It is often
argued that new and more complex technologies
and, in particular, the use of new information
and communication technologies have raised
the demand for highly skilled labour but has
deteriorated the position of low skilled workers
as these workers are increasingly substituted
by higher qualified workers or more capital-
intensive production technologies. This is
known as skill-biased technological change
(Piva et al. 2005). In addition, skill-biased
organisational change might take place as an
increasing number of firms transform from rigid
organisations towards more flexible structures
with less hierarchy. These flexible organisational
forms lead to employees having to perform a
wider range of tasks and being awarded more
responsibility which requires high-skilled workers
in order to perform the more demanding tasks
efficiently (Bresnahan et al. 2001, Caroli and
Van Reenen 2001).

(155) The positive findings of Damijan et al (2014) are not directly
comparable as they group organizational and marketing
innovations together.
Indeed it has been observed in Europe and in
many other industrialised countries that the
share of highly educated persons has grown
over time. Despite a large increase in the supply
of highly educated workers, real wages of highly
educated workers have increased relatively more
than those of low-educated workers. This implies
that the increase in the demand for high skills
was even larger than the increase in their supply
which has led to increasing returns to skills over
time (Acemoglu and Autor 2011).
As an alternative to the skill-bias technological
and organisational change explanation, the
rise in demand for high-skilled workers has
been attributed to the increasing globalisation.
The latter has led to a growing specialisation
in human capital intensive goods in developed
countries. With increasing volumes of world
trade, the demand for low-skilled workers has
therefore declined in developed countries like
Europe (Piva and Vivarelli 2002).
In order to test the skill-biased technological
change hypothesis two routes have been taken.
On the one hand, dynamic factor demand
systems have been estimated. In these models,
the optimal demand for different skill groups
(either in terms of the change in labour demand
or in terms of employment shares) depends
on investments in new technologies. A recent
example for 28 European countries is the study
by Damijan et al. (2014). As the dependent
variable they employ different measures for
the share of high-skilled labour at the industry
level: either HRST, HRST by education, HRST
by occupation or the share of scientific and
professional workers. As the main explanatory
variables they use the lagged sales growth due
to new products, the share of process innovators
and the share of organisational and marketing
innovators (at the industry level). They lagged
these variables by one period (2006-2008)
in order to mitigate potential endogeneity
problems. They additionally control for the initial
employment in 2008 and Chinese import share.
The results of the study by Damijan et al. (2014)
are depicted in Figure II-8-26.

===== PDF_PAGE 309 =====
307
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
The results confirm a strong upskilling impact
of product and process innovation in European
manufacturing and thus confirm the skill-biased
technological skill hypothesis. For instance, a
10% increase in sales due to new products at
the industry level leads to an increase in the
proportion of high-skilled workers by 0.6% in
manufacturing. And according to the study a
10% increase in the share of process innovators
at the industry level leads to an increase in the
proportion of high-skilled persons by 1.8%. The
results further indicate that the upskilling impact
of innovation is stronger in manufacturing than
in services. These findings at the European
level corroborate the substantial and consistent
evidence in favour of the skill-bias technological
change hypothesis found in prior studies. Most
of these studies refer to the nineties and first
decade of this century. The evidence was found
for different technology measures (e.g., R&D
intensity, R&D investments, innovation indicators
or ICT investment) and for different countries,
e.g., the US (Berman et al. 1994, Dunne
et al. 1996, Doms et al. 1997, Adams 1999),
Canada (Gera et al. 2001), the UK (Machin
1996), Germany (Kaiser 2000, 2001, Falk and
Seim 2000, 2001), Spain (Aguierregabiria and
Alsonso-Borrego 2001) or Italy (Piva et al. 2005).
The study by Damijan et al. (2014) also shows
that organisational and marketing innovations
strongly contribute to the upskilling trend in
Europe. This effect is even larger than for
process innovation. This supports the skill-
bias organisational change hypothesis. This
finding is again in line with prior findings from
the literature for single countries. Though,
in general, fewer studies have focussed on
skill-biased organisational change, there is
also substantial evidence in favour of this
 ▶ Figure II-8-26 Impact of innovation on upskilling(1) in the EU, 2008-2010
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (LFS), Damijan et al (2014)
Note: (1)Effects of the sales growth due to new products, the share of process innovators and the share of organisational and marketing
innovators in the period 2006-2008 on the share of high-skilled workers in the period 2008-2010 (at the industry level). Based on
a fixed effects regression for 28 European countries. Additional control variables: initial employment in 2008 and Chinese import
share. Reading: A 10% increase in sales due to new products at the industry level leads to an increase in the proportion of high-skilled
workers by 0.6%. A 10% increase in the share of process innovators at the industry level leads to an increase in the proportion of high-
skilled persons by 1.8%. Similarly for the share of organizational and marketing innovators.
0 .6
1 .8
3 .6
-0 .1
0 .5
0 .9
0 .5
1 .9
3 .6
0 .1
0 .3
0 .3
0 .6
2 .2
4 .4
-0 .3
0 .8
0 .8
0 .6
1 .0
1 .9
0 .3
0 .1
0 .1
-1 0 1 2 3 4 5
Sa l e s g r o w th PD
Pr o c e s s
O r g a n i s a ti o n a l a n d Ma r k e ti n g
Sa l e s g r o w th PD
Pr o c e s s
O r g a n i s a ti o n a l a n d Ma r k e ti n g
Ma n u fa c tu r i n gSe r v i c e s
F i g u r e I I-8-2 6 I m p a c t o f i n n o v a t i o n o n u p s k i l l i n g( 1 )i n t h e E U , 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 0
A l l h i g h-s k i l l e d H i g h-s k i l l e d b y e d u c a ti o n H i g h-s k i l l e d b y o c c u p a ti o n Sc i e n ti ﬁc a n d p r o fe s s i o n a l w o r k e r s
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (LFS), Damijan et al (2014)
Note: (1)Effects of the sales growth due to new products, the share of process innovators and the share of organisational and marketing
marketing innovators in the period 2006-2008 on the share of high-skilled workers in the period 2008-2010 (at the industry level). Based
on a fixed effects regression for 28 European countries. Additional control variables: initial employment in 2008and Chinese import share.
Reading: A 10% increase in sales due to new products at the industry level leads to an increase in the proportion of high-skilled workers
by 0.6%. A 10% increase in the share of process innovators at the industry level leads to an increase in the proportion of high-skilled
persons by 1.8%. Similarly for the share of organizational and marketing innovators.

===== PDF_PAGE 310 =====
308
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
hypothesis in the literature. Bresnahan et al.
(2001) showed that both IT investment and new
workplace organisation are associated with an
increase in human capital in the US. Their results
furthermore point towards complementary, i.e.,
the effect of IT on high skilled labour demand
is larger when combined with changes in the
workplace organisation. Similarly, Caroli and
Van Reenen (2001) found for British and French
firms that past organisational changes lead to
a significant decline in the wage bill share of
unskilled manual workers and to a corresponding
rise for skilled manual workers, clerical workers
and professionals. Piva and Vivarelli (2002)
also found evidence that the upskilling trend
of employment is a result of organisational
changes in Italy. Like Damijan et al. (2014) they
find this effect to be stronger than the one for
technological change and globalisation. Piva
et al. (2005) corroborated this finding and also
showed that organisational changes, in particular
to shop floor functions, and R&D investments
jointly affect the demand for high skilled labour.
The second approach to test for skill-biased
technological change uses the so-called canonical
model which includes two skill groups performing
two distinct and imperfectly substitutable
tasks. Technology is assumed to take a factor-
augmenting form which, by complementing either
high or low skilled workers, can generate skill-
biased demand shifts (Acemoglu and Autor 2011).
This model has successfully explained several
salient changes in the earnings distribution
between high- and low-skilled workers in the past
(e.g., Katz et al 1995, Fitzenberger and Kohn 2006
and Chennells and van Reenen 2002, Katz and
Autor 1999, Goldin and Katz 2009 or Acemoglu
and Autor 2011 for surveys).
The skill-biased technological change, however,
cannot explain the recent phenomenon of what
is called job polarisation (Autor et al. 2006, 2008,
Goos and Manning 2007, Spitz-Oener 2006,
Goos et al. 2014). Job polarisation describes
the phenomenon that actually the demand for
both high and low skilled and paid occupations
has increased whereas the demand for middling
occupations has decreased. This phenomenon
has first been reported for the US (Autor et al.
2006, 2008). In a recent study Goos et al. (2014)
confirmed this finding for 16 European countries
for the period 1993-2010. Figure II-8-27 shows
that the trend towards job polarisation is still
ongoing in Europe. Depicted are the employment
shares of eight different occupation classes in
2008 as well as their change between 2008 and
2014. Based on the average European wage
within each occupation class, the eight occupation
classes are classified into three high-paid, three
medium-paid and two low-paid occupation
classes (see Goos et al. 2014). The results
show that among the high-paid occupations
professionals like scientists and engineers,
health, teaching, business and administration, IT
and law professionals have substantially raised
their employment share over the six-year period
by +4.8 percentage points. In contrast, even high-
paid occupations like technicians and associate
professionals (-0.4 pp) and managers (-2.4 pp)
have suffered losses in employment shares. But
as the hypothesis of job polarisation states low-
paid occupations like service and sales workers
have experienced a substantial increase in the
employment share over this period of about
3.3 percentage points. This is not the case for
low-paid workers in elementary occupations
though their employment share has only slightly
decreased — at least compared to medium-
paid workers. The Figure impressively shows
that (relative) job losses are strongest for this
occupational group. Clerical support workers,
craft and related trade workers as well as plant
and machines operators and assemblers have
experienced a decline in employment shares by
1 to 2 percentage points. This corresponds to a
decline of about 10 to 14% with respect to their
employment share in 2008.

===== PDF_PAGE 311 =====
309
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
How can this job polarisation be explained? Research
has tried to explain this with the task approach.
The basic idea is that in order to produce a good
or service certain tasks have to be performed
and whether capital or (different types of) labour
perform a specific task can vary over time. That is,
the boundary between labour tasks and capital tasks
in production is permeable and shifting (Autor 2013).
The introduction of a new product or service and the
implementation of new production technologies
often involve novel tasks. These novel tasks are
often first assigned to high-educated workers as
they are more flexible and adaptable if problems
arise. Often, these tasks become more formalised
and codified, i.e., routinised, over time and allow for
automation as machines are typically more cost
efficient in performing routine tasks. This is why
technological change is biased towards replacing
labour in routine tasks. Using a Routine task intensity
and offshorability indicator for each occupation
category, Goos et al. (2014) provided empirical
evidence that this shift in the labour demand
between high-, medium- and low-paid occupations
in Europe is mainly driven by routine-biased
technological change. The offshoring of tasks as a
result of increasing globalisation also contributes to
this development but to a much lesser extent.
8.4.2 Skills development outlook
Recent forecasts show that the trend towards
upskilling and job polarisation in the European
labour market is likely to continue in the next decade
(Cedefop 2015). Overall, forecasts by Cedefop
show that in a baseline scenario employment will
grow by about 9 million jobs or 4.1% between
2013 and 2025
(156). But employment will not
rise equally across qualification levels. Due to an
increasing demand for high-skilled employees, and
a simultaneous rise in the supply of persons having
a tertiary education, employment of high-skilled
persons is estimated to increase by about 27%.
At the same time, employment of medium-skilled
and low-skilled persons will decline by -1.3% and
-19.8% (Figure II-8-28).
(156) Forecasts of the development of skills supply and demand are based
on a modular approach. It includes a multi-sectoral macroeconomic
model by country to estimate employment forecasts and additional
modules to estimate the expansion and replacement demand by
occupation and qualification levels. Additional modules are used to
estimate skills supply (see Cedefop 2012).
 ▶ Figure II-8-27 Employment by occupation(1) as % of total employment in the EU, 2008 and change in percentage
 points between 2008 and 2014
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (LFS), Damijan et al (2014)
Note:
(1)High, medium and low classifies occupations based on their average European wage (see Goos, Mannings and Salomons 2014).
Residual occupation class not reported: Armed forces occupations.
8 .3
1 3 .8
1 6 .3
1 0 .7
1 3 .9
8 .6
1 3 .7
9 .8
-2 .4
4 .8
-0 .4
-0 .9
-2 .1
-1 .2
3 .3
-0 .5
- 5 0 5 1 0 1 5 2 0
Ma n a g e r s
Pr o fe s s i o n a l s
T e c h n i c i a n s , a s s o c i a te p r o fe s s i o n a l s
C l e r i c a l s u p p o r t w o r k e r s
C r a /ft a n d r e l a te d tr a d e s w o r k e r s
Pl a n t a n d m a c h i n e o p e r a to r s , a s s e m b l e r s
Se r v i c e a n d s a l e s w o r k e r s
El e m e n ta r y o c c u p a ti o n s
H i g hMe d i u mL o w
F i g u r e I I-8-2 7 Em p l o y m e n t b y o c c u p a ti o n( 1 )a s % o f to ta l e m p l o y m e n t i n th e EU , 2 0 0 8 a n d c h a n g e i n p e r c e n ta g e p o i n ts
b e tw e e n 2 0 0 8 a n d 2 0 1 4
Em p l o y m e n t s h a r e , 2 0 0 8 C h a n g e i n e m p l o y m e n t s h a r e , 2 0 0 8-2 0 1 4
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Eurostat (LFS), Damijan et al (2014)
Note: (1)High, medium and low classifies occupations based on their average European wage (see Goos, Mannings and
Salomons 2014). Residual occupation class not reported: Armed forces occupations.

===== PDF_PAGE 312 =====
310
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Employment growth by occupations, however,
depicts a more nuanced pattern. According to
the forecasts employment of all three high-paid
occupations will substantially rise (Figure II-8-29).
As in the period 2008-2013 jobs of professionals
like scientists and engineers, health, teaching,
business and administration, IT and law
professionals are predicted to grow by 17% between
2013-2025. This development is forecasted for all
European countries despite a large cross-country
heterogeneity (Figure II-8-30). Likewise, employment
of technicians and associate professionals as well
as managers is supposed to increase by 15.3% and
19.6%, respectively. For both occupations, however,
country-level data reveals that this development is
not unified across Europe with 4 and 11 countries
showing a diverging negative trend for these high-
paid occupational groups.
The development that mainly routinised-cognitive
and routinised-manual tasks — typical for medium-
paid occupations — are destroyed by technological
progress and globalisation is supposed to continue
in the next decade. Forecasts show that the
prospects of medium-paid occupations will further
deteriorate predicting a job destruction rate that is
of similar range for clerks (- 10%), craft and related
trade workers (- 11.6%) and agricultural and
fishery workers (- 12.7%). Only plant and machine
operators and assemblers are supposed to be less
affected by job destruction (-1.8%).
 ▶ Figure II-8-28 Forecast of employment growth (%) in the EU by qualification, 2013-2025
 ▶ Figure II-8-29 Forecast of employment growth (%) in the EU by occupation(1), 2013-2025
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Cedefop: Skills Forecast for 2015
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Cedefop: Skills Forecast for 2015
Note:
(1)High, medium and low classifies occupations based on their average European wage (see Goos, Mannings and Salomons 2014).
2 6 .9
-1 .3
-1 9 .8
-3 0 -2 0 -1 0 0 1 0 2 0 3 0
H i g h-s k i l l e d
M e d i u m-s k i l l e d
L o w-s k i l l e d
Em p l o y m e n t g r o w th (% ), 2 0 1 3-2 0 2 5
F i g u r e I I-8-2 8 F o r e c a s t o f e m p l o y m e n t g r o w th (% ) i n th e EU b y q u a l i ﬁc a ti o n , 2 0 1 3-2 0 2 5
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Cedefop: Skills Forecast for 2015
1 9 .6
1 7 .2
1 5 .3
-9 .9
-1 1 .6
-1 .8
-1 2 .7
5 .0
7 .2
-1 5 -1 0 -5 0 5 1 0 1 5 2 0 2 5
Ma n a g e r s
Pr o fe s s i o n a l s
T e c h n i c i a n s , a s s o c i a te p r o fe s s i o n a l s
C l e r k s
C r a /ft a n d r e l a te d tr a d e s w o r k e r s
Pl a n t a n d m a c h i n e o p e r a to r s , a s s e m b l e r s
Sk i l l e d a g r i c u l tu r a l a n d ﬁs h e r y w o r k e r s
Se r v i c e s a l e s w o r k e r s
El e m e n ta r y o c c u p a ti o n s
H i g hMe d i u mL o w
Em p l o y m e n t g r o w th (% ), 2 0 1 3-2 0 2 5
F i g u r e I I-8-2 9 F o r e c a s t o f e m p l o y m e n t g r o w th (% ) i n th e EU b y o c c u p a ti o n( 1 ), 2 0 1 3-2 0 2 5
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Cedefop: Skills Forecast for 2015
Note: (1)High, medium and low classifies occupations based on their average European wage (see Goos, Mannings and
Salomons 2014).

===== PDF_PAGE 313 =====
311
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
 ▶ Figure II-8-30 Forecast of employment growth (%) for high-paid occupations, 2013-2025
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Cedefop: Skills Forecast for 2015
9 4
3 2 2 9 2 6 2 5 2 4 2 1 2 0 2 0 1 8 1 8
1 1 8 8 7 7 3 2 1 1
-4 -6 -6 -8 -1 0 -1 1 -1 2 -1 3
-2 4 -2 6 -2 7-4 0
-2 0
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
M a n a g e r s
3 8 3 6 3 6 3 5
3 2 3 2
2 9 2 9 2 8 2 8 2 8 2 6 2 6
2 3 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 1
1 8 1 8 1 8 1 7 1 7
1 5
1 3 1 2
1 0 9
5 5
3
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
P r o f e s s i o n a l s
4 4
3 7 3 7
3 3
2 6 2 5 2 3 2 2 2 0 1 7 1 7 1 6 1 5 1 5 1 4 1 4 1 3 1 2 1 0 1 0 9 8 7 7 5
1 0
0 -2
-8 -8-1 0
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
T e c h n i c i a n s a n d a s s o c i a te p r o fe s s i o n a l s
Finland
Finland
Finland
Luxembourg
Luxembourg
Luxembourg
United Kingdom
United Kingdom
United Kingdom
Netherlands
Netherlands
Netherlands
France
France
France
Ireland
Ireland
Ireland
Austria
Austria
Austria
Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
Germany
Germany
Germany
Belgium
Belgium
Belgium
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Estonia
Estonia
Estonia
Portugal
Portugal
Portugal
Malta
Malta
Malta
Cyprus
Cyprus
Cyprus
Slovenia
Slovenia
Slovenia
Latvia
Latvia
Latvia
Czech Republic
Czech Republic
Czech Republic
Greece
Greece
Greece
Lithuania
Lithuania
Lithuania
Slovakia
Slovakia
Slovakia
Poland
Poland
Poland
Italy
Italy
Italy
Hungary
Hungary
Hungary
Croatia
Croatia
Croatia
Spain
Spain
Spain
Romania
Romania
Romania
Bulgaria
Bulgaria
Bulgaria
Switzerland
Switzerland
Switzerland
Norway
Norway
Norway
Iceland
Iceland
Iceland
Figure II-8-30 Forecast of employment growth (%) for high-paid occupations, 2013-2025
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Cedefop: Skills Forecast for 2015

===== PDF_PAGE 314 =====
312
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
In contrast to medium-paid occupations but in
line with job polarisation, employment of low-
paid service and sales workers and workers in
elementary occupations are predicted to increase
by 5% and 7.2%, respectively. This sharply
contrasts with the finding that employment of
low-skilled persons is supposed to fall. Hence,
the forecasts on the employment growth by
qualification and occupation point towards
an important future risk of skill mismatch through
over-qualification. In particular, in times of weak
labour demand persons might be more willing
to accept jobs below their qualification level. A
similar conclusion can be drawn for the high-
skilled employees as the growth in employment
of high-skilled persons is stronger than the job of
high-paid occupations
(157).
(157) This line of reasoning neglects that wage differentials between
different occupation groups might change as a result of higher
qualification levels.
As a final piece of evidence related to the future
skills development, Figure II-8-31 shows the
estimated growth in job opportunities between
2013 and 2025. Job opportunities represent
the sum of net employment changes and
replacement demand. Replacement demand
is based on the fact that some jobs become
available due to people leaving work places for
different reasons (retirement, migration, etc.)
and these vacant positions need to be filled.
As Figure II-8-31 shows there will be more than
107 million jobs opportunities between 2013
and 2025. Job opportunities will also arise
mainly for higher- and lower-paid occupations.
More than 90% of them are forecasted to be a
result of the need to replace people leaving the
labour market, mainly to retire (Cedefop 2015).
In particular for medium-paid occupations
future job opportunities mainly relate to
replacement demand.
 ▶ Figure II-8-31 Forecast of job opportunities (millions of jobs) in the EU by occupation(1), 2013-2025
 Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Cedefop: Skills Forecast for 2015
Note:
(1)High, medium and low classifies occupations based on their average European wage (see Goos, Mannings and Salomons 2014).
9 .7
2 5 .6
1 4 .1
9 .5
5 .9
4 .2
6 .8
1 7 .4
1 4 .3
2 .4
6 .9
4 .0
-3 .2
-2 .9
-0 .2
-1 .3
2 .1
1 .7
7 .2
1 8 .7
1 0 .1
1 2 .7
8 .8
4 .4
8 .1
1 5 .3
1 2 .6
-5 0 5 1 0 1 5 2 0 2 5 3 0
Ma n a g e r s
Pr o fe s s i o n a l s
T e c h n i c i a n s , a s s o c i a te p r o fe s s i o n a l s
C l e r k s
C r a /ft a n d r e l a te d tr a d e s w o r k e r s
Pl a n t a n d m a c h i n e o p e r a to r s , a s s e m b l e r s
Sk i l l e d a g r i c u l tu r a l a n d ﬁs h e r y w o r k e r s
Se r v i c e s a l e s w o r k e r s
El e m e n ta r y o c c u p a ti o n s
H i g hMe d i u mL o w
Mi l l i o n s
F i g u r e I I-8-3 1 F o r e c a s t o f j o b o p p o r t u n i t i e s ( m i l l i o n s o f j o b s ) i n t h e E U b y o c c u p a t i o n( 1 ), 2 0 1 3-2 0 2 5
T o ta l j o b o p p o r tu n i ti e s Ex p a n s i o n d e m a n d R e p l a c e m e n t n e e d s
Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2016
Source: DG Research and Innovation - Unit for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies
Data: Cedefop: Skills Forecast for 2015
Note: (1)High, medium and low classifies occupations based on their average European wage (see Goos, Mannings and
Salomons 2014).

===== PDF_PAGE 315 =====
313
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
8.5 Conclusions
The relationship between skills, innovation and
employment growth has, for several reasons,
gained attention among researchers and policy-
makers in recent years. On the one hand, there is
rising educational attainment and supply of high-
skilled labour. On the other hand, the demand for
high-skilled labour has grown strongly as a result
of the increased complexity of technologies and
IT-enabled organisational innovations. At the
same time, the overall unemployment rates have
been growing in many European countries in
recent years affecting, in particular, young people
in southern Europe and leading to a situation in
which a large proportion of young people have
no opportunities to accumulate skills by training
on the job. This comes while Europe is facing a
multitude of grand challenges like increasing
competition from Asian countries.
This chapter of the Report has summarised and
analysed the complex interrelationship between
skills, innovation and employment growth in Europe.
The evidence shows a substantial and cumulative
relation between the supply of higher level education
and skills, the generation of new products, process
and organisational procedures and employment
growth, in particular for high-skilled occupations
but also for some low-skilled occupations. The key
findings can be summarised as follows:
• There has been an ongoing upskilling trend
in Europe in recent years, mainly coming
from a growing proportion of persons having
completed tertiary education. This increase in
supply is observed across nearly all countries
and across all sectors but it is not unified
across education fields. In most countries the
absolute number of persons with a tertiary
degree in science and engineering has grown,
but less than in other fields.
• Higher skill levels foster the likelihood of
introducing an innovation and they improve
innovation performance in European firms. This
confirms that skills are necessary to identify
and assess firm-specific knowledge in order
to generate new knowledge and innovation
but also in order to identify the value of new
external information from the environment and
to assimilate and apply it to commercial ends.
This positive relationship has been found for
both generic skills and field-specific skills.
• However, the results point towards a non-
negligible effect heterogeneity across
different types of skills as well as on different
types of innovation activities:
 - With respect to generic skills, the
innovation impact is particularly strong for
problem-solving skills, followed by literacy
and numeracy skills.
 - Engineering skills are particularly
important for developing new products,
less so for process innovation and not
conducive to organisational innovation.
 - In contrast, skills in mathematics,
statistics and database management
significantly stimulate organisational
and process innovation but not product
innovation as of yet.
 - Design skills are conducive to all three
types of innovation.
 - While multimedia, web design and
software development belong to the
group of skills most often employed by
enterprises, their marginal impact on
product innovation is smaller than that of
engineering and design.
 - The large impact software skills exert
on the introduction of new production
technologies and organisational methods
is outstanding.
 - Market novelties, as a measure for radical
innovation, are particularly fostered by
employing design skills, followed by
engineering skills and abilities in software
development and web design.
 - Process innovations are particularly driven
by software skills.
 - Skills in software development, mathematics,
statistics and database management as well

===== PDF_PAGE 316 =====
314
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
as in market research are main drivers of
organisational innovation.
 - The innovation-inducing effect of skills
depends on whether skills are employed
in-house or whether they are bought in
from external sources. Engineering and
design skills are more effective in-house
whereas the lack of in-house multimedia
and web design capacity can be more than
compensated by hiring external specialists.
 Policy should take this heterogeneity effect
into account when designing educational,
training or innovation programmes.
• Product innovation fosters employment
growth. Empirical evidence for process and
organisational innovation is mixed and also
rather limited.
• Europe undergoes an ongoing job polarisation
trend which describes the phenomenon that
the demand for both high- and low-skilled
and paid occupations has increased whereas
the demand for middling occupations has
decreased. Evidence shows that technological
change is biased towards replacing labour in
routine tasks mainly performed by medium-
paid occupations. The extent to which this
replacement takes place depends on the
relative costs of labour to capital. Policy should
avoid needless increases in labour costs for
this group of workers in order to not stimulate
labour displacement in this segment in the
first place. For those workers which have been
laid off, it will be necessary for policy to offer
them programmes in order to improve their
skill level and thus increase their chances to
participate in the labour market.
Currently, there is no evidence for a European-wide
skill shortage. However, certain occupations and
related skills — in particular in the area of science
and engineering, ICT and health professionals but
also metal and machinery workers — already
present a bottleneck for firms in Europe and
impair their competitiveness. These shortages do
not only reflect short-term developments on the
labour market but forecasts indicate that these
occupations are also associated with higher growth
potentials and job opportunities at least in the
next decade. As shown above, skills in these areas
are also drivers of innovation and employment
growth. Hence, policy should strive for reducing
skills shortages in these areas while taking into
account that reasons for skill mismatches are
quite different across occupations. Improving
the working environment could be, for instance,
a rather short-term policy instrument to increase
the labour supply of health professionals. On the
other hand, stimulating young people to take
up study or apprenticeship in current and future
shortage occupations is more of a long-term
oriented policy measure.
In addition, major upcoming technological changes
like the transition to a low-carbon economy, the
fourth industrial revolution (industry 4.0) and Big
data applications but also the aging population
and associated potential skill shortages will be
challenges for managing skills, innovation and
employment in the future. For instance, in order to
successfully manage the transition to a low-carbon
economy, green skills will be crucial. Green skills are
skills needed by the workforce in all sectors in order
to help the adaptation of the products, services and
processes to the changes due to climate change
and to environmental requirements and regulations
(OECD 2014). Here, Europe is still at the beginning.
Changes in curricula and competences have
mainly taken place for explicit green jobs but not
at a large scale. But skill shortages in this area
may result in increased costs to climate change
mitigation and adaptions (OECD 2014). Based on
the evidence on skill-biased organisational change,
we can also expect that, in particular, the changes
in industrial production due to industry 4.0 which
are associated with a stronger customisation of
products using intelligent automated methods of
self-optimisation, self-diagnosis and cognition,
will further change skill requirements of workers.
Exploiting the potential of Big data analysis, data
has to be processed with advanced analytical and
algorithm tools to generate useful information
in order to improve the factory floor or to better
address customer needs. Skills in these areas are
thus likely to become more important for innovation
in the future. Hence, policy should set the course
for stimulating skill development in these areas
as these skills will turn out to be a major future
competitive advantage for European firms.

===== PDF_PAGE 317 =====
315
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
Adams, J.D. (1999), The Structure of Firm R&D, The
Factor Intensity of Production and Skill Bias, Review
of Economics and Statistics 91, 499-510.
Aguirregabiria, V. and Alonso-Borrego, C. (2001),
Employment Occupational Structure, Technological
Capital and Reorganisation of Production, Labour
Economics 8, 43-73.
Autor, D. (2013), The Task Approach to Labour
Market: An Overview, Journal of Labour Market
Research 46, 185-199.
Acemoglu, D. and Autor, D. (2011), Skills, Tasks
and Technologies: Implications for Employment
and Earnings, in: Ashenfelter, O. and Card, D. (eds),
Handbook of Labour Economics, Vol. 4B, 1043-1171.
Armbruster, H., Bikfalvi, A., Kinkel, S. and Lay, G.
(2008), Organizational Innovation: The Challenge
of Measuring Non-Technical Innovation in Large-
Scale Surveys, Technovation 28, 644-657.
Autor, D., Katz, L. and Kearney, M. (2006), The
Polarization of the US Labour Market, American
Economic Review 96 (2), 189-194.
Autor, D., Katz, L. and Kearney, M. (2008), Trends
in US Wage Inequality: Revisiting the Revisionists,
Review of Economics and Statistics 90(2), 300-323.
Bartelsman, E., Dobbelaere, S. and Peters, B.
(2014), Allocation of Human Capital and Innovation
at the Frontier: Firm-Level Evidence on Germany
and the Netherlands, Industrial and Corporate
Change, forthcoming.
Bauer, T.K. and Bender, S. (2004) , Technological
Change, Organizational Change, and Job Turnover,
Labour Economics 11, 265-291.
Berman, E., Bound, J. and Griliches, Z. (1994),
Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor within
US Manufacturing Industries: Evidence from the
Annual Survey of Manufacturing, Quarterly Journal
of Economics 109, 367-397.
Bertschek, I. and Kaiser, U. (2004), Productivity
Effects of Organizational Change: Microeconometric
Evidence, Management Science 50, 394-404.
Black, S.E. and Lynch, L. (1996), Human Capital
Investments and Productivity, American Economic
Review 86, 263-307.
Black, S.E. and Lynch, L. (2001), How to Compete:
The Impact of Workplace Practices and Information
Technology on Productivity, Review of Economics
and Statistics 83(3), 434-445.
Black, S.E. and Lynch, L. (2004), What’s Driving
the New Economy?: The Benefits of Workplace
Innovation, The Economic Journal 114, F97-F116.
Bresnahan, T.F., Brynjolfsson, E. and Hitt, L.M.
(2002), Information Technology, Workplace
Organization and the Demand for Skilled Labor:
Firm-Level Evidence, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117, 339-376.
Brouwer, E., Kleinknecht, A. and Reijnen, J.O.N.
(1993). Employment Growth and Innovation at
the Firm Level — An Empirical Study, Journal of
Evolution Economics 3, 153-159.
Brouwer, E. and Kleinknecht, A. (1997), Measuring
the Unmeasurable: A Country’s Non-R&D
Expenditure on Product and Service Innovation,
Research Policy 25(8), 1235–1242.
Brynjolfsson, E. and Hitt, L.M. (2000), Beyond
Computation: Information Technology, Organizational
Transformation and Business Performance, Journal
of Economic Perspectives 14, 23-48.
Brynjolfsson, E. and Hitt, L.M. (2003), Computing
Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence, The Review of
Economics and Statistics 85, 793-808.
Brynjolfsson, E. and McAfee, A. (2012), Race
Against The Machine: How The Digital Revolution
Is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity,
and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and
the Economy, Research Brief, MIT Center for
Digital Business.
REFERENCES

===== PDF_PAGE 318 =====
316
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Cohen, W. M. and Levinthal, D. A. (1989),
Innovation and Learning: The Two Faces of R&D,
The Economic Journal 99(397), 569–596.
Corrado, C., Hulten, C. and Sichel, D. (2009),
Intangible Capital and Economic Growth, The
Review of Income and Wealth 55(3), 661-685.
Dachs, B. and Peters, B. (2014) , Innovation,
Employment Growth and Foreign Ownership of
Firms — A European Perspective, Research Policy
43, 214–232.
Damijan, J.P., Kostevc, C. and Stare, M. (2014),
Impact of Innovation on Employment and Skill
Upgrading of Firms, Simpatic Working Paper No 7.
Deneels, E. (2002), The Dynamics of Product
Innovation and Firm Competences, Strategic
Management Journal 23, 1095-1121.
Dosi, G. (1988), Sources, Procedures, and
Microeconomic Effects of Innovation, Journal of
Economic Literature 26(3), 1120–1171.
Doms, M., Dunne, T. and Troske, K. (1997),
Workers, Wages and Technology, Quarterly Journal
of Economics 112, 253-290.
Dunne, M., Haltiwanger, J. and Troske, K. (1996),
Technology and Jobs: Secular Changes and Cyclical
Dynamics, NBER worker paper 5656, Cambridge, Ma.
Edquist, C. (2005), Systems of Innovation:
Perspectives and Challenges, in: Fagerberg, J.,
Mowery, D. and Nelson, R. (eds), The Oxford
Handbook of Innovation, 181-208.
Entorf, H. and Pohlmeier, W. (1990), Employment,
Innovation and Export Activity: Evidence from Firm-
Level Data, in: Florens, J.-P., Ivaldi, M., Laffont, J.-J.,
Laisney, F. (Eds.), Microeconometrics: Surveys and
Applications, Oxford, 394–415.
European Commission (2014a). Mapping and
Analysing Bottleneck Vacancies in EU Labour
Markets. Overview report. Prepared by Karin
Attström, Sebastian Niedlich, Kees Sandvliet,
Hanna-Maija Kuhn, Edmund Beavor. Luxembourg:
Publications Office of the European Union.
Sandvliet, Hanna-Maija Kuhn, Edmund Beavor.
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.
Evangelista, R. and Vezzani, A. (2011), The Impact
of Technological and Organizational Innovations
on Employment in European Firms, Industrial and
Corporate Change, 1-29.
Falk, M. und Seim, K. (2000), Workers’ Skill Level
and Information Technology: A Censored Regression
Model, International Journal of Manpower 22 (1, 2),
98-120.
Falk, M. und Seim, K. (2001), The Impact of
Information Technology on High-Skilled Labour in
Services: Evidence From Firm Level Panel Data,
Economics of Innovation and New Technology 10,
289-323.
Fitzenberger, B. and Kohn, K. (2006), Skill
Wage Premia, Employment and Cohort Effects:
Are Workers in Germany all of the Same Type?,
University of Freiburg Working Paper.
Garcia, A., Jaumandreu, J. and Rodriguez, C.
(2004), Innovation and Jobs: Evidence from
Manufacturing Firms, MPRA Paper No 1204,
Munich.
Gera, S. and Gu, W. (2004), The Effect of
Organizational Innovation and Information and
Communications Technology on Firm Performance,
International Productivity Monitor 9, 37-51.
Gera, S., Gu, W. and Lin, Z. (2001), Technology
and The Demand for Skills in Canada: An Industry
Level Analysis, Canadian Journal of Economics 34,
132-148.
Goldin, C. and Katz, L. (2009), The Race Between
Education and Technology: The Evolution of US
Wage Differentials, 1890-2995, NBER Working
Paper 12984.
Goos, M. and Manning, A. (2007), Lousy and
Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of Work in
Britain, Review of Economics and Statistics 89(1),
118-133.

===== PDF_PAGE 319 =====
317
II-8. Innovation, Skills and Job Creation
Goos, M., Manning, A. and Salomons, A. (2014),
Explaining Job Polarization: Routine-Biased
Technological Change and Offshoring, American
Economic Review 104(8), 2509-2526.
Greenan, N. (2003), Organisational Change,
Technology, Employment and Skills: An Empirical
Study of French Manufacturing, Cambridge Journal
of Economics 27, 287-316.
Greenan, N. and Guellec, D. (2000), Technological
Innovation and Employment Reallocation, Labour
14, 547-590.
Hall, B.H., Lotti, F. and Mairesse, J. (2008) ,
Employment, Innovation, and Productivity: Evidence
from Italian Microdata, Industrial and Corporate
Change 17, 813-839.
Hall, B. H., Mairesse, J. and Mohnen, P. (2010),
Measuring the Returns to R&D, in B. Hall and N.
Rosenberg, eds, ‘Handbook of the Economics
of Innovation’, Vol. 2, Elsevier, chapter 22,
pp. 1033-1082.
Harrison, R., Jaumandreu, J., Mairesse, J. and
Peters, B. (2014), Does Innovation Stimulate
Employment? A Firm-Level Analysis Using
Comparable Micro-Data From Four European
Countries, International Journal of Industrial
Organization 35, 29-43.
Henderson, R.M. and Clark, K.B. (1990), Architectural
Innovation: The Reconfiguration of Existing Product
Technologies and the Failure of Established Firms,
Administrative Science Quarterly 35, 9-30.
Ichinowski, C., Shaw, K. and Prennushi, G. (1997),
The Effects of Human Resource Management
Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing
Lines, American Economic Review 87, 291-313.
Lachenmaier, S. and Rottmann, H. (2011),
Effects of Innovation on Employment: A Dynamic
Panel Analysis, International Journal of Industrial
Organization 29, 210-220.
Lam, A. (2005), Organization Innovation. In:
Fagerberg, J., Mowery, D.C., Nelson, R.R. (Eds.), The
Oxford Handbook of Innovation, Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 115-147.
Leitner, S.M., Pöschl, J. and Stehrer, R. (2011),
Changes Begets Change: Employment Effects of
Technological and Non-Technological Innovations
— A Comparison Across Countries, WIIW Working
Paper No 72, Wien.
Lokshin, B., Van Gils, A. and Bauer, E. (2009),
Crafting Firm Competencies to Improve Innovative
Performance, European Management Journal 27,
187-196.
Kaiser, U. (2000), New Technologies and the
Demand for Heterogeneous Labor: Firm-Level
Evidence for German Business-Related Services,
Economics of Innovation and New Technology 9,
465-484.
Kaiser, U. (2001) , The Impact of Foreign
Competition and New Technologies on the Demand
for Heterogeneous Labor: Empirical Evidence From
the German Business-Related Services Sector,
Review of Industrial Organization 19, 109-120.
Katz, L. and Autor, D. (1999), Changes in the Wage
Structure and Earnings Inequality, in: Ashenfelter, O.
and Card, D. (eds), Handbook of Labour Economics,
Vol 3A, 1463-1555.
Katz, L., Loveman, G. and Blanchflower, D. (1995), A
Comparison of Changes in the Structure of Wages in
Four OECD Countries, in: Freeman, R. and Katz, L. (eds),
Differences and Changes in Wage Structures, NBER.
König, H., G. Licht, and Buscher, H. (1995),
Employment, Investment and Innovation at the
Firm Level, in: OECD (Ed.), The OECD Jobs Study —
Investment, Productivity and Employment, Paris,
67–81.
Katsoulacos, Y. (1986), The Employment Effect
of Technical Change. A Theoretical Study of
New Technology and the Labour Market. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Kim, Y. (2002), A State of Art Review of the Impact
of Technology on Skill Demand in OECD Countries,
Journal of Education and Work 15 (1), 89-109.
Konings, J. and Vanormelingen, S. (2009), The
Impact of Training on Productivity and Wages: Firm
Level Evidence, CEPR Discussion Papers 7473.

===== PDF_PAGE 320 =====
318
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Machin, S. (1996), Changes in the Relative Demand
for Skills in the UK Labor Market, in: Booth, A. and
Snower, D. (eds), Acquiring Skills: Market Failure.
Their symptoms and policy responses. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 129-146.
Nelson, R. R. and Winter, S. (1982), An Evolutionary
Theory of Economic Change, Cambridge, MA.
OECD, 2015 : Key Facts about the Survey of
Adult Skills (PIAAC). Available online: http://www.
oecd.org/site/piaac/Key%20facts%20about%20
the%20Survey%20of%20Adult%20Skills.pdf
(May 19
th, 2015).
Peters, B. (2008), Innovation and Firm Performance.
An Empirical Investigation for German Firms, Vol. 38
of ZEW Economic Studies, Heidelberg, New York.
Peters, B. (2009), Persistence of Innovation:
Stylised Facts and Panel Data Evidence, Journal of
Technology Transfer 34/2, 226-243.
Peters, B., Riley, R. and Siedschlag, I. (2013), The
Influence of Technological and Non-Technological
Innovation on Employment Growth in European
Service Firms, Servicegap Discussion Paper No 40,
Mannheim.
Peters, B., Dachs, B., Dünser, M., Hud, M., Köhler,
C. and Rammer, C. (2014), Firm Growth, Innovation
and the Business Cycle, Background Report for the
2014 Competitiveness Report.
Piva, M. and Vivarelli, M. (2002), The Skill Bias:
Comparative Evidence and an Econometric Test,
International Review of Applied Economics, 16 (3),
347-357.
Piva, M., Santarelli, E. and Vivarelli, M. (2005), The
Skill Bias Effect of Technological and Organisational
Change: Evidence and Policy Implications, Research
Policy 34, 141-157.
Polder, M., Van Leeuwen, G., Mohnen, P.
and Raymond, W. (2010), Product, Process
and Organizational Innovation: Drivers,
Complementarity, and Productivity Effects. MPRA
Paper No 23719, Munich.
Reymen, D., M. Gerrad, P. de Beer, A. Meierkord,
M. Paskov, V. Di Stasio, V. Donlevy, I. Atkinson, A.
Makulec, U. Famira-Mühlberger and H. Lutz (2015),
Labour Market Shortages in the European Union,
Brussels.
Schmidt, T. and Rammer, C. (2007), Non-
Technological and Technological Innovation:
Strange Bedfellows?. ZEW Discussion Paper No 07-
052, Mannheim.
Schumpeter, J. (1934). The Theory of Economic
Development: An Inquiry into Profits, Capital,
Credit, Interest and the Business Cycle. Transaction
Publishers, New Brunswick and London.
Smolny, W. (1998), Innovations, Prices and
Employment — A Theoretical Model and
an Empirical Application for West German
Manufacturing Firms, Journal of Industrial
Economics XLVI(3), 359–381.
Spitz-Oener, A. (2006), Technical Change, Job
Tasks and Rising Educational Demands: Looking
Outside the Wage Structure, Journal of Labour
Economics 24(2), 235-270.
Tether, B., Mina, A., Consoli, D. and Gagliardi,
D. (2005), A Literature Review on Skills and
Innovation; How Does Successful Innovation
Impact on the Demand for Skills and How Do Skills
Drive Innovation?, ESRC Centre on Innovation and
Competition, University of Manchester.
Toner, P. (2011), Workforce Skills and Innovation:
An Overview of Major Themes in the Literature,
OECD Working Paper, Paris.
Van Reenen, J. (1997), Employment and
Technological Innovation: Evidence from U.K.
Manufacturing Firms, Journal of Labour Economics
15, 255-284.
Vivarelli, M. (2007), Innovation and Employment: A
Survey, IZA DP No 2621, Bonn.
Vivarelli, M. (2012), Innovation, Employment and
Skills in Advanced and Developing Countries: A
Survey of the Literature, IZA DP No 6291, Bonn.

===== PDF_PAGE 321 =====
319
SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS
Country codes
BE Belgium FI Finland
BG Bulgaria SE Sweden
CZ Czech Republic UK United Kingdom
DK Denmark EU European Union
DE Germany IS Iceland
EE Estonia LI Liechtenstein
IE Ireland NO Norway
EL Greece CH Switzerland
ES Spain MK The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
FR France RS Serbia
HR Croatia TR Turkey
IT Italy IL Israel
CY Cyprus ERA European Research Area
LV Latvia US United States
LT Lithuania JP Japan
LU Luxembourg CN China
HU Hungary KR South Korea
MT Malta IN India
NL Netherlands TW Chinese Taipei
AT Austria SG Singapore
PL Poland RU Russian Federation
PT Portugal ZA South Africa
RO Romania BR Brazil
SI Slovenia RoW Rest of the world
SK Slovakia
Other abbreviations
: ‘not available’
- ‘not applicable’ or ‘real zero’ or ‘zero by default’
Methodological Annex

===== PDF_PAGE 322 =====
320
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
SCIENCE, RESEARCH AND INNOVATION
PERFORMANCE OF THE EU
Business R&D intensity
(BERD intensity)
Definition: Business enterprise expenditure on
R&D (BERD) as % of Gross domestic product (GDP)
Sources: Eurostat, OECD
Public R&D intensity
Definition: Public expenditure on R&D (GOVERD
plus HERD) as % of Gross domestic product (GDP).
Sources: Eurostat, OECD
Government budget appropriations
or outlays for R&D (GBAORD)
Definition: Government budget appropriations or
outlays for R&D (GBAORD) is defined according
to the OECD Frascati Manual (2002) definition.
The data are based on information obtained from
central government statistics and are broken down
by socio-economic objectives in accordance with
the nomenclature for the analysis and comparison
of scientific programmes and budgets (NABS).
Source: Eurostat
Framework Programme
Definition: The Framework Programmes for
Research and Technological Development are the
EU’s main instruments for supporting collaborative
research, development and innovation in science,
engineering and technology. Participation is on an
internationally collaborative basis and must involve
European partners. The first Framework Programme
was launched in 1984. The seventh Framework
Programme (FP7) covers the period 2007-2013.
Source: DG Research and Innovation
R&D intensity
Definition: Gross domestic expenditure on R&D
(GERD) as % of Gross domestic product (GDP)
Sources: Eurostat, OECD
Gross domestic product (GDP)
Definition: Gross domestic product (GDP) data
have been compiled in accordance with the
European System of National and Regional
Accounts (ESA 2010).
Source: Eurostat
Gross domestic expenditure on R&D (GERD)
Definition: Gross domestic expenditure on R&D
(GERD) is defined according to the OECD Frascati
Manual (2002) definition. GERD can be broken
down by four sectors of performance:
(i) Business enterprise expenditure on R&D (BERD);
(ii) Government intramural expenditure on R&D
(GOVERD);
(iii) Higher education expenditure on R&D (HERD);
(iv) Private non-profit expenditure on R&D (PNPRD).
GERD can also be broken down by four sources of
funding:
(i) Business enterprise;
(ii) Government;
(iii) Other national sources;
(iv) Abroad.
Sources: Eurostat, OECD
Public expenditure on R&D
Definition: For the purposes of this publication,
public expenditure on R&D is defined as Government
intramural expenditure on R&D (GOVERD) plus
Higher education expenditure on R&D (HERD).
Sources: Eurostat, OECD

===== PDF_PAGE 323 =====
321
II. Methodological Annex
Structural Funds
Definition: Structural Funds are funds intended to
facilitate structural adjustment of specific sectors,
regions, or combinations of both, in the European Union.
Structural Funds for RTDI include data from sectors
involving research and development, technological
innovation, entrepreneurship, and human capital.
Source: DG Regional and Urban policy
Purchasing Power Standards (PPS)
Definition: Financial aggregates are sometimes
expressed in Purchasing Power Standards (PPS),
rather than in euro based on exchange rates.
PPS are based on comparisons of the prices of
representative and comparable goods or services
in different countries in different currencies on a
specific date. The calculations on R&D investments
in real terms are based on constant 2005 PPS.
Source: Eurostat
Value Added
Definition: Value added is current gross value added
measured at producer prices or at basic prices, depending
on the valuation used in the national accounts. It
represents the contribution of each industry to GDP.
Sources: Eurostat, OECD
Venture Capital
Definition: Venture Capital investment is defined
as private equity being raised for investment in
companies. Venture Capital includes seed, start-up
and later stage capital.
Sources: Eurostat, NVCA
Small and medium-size
enterprises (SMEs)
Definition: Small and medium-size enterprises
(SMEs) are defined as enterprises having fewer
than 250 employees.
Sources: Eurostat, OECD
Multifactor productivity (MFP)
Definition: Multi-factor productivity (MFP) relates
a change in output to several types of inputs. MFP
is often measured residually, as that change in
output that cannot be accounted for by the change
in combined inputs.
Source: OECD
Capital deepening
Capital deepening refers to the annual rate of change
in capital intensity. Capital intensity is defined as the
ratio of capital services per hour worked.
Source: OECD
Unemployment rate
The number of people unemployed as a % of the
labour force.
Sources: Eurostat (LFS), DG Economic and Social Affairs, OECD
Employment rate
The number of persons employed aged 15-64
years as % of total population aged 15-64 years
based on resident population concept.
Sources: Eurostat (LFS), OECD

===== PDF_PAGE 324 =====
322
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Higher Education
Data on education up to and including 2012 are based on ISCED (158) 1997. Data from 2013 onwards are
based on ISCED 2011. The table below shows the correspondence between ISCED 1997 and ISCED 2011
levels (at 1-digit ISCED 1997):
(158) International Standard Classification of Education
- Researchers: “Researchers are professionals
engaged in the conception or creation of new
knowledge, products, processes, methods and
systems and also in the management of the
projects concerned”. R&D may be either the
primary function or a secondary function. It
may also be a significant part-time activity.
Therefore, the measurement of personnel employed
in R&D involves two exercises:
- Measuring their number in headcounts (HC)
whereby the total number of people who are
mainly or partially employed in R&D are counted;
- Measuring their R&D activities in full-time
equivalence (FTE): the number of people
engaged in R&D is expressed in full-time
equivalents on R&D activities.
Source: Eurostat
Job-to-job mobility
Definition: Mobility (job-to-job mobility) of
employed HRST is built up by considering the
number of HRST employed in the years T-1 and T,
that have changed jobs during the twelve month
period. It is expressed as a proportion of the total
number of HRST employed in year T.
Source: Eurostat
Human Resources for Science
and Technology (HRST), sR&D
personnel and researchers
The Canberra Manual proposes a definition of HRST
as people who either have higher education or are
employed in positions that normally require such
education. HRST applies to people who fulfil one or
other of the following conditions:
a) Have successfully completed education at
the tertiary level in an S&T field of study
(HRSTE - Education);
b) Not formally qualified as above, but
employed in an S&T occupation where the
above qualifications are normally required
(HRSTO - Occupation).
HRST Core (HRSTC) refers to people with both tertiary-
level education and an S&T occupation. Scientists and
engineers are defined as ISCO
 (159) categories 21 (physical,
mathematical and engineering science professionals)
and 22 (life science and health professionals).
The Frascati Manual (2002) proposes the following
definitions of R&D personnel and researchers:
- R&D personnel: “All persons employed
directly on R&D should be counted, as well as
those providing direct services such as R&D
managers, administrators, and clerical staff.” ;
(159) International Standard Classification of Occupations
ISCED 1997
(data up to 2012)
ISCED 2011
(data from 2013 onwards)
ISCED 5: Tertiary education (first stage) not
leading directly to an advanced
research qualification
ISCED 5:
 Short-cycle tertiary education
ISCED 6: Bachelor’s or equivalent level
ISCED 7: Master’s or equivalent level
ISCED 6: Tertiary education (second stage)
leading to an advanced research
qualification (PhD or doctorate)
ISCED 8:
 Doctoral or equivalent level
Source: Eurostat

===== PDF_PAGE 325 =====
323
II. Methodological Annex
Patent Cooperation Treaty
(PCT) – International Patents
Definitions: The Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT)
is an international treaty, administered by the
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO),
signed by 133 Paris Convention countries. The PCT
makes it possible to seek patent protection for an
invention simultaneously in each of a large number
of countries by filing a single “international” patent
application instead of filing several separate
national or regional applications. Indicators
based on PCT applications are relatively free
from the “home advantage” bias (proportionate
to their inventive activity, domestic applicants
tend to file more patents in their home country
than non-resident applicants). The granting of
patents remains under the control of the national
or regional patent offices. The PCT patents
considered are ‘PCT patents, at international
phase, designating the European Patent Office’.
The country of origin is defined as the country of
the inventor. If one application has more than one
inventor, the application is divided equally among
all of them and subsequently among their countries
of residence, thus avoiding double counting.
“PCT is an option for possible future patenting,
that provides the applicant with a further delay
before deciding to apply or not. The delay can be
6 to 12 months. The relation between the PCT
option and patent value is not predictable (Grupp
and Schmoch, 1999). The PCT process provides
the advantage of a longer investigation of the
technological potential of the invention, and in
case of a negative assessment, the application
can be withdrawn before entering into the
expensive regional (EPO) phase. Having passed
this test, the PCT applications that are continued
towards entering the regional phase are likely
the ones of higher value. However, the argument
can be reversed in the way that inventions with
unclear market potential are passed through the
PCT route, whereas those with an unquestionable
potential are directly applied at the regional phase,
since the direct path is cheaper.” (Guellec & van
Pottelsberghe, 2000).
Source: OECD
Scientific Publications
Definition: Publications are research articles,
reviews, notes and letters published in referenced
journals which are included in the Scopus database
of Elsevier. Bibliometric indicators were calculated
using either full counting (i.e. each paper was
counted once for each entity listed in the address
field) or fractional counting (i.e. each author / entity
is attributed a fraction of the paper, so that the
total across entities adds up to the total number
of papers), as specified. In the case of the full
counting method, for the EU aggregate, double
counts of multiple occurrences of EU Member
States in the same record were excluded.
Source: Scopus (Elsevier); treatments and calculations:
Science Metrix
Average of Relative Citations (ARC)
The ARC is an indicator of the scientific impact of
papers produced by a given entity (e.g. the world,
a country, a NUTS2 region, an institution) relative
to the world average (i.e. the expected number
of citations). The number of citations received by
each publication is counted for the year in which
it was published and for the three subsequent
years. For papers published in 2010, for example,
citations received in 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013
are counted.
To account for different citation patterns across
fields and subfields of science (e.g. there are
more citations in biomedical research than in
mathematics), each publication’s citation count
is divided by the average citation count of all
publications of the corresponding document type
(i.e. a review would be compared to other reviews,
whereas an article would be compared to other
articles) that were published the same year in the
same subfield to obtain a Relative Citation count
(RC). The ARC of a given entity is the average of
the RCs of the papers belonging to it. An ARC value
above one means that a given entity is cited more
frequently than the world average, while a value
below one means the reverse.

===== PDF_PAGE 326 =====
324
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Methodology of co-publication analysis
The methodology used for the co-publication
analysis involved three types of analysis:
a) Single country publications cover co-
publications that involve domestic partners
only; this is the sum of all papers written
by one or more authors from a given
country (and non-nationals resident in that
country). Although the literature usually
distinguishes between domestic single
publications (including one or more authors
belonging to the same institution) and
domestic co-publications (i.e. authors within
the same country but from different main
organisations), for the aim of the current
analysis the sum of the two categories have
been treated as single country publications.
b) EU transnational co-publications refer to
international co-publications which involve
at least one author from an EU country.
This category includes both co-publications
by authors from at least two different
EU Member States (as defined by research
papers containing at least two authors’
addresses in different countries) and co-
publications between one or several authors
from the EU together with at least one author
from a country outside the EU.
c) Extra-EU co-publications is a sub-category of
the broader EU transnational co-publications.
It refers exclusively to international co-
publications involving at least one EU author
and at least one non-EU author, as defined by
the authors’ addresses in different countries.
An important methodological issue is the way
in which a co-publication is quantified. The full
counting method has been used in this report,
meaning that a single international co-published
paper is assigned to more than one country
of scientific origin. If, for example, the authors’
addresses signal three different countries in the
EU, the publication is counted three times – once
for each country mentioned. Therefore, in a matrix
of co-publications between countries, the number
of publications mentioned is not a completely
accurate indicator of the number of publications
being co-authored, but rather how often a country
or region is involved in co-publications.
Public-Private co-publications
Definition: Number of public-private co-authored
research publications. The private sector excludes
the private medical and health sector.
Source: DG Research and Innovation, based on Scopus data-
base (SciVal)
Matching scientific subfields
to FP7 thematic priorities
The matching process was undertaken using
expert decisions supported by different statistics.
The first step was to delineate the breadth of each
thematic priority by reading the Work Programmes
(http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/find-doc_en.html)
for all themes. The documents were also used
to extract relevant keywords that were searched
in Scopus. Statistics were produced to identify
the association between the thematic priorities
(through keywords) and the fields and subfields
(through the classification of the articles retrieved).
The resulting matching scheme matches S&T
field(s) and/or subfield(s) to each thematic priority.
All themes have been matched to at least one
relevant field/subfield. No S&T field or subfield has
been matched with more than one theme, with the
exception of Aerospace & Aeronautics, which has
been matched to both Space and Aeronautics. It
is impossible to split Aerospace & Aeronautics into
two subfields, even when using a match based on
journals, because many journals present research
on both aerospace science and aeronautics (e.g.
Aircraft Engineering and Aerospace Technology,
Transactions of the Japan Society for Aeronautical
and Space Sciences, Canadian Aeronautics and
Space Journal). However, it should be noted that
this subfield includes many more articles on space
science than on aeronautics.
It should also be noted that this solution contains
missing links between thematic priorities and scientific
papers that are not classified under the suggested
matching S&T field/subfield (false negatives), as
well as spurious links between thematic priorities
and scientific papers that are classified under the
suggested match but are not relevant to the theme.
Nevertheless, this matching scheme is believed to be
highly appropriate for linking the FP7 priorities with
scientific output (through bibliometric data).

===== PDF_PAGE 327 =====
325
II. Methodological Annex
FP7 Thematic Priorities Science-Metrix Field Science-Metrix SubField
1. Health
Biomedical Research All subfields
Clinical Medicine All subfields
Psychology & Cognitive Sciences All subfields
Public Health & Health Services All subfields
2a. Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Food, Agriculture and Fisheries All subfields
2b. Biotechnology
Enabling & Strategic Technologies Biotechnology
Enabling & Strategic Technologies Bioinformatics
3. Information and Communication
Technologies
Information and Communication
Technologies All subfields
4a. Nanosciences and
Nanotechnologies Enabling & Strategic Technologies Nanoscience & Nanotechnology
4b. Materials
(excluding nanotechnologies)
Enabling & Strategic Technologies Materials
Chemistry Polymers
4c. New Production Technologies
Engineering Industrial Engineering & Automation
Engineering Operations Research
4d. Construction and Construction
Technologies Built Environment & Design All subfields
5. Energy Enabling & Strategic Technologies Energy
6. Environment
(including Climate Change)
Earth & Environmental Sciences Environmental Sciences
Engineering Environmental Engineering
Earth & Environmental Sciences Meteorology & Atmospheric Sciences
Earth & Environmental Sciences Oceanography
Biology Ecology
7a. Aeronautics Engineering Aerospace & Aeronautics
7b. Automobiles Engineering Automobile Design & Engineering
7c. Other Transport Technologies
Economics & Business Logistics & Transportation
Engineering Mechanical Engineering & Transports
Engineering Civil Engineering
8a. Socio-Economic Sciences
Communication & Textual Studies Communication & Media Studies
Economics & Business All subfields except Logistics &
Transportation
Social Sciences All subfields
8b. Humanities
Anthropology, Archeology & History All subfields
Communication & Textual Studies Languages & Linguistics
Communication & Textual Studies Literary Studies
Philosophy & Theology All subfields
Visual & Performing Arts All subfields
9. Space Engineering Aerospace & Aeronautics
10. Security Enabling & Strategic Technologies Strategic, Defence & Security Studies
Source: Science-Metrix

===== PDF_PAGE 328 =====
326
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
High-tech (HT) manufacturing
Definition: High-tech manufacturing includes the
following sectors (NACE Rev.2 codes are given
in brackets): basic pharmaceutical products and
pharmaceutical preparations (21), computer,
electronic and optical products (26).
Sources: Eurostat, OECD.
Medium-high-tech (MHT)
manufacturing
Definition: Medium-high-tech manufacturing
includes the following sectors (NACE Rev.2 codes
are given in brackets): chemicals and chemical
products (20), electrical equipment (27), machinery
and equipment (28), motor vehicles, trailers and
semi-trailers (29), other transport equipment (30).
Sources: Eurostat, OECD
Knowledge-intensive services (KIS)
Definition: Knowledge-intensive services (KIS)
include the following sectors (NACE Rev.2 codes
are given in brackets): water transport (50), air
transport (51), publishing activities (58), motion
picture, video and television programme production,
sound recording and music publishing activities
(59), programming and broadcasting activities (60),
telecommunications (61), computer programming,
consultancy and related activities (62), information
service activities (63), financial service activities,
except insurance and pension funding (64), insurance,
reinsurance and pension funding, except compulsory
social security (65), activities auxiliary to financial
services and insurance activities (66), legal and
accounting activities (69), activities of head offices,
management, consultancy activities (70), architectural
and engineering activities, technical testing and
analysis (71), scientific research and development
(72), advertising and market research (73), other
professional, scientific and technical activities (74),
veterinary activities (75), employment activities
(78), security and investigation activities (80), public
administration and defence; compulsory social security
(84), education (85), human health activities (86),
residential care activities (87), social work activities
without accommodation (88), creative arts and
entertainment activities (90), libraries, archives,
museums and other cultural activities (91), gambling
and betting activities (92), sports activities and
amusement and recreation activities (93).
Sources: Eurostat, OECD
Knowledge-intensive activities (KIAs)
Definition: Knowledge-intensive activities (KIAs)
are defined as economic sectors in which more than
33% of the employed labour force has completed
academic-oriented tertiary education. They cover
all sectors in the economy, including manufacturing
and services sectors, and can be defined at two and
three-digit levels of the statistical classification of
economic activities.
Source: Eurostat
Knowledge-intensive activities
– business industries (KIABI)
Definition: KIABI corresponds to the economic
sectors defined as KIA with the exception of the
following sectors (NACE Rev.2 codes in brackets):
public administration and defence; compulsory
social security (84), education (85), human health
activities (86), libraries, archives, museums
and other cultural activities (91), activities of
membership organisations (94) and activities of
extraterritorial organisations and bodies (99).
Source: Eurostat
Innovation Union Scoreboard
(IUS) index
Definition: The IUS index measures innovation
performance using a composite indicator (the
Summary Innovation Index – SII), which summarizes
the performance of a range of different indicators.
The Innovation Union Scoreboard distinguishes
between three main types of indicators – Enablers,
Firm activities and Outputs – and eight innovation
dimensions, capturing in total 25 indicators.

===== PDF_PAGE 329 =====
327
II. Methodological Annex
Innovation Output Indicator
where
PCT = Number of patent applications filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty per billion GDP;
Patent counts are based on the priority date, the inventor’s country of residence and fractional
counts (Eurostat/OECD).
KIABI = Employment in knowledge-intensive activities in business industries (including financial
services) as % of total employment;
Knowledge-intensive activities are defined, based on EU Labour Force Survey data, as all NACE Rev.2
industries at 2-digit level where at least 33 % of employment has a higher education degree (Eurostat).
COMP = 0.5 × GOOD + 0.5 × SERV
GOOD = High-tech and medium- tech products exports as % of total exports
Sum of product exports in Standard International Trade Classification (SITC) Rev.3 classes: 266,
267, 512, 513, 525, 533, 54, 553, 554, 562, 57, 58, 591, 593, 597, 598, 629, 653, 671, 672,
679, 71, 72, 731, 733, 737, 74, 751, 752, 759, 76, 77, 78, 79, 812, 87, 88 and 891 (Eurostat
(COMEXP)/UN (Comtrade)).
SERV = Knowledge-intensive services exports as % of total service exports
(exports of knowledge-intensive services are measured by the sum of credits in EBOPS 2010
(Extended Balance of Payments Services Classification)
items SC1, SC2, SC3A, SF, SG, SI, SJ, SK1 (UN/Eurostat)).
DYN = Employment in fast-growing firms in innovative business industries, including financial
services (NACE Rev. 2 sections B-N & S95).
Source: DG Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs (Innovation Union Scoreboard 2015)

===== PDF_PAGE 330 =====
328
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
where
of existing technology, or the use of other
knowledge acquired by the enterprise.
Product innovative enterprises are those which
introduced new or significantly improved goods and/
or services with respect to their capabilities, user
friendliness, components or sub-systems. Changes
of a solely aesthetic nature and the simple resale
of new goods and services purchased from other
enterprises are not considered as innovation.
Process innovative enterprises implemented
new or significantly improved production process,
distribution method or supplying activity.
Organisational innovative enterprises implemented
a new organisational method in the enterprise’s business
practices, workplace organisation or external relations.
Marketing innovative enterprises implemented
a new marketing concept or strategy that differs
significantly from enterprises’ existing marketing
methods and which has not been used before. It
requires significant changes in product design or
packaging, product placement, product promotion
or pricing and excludes seasonal, regular and other
routine changes in marketing methods.
Source: Eurostat
Community Design System (CD)
Definition: A design is the outward appearance
of a product or part of it, resulting from the lines,
contours, colours, shape, texture, materials and/
or its ornamentation. The design or shape of a
product can be synonymous with the branding
and image of a company and can become an
asset with increasing monetary value. A registered
Community design (RCD) is an exclusive right that
covers the outward appearance of a product or
part of it. Community Trademarks and Design
refer to trade mark and design protections
throughout the European Union, which covers 28
countries. The Office for Harmonization in the
Internal Market (OHIM) is the official office of the
European Union for the registration of Community
Trademarks and Designs.
Source: OHIM
Innovative enterprises
Definition: These are enterprises that introduce
new or significantly improved products (goods or
services) to the market or those that implement
new or significantly improved processes.
Innovations are based on the results of new
technological developments, new combinations
= Innovativeness coefficient of sector s, resulting from the
product of Community Innovation Survey and Labour Force
Survey scores for each sector at EU level.
Innovativeness coefficients have been updated from (CIS*KIA)
2008 to (CIS*KIA) 2010.
= The employment in fast-growing firms in sector s and country C.
= The employment in fast-growing firms in country C.
= The weights of the component indicators, fixed over time,
and statistically computed in such a way that the component
indicators are equally balanced.
The current values are (27, 19, 33, 21).
Source: DG Research and Innovation (Commission Staff Working Document - Developing an indicator of innovation output) – Unit
for the Analysis and Monitoring of National Research Policies

===== PDF_PAGE 331 =====
329
II. Methodological Annex
Fast-growing enterprises /
High-Growth Enterprises
Definition: High-Growth Enterprises (HGEs) are
defined as enterprises with an average annual
growth in employees greater than 10 % a year, over
a three-year period, and with 10 or more employees
at the beginning of the observation period.
Source: Eurostat
Ease of doing business
Definition: Doing Business measures regulations
affecting 11 areas of the life of a business. Ten
of these areas are included in this year’s ranking
on the ease of doing business: starting a business,
dealing with construction permits, getting electricity,
registering property, getting credit, protecting minority
investors, paying taxes, trading across borders,
enforcing contracts and resolving insolvency. Doing
Business also measures labour market regulation,
which is not included in this year’s ranking.
The indicators are used to analyse economic
outcomes and identify what reforms of business
regulation have worked, where and why.
The Starting a business indicator measures the
number of procedures, time and cost for a small
and medium-size limited liability company to start
up and formally operate.
The Enforcing contracts indicator assesses the
efficiency of the judicial system by following the
evolution of a commercial sale dispute over the
quality of goods and tracking the time, cost and
number of procedures involved from the moment
the plaintiff files the lawsuit until payment is
received.
Source: World Bank
Product Market Regulation
Definition: The OECD Indicators of Product Market
Regulation (PMR) are a comprehensive and
internationally-comparable set of indicators that
measure the degree to which policies promote or
inhibit competition in areas of the product market
where competition is viable. They measure the
economy-wide regulatory and market environments
in 34 OECD countries in (or around) 1998, 2003,
2008 and 2013, and in another set of non-OECD
countries in 2013. They are consistent across time
and countries. Users of the data must be aware
that they may no longer fully reflect the current
situation in fast reforming countries. The indicators
cover formal regulations in the following areas:
state control of business enterprises; legal and
administrative barriers to entrepreneurship; barriers
to international trade and investment.
Source: OECD

===== PDF_PAGE 332 =====
330
Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU
Employment protection indicators
Definition: The OECD indicators of employment
protection legislation measure the procedures
and costs involved in dismissing individuals or
groups of workers and the procedures involved in
hiring workers on fixed-term or temporary work
agency contracts.
Source: OECD
Employment protection
The OECD indicators of employment protection are
synthetic indicators of the strictness of regulation
on dismissals and the use of temporary contracts.
For each year, indicators refer to regulations in force
on the 1
st of January.
Source: OECD

===== PDF_PAGE 333 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 334 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 335 =====
How to obtain EU publications
Free publications:
• one copy:
 via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu);
• more than one copy or posters/maps:
 from the European Union’s representations (http://ec.europa.eu/represent_en.htm);
 from the delegations in non-EU countries (http://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/index_en.htm);
 by contacting the Europe Direct service (http://europa.eu/europedirect/index_en.htm) or
 calling 00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 (freephone number from anywhere in the EU) (*).
 (*) The information given is free, as are most calls (though some operators, phone boxes or hotels may charge you).
Priced publications:
• via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu);

===== PDF_PAGE 336 =====
"To tackle the EU’s productivity challenge and make its economy
more knowledge intensive, we need to put in place the right
incentives and conditions for businesses to innovate. For this to
happen, we need to focus on three strategic priorities:
Open Innovation, Open Science and Open to the World."

Carlos Moedas
European Commissioner for Research, Science and Innovation
Studies and reports
doi:10.2777/427046
KI-04-15-512-EN-N
