Page 1 / 7 
2025 
HIGHLIGHTS  
‣ Although EU players (firms, research institutions, and government bodies) have increased their 
twin technology (green and digital) patents by an average of 14% annually since 2009, the EU 
faces challenges in enhancing its competitive stance against global players, particularly China.
‣ It is crucial to monitor the evolution of the EU's international partnerships regarding co-
application 
in twin patents to avoid becoming overly dependent on foreign collaborations.
‣ Most EU firms engaged in twin transition innovation are mainly u nder domestic control, 
reflecting the global trend.
‣ The EU reached by 2022 a competitive edge in twin technologies related to building and 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions in energy processes, enhancing the good position 
registered in 2019.
‣ Beyond the digital ecosystem, energy-intensive industries and electronics were the leading 
ecosystems in EU patent-driven twin innovation from 2009 to 2023.
Quick Guide 
This analysis, along with the brief ‘Green and digital patenting of Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard 
firms’ (Ince and Georgakaki, 2025), examines patent-driven innovation for twin transition through two 
distinct but complementary approaches, with a particular focus on Scoreboard firms. Our approach uses 
'green' patent codes to explore twin innovation within the Digital Techno-Economic ecoSystem (DGTES) to 
analyse EU’s global position and its industrial composition. In contrast, Ince and Georgakaki (2025) 
investigate how the intersection of climate change mitigation technologies and digital technologies either 
transforms our interaction with energy systems or mitigates their additional energy consumption. Despite 
differences in methodology, both studies converge on key messages, strengthening the validity of the 
findings. These shared conclusions are cross-referenced in both documents.  
Green Patenting of EU vs. Global 
Competitors in the Digital Techno 
Economic Ecosystem  
Joint Research Centre  
SCIENCE FOR POLICY BRIEF

Page 2 / 7 
Introduction  
The ongoing twin transition—simultaneously 
pursuing the digital and green transitions—presents 
both a challenge and an opportunity to move closer 
to the needed level of transformation for an 
environmentally sustainable and competitive 
European Union (EU). The relationship between the 
two transformations is complex. Rebound effects 
from digitalization such as energy consumption and 
e-waste can hinder the green transition (Muñoz-de-
Bustillo Llorente, 2024). However, digital
technologies are pivotal in tackling climate change
through innovation, accelerating the EU's
competitive edge and productivity.
Box 1: DGTES methodology 
We identify the innovation activities that 
support the twin transition to a green and 
digital economy. The approach's granularity 
allows for examining innovation's evolution, 
main features for the twin transition and 
benchmarking EU's position relative to global 
competitors such as China and the US. 
The basis of our analysis is 2009-2023 global 
patent filings sourced from Patstat, which 
contain textual information on the invention 
description and the applicant. First, we search 
a comprehensive dictionary of keywords on 
digital technologies in the patent descriptions. 
To get the subset of twin innovation activities, 
we filter for patents on climate change 
mitigation technologies (Corporate Patent 
Classification (CPC) code Y02). 
We use information on patent attributes to 
identify who is innovating in the twin 
transition (the players), their geographical 
distribution, and the connections among them 
as they co-patent, forming a network of 
collaborations within and across borders. We 
complement the data with information on (i) 
the industrial ecosystems associated with 
each player (Signorelli et al., 2025), and (ii) the 
firm's historical ownership from Orbis. We 
exploit this network and generate a series of 
indicators to analyse the EU’s competitiveness 
and foreign dependencies as regards the twin 
transition. 
This study explores how the green and digital 
transitions reinforce each other, pushing the 
innovation frontier. We look at the intersection of 
these two transformative processes by leveraging 
patent data and text analysis to identify emerging 
climate technologies at the heart of the twin 
transition. We rely on the Digital Techno-Economic 
ecoSystem (DGTES) methodology from Calza et al. 
(2022) to identify priority patent applications for 
technologies related to the twin transition. By 
constructing a network of organizations engaged in 
co-application, this analysis offers new insights into 
the state of patent-driven innovation on twin 
technologies in the EU, its interlinkages with other 
global regions, and its prevalence across industrial 
ecosystems. 
Twin transition in the EU from a 
glob al perspective 
This section analyses the EU's position in the global 
patent-driven innovation landscape related to the 
twin transition. It highlights the findings of the 
mapping exercise that examined the geographical 
distribution of players filing priority patents in digital 
technologies, covering those aimed at climate 
mitigation (referred to as twin patents). 
Figure 1 – Global patents filed vs. granted on digital and 
climate mitigating technologies, 2009-2023. 
Note: Cumulative sum of patents worldwide filed on digital technologies 
that also include climate-mitigating technologies (CPC code Y02). Source: 
DGTES database. 
Patents on the twin transition grew exponentially 
over the last decade, cumulating over 36 000 
granted patents globally by 2023. The number 
doubles when accounting for filed patents i.e., 
including non-granted ones (Figure 1). Filed patents 
indicate emerging innovation trends and competitive 
activity, even before being granted. They provide 
valuable insights into areas of technological focus 
and R&D investment, which may signal future 
0 000
10 000
20 000
30 000
40 000
50 000
60 000
70 000
80 000
2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022
Filed Granted

Page 3 / 7 
advancements, even if not all patents are ultimately 
granted.1  
Figure 2 – Digital patents filed on climate-mitigating 
technologies by geographical area, 2009-2023.
Note: Patents filed by geographical area on digital technologies that also 
include climate-mitigating technologies (CPC code Y02). Collaborative 
patents count on a fractional basis, i.e. divided by the number of co-ap-
plicants of the patent. RoW stands for rest of the world. Source: DGTES 
database. 
Even though the number of twin patents filed by EU 
players has increased by an average of 14% 
annually since 2009, the analysis underscores the 
ongoing challenge for the EU to strengthen its 
position relative to other global players, especially 
China. China holds the largest share of twin patents 
(79.4%), surpassing the US (6%) and the EU (2.4%) 
(Figure 2). This finding holds even when considering 
only granted patents, and highlights China's 
dominant role in driving innovation in digital and 
climate-mitigating technologies.
2      
The leading role of China in the global scene is 
further supported by the network of global 
collaborations on twin patents based on 
international co-applications (Figure 3). China has a 
central role as it presents the highest betweenness 
centrality score (=1), serving as a crucial link or 
bottleneck between regions.
3 The US holds a 
strategic position in the global flow of knowledge 
(score 0.87), exerting high influence in the network 
and having the highest number of co-applications 
with Chinese entities in the network. The EU’s 
influence in the global network of patent-driven 
1 See Pasimeni and Georgakaki (2020) for main concepts for patent analysis and data availability time lags. 
2 The finding on Chinese global leadership on twin patents is also robust to counting patents filed up to 2020, though with a smaller difference across 
regions (CN: 69%; US: 9%; EU: 4% of global patent share). This finding aligns with the relatively low and stagnated patenting activity of the EU versus China 
documented by Ince and Georgakaki (2025) using high-value green inventions between 2016 and 2020. 
3 Betweenness centrality is a network indicator that measures the relative position of a node (country in this case) and the extent to which a node serves as 
a key broker between many other nodes. It is helpful for identifying key players or influential nodes within a network as it computes how often a node lies in 
the shortest path between two nodes in the network. The value is normalised between 0 and 1, where a country with a high intermediation score in the 
innovation network is considered a gatekeeper of knowledge flowing across global regions. 
4 To assess partnerships’ tightness (the width of the edges), we consider all collaborations between each node-pair in the network. The value is normalised 
between 0 and 1, where the edge with the highest number of collaborations is US-China. EU collaborations with US-based partners get a value of 0.32, 
while with Chinese partners 0.27. 
innovation of twin technologies is limited (score 
0.29) and its tightest partnerships are with US 
entities, followed by China, India, Canada, and 
Switzerland.
4   
Figure 3 – Global collaborations in patent-driven innovation 
on digital and climate mitigating technologies.  
Note: The network represents international co-applications in digital pa-
tents that cover climate mitigating technologies filed between 2009 and 
2023. The nodes group players by country (the node EU refers to EU27) 
and their size depends on the total number of international collabora-
tions. The edges represent the bilateral collaborations between the 
nodes. Source: DGTES database. 
Next, the focus turns to the linkages of players with 
other entities to help identify the strengths and 
dependencies of the EU twin innovation landscape. In 
this setting, two organizations can connect through 
two types of relationships: co-applicants of a patent 
and firm ownership, signalling control over the 
innovation.  
First, the analysis of patent collaborations reveals a 
relatively balanced relationship with the US but an 
imbalanced relationship with China. China and the 
United States are the primary collaborators for EU 
organizations, with 6.9% of EU co-applications in-
volving Chinese partners and 8.2% involving US-
based partners (Table 1). However, there is a signifi-
cant imbalance in the relationship with China: only 
EU, 2.41%
JP, 
3.27%
RoW, 
2.49%
SK, 6.40%
US, 6.01%
CN, 79.41%
China
US
EU
South Korea
Japan
India
Canada
Australia
UK
Taiwan
Switzerland
Singapore

Page 4 / 7 
0.4% of China's collaborations involve EU co-appli-
cants. Instead, the EU exhibits a more balanced co-
operation with the US, accounting for 6.1% of US co-
applications. It is crucial for the EU to monitor the 
evolution of its collaborations with China carefully to 
avoid becoming overly dependent on Chinese part-
nerships, which could limit its strategic autonomy in 
the long-run.  
Note: Patents filed by geographical area on digital technologies that also 
include climate-mitigating technologies (CPC code Y02). Cells indicate 
the share of collaborations between node in row i and node in column j 
over the sum of collaborations of node i. In the diagonal, i.e., when i=j, 
the cells display the shares of collaborative activities within the same 
geographical areas (internal collaborations). Row values add up to one. 
High asymmetry reveals an imbalance. RoW stands for rest of the world. 
Source: DGTES database.
 
Second, the analysis of ownership links indicates 
that EU firms involved in twin transition innovation 
are predominantly under domestic control, aligning 
with the global average. The dataset allows for 
tracking the location of the global ultimate owner for 
more than half of EU firms that filed at least one 
twin patent from 2009 to 2023.
5  Out of the subset 
of EU firms with ownership information, 80% 
account as domestic—i.e., their ultimate owner is in 
the EU. This fact is further supported by the evidence 
in Ince and Georgakaki (2025) where domestic 
ownership is observed at the EU member state level. 
The remaining 20% of firms involved in twin patents 
have an ultimate owner outside the EU (Figure 4). 
The US is the primary partner, followed by 
Switzerland and the UK.
6 This preliminary analysis 
highlights the need for further efforts to track 
ownership structures, as understanding these links 
can help inform policies that strengthen the EU’s 
autonomy in emerging technologies. 
5 The ownership analysis excludes academic institutions and government bodies filing for twin patents. The global ultimate owner is the entity controlling 
over 50% of the shares of a company. Foreign-owned firms have a global ultimate owner located in another country. A firm is foreign in the EU when the 
owner is located outside the EU, while ownerships between Member States are domestic. With half of the firms with known ownership, the EU is the region 
with the second highest share of tracked ownership after Japan (61%) (this figure is 45% for China, 35% for the US, and 11% f or South Korea). 
6 As shares of all EU firms filing for patents, 43% are domestic, while 10% are foreign. Unfortunately, ownership data for the remaining firms is unavailable. 
Figure 4 – Ownership of EU firms with patents in both digital 
and green technologies as of 2023.
Note: Figures based on the tracked 2023 ownership status of the 531 
EU firms identified as filing at least for one green and digital patent 
during 2009-2023. Foreign ownership defined as the global ultimate 
owner holding more than 50% of shares. A firm located in the EU is 
foreign when the owner is located outside the EU. Unknown refers to 
firms with no ownership data. RoW stands for rest of the world. Source: 
DGTES database. 
Tec hnologies behind the green 
transi tion 
Breaking down the twin transition-related 
technologies helps assessing EU's competitiveness in 
each area compared to other global regions and 
regarding changes in the post-pandemic era.  
The relative comparative advantage (RCA) score 
measures a region's involvement in patent-driven 
innovation for a specific technology, compared to the 
global average. An RCA value greater than one 
implies that the geographical area has a higher-
than-global average proportion of patents filed in 
that technology, suggesting the presence of a 
competitive edge in that technology. This analysis 
focuses on climate-mitigating technologies (CPC 
subclasses of Y02) and compares the EU's RCA score 
with those of the US and China in the years 2019 
and 2022 as shown in Figure 5.  
China leads in the number of twin patents across 
climate-mitigating technology subclasses. Still, it 
holds a relative competitive advantage over the EU 
and the US in only four areas: adaptation to climate 
change technologies (Y02A), information and 
communication technologies (or ICT, Y02D), 
transportation (Y02T), and waste management 
(Y02W). 
Table 1 - Affinity matrix: dependencies in green and digital 
patents (2009-2023).  
…that are collaborative with 
Share of patents filed by 
CN US EU SK JP RoW 
CN 97% 1.4% 0.4% 0.4% 0.2% 0.4% 
US 19.1% 66% 6.1% 0.5% 0.5% 7.5% 
EU 6.9% 8.2% 78% 0.0% 0.3% 6.5% 
SK 8.3% 0.7% 0.1% 90% 0.2% 0.4% 
JP 6.6% 1.2% 0.6% 0.4% 90% 1.0% 
RoW 3.3% 4.4% 2.8% 0.2% 0.2% 89% 
EU
43%
Unknown
47%
US
3.2%
CH
1.3%
GB
1.1%
JP
0.9%
CN
0.8%
SK
0.2%
RoW
2.3%
Other
10%

Page 5 / 7 
Figure 5 – Relative comparative advantage of the EU, China, 
and the US in climate mitigating technologies patents: 2019 
to 2022 change. 
Note: Relative comparative advantage (RCA) of geographical area on 
patents filed on digital technologies that also include climate-mitigating 
technologies (CPC code Y02) by technology class. RCA score calculated 
by comparing the geographical area’s share of patents filed in a specific 
technology in its twin patent portfolio against the global share in that 
same technology. RCA value greater than one means that the 
geographical area has a higher-than-world average proportion of 
patents filed in that technology. Light shaded bubbles represent 2019 
values for patents filed during 2009-2019 while dark shaded bubbles 
represent 2022 values for patents filed during 2009-2022. Source: 
DGTES database. 
The US maintains a strong advantage in climate 
change mitigating technologies in production 
processes (Y02P), consistent since 2019. Meanwhile, 
the EU has a competitive edge in technologies 
related to buildings (Y02B), reduction of greenhouse 
gas emissions related to energy processes (Y02E), 
and, following the US, in production technologies 
(Y02P). It holds the highest RCA in building and 
energy globally, strengthening its innovation in these 
areas since 2019. This innovative progress has 
allowed the EU to reach a competitive edge by 2022. 
Technologies reducing energy emissions register the 
largest improvement in the EU’s RCA score between 
2019 and 2022. However, from 2019 to 2022, the 
EU's share has declined relative to the global 
average in ICT, adaptation, and transport 
technologies. The latter group shows the largest 
drop in RCA score across all technology classes. 
While it already faced disadvantages in ICT and 
adaptation in 2019, these worsened, and EU’s RCA in 
transport has shifted from a competitive edge to a 
disadvantage. 
Twin transition in the EU across 
industrial ecosystems 
This section expands the DGTES methodology to 
other industrial ecosystems beyond digital and 
explores how twin innovation is transversal to the 
EU's industries.  
All patents are part of the digital ecosystem, which 
is central to the twin transition; nearly 80% of 
patents filed by EU players are not directly 
connected to other industries and focus solely on 
digital technologies (Figure 6). Nevertheless, some 
of these technologies can still indirectly provide 
spillover efficiency gains to other industrial 
ecosystems. For example, general-purpose 
technologies like communication networks can lead 
to productivity gains or process improvements 
across multiple industries. 
Note: Patents filed by EU players on digital technologies that also 
include climate-mitigating technologies (CPC code Y02) during 2009-
2023. Collaborative patents count on a fractional basis, i.e. divided by 
the number of co-applicants of the patent. Figures aggregated at the EU 
level. Patents corresponding to multiple ecosystems get a weight based 
on the number of overlapping ecosystems. Source: DGTES database.  
Energy-intensive industries and electronics were the 
most active ecosystems in filing digital and green 
innovations patents between 2009 and 2023. 
Together, these industries account for 14% of all 
twin patents filed by EU players. For instance, the 
electronics sector has been key in developing 
energy-efficient devices. At the same time, energy-
intensive industries focus on reducing carbon 
emissions through digital solutions like smart 
sensors and AI for energy optimization. 
Figure 6 – Engagement of industrial ecosystems in the EU 
on green and digital innovation. 
Relative 
disadvantage
Relative 
advantage
0.5
5.5
10.5
15.5
20.5
0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.00
US
EU
CN
US
EU
CN
US
EU
CN
US
EU
CN
US
EU
CN
US
EU
CN
US
EU
CN
Waste Transport Production Energy ICT Building Adaptation
RCA score
2022   2019
78%
8%
6%
3% 3% 2%
Only Digital
Digital and Energy-Intensive
Industries
Digital and Electronics
Digital and Energy Renewables
Digital and Mobility, Transport,
Automotive
Digital and other industrial
ecosystems

Page 6 / 7 
Box 2: Twin transition in Scoreboard firms 
'The 2024 EU Industrial R&D Investment 
Scoreboard' includes 3% of companies filing 
for twin patents in this analysis. This box 
examines the distribution of these firms 
across technologies and countries. 
China leads with 58% of firms filing for twin 
patents, reflecting trends similar to non-
scoreboard firms. Japan is next with 13% of 
these firms, while the EU and the US each 
host 9% (Figure 7). Scoreboard firms 
primarily innovate in climate mitigation 
technologies related to production processes 
(Y02P), with over half holding patents in this 
area. They also focus on ICT (Y02D, 30%) and 
energy (Y02E, 29%) technologies for the twin 
transition (Figure 8). 
Doubling the share for non-scoreboard firms, 
nearly 40% of scoreboard firms seek patents 
in multiple technology areas, with 22% active 
in two climate-mitigating technologies and 
18% engaged in three or more. 
Among these firms, General Electric (US), 
stands out as the firm holding the largest 
number of twin inventions. It accounts for over 
400 twin patent filings between 2009 and 
2023. Chinese Tencent (technology), Naura 
(semiconductor), and Huawei 
(telecommunications) complete the podium 
with over 100 twin patents filed each during 
the period. 
Note: Geographical distribution of scoreboard firms with patents filed on 
digital technologies that also include climate-mitigating technologies 
(CPC code Y02). RoW stands for rest of the world. Source: DGTES 
database. 
Note: Number of Scoreboard firms with patents filed on digital 
technologies that also include climate-mitigating technologies (CPC code 
Y02) by technology class. Source: DGTES database. 
Conclusions  
This study underscores the EU's progress and 
challenges in the twin transition, offering insights 
into the EU's competitive position and potential 
areas for policy action. Despite twin patents filed by 
EU players increasing on average of 14% annually 
since 2009, the number of patents is still far behind 
those from China and the US, clear leaders in twin 
technologies innovations. China and the US host also 
most co-applicants for patent filings of EU-based 
players, and the study underscores potential 
dependencies on Chinese partnerships.   
The findings highlight the importance of fostering 
patent-driven innovation, so the EU can set a global 
benchmark for integrating digital and green 
solutions. The analysis outlines that the EU reached 
a competitive edge in twin technologies related to 
building and reducing greenhouse gas emissions in 
energy processes while is lagging its competitors in 
ICT, adaptation, and transport technologies. 
Figure 7 – Share of Scoreboard firms filing for twin 
patents by geographical area. 
Figure 8 – Number of Scoreboard firms filing for twin 
patents by climate mitigating technology. 
CN
58%
JP
13%
EU
9%
RoW
9%
US
9%
SK
2%
1342 
scoreboard 
firms
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
Production
ICT
Energy
Transport
Building
Adaptation
Waste

Page 7 / 7 
References
Calza, E., Dalla Benetta, A., Kostić, U., Mitton, I., Vázquez-Prada 
Baillet, M. et al., ‘A policy oriented analytical approach to map 
the digital ecosystem (DGTES)’, Publications Office of the 
European Union, Luxembourg, 2022, doi:10.2760/811932, 
JRC130799.  
Ince, E. and Georgakaki, A., ‘Green and digital patenting of 
Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard firms’, 2025, European 
Commission, Petten (the Netherlands), JRC142597  
Muñoz De Bustillo Llorente, R., ‘A Critical Review of the Digital 
and Green Twin Transitions. Implications, synergies and 
tradeoffs’, European Commission, Seville, 2024, 
https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC140036, 
JRC140036. 
Nindl, E., Napolitano, L., Confraria, H., Rentocchini, F., Fako, P. et 
al., ‘The 2024 EU Industrial RandD Investment Scoreboard’, 
Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2024, 
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2760/0775231, JRC140129. 
Pasimeni, F. and Georgakaki, A., ‘Patent-Based Indicators: Main 
Concepts and Data Availability’, European Commission, 2020, 
https://setis.ec.europa.eu/patent-based-indicators-main-
concepts-and-data-availability_en, JRC121685. 
Signorelli, S., Fabiani, J., De Prato, G., ‘ATLAS: An Analytical Tool 
for Linking and Assessing industrial ecoSystems - Measuring 
investment, innovation and the EU’s role in worldwide industrial 
ecosystems', Publications Office of the European Union, 
Luxembourg, 2025, 
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2760/6605919, JRC142571. 
Suggested citation 
Fabiani, J., Fernández Cruzado, A. and De Prato, G., ‘Green 
Patenting of the EU vs Global Competitors in the Digital Techno 
Economic Ecosystem’, European Commission, Seville, 2025, 
JRC142637.  
Acknowledgements 
This d
ocument has been published within the c ontex t of the 
Glob
al Industrial Research & Innovation An alyses (GLORIA) 
project that is jointly c arried out by th e European C ommission’s 
Dir
ectorate General for Research and Innovation Directorate E – 
Prosperity, and the Joint Research Centre Directorate B - F air 
an
d Sustainable Economy. GLO RIA has received funding fr om 
the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation 
pr
ogramme under a sp ecific action for scientific and te chnical 
services by the Joint Research C entr e (JRC) over the period 
2022-2025. The main expected impact of GLORIA is th e better 
understanding of co rporate Research & Development (R&D) 
efforts in relation to th e EU’s long-term 3% of GDP R&D 
in
vestment policy target and the EU policy ob jective s regarding 
competitiveness, the green d eal and sustainability. The authors 
would like to thank the JRC colleagues A. Georgakaki, E. Ince, A. 
Tuebke, J. Soguero Escuer, and O. D. Eulaerts for their 
comments
, C. Capote de la Calle (ABDE Business Consulting) 
for the graphic support, and the JRC T.1 IT pool, particularly M. 
Moraschini (Piksel), M. Tantardini (Network Research Belgium 
SA),
 and U. Kostić ( Engineering Ingegneria Informatica SpA), for 
the data support .
Disclaimer 
The views expressed are purely those of  the authors and ma y 
not in any circumstances be regarded  as stating an  official 
position of the European  Commission. 
Copyright 
© European Union,  2025 
Science for policy CONTACT  INFORMATION  
Scan the QR code to visit: 
The Joint Research Centre: EU Science Hub 
https://joint-research-centre.ec.europa.eu 
European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC) 
Contact: Josefina Fabiani 
E-mail: josefina.fabiani@ec.europa.eu 
JRC142637
