Petros Gkotsis, Antonio Vezzani 
 
 
Advanced Manufacturing Activities of 
Top R&D investors: Geographical and 
Technological Patterns 
2016  
 
EUR 28040 EN

This publication is a Technical report by the Joint Research Centre, the European Commission’s in-house science 
service. It aims to provide evidence-based scientific support to the European policy-making process. The scientific 
output expressed does not imply a policy position of the European Commission. Neither the European 
Commission nor any person acting on behalf of the Commission is responsible for the use which might be made 
of this publication. 
 
 
JRC Science Hub 
https://ec.europa.eu/jrc 
 
 
JRC101970 
EUR 28040 EN 
 
ISBN 978-92-79-60737-0 (PDF) 
 
ISSN 1831-9424 (online) 
 
doi:10.2791/97641 (online) 
 
 
© European Union, 2016  
 
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. 
 
 
All images © European Union 2016 
 
 
How to cite: Gkotsis P. and Vezzani A. (2016). Advanced Manufacturing Activities of Top R&D invest ors: 
Geographical and Technological Pattern, JRC Technic al Report,  EUR 28040, doi:10.2791/97641,  Luxembourg ,
Publications Office of the European Union.

2
Table of contents  
Abstract ............................................................................................................... 4 
1. Introduction ................................................................................................... 5 
2. Methodology .................................................................................................. 7 
3. AMT-related patenting activities of Scoreboard companies ................................... 8 
3.1 AMT development across industrial sectors .................................................... 8 
3.2 Complex patents (AMTs and KETs) ............................................................. 10  
3.3 The internationalisation of AMT-related activities .......................................... 14  
3.4 A closer look at the AMT international innovation network ............................. 17  
4. Conclusion ................................................................................................... 21  
References ......................................................................................................... 23  
Appendix ............................................................................................................ 24  
List of abbreviations ............................................................................................ 26  
List of figures ...................................................................................................... 27  
List of tables ....................................................................................................... 27

3

4
Abstract  
Advanced manufacturing technologies (AMTs) and othe r key enabling technologies 
(KETs) are expected to have a major impact on produ ctivity, efficiency, profitability and 
employment in major industrial sectors worldwide. Thus, development of AMTs and KETs 
is considered essential if the European Union is to  achieve the strategic goals set out in 
the European Commission’s Employment, Growth and In vestment priorities. Indeed, 
AMTs and KETs are among the top priorities identifi ed as necessary to support the 
competitiveness of European industries in the conte xt of the European flagship on 
industrial modernisation. 
This study builds upon and extends results that wer e obtained in the context of the 
Advanced Manufacturing Technologies for Competitive ness AMTEC project, in which the 
technological profiles of the patent portfolios of the EU Industrial R&D Investment 
Scoreboard companies were constructed using patent-based analysis. In particular, their 
technological competences were investigated and it was found that European companies 
invest in KETs, and in particular in AMTs, as these technologies are considered to be vital 
for maintaining current competitiveness. However, o ther countries also invest heavily in 
AMTs and KETs. 
It is therefore very important for the EU to define  a strategy that aims to find a suitable 
position in the global value and innovation chains and that selectively augments existing 
capabilities. To this end, a methodology based on p atent analysis was applied to assess 
the capacity of the world’s top R&D investors in de veloping AMTs. Particular emphasis 
was placed on complex AMT patents that also pertain  to at least one of the five KETs. 
These patents are considered important because they  represent AMT applications used 
for the development of KETs in general or, converse ly, they represent other KET 
applications that can be incorporated into AMT systems. 
The main questions addressed by this study were (1)  In which countries are the most 
important inventors of AMTs and applicants for AMT- related patents located? (2) Is it 
possible to analyse internationalisation patterns a nd knowledge flows between world 
regions and countries? and (3) Are there any special patterns and clusters between AMT-
related technological fields and the five core KETs  and, if so, which companies are 
responsible for the development of these technological applications? 
Developing and patenting AMT-related technologies i s particularly important for firms in 
the Aerospace & defence,  Industrials , Automobiles & parts  and Electronics & electrical 
equipment  sectors. Moreover, the more specialised a sector i s in developing AMT-related 
technologies, the less internationalised the AMT-re lated activities of the firms in the 
sector appear to be. 
In general AMT-related R&D activities of European- and US-based firms are more 
internationalised than the activities of Japanese- and Asian-based companies. It was 
found that many Scoreboard firms based in the USA, Japan, Germany, France and the 
UK own and develop a large number of AMT-related pa tents. However, there are also 
many inventors of AMT-related technologies based in  other countries, such as China, 
India, Canada, Italy, Belgium and Spain. 
Finally, the ratio of complex AMT patents to the to tal number of AMT-related patents is 
close to 8%, the vast majority being patents that r elate to micro- and nano-electronics, 
advanced materials or photonics. Companies that own  these complex patents are often 
relatively small firms that are highly specialised in the development of AMT-related 
applications.

5
1. Introduction  
Maintaining a globally competitive manufacturing se ctor is a priority not only for the EU, 
but also for all its main competitor regions, not l east because the financial downturn of 
2007/08 led to economic recession in many developed  countries. As a result, new 
initiatives to boost the competitiveness of the man ufacturing sector are under way 
around the world. 1 In the USA, the main focus has been on new technol ogies that rely 
increasingly on information, automation, software a nd networking, and are expected to 
play a key role in helping humanity to tackle socie tal grand challenges (IDEA Consult et 
al., 2013). In the same vein, the European Commissi on has placed special emphasis on 
a set of technologies labelled key enabling technol ogies (KETs) (European Commission 
Communication, 2009). In a 2014 communication, the European Commission (COM 
(2014) 14/2) highlighted the importance of stimulat ing investment in innovation and 
new technologies to maintain competitiveness and a strong industrial base for Europe’s 
economic recovery. A 2016 European Commission communication (COM(2016) 180 final) 
identified the need to digitise European industry i n order to reap the full benefits of the 
single market. 2 Such technologies are expected to simultaneously e xploit and further 
enable the development of new production processes,  novel materials, and devices and 
applications with unprecedented functionality and c apabilities. These new technologies 
are also expected to revolutionise the manufacturin g of existing products by reducing 
the cost of production, the reliance on raw materia ls and the consumption of energy, 
while simultaneously diminishing the adverse impact on the environment by reducing the 
volume of waste and pollution generated. 
This study built and expanded on previous work (Neu häusler et al., 2015) attempting to 
map the technological profiles of the world’s top R &D investors, and to highlight the 
differences between European companies and their ma in global competitors. Using a 
methodology based on patent analysis, the technolog ical profiles of the patent portfolios 
of the EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard (her eafter the Scoreboard) companies 
were constructed in order to investigate their capa city to develop advanced 
manufacturing technologies (AMTs) and KETs. The stu dy revealed that European 
companies do invest in KETs, and in particular in A MTs, because these technologies are 
considered to be vital for maintaining current tech nological competitive advantages. 
However, other countries are also investing heavily in KETs; therefore, it is essential that 
the EU to define a strategy that enables it to esta blish and consolidate an appropriate 
position in global value and innovation chains. Thi s also involves selectively augmenting 
existing innovation capabilities. 
In this context, the most compelling questions to b e addressed are: (1) Which industrial 
sectors are most specialised in the development of AMT-related technologies? (2) Where 
are these technologies being developed? (3) Who are the final owners of the AMT-related 
technologies? and (4) How should the results in ter ms of policy implications be 
interpreted at Member State and EU levels. Answerin g these questions is rendered 
difficult by the lack of detailed company data. Mos t of the companies listed in the 
Scoreboard are multinational industrial groups oper ating in diverse markets and dealing 
                                           
1 https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/pcast-advanced-manufacturing-
june2011.pdf 
2 https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/communication-digitising-european-industry-
reaping-full-benefits-digital-single-market

6
with a diversified portfolio of technologies. Information disclosed in company reports and 
accounts is, in general, not sufficiently detailed to allow the location of different activities 
(research and development, production, etc.) to be identified, which hinders the 
possibility of mapping the geographical distributio n of industrial activities and 
disentangling economic performance by world region or by country. Indeed, companies’ 
decisions on where to locate their headquarters can be influenced by tax ruling systems; 
this is true even within Europe. In addition, prefe rential tax treatments based on output 
indicators such as patent boxes (rather than the us ual input-based ones) can affect 
companies’ decision on where to register their pate nts, encouraging them to file patents 
in countries without a corresponding flow of R&D (A lstadsæter et al., 2015).Despite all 
these caveats patent data are the most complete and accurate source of information and 
therefore in this report we rely on information about the inventor(s) location from patent 
documents to proxy the localisation of R&D activities. 
Given the pervasiveness of KET-based components and  products, and the competitive 
advantage of non-EU-based firms in the production o f such technologies, as measured 
by the filing of KET-related patents (Gkotsis, 2015 ), another important question arises: 
(5) Which specific AMTs are used for the development of KETs with the most potential to 
have profound effects on key industrial sectors and , conversely, which KET-based 
components are crucial for the development of AMTs?  This line of work includes 
comparative analyses of the competitiveness of the EU industry with respect to its main 
competitors, such as the USA, Japan and the emerging economies.  
The data sources used in this study are the 2013 ed ition of the Scoreboard — collecting 
information on the world’s top corporate R&D investors, which are responsible for almost 
90% of the global R&D investment 3 — and the Worldwide Patent Statistical Database 
(PATSTAT). 4 Patents are the main output of technology-oriented  R&D activities in 
technology-based sectors (Freeman, 1982; Grupp, 199 8); patent documents contain a 
wealth of useful information about the invention, such as the technical fields to which the 
patent pertains and the addresses of the different actors in the innovation process 
(applicant and inventors). Patents filed by Scorebo ard companies are related to KETs — 
and AMTs — using the technological definition propo sed by the KETs Observatory. 5 This 
allows assignment of International Patent Classific ation (IPC) codes, as contained in the 
patent documents, to the different KETs identified by the European Commission. 
The methodological approach and the data sources us ed in this study are presented in 
more detail in section 2. Section 3 presents data o n the internationalisation of R&D 
activities targeting AMTs of the EU R&D Scoreboard companies. In subsection 3.4 a 
special focus is given to AMT-related patents that also relate to at least one of the 
remaining KETs. Finally, in section 4, the conclusions of this study are presented and the 
policy implications are discussed. 
 
  
                                           
3 For more information on the sample of companies in cluded in the EU Industrial and R&D 
Investment Scoreboard, see http://iri.jrc.ec.europa.eu/scoreboard.html 
4 PATSTAT is the European Patent Office’s Worldwide Patent Statistical Database, which contains 
data on about 70 million applications from more than 80 countries. See http://www.epo.org  
5 https://ec.europa.eu/growth/tools-databases/ketsobservatory

7
2. Methodology  
The analysis presented in this report is based on t he world top 2000 corporate R&D 
investors, as reported in the 2013 edition of the E U Industrial R&D Investment 
Scoreboard. The Scoreboard is part of the European Commission’s monitoring activities 
to improve its understanding of trends in R&D inves tment by the private sector and the 
factors affecting it. Data for the Scoreboard are taken from the publicly available audited 
accounts of the companies, which in most cases do n ot include information about the 
location where R&D is actually performed. Thus, the  whole R&D investment of 
Scoreboard companies is attributed to the country i n which that company has its 
registered office. In the 2013 edition of the Score board, companies’ R&D rankings are 
based on information taken from their latest published accounts (see Appendix). 
To analyse the technological outputs of top R&D inv estors’ efforts, we retrieved the 
patents they filed during the 2010–12 period from P ATSTAT. PATSTAT is a relational 
database that is updated twice a year and contains information about published patents 
from 83 patent authorities worldwide. All informati on provided on a patent application is 
included in the corresponding PATSTAT entry. The ma tching has been carried out on a 
by-country basis using a series of string matching algorithms; patent applicants were 
matched with Scoreboard companies, including their subsidiaries (Dernis et al., 2015). 
Most of the analyses on the patenting activities of  companies or countries are based on 
one specific Intellectual Property Office (IPO), generally the USPTO (United States Patent 
and Trademark Office) or the EPO (European Patent Office). However, companies tend to 
file the majority of their patent applications in t he IPO of their home country, and this 
country bias in patent statistics is particularly p ronounced in the case of Japanese and 
Chinese firms (Dernis et al., 2015). In order to re duce the country bias, this study 
considers patents that have been filed at the EPO o r the USPTO. In order to control for 
the multiple filing of the same invention at both I POs, different patent applications have 
been matched through INPADOC (International Patent Documentation) families to avoid 
double counting. 6 
Information on the location of inventors and owners, as reported in patent documents, is 
used as a proxy for the localisation of the R&D act ivities of Scoreboard companies. 
Innovation activities are defined as international when the location of the inventor is 
different from the location of the Scoreboard compa ny that is the legal owner of the 
intellectual property rights. In the cases of multi -inventors from multiple countries, 
fractional counts of the same patent family between the different countries are applied. 
The IPC is a hierarchical classification system use d primarily to classify and search 
patent documents according to the technical fields they pertain to. It contains about 
70 000 entries identified by classification symbols  (IPC codes) that can be allotted to 
patent documents. These different classification co des are organised in a tree-like, 
hierarchical structure. The IPC is updated annually  and revised every three years to 
capture technological changes more effectively (WIP O, 2006). For consistency with 
existing figures on patents relating to KETs and AM T, for the purpose of this report we 
use the definition of KETs that has been developed by the KETs Observatory, in which 
AMT is defined as a subfield of KETs (IDEA Consult et al., 2013) (see Appendix). 
                                           
6  For a definition of INPADOC family, see http://www.epo.org/searching/essentials/patent-
families/inpadoc.html

8
A patent document may contain different IPC codes a nd therefore refer to different 
technologies. In this work, we focus on patent fami lies pertaining specifically to AMTs or 
KETs in general. We define complex patents as those  related both to AMTs and to 
another KET, and assume that these patents can represent AMT applications used for the 
development of KETs or, conversely, they can repres ent other KET applications that can 
be incorporated into AMT systems. Finally, when int erpreting the results of this study, it 
should be noted that the results of purely patent-b ased analysis cannot exhaustively 
represent the relative importance of firms in the d evelopment of AMTs or KETs, 
particularly when considering those that are crucial for the development of other KETs or 
AMTs. A complete picture could be drawn by compleme nting the results with different 
types of studies targeting the analysis of specific technological solutions. 
 
3. AMT-related patenting activities of Scoreboard companies  
The analysis of the R&D activities related to AMTs,  their connection with other KETs and 
the geographical configuration of AMT-inventive act ivities is based on the patent 
applications filed by the Scoreboard companies at t he EPO or USPTO between 1 January 
2010 and 31 December 2012. Of the top 2 000 R&D inv estors, 1752 filed patents at 
these two IPOs during this period. The total number  of patent families filed during the 
same period was 510970. 
The proportion of all patents that belong to AMT-re lated families is close to 5% (25631 
patents from AMT-related families were identified), and these patents were filed by 1102 
companies, although 82% of all patents in AMT-relat ed families are owned by just 188 
companies. 
 
3.1 AMT development across industrial sectors 
The starting point for the analysis was the relative importance of AMT-related patents for 
different industrial sectors. In order to investiga te the contribution of different industries 
to the development of AMTs, firm-level patent information was aggregated in accordance 
with the Industry Classification Benchmark (ICB) fo ur-digit level. Table 1 reports the 
industrial sectors with the highest number of paten t families related to the development 
of AMTs. 
The production of new AMTs appears to be concentrat ed in a narrow group of industrial 
sectors. In particular, Table 1 shows that almost 8 0% of all AMT-related patent families 
in the sample have been developed by companies operating in only five industry sectors: 
Industrials , Electronics & electrical equipment,  ICT producers , Automobiles & parts  and 
Aerospace & defence . 
However, the propensity to patent (i.e. the number of patents obtained per unit of R&D 
investment; Scherer, 1983) varies greatly across in dustries. In particular, companies 
operating in ICT-related industries have a much hig her average propensity to patent 
than companies in other industries such as the automobile industry (Dernis et al., 2015). 
As a result, companies operating in these industrie s tend to hold larger patent portfolios 
than those operating in other sectors; comparisons of numbers across sectors are partly 
driven by these underlying differences between industries.

9
 
Table 1 - Proportion of AMT-related patents by Industrial Sector 
 
Source: Authors’ own calculations on EPO and USPTO patent applications. ICT, information and 
communication technology. 
 
The importance of AMTs for technological competitiv eness is likely to be sector specific. 
Therefore, an alternative way to capture its import ance is to consider the proportion of 
AMT-related patent families with respect to the ove rall patent portfolio of the industry. 
Table 2 reports the five industries with the highes t proportions of AMT-related patent 
families. 
 
Table 2 - Relative importance of AMT-related patents in the patent portfolio of 
companies within specific sectors 
 
Source: Authors’ own calculations on EPO and USPTO patent applications . 
 
Among the sectors with the highest number of AMT-re lated patent families discussed 
above, the ratio of AMT-related patents to total pa tents is highest in the Aerospace & 
defence, Industrials and Automobiles & parts sectors. The proportion of AMT-related 
patents is also high in the energy industries, alth ough the total number of patents in 
companies’ portfolios tends to be much lower than i n other industries. In the Electronics 
& electrical equipment  sector, not reported in Table 2,  the proportion of AMT-related 
patent families is higher than the sample mean (5.7% vs. 5%). 
Based on the results of Table 1 and Table 2, in sec tion 3.3 we will focus our analysis on 
the internationalisation of AMT-related innovative activities, considering companies 
Sector (Number of AMT Patents) Ratio of AMT 
patents 
Industrials (5540.8) 21.6% 
Electronic & Electrical Equipment (5095.7) 19.9% 
ICT producers (4280.2) 16.7% 
Automobiles & parts (3559.5) 13.9% 
Aerospace & defence (1926.2) 7.5% 
Sector (Number of AMT 
Patents) 
AMT 
patents 
Total 
Patents AMT /Total 
Aerospace & defence 1926.2 15004.5 12.8% 
Alternative energy 72.0 694.3 10.4% 
Industrials 5540.8 57421.5 9.6% 
Automobiles & parts 3559.5 41932.6 8.5% 
Traditional energy 202.5 2408.6 8.4%

10 
operating in the Industrials , Electronics & electrical equipment, Automobiles & p arts and 
Aerospace & defence  sectors. This allows us a sufficiently large numbe r of patent 
families to guarantee robustness of the results and  to consider industries in which AMTs 
represent an important part of the overall technolo gical development. Indeed, 
companies operating in these four sectors were resp onsible for almost 63% of the AMT-
related filings between 2010 and 2012. At the same time they showed a high degree of 
specialisation in AMTs. 7 
Before moving to the analysis of the internationali sation patterns of AMT-related 
innovative activities, we will first look at complex patents. 
 
3.2 Complex patents (AMTs and KETs) 
Advanced manufacturing technologies are expected to  revolutionise existing industrial 
processes. Moreover, these technologies can be also  linked to the development of the 
other five KETs, namely nanotechnology, industrial biotechnology, micro- and nano-
electronics, photonics and advanced materials. In m any cases KET-based components 
are also vital for the development of AMTs. This se ction focuses on patent families 
combining IPC codes that correspond to AMTs with IP C codes that correspond to at least 
one of the five KETs. The idea underlying this exer cise is that these patents could 
represent AMT systems used for the development of K ETs or they could represent KET 
components that are vital for the development of AMTs. Different KETs converge in these 
patents families, which may represent particularly promising technological solutions. 
However, it is worth considering that the approach based on the assumption of co-
occurrence of KET-related codes in the same patent document may not capture certain 
aspects of the technological development process. O n the one hand, it may be the case 
that not all of the patents identified represent us es of KETs for the development of AMT 
applications (and vice versa). On the other hand, t his approach might fail to identify 
some patents (and techniques) that are important fo r the development of KETs and 
AMT-related applications.  
In total, 1834 patent families combining AMT-related IPC codes with IPC codes related to 
one or two of the core five KETs were identified. T he proportion of AMT-related patent 
families that also relate to at least one of the KE Ts was 7.8%, making this a not 
insignificant phenomenon. Figure 1 shows the propor tion of patents combining AMT-
related IPC codes with other KETs; combinations inv olving two other KETs are plotted in 
red. 
About half of complex patent families (897) combine  micro- and nano-electronics with 
AMTs. Combinations of AMTs with advanced materials or photonics are the next two 
most frequent pairings, together representing about  37% of the total complex patent 
families. Combinations of AMTs with nanotechnology (45 patent families) and industrial 
biotechnology (60 patent families) are much less co mmon. With 148 patent families, 
combinations of AMTs with two or more KET-related I PC codes represent 8.1% of the 
total complex patent families. The vast majority of  these patent families (130) include 
                                           
7 Specialisation in this context refers to the ratio of patents related to a specific field over the total 
number of patents.

11 
combinations of AMTs and micro- and nano-electronic s with either advanced materials, 
photonics or nanotechnology. 
 
Figure 1 - Distribution of combinations of AMT and other KETs 
 
Source: Authors’ own calculations on EPO and USPTO patent applications. 
 
Which are the Scoreboard companies developing these  complex technologies? Table 3 
reports the top 10 patenting companies for each of the combinations involving AMTs and 
another KET. The table also reports the number of c omplex patent families, their 
proportion of AMT-related patent families and the t otal number of patent families owned 
by the company. For each company, the proportion of AMT-related patents over the total 
patent portfolio was calculated and compared with t he industry average. Firms with 
proportions of AMT-related patent families that are higher than the industry average (i.e. 
that are relatively specialised in AMT production) are reported in bold blue, those within 
5% of the average are reported in normal blue, whil e those lower than the industry 
average are reported in red. 
 
Many of the companies present in these top 10 lists  are relatively small in terms of the 
size of their overall patent portfolios. These companies appear to be highly specialised in 
the development of AMTs; in most cases their level of specialisation is higher than the 
average specialisation of the industry in which the y operate. In addition, the proportion 
of complex patent with respect to AMT patents is ge nerally higher than the sample 
average (7.8%). 
 
Table 4 reports the top 10 companies that develop p atent families combining AMT-
related IPCs with two or more KETs. Only combinatio ns of AMTs with micro-electronics 
and nano-electronics-related IPC codes that also relate to advanced materials, photonics 
or nanotechnology are shown; these represent the va st majority (87%) of the total 
complex patents involving three or more KETs. Many of the companies shown in Table 4 
do not own large patent portfolios.

12 
Table 3 - Top 10 companies owing patents that combine AMT with another KET 
 
Source: Authors’ own calculations on EPO and USPTO patent applications. 
Note: The width of coloured bar is proportional to the column value within each panel. 
 
 
These companies appeared to be highly specialised i n developing AMT-related patents. 
Indeed, in the majority of cases, the proportion of  AMT-related patent families in their 
patent portfolio is higher than the sector average.  In addition, many of the companies 
reported in Table 4 have very high proportions of complex patent families with respect to 
AMT-related patents. Overall, the results seem to s uggest a positive relationship 
between a company’s technological specialisation an d its capacity to develop complex 
KETs. A particularly interesting case is that of US -based company Applied Materials; this 
company filed 1421 patent families during the perio d under consideration, is relatively 
specialised in the development of AMTs and appears among the top 10 in four out of the 
eight lists of complex patent family owners. 
IBM 
(ICT services) 34 10% 15938 NIPPON STEEL 
(Industrials) 29 35% 812 PHILIPS 
(Industrials) 19 15% 3472 
APPLIED MATERIALS 
(ICT producers) 30 24% 1421 KOBE STEEL 
(Industrials) 23 27% 573 QUALCOMM 
(ICT producers) 14 9% 5998 
TOKYO ELECTRON 
(ICT producers) 27 27% 1328 GENERAL ELECTRIC 
(Industrials) 20 2% 9012 APPLE 
(ICT producers) 7 4% 3930 
RENESAS 
(Electronic & Electrical eq) 26 21% 2201 UNITED TECHNOLOGIES 
(Aerospace & defence) 16 3% 3219 KOITO MANUFACTURING 
(Automobile & parts) 6 60% 304 
TAIWAN SEMICONDUCTOR 
(ICT producers) 25 22% 3261 APPLIED MATERIALS 
(ICT producers) 10 8% 1421 SIEMENS 
(Electronic & electrical eq) 6 1% 6712 
TOSHIBA 
(Industrials) 24 8% 9550 SIEMENS 
(Electronic & electrical eq) 10 1% 6712 ACUITY BRANDS 
(Others) 5 45% 68 
HITACHI 
(Electronic & Electrical eq) 24 8% 6629 DOW CHEMICAL 
(Chemicals) 7 3% 4119 CANON 
(ICT producers) 5 2% 10970 
HAMAMATSU PHOTONICS 
(Electronics & Electrical eq) 23 77% 273 FUJIFILM 
(Electronic & electrical eq) 7 9% 5165 GENERAL ELECTRIC 
(Industrial) 5 0.5% 9012 
SEIKO EPSON 
(ICT producers) 22 10% 4505 SUMITOMO ELECTRIC 
(Electronic & electrical eq) 7 13% 1717 TAIWAN SEMICONDUCTOR 
(ICT producers) 5 4% 3261 
INFINEON TECHNOLOGIES 
(ICT producers) 22 20% 1473 HITACHI 
(Electronic & electrical eq) 6 2% 6629 SAMSUNG DISPLAY 
(Electronic & electrical eq) 5 10% 2724 
ABBOTT LABORATORIES 
(Pharmaceuticals & 
Biotechnology) 
4 5% 1278 AREVA 
(Traditional energy) 6 4% 1608 
LIFE TECHNOLOGIES 
(Pharmaceuticals & 
Biotechnology) 
4 22% 459 IBM 
(ICT services) 4 1% 15938 
PHILIPS 
(Industrials) 4 3% 3472 
HON HAI PRECISION 
INDUSTRY 
(Electronic & elctrical eq) 
3 1% 9584 
EPPENDORF 
(Health) 3 30% 74 
FAIRCHILD 
SEMICONDUCTOR 
(ICT producers) 
2 8% 207 
GENERAL ELECTRIC 
(Industrials) 3 0.3% 9012 FREESCALE 
(ICT producers) 2 3% 1008 
BIOMERIEUX 
(Pharmaceuticals & 
Biotechnology) 
2 50% 124 QUALCOMM 
(ICT producers) 2 1% 5998 
DOW CHEMICAL 
(Chemicals) 2 1% 4119 ROBERT BOSCH 
(Autmobile & parts) 2 0.4% 5044 
JOHNSON & JOHNSON 
(Pharmaceuticals & 
Biotechnology) 
2 5% 2072 
SAMSUNG ELECTRO- 
MECHANICS 
(Electronic & elctrical eq) 
2 2% 1944 
LUMINEX 
(Pharmaceuticals & 
Biotechnology) 
2 67% 25 XEROX 
(ICT producers) 2 2% 3026 
QIAGEN 
(Pharmaceuticals & 
Biotechnology) 
2 67% 102 3M 
(Inductrials) 1 3% 1597 
Company 
(Industry) 
AMT 
+
MNE 
Complex 
% on 
AMT 
Patent 
Families 
Company 
(Industry) 
AMT 
+
Nano 
Complex 
% on 
AMT 
Patent 
Families 
Complex 
% on 
AMT 
Patent 
Families 
Company 
(Industry) 
AMT 
+
AM 
Company 
(Industry) 
AMT + 
Ind 
Biotec 
Complex 
% on 
AMT 
Patent 
Families 
Company 
(Industry) 
AMT 
+
Photonic 
Complex 
% on 
AMT 
Patent 
Families

13 
 
Table 4 - Top 10 companies owning patents that combine AMT with two or more KETs 
 
Source: Authors’ own calculations on EPO and USPTO patent applications. 
Note: The width of coloured bar is proportional to the column value within each panel.  
 
Finally, a consideration about the potential of AMT -related patents. The scope of the 
patent, that is the number of technological fields (IPC codes) to which the patent 
pertains, is often related to the technological and  economic value of patents; moreover, 
patent portfolios with a higher average scope are a ssociated with higher market 
valuations of the owning company (Lerner, 1994). Th e average scope, calculated at the 
IPC8 level,8 of all of the patent families filed by the Scorebo ard companies during the 
period under study, is 2.65. The average scope of the AMT-related patents in the sample 
is much higher, at 3.96. AMT-related patents have a  higher technological breadth than 
the other patents in the sample, which suggests tha t they might also be particularly 
valuable from the technological and economic points  of view. However, further analysis 
would be needed to confirm this. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                           
8 The International Patent Classification is a hierar chical classification scheme organised in eight 
main sections (IPC1) and an increasing number of cl asses (IPC3), subclasses (IPC4) and groups 
(IPC8).  
LAM RESEARCH 
(ICT producers) 12 26% 449 INTERSIL 
(ICT producers) 3 4% 243 
ELMOS 
SEMICONDUCTOR 
(ICT producers ) 
4 36% 35 
TOKYO ELECTRON  
(ICT producers) 11 11% 1328 CREE 
(ICT producers) 2 12% 347 AREVA 
(Traditional energy) 4 2% 1608 
APPLIED MATERIALS  
(ICT producers) 7 6% 1421 PHILIPS 
(Industrials) 2 2% 3472 SEIKO EPSON 
(ICT producers) 3 1% 4505 
PANASONIC 
(Other) 4 1% 9460 QUALCOMM 
(ICT producers) 2 1% 5998 
INFINEON 
TECHNOLOGIES 
(ICT producers ) 
2 2% 1473 
NIPPON STEEL 
(Industrials) 3 4% 812 SAMSUNG DISPLAY 
(Electronic & electrical eq) 2 4% 2724 ROBERT BOSCH 
(Automobiles & parts) 2 0.4% 5044 
FUJITSU 
(ICT services) 2 1% 8460 SHARP 
(Electronic & electrical eq) 2 5% 3828 FREESCALE 
(ICT producers ) 2 2% 1008 
JX 
(Low) 2 22% 221 APPLIED MATERIALS 
(ICT producers) 1 1% 1421 BOEING 
(Aerospace & defence) 1 0.3% 1899 
ASAHI GLASS 
(Industrials) 1 6% 809 AREVA 
(Traditional energy) 1 1% 1608 DAI NIPPON PRINTING 
(Services) 1 11% 356 
BE AEROSPACE 
(Aerospace & defence) 1 3% 1870 ASM INTERNATIONAL 
(ICT producers) 1 17% 118 IBM 
(ICT services) 1 0.3% 15938 
BROOKS AUTOMATION 
(Industrials) 1 6% 56 AVAGO TECHNOLOGIES 
(ICT producers) 1 3% 291 LOCKHEED MARTIN 
(Aerospace & defence) 1 2% 737 
Patent 
Families 
Company 
(Industry) 
AMT 
MNE 
AM 
% on 
AMT 
Patent 
Families 
Company 
(Industry) 
AMT 
MNE 
Photonic 
% on 
AMT 
Company 
(Industry) 
AMT 
MNE 
Nano 
% on 
AMT 
Patent 
Families

14 
3.3 The internationalisation of AMT-related activities 
The focus of both this section and the next is the international dimension of AMT-related 
innovative activities. As previously discussed, the se sections will focus on the behaviour 
of companies operating in the Industrials,  Electronics & electrical equipment , 
Automobiles & parts  and Aerospace & defence  sectors. This allows us to have a 
sufficiently large number of patent families for ou r study, and to analyse industries for 
which AMTs represent an important part of the overall technological development.  
 
Table 5 reports the distribution of AMT-related pat ent families across different world 
regions based on information retrieved from patent filings by companies in the 
Industrials  sector. Firms in the Industrials  sector filed 5 541 AMT-related patent families 
between 2010 and 2012. The proportion of inventors residing in the same world region 
as the company applying for the patent family was 7 9%; the remaining 21% of patent 
applications were developed internationally. 
The proportion of AMT-related patent families appli ed for by EU- and US-based 
companies from inventors residing in the same regio n was quite similar, 80.6% and 
79.3% respectively. However, while 10.8% of US-owne d patents (268) were developed 
by inventors residing in the EU, 14% of the EU-owned patent families were developed by 
inventors located in the USA. Overall, US companies  filed more AMT-related patent 
families than EU companies during the period consid ered in this report. This is reflected 
in the fact that, although the proportion of EU pat ents developed in the USA was higher, 
when considering total numbers, the number of US-ow ned patent families developed in 
the EU was higher (268 vs. 161). AMT-related R&D ac tivities of Japanese-based 
companies appear to be quite concentrated; 93% of f ilings came from inventors residing 
in Japan. 
 
 
Table 5 - International location of AMT-related patenting activities: Industrials  
 
Source: Authors’ own calculations on EPO and USPTO patent applications. 
RoW, rest of the world. 
 
EU Japan USA RoW 
EU (1152) 80.6% 0.4% 14.0% 5.0% 
Japan (1305) 1.8% 93.0% 4.3% 0.9% 
USA (2681) 10.8% 0.2% 79.3% 9.7% 
RoW (403) 50.2% 0.3% 16.7% 32.7% 
Applicant Region 
(Number of 
patent families) 
Inventor Region 
AMT patents - Industrials

15 
Table 6 - International location of AMT-related patenting activities: Electronics & 
electrical equipment  
 
Source: Authors’ own calculations on EPO and USPTO patent applications. 
Asian Tigers:  South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore. 
RoW, rest of the world. 
 
Firms in the Electronics & electrical equipment sector filed 5 096 patent families during 
the period considered. The ratio of AMT-related fam ilies filed by inventors that were 
located in the same region as the applicant is 76.7 % (slightly lower than companies in 
the Industrials  sector). Most of the patent families come from Jap anese-based 
companies, followed closely by firms from the Asian  Tiger economies (Singapore, South 
Korea, Taiwan and Hong Kong) and from the EU. Table  6 shows that AMT-related R&D 
activities of firms based in the EU or the Asian Ti gers countries are more 
internationalised than those of their US- and Japanese-based counterparts. 
It is also interesting to note that almost one in f our (23.6%) of the EU-owned patent 
families come from US-based inventors, while 11.4% of US-owned patent families come 
from EU inventors. Japanese firms are the least internationalised, with 92% of their total 
number of AMT-related patents deriving from inventors located in Japan; US-based firms 
followed closely with 81.5%. 
Table 7 presents the results obtained from the anal ysis of companies operating in the 
Automobiles & parts  sector. Companies in this sector filed 3 560 AMT-r elated patent 
families between 2010 and 2012. The proportion of p atents with inventors residing in a 
different region of the world from the owner is alm ost 20%. European and Japanese 
firms hold the majority of AMT-related patent filin gs; however, their patenting activities 
across the world are slightly different. EU firms a re more internationalised, with 17.2% 
of their patent filings coming from US-based invent ors. The corresponding figure for 
firms based in Japan is 13.4%. Japanese companies o perating in the Automobiles & 
parts industry appear to be more internationalised than their counterparts operating in 
the Industrials  and Electronics & electrical equipment  sectors. Finally, 24.5% of the total 
number of US-owned patent families that relate to A MT have EU-based inventors, the 
Asian Tigers EU Japan RoW USA 
Asian Tigers 
(1299) 70.3% 0.3% 0.4% 26.8% 2.2% 
EU (1272) 0.3% 70.5% 0.3% 5.3% 23.6% 
Japan (1592) 0.4% 3.2% 92.0% 0.5% 3.9% 
RoW (187) 6.9% 53.5% 0.8% 16.0% 22.8% 
USA (746) 0.5% 11.4% 0.0% 6.6% 81.5% 
Applicant Region 
(Number of 
patent families) 
Inventor Region 
AMT patents Electronic & Electrical Equipment

16 
opposite to the findings for the Industrials  and Electronics & electrical equipment  
industries. 
 
Table 7 - International location of AMT-related patenting activities: Automobiles & parts 
 
Source: Authors’ own calculations on EPO USPTO patent applications. 
RoW, rest of the world. 
 
Companies operating in the Aerospace & defence  sector appear by far the least 
internationalised of those considered in the study.  During the three-year period 
considered, companies in this sector accounted for 1926 patent families. The vast 
majority of these patent families (almost 99% of the total) came from EU- and US-based 
companies; these two regions seemed to retain an ed ge in the technological 
development of this sector. Moreover, AMT-related p atenting activities are quite 
geographically concentrated; this is probably becau se of the strategic importance of this 
sector. Of the patent families owned by US-based co mpanies, 91.3% were invented by 
US-based invertors. Likewise, 92.6% of EU-owned AMT -related patent were invented 
within the EU. A very small number of EU-owned pate nt families (approximately 54) 
were developed in the USA. Similarly only about 48 US-owned patent families were 
invented by EU-based inventors. 
It can be observed that, although the proportion of  AMT-related patent families filed by 
companies operating in the four industrial sectors considered in the analysis was higher 
than the average (close to 5%), the internationalis ation of their AMT-related patenting 
activities varied greatly. In particular, Aerospace & defence  companies are the least 
internationalised; these companies are also those w ith the highest proportion of AMT-
related patent families in their overall patent por tfolios (Table 6). AMTs are likely to be 
key to guaranteeing a competitive position in this sector and, given their strategic 
importance, they tend to be developed locally. On t he other hand, firms in the 
Electronics & electrical equipment sector , with 5.7% of their total patent families related 
to AMTs, are the most internationalised group of co mpanies analysed. Companies from 
the other two sectors, Industrials  and Automobiles & parts , show similar levels of 
internationalisation, between the two extremes. 
EU USA Japan RoW 
EU (1333) 79.3% 17.2% 1.0% 2.2% 
USA (744) 24.5% 70.1% 0.4% 5.0% 
Japan (1321) 2.0% 13.4% 83.6% 1.0% 
RoW (162) 6.7% 0.7% 0.0% 92.6% 
AMT patents - Automobiles & Parts 
Applicant Region 
(Number of 
patent families) 
Inventor Region

17 
 
Table 8 - International location of AMT-related patenting activities: Aerospace & defence 
 
Source: Authors’ own calculations on EPO USPTO patent applications. 
RoW, rest of world. 
 
 
3.4 A closer look at the AMT international innovation network 
In this section we attempt to assess the contributi on of different countries to the 
development of AMT. In particular, we look at the l inkages between the location of 
patent owners and inventors. In doing so, we disent angle the geographical ownership 
structure of AMTs and the links and collaboration networks between countries around the 
world. 
To draw the AMT international innovation networks, all the AMT-related patents from 
Scoreboard companies were considered. Applicant and  inventor information from patent 
documents was aggregated at the country level and i ndividual countries were used as 
nodes in the network. 
9 Links between nodes (countries) correspond to coll aboration 
between inventors and applicants from different cou ntries for the development of AMT-
related patents. To facilitate the visualisation of  knowledge flows between different 
countries, the links between nodes — the edges — we re directed from the inventor to 
the applicant country. The number of incoming links  (incoming degree) to a country is 
an indication of knowledge flowing from inventors r esiding abroad to owners based in 
that country. The number of outgoing links (outgoin g degree) from one country relates 
to knowledge flowing from this country abroad. 
The world network of ‘owner’ and ‘inventor’ countri es of AMT-related patent filings is 
shown in Figure 2. In the figure we condense inform ation surrounding the AMT 
international innovation network, in particular: 
1)  The colour of the nodes varies between purple for t he country with the highest 
incoming weighted degree (most important in term of  patent applications) and 
                                           
9 In network analysis, the structure of a network is  characterised in terms of nodes (the entities 
within the network) and ties or edges (relationships or interactions) that connect them.   
EU USA RoW 
EU (894) 92.6% 6.0% 1.0% 
USA (1008) 4.8% 91.3% 3.9% 
RoW (24) 10.4% 10.4% 79.1% 
AMT patents  - Aerospace & Defence 
Applicant Region 
(Number of 
patent families) 
Inventor Region

18 
pink for the country with the lowest incoming weigh ted degree (the least 
important in terms of patent applications);  
2)  The size of the nodes depends on the outgoing weigh ted degree (the higher the 
outgoing degree, the larger the node), which repres ents the number of 
connections between a country inventors with applicants from abroad.  
 
Figure 2 - International patent network of Scoreboard companies based on AMT-related 
patent filings between 2010 and 2012 
 
Source: Authors’ own calculations on EPO and USPTO patent applications. 
 
In the figure, we report weighted degrees, which is a measure of the number of different 
countries that are home to the inventors and applic ants of AMT-related patents. The 
relative importance of a link between two countries , which is represented by an edge in 
the graph and corresponds to collaborations between applicants and inventors residing in 
these two countries, is assessed by the number of p atents that have been co-developed 
by applicants and inventors from the two countries.  Thus, these metrics are not only an 
indication of internationalisation, but also assess  the relative importance of 
collaborations by taking into account the number of developed patents. 
US-based companies own a large number of AMT-relate d patent families that were 
developed in collaboration with inventors from many different countries outside the USA. 
At the same time, the USA is also an important inve ntor country: US inventors have 
developed AMT-related patents with applicants from many other countries. In terms of 
ownership of AMT-related technologies, US-based com panies are closely followed by 
companies based in Japan, Germany and France. Switz erland, the UK, South Korea, 
Taiwan and the Netherlands are also countries where  companies owning AMT-related 
patents are located. All of these countries are als o important when considering the 
location of the inventors developing AMT-related te chnologies. US-based companies 
have established close links and are highly interco nnected with Japanese, European, 
South Korean and Taiwanese companies. European comp anies are also highly 
interconnected both with other EU companies and wit h US-based companies. Finally

19 
Japanese, South Korean, Taiwanese and Chinese compa nies form another important 
cluster for the development of AMT-related patents. 
We next focus on the internationalisation of the AM T-related patenting activities of 
companies from the Automobiles & parts  and Aerospace & defence sectors: industries 
that are particularly AMT intensive and where the E U has a comparative advantage over 
most of its competitors elsewhere.  Table 9 lists the top 10 AMT-related patent owners in 
the Automobiles & parts  sector. Companies are ranked in accordance with the number of 
AMT-related patent families owned and the three mos t important countries, in terms of 
residence of inventors, are reported. We further di stinguish between companies whose 
proportion of AMT-related patents in their total po rtfolios is higher than the sector 
average (deep blue) and those for which this proportion is lower than the sector average 
(light blue, italic). Most of the top 10 AMT-relate d patent applicant companies operating 
in the Automobiles & parts  sector tend to develop their technologies ‘in house’. 
Indeed, in most cases, the country in which a compa ny’s headquarters is located is also 
where the majority of technologies are developed. H owever, the need to utilise the skills 
of international inventors varies greatly across companies. In contrast to Hyundai Motor, 
which develops almost all of its AMT-related patent s in South Korea, Continental and 
Volkswagen are among the most ‘internationalised’ c ompanies. Fiat (which acquired the 
Chrysler F platform) and Delphi Automotive (which b egan as the parts arm of GM) 
represent exceptions in this group, with the majori ty of their AMT-related technologies 
developed abroad. 
 
Table 9  — AMT-related international R&D activities of the world ’s top 10 firms by 
number of AMT-related filings of the Automobiles & parts sector  
 
Source: Authors’ own calculations on EPO and USPTO patent applications. 
 
Company R&D 2012 
(€ mil.) 
Patent 
Families AMT HQ 
Country 
US DE IT Other 
DE US JP 
ROBERT BOSCH 4,924 5044 
JP US GB 
JP US DE 
HONDA MOTOR 4,906 3096 298 JP 
JP US CA 
TOYOTA MOTOR 7,071 4312 296 JP 
DE SE FR 
VOLKSWAGEN 9,515 1780 144 DE 
DE US FR 
CONTINENTAL 1,827 1084 130 DE 
KR DE 
US IT DE 
FIAT 3,295 448 86 IT 
US FR DE 
67.7% 17.7% 6.7% 8.0% 
99.5% 0.5% 
52.0% 37.4% 6.4% 4.1% 
66.4% 27.2% 2.1% 4.4% 
60.9% 24.4% 8.3% 6.4% 
73.4% 22.9% 2.5% 1.2% 
74.7% 21.9% 3.0% 0.4% 
76.9% 12.8% 2.1% 8.2% 
96.9% 2.4% 0.3% 0.4% 
DELPHI 910 524 67 GB 
AMT - Inventor Countries 
76.1% 13.1% 4.4% 6.4% 
HYUNDAI MOTOR 934 1999 99 KR 
496 DE 
DENSO 2,938 2800 307 JP 
GENERAL MOTORS 5,584 4608 508 US 
Automobile & Parts

20 
The top 10 AMT-related patent owners in the Aerospace & defence  sector are listed in 
Table 10. As before, companies are ranked by number  of AMT-related patent families 
and the three most important inventor countries are  reported. Almost all companies in 
the list develop the vast majority of their AMT-rel ated patents in the country in which 
the headquarters is located. The proportion of AMT- related patents developed ‘in-house’ 
in the Aerospace & defence  sector is generally much higher than for companies  
operating in the Automobiles & parts  sector. An important exception is EADS, whose 
headquarters is located in the Netherlands, but who se main R&D activities take place in 
other European countries (EADS was formed by the me rger of different European 
aerospace companies and currently has the statute o f European company). The next 
most internationalised firm of in the sector, in te rms of location of AMT-related R&D 
activities, is BAE systems, with almost 40% of its AMT-related patent families developed 
outside the UK and almost one-quarter of these in the USA. 
 
Table 10 - International R&D activities of the world ’s top 10 firms by number of AMT-
related filings of the Aerospace & defence  sector 
 
Source: Authors’ own calculations on EPO and USPTO patent applications.  
 
Similar figures for ‘owner’ and ‘inventor’ countrie s of AMT-related patent filings can be 
compiled for the Industrials  and Electronics & electrical equipment  sectors. Based on the 
incoming degree criterion, the most important ‘appl icant’ countries, in terms of firms 
from the Industrials  sector owning AMT-related patent families that wer e developed by 
domestic and international inventors, are the USA, Switzerland, Germany and Japan. 
These countries, along with Italy and France, are a lso important inventors of AMT-
related patents, as shown by the outgoing degree criterion.  
Finally, the USA, Germany, France, Japan, the Nethe rlands and Switzerland are 
important applicant countries in terms of ‘owners’ of AMT-related technologies for the 
Company R&D 2012 
(€ mil.) 
Patent 
Families AMT HQ 
Country 
US CA GB Other 
FR DE GB 
EADS 3630 2438 324 NL 
US ES DE 
GB DE US 
FR BE US 
DE CH PL 
FR BE DE 
GB US FR 
US IN 
US DE CA 
99.1% 0.9% 
1.0% 
1.6% 0.8% 0.8% 
62.8% 24.3% 5.3% 7.5% 
90.3% 5.2% 3.5% 
89.1% 8.7% 2.2% 
98.4% 0.8% 0.8% 
96.7% 
94.1% 3.5% 1.3% 1.1% 
78.7% 11.1% 6.3% 3.9% 
1.3% 3.5% 
48.3% 32.9% 9.0% 9.8% 
TEXTRON 443 285 46 US 
BAE SYSTEMS 189 591 57 GB 
LOCKHEED MARTIN 467 737 54 US 
MTU AERO ENGINES 161 241 62 DE 
THALES 700 745 61 FR 
ROLLS-ROYCE 750 924 167 GB 
SAFRAN 1109 1145 155 FR 
BOEING 2253 1899 300 US 
UNITED TECHNOLOGIES 1797 3219 482 US 
AMT - Inventor Country 
89.2% 6.0%

21 
Electronics & electrical  equipment  sector. They are also important ‘inventor’ countri es, 
along with China and the UK. 
 
 
4. Conclusion  
In this report, empirical evidence about the intern ationalisation of AMT-related R&D 
activities of Scoreboard companies operating in sec tors that are highly specialised in the 
development of AMT-related patents is presented. Pa tent data from applications filed at 
the EPO and the USPTO were linked to Scoreboard com panies and information from 
patent documents on the location of the applicant a nd the inventors was used for this 
analysis. The focus on firm-level data allowed anal ysis of where most of the AMT-related 
R&D activities take place and what is the ownership  structure of the resulting AMT-
related technologies. Given that KET components are  integrated into AMT-based 
systems, and that, among other applications, AMT-re lated technologies are being used 
for the development of KET-based products, we focus ed on complex AMT patents, i.e. 
those also related to other KETs. 
The starting point for the analysis was to look at the sectors in which the development of 
AMT-related technologies is crucial. Based on the p roportion of total patents that relate 
to AMTs, and on the specialisation of companies in different sectors, it was found that 
developing and patenting AMT-related technologies i s of crucial importance for firms in 
the Aerospace & defence,  Industrials , Automobiles & parts  and the Electronics & 
electrical equipment  sectors, which together own almost 80% of the AMT- related patent 
families that were filed during the period under study. 
The more specialised in developing AMT patents a sector is, the less internationalised the 
AMT-related activities of the firms in this sector appear to be. The most concentrated 
AMT-related R&D activities are performed by firms i n the Aerospace & defence sector, 
with over 90% of their AMT-related patents being de veloped in the world region where 
the applicant is based. These firms are highly spec ialised in developing AMT-related 
technologies, with 12.8% of their total patent fili ngs classified as AMTs, compared with 
global average of close to 5%. Firms in the Aerospace & defence  sector were responsible 
for 7.5% of the total AMT-related filings during th e period under study; most of these 
were developed in the USA, the UK, Germany and France. Firms in the Industrials  and in 
the Automobiles & parts  sectors are also highly specialised in the develop ment of AMT-
related technologies. They are followed by companie s in the Electronics & electrical 
equipment  sector, which file almost 5.7% of their patent fam ilies in AMT-related 
technological fields. 
In general, AMT-related R&D activities of European-  and US-based firms are more 
internationalised than the activities of Japanese- and Asian-based firms. In most cases 
the proportion of AMT-related patents that are deve loped in the same region where the 
applicant is based is 70–80%, a notable exception b eing Japanese-based companies, 
which show highly concentrated AMT-related R&D acti vities. Analysis of the ownership 
structure of AMT-related patents and possible knowl edge flows between different 
countries was undertaken by exploiting the informat ion about the location of inventors 
and applicants in patent filings. It was found that  in some countries, such as the USA, 
Japan, Germany, France and the UK, many Scoreboard firms own and develop a large 
number of AMT-related patents. However, large numbe rs of inventors of AMT-related

22 
technologies are also based in other countries, suc h as China, India, Canada, Italy, 
Belgium and Spain. 
We also focused on AMT-related patents that relate to at least one or more of the KETs; 
this was an attempt to assess the capability of Sco reboard firms to develop complex 
patents that can be assumed to link to AMT applicat ions for the development of KETs, or 
to KET applications that can be incorporated into A MT systems. However, it should be 
borne in mind that the results of this type of anal ysis are by no means exhaustive and 
the relative importance of firms in the development  of AMTs or KETs that are crucial for 
the development of other KET- or AMT-related applic ations should be complemented by 
different types of studies. It is found that approx imately 8% of the AMT-related patents 
fall into this category of complex patents, the vast majority being patents which relate to 
micro- and nano-electronics, advanced materials and photonics. It is found that many of 
the firms that are mainly responsible for the devel opment of these technologies are 
relatively small in terms of the total number of pa tent families in their portfolios but are 
highly specialised in the development of AMT-related patents.

23 
References  
Alstadsæter A, Barrios S, Nicodème G, Skonieczna AM , Vezzani A, ‘Patent Boxes Design, 
Patents Location and Local R&D’. Taxation Papers, N.57, 2015. 
Dernis H, Dosso M, Hervás F, Millot V, Squicciarini  M, Vezzani A, ‘World Corporate Top 
R&D Investors: Innovation and IP bundles’. A JRC an d OECD common report. 
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2015 
Du Plessis M, Van Looy B, Song X, Magerman T, ‘Data  Production Methods for 
Harmonised Patent Indicators: Assignee sector alloc ation’ (EUROSTAT Working Paper 
and Studies), Luxembourg, 2009. 
EC Communication, ‘Preparing for our future: Develo ping a common strategy for key 
enabling technologies in the EU’, 2009, CELEX: 52009DC0512. 
EC Communication, ‘For a European Industrial Renais sance’, 2014, CELEX : 
52014DC0014. 
EC Communication, ‘Digitising European Industry Rea ping the full benefits of a Digital 
Single Market’, 2016, CELEX : 52016DC0180. 
Freeman C, ‘The Economics of Industrial Innovation’. London: Pinter Publishers, 1982. 
Gkotsis P, ‘The capability of the EU R&D Scoreboard  companies to develop Advanced 
Manufacturing Technologies’. Joint Research Centre-  IPTS Technical Reports, May 
2015. 
Grupp H, ‘Foundations of the Economics of Innovatio n — Theory, Measurement and 
Practice’. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 1998. 
IDEA Consult, ZEW, TNO, CEA, ‘Feasibility study for an EU Monitoring Mechanism on Key 
Enabling Technologies: Report for the European Comm ission’, DG Enterprise and 
Industry, 2013. 
Lerner, J. ‘The importance of patent scope: an empi rical analysis.’ The RAND Journal of 
Economics, vol 25(2), 319-333, 1994. 
Magerman T, Grouwels J, Song X, Van Looy B, ‘Data P roduction Methods for Harmonised 
Patent Indicators: Patentee Name Harmonisation’ (EU ROSTAT Working Paper and 
Studies), Luxembourg, 2009. 
Neuhäusler P, Frietsch R, Bethke N, Mund C, ‘Assess ing companies’ capability to develop 
advanced manufacturing technologies in selected ind ustrial sectors’. Final Report 
JRC/SVQ/2014/J.2/0009/NC, Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation 
Research ISI, January 2015. 
OECD, ‘Emerging technologies’ in OECD Science, Tech nology and Industry Scoreboard 
2013: Innovation for Growth, OECD Publishing, 2013. 
Peeters B, Song X, Callaert J, Grouwels J, Van Looy  B, ‘Harmonising harmonised 
patentee names: an exploratory assessment of top pa tentees’ (EUROSTAT Working 
Paper and Studies), Luxembourg, 2009. 
WIPO, ‘International Patent Classification: Core Le vel’, Eighth Edition, Volume 5: World 
Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO), 2006.

24 
Appendix 
Company-specific data, such as employment and R&D e xpenditure, came from the EU 
Industrial R&D Scoreboard, whereas patent data were  based on PATSTAT. The matching 
procedure that was necessary for linking the PATSTA T entries with the Scoreboard 
companies is briefly presented. 
 
PATSTAT  
PATSTAT is a relational database that contains info rmation about published patents from 
83 patent authorities worldwide, dating back to the late 19th century; it is updated twice 
a year. All information that is provided on a paten t application is included in the 
corresponding PATSTAT entry. In the original versio n of the database, the names of the 
applicants were in a ‘raw format’ taken directly fr om the patent application; this means 
that several variants of the same name may exist. T he names may also contain special 
characters, abbreviations, legal forms and spelling  mistakes. The automated 
harmonisation of all applicant names occurring in P ATSTAT developed by the K.U. 
Leuven solved this problem (Du Plessis et al., 2009 ; Magerman et al., 2009; Peeters et 
al., 2009). The process of name harmonisation included cleaning-up of special characters 
(HTML code, accents, etc.) and punctuation, cleanin g-up of legal forms (e.g. Inc., Ltd., 
GmbH), harmonisation of additional enterprise infor mation (‘COMPANY’, ‘CORP’, 
‘CORPORATION’), harmonisation of spelling variants (‘SYSTEM’, ‘SYSTEMS’, 
‘SYSTEMES’), condensation of irrelevant characters (‘3 COM’, ‘3COM’). This meant that 
patents could be more exactly assigned as belonging to a specific patent applicant, which 
minimised classification errors to a large extent. 
The patents in this analysis were counted based on the application filing date. Patent 
applications that were filed in the EPO or the USPT O between 2010 and 2012 were used 
for the analysis of the internationalisation activi ties of firms that develop AMT-related 
technologies and for the analysis of complex patent s. The data from PATSTAT were 
matched at the level of patent applicants in the harmonised version of the database with 
data from the EU Industrial R&D Scoreboard at the l evel of individual companies 
(including subsidiaries). 
 
Table 11 Definition of AMTs based on IPC (IDEA Consult et al. 2013) 
Advanced Manufacturing Technologies B03C, B06B 1/6, B06B 3/00, B07C, B23K, B23P, B23Q, B25J, G01D, 
G01F, G01H, G01L, G01M, G01P, G01Q, G05B, G05D, G05 F, G05G, 
G06M, G07C, G06 if co occurrence with A21C, A22B, A 22C, A23N, 
A24C, A41H, A42C, A43D, B01F, B02B, B02C, B03B, B03 D, B05C, 
B05D, B07B, B08B, B21B, B21D, B21F, B21H, B21J, B22C, B23B, B23C, 
B23D, B23G, B24B, B24C, B25D, B26D, B26F, B27B, B27C, B27F, B27J, 
B28D, B30B, B21B, B31C, B31D, B31F, B41B, B41C, B41 D, B41F, 
B41G, B41L, B41N, B42B, B42C, B44B, B65B, B65C, B65 H, B67B, 
B67C, B68F, C14B, C23C, D01B, D01D, D01G, D01H, D02 G, D02H, 
D02J, D03C, D03D, D03J, D04B, D04C, D05B, D05C, D06 B, D06G, 
D06H, D21B, D21D, D21F, D21G, E01C, E02D, E02F, E21 B, E21C, 
E21D, E21F, F04F, F16N, F16B, G01K, H05H, G08C exce pt for co 
occurrence with G01D 5/12, G05F 1/10, G07C 9/00, G0 1P 3/42, H01L 
21/02, G05B 19/05, H05K 3/34, G01D 5/14, F02D 45/00 , H01L 29/66, 
G05F 1/56, G05F 3/24, G07C 5/00, G05D 1/00, B60T 8/17, G05D 1/02, 
G01M 15/04, G01M 17/007, G07C 5/08, F02D 41/14, G05 D 1/06, B60R 
16/02, B62D 65/00, B60T 7/04, G01P 21/00, B60R 25/00, B62D 57/00, 
B60T 8/172, B60T 7/06, B62D 57/032, E05B 49/00, G01 P 3/489, G05D 
1/08 
 
The IPC is a hierarchical classification system use d primarily to classify and search 
patent documents according to the technical fields to which they pertain. The 
classification scheme contains about 70 000 entries  identified by classification symbols 
(IPC codes) that can be allotted to patent documents. These different classification codes

25 
are arranged in a tree-like, hierarchical structure . The IPC is updated annually and 
revised every three years to capture technological changes more effectively. Existing 
data are adjusted to the current version of the IPC (WIPO 2006).  
For consistency with existing figures for patents r elating to KETs and AMTs, we utilised 
the most recent definition of KETs that was developed by the KETs Observatory, in which 
AMT is a subfield of KET (IDEA Consult et al. 2013). The definition is based on the IPC. 
Patent applications filed in the USPTO between 1972  and 2012 were examined in the 
analysis of the technical knowledge base to detect patterns and clusters that could 
suggest the emergence of new technologies. 
 
The EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard  
The EU Industrial R&D Scoreboard is part of the Eur opean Commission’s monitoring 
activity that aims to improve the understanding of trends in R&D investment by the 
private sector, and the factors affecting such inve stment. It was created in response to 
the Commission’s Research Investment Action Plan, w hich aims to help close the gap 
between the EU’s R&D investment and that of other d eveloped economies. The annual 
publication of the Scoreboard is intended to raise awareness of the importance of R&D 
for businesses and to encourage firms to disclose i nformation about their R&D 
investments and other intangible assets. 
The data for the Scoreboard are taken from the publ icly available audited accounts of 
the companies. In more than 99% of cases these acco unts do not include information 
about where R&D is actually performed; the whole R& D investment of Scoreboard 
companies is attributed to the country in which tha t company has its registered office. 
The Scoreboard data are primarily of interest to th ose concerned with benchmarking 
company commitments and performance (e.g. companies, investors and policymakers). 
The scope of the Scoreboard is gradually being impr oved by increasing both the 
geographic and temporal coverage and the number of companies included. The target is 
to cover the world’s top 2 500 R&D investors so tha t fastest-growing middle-sized 
companies can be captured, particularly those in key sectors such as health and the ICT-
related industries. Thus far, the total R&D investm ent of companies included in the 
Scoreboard is equivalent to almost 90% of the total  expenditure on R&D by businesses 
worldwide. The 2013 edition of the Scoreboard inclu des the 2 000 companies investing 
the largest sums in R&D in the world while maintain ing an EU focus by also reporting on 
the top 1 000 R&D investing companies based in the EU. 
The Scoreboard collects key information to enable the R&D and economic performance of 
companies to be assessed. The main indicators, name ly R&D investment, net sales, 
capital expenditure, operating profits and number o f employees, are collected following 
the same methodologies, definitions and assumptions  as applied in previous years. This 
ensures comparability so that the companies’ econom ic and financial data can be 
analysed over a longer period of time.  
In the 2013 edition of the Scoreboard, companies’ R &D rankings are based on 
information taken from their latest published accou nts. For most companies, this 
corresponds to the data from calendar year 2012, bu t in a significant proportion of 
companies the financial year ended on 31 March 2013 . In some of the included 
companies, the financial year ended as late as 30 J une 2013, and a in a few cases only 
accounts to the end of 2011 were available.

26 
List of abbreviations  
AMT — advanced manufacturing technology 
EPO — European Patent Office 
ICB — Industry Classification Benchmark 
ICT — information and communication technology 
IPC — International Patent Classification 
IPO — Intellectual Property Office 
KET — key enabling technology 
PATSTAT — Worldwide Patent Statistical Database 
RoW — rest of the world 
Telecomm — telecommunications 
USPTO — United States Patent and Trademark Office 
WIPO — World Intellectual Property Organisation

27 
List of figures 
Figure 1 - Distribution of combinations of AMT and other KETs .................................. 11  
Figure 2 - International patent network of Scoreboa rd companies based on AMT-related 
patent filings between 2010 and 2012 ................................................................... 18  
 
 
 
List of tables 
 
Table 1 - Proportion of AMT-related patents by Industrial Sector ................................. 9 
Table 2 - Relative importance of AMT-related patent s in the patent portfolio of 
companies within specific sectors ............................................................................ 9 
Table 3 - Top 10 companies owing patents that combine AMT with another KET .......... 12  
Table 4 - Top 10 companies owning patents that combine AMT with two or more KETs 13  
Table 5 - International location of AMT-related patenting activities: Industrials  ........... 14  
Table 6 - International location of AMT-related pat enting activities: E lectronics & 
electrical equipment  ............................................................................................ 15  
Table 7 - International location of AMT-related pat enting activities:     Automobiles & 
parts  ................................................................................................................. 16  
Table 8 - International location of AMT-related pat enting activities:   Aerospace & 
defence .............................................................................................................. 17  
Table 9  — AMT-related international R&D activities  of the world’s top 10 firms by 
number of AMT-related filings of the Automobiles & parts sector  ............................... 19  
Table 10 - International R&D activities of the worl d’s top 10 firms by number of AMT-
related filings of the Aerospace & defence  sector ..................................................... 20  
Table 11 Definition of AMTs based on IPC (IDEA Consult et al. 2013) ......................... 24

28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to obtain EU publications 
 
Our publications are available from EU Bookshop ( 
http://bookshop.europa.eu ), 
where you can place an order with the sales agent of your choice. 
 
The Publications Office has a worldwide network of sales agents. 
You can obtain their contact details by sending a fax to (352) 29 29-42758. 
 
 
Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers to your questions about the European Union 
Free phone number (*): 00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 
(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers or these calls may be billed. 
 
A great deal of additional information on the European Union is available on the Internet. 
It can be accessed through the Europa server http://europa.eu

29 
 
doi:10.2791/97641 
ISBN 978 -92 -79 -60737 -0 
LF-NA-28040-EN-N 
JRC Mission  
 
As the Commission’s  
in-house science service,  
the Joint Research Centre’s  
mission is to provide EU  
policies with independent,  
evidence-based scientific  
and technical support  
throughout the whole  
policy cycle. 
 
Working in close  
cooperation with policy  
Directorates-General,  
the JRC addresses key  
societal challenges while  
stimulating innovation  
through developing  
new methods, tools  
and standards, and sharing  
its know-how with  
the Member States,  
the scientific community  
and international partners. 
 
Serving society  
Stimulating innovation  
Supporting legislation
