
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
More information on the European Union is available on (http://europa.eu)
Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.
© European Union, 2016
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged
Printed in Belgium
Printed on chlorine free paper
Legal notice:
The views expressed in this report, as well as the information included in it, do not necessarily reflect the
opinion or position of the European Commission and in no way commit the institution.
This report was prepared by:
Hugo Hollanders, Nordine Es-Sadki, and Minna Kanerva
Maastricht University (Maastricht Economic and Social Research Institute on Innovation and Technology – MERIT)
as part of the European Innovation Scoreboards (EIS) project for the European Commission,
Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs.

Coordinated and guided by:
Mark Nicklas, Acting Head of Unit, Daniel Bloemers, Alberto Licciardello, and Marshall Hsia
Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs
Directorate F – Innovation and Advanced Manufacturing
Unit F1 – Innovation Policy and Investment for Growth
in close co-operation with
Román Arjona, Chief Economist, Marnix Surgeon, Deputy Head of Unit, and Richard Deiss
Directorate-General for Research and Innovation
Unit A4 – Analysis and monitoring of national research policies

The European Innovation Scoreboard report and annexes, and the indicators database are available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/innovation/facts-figures/scoreboards/index_en.htm
Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers
to your questions about the European Union
Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11
(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers or these calls may be billed.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
European Innovation
Scoreboard 2016

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Foreword
Innovation grows the EU’s knowledge economy, it enhances our competitiveness and it creates a prosperous
future for all Member States. This is why innovation features prominently in the ten priorities of the Juncker
Commission.
The European Innovation Scoreboard 2016 gives an assessment of the EU and Member States' innovation
performance, as well as that of key international competitors. Its 25 indicators give a detailed analysis
of the strengths and weaknesses of Member States on the basis of important innovation drivers − from
research systems and public and private investment, to the economic effects of innovation. Also, for the
first time, we include a chapter on expected short-term changes in EU innovation performance to help
anticipate future trends.
This edition of the Scoreboard reveals several interesting developments. The EU has a lead in innovation
performance over many other countries, while China is making swift progress. In addition, the EU is catching
up with Japan and the United States, but is still losing ground to South Korea.
The report shows positive trends in human resources, and the attractiveness, openness and quality of
research systems, but negative trends both in research investment and in the framework conditions for
business engagement in venture capital and SME innovation.
While performance varies considerably, many Member States are top innovators worldwide. Reforms are
crucial to maintaining and improving the performance of national research and innovation systems. The
EU supports Member States in achieving reform through the Horizon 2020 Policy Support Facility and,
through initiatives such as the Investment Plan for Europe and the Single Market Agenda, the Commission
is improving the business environment for SMEs and start-ups.
In short, Europe's future depends on becoming a place where innovation flourishes and where businesses
develop new products and services. We need market-creating innovation for sustainable economic growth,
more and better jobs, an improved quality of life and economic opportunities for all citizens.
We believe the European Innovation Scoreboard 2016 provides important insights into the challenges and
opportunities that lie ahead and we hope it will be a useful tool for everyone interested in innovation, in
particular, decision-makers designing innovation policies and strategies.
 Elżbieta Bieńk
owska
 Carlos Moedas
 Member of the European Commission
 Member of the European Commission

 Responsible f
or Internal Market, Industry,
 Responsible f
or Research,
 Entrepreneurship and SMEs
 Science and Inno
vation

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 6 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
 8 1. INTRODUCTION
12 2. INNO VATION PERFORMANCE AND TRENDS
12
 2.1
 Most recent inno
vation performance
12
 2.2
 Perf
ormance changes over time
16
 2.3
 Convergence in inno
vation performance
18 3. INNO VATION DIMENSIONS
27 4. INNO VATION PERFORMANCE OF THE EUROPEAN UNION
27
 4.1
 EU inno
vation performance
28
 4.2
 EU perf
ormance growth
29 5. BENCHMARKING INNOVATION PERFORMANCE WITH NON-EU COUNTRIES
29
 5.1
 Benchmarking against other European countries and regional neighbours
30
 5.2
 Benchmarking against global competitors
37 6. EXPECTED SHORT-TERM CHANGES IN EU INNOVATION PERFORMANCE
38
 6.1
 EU trend perf
ormance compared to China, Japan, South Korea, and the United States
41
 6.2
 Short-term changes in EU inno
vation performance by indicator
43
 6.3
 Pro
visional CIS 2014 data
45
 6.4
 Methodology section
46 7. COUNTR Y PROFILES
83 8. EUROPEAN INNOVATION SCOREBOARD METHODOLOGY
83
 8.1
 Ho
w to calculate composite indicators
84
 8.2
 Ho
w to calculate growth rates
84
 8.3
 International benchmarking
84
 8.4
 Interactive T
ool
85
 ANNEX
 A: Country abbreviations
8
5
 ANNEX
 B: Perf
ormance per indicator
86
 ANNEX
 C: Current perf
ormance
88
 ANNEX
 D: Perf
ormance growth
90
 ANNEX
 E: Definitions of indicators
9
4
 ANNEX
 F: Summary Inno
vation Index (SII) time series
95
 ANNEX
 G: Perf
ormance scores per dimension
96
 ANNEX
 H: International data

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
6
Executive summary
European Innovation Scoreboard 2016: a new name
Using again its original name, the report is now called European
Innovation Scoreboard, and not Innovation Union Scoreboard, as it was
called from 2010 to 2015.
The EU is doing better compared to Japan and the United
States, while it is losing ground vis-à-vis South Korea
At global level, the EU continues to be less innovative than South
Korea, the United States and Japan, but performance differences
with the last two countries have become smaller. However, South
Korea has managed to improve its performance at a much faster
pace than the EU over the last eight years. The EU still has a
considerable performance lead over many other countries, including
China. However, China is catching up, with a performance growth
rate five times that of the EU.
Innovation performance is measured by average
performance on 25 indicators
The measurement framework used in the European Innovation
Scoreboard distinguishes between three main types of indicators
and eight innovation dimensions, capturing in total 25 different
indicators. The Enablers capture the main drivers of innovation
performance external to the firm and cover three innovation
dimensions: Human resources, Open, excellent and attractive
research systems, as well as Finance and support. Firm activities
capture the innovation efforts at the level of the firm, grouped
in three innovation dimensions: Firm investments, Linkages &
entrepreneurship, and Intellectual assets. Outputs cover the
effects of firms’ innovation activities in two innovation dimensions:
Innovators and Economic effects.
Member States are classified into four performance
groups based on their average innovation performance
Based on their average innovation performance as calculated by a
composite indicator, the Summary Innovation Index, Member States
fall into four different performance groups (Figure 1). Denmark,
Finland, Germany, the Netherlands, and Sweden are Innovation
Leaders with innovation performance well above that of the EU
average. Austria, Belgium, France, Ireland, Luxembourg, Slovenia,
and the UK are Strong Innovators with innovation performance
above or close to that of the EU average. The performance of
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Greece, Hungary, Italy,
Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, and Spain
is below that of the EU average. These countries are Moderate
Innovators. Bulgaria and Romania are Modest Innovators with
innovation performance well below that of the EU average.
Figure 1: EU Member States’ innovation performance

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
7
European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
There have been two changes in performance group memberships
compared to last year's report: Latvia has moved up to the
Moderate Innovators, and the Netherlands has moved up to the
Innovation Leaders.
Date timeliness has improved
The improved timeliness of the data for this year's report
originates from two changes. Firstly, the postponement of the
report's publication has allowed data updates until April 2016 to
be included. Secondly, timeliness has improved due to changes in
several data sources, e.g. data on trademarks and designs have
now been acquired directly from the European Union Intellectual
Property Office (EUIPO), and data on venture capital investments
from Invest Europe, instead of acquiring these data indirectly from
Eurostat.
Growth has been positive over a period of eight years …
Over an eight-year period (2008-2015), performance has been
improving for the EU as a whole, and for as many as 21 Member
States, with growth having been highest for Latvia and Malta.
However, for seven Member States, long-term performance growth
has been negative, with the most negative growth rate observed
for Romania.
… but more recently, performance has declined for
many Member States
Despite the positive performance growth for many Member
States for 2008-2015, there has been a trend reversal when
comparing the years before and after 2012, with many Member
States experiencing negative performance growth for 2012-2015.
Most recently (2014-2015), as many as 17 Member States have
experienced negative growth. The process of convergence in
performance differences between Member States – as observed
in previous reports since 2012 – appears to have come to a halt.
More innovative countries have balanced innovation
systems
The country ranking order in overall innovation performance is similar
to the ranking order for each of the eight innovation dimensions.
Performance differences across the dimensions are smallest for the
Innovation Leaders, suggesting that a balanced innovation system
is essential for achieving a high level of performance.
Switzerland remains the most innovative country in
Europe
Comparing the EU Member States to other European and
neighbouring countries, Switzerland remains the most innovative
European country. New inclusions this year to this comparison are
Israel, a Strong Innovator, and Ukraine, a Modest Innovator. As
regards other changes since last year, recent performance growth
for Turkey has been strong, and this has moved the country from
Modest to Moderate Innovators.
In two years' time, EU innovation performance is
expected to increase by about 2.5%
For the first time, this year’s report includes a forward-looking
analysis of EU innovation performance discussing more recent
developments, trends, and expected changes. The purpose of this
exercise is to address the need for more recent information, since
available statistical data for the EIS innovation indicators are,
on average, two to three years old. The analysis explores the EU
trend performance for 20 indicators, for which a robust calculation
of expected short-term changes proved possible. Increasing
performance is expected for 15 of these indicators, and decreasing
performance for only three indicators. Projections for six indicators
are based on provisional ‘fast track’ Community Innovation Survey
2014 data made available by 18 Member States. Overall, the
EU innovation index is expected to increase relatively strongly by
about 2.5% in two years' time. The exercise also includes a trend
comparison of the EU with its main competitors. At the global level,
the trends observed in recent years can be expected to continue,
with the EU performance gap towards Japan and the US narrowing
further, the gap towards South Korea increasing, and the EU lead
over China shrinking.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 20168
1. Introduction
The annual European Innovation Scoreboard (EIS) provides a
comparative assessment of the research and innovation performance
of the EU Member States and the relative strengths and weaknesses of
their research and innovation systems. It helps Member States assess
areas in which they need to concentrate their efforts in order to boost
their innovation performance.
Measurement framework
The European Innovation Scoreboard 2016 1, the 15 th edition since the
introduction of the EIS in 2001, follows the methodology of previous
editions. Innovation performance is measured using a composite indicator
– the Summary Innovation Index – which summarizes the performance of
a range of different indicators. The EIS distinguishes between three main
types of indicators – Enablers, Firm activities, and Outputs – and eight
innovation dimensions, capturing in total 25 indicators. The measurement
framework is presented in Figure 2 and Table 1.
The Enablers capture the main drivers of innovation performance
external to the firm and differentiate between three innovation
dimensions. The Human resources dimension includes three
indicators and measures the availability of a high-skilled and
educated workforce. Human resources captures New doctorate
graduates, Population aged 30-34 with completed tertiary
education, and Population aged 20-24 having completed at least
upper secondary education. Open, excellent and attractive research
systems includes three indicators and measures the international
competitiveness of the science base by focusing on International
scientific co-publications, Most cited publications, and Non-EU
doctorate students. Finance and support includes two indicators
and measures the availability of finance for innovation projects
by Venture capital investments and the support of governments
for research and innovation activities by R&D expenditures by
universities and government research organisations.
Figure 2: Measurement framework of the European Innovation Scoreboard
1 The EIS reports have been published under the name “European Innovation Scoreboard” until 2009, as “Innovation Union Scoreboard” between 2010 and 2015, and again as “European
Innovation Scoreboard” from 2016 onwards.
Summary
Innovation
Index (SII)
Human
resources
New doctorate
graduates
Non-EU
doctorate
students
Venture
capital
investments
Non-R&D
innovation
expenditure
Public-private
co-
publications
International
scientiﬁc co-
publications
R&D
expenditure in
the public
sector
Population
aged 30-34
with tertiary
education
Top 10%
most cited
scientiﬁc
publications
Youth with at
least upper
secondary
education
R&D
expenditure in
the business
sector
Innovative
SMEs
collaborating
with others
PCT patent
applications in
societal
challenges
SMEs with
product or
process
innovations
Employment
fast-growing
ﬁrms of inno-
vative sectors
SMEs with
marketing or
organisational
innovations
Employment
in knowledge-
intensive
activities
Medium &
high-tech
product
exports
Knowledge-
intensive
services
exports
Sales of new
to market and
new to ﬁrm
innovations
License and
patent
revenues from
abroad
PCT patent
applications
Community
designs
Community
trademarks
SMEs
innovating in-
house
Finance and
support
Intellectual
assets Innovators Economic
eﬀects
Firm
investments
Linkages &
entrepre-
neurship
Open,
excellent
research
systems
ENABLERS FIRM
ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
9European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Firm activities capture the innovation efforts at the level of the firm and
differentiate between three innovation dimensions. Firm investments
include two indicators of both R&D and Non-R&D investments
that firms make in order to generate innovations. Linkages &
entrepreneurship includes three indicators measuring innovation
capabilities by looking at SMEs that innovate in-house, collaboration
efforts between innovating firms, and research collaboration between
the private and public sector. Intellectual assets captures different
forms of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) generated in the innovation
process, including PCT patent applications, Community trademarks
and Community designs.
Outputs capture the effects of firms’ innovation activities and
differentiate between two innovation dimensions. Innovators include
three indicators measuring the share of firms that have introduced
innovations onto the market or within their organisations, covering both
technological and non-technological innovations, and Employment in
fast-growing firms in innovative sectors. Economic effects includes
five indicators and captures the economic impact of innovation in
Employment in knowledge-intensive activities, Exports of medium and
high tech products, Exports of knowledge-intensive services, Sales due
to innovation activities, and License and patent revenues from selling
technologies abroad.
Data sources and data availability
The EIS uses the most recent statistics from Eurostat and other
internationally-recognised sources such as the OECD and the United
Nations available at the time of analysis, with the cut-off day of 1 April
2016. International sources have been used wherever possible in order
to improve comparability between countries. The data relates to actual
performance in 2015 for seven indicators, 2014 for seven indicators,
2013 for four indicators, and 2012 for seven indicators (these are the
most recent years for which data are available, as highlighted by the
underlined years in the last column in Table 1).
Data availability is complete for 27 Member States, with data being
available for all 25 indicators. For Greece, data is missing for only one
indicator (Non-EU doctorate students as percentage of all doctorate
students). Compared to last year, data availability has improved
significantly for Venture capital investments, as data for ten more
countries have been made available by Invest Europe
2.
Changes to the measurement framework
Although the general methodology of the EIS 2016 has remained
unchanged, there have been several changes in indicator definitions,
data sources or data revisions as compared to the IUS 2015 report.
Due to these changes, results in this year’s report are not comparable to
those in last year’s report:
1.
 Change in data source f
or International scientific co-publications
Data on International scientific co-publications are calculated by
the Centre for Science and Technology Studies (CWTS) using data
from Web of Science
3. For the IUS 2015 report, the indicator was
calculated using data from Scopus 4. Web of Science is an online
subscription-based scientific citation indexing service maintained
by Thomson Reuters. Scopus is a bibliographic database containing
abstracts and citations for academic journal articles maintained by
Elsevier. The impact of switching data sources is significant, as the
indicator values for the Member States for International scientific
co-publications for 2008-2012 (for which data are available from
the IUS 2015 and EIS 2016) are on average about 23% higher using
Web of Science data.
2. Change in data source for Most-cited scientific publications
Data on Most-cited scientific publications are calculated CWTS using
data from Web of Science. For the IUS 2015 report, the indicator was
calculated using data from Scopus. The impact of switching data
sources is significant as the indicator values for the Member States
for Most-cited scientific publications for 2006-2009 (for which data
are available from the IUS 2015 and EIS 2016) are on average about
16% lower using Web of Science data.
3.
 Change in definition and calculation method f
or Venture capital
investments
The definition of Venture capital investments has changed, using market
instead of industry statistics. Industry statistics measure how much
venture capital funding originates from a particular country, whereas
market statistics measure how much venture capital is invested in a
particular country. Market statistics provide more relevant information
about the importance of venture capital for the domestic market.
Another change is that for Venture capital investments three-year
averages have been used, whereas in the IUS 2015 two-year averages
were used. Venture capital statistics are obtained directly from Invest
Europe, which has provided data for all Member States, including data
for those countries for which data had not been available in any of
the previous EIS/IUS reports: Croatia, Cyprus, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, Slovakia, and Slovenia.
5 The indicator values for the Member
States for Venture capital investments for 2008-2013 (for which data
are available from the IUS 2015 and EIS 2016) are on average about
190% higher in the EIS 2016 as compared to the IUS 2015.
4. Data revision for Public-private co-publications
Data on Public-private co-publications are calculated by CWTS using
data from Web of Science. Data are not comparable to those used
in the 2015 report due to a revised calculation method by CWTS.
The indicator values for the Member States for Public-private co-
publications for 2007-2012 (for which data are available from the
IUS 2015 and EIS 2016) are on average about 20% lower in the EIS
2016 as compared to the IUS 2015.
2 Invest Europe, formerly known as EVCA, European Private Equity & Venture Capital Association, is the association representing Europe’s private equity, venture capital and infrastructure
sectors, as well as their investors (http://www.investeurope.eu/).
3 http://ipscience.thomsonreuters.com/product/web-of-science/
4 https://www.elsevier.com/solutions/scopus
5 In addition to these eight Member States, Invest Europe has also made data available for the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201610
5. Change in definition f
or PCT patent applications in societal
challenges
For the IUS 2015, the indicator was calculated using data from
the OECD aggregating PCT patent applications in Environment-
related technologies and Health. Patents in Environment-related
technologies include applications in the following technology
domains: 1) General Environmental Management (air, water, waste),
2) Energy generation from renewable and non-fossil sources, 3)
Combustion technologies with mitigation potential (e.g. using fossil
fuels, biomass, waste, etc.), 4) Technologies specific to climate change
mitigation, 5) Technologies with potential or indirect contribution to
emissions mitigation, 6) Emissions abatement and fuel efficiency
in transportation, and 7) Energy efficiency in buildings and lighting.
Patents in Health-related technologies include applications in
Medical technology and Pharmaceuticals technology domains. For
the EIS 2016, similar data for Environment-related technologies are
no longer available from the OECD. Environment-related technologies
for the EIS 2016 include applications in the following technology
domains: 1) Climate change mitigation technologies related to
buildings, 2) Climate change mitigation technologies related to
energy generation, transmission or distribution, 3) Capture, storage,
sequestration or disposal of greenhouse gases, 4) Environmental
management, 5) Climate change mitigation technologies related to
transportation, and 6) Water-related adaptation technologies. The
indicator values for the Member States for PCT patent applications
in societal challenges for 2006-2011 (for which data are available
from the IUS 2015 and EIS 2016) are on average about 11% higher
in the EIS 2016 as compared to the IUS 2015.
6. Change in data source for Community trademarks
Data are obtained directly from the European Union Intellectual
Property Office (EUIPO)
6. Previously, data were extracted from
Eurostat who also use EUIPO as their source. The advantage of
receiving the data directly from EUIPO is that more timely 2015
data could be used. There is no impact as such on the indicator
values for the Member States for Community trademarks.
7. Change in definition and data source for Community designs
For the indicator measuring Community designs, following a
recommendation from EUIPO, data on individual designs have
been used instead of using the number of applications, as one
application can include multiple individual designs. Data are
obtained directly from EUIPO. Previously, data were extracted from
Eurostat who also use EUIPO as their source, but Eurostat data are
for number of applications only. The advantage of receiving the
data directly from EUIPO is also that more timely 2015 data could
be used. The impact of changing the definition is significant, as the
indicator values for the Member States for Community designs for
2007-2012 (for which data are available from the IUS 2015 and
EIS 2016) are on average about 250% higher in the EIS 2016 as
compared to the IUS 2015.
8.
 Change in the methodology f
or calculating Balance of Payments
statistics for Exports of knowledge-intensive services
The production of statistics on international trade in services uses as
reference the International Monetary Fund (IMF)’s Balance Of Payments
and International Investment Position Manual (BPM) and the United
Nations’ Manual on Statistics of International Trade in Services (MSITS).
The indicator measuring Exports of knowledge-intensive services was
first introduced in the EIS 2008. It followed the fifth edition of the BPM
and matched NACE industries to EBOPS (Extended Balance of Payments
Services Classification) using the correspondence table in the 2002 MSITS
7.
BMP5 and MSITS 2002 have meanwhile been replaced by newer editions,
BMP6 (the sixth edition) and MSITS 2010. As a result of these revisions,
the EBOPS classification has been revised, requiring an update of the
definition of knowledge-intensive services exports. As work is still ongoing
at the United Nations Statistics Division on the concordance tables that
would allow for an ‘automatic’ selection of knowledge-intensive services,
a task force involving experts from various European Commission services
decided to select a list of services that – given the details in BPM6 – are
potentially associated with knowledge-intensive business activities
8. Full
details are reported in the Methodology report for the 2016 Innovation
Output Indicator
9. Data using the new definition have been estimated by
the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre. The impact of changing
the definition is significant, as the indicator values for the Member States
for Exports of knowledge-intensive services for 2010-2012 (for which data
are available from the IUS 2015 and EIS 2016) are on average about 34%
higher in the EIS 2016 as compared to the IUS 2015.
9.
 Change in the methodology f
or calculating Balance of Payments
statistics for License and patent revenues from abroad
As for the indicator measuring Exports of knowledge-intensive
services, the indicator on License and patent revenues from abroad
is also affected by the introduction of new international standards
for compiling Balance of Payments statistics under the BPM6
methodology. The impact of changing the definition is significant, as
the indicator values for the Member States for License and patent
revenues from abroad for 2007-2013 (for which data are available
from the IUS 2015 and EIS 2016) are on average about 57% higher
in the EIS 2016 as compared to the IUS 2015.
Of the above-mentioned changes, several had to be introduced because of
changes in the primary data sources. These include changes in the values
for the three indicators using bibliometric data (items 1, 2 and 4 above),
in the values for the two indicators using Balance of Payment statistics
(items 8 and 9 above), and the value for PCT patent applications in societal
challenges as OECD data for the definition used up until last year are no
longer available (item 5 above). Changes to the indicators on Venture capital
investments (item 3) and Community designs (item 7) were introduced, as
these are perceived to improve the measurement framework. Changes on
the normalized scores used for calculating the Summary Innovation Index
are much smaller, as the normalized scores are always between 0 and 1 (for
respectively the lowest and highest performing country).
6 The European Union Intellectual Property Office, or EUIPO, is the trademark and designs registry for the internal market of the European Union. Until 23 March 2016, it was named Office
for Harmonization in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs), or OHIM: https://euipo.europa.eu/ohimportal/en/
7 Table A.IV.1 in United Nations, Manual on Statistics of International Trade in Services, Statistical Papers Series M. No. 86, 2002
8 The revised list of Knowledge-intensive services includes the following items: SC1 Sea transport, SC2 Air transport, SC3A Space transport, SF Insurance and pension services, SG Financial
services, SI Telecommunications, computer and information services, SJ Other business services and SK1 Audio-visual and related services.
9 Vertesy, D., (2016), The Innovation Output Indicator 2016: Methodology update, European Commission, DG JRC, COIN.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
11European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
10 For non-EU countries, the indicator measures the share of non-domestic doctoral students.
MAIN TYPE / Innovation dimension / Indicator Data source Years included
ENABLERS
Human resources
1.1.1 New doctorate graduates (ISCED 6) per 1000 population aged 25-34 Eurostat 2007 - 2014
1.1.2 Percentage population aged 30-34 having completed tertiary education Eurostat 2008 - 2015
1.1.3 Percentage youth aged 20-24 having attained at least upper secondary level education Eurostat 2008 - 2015
Open, excellent and attractive research systems
1.2.1 International scientific co-publications per million population Web of Science (data provided by CWTS as part
of a contract to DG Research and Innovation) 2008 - 2015
1.2.2
 Scientific publications among the top 10% most cited publications worldwide
as % of total scientific publications of the country
Web of Science (data provided by CWTS as part
of a contract to DG Research and Innovation) 2006 - 2013
1.2.3 Non-EU doctorate students as percentage of all doctorate students10 Eurostat 2007 - 2014
Finance and support
1.3.1 R&D expenditure in the public sector as percentage of GDP Eurostat 2007 - 2014
1.3.2 Venture capital investment as percentage of GDP Venture capital: Invest Europe; GDP: Eurostat 2008 - 2015
FIRM ACTIVITIES
Firm investments
2.1.1 R&D expenditure in the business sector as percentage of GDP Eurostat 2007 - 2014
2.1.2 Non-R&D innovation expenditures as percentage of turnover Eurostat 2006, 2008, 2010,
2012
Linkages & entrepreneurship
2.2.1 SMEs innovating in-house as percentage of SMEs Eurostat 2006, 2008, 2010,
2012
2.2.2 Innovative SMEs collaborating with others as percentage of SMEs Eurostat 2006, 2008, 2010,
2012
2.2.3 Public-private co-publications per million population Web of Science (data provided by CWTS as part
of a contract to DG Research and Innovation) 2008 - 2014
Intellectual assets
2.3.1 PCT patents applications per billion GDP (in Purchasing Power Standard €) Patents: OECD; GDP: Eurostat 2006 - 2013
2.3.2
 PCT patent applications in societal challenges (environment-related
technologies; health) per billion GDP (in Purchasing Power Standard €) P
atents: OECD; GDP: Eurostat 2005 - 2012
2.3.3 Community trademarks per billion GDP (in Purchasing Power Standard €) Trademarks: EUIPO; GDP: Eurostat 2008 - 2015
2.3.4 Community designs per billion GDP (in Purchasing Power Standard €) Designs: EUIPO; GDP: Eurostat 2008 - 2015
OUTPUTS
Innovators
3.1.1 SMEs introducing product or process innovations as percentage of SMEs Eurostat 2006, 2008, 2010,
2012
3.1.2
 SMEs introducing marketing or organisational innovations as percentage of
SMEs Eurostat
2006, 2008, 2010,
2012
3.1.3 Employment in fast-growing enterprises (average innovativeness scores), Joint Research Centre 2010 - 2013
Economic effects
3.2.1 Employment in knowledge-intensive activities (manufacturing and services) as
percentage of total employment Eurostat
2008 - 2014
3.2.2 Medium and high tech product exports as percentage of total product exports Eurostat 2008 - 2015
3.2.3 Knowledge-intensive services exports as percentage of total service exports Joint Research Centre 2010 - 2013
3.2.4 Sales of new-to-market and new-to-firm innovations as percentage of turnover Eurostat 2006, 2008, 2010,
2012
3.2.5 License and patent revenues from abroad as percentage of GDP Eurostat 2007 - 2014
Table 1: European Innovation Scoreboard indicators
Underlined years in the last column show the data used to measure countries’ most recent innovation performance.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201612
2. Innovation performance and trends
2.1 Most recent innovation performance
The performance of EU national innovation systems is measured by the
Summary Innovation Index, which is a composite indicator obtained by
taking an unweighted average of the 25 indicators
11. Figure 3 shows the
performance results for all EU Member States.
Based on this year’s Summary Innovation Index, the Member States fall
into the following four performance groups12:
• The first group of I
nnovation Leaders includes Member States in
which innovation performance is more than 20% above the EU
average. These are Denmark, Finland, Germany, the Netherlands,
and Sweden, which confirms its top position. The Netherlands
has improved from being a Strong Innovator to an Innovation
Leader.
11 Section 8.1 gives a brief explanation of the calculation methodology. The EIS 2016 Methodology report provides a more detailed explanation.
12 The EIS performance groups are relative performance groups with countries’ group membership depending on their performance relative to that of the EU. With a growing EU innovation
performance, the absolute thresholds between these groups will also be increasing over time.
Figure 3: EU Member States’ innovation performance
Note: Average performance is measured using a composite indicator building on data for 25 indicators
going from a lowest possible performance of 0 to a maximum possible performance of 1.
2.2 Performance changes over time
This section will discuss performance changes over time for each of the
innovation performance groups and the Member States included in each
of the groups.
Innovation Leaders
Innovation performance for the Innovation Leaders has been improving
up to about two years ago, when average performance for the group
started to decline. During the last two years, performance relative to the
EU dropped by 1.3 percentage points (Figure 4). For Finland, performance
started to decline in 2010, for Denmark and Germany in 2012, for
Sweden in 2013, and for the Netherlands in 2014. Sweden has been the
most innovative Member State over the whole period, but Denmark has
managed to close a significant part of its performance gap with Sweden.
Performance has improved most for the Netherlands. The Dutch innovation
index has grown at an average annual growth rate for 2008-2015 of 2.0%,
followed by Denmark (1.7%), Germany (0.2%) and Sweden (0.1%) (cf. Figure
8). For Finland, the innovation index has decreased at an average annual rate
of -0.3%. For both Denmark and the Netherlands, innovation performance
has been improving more rapidly than that of the EU. The other Innovation
•
 The
second group of Strong Innovators includes Member States with a
performance between 90% and 120% of the EU average. Austria, Belgium,
France, Ireland, Luxembourg, Slovenia, and the UK are Strong Innovators.
• The third group of Moderate Inno
vators includes Member States
where the innovation performance is between 50% and 90% of
the EU average. Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Greece,
Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia,
and Spain belong to this group. Latvia has improved from being a
Modest Innovator to a Moderate Innovator.
•
 The f
ourth group of Modest Innovators includes Member States that
show an innovation performance level well below that of the EU
average, i.e. less than 50% of the EU average. This group comprises
Bulgaria and Romania.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
13European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Leaders have not been able to match the performance increase of the EU,
resulting in declining performance leads over the EU average. For example,
the Swedish performance lead over the EU has declined from an average of
41% in 2008-2010 to 35% in 2015, the most recent reference year.
Innovation performance for the Strong Innovators has been improving
until last year, when average performance for the group declined.
Performance relative to the EU has been declining for most of the
period, in particular between 2009 and 2011, after which the rate of
decline decreased (Figure 5). Within the group of Strong Innovators,
Ireland and Luxembourg have been swapping group leadership over
time. Luxembourg was the best performing country for 2008-2010
and 2013-2014, Ireland was the best performing country for 2011-
2012 and 2015.
Innovation performance has been improving for most Strong Innovators.
Performance has improved strongest for the UK (2.0% average annual
growth rate for 2008-2015, cf. Figure 8), Slovenia (1.2%), Belgium
(0.9%), and France (0.8%). These four Strong Innovators have been
growing at a higher rate than the EU, and relative performance to the
EU has improved. Growth performance of Ireland (0.6%) and Austria
(0.2%) is at or below that of the EU, and for both countries, relative
performance to the EU has declined. For Luxembourg, the innovation
index has decreased at an average annual rate of -0.8%, leading to a
strong decline of 13 percentage points between 2008 and 2015 in the
relative performance to the EU.
Figure 4: Innovation Leaders
Figure 5: Strong Innovators
Group performance
Group performance
Innovation index
Innovation index
Relative to EU (EU=100)
Relative to EU (EU=100)
Strong Innovators

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201614
Moderate Innovators
Innovation performance for the Moderate Innovators has been
consistently improving over time until last year. Performance relative to
the EU has improved from 70.4% in 2008 to 71% in 2015 (Figure 6).
Cyprus and Estonia are among the best performing countries, with both
countries belonging to the group of Strong Innovators until last year.
Latvia, a Modest Innovator in the IUS 2015, is the weakest performing
Moderate Innovator, but its gap with other countries has decreased
significantly as shown by an increase in the performance level relative
to that of the EU from as low as 43% in 2008 to almost 54% in 2015.
Performance between 2008 and 2015 has improved for ten countries
and was strongest for Latvia (4.0% average annual growth rate for
2008-2015, cf. Figure 8), followed by Malta (3.6%), Lithuania (2.4%),
Italy (1.5%), Slovakia (1.4%), Estonia (1.1%), and Portugal (0.9%). All
of these Moderate Innovators have been growing at a higher rate than
the EU, resulting in an improved relative performance to the EU. For
the Czech Republic (0.7%), innovation performance has improved at
almost the same rate as that of the EU. For Poland (0.1%) and Hungary
(0.4%), innovation performance has improved but at a rate below that
of the EU, and for both countries, relative performance to the EU has
decreased. For Greece (-0.2%), Cyprus (-0.6%), Spain (-0.8%), and
Croatia (-0.9%), growth of their innovation index has been negative, and
relative performance to the EU has declined. Malta's strong performance
growth has resulted in an increase of six rank positions over time to the
third best Moderate Innovator in 2015.
Modest Innovators
There are only two Member States currently included in this group,
Bulgaria and Romania. Over time, innovation performance for the Modest
Innovators has been declining, and performance relative to the EU has
dropped from more than 48% in 2010-2012 to 40.3% in 2015 (Figure
7). Innovation performance has increased for Bulgaria and has declined
strongly for Romania. For Bulgaria (1.4% average annual growth rate
for 2008-2015, cf. Figure 8) performance declined strongly in 2013,
but was followed by a strong recovery in 2014 and 2015. Romania’s
performance has declined the most of all countries (-4.4%), in particular
since 2012. Until 2010, Romania's innovation index had improved,
even raising its relative performance level above 50%. During the last
three years, performance has declined sharply, in particular due to
performance drops of 75% or more in Non-R&D innovation expenditures
and Sales of new product innovations.
Figure 6: Moderate Innovators
Group performance Innovation index
 Relative to EU (EU=100)

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
15European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Performance growth and growth leaders
For 21 Member States, performance growth has been positive over
the eight-year period considered (Figure 8). Average annual growth
has been close to or at 4% for both Latvia and Malta, the two growth
leaders. For 14 Member States, growth has been faster than that of the
EU, for 14 Member States it has been slower. Growth has been negative
for seven Member States (in descending order of performance): Greece,
Finland, Cyprus, Spain, Luxembourg, Croatia, and Romania. Innovation
performance for half of the Member States has been growing faster than
that of the EU, where the group of Moderate Innovators has performed
best, with seven out of 14 countries growing faster than the EU.
Within the four country groups, growth performance is very different.
Within the Innovation Leaders, the Netherlands is the growth leader
closely followed by Denmark, whereas performance growth for Finland
is negative. The UK is the growth leader of the Strong Innovators.
Performance growth is also relatively strong for Slovenia and Belgium,
and negative for Luxembourg. Latvia and Malta are the growth leaders
amongst the Moderate Innovators. Performance growth is negative for
Croatia, Cyprus, Greece and Spain. Bulgaria is the growth leader of the
Modest Innovators.
Figure 7: Modest Innovators
Group performance Innovation index
 Relative to EU (EU=100)
Figure 8: EU Member States’ performance growth
Average annual growth rates of the innovation index have been calculated over an eight-year period (2008-2015).

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201616
For most Member States, performance has improved over time, but
for many countries this has not been a consistent process. Figure 9
shows on a year-to-year basis whether performance has improved
(green circle), remained the same (yellow circle) or declined (red
circle). One clearly sees that performance growth for 2008-2015
relies mostly on performance improvements between 2008 and
2012, during which time declines in performance were observed for
only one out of seven Member States on average.
Between 2012 and 2013, performance declined for 15 Member
States, and between 2014 and 2015, performance declined for
17 Member States. Although the number of Member States for
which performance declined between 2013 and 2014 was lower
than in the surrounding years, this number was still much higher
than for the years 2008-2012.
The large number of Member States for which performance declined
in 2013 and 2015 can mostly be attributed to a relatively small
number of indicators. In 2013, performance declined for a large
number of Member States in Public-private co-publications (25
Member States), Non-R&D innovation expenditures (23), Venture
capital investments (19), Sales of new-to-market and new-to-firm
innovations (19), SMEs with product or process innovations (16),
and PCT patent applications in societal challenges (15). In 2015,
performance declined for a large number of Member States in PCT
patent applications in societal challenges (24), SMEs with product or
process innovations (22), Sales of new-to-market and new-to-firm
innovations (21), SMEs with marketing or organizational innovations
(20), SMEs innovating in-house (19), PCT patent applications (19),
Innovative SMEs collaborating with others (18), and Public-private
co-publications (17). In particular, using more recent CIS data (CIS
2010 instead of CIS 2008 data in 2013, and CIS 2012 instead of CIS
2010 data in 2015) had a significant negative impact on Member
States’ innovation performance. In addition, PCT patent applications
and Public-private co-publications contribute negatively to Member
States’ innovation performance in 2013-2015, with declines in
performance for more than half of the Member States.
2008-
2009
2009-
2010
2010-
2011
2011-
2012
2012-
2013
2013-
2014
2014-
2015
2008-
2015
EU
Innovation Leaders
SE
DK
FI
DE
NL
Strong Innovators
IE
BE
UK
LU
FR
AT
SI
Moderate Innovators
CY
EE
MT
CZ
IT
PT
ES
EL
HU
SK
PL
LT
HR
LV
Modest Innovators
BG
RO
Increasing performance 22 22 17 20 12 17 7 21
Stable performance 2 3 3 5 1 0 4 0
Decreasing performance 4 3 8 3 15 11 17 7
Figure 9: Performance changes over time
Figure 10: Convergence in Member States
innovation performance
The bars show the degree of sigma-convergence (cf. footnote 13). Lower
(higher) degrees of sigma-convergence reveal higher (lower) convergence.
13 The change in performance differences over time can be measured by sigma-convergence. Sigma-convergence occurs when the spread in innovation performance across a group of
economies falls over time. This spread in convergence is measured by the ratio of the standard deviation and the average performance of all EU Member States. Figures 11 to 14 show
an additional measure for changes in performance differences using the performance gap ratio between the best and worst performing country in each performance group.
2.3 Convergence in innovation performance
The differences in innovation performance between Member States
can become smaller (convergence) or larger (divergence) over time. 13
Until 2012, differences in innovation performance became smaller. In
2013, the process of convergence reversed, and differences in countries’
innovation performance became more pronounced (Figure 10). Between
2013 and 2014, differences in innovation performance decreased
strongly, but between 2014 and 2015 differences again increased.
These increases in performance differences in 2013 and 2015 are
directly linked to the increase in the number of Member States in both
years for which performance declined (cf. Section 2.2). The increase in
performance differences in 2013 and 2015 is partly due to a declining
performance of those Member States with the lowest performance
(-12.3% for Bulgaria between 2012 and 2013, and -19.6% for Romania

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
17European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
between 2014 and 2015) increasing the distance between the highest
and lowest performing Member States in 2013 and 2015.
Differences between the four performance groups
Among the Innovation Leaders, performance converged until 2014, but in
2015 performance differences have increased slightly. The performance
gap between the best and worst performing country has almost halved
due to the strong performance increase for the Netherlands, the lowest
performing Innovation Leader (2.0% average annual growth), and stagnating
performance for the best Innovation leader Sweden (0.1% average annual
growth) (Figure 11). Among the Strong Innovators, we see a similar pattern
as observed for all countries: a process of convergence until 2012, followed
by increasing performance differences in 2013, after which performance
differences became smaller again in 2014 and 2015 (Figure 12).
Among the Moderate Innovators, performance differences were
stable over time, but in 2015 performance differences have become
smaller, mainly due to a strong decline in performance for Cyprus,
the highest performing Moderate Innovator, and a strong increase in
performance for Latvia, the lowest performing Moderate Innovator
(Figure 13). For the two Modest Innovators, we see a mixed pattern
over time, but performance differences for this group are expected to
be more volatile with only two Member States belonging to the group
of Modest Innovators (Figure 14).
The results for the different performance groups show that the
difference in convergence patterns over time for all Member States
is also observed within the Strong Innovators and to a certain extent
the Moderate Innovators. However, this is not the case for the
Modest Innovators, where differences between countries have rather
increased strongly over time, and the Innovation leaders, where
differences have become consistently smaller after 2012.
Figure 11: Innovation Leaders
 Figure 12: Strong Innovators
Figure 13: Moderate Innovators
 Figure 14: Modest Innovators

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201618
3. Innovation dimensions
Where Section 2.1 introduced four performance groups based on
the average performance of countries for 25 innovation indicators, a
different pattern emerges when a comparison in performance is made
across the eight innovation dimensions (Figure 15).
The performance order for overall innovation performance is also
observed for the individual dimensions. The Innovation Leaders perform
best on all dimensions, followed by the Strong Innovators, the Moderate
Innovators and the Modest Innovators. Performance differences, however,
can be small between the different performance groups, in particular
for Human resources, Open, excellent and attractive research systems,
Innovators, and Economic effects between the Innovation Leaders
and Strong Innovators, for Firm investments between the Strong and
Moderate Innovators, and for Human resources and Intellectual assets
between the Moderate and Modest innovators.
Variance in performance is a measure for the spread in performance
across different countries
14 and it shows how large differences are
between Member States when looking at individual strengths and
weaknesses. Performance differences across the eight dimensions are
smallest among the Innovation Leaders (variance of 0.37%) and largest
among the Modest Innovators (variance of 1.53%) (Table 2), confirming
that to achieve a high level of performance, countries need a balanced
innovation system performing well across all dimensions. Performance
differences within the Strong Innovators are larger than those within the
Moderate Innovators. The high variation within the Strong Innovators is
mostly the result of a relatively weak performance in Firm investments.
Figure 15: Country groups: innovation performance per dimension
14 The variance of a data set is the arithmetic average of the squared differences between the values and the mean or average value, and it is a measure of the spread of the distribution
about the mean. If all countries had the same performance level, variance would be 0%. Variance would be highest (25%) if half of all countries shared the highest possible normalised
score of 1, and the other half shared the lowest possible normalised score of 0. High levels of variance signal large differences in performance across countries, whereas low levels
of variance signal small differences in performance across countries. There are no statistical rules for identifying high versus low levels of variance, as variance also depends on, for
example, the number of countries included in the sample (i.e., a higher spread in performance is more likely for a larger group of countries).
INNOVATION
LEADERS
STRONG
INNOVATORS
MODERATE
INNOVATORS
MODEST
INNOVATORS
Average performance by dimension
 Human resources 0.709 0.685 0.542 0.445
 Open, excellent research systems 0.684 0.649 0.281 0.099
 Finance and support 0.671 0.441 0.352 0.087
 Firm investments 0.514 0.365 0.331 0.148
 Linkages & entrepreneurship 0.697 0.573 0.293 0.058
 Intellectual assets 0.712 0.545 0.364 0.324
 Innovators 0.632 0.613 0.379 0.189
 Economic effects 0.641 0.606 0.392 0.225
Variance across all eight dimensions 0.37% 1.01% 0.57% 1.53%
Table 2: Average performance and variance
in performance across the innovation dimensions for four performance groups
The remainder of this section will discuss for each of the innovation dimensions the performance ranking for the Member States and the increase
(or decrease) in performance over time.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
19European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Performance in Human resources
Two Innovation Leaders (Sweden and Finland) and three Strong
Innovators (Ireland, Slovenia, and the United Kingdom) are in the top-
5 performers in Human resources, with Sweden leading the dimension
(Figure 16). A high share of the workforce in these countries has the
skills needed to participate in and further develop the knowledge-
based economy. Germany, another Innovation Leader, only manages to
perform at the EU average for this dimension. Germany performs very
well in doctoral education, but not so well in other tertiary and in upper
secondary-level education. Most Strong Innovators perform above the
EU average, except for Luxembourg which can be found close to the
bottom of the range. Most Moderate Innovators perform below the EU
average, except Lithuania, Cyprus, Slovakia, Croatia and Portugal.
All countries, except Finland and Austria, have improved their
performance on Human resources over the last eight years.
Average performance has improved slightly more for the less
innovative countries than for the more innovative countries, but two
Innovation Leaders, Denmark and the Netherlands, and two Strong
Innovators, Slovenia and the United Kingdom, have improved their
performance well above the EU average. Performance differences
in Human resources have become smaller over time contributing to
the overall process of convergence in innovation performance; however,
performance in this dimension has stagnated recently.
Figure 16: Human resources
Most recent performance level
Increase in performance over eight years
Colour coding matches the groups of countries identified in Section 2.1.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201620
Performance in Open, excellent and attractive research systems
The Innovation Leaders and Strong Innovators are performing best in this
dimension (Figure 17), and all of them, except Germany and Slovenia, are
above the EU average. Sweden is the overall leader, followed very closely
by five other countries, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Belgium,
Luxembourg and Denmark. The innovation systems in these countries
are open for cooperation with partners from abroad, researchers are
well networked at international level, and the quality of research output
is very high. Germany, one of the Innovation Leaders, performs below
average due to a low share of non-EU doctorate students at only 42%
of the EU average. All the Modest and Moderate Innovators perform
below the EU average, only Portugal manages to get very close to the
EU average.
All countries, except Bulgaria, Malta, Hungary and Greece, have
improved their performance over time, with Luxembourg and Sweden
being the top performers. Performance of the more innovative countries
in this dimension has improved more than that of the less innovative
countries, whereas there has been practically no improvement for the
Modest Innovators. Moderate and Modest Innovators will need to further
intensify their efforts to increase the performance of their research
systems, if they want to close the performance gap with the Innovation
Leaders and Strong Innovators. Performance differences have been
slowly but steadily increasing, creating more divergence among the
countries.
Figure 17: Open, excellent and effective research system
Most recent performance level
Increase in performance over eight years
Colour coding matches the groups of countries identified in Section 2.1.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
21European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Performance in Finance and support
The Innovation Leaders and Strong Innovators are performing best
in Finance and support (Figure 18), although Estonia, a Moderate
Innovator, comes second in this dimension. The other top-5 performers
are Finland (leading the dimension), Sweden, the Netherlands and
Denmark. These countries are characterised by a public sector which is
well endowed to perform R&D activities and by the availability of risk
capital for private firms to develop new technologies. Almost all Modest
and Moderate Innovators perform below the EU average. Apart from
Estonia, the only other Moderate Innovator performing above the EU
average is Lithuania.
Large differences can be observed in the eight-year performance
development. For more than half of the Member States, as well as for
the EU average, performance has not improved over time, in particular
due to declining Venture capital investments. There has, however, been
a gradual process of convergence in performance since 2011.
Figure 18: Finance and support
Most recent performance level
Increase in performance over eight years
Colour coding matches the groups of countries identified in Section 2.1.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201622
Performance in Firm investments
In terms of Firm investments, the Innovation Leaders and Strong
Innovators are performing best (Figure 19). Germany and Sweden
are the overall leaders, followed by Estonia, Austria and Finland. In
these countries, companies invest more in innovation activities, both
for science-based R&D activities and non-R&D innovation activities,
including investments in advanced equipment and machinery. The
performances of Luxembourg, one of the Strong Innovators, and the
Netherlands, an Innovation Leader, are relatively weak, in particular due
to low shares of Non-R&D innovation expenditures in these countries.
Except for Estonia and Latvia, all the Modest and Moderate Innovators
perform below the EU average, with Romania being at the bottom of the
performance scale.
There are large differences in performance development over time, with
performance having worsened for nearly half of the Member States,
in particular for Luxembourg, Cyprus, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia.
Performance has improved most notably for Germany and Lithuania. The
performance improvement of the EU is higher than that for 24 Member
States, which is a direct result of the fact that Germany contributes more
than one-third to the EU’s overall business R&D expenditures and non-
R&D innovation expenditures. A process of convergence has taken place
until last year with performance differences increasing in 2015.
Figure 19: Firm investments
Most recent performance level
Increase in performance over eight years
Colour coding matches the groups of countries identified in Section 2.1.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
23European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Performance in Linkages & entrepreneurship
In Linkages & entrepreneurship, the Innovation Leaders and Strong
Innovators have performed particularly strongly. Belgium, Denmark, the
Netherlands, Sweden and Finland are the overall leaders (Figure 20).
SMEs in these countries have more versatile innovation capabilities
as they combine in-house innovation activities with joint innovation
activities with other companies or public-sector organisations. The
research systems in these countries are also geared towards meeting
the demand from companies, as highlighted by high co-publication
activities. All Innovation Leaders and Strong Innovators perform above
the EU average. All Modest and Moderate Innovators perform below the
EU average.
For 20 Member States, average performance has not improved over
time. For Finland, performance has decreased most over time, and the
strongest performer in terms of growth is the United Kingdom. Over the
eight-year period, the differences in country performances have mostly
grown larger, but in 2015 there was some convergence.
Figure 20: Linkages & entrepreneurship
Most recent performance level
Increase in performance over eight years
Colour coding matches the groups of countries identified in Section 2.1.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201624
Performance in Intellectual assets
In Intellectual assets, the Innovation Leaders all perform above the EU
average, with three of them, Denmark, Sweden and Finland in the top-
5 (Figure 21). More than half of the Strong Innovators perform below
average, as do nearly all of the Modest and Moderate Innovators. Only
Malta, as a Moderate Innovator, is above the EU average. Bulgaria is
performing at close to an average level, mostly due to its very strong
performance in Community designs. The average EU performance
is higher than that of most Member States due to the very good
performance of the leading countries.
Many less innovative countries have improved their performance over
time in this dimension, in particular Malta, Bulgaria, Estonia and Poland.
There has been a process of convergence among countries during most
of the eight-year period. However, performance has decreased for three
Innovation Leaders, Germany, Denmark, and Sweden.
Figure 21: Intellectual assets
Most recent performance level
Increase in performance over eight years
Colour coding matches the groups of countries identified in Section 2.1.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
25European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Performance in Innovators
In the Innovators dimension, the Strong Innovators and Innovation
Leaders are performing best, with all of them except Slovenia and the
United Kingdom above the EU average. Ireland is the overall leader,
followed by Germany, Luxembourg, France, and Austria (Figure 22).
Innovation systems in these countries are characterised by high shares
of firms involved in innovation activities: innovation seems a natural
strategy for firms to meet their customers’ demands and to face
competitive pressures. This also results in faster employment growth
linked to innovation activities. Malta, Cyprus, and Italy are the strongest
performing Moderate Innovators. The performance of Lithuania and
Latvia is overall the weakest.
Over time, performance has worsened for 19 Member States and the EU
at large. Malta, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and France have
been the only countries where performance has increased significantly
over time, and for four Innovation Leaders – Germany, Denmark, Finland,
and Sweden – performance has decreased. Over time, a process of
convergence among the EU countries has been taking place.
Figure 22: Innovators
Most recent performance level
Increase in performance over eight years
Colour coding matches the groups of countries identified in Section 2.1.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201626
Performance in Economic effects
In Economic effects, most of the Innovation Leaders and Strong
Innovators are performing above the EU average (Figure 23). Ireland is
the overall leader in this dimension, followed by Luxembourg, Denmark,
the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. All the Modest and Moderate
Innovators perform below the EU average, with the exception of Malta,
mainly because of its very strong performance in License and patent
revenues from abroad.
Over time, performance has decreased for half of the Member States,
in particular for Greece, Malta and Romania. Performance of the more
innovative countries on average has been better than that of the less
innovative countries, but since 2011, there has been a process of
divergence in this dimension.
Figure 23: Economic effects
Most recent performance level
Increase in performance over eight years
Colour coding matches the groups of countries identified in Section 2.1.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
27European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
4. Innovation performance of the European Union
4.1 EU innovation performance
Average innovation performance for the EU depends on the performance
of each of the Member States but also on the average performance of
the Member States on each of the innovation dimensions and indicators. A
comparison of the normalised performance scores by dimension and indicator
to the average performance measured by the Summary Innovation Index
reveals relative strengths and weaknesses of the EU as a whole (Figure 24).
For the innovation dimensions, relative strengths for the EU, as compared to
average performance, are in Human resources (in particular in Population
with completed tertiary education and Youth with upper secondary level
education), in Economic effects (in particular in Exports of medium and
high tech products and Exports of knowledge-intensive services), and
in Intellectual assets (in particular in PCT patent applications). Relative
weaknesses are in Firm investments (in particular due to a weak relative
performance in Non-R&D innovation expenditures), Open, excellent and
attractive research systems (in particular in International scientific co-
publications), and Linkages & entrepreneurship (most notably due to a
low share of Innovative SMEs collaborating with others).
Performance in Open, excellent and attractive research systems is
below average because above-average performance in Most-cited
scientific publications is negatively offset by a well below-average
performance in International scientific co-publications. Performance in
International scientific co-publications for the EU, however, is very low
and below that of most Member States for a "technical" reason: for the
EU, co-publications between co-authors in different Member States are
excluded from the indicator, whereas these co-publications are included
in the indicator scores for the individual Member States.
Figure 24: EU innovation performance by dimension

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201628
4.2 EU performance growth
EU innovation performance has been increasing at an average annual
rate of 0.7% between 2008 and 2015, but growth has not been equally
strong across all dimensions and indicators (Figure 25). Growth has
been particularly strong in Open, excellent and attractive research
systems (2.9%), driven by high growth in International scientific co-
publications (6.5%). The EU innovation system is becoming more
networked both between Member States and at the global scale.
Also performance growth in Economic effects (2.3%), Firm
investments (2.0%), and Human resources (1.9%) has been relatively
strong. In Economic effects, performance has increased very strongly
for License and patent revenues from abroad (11.3%). In Human
resources, performance has increased most for Population aged
30-34 with completed tertiary education (3.0%). The EU has been
strengthening its educational knowledge base turning Europe into
a more knowledge-based economy. Growth in Firm investments is
driven by about equal growth performance for both R&D expenditures
in the business sector and Non-R&D innovation expenditures (2.0% and
1.9% respectively). Growth in Linkages & entrepreneurship has been
modest (0.5%), even with strongly improving performance in Innovative
SMEs collaborating with others. Growth in Intellectual assets is
positive but small (0.2%) with decreasing performance in both indicators
measuring PCT patent application and Industrial designs matched by a
strong increase in Community trademarks (3.6%). Growth in Finance
and support has been very negative (-2.1%), due to a strong decline in
Venture capital investments (-5.9%). Negative growth is also observed
in Innovators (-1.3%) due to declining performance in SMEs that
introduced product or process innovations, and SMEs that introduced
marketing or organisational innovations.
Figure 25: EU average annual performance growth over 2008-2015

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
29European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
5. Benchmarking inno vation performance
with non-EU countries
Compared to last year's report, two more countries are included in this
year’s benchmarking: Israel and Ukraine. For Israel, it is the second
appearance after its first (and only) inclusion in the EIS 2007. As discussed
in the Introduction, there have been several changes in indicator definitions,
data sources or data revisions, and due to these changes, results in this
year’s report are not comparable to those in last year’s report.
15
Switzerland is the overall Innovation Leader in Europe, outperforming
all EU Member States (Figure 26). Switzerland’s strong performance
is linked to being the best performer on as many as nine indicators,
in particular in Open, excellent and attractive research systems
where it has the best performance in all three indicators, Linkages and
entrepreneurship where it has best performance in two indicators (SMEs
innovating in-house and Public-private co-publications), and Economic
effects (best performance in Employment in knowledge-intensive
activities and License and patent revenues from abroad). Switzerland’s
relative weaknesses with below EU average scores are in Venture capital
investments, SMEs collaborating with others, and Exports of knowledge-
intensive services. Switzerland's performance growth over the last eight
years has been slightly negative at -0.1% (Figure 27).
Figure 27: Performance growth
5.1 Benchmarking against other European countries and regional neighbours
Figure 26: Innovation performance in Europe
Non-EU countries include (in descending order of performance): Switzerland (CH), Israel (IL), Iceland (IS), Norway (NO), Serbia (RS), Turkey
(TR), the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (MK), and Ukraine (UA).
15 Average data availability for this year's report is good with data available for 25 indicators for Norway, for 24 indicators for Switzerland, for 23 indicators for Israel and Turkey, for 22 indicators
for Iceland, Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Ukraine, and for 21 indicators for Serbia.
Both Iceland and Israel are Strong Innovators. Iceland has
the highest performance of all countries in International
scientific co-publications, Public-private co-publications,
and the Share of SMEs that introduced product or process
innovators. Iceland is among the lowest performers in Youth
education and Exports of medium and high tech products.
Iceland's performance growth has been slightly negative at
-0.1%. Israel has the highest performance of all countries
on four indicators: Business R&D expenditures, PCT patent
applications, PCT patent applications in societal challenges,
and Employment in knowledge-intensive activities.
Performance growth over time has been negative at -0.8%.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201630
Norway, Serbia, and Turkey are Moderate Innovators. Norway's
relative performance score of 88.7% compared to the EU average
is just below the threshold of becoming a Strong Innovator. Serbia
has best overall performance in Non-R&D innovation expenditures,
and Serbia’s innovation performance has been improving rapidly
at an average annual growth rate of 5.4%. Turkey has overall best
performance in Sales of new-to-market and new-to-firm product
innovations. Turkey’s growth rate at 5.1% is significantly above that
of the EU and, compared to last year's report, Turkey has progressed
from the Modest to the Moderate Innovators.
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) and Ukraine are
Modest Innovators. FYROM is performing well above average on Non-R&D
innovation expenditures and SMEs with product or process innovations,
and its growth performance (4.3%) has been well above that of the EU.
Innovation performance for FYROM is improving rapidly, and performance
relative to the EU has improved from 33% in 2008 to 42.1% in 2015, an
increase of 9.1 percentage points. Ukraine, a country in Eastern Europe, is the
latest addition to the EIS. On almost all indicators the country is performing
below the EU average, except for Non-R&D innovation expenditures (2%
above average) and Population with completed tertiary education (33%
above average). Performance growth is negative at -0.8%
16.
This section provides a comparison of the EU to some of its main global
economic competitors including Australia, the BRICS countries (Brazil,
Russia, India, China, and South Africa), Canada, Japan, South Korea and
the United States.
South Korea, the US, and Japan have a performance lead over the EU
(Figure 28). The performance lead has been increasing for South Korea
as its growth rate has been more than twice that of the EU (Figure
29). Innovation performance for the EU, however, has been improving
at a higher rate than that for the US and Japan. As a consequence,
the EU has been able to close part of its performance gap with the US
and Japan over the last eight years. The three global top innovators
are dominating the EU particularly on indicators capturing business
activity as measured by R&D expenditures in the business sector,
Public-private co-publications and PCT patents, especially in societal
challenges, but also in educational attainment as measured by the
Share of population having completed tertiary education. Enterprises
in these countries invest more in research and innovation, and
collaborative knowledge creation between public and private sectors
is better developed. The skilled workforce in these countries is also
relatively larger than in the EU.
The EU continues to have a performance lead over Australia, Canada,
and all BRICS countries. Of these countries, only China has managed
to grow at a (much) higher rate than the EU. Performance growth for
Canada, Brazil, and South Africa has been close to zero.
Methodology
The economic and/or population size of most global competitors
outweighs that of many of the individual Member States, and innovation
performance is therefore compared to the aggregate of the Member States
or the EU. Data availability is more limited for global competitors than for
the European countries. Therefore, a more restricted set of 12 indicators
(Table 3) has been used for the international comparison of the EU with its
global competitors. These indicators focus mainly on performance related
to R&D activities (R&D expenditures, scientific publications, patents), as
innovation survey data are not available for most of the global competitors
or are not directly comparable with data from the Community Innovation
5.2 Benchmarking against global competitors
16 This result has to be interpreted with care as for several indicators time series data are available for only a small number of years.
17 The methodology for calculating average innovation performance is explained in Section 8.3.
Figure 28: Global innovation performance Figure 29: Global innovation growth rates
Average performance is measured using a composite indicator - the inno-
vation index - building on data for 12 indicators ranging from a lowest
possible performance of 0 to a maximum possible performance of 1.
Average annual growth rates of the innovation index have been calculated
over an eight-year period. Due to a smaller set of indicators the EU growth
rate shown in this figure is not comparable to that in Sections 2 and 4.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
31European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Survey (CIS). Most of the indicators used here are nearly identical to
indicators used in the measurement framework for the EU Member States
(cf. Table 1).
17 Only the indicator measuring the Percentage of population
aged 30 to 34 having completed tertiary education has been replaced by
the same indicator for a larger age group, namely 25 to 64, as data for the
age group 30 to 34 are not available for most countries.
For some indicators, slightly different definitions have been used for the
EU as compared to the previous chapters. For Medium and high tech
product exports and Knowledge-intensive services exports, the data for
the EU will exclude trade between Member States (so-called intra-EU
trade) and will only include exports to non-Member States (so-called
extra-EU trade). Indicator values in the international comparison using
only extra-EU trade will be higher for the EU compared to those used
for the EU in the comparison between Member States. For License and
patent revenues from abroad, for the EU data will be used from the
World Bank’s World Development Indicators to ensure full comparability
with the other countries. World Bank data, however, give different results
than Eurostat (e.g., in 2013 the value was 0.498 using Eurostat data
and 0.585 using World Bank data).
As discussed in the Introduction, there have been several changes in
indicator definitions, data sources or data revisions. Some of these
changes are also relevant here, in particular the change in data source
for International scientific co-publications and Most–cited publications,
the revised data for Public-private co-publications, and the change in
definition for PCT patent applications in societal challenges. Due to
these changes, results in this year’s report are not comparable to those
in the IUS 2015. For the first time, data on International scientific co-
publications and Most–cited publications are available for Australia,
Canada, and South Africa, adding to the fact that the results this year
may be very different from those in the IUS 2015.
For each of the international competitors, the following pages discuss
their performance relative to the EU and relative strengths and
weaknesses for the different indicators. Indicator values, performance
leads and changes in performance leads are shown in Annex H Data
have been extracted from various sources including Eurostat, OECD,
UNESCO Institute for Statistics, United Nations, Web of Science, and
World Bank.
Underlined years in the last column show the data used to measure countries’ most recent innovation performance. For the EU28, data sources are
similar to those in Table 1 except for Knowledge-intensive services exports and License and patent revenues from abroad, where data from the United
Nations and World Bank have been used also for the EU. For India data are not available for New doctorate graduates, for South Africa data are not
available for Knowledge-intensive services exports.
Table 3: Indicators used in the international comparison
MAIN TYPE / Innovation dimension / Indicator Data
source
Years
included
ENABLERS
Human resources
1.1.1 New doctorate graduates (ISCED 6) per 1000 population aged 25-34 OECD 2006 - 2013
1.1.2 Percentage population aged 25-64 having completed tertiary education OECD, World Bank, Eurostat 2007 - 2014
Open, excellent and attractive research systems
1.2.1 International scientific co-publications per million population Web of Science (data provided by CWTS as part
of a contract to DG Research and Innovation) 2008 - 2015
1.2.2
 Scientific publications among the top 10% most cited publications worldwide as %
of total scientific publications of the country
Web of Science (data provided by CWTS as part
of a contract to DG Research and Innovation) 2006 - 2013
Finance and support
1.3.1 R&D expenditure in the public sector as % of GDP OECD, UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2007 - 2014
FIRM ACTIVITIES
Firm investments
2.1.1 R&D expenditure in the business sector as % of GDP OECD, UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2007 - 2014
Linkages & entrepreneurship
2.2.3 Public-private co-publications per million population Web of Science (data provided by CWTS as part
of a contract to DG Research and Innovation) 2008 - 2014
Intellectual assets
2.3.1 PCT patents applications per billion GDP (Purchasing Power P arity in international
dollars (PPP$)) OECD, World Bank 2006 - 2013
2.3.2
 PCT patents applications in societal challenges per billion GDP (Purchasing Power
P
arity in international dollars (PPP$)) (environment-related technologies; health) OECD, World Bank 2005 - 2012
OUTPUTS
Economic effects
3.2.2 Medium and high tech product exports as a % of total product exports United Nations 2007 - 2014
3.2.3 Knowledge-intensive services exports as % total service exports United Nations 2007 - 2014
3.2.5 License and patent revenues from abroad as % of GDP World Bank 2007 - 2014

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201632
South Korea
South Korea is more innovative than the EU, and the innovation
lead has been increasing over the last eight years. In 2008, the
lead was relatively small at 5%, but in 2015 it has increased to 23%,
being even higher than the current US-EU or Japan-EU performance lead.
South Korea is performing better than the EU on seven indicators. A 41%
higher share of the population has completed tertiary education. South
Korea is much more active in Public-private co-publications, in applying
for patents and, in particular, the country spends more than twice as
much on business R&D as a share of GDP. South Korea has relative
weaknesses in Doctorate graduates, License and patent revenues from
abroad, Exports of knowledge-intensive services, and in sharing its
knowledge base, with considerably weaker performance compared to
the EU on Most-cited publications.
Relative performance of South Korea has improved for nine indicators.
This has led to performance lead increases for six indicators, particularly
in Patent applications. South Korea is narrowing the performance gap
with faster growth in Doctorate graduates and Licence and patent
revenues from abroad. South Korea is experiencing a widening in its
performance gap in Exports of knowledge-intensive services.
Scores are calculated by dividing the innovation index by that of the EU
and multiplying by 100.
RELATIVE
PERFORMANCE
DIFFERENCE IN
PERFORMANCE
GROWTH
Doctorate graduates 86.1 3.4%
Tertiary education 140.6 0.2%
International co-publ. 98.1 0.7%
Most cited publications 59.3 0.0%
R&D exp. public sector 120.8 1.8%
R&D exp. business sector 242.1 1.8%
Public-private co-publ. 172.4 2.2%
PCT patents 163.6 3.8%
PCT patents societal ch. 216.0 14.1%
Exports med&high tech prods 118.9 -0.3%
Exports knowledge-int serv 80.3 -3.4%
License and patent rev. 62.4 7.4%
Performance scores equal 100 * the country’s indicator values divided
by those of the EU. Growth differences are calculated by subtracting EU
growth rates from those of the country.
The United States
The United States has been more innovative than the EU, but
the performance lead is steadily decreasing. Between 2008 and
2013, the US innovation index was more than 20% higher than that of
the EU, but since 2014 the US lead has dropped below 20%.
The US is performing better on eight indicators compared to the EU.
A much higher share of the US population has completed tertiary
education, creating a performance lead of the US of almost 40%. The
US is also performing much better on all three indicators using data on
scientific publications. US businesses spend about 58% more on R&D,
and the US is more successful in commercializing new technologies
as measured by a 26% higher score for License and patent revenues.
The US has relative weaknesses in Exports of medium and high tech
products and Exports of knowledge-intensive services, as well as in the
number of doctorate graduates.
For most indicators, relative performance of the US has worsened. Only
for PCT patent applications and Exports of knowledge-intensive services,
the US has managed to improve its performance at a faster rate. For
all other indicators, either the performance lead has declined or the
performance gap with the EU has widened.
Scores are calculated by dividing the innovation index by that of the EU
and multiplying by 100.
RELATIVE
PERFORMANCE
DIFFERENCE IN
PERFORMANCE
GROWTH
Doctorate graduates 82.5 -1.8%
Tertiary education 139.6 -2.1%
International co-publ. 117.2 -0.4%
Most cited publications 133.4 -0.8%
R&D exp. public sector 100.0 0.0%
R&D exp. business sector 158.1 -1.3%
Public-private co-publ. 183.2 -0.7%
PCT patents 117.7 1.3%
PCT patents societal ch. 131.2 -1.9%
Exports med&high tech prods 83.2 -3.0%
Exports knowledge-int serv 83.1 1.7%
License and patent rev. 126.0 -3.1%
Performance scores equal 100 * the country’s indicator values divided
by those of the EU. Growth differences are calculated by subtracting EU
growth rates from those of the country.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
33European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Japan
Japan has been consistently more innovative than the EU. In
2008-2009, the Japanese innovation index was more than 20% above
that of the EU. The performance lead started to decline from 2010, but
has climbed up again in the last years to 18% in 2015.
A closer look at the individual indicators reveals that Japan is performing
better on eight indicators. A 47% higher share of population has
completed tertiary education (46.6% in Japan compared to 31.7% in
the EU). Japanese businesses spend more than twice as much on R&D
as a share of GDP, and Japan is also much more active in applying
for patents. Japan also outperforms the EU on Public-private co-
publications, Exports of medium and high tech products, and License
and patent revenues from abroad. Japan has relative weaknesses in
Doctorate graduates, International scientific co-publications, Most-cited
publications, and Exports of knowledge-intensive services.
Growth performance of Japan is below that of the EU for nine indicators.
The Japanese performance lead has been improving on three indicators,
especially on both patent indicators. The gap with the EU has widened
on four indicators, especially on International scientific co-publications
and Exports of knowledge-intensive services.
Scores are calculated by dividing the innovation index by that of the EU
and multiplying by 100.
RELATIVE
PERFORMANCE
DIFFERENCE IN
PERFORMANCE
GROWTH
Doctorate graduates 65.8 -0.3%
Tertiary education 147.1 -1.6%
International co-publ. 73.6 -1.7%
Most cited publications 61.4 -0.4%
R&D exp. public sector 104.0 -1.0%
R&D exp. business sector 227.6 -1.4%
Public-private co-publ. 131.8 -2.5%
PCT patents 168.7 2.4%
PCT patents societal ch. 260.8 4.3%
Exports med&high tech prods 122.0 -0.5%
Exports knowledge-int serv 56.9 -1.9%
License and patent rev. 126.0 0.2%
Performance scores equal 100 * the country’s indicator values divided
by those of the EU. Growth differences are calculated by subtracting EU
growth rates from those of the country.
Canada
Canada’s innovation performance was above the EU until
recently, but is currently lagging slightly behind. Relative
performance was close to that of the EU from 2008 to 2013, after which
it has decreased to 98% of EU performance in 2015.
Canada is performing worse than the EU on seven indicators, in
particular on License and patent revenues from abroad, and Exports
medium and high tech products. Canada is performing better on five
indicators: Population with completed tertiary education, where the
country is performing almost 70% better than the EU, both international
and most cited publications, and R&D expenditures in the public and
business sectors.
Growth performance for seven indicators is below that of the EU,
and above it for four indicators. Canada has been able to improve
its performance lead in R&D expenditures in the business sector. The
performance leads Canada has on Tertiary education, International co-
publications, and R&D expenditures in the public sector are decreasing.
The performance gaps in Public-private co-publications, PCT patent
applications in societal challenges, Exports of medium and high tech
products, and License and patent revenues from abroad have widened.
Scores are calculated by dividing the innovation index by that of the EU
and multiplying by 100.
RELATIVE
PERFORMANCE
DIFFERENCE IN
PERFORMANCE
GROWTH
Doctorate graduates 72.9 1.0%
Tertiary education 169.2 -1.9%
International co-publ. 167.4 -1.0%
Most cited publications 112.4 0.0%
R&D exp. public sector 111.0 -2.5%
R&D exp. business sector 143.3 2.6%
Public-private co-publ. 94.4 -5.1%
PCT patents 88.2 0.3%
PCT patents societal ch. 85.5 -3.5%
Exports med&high tech prods 56.7 -2.0%
Exports knowledge-int serv 82.6 0.8%
License and patent rev. 38.0 -6.6%
Performance scores equal 100 * the country’s indicator values divided
by those of the EU. Growth differences are calculated by subtracting EU
growth rates from those of the country.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201634
Australia
Australia’s innovation performance is lagging behind that
of the EU, and the innovation gap is slowly widening. The
performance gap was at its smallest in 2009, when relative performance
was 96% of that of the EU. Relative performance has since steadily
decreased to 85% in 2015.
China
China’s innovation performance is lagging well behind that
of the EU, but its relative performance has been increasing
strongly from 26% of the EU average in 2008 to 40% in
2015.
Australia is performing worse than the EU on seven indicators, particularly
on License and patent revenues from abroad, and Exports of medium
and high tech products. Australia is performing better than the EU on
five indicators related to the public sector and to the knowledge base:
Doctorate graduates, Population having completed tertiary education,
R&D expenditures in the public sector, International co-publications, and
Most-cited publications.
Australia shows a mostly negative growth performance. Australia
has improved its performance lead only on Most-cited publications.
Australia’s performance gap in business R&D expenditures, Public-
private co-publications, PCT patent applications, Exports of medium and
high tech products, and License and patent revenues from abroad has
widened. Australia performs much better in its enabling conditions, but
relatively worse in both firm activities and innovation outputs.
China is performing worse than the EU on 11 indicators, in particular on
License and patent revenues from abroad, Public-private co-publications,
Doctorate graduates, International scientific co-publications, PCT patent
applications in societal challenges, and Tertiary education. China is
outperforming the EU in R&D expenditures in the business sector.
However, China’s growth performance has been much stronger than that
of the EU, with growth rates of nine indicators being higher, revealing a
continuous catch-up process. China's growth rate has been below that
of the EU in Doctorate graduates and Licence and patent revenues from
abroad. China’s performance lead in R&D expenditures in the business
sector has increased, and its performance gap has become smaller
on eight indicators, in particular on PCT patent applications in societal
challenges and on Public-private co-publications. China’s performance
gap in Doctorate graduates and License and patent revenues from
abroad has widened.
Scores are calculated by dividing the innovation index by that of the EU
and multiplying by 100.
Scores are calculated by dividing the innovation index by that of the EU
and multiplying by 100.
RELATIVE
PERFORMANCE
DIFFERENCE IN
PERFORMANCE
GROWTH
Doctorate graduates 126.2 0.0%
Tertiary education 132.2 -0.3%
International co-publ. 167.4 -1.2%
Most cited publications 116.4 1.2%
R&D exp. public sector 119.9 -0.8%
R&D exp. business sector 97.2 -2.8%
Public-private co-publ. 69.7 -4.6%
PCT patents 79.9 -1.8%
PCT patents societal ch. 69.4 -7.4%
Exports med&high tech prods 14.6 -6.0%
Exports knowledge-int serv 63.3 -0.2%
License and patent rev. 10.5 -8.5%
RELATIVE
PERFORMANCE
DIFFERENCE IN
PERFORMANCE
GROWTH
Doctorate graduates 11.4 -2.9%
Tertiary education 35.7 4.5%
International co-publ. 41.2 3.3%
Most cited publications 77.6 3.2%
R&D exp. public sector 64.5 0.8%
R&D exp. business sector 129.2 4.7%
Public-private co-publ. 13.7 17.8%
PCT patents 67.7 6.3%
PCT patents societal ch. 24.1 11.2%
Exports med&high tech prods 91.4 -0.2%
Exports knowledge-int serv 71.1 5.4%
License and patent rev. 1.6 -4.9%
Performance scores equal 100 * the country’s indicator values divided
by those of the EU. Growth differences are calculated by subtracting EU
growth rates from those of the country.
Performance scores equal 100 * the country’s indicator values divided
by those of the EU. Growth differences are calculated by subtracting EU
growth rates from those of the country.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
35European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Brazil
Brazil’s innovation performance is lagging behind that
of the EU and is stagnating. Relative performance was at its
highest in 2008 at 38% and declined to 31% in 2010. In 2013
performance improved to 34%, and has been constant at that
value since.
Russia
Russia’s innovation performance is lagging well behind
that of the EU, although lately the innovation gap has been
narrowing. Relative innovation performance was around 40% up until
2010, but decreased to 29% in 2012. The strong decline in 2012 was
due to a sharp decline in New doctorate graduates. Since 2012, Russia's
relative performance has increased to 38% in 2015.

Brazil is performing worse than the EU on 11 indicators, in particular
on License and patent revenues from abroad, PCT patent applications,
Doctorate graduates, and Public-private co-publications. Brazil is only
performing better than the EU on Exports of knowledge-intensive
services.
For half of the indicators, however, the growth performance of Brazil
exceeds the growth performance of the EU. Growth performance
is better than that of the EU in particular in Tertiary education, PCT
patent applications in societal challenges, and Exports of knowledge-
intensive services. Brazil has managed to reduce its performance gap
on five indicators, and has improved its performance lead in Exports
of knowledge-intensive services. The performance gap in Doctorate
graduates and License and patent revenues from abroad, but also in
Exports of medium and high tech products, has clearly widened.
Russia is performing worse than the EU on 11 indicators, in particular
on Public-private co-publications, License and patent revenues from
abroad, PCT patent applications, Exports of medium and high tech
products, and Most-cited publications. However, a 69% higher share of
Russia’s population has completed tertiary education.
Russia’s growth performance is worse than that of the EU with growth
rates in ten indicators being below that of the EU, especially for Doctorate
graduates, R&D expenditures in the business sector, Public-private co-
publications, and PCT patent applications in societal challenges. Growth
has been just above that of the EU in R&D expenditures in the public
sector. The performance gap with the EU has widened for nine indicators.
The performance gap of Russia with the EU has become smaller for R&D
expenditures in the public sector.
Scores are calculated by dividing the innovation index by that of the EU
and multiplying by 100.
Scores are calculated by dividing the innovation index by that of the EU
and multiplying by 100.
RELATIVE
PERFORMANCE
DIFFERENCE IN
PERFORMANCE
GROWTH
Doctorate graduates 25.0 -17.2%
Tertiary education 54.3 5.5%
International co-publ. 45.7 1.2%
Most cited publications 46.6 -1.0%
R&D exp. public sector 87.5 -0.5%
R&D exp. business sector 42.5 -1.5%
Public-private co-publ. 5.3 1.3%
PCT patents 27.3 1.1%
PCT patents societal ch. 8.5 5.0%
Exports med&high tech prods 38.5 -4.5%
Exports knowledge-int serv 115.2 2.6%
License and patent rev. 2.7 -9.1%
RELATIVE
PERFORMANCE
DIFFERENCE IN
PERFORMANCE
GROWTH
Doctorate graduates 78.3 -3.8%
Tertiary education 168.8 -3.1%
International co-publ. 49.9 -1.2%
Most cited publications 31.3 -0.4%
R&D exp. public sector 66.4 0.8%
R&D exp. business sector 57.8 -2.1%
Public-private co-publ. 4.9 -2.2%
PCT patents 34.4 -0.1%
PCT patents societal ch. 11.5 -3.7%
Exports med&high tech prods 16.9 0.0%
Exports knowledge-int serv 75.0 -0.5%
License and patent rev. 6.1 -0.4%
Performance scores equal 100 * the country’s indicator values divided
by those of the EU. Growth differences are calculated by subtracting EU
growth rates from those of the country.
Performance scores equal 100 * the country’s indicator values divided
by those of the EU. Growth differences are calculated by subtracting EU
growth rates from those of the country.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201636
India
India’s innovation performance is lagging well behind that of
the EU but has remained relatively stable over time.

India is performing worse than the EU on ten indicators, in particular
on License and patent revenues from abroad, International scientific
co-publications, Public-private co-publications, PCT patent applications,
and R&D expenditures in the business sector. India is performing better
than the EU in Exports of knowledge-intensive services, where its
performance is 33% higher than that of the EU.
India’s growth performance is mixed with growth rates on five indicators
being above the EU, in particular for License and patent revenues from
abroad, and Exports of medium and high tech products. Growth for six
indicators has been below that of the EU, especially in Tertiary education,
business R&D expenditures, and PCT patent applications in societal
challenges. India has managed to reduce its performance gap on five
indicators, especially on License and patent revenues from abroad,
and Exports of medium and high tech products. The performance gap
has widened for five indicators, especially in Tertiary education. India's
performance lead on Knowledge-intensive service exports has slightly
decreased.
Scores are calculated by dividing the innovation index by that of the EU
and multiplying by 100.
RELATIVE
PERFORMANCE
DIFFERENCE IN
PERFORMANCE
GROWTH
Doctorate graduates n/a n/a
Tertiary education 30.9 -3.4%
International co-publ. 17.8 1.2%
Most cited publications 60.1 -0.5%
R&D exp. public sector 73.5 -0.9%
R&D exp. business sector 23.7 -2.2%
Public-private co-publ. 1.8 1.1%
PCT patents 32.1 0.3%
PCT patents societal ch. 14.2 -2.5%
Exports med&high tech prods 44.0 2.8%
Exports knowledge-int serv 132.9 -0.2%
License and patent rev. 5.5 8.7%
Performance scores equal 100 * the country’s indicator values divided
by those of the EU. Growth differences are calculated by subtracting EU
growth rates from those of the country.
South Africa
The innovation performance of South Africa is lagging far
behind that of the EU and is stagnating. Relative performance
peaked at 24% of the EU level in 2008, but has been at 20-21%
since 2011.

South Africa is performing worse than the EU on all 11 indicators. Its
gap is largest on License and patent revenues from abroad, Doctorate
graduates, and Public-private co-publications. The gap is smallest in
International scientific co-publications and Most-cited publications, as
well as in R&D expenditures in the public sector, and Exports of medium
and high tech products.
For eight indicators, South Africa’s growth performance is below that
of the EU, but for Doctorate graduates, International co-publications,
and Exports of medium and high tech products, performance has grown
slightly faster than for the EU.
The performance gap has widened for most indicators, especially for
R&D expenditures in the business sector, Public-private co-publications,
PCT patent applications, and Tertiary education.
Scores are calculated by dividing the innovation index by that of the EU
and multiplying by 100.
RELATIVE
PERFORMANCE
DIFFERENCE IN
PERFORMANCE
GROWTH
Doctorate graduates 10.1 1.4%
Tertiary education 20.1 -3.4%
International co-publ. 61.8 1.8%
Most cited publications 66.5 -1.0%
R&D exp. public sector 56.5 -0.3%
R&D exp. business sector 26.4 -8.1%
Public-private co-publ. 5.0 -4.8%
PCT patents 40.0 -3.4%
PCT patents societal ch. 17.3 -6.1%
Exports med&high tech prods 54.5 0.5%
Exports knowledge-int serv n/a n/a
License and patent rev. 5.7 -0.4%
Performance scores equal 100 * the country’s indicator values divided
by those of the EU. Growth differences are calculated by subtracting EU
growth rates from those of the country.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
37European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
6. Expected short-term changes in EU inno vation
performance
This year’s report includes, for the first time, a forward-looking analysis
of EU innovation performance discussing more recent developments,
trends, and expected changes. The aim is to cover the need for more
recent information, since available statistical data for the indicators
used for constructing the innovation index are, on average, two to
three years old.
In summary, the analysis suggests that EU innovation will continue to
increase on most indicators, leading to a relatively strong increase in
the EU innovation index of about 2.5% in two years' time (Figure 30),
in particular due to increases in performance in Doctorate graduates,
Non-R&D innovation expenditures, Sales due to new product innova-
tions, and Tertiary education attainment. Table 4 shows a summary of
the results for those 20 indicators for which the calculation of relatively
reliable short-term changes proved possible. EU innovation performance
is expected to increase strongly for four indicators, to increase more
moderately for 11 indicators, to remain stable for two indicators, and to
decrease for three indicators. At the global level, the trends observed in
recent years can be expected to continue, with the EU performance gap
towards Japan and the United States narrowing further, the gap towards
South Korea increasing, and the EU lead over China shrinking.
Section 6.1 discusses trend performance of the EU innovation index
compared to four of its main international competitors. Section 6.2 ex-
plores EU trend performance for individual indicators, and Section 6.3
discusses expected changes in performance for the six indicators using
CIS data, based on provisional ‘fast track’ CIS 2014 data made avail-
able by 18 Member States. Section 6.4 provides details on some of the
methodologies used for estimating short-term changes.
CURRENT
SCORE
EXPECTED CHANGE IN
TWO-YEARS’ TIME
METHODOLOGY FOR ESTIMATING
EXPECTED CHANGE
Human resources
New doctorate graduates 1.84 >10% increase Number of doctoral students
Population aged 30-34 with tertiary education 38.5 5-10% increase Linear regression
Youth aged 20-24 with upper secondary level education 82.6 1-5% increase Linear regression
Open, excellent and attractive research systems
International scientific co-publications 459.2 >10% increase Linear regression
Most-cited scientific publications 10.51 1-5% increase Linear regression
Non-EU doctorate students 17.8 1-5% increase Linear regression
Finance and support
R&D expenditure in the public sector 0.72 1-5% decrease Budget plan data
Venture capital investment 0.063 >10% decrease Linear regression
Firm investments
R&D expenditure in the business sector 1.30 1-5% increase Survey on Industrial R&D Investment Trends
Non-R&D innovation expenditures 0.69 >10% increase Fast-track CIS 2014
Linkages & entrepreneurship
SMEs innovating in-house 28.7 No notable change Fast-track CIS 2014
Innovative SMEs collaborating with others 10.3 5-10% increase Fast-track CIS 2014
Intellectual assets
PCT patents applications 3.53 No notable change Econometric model using GDP and R&D
PCT patent applications in societal challenges 1.01 5-10% increase Linear regression
Community trademarks 6.09 5-10% increase Linear regression
Innovators
SMEs with product or process innovations 30.6 1-5% increase Fast-track CIS 2014
SMEs with marketing or organisational innovations 36.2 1-5% decrease Fast-track CIS 2014
Economic effects
Employment in knowledge-intensive activities 13.9 1-5% increase Linear regression
Sales of new-to-market and new-to-firm innovations 12.4 5-10% increase Fast-track CIS 2014
License and patent revenues from abroad 0.543 >10% increase Linear regression
Table 4: Changes in two years' time in EU innovation performance

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201638
6.1 EU trend performance compared to China, Japan, South Korea, and the United States
6.1.1 Trend performance of the innovation index
A statistical trend analysis using performance data from the previous
eight years shows that the EU performance gap towards South Korea
is expected to increase, that the performance gaps towards the United
States and Japan are expected to narrow, and that the performance
lead over China is expected to decrease.
Nowcasts for 2016 and 2017 have been calculated for the EU, China, Ja-
pan, South Korea, and the US, using estimates based on nowcasting three-
year averages. Details are explained in Section 6.4. The trend line for South
Korea as shown in Figure 31 resumes the increase observed until 2013,
after a slight deceleration in performance growth in 2014 and 2015. The
innovation index would increase from 0.726 in 2015 to 0.776 in 2017, and
the performance lead over the EU would further increase from 123% to
127%. After the decline in the innovation index in 2015, the trend line
for the United States shows a recovery in 2016 and 2017 similar to the
recovery seen after the performance decline in 2010. The innovation index
would increase slightly from 0.703 in 2015 to 0.713 in 2017. However,
due to relatively stronger expected growth in the EU, the US performance
lead over the EU would further decrease from 119% to 116%. The trend
line for Japan shows continued performance growth for 2016-2017. The
innovation index would increase from 0.701 in 2015 to 0.715 in 2017, but
the performance lead over the EU would, after four years of an increasing
trend, decrease from 118% to 117%. The trend line for China also shows
continued performance growth for 2016-2017. The innovation index
would increase more strongly from 0.236 in 2015 to 0.264 in 2017, and
China would continue to catch up from 40% of EU performance to 43%.
Figure 31: Expected short-term changes in innovation performance for EU’s main competitors
Figure 30: EU innovation performance

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
39European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Complementary to the statistical results presented in section 6.1.1, this
section will discuss forecasts for three key indicators in greater detail.
Tertiary education attainment
Estimates show that the share of EU population (aged 25-64) having
completed tertiary education is expected to increase relative to that of
Japan and the United States, but is expected to decrease relative to that
of South Korea. For the share of population having completed tertiary
education, the comparison between Member States uses data for 30-34
year olds, but due to data limitations for international comparisons, this
analysis draws on data for 25-64 year olds. For Japan, South Korea, and
the US, tertiary attainment data are available for the younger cohort of
25-34 year olds, and these data can be used for estimating short-term
changes in tertiary attainment for the full working age population. For
the US, tertiary attainment of both cohorts is similar, suggesting that
improvements in the EIS indicator will be small when older cohorts are
replaced by younger cohorts (Figure 32). For Japan, South Korea, and
the EU, the situation is different, as younger cohorts are more highly
educated than older cohorts, and a significant improvement in the EIS
indicator is therefore expected in 10 to 15 years. For the more immedi-
ate future, i.e. in two years’ time, effects of replacing older by younger
cohorts will be smaller.
Assuming that the 25-34 year olds cohort contributes 25% to the value
of the indicator, one can calculate by how much the indicator would
increase in two years’ time if individuals with the tertiary attainment
level of the younger cohort replaced individuals of the older 35-64 year
old cohort (details are explained in Section 6.4). For the EU, the share
of population aged 25-64 with completed tertiary education would in-
crease from 31.7% to 33.0% in two years’ time (Figure 32). For South
Korea, this share would increase more strongly from 44.6% to 47.3%,
raising performance relative to the EU to 143%. For the US, this share
would increase more modestly from 44.2% to 44.8%, thereby lower-
ing US performance relative to the EU to 136%. Finally, for Japan, this
share would increase at a lower rate than that of the EU, from 49.2% to
50.6%, thereby lowering performance relative to the EU to 153%.
6.1.2 Trend performance of three individual indicators: Tertiary education attainment, Business R&D expenditures, and Licence and
patent revenues from abroad
Figure 32: Nowcasts for Tertiary education attainment for 25-64 year olds
Source data 2007-2014: OECD, Education at a Glance, various editions. No data for China.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201640
For South Korea, business R&D expenditures are expected to increase
by 5.35% in 2015 and 3.0% in 201621, and GDP is expected to increase
by 2.7% in 2015 and 3.1% in 2016 22. The business R&D intensity is
therefore expected to increase to 3.44 in both 2015 and 2016, resulting
in an increase in the large gap between the EU and South Korea.
Forecasts for the United States show an increase in business R&D
expenditures of 2.4% in 2014 and 2015
23, and 3.5% in 2016 24. GDP
is expected to increase by 2.4% in both 2014 and 2015 and 2.5% in
2016
25. The business R&D intensity is therefore expected to decline from
1.94 in 2013 to 1.95 in 2016, such that the gap between the EU and the
US would remain relatively constant. For Japan, forecasts for business
R&D are not available, but total R&D expenditures are expected to
Business R&D expenditures
The most recent R&D statistics from the OECD are for 2014
18. Based on
nowcasts which are two years more timely than the data used for the
calculation of the Summary Innovation Index, the EU business R&D inten-
sity is expected to increase relative to Japan, to remain stable compared
to the United States, and to decrease relative to China and South Korea.
The 2015 EU Survey on R&D Investment Business Trends
19 shows
that larger EU companies expect their R&D expenditures in the EU to
increase, on average, by 2.6% yearly for 2015-2017. Nominal GDP is
expected to increase by 2.0% in 2015 and 2.1% in 2016 (European
Economic Forecast - Spring 2016
20). The EU's business R&D intensity is
therefore expected to increase from 1.22 in 2014 to 1.23 in 2015 and
1.24 in 2016 (Figure 33).
Figure 33: Business R&D expenditure
as a percentage of GDP
Figure 34: License and patent revenues
from abroad as a percentage of GDP
Nowcasts shown by markers.
Nowcasts shown by markers.
18 As in the international comparison in Section 5.2, OECD data are used for nowcasting business R&D expenditures. There is a difference between the OECD results for the EU (business
R&D intensity of 1.22 in 2014) and those of Eurostat as used in the European benchmarking exercise (business R&D intensity of 1.30 in 2014).
19 This survey is carried out by the Industrial Research and Innovation (IRI) action of the European Commission’ s Joint Research Centre (JRC), Institute for Prospective Technological Studies
(IPTS). Survey results are available at http://iri.jrc.ec.europa.eu/survey.html
20 http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/eu/forecasts/2016_spring_forecast_en.htm
21 Korea Industrial Technology Association, Industry R&D T rends for 2016
22 OECD Economic Outlook No 98, November 2015
23 For 2014, the increase is assumed to be equal to that in 2015: R&D Magazine & Industrial Research Institute, 2016 Global R&D Fu nding Forecast: www.iriweb.org/sites/default/files/20
16GlobalRDFundingForecast.pdf.
24 2016 Industrial Research Institute's R&D T rends Forecast (http://www.iriweb.org/)
25 OECD Economic Outlook No 98, November 2015
26 R&D Magazine & Industrial Research Institute, 2016 Global R&D Funding Forecast:www.iriweb.org/sites/default/files/2016GlobalRDFundingForecast.pdf
27 OECD Economic Outlook No 98, November 2015
28 The Statistics Portal: http://www.statista.com/statistics/279951/internal-research-and-development-expenditure-in-china/
29 Assuming a similar relative increase of 6.9% in 2016 in business R&D as for total R&D (www.iriweb.org/sites/default/files/2016GlobalRDFundingForecast.pdf)
30 OECD Economic Outlook No 98, November 2015
increase by 0.7% in 2015 and 1.2% in 2016 26, and GDP is expected
to increase by 0.6% in 2015 and 1.0% in 2016 27. The business R&D
intensity is therefore expected to increase from 2.79 in 2014 to 2.80
in 2016, such that the EU would narrow its performance gap towards
Japan. For China, business R&D is expected to increase by 9.3%
28 in
2015 and 6.9% in 2016 29, and GDP is expected to increase by 6.8%
in 2015 and 6.5% in 2016 30. The business R&D intensity is therefore
expected to increase from 1.58 in 2014 to 1.62 in 2016, leading to an
increasing performance lead over the EU.
License and patent revenues from abroad
Based on a statistical extrapolation of data for 2007-2014, License
and patent revenues from abroad as a share of GDP are expected to
increase for the EU and most of its international competitors. For the
EU, the indicator is expected to increase from 0.630 in 2014 to 0.661
in 2016 (Figure 34). This increase is stronger than that expected for the
United Sates, lowering the US performance lead over the EU from 119%
to 114% over the two-year forecast. The performance lead of Japan
would not change over two years. The EU's performance lead over South
Korea would decrease from 172% to 170%, and the performance lead
over China would remain substantial.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
41European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Figure 35: Shares of doctorate graduates
and doctoral students
Shares of doctorate graduates and doctoral students 34
This section discusses expected short-term changes for 20 indicators.
For ten of these indicators, changes have been calculated applying a
simple linear regression using time series data (see Section 6.4.3 for
more details). For the other indicators, a mix of techniques has been
used, which will be discussed in this section. For five indicators, short-
term changes could not be calculated
31.
Human resources
For the share of Doctorate graduates per 1000 population aged 25-
34, data for the EU are available up until 2014
32. Data on the number
of doctoral students per 1000 population aged 25-34 can be used to
predict changes in the number of doctorate graduates. For doctoral stu-
dents, data are available up until 2014. The shares for both doctorate
graduates and doctoral students are increasing over time (Figure 35).
Assuming an average completion time of five years for finishing a PhD,
the 13.5% increase in doctoral students in 2009-2011 as compared
to 2008 can be used to forecast the number of doctorate graduates in
2015-2016. Combining this with an expected decline in the population
aged 25-3
33, the share of doctorate students per 1000 population aged
25-34 is expected to increase from 1.84 in 2014 to 1.94 in 2015 and
2.04 in 2016.
Between 2008 and 2015, the Population share aged 30-34 having
completed tertiary education has shown a steady increase of over one
percentage point per year. A simple linear regression for the same period
has been used to estimate an increase from 38.5 to 41.1 in two years'
time. Between 2008 and 2015, the Youth share aged 20-24 having at-
tained at least upper secondary level education has increased, on aver-
age, by 0.6 percentage points per year. A simple linear regression for the
same period has been used to estimate an increase from 82.6 to 83.8
in two years' time.
Open, excellent and attractive research systems
The share of International scientific co-publications has shown a steady
increase between 2008 and 2015. A simple linear regression for the
same period has been used to estimate an increase from 459.2 to
507.5 in two years' time. The share of Most-cited scientific publications
has been increasing for most years except for a one-time decrease
between 2011 and 2012. A simple linear regression for 2006-2013 has
been used to estimate an increase from 10.51 to 10.64 in two years'
time. The share of Non-EU doctorate students has been increasing for
most years except for a one-time decrease between 2012 and 2013. A
simple linear regression for 2007-2014 has been used to estimate an
increase from 17.8 to 18.3 in two years' time.
31 For Public-private co-publications, Community designs, Employment in fast-growing enterprises, Medium and high tech product exp orts, and Knowledge-intensive services exports,
no reliable proxy indicators are available, and linear regression results are weak with adjusted R2’s below 0.6.
32 Aggregate data for doctoral students for the EU have been calculated using data for the Member States, where data have been a djusted for sharp declines for Spain from 68,865 in 2011
to 22,542 in 2012, and for the UK from 99,416 in 2007 to 80,906 in 2008.
33 The most recent EU aggregate available from Eurostat as used in the other chapters of this report is for 2013. After the cut-of f day of 1 April 2016 for collecting the data for the main
analysis, 2014 data for all Member States have become available from Eurostat. The aggregate for all 28 Member States for 2013 and 2014 shows a stable share of 1.84 for both years.
34 A linear regression almost perfectly predicts the evolution in the population aged 25-34 between 2004 and 2014 suggesting a further decline of almost 2% in two years’ time.
6.2 Short-term changes in EU innovation performance by indicator

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201642
Finance and support
Government budget plans can be used to nowcast R&D expenditure in
the public sector as a percentage of GDP. Budget plan data for 2015
and 2016 for Austria
35, France36, Germany37, Italy38, the Netherlands 39,
and the United Kingdom40, with these six countries accounting for about
73% of public R&D expenditure in the EU, show that the aggregate
spending for these six countries would increase by 6.0% over the next
two years, and GDP by 7.1%
41. Assuming equal growth rates for the EU,
R&D expenditure in the public sector as a share of GDP would decrease
from 0.72 to 0.71 in two years’ time. Venture capital investments as a
percentage of GDP have been declining steadily over time, in particular
between the first half of the 2009-2015 period. A simple linear
regression for 2009-2015 has been used to estimate a further decrease
from 0.063 to 0.050 in two years’ time.
Firm investments
R&D expenditures in the business sector as a percentage of GDP are
expected to increase from 1.30 to 1.32 in two years' time (cf. Section
6.2). Non-R&D innovation expenditures as a share of turnover are
expected to increase in two years' time (cf. Section 6.3).
Linkages & entrepreneurship
For the two indicators using CIS data, provisional CIS 2014 data show
a stable performance for the share of SMEs innovating in-house, and
an increase in the performance for Innovative SMEs collaborating with
others (cf. Section 6.3).
Intellectual assets
A working paper by Eurostat
42 discusses several options for nowcasting
patent data, including six econometric models using data on GDP,
R&D expenditures, researchers, and Human Resources in Science and
Technology. Three of these models have been explore
43, of which the
model assuming a linear dependence with GDP and R&D expenditures
performs best. PCT patent applications per billion GDP are expected
to further decrease. PCT patent applications in societal challenges per
billion GDP have increased steadily between 2005 and 2011 followed
by a decline in 2012. A linear regression for 2005-2012 has been used
to estimate an increase from 1.01 to 1.06 in two years' time. Between
2008 and 2015, the indicator score for Community trademarks per
billion GDP has increased steadily by almost 0.2 each year. A linear
regression for 2008-2015 has been used to estimate an increase from
6.09 to 6.47 in two years' time.
Innovators
For the two indicators using CIS data, provisional CIS 2014 data show
a stable performance for the share of SMEs with product or process
innovations, and a decrease in performance for the share of SMEs with
marketing or organizational innovations (cf. Section 6.3).
Economic effects
Between 2008 and 2014, the Employment share in knowledge-intensive
activities has increased by over 0.1 percentage points a year. A simple
linear regression for 2008-2014 has been used to estimate an increase
from 13.9 to 14.1 in two years' time. For the indicator using CIS data,
provisional CIS 2014 data show an increase in performance for the Sales
share due to new-to-market or new-to-firm product innovations (cf.
Section 6.3). The indicator score for License and patent revenues from
abroad as a percentage of GDP has been steadily increasing between
2007 and 2014 at an average rate of 0.041. A simple linear regression
for 2007-2014 has been used to estimate an increase from 0.543 to
0.619 in two years' time
44.
35 Austrian Federal Ministry of Science, Research and Economy, Austrian Research and Technology Report 2015 ( http://wissenschaft.bmwfw.gv.at/home/research/national/austrian-research-
and-technology-report-2015/)
36 Journal Officiel de la République Française, LOI no 2014-1654 du 29 décembre 2014 de finances pour 2015 ( https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/eli/loi/2014/12/29/2014-1654/jo/texte);
Journal Officiel de la République Française, LOI no 2015-1785 du 29 décembre 2015 de finances pour 2016 (https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/eli/loi/2015/12/29/2015-1785/jo/texte)
37 German Bundesministerium der F inanzen, Die Struktur des Bundeshaushaltes (http://www.bundeshaushalt-info.de/#/2016/soll/ausgaben/einzelplan.html)
38 Ministero dell’Economia e delle F inanze, Bilancio finanziario - 2016-2018 (http://www.rgs.mef.gov.it/VERSIONE-I/Attivit--i/Bilancio_di_previsione/Bilancio_finanziario/2016/)
39 Rathenau Instituut, Feiten & Cijfers, Totale Onderzoek F inanciering 2011-2017 (https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/file/103/download?token=uTmAIF7D)
40 UK Department for Business Innovation & Skills, The Allocation of Science and Research Funding 2011/12 to 2014/15 ( https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment_data/file/422477/bis-10-1356-allocation-of-science-and-research-funding-2011-2015.pdf)
41 Budget data are not a perfect predictor for public R&D expenditures; in some countries, budget data overestimate public R&D expenditures, in other countries, they underestimate these
expenditures. In the nowcasting, the ratio between budget data and public R&D expenditures in 2014, or the closest year for which data are available, is assumed not to change in 2015
and 2016, the two years for which nowcasts are calculated.
42 Eurostat, P atent Statistics – Working Paper: Methods for Nowcasting Patent Data, Final version, 21 December 2010.
43 The first model assumes that the number of patent applications is linearly dependent on GDP and R&D expenditures, the second m odel assumes a linear logarithmic dependence between
the same variables, and the third model assumes a linear dependence on R&D expenditures only. The estimates for the first two models are almost identical. All three models cannot
predict the decline in PCT applications in the two most recent years, but the first and second model do predict the decline in the value for PCT applications per billion GDP.
44 The analysis in Section 6.1.2 shows different results, as the World Bank data used for license and patent revenues from abroad in the international comparison are different from the
Eurostat data used in the Member States’ analysis.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
43European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
The Community Innovation Survey (CIS) is a survey of innovation activity
in enterprises. For the CIS 2012, the latest CIS for which final results
are available, most questions cover the reference period 2010-2012,
i.e. the three-year period from the beginning of 2010 to the end of
2012. According to Commission Regulation No 995/2012, national CIS
statistics must be delivered to Eurostat within 18 months of the end of
the reference year, i.e. June in even-numbered years (e.g. June 2014
for the CIS 2012). Data are then checked and corrected for detected
inconsistencies by Eurostat. Final CIS 2012 data were made available by
Eurostat in November 2014. Similarly, final CIS 2014 data are expected
to be made available by Eurostat in the last quarter of 2016.
Eurostat has made a request to national data providers to share
provisional CIS 2014 data for the indicators used in the EIS. Provisional CIS
2014 data were received from 20 countries, including 18 Member States,
Norway and Serbia
45, for all EIS indicators, except for the two indicators
using expenditure data for Austria, Finland, France, and Italy (Table 5).
An EU aggregate using data for those Member States which shared provisional
CIS 2014 data can be compared with the EU aggregate for the same set of
Member States using final CIS 2012 data. For the EU, provisional CIS 2014
data scores are higher for three indicators, almost the same for two indicators,
and lower for one indicator as compared to the CIS 2012 (Figure 36).
The share of non-R&D innovation expenditure for the EU has followed
a pattern of increases and decreases between 2006 and 2012. Using
provisional CIS 2014 data for 14 Member States, the share of non-R&D
innovation expenditure for the EU is estimated to increase from 0.69 in 2012
to 0.79 in 2014. For nine Member States, the indicator is expected to increase,
and for five Member States, it is expected to decrease, in particular for Latvia.
The share of SMEs innovating in-house for the EU has been falling between
2006 and 2012 despite a temporary increase in 2010. Based on provisional
CIS 2014 data for 18 Member States, the share of SMEs innovating in-house
for the EU is estimated to remain almost constant at 28.9 in 2014. For ten
Member States, the indicator is expected to increase, in particular for Lithuania.
Relatively strong declines are seen for Italy, Latvia, and the Netherlands.
The share of innovative SMEs collaborating with others for the EU has been
mostly increasing between 2006 and 2012. Based on provisional CIS 2014
data for 18 Member States, the share of innovative SMEs collaborating is
estimated to increase from 10.3 in 2012 to 11.2 in 2014. For 12 Member
States, the indicator is expected to increase, and for six Member States, it
is expected to decrease, in particular for the UK. The share of SMEs with
product and process innovations for the EU has been falling between 2006
and 2012. Based on provisional CIS 2014 data for 18 Member States, the
share of product and process innovators is estimated to increase from 30.6
in 2012 to 31.1 in 2014. For 12 Member States, the indicator is expected
to increase, especially for Lithuania. For the Czech Republic, the share of
product and process innovators is expected to decline significantly. Notable
declines are also observed for Italy and Latvia.
6.3 Provisional CIS 2014 data
EU averages using data for all Member States shown in blue coloured columns. Data for 2012 and 2014 for the average of those Member States for which
provisional CIS 2014 data are available are shown with red coloured dots. The forecast for the EU for 2014, shown in the green colored column, is calculated by
taking the vertical difference between the EU (blue column for 2012) and the CIS 2014 subgroup of Member States (the red coloured dot above the blue column)
and repeating this difference for 2014. The EU average using data for Member States having made available provisional CIS 2014 data represents 75% of total
EU non-R&D innovation expenditure in 2012, 91% of SMEs innovating in-house, 89% of innovative SMEs collaborating with others, 90% of SMEs with product and
process innovations, 90% of SMEs with marketing and organizational innovations, and 65% of sales due to new-to-market or new-to-firm product innovations.
Figure 36: Expected change in EU performance in 2014 for the indicators using CIS data
Share of non-R&D innovation expenditure
expected to increase
Share of SMEs with product and process
innovations expected to increase
Share of SMEs innovating in-house expected
to remain constant
Share of SMEs with marketing and organizational
innovations expected to decrease
Share of SMEs innovating in-house expected
to remain constant
Share of SMEs innovating in-house expected
to remain constant
45 Results for Norway and Serbia are included in the respective Country profiles in Section 7.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201644
The share of SMEs with marketing and organizational innovations for
the EU has been falling between 2006 and 2012. Based on provisional
CIS 2014 data for 18 Member States, the share of marketing and
organizational innovators is estimated to further decrease from 36.2 in
2012 to 35.1 in 2014. For 11 Member States, the indicator is expected
to decrease. The indicator is foreseen to increase strongly in Germany,
Spain, and the UK. The sales share due to new-to-market or new-to-
firm product innovations for the EU declined in 2012 from a higher level
in 2006-2010. Based on provisional CIS 2014 data for 14 Member
States, the sales share due to new-to-market and new-to-firm product
innovations is estimated to increase from 12.4 in 2012 to 13.4 in 2014,
which is equal to the level in 2010. This increase is driven by increasing
performance in 11 Member States, including an almost 20 percentage
point increase for the Czech Republic.
NON-R&D
INNOVATION
EXPENDITURE
SMES
INNOVATING
IN-HOUSE
INNOVATIVE SMES
COLLABORATING
WITH OTHERS
SMES WITH
PRODUCT/
PROCESS
INNOVATIONS
SMES WITH
ORGANISATIONAL/
MARKETING
INNOVATIONS
SALES OF
NEW-TO-MARKET
OR NEW-TO-
FIRM PRODUCT
INNOVATIONS
EU European Union 0.11 0.22 0.86 0.55 -1.11 1.01
BG Bulgaria 0.26 -0.43 0.78 0.46 -2.89 0.56
CZ Czech Republic 0.21 1.68 -1.60 -27.02 -4.46 19.65
DE Germany -0.07 -0.66 -1.42 -0.77 2.82 0.24
EL Greece -0.11 4.76 2.33 4.95 -4.89 1.00
ES Spain 0.05 -1.03 0.63 3.84 2.96 1.61
FR France n/a 2.54 1.73 3.11 0.42 n/a
HR Croatia 0.25 1.80 -0.67 3.82 0.46 -4.76
IT Italy n/a -6.12 1.79 -6.14 -10.43 n/a
LV Latvia -0.80 -3.65 -1.75 -3.81 -4.09 0.29
LT Lithuania 0.91 16.39 7.68 17.62 -1.17 3.10
NL Netherlands -0.02 -3.89 3.00 2.07 -2.66 -1.03
AT Austria n/a 2.95 4.89 5.05 1.17 n/a
PL Poland 0.51 1.05 -0.35 0.20 -2.81 0.12
RO Romania 1.25 6.51 2.30 8.12 -6.72 2.76
SK Slovakia -0.22 -1.07 1.69 -0.93 -3.80 -0.49
FI Finland n/a 1.83 2.49 4.03 0.23 n/a
SE Sweden 0.33 0.68 0.82 0.50 -3.09 0.79
UK United Kingdom 0.32 7.62 -2.72 8.46 4.05 1.27
Table 5: Change between CIS 2012 and CIS 2014 performance for EU and Member States
Changes calculated as difference between provisional CIS 2014 indicator score and CIS 2012 indicator score. For Austria, Finland, France, and Italy,
data are not available for the two expenditure-based indicators.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
45European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Nowcasts for 2016 and 2017 have been calculated using the following
methodology :
•
 Step 1: Using the inno
vation index scores for 2008-2015, three-
year averages have been calculated for 2009-2014, e.g. the three-
year average for 2010 is the unweighted average of the innovation
indexes for 2009-2011.
•

 Step 2: A linear regression has been estimated on the 2009-2014
three-year averages.
•

 Step
3: Using the intercept and the slope of the linear regression,
estimates for three-year averages have been calculated for 2008-2017.
• Step 4: Adjusted estimates f
or the three-year averages for 2015-
2017 have been calculated by correcting the estimates in Step 3 by
adjusting for the difference in 2014 between the three-year average
calculated in Step 1 and the estimate calculated in Step 3.
•
 Step 5: An estimate has been calculated f
or the innovation index in
2016 by taking the difference between the estimates, as calculated
in Step 4, for the three-year averages in 2015 and 2016 and the
innovation index score in 2015. Similarly, estimates have been
calculated for the innovation index in 2017.
•
 Step
6: Scores relative to the EU have been calculated by dividing
the estimates for the respective country by those for the EU and
multiplying by 100.
SLOPE ADJUSTED R 2 CURRENT
SCORE T+1 T+2
Tertiary education attainment 1.0738 0.9855 38.5 39.6 41.1
Youth upper secondary level education 0.6024 0.9435 82.6 83.2 83.8
International scientific co-publications 24.1652 0.9954 459.2 483.4 507.5
Most cited scientific publications 0.0644 0.8696 10.51 10.58 10.64
Non-EU doctorate students 0.2597 0.8445 17.8 18.0 18.3
Venture capital investments -0.0067 0.8839 0.063 0.056 0.050
PCT patent applications in societal challenges 0.0288 0.8099 1.01 1.03 1.06
Community trademarks 0.1864 0.9368 6.09 6.28 6.47
Employment in knowledge-intensive activities 0.1143 0.9176 13.9 14.0 14.1
License and patent revenues from abroad 0.0381 0.8688 0.543 0.581 0.619
Table 6: Nowcasts for ten indicators using linear regressions
6.4.1 Nowcasting the innovation index for the EU and some of its major competitors
6.4 Methodology section
6.4.2 Nowcasting tertiary education attainment for the EU and some of its major competitors
For the share of population aged 25-64 having completed tertiary
education, nowcasts are calculated using data for tertiary education
attainment for 25-34 year olds as follows:
•
 Calculate the tertiary education rate of the population aged 35-64 b
y
assuming that this cohort contributes 75% to the indicator value for the
population aged 25-64 in any year T, i.e. X
35-64,T=(4*X25-64, T-X25-34,T)/3,
where X is the indicator value for the respective age group in year T.
• Calculate the average annual gro
wth rate of the tertiary
education rate of the population aged 25-64 for 2007-2014, i.e.
AAGR25-34=(X25-34,2014-X25-34,2007)^(1/7)-1.
• Assume that one year of the 35-64 age cohort will be replaced
b
y one year of the 25-34 age cohort in both 2015 and 2016, and
also assume that tertiary education rate of the population aged
25-64 will continue to grow at the same growth rate as in 2007-2014:
X25-64,2016=0.7 * X35-64,2014 + 0.3 * (1+AAGR25-34)2 * X25-34,2014.
6.4.3 Using linear regression for estimating short-term changes for individual indicators
For ten indicators discussed in section 6.2, the coefficients of the slope
have been used to estimate results for the EU one (T+1) and two years
(T+2) from now by adding the slope to the last known value. Table 6
shows the regression results for these indicators.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201646
7. Country profiles
This section provides individual profiles for all European countries. Each
profile includes the following graphs:
• The first graph sho
ws the development of the country’s innovation
index over time (as shown by the solid line) and its development
relative to the EU average (as shown by the dotted line).
• For
those countries which provided provisional CIS 2014 data, the
second graph compares the provisional CIS 2014 data with the CIS
2012 data as used in this year’s report.
•
 The third graph pro
vides a comparison of the respective country's
performance by indicator and dimension with that of the EU (where
the EU performance equals 100), highlighting relative strengths and
weaknesses. The comparison of the indicators is based on the real
indicator values before being corrected for outliers, being possibly
transformed and being normalized (cf. Section 8.1 for more details on
the methodology used to construct normalized indicator scores). The
comparison of the dimensions is based on the dimensions’ composite
index values, which are the average of the normalized scores of the
indicators captured by the respective dimension.
•
 The f
ourth graph shows the average annual growth rates over an
eight-year period by indicator and dimension, highlighting which
indicators and dimensions have been driving a country’s change in
innovation performance over time.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
47European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Belgium is a Strong Innovator. Innovation performance gradually
increased over time and then declined in 2015. Over time, performance
relative to that of the EU has improved to almost 116% in 2015.
Belgium is performing well above the EU average in Linkages and
entrepreneurship. Also Belgium’s research system is performing well in
particular due to a high number of International scientific co-publications.
Relative weaknesses are in Intellectual assets, where performance
is somewhat below the EU average for all four indicators, and in the
dimension Economic effects.
Performance has improved most strongly in Open, excellent and
attractive research systems (4.4%) and has worsened in Finance
and support (-3.8%). For nine indicators, performance has declined, in
particular in Venture capital investments (-11%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Belgium

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201648
Bulgaria is a Modest Innovator. Innovation performance increased
over time until 2012, after which it strongly declined in 2013 (due to
strong declines in Venture capital investments and Non-R&D innovation
expenditures), to increase again in 2014 and 2015. Performance relative
to the EU is at 46.3% in 2015.
Bulgaria’s relative strengths are in Human resources and Intellectual assets.
Bulgaria has relatively high shares of highly educated people and performs
well in applying for Community trademarks and designs. Linkages and
entrepreneurship and Finance and support are the main weaknesses, in
particular due to low Venture capital investments. For all indicators, except
for Youth with upper secondary level education, Community trademarks and
designs, Bulgaria is performing below the EU average.
For 12 indicators, growth has been positive, most notably for Community
designs with a growth rate of 32% and R&D expenditures in the business
sector (21%). Strong declines in performance are observed in Venture
capital investments (-23%) and the Sales shares due to new product
innovations (-12%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for four and
worsened performance for two indicators. The overall impact on the
innovation index is expected to be positive with the index possibly
increasing from 0.242 to 0.248 assuming that for the other indicators
performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Bulgaria

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
49European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
The Czech Republic is a Moderate Innovator. Innovation performance
increased until 2012, declined in 2013, and increased again in more
recent years. The performance relative to that of the EU shows a similar
trend. Performance relative to the EU is at 83.1% in 2015.
Relative strengths compared to the EU average are in Human resources,
Firm investments, and Finance and support. Relative weaknesses are in
Intellectual assets and Open, excellent and attractive research systems.
In the latter, quite a diverse pattern can be observed with below-average
performance for Most cited scientific publications and Non-EU doctorate
students, and above average performance for International scientific co-
publications.
Performance has improved most in Open, excellent and attractive
research systems (6.0%). The fastest growing indicators are License
and patent revenues from abroad (15%), International scientific
co-publications (9.0%), and Community trademarks (8.9%). A strong
decline is observed in Venture capital investments (-30%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for three and
worsened performance for three indicators. The overall impact on the
innovation index is expected to be positive with the index possibly
increasing from 0.434 to 0.458 assuming that for the other indicators
performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Czech Republic

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201650
Denmark is an Innovation Leader. Innovation performance
increased until 2012. Performance then declined in 2013 and
2014, and increased again in 2015. Performance relative to the
EU has increased from 26% above the EU average in 2008 to 34%
in 2015.
Denmark is performing above the EU average in all dimensions,
most notably in Open, excellent and attractive research systems,
Linkages and entrepreneurship, and Intellectual assets. In particular
in International scientific co-publications and Public-private co-
publications, the country is performing well above the EU average.
Relative weaknesses are in Non-R&D innovation expenditures.
Performance has improved for 14 indicators and on average most
strongly in the dimensions Human resources (5.3%) and Economic
effects (3.4%). Performance has declined in Finance and support
(-2.0%), due to a relatively sharp decline in Venture capital
investments (-9.0%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Denmark

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
51European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Germany is an Innovation Leader. Innovation performance increased
up until 2012, after which it started to decline. Relative to EU, performance
was highest at 28% above the average in 2012, but has dropped to 21%
above the EU in 2015.
Germany’s strongest dimensions are Firm investments and Innovators.
In all other dimensions except Open, excellent and attractive research
systems, the country is also performing above the EU average. Relative
weaknesses are in Non-EU doctorate students and License and patent
revenues from abroad.
Performance has improved most strongly in License and patent revenues
from abroad (32%), Non-R&D innovation expenditures (6.3%), and
International scientific co-publications (6.3%). Strong performance
declines are observed for Non-EU doctorate students (-5.8%) and Sales
share of new product innovations (-5.5%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show worsened performance for four and
improved performance for two indicators. The overall impact on the
innovation index is expected to be negative with the index possibly
declining from 0.632 to 0.629 assuming that for the other indicators
performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Germany

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201652
Estonia is a Moderate Innovator. Innovation performance increased
at a steady rate until 2012, but started to decline since 2013.
Estonia’s performance relative to that of the EU has improved from
84% in 2008 to 86% in 2015, with a peak of 97% in 2012.
Estonia’s relatively strong dimensions are Finance and support and
Firm investments. Estonia performs well above average on Non-R&D
innovation expenditures, Venture capital investments, International
scientific co-publications, and Community trademarks. Performance
is well below the EU average for License and patent revenues from
abroad, PCT patent applications in societal challenges, and Public-
private co-publications.
Performance has improved most strongly in Venture capital
investments (18%), PCT patent applications in societal challenges
(15%), and Community trademarks (15%). Strong performance
declines are observed for Public-private co-publications (-16%),
Non-R&D innovation expenditures (-10%) and Sales share of new
product innovations (-7.7%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Estonia

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
53European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Ireland is a Strong Innovator. Irish innovation performance increased
until 2012. Performance declined strongly in 2013, after which it
increased again in 2014-2015. Performance relative to the EU shows
a similar trend, with a significant drop in 2013, and increased relative
performance in 2014-2015.
Ireland’s relative strengths are in Innovators and Human resources.
Ireland performs well above the EU average on License and patent
revenues from abroad and International scientific co-publications.
Other strong performing indicators are Exports of knowledge-
intensive services and Employment in knowledge-intensive activities.
Relative weaknesses are in Community designs, Non-R&D innovation
expenditures, and R&D expenditures in the public sector.
Performance has increased considerably in License and patent
revenues from abroad (29%), International scientific co-publications
(7.3%), and New doctorate graduates (6.3%). Performance has declined
most in Non-R&D innovation expenditures (-12%) and Venture capital
investments (-8.8%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Ireland

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201654
Greece is a Moderate Innovator. Over time, its innovation performance
improved until 2014, followed by a strong decline in 2015. Relative
performance to the EU reached a peak of 76% in 2014, but has declined
to 70% in 2015.
Greece performs below the EU average on all dimensions. Relative
strengths are in Human resources and Innovators. Performance in Finance
and support and Intellectual assets is particularly lagging relative to
the EU. Low performing indicators include Venture capital investments,
License and patent revenues from abroad, and PCT patent applications
(in societal challenges). Greece performs above the EU average on Non-
R&D innovation expenditures, SMEs with marketing and/or organisational
innovations, International scientific co-publications, and Innovative SMEs
collaborating with others.
Performance in Intellectual assets has experienced the highest growth
(7%). Highest indicator growth is observed for License and patent
revenues from abroad (16%), Community designs (14%), and Community
trademarks (12%). Performance has declined strongly in Venture capital
investments (-28%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for four and worsened
performance for two indicators. The overall impact on the innovation index is
expected to be positive with the index possibly increasing from 0.364 to 0.374
assuming that for the other indicators performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100. No data for non-EU doctorate students.
Greece

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
55European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Spain is a Moderate Innovator. Innovation performance improved
steadily until 2013, after which the innovation index has declined. In
2015, performance is at a significantly lower level compared to 2008.
Spain’s gap with the EU has increased over time. In 2008, the relative
performance level was at its highest at 77%, whereas in 2015 it has
decreased to 69%.
For most indicators, Spain is performing below the EU average.
Performance in Open, excellent and attractive research systems
is close to the average performance of the EU, mainly because of
strong relative performance in International scientific co-publications. In
relative terms, the weakest indicator is License and patent revenues
from abroad.
Performance has improved most in the dimension of Human resources
(3.8%). The indicator that has improved most is License and patent
revenues from abroad (13%), and Venture capital investments (-11%)
has declined most.
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for five indicators
and worsened performance for one indicator. The overall impact on
the innovation index is expected to be positive with the index possibly
increasing from 0.361 to 0.372 assuming that for the other indicators
performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Spain

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201656
France is a Strong Innovator. Innovation performance increased
between 2008 and 2012, declined in 2013-2014, and increased
again in 2015. The performance level relative to the EU reached
a peak of almost 10% above the average in 2010, and is at 9%
above the EU average in 2015.
France’s relative strengths are in Open, excellent and attractive
research systems and Innovators. The best performing indicator
is Non-EU doctorate students. France is experiencing relative
weaknesses in Firm investments and Intellectual assets.
Performance is particularly weak in Non-R&D innovation
expenditures, Community trademarks, and Community designs.
France has experienced positive growth for most indicators,
particularly in License and patent revenues from abroad (6.1%),
International scientific co-publications (4.9%), and New doctorate
graduates (3.9%). The sharpest performance decline is observed
for Non-R&D innovation expenditures (-3.1%) and Community
designs (-2.8%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for all four
indicators for which data are available. The overall impact on the
innovation index is expected to be positive with the index possibly
increasing from 0.568 to 0.578 assuming that for the other
indicators performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
France

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
57European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Croatia is a Moderate Innovator. Innovation performance improved until
2012 and then declined. After a decline until 2010, innovation performance
improved until 2012 and then declined again. Performance relative to the
EU was above 60% in 2008, but has fallen to less than 54% by 2015.
Croatia is performing below the EU average in most dimensions. It only
performs above the EU average in Human resources, due to above-
average performance in Youth with upper secondary level education. The
weakest performing dimensions are Open, excellent and attractive
research systems, Innovators, and Intellectual assets. Non-R&D
innovation expenditures is the best performing indicator.
Performance increases in dimensions are observed in Finance and
support (6.8%) and Open, excellent and attractive research
systems (4.3%), with the largest improvement at the indicator level
for Community trademarks (29%). Performance has worsened in
Linkages and entrepreneurship (-9.4%), Economic effects (-2.6%)
and Innovators (-2.3%), with the indicators declining most being PCT
patent applications in societal challenges (-14%), Public-private co-
publications (-9.4%) and PCT patent applications (-9.3%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for four and
worsened performance for two indicators. The overall impact on
the innovation index is expected to be small with the index possibly
increasing from 0.280 to 0.281 assuming that for the other indicators
performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Croatia

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201658
Italy is a Moderate Innovator. Its innovation performance increased
steadily until 2011, experienced a decline in 2012, and increased again
in 2013-2014. Performance declined slightly in 2015. Italy has been
increasing its innovation performance relative to the EU from 78% in
2008 to almost 83% in 2015.
Italy performs below the EU average in most dimensions, in particular in
Finance and support and in Firm investments, with the worst relative
performance in Venture capital investments and License and patent
revenues from abroad. In the Innovators dimension, Italy performs better
than the EU average.
Italy has experienced performance increases for most indicators. Growth
has been strong in the dimension of Open, excellent and attractive
research systems (7.4%), due to performance improvements in Non-
EU doctorate students (14%) and International scientific co-publications
(6.9%). Performance has also increased strongly in License and patent
revenues from abroad (19%). A strong performance decline is observed in
Venture capital investments (-9.5%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for one and
worsened performance for three indicators. The overall impact on the
innovation index is expected to be negative with the index possibly
declining from 0.432 to 0.414 assuming that for the other indicators
performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Italy

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
59European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Cyprus is a Moderate Innovator. Innovation performance fluctuated
over time, with a peak in 2012. The performance relative to the EU
peaked in 2011 (95%), but has declined to 86.5% in 2015.
Cyprus performs below the EU average for most dimensions. At the
indicator level, performance is well below average in License and
patent revenues from abroad, R&D expenditures in the business sector,
PCT patent applications in societal challenges, and Non-EU doctorate
students. Relatively strong performance is observed for Community
trademarks and International scientific co-publications.
Performance has improved in some dimensions, in particular in Open
and excellent research systems (7.7%) and Human resources (7.6%).
The indicator with the strongest growth is New doctorate graduates
(23%). Performance has worsened most in Economic effects and Firm
investments, in particular due to strong growth declines in License
and patent revenues from abroad (-42%) and Non-R&D innovation
expenditures (-17%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Cyprus

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201660
Latvia is a Moderate Innovator. Innovation performance increased
until 2012 but dropped in 2013. In 2014, the innovation index recovered
and increased sharply in 2015. The performance relative to the EU shows
a similar trend.
Latvia performs well below the EU average for most dimensions,
particularly for Linkages and entrepreneurship, Open, excellent and
attractive research systems, and Innovators. The relatively worst
performing indicators are Public-private co-publications and License and
patent revenues from abroad. Relative strengths for Latvia are in Non-
R&D innovation expenditures and Venture capital investments.
Performance is increasing for about two-thirds of the indicators. High
growth is observed for Non-EU doctorate students (40%), Community
trademarks (12%), New doctorate graduates (9.4%), and International
scientific co-publications (9.3%). A large decline in performance is
observed for Public private co-publications (-14%) and License and patent
revenues from abroad (-12%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show worsened performance for five indicators.
The overall impact on the innovation index is expected to be negative with
the index possibly declining from 0.248 to 0.249 assuming that for the
other indicators performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Latvia

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
61European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Lithuania is a Moderate Innovator. Despite some minor fluctuations,
the overall innovation performance has been improving since 2008, with
a small decline in 2015. The performance relative to the EU has also
been improving with a small decline in 2015.
Lithuania performs below the average of the EU for most dimensions,
except for Human resources and Finance and support. Relatively
worst performing indicators are Public-private co-publications, Non-
EU doctorate students, License and patent revenues from abroad, PCT
patent applications in societal challenges, and PCT patent applications.
Performance above average is observed for Non-R&D innovation
expenditures, Population with completed tertiary education, Venture
capital investments and Youth with upper secondary level education.
Particularly high growth is observed for License and patent revenues
from abroad (96%), Non-EU doctorate students (70%), and Venture
capital investments (41%). The largest performance declines are for
Public-private co-publications (-14%) and Sales share of new product
innovations (-11%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for five and
worsened performance for one indicator. The overall impact on the
innovation index is expected to be positive with the index possibly
increasing from 0.282 to 0.359 assuming that for the other indicators
performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Lithuania

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201662
Luxembourg is a Strong Innovator. Performance declined in
2010 and 2011 (due to a much worse performance in Non-R&D
innovation expenditures), but more than fully recovered in 2012
and 2013. However, in 2014 and 2015 there is again a significant
decline, and the innovation index in 2015 is even below the level
of 2008. The performance relative to the EU has declined over time
from 28% above the EU in 2008 to about 15% above the EU in
2015.
Luxembourg performs best on the dimensions Open and excellent
research systems and Innovators. Relative strengths for Luxembourg
at the indicator level are Community trademarks, International
scientific co-publications, Community designs, and License and
patent revenues from abroad. Luxembourg performs well below the
average on the dimension Firm investments, in particular at the
indicator level on Non-R&D innovation expenditures.
Performance in Luxembourg's research system has been growing
strongly (9.3%), mainly because of high growth in International
scientific co-publications (15%) and Most cited publications (11%).
Strong declines are observed in Venture capital investments (-28%),
Non-R&D innovation expenditures (-23%) and R&D expenditures in
the business sector (-9.7%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Luxembourg

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
63European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Hungary is a Moderate Innovator. The country’s innovation
performance, despite some fluctuations, has improved between 2008
and 2015. The performance relative to the EU also had fluctuations,
over time it has declined from almost 70% in 2008 to 68% in 2015.
Hungary performs below the EU average for all dimensions, and nearly
all indicators, especially for Community designs and Non-EU doctorate
students. Relative strengths in terms of indicators are observed in
License and patent revenues from abroad and Exports of medium and
high tech products.
For more than half of the indicators, performance has improved. High
growth is observed for R&D expenditures in the business sector (10%),
Community trademarks (8.1%) and Population with completed tertiary
education (6.3%). Notable declines in performance are observed in
PCT patent applications in societal challenges (-7.2%), Community
designs (-4.3%), and Sales share of new product innovations (-4.1%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Hungary

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201664
Malta is a Moderate Innovator. Innovation performance was fairly
stable until 2012 after which it increased strongly in 2013 to 2015.
The performance relative to the EU was 69% in 2008 and reached
almost 84% in 2015.
Malta is performing below the average of the EU for most
dimensions and indicators. The strongest relative weaknesses are
in Venture capital investments, Non-EU doctorate students, and
Public-private scientific co-publications. Relative strengths are in
particular in Community trademarks, License and patent revenues
from abroad, and Community designs.
A strongly growing innovation dimension is Intellectual assets,
in particular the indicators Community designs and Community
trademarks. Performance for most indicators has improved,
with other large increases observed in International scientific
co-publications (20%) and New doctorate graduates (8.5%).
Declining performance is observed in particular for Venture capital
investments (-19%), Sales share of new product innovations (-11%)
and Public-private co-publications (-10%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Malta

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
65European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
The Netherlands is an Innovation Leader. Performance improved
steadily up until 2012, then increased strongly in 2013 (among others
due to an increase in the share of product or process innovators), and
after an increase in 2014 it declined in 2015. The performance relative
to the EU is at 21% above the EU average.
The Netherlands is performing above the EU average for most dimensions,
except for Firm investments, because of poor relative performance in
Non-R&D innovation expenditures. Excellent relative performance is
observed in License and patent revenues from abroad, International
scientific co-publications, and Public-private co-publications. Relative
weaknesses are in Non-R&D innovation expenditures and Community
designs.
Performance has improved for most dimensions and indicators. High
growth is observed, in particular, for International co-publications
(7.9%), PCT patent applications in societal challenges (5.9%) and New
doctorate graduates (5.7%). Significant declines in performance are
observed for Non-R&D innovation expenditures (-6.5%) and Venture
capital investments (-3.1%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for two and
worsened performance for four indicators. The overall impact on the
innovation index is expected to be negative with the index possibly
declining from 0.630 to 0.618 assuming that for the other indicators
performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
The Netherlands

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201666
Austria is a Strong Innovator. Innovation performance increased until
2010, but declined strongly in 2011, followed by a strong recovery in 2012
and 2013. In 2014 and 2015, performance has declined once again. The
performance relative to the EU peaked at 119% in 2010 and is at 13.3%
above average in 2015.
Austria performs better than the EU in most dimensions, except in
Economic effects because of poor relative performance in License
and patent revenues from abroad and Exports of knowledge-intensive
services. In terms of indicators, relative strengths for Austria are
particularly International scientific co-publications, Public-private co-
publications, Community designs, R&D expenditures in the business
sector, and Community trademarks.
Most dimensions and indicators show positive growth. The strongest
increases in performance are observed for International scientific co-
publications (7.1%) and Community trademarks (3.6%). Significant
declines in performance are observed in Sales share of new innovations
(-4.6%) and SMEs with product or process innovations (-4.1%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for four indicators.
The overall impact on the innovation index is expected to be positive with
the index possibly increasing from 0.591 to 0.609 assuming that for the
other indicators performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Austria

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
67European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Poland is a Moderate Innovator. Innovation performance has been
somewhat volatile within a relatively narrow range. Compared to 2008,
performance has increased marginally. Poland's relative performance
has declined from 59% in 2009 to 56% in 2015.
Poland is performing below the EU average in all dimensions, particularly
in Linkages and entrepreneurship and Open, excellent and attractive
research systems. For most indicators, performance is also below
the EU average, with largest relative weaknesses in Non-EU doctorate
students, Public-private co-publications, PCT patent applications (in
societal challenges), and License and patent revenues from abroad.
Relative strengths are in Non-R&D innovation expenditures and
Community designs.
Performance has increased for most of the dimensions and indicators.
High growth is observed for R&D expenditures in the business sector
(15%) and License and patent revenues from abroad (15%). Fairly strong
declines in performance are observed in Innovative SMEs collaborating
with others (-12%) and SMEs with marketing or organisational
innovations (-9.7%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for four and
worsened performance for two indicators. The overall impact on the
innovation index is expected to be positive with the index possibly
increasing from 0.292 to 0.305 assuming that for the other indicators
performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Poland

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201668
Portugal is a Moderate Innovator. Innovation performance has
increased over time with a large increase in 2014. Performance
relative to the EU declined until 2013. In 2014 and 2015,
performance relative to the EU has increased to 80% of the EU
average.
Portugal performs below the EU average in most dimensions, except in
Human resources. In the dimensions Innovators, Open, excellent and
attractive research systems and Finance and support, performance is
close to the EU average. Performance for most indicators is also below
average, in particular for License and patent revenues from abroad,
PCT patent applications, Public-private co-publications, and PCT patent
applications in societal challenges. Relative strengths for Portugal are in
New doctorate graduates, International scientific co-publications, SMEs
with product or process innovations, and SMEs innovating in-house.
High growth is observed for the dimension Open, excellent and attractive
research systems (7.3%). High growth in performance at the indicator
level is observed for International scientific co-publications (11%), Non-
EU doctorate students (8.6%), and PCT patent applications in societal
challenges (6.7%). Notable declines in performance are observed in
Non-R&D innovation expenditures (-6.4%) and SMEs with marketing or
organisational innovations (-3.1%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Portugal

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
69European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Romania is a Modest Innovator. Innovation performance increased
until 2010, after which it has been declining. Innovation performance
in 2015 is at a significantly lower level than in 2008. The development
of Romania's relative performance to the EU has closely followed the
development of the innovation index. Over time, the relative performance
has worsened from almost 50% in 2008 to 34.4% in 2015.
Romania is performing well below the average of the EU on all dimensions
and all indicators. The weakest relative performance in terms of dimensions
is Linkages and entrepreneurship, while in terms of indicators, the worst
relative performance is observed for PCT patent applications in societal
challenges and PCT patent applications. Romania performs similar to
the EU average for a number of indicators, in particular Youth with upper
secondary level education, Exports in medium & high tech products, and
Employment in fast-growing firms in innovative sectors.
Performance has increased the most for the innovation dimension Human resources
(4.4%). High growth at the indicator level is observed for License and patent revenues
from abroad (17%) and Community designs (14%). The strongest declines in
performance are observed in Venture capital investments (-23%), Sales share of
new product innovations (-21%), Non-R&D innovation expenditures (-17%), SMEs
innovating in-house (-17%), and SMEs with product or process innovations (-17%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for two indicators.
The overall impact on the innovation index is expected to be positive
with the index possibly increasing from 0.180 to 0.188 assuming that
for the other indicators performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Romania

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201670
Slovenia is a Strong Innovator. Innovation performance has been
steadily increasing with minor declines in 2013 and 2015. Slovenia’s
relative performance to the EU has improved from 90% in 2008 to
93% in 2015.
Slovenia performs close to the EU average with performance
for three dimensions being above and for five dimensions being
below the average. Particular relative strengths are in International
scientific co-publications, New doctorate graduates, and Public-
private co-publications. Strong relative weaknesses are observed
for Venture capital investments, License and patent revenues from
abroad, and Non-EU doctorate students.
Performance in most dimensions and indicators has improved. The
fastest growing dimension is Human resources (6.7%), followed
by Open, excellent and attractive research systems (5.0%). The
fastest growing indicators are License and patent revenues from
abroad (20%) and New doctorate graduates (16%). A strong
decline in performance is observed in Non-R&D innovation
expenditures (-12%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Slovenia

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
71European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Slovakia is a Moderate Innovator. Innovation performance has
increased between 2008 and 2015, but declined in 2011 and in 2012.
The performance relative to the EU shows a similar trend. Performance
relative to the EU reached a peak in 2014 at almost 68% of the EU
average, and is at 67% in 2015.
Except for Human resources, Slovakia performs below the EU average
for all dimensions, and also for most indicators. Large relative strengths
in terms of indicators are in Sales share of new innovations and New
doctorate graduates. Large relative weaknesses are in License and
patent revenues from abroad, PCT patent applications in societal
challenges, Non-EU doctorate students, Venture capital investments,
and PCT patent applications.
Performance in most dimensions and most indicators has improved. The
highest growth in terms of indicators is observed for Non-EU doctorate
students (16%), Community trademarks (12%) and R&D expenditures
in the public sector (11%). A very strong decline in performance can be
observed in License and patent revenues from abroad (-25%) and Non-
R&D innovation expenditures (-8.8%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for one and
worsened performance for five indicators. The overall impact on the
innovation index is expected to be negative with the index possibly
declining from 0.350 to 0.342 assuming that for the other indicators
performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Slovakia

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201672
Finland is an Innovation Leader. Innovation performance has
decreased since 2010, with a small increase in 2014, followed by a
decrease in 2015. Finland's performance relative to the EU has also
been declining from its peak of 134% in 2008 to 124.5% in 2015.
Finland is performing above average for all dimensions except Economic
effects, and for most of the individual indicators. The strongest relative
strengths are in International scientific co-publications, License and
patent revenues from abroad, PCT patent applications, and Public-
private co-publications. Relative weaknesses are in Non-R&D innovation
expenditures, Non-EU doctorate students, Exports of medium & high
tech products, and Exports of knowledge-intensive services.
Performance in Open, excellent and attractive research systems
has increased the most with 8.4%. Performance in less than half of
the indicators has improved. Particularly high growth is observed for
Non-EU doctorate students (17%) and License and patent revenues
from abroad (16%). Notable declines in performance are observed for
Innovative SMEs collaborating with others (-8.9%), Non-R&D innovation
expenditures (-5.8%), and Venture capital investments (-5.5%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for four
indicators. The overall impact on the innovation index is expected to
be positive with the index possibly increasing from 0.649 to 0.660
assuming that for the other indicators performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Finland

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
73European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Sweden is an Innovation Leader. Its innovation performance increased
until 2013, but has been declining since, with the decline being rather
sharp in 2015. The performance relative to the EU has been declining
over the whole period from its peak of 141% in 2008 and 2009 to
135% in 2015.
Sweden is performing above the EU average for all dimensions.
Performance in nearly all of the indicators is also above the EU average,
especially in International scientific co-publications, Public-private co-
publications, License and patent revenues from abroad, and PCT patent
applications (in societal challenges).
Performance has improved strongly in Open, excellent and attractive
research systems (5.3%) but declined most notably in Finance and
support (-4.1%). Performance for the indicators has shown significant
positive growth in Non-EU doctorate students (7.6%), License and patent
revenues from abroad (7.4%) and International scientific co-publications
(7.2%). A strong decline in indicator performance can be observed for
Venture capital investments (-10%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for five indicators
and worsened performance for one indicator. The overall impact on
the innovation index is expected to be positive with the index possibly
increasing from 0.704 to 0.714 assuming that for the other indicators
performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Sweden

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201674
The United Kingdom is a Strong Innovator. Its innovation performance
has been improving at a steady rate between 2008 and 2015. The
performance relative to the EU has also been on the rise in the period
2008-2015. The performance was 6% above the EU average in 2008,
and is more than 15% above the average in 2015.
The UK performs better than the EU average for most dimensions, and above
or close to the average for the indicators. The best performing dimensions are
Open, excellent and attractive research systems and Human resources. Relative
best performance is in International scientific co-publications, Innovative SMEs
collaborating with others, Non-EU doctorate students, and Venture capital
investments. A relative weakness is the dimension of Firm investments,
especially due to bad relative performance in Non-R&D innovation expenditures.
Performance in most dimensions and indicators has improved, although
in most cases growth is modest. Performance has improved most clearly
for Innovative SMEs collaborating with others (11%) and Sales share
of new product innovations (7.5%). A strong decline in performance is
observed in the dimension Finance and support (-3.6%), mainly due to a
strong decline in Venture capital investments (-6.7%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show improved performance for five indicators.
The overall impact on the innovation index is expected to be positive
with the index possibly increasing from 0.602 to 0.627 assuming that
for the other indicators performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
The United Kingdom

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
75European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Iceland is a Strong Innovator. Despite some fluctuations, performance
has remained relatively stable in the observed time period. In 2015,
innovation performance was at the same level as in 2008. The
performance relative to the EU has declined from being 16% above the
EU average in 2008 to 10% above average in 2015.
Iceland performs better than the EU average in most innovation
dimensions. The overwhelmingly strongest relative strengths for Iceland
in terms of indicators are International scientific co-publications, Public-
private co-publications and, to a lesser extent, Community trademarks.
Relative weaknesses are in Community designs, Exports in medium and
high tech products, Sales share of new innovations, and New doctorate
graduates.
For Iceland, time series data are not available for all indicators. For about
half of the dimensions and about half of the indicators, performance has
improved. The highest growth is observed in New doctorate graduates
(24%) and International co-publications (8.6%). Fairly significant
declines in performance are observed in License and patent revenues
from abroad (-14%), Community designs (-13%), Exports in medium and
high tech products (-10%), and Sales share of new product innovations
(-9.2%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100. No data for Venture capital investments, Non-R&D innovation expenditures and SMEs
innovating in-house.
Iceland

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201676
Israel is a Strong Innovator. Performance remained relatively stable
until 2014, after which it declined strongly in 2015. The performance
relative to the EU has declined from being 24% above the EU average
in 2008 to 11% above average in 2015, in particular due to a strong
decline between 2014 and 2015.
Israel performs better than the EU average in most innovation
dimensions. The overwhelmingly strongest relative strengths for Israel
in terms of indicators are PCT patent applications in societal challenges,
PCT patent applications, R&D expenditures in the business sector,
International scientific co-publications, and Employment in knowledge-
intensive activities. Relative weaknesses are especially in Venture
capital investments, Community trademarks, and Community designs.
Performance has increased the most in the dimensions of Open, excellent and
attractive research systems (2.0%) and Intellectual assets (1.9%), and it has
declined the most in the dimension Linkages and entrepreneurship (-5.5%).
At the indicator level, performance has increased most in Community designs
(8.6%) and Venture capital investments (3.9%). It has decreased the most in
Public-private co-publications (-5.5%), SMEs with marketing or organisational
innovations (-5.4%), and SMEs with product or process innovations (-4.7%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100. No data for Non-EU doctorate students and Non-R&D innovation expenditures. Data for
Israel have been partly supplied by the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics (ICBS). Data from the innovation surveys are for 2006-2008 and 2010-
2012. The question on marketing and organisational innovation was changed between the two surveys, which might partly explain a decrease in the
percentage of marketing and organisational innovators. Data for Venture capital have been supplied by ICBS, but the data source is IVC Research
Center, and data do not necessarily comply to the quality standards of ICBS. For Employment in knowledge-intensive activities as of 2012, data
refer to the entire labour force (including compulsory or permanent military service).
Israel

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
77European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) is a Modest
Innovator. Innovation performance has increased over time. The
country has been gradually catching up to the performance level of the
EU: its relative performance improved from 33% in 2008 to 42% in
2015.
FYROM is performing well below the EU average for nearly all dimensions
and indicators. In relative terms, the worst performing dimension is
Finance and support. Relative performance is weak for a substantial
share of the indicators. Relative strengths can be found in Non-R&D
innovation expenditures and SMEs with product or process innovations.
For several indicators, performance has not changed over time as, due
to a lack of data, data is available for one year only. Performance has
increased most significantly for the dimensions of Human resources
(8.6%) and Open, excellent and attractive research systems. At
the indicator level, the highest growth can be observed for Exports of
medium and high tech products (22%) and Community trademarks
(20%). The only strong decline in performance can be observed for PCT
patent applications (-23%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100. No data for Most-cited publications, Employment in fast-growing firms of innovative
sectors, and Exports of knowledge-intensive services.
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201678
Norway is a Moderate Innovator. Norwegian innovation performance
increased until 2012, declined slightly in 2013, and has been steady
since then. Norway's performance compared to the EU increased until
2011, peaking at close to 93%, but relative performance has since then
been in decline and is just below 89% of the EU average in 2015.
Norway is performing below the EU average for most dimensions
and indicators, particularly for Community designs and License and
patent revenues from abroad. A strong innovation dimension is Open,
excellent and attractive research systems, due to exceptional relative
performance in International scientific co-publications.
Performance in three innovation dimensions and about half the indicators
has increased. The highest growth at the indicator level is observed for
Non-R&D innovation expenditures (13%). Large performance declines
are observed in Community designs (-15%) and License and patent
revenues from abroad (-10%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show strongly improved performance for all six
indicators. These strong increases are a direct effect of changing to a separate
innovation survey in 2014 resulting in considerable higher reported innovation
activity compared to previous combined R&D and innovation surveys
(explaining why there are no labels on the horizontal axis in the graph). The
overall impact on the innovation index is expected to be positive with the index
possibly increasing from 0.463 to 0.534 assuming that for the other indicators
performance would not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100.
Norway

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
79European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Serbia is a Moderate Innovator, and innovation performance has
increased over the whole period. Relative performance to the EU has
improved significantly from 45% in 2008 to almost 62% in 2015.
Serbia is performing below the EU average for nearly all dimensions
and indicators. The most significant relative strength is in Non-R&D
innovation expenditures, which lifts Firm investments to the best
performing dimension. Strongest relative weaknesses are in Venture
capital investments, Community designs, Community trademarks,
Public-private co-publications, R&D expenditures in the business sector,
and License and patent revenues from abroad.
Performance has increased for most dimensions and most indicators.
The dimension of Firm investments has grown most strongly at
15%. Highest indicator growth is observed for Non-R&D innovation
expenditures (20%) and New doctorate graduates (14%). A strong
decline in performance is only observed for Community designs
(-11%).
Provisional CIS 2014 data show worsened performance for all six
indicators. The overall impact on the innovation index is expected
to be negative with the index possibly declining from 0.325 to
0.301 assuming that for the other indicators performance would
not change.
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100. No data for PCT patent applications, PCT patent applications in societal challenges,
Employment in fast-growing firms of innovative sectors, and Exports of knowledge-intensive services.
Serbia

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201680
Switzerland is an Innovation Leader and the most innovative
country in Europe. Its performance increased until 2011, after which
it declined. The lead over the EU has been declining over time until
2014, and increased slightly to almost 52% above the EU average
in 2015.
Switzerland is performing well above the EU average for all
dimensions and for most indicators, in particular on three indicators:
International scientific co-publications, Public-private co-publications,
and License and patent revenues from abroad. Relative weaknesses
are only in Exports of knowledge-intensive services, Innovative
SMEs collaborating with others, and Exports of medium & high tech
products.
For half of the innovation dimensions and more than half of the
indicators, performance has increased. Performance has improved
most for Non-R&D innovation expenditures (8.2%), SMEs innovating
in-house (7.0%), License and patent revenues from abroad (6.7%), and
International scientific co-publications (6.4%). The strongest declines in
performance are observed in SMEs with product or process innovations
(-7.7%) and Sales share of new product innovations (-6.1%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100. No data for SMEs with marketing or organisational innovations.
Switzerland

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
81European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Turkey is a Moderate Innovator. Innovation performance has been
improving at a slow but steady rate between 2008 and 2014, and for
2015 a sharp increase can be observed. Turkey is catching up to the EU;
its relative performance has improved from 38% in 2008 to 39% in 2014
and then jumped to 51% in 2015 turning the country from a Modest into
a Moderate Innovator. The strong increase from 2014 to 2015 is the result
of an almost twelvefold increase in Non-R&D innovation expenditures and
a more than fourfold increase in Sales share of new product innovations
using CIS 2012 data as compared to CIS 2010 data.
Turkey is performing well below the average of the EU for all dimensions
except Firms investments – due to high relative performance in
Non-R&D innovation expenditures – and on almost all indicators.
Another strong relative performance is observed for Sales share of
new innovations. The most significant relative weaknesses are in
License and patent revenues from abroad, Public-private scientific co-
publications, Community designs, and Community trademarks.
In nearly all dimensions – especially Firm investments – and most
indicators, performance has improved. Particularly high growth is
observed for Non-R&D innovation expenditures (43%), Sales share of
new product innovations (24%), PCT patent applications in societal
challenges (22%), and Community trademarks (19%). The few declines
in performance are minor, with the relatively largest ones in Community
designs (-7.0%) and Public-private scientific co-publications (-3.6%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100. No data for Venture capital investments.
Turkey

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201682
Ukraine is a Modest Innovator. Innovation performance has declined
somewhat over time. Performance relative to the EU has decreased
from 38% in 2008 to just above 34% in 2015.
Ukraine is performing well below the average of the EU for all
dimensions and on almost all indicators. The only strong relative
performance is for Population with completed tertiary education.
The most significant relative weaknesses at the indicator level are
in Public-private scientific co-publications, Community designs,
Community trademarks, and Venture capital investments.
For four dimensions, performance has improved, especially for
Intellectual assets (5.0%). The strongest growth is for Community
designs (16%) and License and patent revenues from abroad (13%),
and the largest declines are for Non-R&D innovation expenditures
(-6.5%) and Sales share of new product innovations (-5.2%).
Note: Performance relative to the EU where the EU = 100. No data for Non-EU doctorate students, PCT patent applications in societal challenges
and Employment in fast-growing firms of innovative sectors. Data have been partly made available by the National Academy of Sciences of
Ukraine.
Ukraine

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====
83European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
8. European Innovation Scoreboard methodology
Full details on the EIS methodology, including the impact on
the results of the changes to the indicators as discussed in the
Introduction, are available in the EIS 2016 Methodology report:
http://ec.europa.eu/DocsRoom/documents/17189.
The overall innovation performance of each country has been sum-
marized in a composite indicator (the Summary Innovation Index). The
methodology used for calculating this composite innovation indicator
will be explained in detail.
Step 1: Identifying and replacing outliers
Positive outliers are identified as those country scores which are
higher than the mean across all countries plus twice the standard
deviation. Negative outliers are identified as those country scores
which are smaller than the mean across all countries minus twice
the standard deviation. These outliers are replaced by the respective
maximum and minimum values observed over all the years and all
countries.
Step 2: Setting reference years
For each indicator, a reference year is identified based on data avail-
ability for all countries for which data availability is at least 75%. For
most indicators, this reference year will be lagging one or two years
behind the year to which the EIS refers. Thus for the EIS 2016, the
reference year will be 2014 or 2015 for most indicators (cf. Table 1).
Step 3: Imputing for missing values
Reference year data are then used for “2015”, etc. If data for a year-
in-between is not available, we substitute with the value for the previ-
ous year. If data are not available at the beginning of the time series,
we replace missing values with the next available year. The following
examples clarify this step and show how ‘missing’ data are imputed.
If data are missing for all years, no data will be imputed (the indicator
will not contribute to the Summary Innovation Index) (Table 7).
Step 4: Determining Maximum and Minimum scores
The Maximum score is the highest score found for the whole time
period within all countries excluding positive outliers. Similarly, the
Minimum score is the lowest score found for the whole time period
within all countries excluding negative outliers.
Step 5: Transforming data if data are highly skewed
Most of the indicators are fractional indicators with values between
0% and 100%. Some indicators are unbound indicators, where val-
ues are not limited to an upper threshold. These indicators can be
highly volatile and can have skewed data distributions (where most
countries show low performance levels and a few countries show
exceptionally high performance levels). For the following indica-
tors, data have been transformed using a square root transforma-
tion: Venture capital investments, Public-private co-publications, PCT
patent applications, PCT patent applications in societal challenges,
Community trademarks, and License and patent revenues from
abroad. A square root transformation means using the square root of
the indicator value instead of the original value.
Step 6: Calculating re-scaled scores
Re-scaled scores of the country scores (after correcting for outliers
and a possible transformation of the data) for all years are calcu-
lated by first subtracting the Minimum score and then dividing by the
difference between the Maximum and Minimum score. The maximum
re-scaled score is thus equal to 1 and the minimum re-scaled score
is equal to 0. For positive and negative outliers, the re-scaled score
is equal to 1 or 0, respectively.
Step 7: Calculating composite innovation indexes
For each year, a composite Summary Innovation Index is calculated
as the unweighted average of the re-scaled scores for all indicators
where all indicators receive the same weight (1/25 if data are avail-
able for all 25 indicators).
LATEST YEAR MISSING “2015” “2014” “2013” “2012” “2011”
Available data N/A 45 40 35 30
Use most recent year 45 45 40 35 30
YEAR-IN-BETWEEN MISSING “2015” “2014” “2013” “2012” “2011”
Available data 50 N/A 40 35 30
Substitute with previous year 50 40 40 35 30
BEGINNING-OF-PERIOD MISSING “2015” “2014” “2013” “2012” “2011”
Available data 50 45 40 35 N/A
Substitute with next available year 50 45 40 35 35
8.1 How to calculate composite indicators
Table 7: Examples of imputing missing data

===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201684
8.2 How to calculate growth rates
8.3 International benchmarking
The methodology for calculating average innovation performance
for the EU and its major global competitors is similar to that used for
calculating average innovation performance for the EU Member States:
1.
 Calculate normalised scores f
or all indicators as follows: Yi = ((Xi -
smallest X for all countries) / (largest X for all countries – smallest X
for all countries)) such that all normalised scores are between 0 and 1
2.
 Calculate the arithmetic average o
ver these index scores (CIi)
3. Calculate perf ormance relative to that of the EU: CIi* = 100*CIi/CIEU
Note that the results for country i depend on the data from the other
countries, as the smallest and largest scores used in the normalisation
procedure are calculated over all countries.
Figure 37: Example of Overview module
Overview (normalised values)
Average annual growth rates - usually referred to as compound
average growth rates - of the Summary Innovation Index, the innovation
dimensions and the individual indicators are calculated using the
following formula where the number of years equals 7 (i.e. the number
of yearly changes between 2008 and 2015):
The EIS 2016 is accompanied by an Interactive Tool which
allows for customized comparisons of the performance scores
discussed in the report. The tool contains four modules or
screens, with metadata on indicators, definitions of innovation
performance groups, etc. The EIS Interactive Tool is available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/innovation/facts-figures/scoreboards/index_en.htm.
The OVERVIEW module provides a comparison of countries' performance
on each of the innovation dimensions and indicators over an eight-year
time period. Users can select one indicator or dimension at a time, and
visualise on a bar chart the performance of all countries as well as the
EU28 average for a particular year and type of data (absolute indicator
values, normalised values, average annual growth). In addition, a trend
line chart allows for a direct comparison of performance over time of
any pair of European countries. An example is shown in Figure 37.
8.4 Interactive Tool

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
85European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Available only on the EIS website: http://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/innovation/facts-figures/scoreboards/index_en.htm.
Annex A: Country abbreviations
Annex B: Performance per indicator
AT Austria
AU Australia
BE Belgium
BG Bulgaria
BR Brazil
CA Canada
CH Switzerland
CN China
CY Cyprus
CZ Czech Republic
DE Germany
DK Denmark
EL Greece
EE Estonia
ES Spain
FI Finland
FR France
HR Croatia
HU Hungary
IE Ireland
IL Israel
IN India
IS Iceland
IT Italy
JP Japan
KR South Korea
LT Lithuania
LU Luxembourg
LV Latvia
MK Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
MT Malta
NL Netherlands
NO Norway
PL Poland
PT Portugal
RO Romania
RS Serbia
RU Russia
SA South Africa
SE Sweden
SI Slovenia
SK Slovakia
TR Turkey
UA Ukraine
UK United Kingdom
US United States

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201686
Annex C: Current performance
EU28 BE BG CZ DK DE EE IE EL ES FR HR IT CY LV LT LU HU MT
ENABLERS
Human resources
1.1.1 New doctorate graduates 1.8 1.8 1.4 1.7 3.2 2.8 1.1 2.1 1.0 1.8 1.7 1.5 1.5 0.4 0.9 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.4
1.1.2 Population completed tertiary education 38.5 43.1 32.0 29.5 46.7 31.8 45.2 52.3 39.4 41.1 44.9 31.7 24.9 54.2 41.0 56.4 50.5 34.9 27.0
1.1.3 Youth with upper secondary level education 82.6 84.3 85.2 90.7 73.4 77.4 82.6 92.8 89.5 67.9 87.3 95.5 80.0 94.2 86.2 91.3 68.6 84.3 77.4
Open, excellent and attractive research systems
1.2.1 International scientific co-publications 459 1352 173 661 2067 729 908 1080 549 645 651 410 552 999 221 355 1599 414 517
1.2.2 Scientific publications among top 10% most cited 10.5 12.9 3.5 7.3 13.3 11.5 7.3 11.7 9.0 9.2 11.3 4.5 10.1 9.5 6.3 4.5 11.7 6.5 7.9
1.2.3 Non-EU doctorate students 17.8 25.0 3.0 5.2 15.2 7.4 4.4 14.3 n/a 12.0 33.6 3.0 10.1 2.2 2.9 1.4 23.5 3.8 2.1
Finance and support
1.3.1 R&D expenditure in the public sector 0.72 0.70 0.27 0.87 1.08 0.91 0.80 0.40 0.54 0.58 0.76 0.41 0.54 0.32 0.45 0.72 0.59 0.38 0.33
1.3.2 Venture capital investments 0.063 0.072 0.015 0.013 0.059 0.049 0.136 0.086 0.001 0.043 0.083 0.054 0.022 0.071 0.098 0.081 0.047 0.055 0.000
FIRM ACTIVITIES
Firm investments
2.1.1 R&D expenditure in the business sector 1.30 1.76 0.52 1.12 1.95 1.95 0.63 1.11 0.28 0.65 1.46 0.38 0.72 0.08 0.25 0.30 0.66 0.98 0.50
2.1.2 Non-R&D innovation expenditure 0.69 0.60 0.49 0.73 0.37 1.35 1.55 0.39 0.87 0.31 0.37 0.95 0.57 0.58 1.38 1.10 0.14 0.70 1.20
Linkages & entrepreneurship
2.2.1 SMEs innovating in-house 28.7 37.4 11.6 27.3 30.4 38.6 27.4 38.8 26.6 15.5 28.8 19.3 36.6 27.9 13.8 13.8 37.2 10.6 29.0
2.2.2 Innovative SMEs collaborating with others 10.3 22.9 2.3 11.6 17.3 11.5 15.8 12.0 12.4 6.0 11.5 7.5 4.8 15.3 4.5 7.5 8.9 5.6 5.1
2.2.3 Public-private co-publications 33.9 68.5 2.1 13.8 143.5 53.0 6.8 34.3 9.9 16.3 39.6 10.6 18.0 7.0 0.5 1.7 40.0 23.2 2.4
Intellectual Assets
2.3.1 PCT patent applications 3.53 3.17 0.48 0.91 6.24 6.26 1.00 2.40 0.55 1.48 3.77 0.54 1.96 0.63 0.82 0.60 1.39 1.19 0.62
2.3.2 PCT patent applications in societal challenges 1.01 0.77 0.08 0.24 2.05 1.47 0.20 0.65 0.13 0.47 0.92 0.20 0.47 0.06 0.28 0.12 0.68 0.29 0.28
2.3.3 Community trademarks 6.09 5.87 7.07 3.83 8.35 6.88 11.56 6.03 3.66 7.81 3.92 1.87 5.96 25.84 4.46 3.99 29.88 2.94 38.63
2.3.4 Community designs 4.44 2.90 9.87 3.10 8.03 6.52 3.08 1.59 0.98 2.97 3.06 0.90 5.93 1.98 2.26 1.29 15.36 0.87 24.94
OUTPUTS
Innovators
3.1.1 SMEs introducing product or process innovations 30.6 42.3 13.6 30.9 33.9 42.4 33.0 35.7 29.6 18.4 32.4 21.6 38.8 29.2 15.7 16.1 43.1 12.8 32.0
3.1.2 SMEs introducing marketing/organisational innovations 36.2 36.7 17.6 30.2 40.4 46.2 31.2 49.6 45.0 22.6 41.2 30.4 44.7 35.6 23.1 25.2 52.1 25.3 43.3
3.1.3 Employment fast-growing firms innovative sectors 18.8 16.9 16.5 18.4 20.1 21.0 16.0 23.4 15.2 16.2 21.7 11.6 16.3 23.5 12.3 11.6 17.7 19.2 20.0
Economic effects
3.2.1 Employment in knowledge-intensive activities 13.9 15.4 9.4 12.7 15.4 14.6 11.4 20.2 12.2 12.3 14.0 10.7 13.6 17.2 10.9 8.8 27.5 12.3 17.9
3.2.2 Medium & high-tech product exports 56.1 48.5 31.2 64.0 47.7 67.4 42.6 52.1 22.7 47.7 58.5 37.9 52.3 43.0 32.1 34.4 52.1 69.5 56.7
3.2.3 Knowledge-intensive services exports 63.1 64.6 27.1 41.1 75.1 69.6 43.9 88.5 51.8 42.2 58.6 17.8 48.5 69.0 49.8 18.3 88.4 38.3 25.9
3.2.4 Sales of new to market and new to firm innovations 12.4 11.2 4.2 13.4 22.1 13.0 7.8 9.3 11.8 14.3 13.5 10.0 11.0 11.4 5.0 5.5 7.9 9.7 10.2
3.2.5 License and patent revenues from abroad 0.54 0.63 0.06 0.24 0.71 0.36 0.04 2.53 0.05 0.10 0.50 0.04 0.16 0.01 0.02 0.05 1.66 1.51 3.10

===== PDF_PAGE 89 =====
87European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
EU28 NL AT PL PT RO SI SK FI SE UK IS IL MK NO RS CH TR UA
ENABLERS
Human resources
1.1.1 New doctorate graduates 1.8 2.2 2.0 0.6 3.1 1.4 3.9 2.5 2.9 2.9 2.9 0.9 1.5 0.7 2.1 0.8 3.5 0.4 1.0
1.1.2 Population completed tertiary education 38.5 46.4 39.1 43.2 31.3 25.5 42.6 27.9 45.3 50.0 47.7 47.5 51.0 28.5 51.6 24.7 51.5 23.0 50.3
1.1.3 Youth with upper secondary level education 82.6 79.8 88.7 90.9 75.9 79.9 90.1 91.2 86.6 87.7 85.4 61.4 91.4 87.1 79.1 83.4 86.0 53.7 61.7
Open, excellent and attractive research systems
1.2.1 International scientific co-publications 459 1450 1226 251 795 173 1069 383 1486 1774 1059 2498 872 130 1592 308 2557 82 58
1.2.2 Scientific publications among top 10% most cited 10.5 14.5 11.7 5.0 9.0 4.7 7.4 5.5 10.9 11.7 14.2 9.8 10.0 n/a 11.3 4.5 15.7 4.8 3.1
1.2.3 Non-EU doctorate students 17.8 19.3 9.3 1.3 13.9 2.1 5.7 1.8 12.8 24.5 30.0 19.8 n/a 3.9 33.5 7.1 52.1 5.0 n/a
Finance and support
1.3.1 R&D expenditure in the public sector 0.72 0.87 0.86 0.50 0.66 0.22 0.54 0.56 1.00 1.04 0.57 0.78 0.59 0.19 0.79 0.54 0.86 0.48 0.34
1.3.2 Venture capital investments 0.063 0.096 0.051 0.029 0.069 0.013 0.007 0.008 0.107 0.081 0.103 n/a 0.009 0.000 0.077 0.000 0.067 n/a 0.002
FIRM ACTIVITIES
Firm investments
2.1.1 R&D expenditure in the business sector 1.30 1.11 2.11 0.44 0.59 0.16 1.85 0.33 2.15 2.12 1.09 1.07 3.47 0.03 0.92 0.23 2.05 0.48 0.42
2.1.2 Non-R&D innovation expenditure 0.69 0.18 0.46 1.04 0.60 0.30 0.48 0.79 0.37 0.79 0.30 n/a n/a 0.90 0.24 2.82 2.01 2.59 0.50
Linkages & entrepreneurship
2.2.1 SMEs innovating in-house 28.7 38.9 31.8 10.1 33.8 4.7 25.8 15.0 36.5 34.4 17.6 n/a 21.6 11.3 20.3 25.2 45.2 22.5 18.7
2.2.2 Innovative SMEs collaborating with others 10.3 14.5 15.3 3.9 6.8 1.2 14.6 6.7 14.3 12.7 22.4 17.5 12.9 9.6 7.9 7.6 9.4 4.2 1.5
2.2.3 Public-private co-publications 33.9 85.6 59.0 3.7 7.1 2.6 66.0 8.1 69.9 107.8 50.2 187.3 24.2 0.5 50.9 6.2 217.6 1.4 1.0
Intellectual Assets
2.3.1 PCT patent applications 3.53 5.57 5.06 0.51 0.66 0.17 2.73 0.65 8.17 7.99 3.30 2.97 11.15 0.03 2.56 n/a 6.70 0.66 1.70
2.3.2 PCT patent applications in societal challenges 1.01 1.68 1.07 0.17 0.23 0.04 0.59 0.09 1.61 1.88 0.80 1.76 4.53 0.00 0.56 n/a 1.94 0.19 n/a
2.3.3 Community trademarks 6.09 6.97 9.51 4.71 5.83 2.02 6.82 2.99 7.22 8.26 6.21 12.52 2.34 0.54 1.47 0.67 11.10 0.61 0.27
2.3.4 Community designs 4.44 3.41 7.44 6.02 4.38 0.59 3.37 1.51 5.44 4.92 3.13 0.42 1.74 0.00 0.35 0.01 6.55 0.26 0.10
OUTPUTS
Innovators
3.1.1 SMEs introducing product or process innovations 30.6 40.9 35.7 13.1 38.3 5.2 28.7 17.7 40.1 39.9 27.8 54.2 22.2 39.2 22.5 28.6 32.6 24.0 7.4
3.1.2 SMEs introducing marketing/organisational innovations 36.2 35.2 44.7 14.2 42.8 18.1 35.9 26.2 37.0 38.2 39.1 46.0 44.9 30.8 32.4 40.6 n/a 43.2 10.5
3.1.3 Employment fast-growing firms innovative sectors 18.8 16.9 19.4 18.2 14.8 16.9 16.0 20.9 18.4 19.6 18.7 16.7 19.3 n/a 17.5 n/a 19.6 14.0 n/a
Economic effects
3.2.1 Employment in knowledge-intensive activities 13.9 17.3 14.7 9.9 10.3 6.9 14.0 9.9 15.8 17.9 18.0 18.2 26.9 6.3 16.3 14.4 21.4 5.7 12.9
3.2.2 Medium & high-tech product exports 56.1 48.0 57.4 49.6 36.7 52.8 56.0 66.6 44.6 54.7 54.8 11.5 51.5 52.2 13.6 40.0 49.9 36.6 31.8
3.2.3 Knowledge-intensive services exports 63.1 65.3 43.2 36.7 43.2 44.7 32.9 35.3 50.6 65.0 77.9 62.9 68.3 n/a 75.8 n/a 50.4 27.7 38.9
3.2.4 Sales of new to market and new to firm innovations 12.4 11.8 9.8 6.3 12.4 3.7 10.5 19.6 11.1 6.1 14.1 6.1 11.9 9.9 5.2 12.4 16.1 33.6 3.3
3.2.5 License and patent revenues from abroad 0.54 2.24 0.25 0.06 0.04 0.07 0.14 0.03 1.38 1.59 0.60 0.59 0.42 0.08 0.08 0.10 3.08 n/a 0.09

===== PDF_PAGE 90 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201688
Annex D: Growth performance
EU28 BE BG CZ DK DE EE IE EL ES FR HR IT CY LV LT LU HU MT
ENABLERS
Human resources
1.1.1 New doctorate graduates 2.0% 4.6% 12.6% 3.7% 12.7% 1.6% 5.0% 6.3% -4.4% 10.0% 3.9% 9.4% 2.3% 22.6% 9.4% 3.0% 0.2% 3.6% 8.5%
1.1.2 Population completed tertiary education 3.0% 0.1% 2.4% 3.2% 2.5% 2.0% 4.0% 1.0% 6.3% -0.1% 1.3% -0.2% 3.8% 0.5% 6.5% 5.1% 1.2% 6.3% 3.7%
1.1.3 Youth with upper secondary level education 0.7% 0.4% -0.2% -0.1% 0.9% 0.6% 0.1% 0.0% 1.2% 1.7% 0.1% 0.1% 0.6% 1.1% 1.1% 0.4% 0.0% 0.1% 2.0%
Open, excellent and attractive research systems
1.2.1 International scientific co-publications 6.5% 6.9% 1.3% 9.0% 9.5% 6.3% 11.8% 7.3% 6.9% 8.7% 4.9% 10.5% 6.9% 13.5% 9.3% 10.2% 15.4% 5.6% 20.3%
1.2.2 Scientific publications among top 10% most cited 0.5% 1.6% -8.4% 1.4% -0.7% 0.8% 0.2% 1.5% 1.5% 0.4% 1.4% -1.8% 1.8% 3.7% 3.8% 0.6% 10.8% -2.2% -3.4%
1.2.3 Non-EU doctorate students 1.7% 4.7% -4.0% 7.7% 1.0% -5.8% 13.5% 0.0% n/a -4.7% 1.1% 4.5% 13.9% 6.1% 39.8% 70.0% 2.1% 4.6% 6.3%
Finance and support
1.3.1 R&D expenditure in the public sector 1.9% 3.8% -1.5% 7.1% 5.5% 3.2% 5.8% -1.0% 3.3% 0.8% -0.2% -1.9% 1.1% 1.9% 2.8% 3.1% 5.0% -2.7% 8.2%
1.3.2 Venture capital investments -5.9% -10.7% -22.5% -30.4% -9.0% -3.3% 18.1% -8.8% -28.3% -11.5% -2.2% 16.2% -9.5% -2.6% 8.0% 41.4% -28.2% 5.3% -19.2%
FIRM ACTIVITIES
Firm investments
2.1.1 R&D expenditure in the business sector 2.0% 4.7% 20.6% 5.5% 1.5% 1.9% 3.4% 4.6% 2.9% -1.5% 2.0% 2.5% 2.9% -1.7% 4.8% 3.9% -9.7% 10.4% 4.8%
2.1.2 Non-R&D innovation expenditure 1.9% 2.0% -6.8% -2.7% -4.4% 6.3% -10.4% -12.1% 2.5% -7.9% -3.1% 1.5% -1.0% -17.0% 2.0% 8.0% -23.3% -0.5% 1.3%
Linkages & entrepreneurship
2.2.1 SMEs innovating in-house -0.8% -1.3% -3.7% -0.3% 0.0% -2.6% -4.2% 0.0% -2.9% -6.4% -0.6% -3.3% 1.0% -4.1% -0.6% -3.5% -0.1% -2.5% 4.3%
2.2.2 Innovative SMEs collaborating with others 2.5% 4.7% -6.9% -0.1% 2.1% 3.7% -1.9% 0.4% -1.0% 2.6% -2.3% -3.6% 1.7% -7.4% -3.0% -4.4% -7.3% -2.1% -1.6%
2.2.3 Public-private co-publications -0.1% -0.1% -4.2% -7.0% 2.3% 1.4% -15.6% 3.9% -3.4% -0.2% 1.2% -9.4% -2.6% 1.2% -13.5% -14.2% 0.3% 1.3% -9.9%
Intellectual Assets
2.3.1 PCT patent applications -1.7% -2.0% -0.1% 2.7% -1.9% -2.7% -5.9% 0.4% 5.9% 2.5% -0.4% -9.3% -1.6% 2.3% -0.2% 9.0% -3.2% -1.5% 1.2%
2.3.2 PCT patent applications in societal challenges -0.3% 0.8% -6.3% 3.7% -6.0% -1.4% 15.3% -1.0% -2.4% 2.4% 0.6% -14.3% -0.4% -26.0% -6.2% 4.1% 19.4% -7.2% -1.3%
2.3.3 Community trademarks 3.6% 4.8% 12.3% 8.9% 3.5% 1.2% 15.4% 3.0% 11.8% 4.1% 2.1% 28.9% 4.1% 14.7% 11.7% 11.4% 3.0% 8.1% 20.0%
2.3.4 Community designs -0.6% -3.3% 31.5% 0.6% -1.3% -2.5% 13.7% -5.1% 14.4% -3.1% -2.8% 13.5% -1.6% 13.5% 6.0% 14.5% 2.0% -4.3% 48.5%
OUTPUTS
Innovators
3.1.1 SMEs introducing product or process innovations -1.7% -1.0% -3.8% -0.5% -0.7% -3.1% -4.6% -2.9% -3.2% -6.5% 0.1% -3.8% 2.3% -3.6% 1.2% -2.9% -0.5% -3.8% 3.1%
3.1.2 SMEs introducing marketing/organisational innovations -3.3% -2.6% 1.6% -2.6% -1.6% -5.4% -6.1% 2.8% -1.8% -4.1% 1.0% -3.2% 1.4% -5.0% 7.5% -1.7% -2.1% -0.6% 4.5%
3.1.3 Employment fast-growing firms innovative sectors 1.2% -0.4% 1.5% 1.6% -0.4% 1.8% 1.5% 1.2% 0.2% -0.4% 1.4% 0.0% -0.6% 3.4% -1.7% -2.3% -5.9% 0.8% 2.4%
Economic effects
3.2.1 Employment in knowledge-intensive activities 0.7% 0.5% 1.8% 1.8% 0.6% -0.3% 2.6% 0.8% 1.5% 1.0% 0.5% 2.0% 0.0% 2.8% 4.3% 2.3% 1.4% -0.6% 2.0%
3.2.2 Medium & high-tech product exports 0.4% -0.1% 3.6% 0.3% 2.3% 0.6% 2.0% 0.3% -2.2% -0.4% 0.3% -2.4% 0.2% 1.8% 0.2% -0.2% -0.1% -0.1% -1.3%
3.2.3 Knowledge-intensive services exports 0.1% 0.2% 3.2% 1.6% 0.0% -0.6% -1.1% -0.1% -2.3% 0.5% 0.5% -2.2% 0.3% 0.0% -1.1% 0.5% 0.0% 0.0% 0.1%
3.2.4 Sales of new to market and new to firm innovations -0.8% 2.8% -12.0% -1.3% 11.2% -5.5% -7.7% -4.2% -10.5% -1.4% 0.2% -3.7% 2.8% -1.1% 5.9% -11.1% -6.2% -4.1% -11.4%
3.2.5 License and patent revenues from abroad 11.3% 8.5% 11.2% 15.3% 3.4% 31.9% -1.2% 28.6% 15.5% 13.5% 6.1% -6.3% 19.3% -42.3% -11.8% 96.1% 8.7% 0.7% -0.1%

===== PDF_PAGE 91 =====
89European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
EU28 NL AT PL PT RO SI SK FI SE UK IS IL MK NO RS CH TR UA
ENABLERS
Human resources
1.1.1 New doctorate graduates 2.0% 5.7% 0.4% -8.1% -2.7% 6.0% 16.0% 7.7% -0.9% -2.2% 3.9% 24.0% 1.5% 12.2% 4.0% 13.8% -0.2% 4.2% 0.0%
1.1.2 Population completed tertiary education 3.0% 2.1% -0.3% 5.5% 2.3% 6.9% 4.7% 8.5% -0.1% 2.5% 2.7% 3.1% 0.0% 12.6% -0.1% 5.4% 0.7% 8.5% 0.9%
1.1.3 Youth with upper secondary level education 0.7% 0.7% -0.1% -0.1% 2.3% 0.3% 0.0% -0.2% 0.1% 0.2% 1.2% 0.0% 0.5% 1.3% 0.2% 0.0% 0.6% 0.3% 0.9%
Open, excellent and attractive research systems
1.2.1 International scientific co-publications 6.5% 7.9% 7.1% 6.8% 11.0% 8.9% 7.8% 4.7% 7.6% 7.2% 6.9% 8.6% 3.5% 11.3% 7.6% 12.4% 6.4% 8.9% 3.4%
1.2.2 Scientific publications among top 10% most cited 0.5% 1.0% 2.3% 1.8% 2.4% -0.1% -0.4% 0.3% 1.1% 1.2% 1.0% 1.4% 0.5% n/a 0.5% -0.8% 1.0% -1.1% -1.9%
1.2.3 Non-EU doctorate students 1.7% -1.1% 2.5% -7.5% 8.6% 0.7% 7.8% 16.3% 17.2% 7.6% -0.3% 4.6% n/a 2.3% 5.2% -2.5% 2.1% 1.6% n/a
Finance and support
1.3.1 R&D expenditure in the public sector 1.9% 1.2% 2.8% 3.6% -0.8% -4.8% -2.4% 11.0% 1.5% 2.6% -0.5% 0.0% -1.2% 5.1% 0.9% -4.4% 3.4% 1.6% -1.5%
1.3.2 Venture capital investments -5.9% -3.1% 3.0% -0.7% -0.2% -23.2% 1.8% 6.9% -5.5% -10.4% -6.7% n/a 3.9% 0.0% -4.7% -3.8% -3.5% n/a 0.0%
FIRM ACTIVITIES
Firm investments
2.1.1 R&D expenditure in the business sector 2.0% 3.0% 3.0% 14.6% 0.2% -1.7% 0.5% 9.0% -1.7% -1.6% 0.4% 0.1% -0.9% -2.0% 1.7% 9.7% 0.3% 6.9% -1.6%
2.1.2 Non-R&D innovation expenditure 1.9% -6.5% -0.4% 1.2% -6.4% -16.9% -11.5% -8.8% -5.8% 2.7% 0.0% n/a n/a 0.0% 12.6% 19.7% 8.2% 42.6% -6.5%
Linkages & entrepreneurship
2.2.1 SMEs innovating in-house -0.8% 5.2% -3.6% -7.3% -0.1% -17.5% 0.0% -2.5% -1.6% -1.0% 0.0% n/a -4.0% 0.0% -3.4% -1.4% 7.0% -3.1% -0.7%
2.2.2 Innovative SMEs collaborating with others 2.5% 2.1% -2.4% -11.9% 0.2% -11.8% -0.5% -1.0% -8.9% -3.7% 11.1% 0.0% -3.9% 0.0% -2.9% 11.7% 0.0% -3.1% -1.8%
2.2.3 Public-private co-publications -0.1% -0.1% 2.3% 2.9% -2.7% -9.2% 1.8% -4.0% -3.8% -0.6% -0.9% 1.0% -5.5% 0.0% -4.2% 1.4% 2.5% -3.6% -1.7%
Intellectual Assets
2.3.1 PCT patent applications -1.7% -2.3% -0.3% 8.0% 3.5% -4.4% 1.7% 2.7% -4.3% -3.4% -1.2% -4.5% -2.5% -23.1% -3.0% n/a -2.7% 5.8% 0.0%
2.3.2 PCT patent applications in societal challenges -0.3% 5.9% 1.2% 11.2% 6.7% -6.8% -3.2% 3.8% 3.7% -4.2% -2.4% -0.6% -1.3% 7.1% -3.0% n/a -4.0% 22.4% n/a
2.3.3 Community trademarks 3.6% 3.6% 3.6% 8.2% 0.6% 6.7% 8.8% 11.7% 6.8% 5.6% 3.9% 1.8% 3.4% 20.3% 4.0% 5.2% 1.7% 19.1% 0.0%
2.3.4 Community designs -0.6% -2.6% -0.8% 8.4% 3.7% 14.3% 5.9% 3.5% 3.6% -0.5% 2.7% -12.7% 8.6% 0.0% -14.8% -11.0% -3.9% -7.0% 15.9%
OUTPUTS
Innovators
3.1.1 SMEs introducing product or process innovations -1.7% 3.1% -4.1% -6.2% -0.2% -17.2% -1.4% -2.7% -1.5% -0.3% 1.5% 0.0% -4.7% 0.0% -4.0% 6.6% -7.7% -2.9% -0.7%
3.1.2 SMEs introducing marketing/organisational innovations -3.3% 2.8% -2.9% -9.7% -3.1% -9.1% -1.3% -1.1% -1.1% 0.6% 3.7% 0.0% -5.4% 0.0% 0.7% 12.3% n/a -2.2% -0.9%
3.1.3 Employment fast-growing firms innovative sectors 1.2% -0.1% 2.8% 0.7% 0.6% 1.5% 0.7% 1.1% -0.1% -1.0% 1.6% -0.4% -2.1% n/a 0.1% n/a -0.6% 0.1% n/a
Economic effects
3.2.1 Employment in knowledge-intensive activities 0.7% 2.1% 0.8% 1.4% 2.3% 2.0% 2.0% -0.1% 0.6% 1.1% 0.8% 0.1% 0.0% -1.9% 2.0% 2.2% 1.0% 2.5% 0.9%
3.2.2 Medium & high-tech product exports 0.4% 1.8% 0.8% -0.5% -1.2% 2.4% -0.2% 1.1% -2.3% -0.4% 0.5% -10.2% 1.2% 21.6% 0.3% 5.4% -3.0% -1.5% -4.0%
3.2.3 Knowledge-intensive services exports 0.1% 0.0% 0.0% -1.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.1% 0.0% 0.0% 0.6% -0.3% -0.6% 1.2% n/a 0.1% n/a -0.3% 0.8% 4.6%
3.2.4 Sales of new to market and new to firm innovations -0.8% 1.2% -4.6% -6.5% -1.0% -20.6% -3.3% 2.3% -4.8% -5.6% 7.5% -9.2% 1.4% 0.0% 1.1% 3.1% -6.1% 24.0% -5.2%
3.2.5 License and patent revenues from abroad 11.3% 4.6% -1.2% 15.5% -0.4% 17.1% 20.1% -25.0% 15.6% 7.4% -1.3% -14.0% -0.6% 6.4% -10.5% 7.5% 6.7% n/a 13.4%

===== PDF_PAGE 92 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201690
Annex E: Definitions of indicators
INDICATOR DEFINITION NUMERATOR DEFINITION
DENOMINATOR INTERPRETATION
 Source Source
1.1.1 New doctorate
graduates (ISCED 8) per
1000 population aged
25-34
Number of doctorate graduates
(ISCED 8)
Eurostat
Population between
and including 25
and 34 years
Eurostat
The indicator is a measure of the supply of new
second-stage tertiary graduates in all fields of
training. For most countries ISCED 8 captures PhD
graduates.
1.1.2
 Percentage population
aged 30-34 having
completed tertiary
education
Number of persons in age class
with some form of post-secondary
education (ISCED 5-8)
Eurostat
Population between
and including 30
and 34 years
Eurostat
This is a general indicator of the supply of advanced skills.
It is not limited to science and technical fields because
the adoption of innovations in many areas, in particular in
the service sectors, depends on a wide range of skills. The
indicator focuses on a narrow share of the population aged
30 to 34 and will more easily and quickly reflect changes
in educational policies leading to more tertiary graduates.
1.1.3
 Percentage youth aged
20-24 having attained
at least upper secondary
education
Number of young people aged 20-24
years having attained at least upper
secondary education
Eurostat
Population between
and including 20
and 24 years
Eurostat
The indicator measures the qualification level of
the population aged 20-24 years in terms of formal
educational degrees. It provides a measure for the
“supply” of human capital of that age group and for
the output of education systems in terms of graduates.
Completed upper secondary education is generally
considered to be the minimum level required for
successful participation in a knowledge-based society.
1.2.1
 International scientific
co-publications per
million population
Number of scientific publications with
at least one co-author based abroad
(where abroad is non-EU for the EU28)
Web of Science (data provided by
CWTS as part of a contract to DG
Research and Innovation)
Total population
Eurostat
International scientific co-publications are a proxy
for the quality of scientific research as collaboration
increases scientific productivity.
1.2.2
 Scientific publications
among the top-10%
most cited publications
worldwide as % of total
scientific publications of
the country
Number of scientific publications
among the top-10% most cited
publications worldwide
Web of Science (data provided by
CWTS as part of a contract to DG
Research and Innovation)
Total number
of scientific
publications
Web of Science
(data provided
by CWTS as part
of a contract to
DG Research and
Innovation)
The indicator is a measure for the efficiency of the
research system as highly cited publications are
assumed to be of higher quality. There could be a
bias towards small or English speaking countries
given the coverage of Scopus’ publication data.
1.2.3
 Non-EU doctorate
students as a % of all
doctorate students
For EU Member States: number of
doctorate students from non-EU
countries (for non-EU countries:
number of non-national doctorate
students)
Eurostat
Total number of
doctorate students
Eurostat
The share of non-EU doctorate students reflects the
mobility of students as an effective way of diffusing
knowledge. Attracting high-skilled foreign doctorate
students will add to creating a net brain gain and will
secure a continuous supply of researchers.
1.3.1
 R&D expenditure in the
public sector (% of GDP)
All R&D expenditures in the
government sector (GOVERD) and the
higher education sector (HERD)
Eurostat
Gross Domestic
Product
Eurostat
R&D expenditure represents one of the major drivers
of economic growth in a knowledge-based economy.
As such, trends in the R&D expenditure indicator
provide key indications of the future competitiveness
and wealth of the EU. Research and development
spending is essential for making the transition to a
knowledge-based economy as well as for improving
production technologies and stimulating growth.
1.3.2
 Venture capital

(% of GDP)
Venture capital investment is defined
as private equity being raised for
investment in companies. Management
buyouts, management buy-ins, and
venture purchase of quoted shares are
excluded. Venture capital includes early
stage (seed + start-up) and expansion
and replacement capital.
Invest Europe
Gross Domestic
ProductEurostat
The amount of venture capital is a proxy for the
relative dynamism of new business creation. In
particular for enterprises using or developing new
(risky) technologies venture capital is often the
only available means of financing their (expanding)
business.
Comment: Three-year averages have been used

===== PDF_PAGE 93 =====
91European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
2.1.1 R&D expenditure in the
business sector

(% of GDP)
All R&D expenditures in the business
sector (BERD)
Eurostat
Gross Domestic
Product
Eurostat
The indicator captures the formal creation of new
knowledge within firms. It is particularly important in
the science-based sector (pharmaceuticals, chemicals
and some areas of electronics) where most new
knowledge is created in or near R&D laboratories.
2.1.2
 Non-R&D innovation
expenditures

(% of turnover)
Sum of total innovation expenditure for
enterprises, in thousand Euros and current
prices excluding intramural and extramural
R&D expenditures
Eurostat (Community Innovation
Survey)
Total turnover for all
enterprises
Eurostat
(Community
Innovation Survey)
This indicator measures non-R&D innovation
expenditure as percentage of total turnover. Several
of the components of innovation expenditure, such
as investment in equipment and machinery and the
acquisition of patents and licenses, measure the
diffusion of new production technology and ideas.
2.2.1
 SMEs innovating
in-house

(% of SMEs)46
Sum of SMEs with in-house innovation
activities. Innovative firms are defined as
those firms which have introduced new
products or processes either 1) in-house
or 2) in combination with other firms.
Eurostat (Community Innovation
Survey)
Total number of
SMEs
Eurostat
(Community
Innovation Survey)
This indicator measures the degree to which SMEs,
that have introduced any new or significantly
improved products or production processes, have
innovated in-house. The indicator is limited to SMEs
because almost all large firms innovate and because
countries with an industrial structure weighted
towards larger firms tend to do better.
2.2.2
 Innovative SMEs
collaborating with others
(% of SMEs)
Sum of SMEs with innovation
co-operation activities, i.e. those firms
that had any co-operation agreements
on innovation activities with other
enterprises or institutions in the three
years of the survey period
Eurostat (Community Innovation
Survey)
Total number of
SMEs
Eurostat
(Community
Innovation Survey)
This indicator measures the degree to which SMEs are
involved in innovation co-operation. Complex innovations,
in particular in ICT, often depend on the ability to draw
on diverse sources of information and knowledge, or to
collaborate on the development of an innovation. This
indicator measures the flow of knowledge between public
research institutions and firms and between firms and other
firms. The indicator is limited to SMEs because almost all
large firms are involved in innovation co-operation.
2.2.3
 Public-private
co-publications per
million population
Number of public-private co-authored

research publications. The definition of
the "private sector" excludes the private
medical and health sector. Publications
are assigned to the country/countries in
which the business companies or other
private sector organisations are located.
Web of Science (data provided by
CWTS as part of a contract to DG
Research and Innovation)
Total population
Eurostat
This indicator captures public-private research linkages
and active collaboration activities between business
sector researchers and public sector researchers
resulting in academic publications.
2.3.1
 PCT patent applications
per billion GDP (in PPS€)
Number of patent applications filed

under the PCT, at international phase,
designating the European Patent Office
(EPO). Patent counts are based on the
priority date, the inventor’s country of
residence and fractional counts.
OECD
Gross Domestic
Product in in
Purchasing Power
Standard €
Eurostat
The capacity of firms to develop new products will
determine their competitive advantage. One indicator
of the rate of new product innovation is the number
of patents. This indicator measures the number of
PCT patent applications.
2.3.2
 PCT patent applications
in societal challenges
per billion GDP (in PPS€)
Number of PCT patent applications in

Environment-related technologies and
Health. Patents in Environment-related
technologies include those in Climate
change mitigation technologies related
to buildings, Climate change mitigation
technologies related to energy generation,
transmission or distribution, Capture,
storage, sequestration or disposal of
greenhouse gases, Environmental
manage¬ment, Climate change mitigation
technologies related to transportation and
Water-related adaptation technologies.
Patents in health-related technologies
include those in Medical technology and
Pharmaceuticals.
OECD
Gross Domestic
Product in in
Purchasing Power
Standard €
Eurostat
This indicator measures PCT applications in health
technology and environment-related technologies and
is relevant as increased numbers of patent applications
in health technology and environment-related
technologies will be necessary to meet the societal
needs of an ageing European society and sustainable
growth.
INDICATOR DEFINITION NUMERATOR DEFINITION
DENOMINATOR INTERPRETATION
 Source Source
46 The EIS 2016 Methodology report provides detailed instructions how to calculate this indicator using tabulated CIS data as available from Eurostat's Statistics Database.
http://ec.europa.eu/DocsRoom/documents/17189.

===== PDF_PAGE 94 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201692
INDICATOR DEFINITION NUMERATOR DEFINITION
DENOMINATOR INTERPRETATION
 Source Source
2.3.3 Community trademarks
per billion GDP (in PPS€)
Number of new community
trademarks applications
European Union Intellectual
Property Office (EUIPO)
Gross Domestic
Product in in
Purchasing Power
Standard €
Eurostat
Trademarks are an important innovation indicator,
especially for the service sector. The Community
trademark gives its proprietor a uniform right applicable
in all Member States of the European Union through a
single procedure which simplifies trademark policies at
European level. It fulfils the three essential functions
of a trademark: it identifies the origin of goods and
services, guarantees consistent quality through
evidence of the company's commitment vis-à-vis the
consumer, and is a form of communication, a basis for
publicity and advertising.
Comment: two-year averages have been used
2.3.4 Community designs per
billion GDP (in PPS€)
Number of new community designs
European Union Intellectual
Property Office (EUIPO)
Gross Domestic
Product in in
Purchasing Power
Standard €
Eurostat
A design is the outward appearance of a product or
part of it resulting from the lines, contours, colours,
shape, texture, materials and/or its ornamentation.
A product can be any industrial or handicraft item
including packaging, graphic symbols and typographic
typefaces but excluding computer programs. It also
includes products that are composed of multiple
components, which may be disassembled and
reassembled. Community design protection is directly
enforceable in each Member State and it provides
both the option of an unregistered and a registered
Community design right for one area encompassing
all Member States.
Comment: two-year averages have been used
3.1.1 SMEs introducing
product or process
innovations (% of SMEs)
Number of SMEs who introduced a
new product or a new process to one
of their markets
Eurostat (Community Innovation
Survey)
Total number of
SMEs
Eurostat
(Community
Innovation Survey)
Technological innovation, as measured by the
introduction of new products (goods or services)
and processes, is a key ingredient to innovation
in manufacturing activities. Higher shares of
technological innovators should reflect a higher level
of innovation activities.
3.1.2
 SMEs introducing
marketing or
organisational
innovations (% of SMEs)
Number of SMEs who introduced
a new marketing innovation or
organisational innovation to one of
their markets
Eurostat (Community Innovation
Survey)
Total number of
SMEs
Eurostat
(Community
Innovation Survey)
The Community Innovation Survey mainly asks
firms about their technological innovation. Many
firms, in particular in the services sectors, innovate
through other non-technological forms of innovation.
Examples of these are marketing and organisational
innovations. This indicator captures the extent that
SMEs innovate through non-technological innovation.
3.1.3
 Employment in fast-
growing enterprises
(average innovativeness
scores) (% of total
employment)
Employment in fast-growing
enterprises in innovative sectors is
calculated through sector-specific
innovation coefficients, reflecting the
level of innovativeness of each sector
,
serving as a proxy for distinguishing
innovative enterprises. These
coefficients are weighted with sectoral
shares of employment in fast-growing
enterprises, providing an indication of
the dynamism of fast-growing firms
in innovative sectors. Fast-growing
enterprises are defined as firms with
average annualised growth in number
of employees of more than 10 % a
year, over a three-year period, and
with 10 or more employees at the
beginning of the observation period
(period of growth).
47
Eurostat
Total employment
in high-growth
enterprises in the
business economy
Eurostat
This indicator provides an indication of the dynamism
of fast-growing firms in innovative sectors as
compared to all fast-growing business activities.
It captures the capacity of a country to transform
rapidly its economy to respond to new needs and to
take advantage of emerging demand.

===== PDF_PAGE 95 =====
93European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
INDICATOR DEFINITION NUMERATOR DEFINITION
DENOMINATOR INTERPRETATION
 Source Source
3.2.1 Employment in
knowledge-intensive
activities (% of total
employment)
Number of employed persons in

knowledge-intensive activities in
business industries. Knowledge-
intensive activities are defined,
based on EU Labour Force Survey
data, as all NACE Rev.2 industries at
2-digit level where at least 33% of
employment has a higher education
degree (ISCED 5-8).
Eurostat
Total employment
Eurostat
Knowledge-intensive activities provide services
directly to consumers, such as telecommunications,
and provide inputs to the innovative activities of
other firms in all sectors of the economy.
3.2.2
 Exports of medium and
high technology products
as a share of total
product exports
V
alue of medium and high tech
exports, in national currency and
current prices. Medium-high and high
tech exports include exports of the
following SITC Rev.3 products: 266,
267, 512, 513, 525, 533, 54, 553,
554, 562, 57, 58, 591, 593, 597, 598,
629, 653, 671, 672, 679, 71, 72, 731,
733, 737, 74, 751, 752, 759, 76, 77,
78, 79, 812, 87, 88 and 891.
Eurostat (ComExt) for Member
States, UN ComTrade for non-EU
countries
Value of total
product exports
Eurostat (ComExt)
for MS, UN
ComTrade for
non-MS
The indicator measures the technological
compe¬titiveness of the EU i.e. the ability to
commercialise the results of research and
development (R&D) and innovation in the
international markets. It also reflects product
specialisation by country. Creating, exploiting and
commercialising new technologies are vital for
the competitiveness of a country in the modern
economy. Medium and high technology products are
key drivers for economic growth, productivity and
welfare, and are generally a source of high value
added and well-paid employment.
3.2.3
 Knowledge-intensive
services exports as % of
total services exports
Exports of knowledge-intensive

services is defined as the sum of
credits in EBOPS 2010 (Extended
Balance of Payments Services
Classification) items SC1, SC2, SC3A,
SF, SG, SI, SJ and SK1.
Eurostat
Total value of
services exports (S)
Eurostat
The indicator measures the competitiveness
of the knowledge-intensive services sector.
Competitiveness-enhancing measures and
innovation strategies can be mutually reinforcing
for the growth of employment, export shares and
turnover at the firm level. It reflects the ability of
an economy, notably resulting from innovation, to
export services with high levels of value added,
and successfully take part in knowledge-intensive
global value chains.
3.2.4
 Sales of new-to-market
and new-to-firm
innovations as % of
turnover
Sum of total turnover of new or
significantly improved products,
either new-to-the-firm or new-to-the-
market, for all enterprises
Eurostat (Community Innovation
Survey)
Total turnover for all
enterprises
Eurostat
(Community
Innovation Survey)
This indicator measures the turnover of new or
significantly improved products and includes
both products which are only new to the firm and
products which are also new to the market. The
indicator thus captures both the creation of state-
of-the-art technologies (new to market products)
and the diffusion of these technologies (new to firm
products).
3.2.5
 License and patent
revenues from abroad
as % of GDP
Export part of the international
transactions in royalties and license
fees
Eurostat
Gross Domestic
ProductEurostat
Trade in technology comprises four main categories:
Transfer of techniques (through patents and
licences, disclosure of know-how); Transfer (sale,
licensing, franchising) of designs, trademarks
and patterns; Services with a technical content,
including technical and engineering studies, as
well as technical assistance; and Industrial R&D.
License and patent revenues capture disembodied
technology exports.
47 The economic sectors included are the three-digit NACE business economy sectors as identified by the national statistical office based on national business register data and based on the
number of employees in these enterprises. More details are provided in section 3.4 of the Staff Working Document SWD(2013) 325 on “Developing an indicator of innovation output”

http://ec.europa.eu/research/press/2013/pdf/staff_working_document_indicator_of_innovation_output.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 96 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201694
Annex F: Summary Innovation Index (SII) time series
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 GROWTH
RATE
EU28 0.495 0.502 0.511 0.514 0.519 0.521 0.523 0.521 0.74%
BE 0.564 0.576 0.578 0.588 0.592 0.596 0.607 0.602 0.93%
BG 0.219 0.209 0.230 0.238 0.240 0.210 0.238 0.242 1.40%
CZ 0.413 0.412 0.422 0.440 0.442 0.421 0.433 0.434 0.71%
DK 0.624 0.630 0.639 0.678 0.694 0.693 0.675 0.700 1.67%
DE 0.624 0.636 0.654 0.655 0.667 0.661 0.655 0.632 0.16%
EE 0.416 0.441 0.469 0.468 0.505 0.490 0.479 0.448 1.06%
IE 0.584 0.596 0.617 0.619 0.627 0.601 0.607 0.609 0.58%
EL 0.370 0.364 0.368 0.371 0.375 0.386 0.399 0.364 -0.21%
ES 0.381 0.386 0.389 0.386 0.388 0.394 0.387 0.361 -0.76%
FR 0.539 0.550 0.560 0.562 0.566 0.560 0.556 0.568 0.76%
HR 0.299 0.293 0.291 0.302 0.304 0.298 0.292 0.280 -0.92%
IT 0.389 0.400 0.407 0.418 0.416 0.425 0.434 0.432 1.53%
CY 0.470 0.474 0.476 0.488 0.491 0.480 0.487 0.451 -0.57%
LV 0.214 0.217 0.224 0.234 0.247 0.215 0.233 0.281 3.99%
LT 0.239 0.238 0.252 0.256 0.268 0.275 0.288 0.282 2.39%
LU 0.632 0.646 0.632 0.619 0.623 0.646 0.626 0.598 -0.79%
HU 0.345 0.343 0.354 0.358 0.363 0.355 0.364 0.355 0.39%
MT 0.342 0.354 0.351 0.326 0.334 0.379 0.371 0.437 3.57%
NL 0.549 0.563 0.573 0.580 0.586 0.631 0.639 0.631 2.03%
AT 0.583 0.598 0.608 0.577 0.581 0.604 0.599 0.591 0.21%
PL 0.290 0.298 0.299 0.291 0.296 0.286 0.291 0.292 0.10%
PT 0.393 0.403 0.401 0.404 0.405 0.401 0.418 0.419 0.90%
RO 0.246 0.255 0.264 0.263 0.261 0.228 0.223 0.180 -4.38%
SI 0.446 0.453 0.464 0.479 0.491 0.476 0.498 0.485 1.18%
SK 0.318 0.329 0.338 0.325 0.313 0.346 0.354 0.350 1.39%
FI 0.663 0.668 0.671 0.651 0.651 0.642 0.658 0.649 -0.29%
SE 0.697 0.709 0.718 0.714 0.717 0.722 0.719 0.704 0.14%
UK 0.525 0.529 0.542 0.560 0.566 0.569 0.580 0.602 1.98%
IS 0.575 0.580 0.567 0.574 0.595 0.570 0.568 0.572 -0.08%
IL 0.615 0.626 0.620 0.623 0.627 0.630 0.620 0.581 -0.80%
MK 0.164 0.165 0.183 0.207 0.202 0.207 0.211 0.220 4.30%
NO 0.449 0.458 0.471 0.476 0.478 0.462 0.466 0.463 0.43%
RS 0.225 0.232 0.233 0.231 0.251 0.318 0.309 0.325 5.35%
CH 0.796 0.792 0.800 0.802 0.799 0.799 0.793 0.791 -0.08%
TR 0.188 0.189 0.191 0.199 0.202 0.199 0.205 0.267 5.14%
UA 0.189 0.186 0.189 0.186 0.179 0.189 0.182 0.178 -0.82%

===== PDF_PAGE 97 =====
95European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
Annex G: Performance scores per dimension
HUMAN
RESOURCES
RESEARCH
SYSTEMS
FINANCE AND
SUPPORT
FIRM
INVESTMENTS
LINKAGES &
ENTREPRENEURSHIP
INTELLECTUAL
ASSETS INNOVATORS ECONOMIC
EFFECTS
EU28 0.575 0.466 0.490 0.426 0.473 0.556 0.526 0.573
BE 0.622 0.768 0.502 0.492 0.814 0.487 0.565 0.561
BG 0.498 0.087 0.104 0.212 0.071 0.500 0.186 0.176
CZ 0.561 0.300 0.446 0.404 0.422 0.336 0.473 0.505
DK 0.703 0.765 0.654 0.459 0.767 0.789 0.624 0.709
DE 0.573 0.443 0.563 0.753 0.624 0.701 0.761 0.630
EE 0.554 0.340 0.727 0.555 0.456 0.426 0.422 0.323
IE 0.816 0.582 0.363 0.300 0.593 0.426 0.773 0.777
EL 0.562 0.408 0.224 0.281 0.412 0.243 0.471 0.322
ES 0.448 0.413 0.357 0.185 0.236 0.437 0.250 0.432
FR 0.657 0.678 0.566 0.363 0.505 0.488 0.663 0.578
HR 0.606 0.160 0.287 0.324 0.271 0.218 0.190 0.247
IT 0.407 0.398 0.279 0.277 0.418 0.505 0.577 0.456
CY 0.662 0.392 0.278 0.153 0.454 0.403 0.621 0.485
LV 0.534 0.168 0.424 0.426 0.105 0.326 0.113 0.255
LT 0.726 0.134 0.538 0.352 0.167 0.256 0.109 0.168
LU 0.431 0.771 0.372 0.136 0.544 0.720 0.704 0.742
HU 0.462 0.218 0.272 0.367 0.206 0.281 0.319 0.570
MT 0.274 0.258 0.100 0.423 0.276 0.645 0.624 0.602
NL 0.653 0.774 0.663 0.237 0.727 0.624 0.542 0.681
AT 0.650 0.561 0.538 0.517 0.629 0.707 0.647 0.475
PL 0.556 0.125 0.274 0.361 0.094 0.391 0.210 0.301
PT 0.591 0.453 0.471 0.260 0.378 0.385 0.513 0.332
RO 0.392 0.111 0.070 0.084 0.045 0.149 0.193 0.273
SI 0.829 0.386 0.241 0.472 0.576 0.484 0.420 0.424
SK 0.642 0.166 0.255 0.267 0.209 0.239 0.415 0.490
FI 0.783 0.625 0.765 0.500 0.676 0.716 0.595 0.561
SE 0.831 0.814 0.710 0.619 0.689 0.728 0.640 0.622
UK 0.786 0.795 0.506 0.270 0.591 0.502 0.519 0.681
IS 0.348 0.722 0.722 0.412 0.875 0.559 0.719 0.418
IL 0.722 0.538 0.275 1.000 0.422 0.621 0.534 0.643
MK 0.413 0.082 0.016 0.241 0.159 0.039 0.501 0.320
NO 0.678 0.857 0.566 0.217 0.395 0.309 0.394 0.359
RS 0.359 0.179 0.222 0.540 0.306 0.063 0.479 0.420
CH 0.862 1.000 0.582 0.899 0.783 0.782 0.613 0.749
TR 0.093 0.124 0.374 0.590 0.194 0.169 0.375 0.389
UA 0.384 0.039 0.111 0.197 0.112 0.163 0.000 0.251

===== PDF_PAGE 98 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 201696
Annex H: International data
EU28 AU BR CA CN IN JP KR RU SA US
Human resources
1.1.1 New doctorate graduates 1.8 2.5 0.5 1.3 0.2 n/a 1.2 1.6 1.4 0.2 1.5
1.1.2 Population completed tertiary education (aged 25-64) 31.7 41.9 17.2 53.6 11.3 9.8 46.6 44.6 53.5 6.4 44.2
Open, excellent and attractive research systems
1.2.1 International scientific co-publications 344.3 1413.5 72.0 989.7 58.3 11.0 186.7 331.4 85.8 131.4 473.1
1.2.2 Scientific publ. among top 10% most cited 10.5 12.2 4.9 11.8 8.2 6.3 6.5 6.2 3.3 7.0 14.0
Finance and support
1.3.1 R&D expenditure in the public sector 0.72 0.86 0.63 0.80 0.46 0.53 0.75 0.87 0.48 0.41 0.72
Firm investments
2.1.1 R&D expenditure in the business sector 1.22 1.19 0.52 1.76 1.58 0.29 2.79 3.36 0.71 0.32 1.94
Linkages & entrepreneurship
2.2.3 Public-private co-publications 33.9 23.6 1.8 32.0 4.6 0.6 44.6 58.4 1.7 1.7 62.1
Intellectual Assets
2.3.1 PCT patent applications 2.60 1.66 0.19 2.03 1.19 0.27 8.82 6.97 0.31 0.42 3.60
2.3.2 PCT patent applications in societal challenges 0.66 0.46 0.06 0.56 0.16 0.09 2.00 1.42 0.08 0.11 0.86
Economic effects
3.2.2 Exports of medium & high tech products 59.7 8.7 23.0 33.9 54.6 26.3 72.9 71.0 10.1 32.6 49.7
3.2.3 Exports of knowledge-intensive services 56.1 35.6 64.7 46.4 39.9 77.8 32.0 45.1 42.1 n/a 46.7
3.2.5 License and patent revenues from abroad 0.585 0.061 0.016 0.223 0.009 0.032 0.800 0.365 0.036 0.033 0.748
PERFORMANCE LEAD (EU=100) AU BR CA CN IN JP KR RU SA US
Human resources
1.1.1 New doctorate graduates 126.2 25.0 72.9 11.4 n/a 65.8 86.1 78.3 10.1 82.5
1.1.2 Population completed tertiary education (aged 25-64) 132.2 54.3 169.2 35.7 30.9 147.1 140.6 168.8 20.1 139.6
Open, excellent and attractive research systems
1.2.1 International scientific co-publications 167.4 45.7 167.4 41.2 17.8 73.6 98.1 49.9 61.8 117.2
1.2.2 Scientific publ. among top 10% most cited 116.4 46.6 112.4 77.6 60.1 61.4 59.3 31.3 66.5 133.4
Finance and support
1.3.1 R&D expenditure in the public sector 119.9 87.5 111.0 64.5 73.5 104.0 120.8 66.4 56.5 100.0
Firm investments
2.1.1 R&D expenditure in the business sector 97.2 42.5 143.3 129.2 23.7 227.6 242.1 57.8 26.4 158.1
Linkages & entrepreneurship
2.2.3 Public-private co-publications 69.7 5.3 94.4 13.7 1.8 131.8 172.4 4.9 5.0 183.2
Intellectual Assets
2.3.1 PCT patent applications 79.9 27.3 88.2 67.7 32.1 168.7 163.6 34.4 40.0 117.7
2.3.2 PCT patent applications in societal challenges 69.4 8.5 85.5 24.1 14.2 260.8 216.0 11.5 17.3 131.2
Economic effects
3.2.2 Exports of medium & high tech products 14.6 38.5 56.7 91.4 44.0 122.0 118.9 16.9 54.5 83.2
3.2.3 Exports of knowledge-intensive services 63.3 115.2 82.6 71.1 132.9 56.9 80.3 75.0 n/a 83.1
3.2.5 License and patent revenues from abroad 10.5 2.7 38.0 1.6 5.5 126.0 62.4 6.1 5.7 126.0
CHANGE IN PERFORMANCE LEAD AU BR CA CN IN JP KR RU SA US
Human resources
1.1.1 New doctorate graduates 0.0% -17% 1.0% -2.9% n/a -0.3% 3.4% -3.8% 1.4% -1.8%
1.1.2 Population completed tertiary education (aged 25-64) -0.3% 5.5% -1.9% 4.5% -3.4% -1.6% 0.2% -3.1% -3.4% -2.1%
Open, excellent and attractive research systems
1.2.1 International scientific co-publications -1.2% 1.2% -1.0% 3.3% 1.2% -1.7% 0.7% -1.2% 1.8% -0.4%
1.2.2 Scientific publ. among top 10% most cited 1.2% -1.0% 0.0% 3.2% -0.5% -0.4% 0.0% -0.4% -1.0% -0.8%
Finance and support
1.3.1 R&D expenditure in the public sector -0.8% -0.5% -2.5% 0.8% -0.9% -1.0% 1.8% 0.8% -0.3% 0.0%
Firm investments
2.1.1 R&D expenditure in the business sector -2.8% -1.5% 2.6% 4.7% -2.2% -1.4% 1.8% -2.1% -8.1% -1.3%
Linkages & entrepreneurship
2.2.3 Public-private co-publications -4.6% 1.3% -5.1% 17.8% 1.1% -2.5% 2.2% -2.2% -4.8% -0.7%
Intellectual Assets
2.3.1 PCT patent applications -1.8% 1.1% 0.3% 6.3% 0.3% 2.4% 3.8% -0.1% -3.4% 1.3%
2.3.2 PCT patent applications in societal challenges -7.4% 5.0% -3.5% 11.2% -2.5% 4.3% 14.1% -3.7% -6.1% -1.9%
Economic effects
3.2.2 Exports of medium & high tech products -6.0% -4.5% -2.0% -0.2% 2.8% -0.5% -0.3% 0.0% 0.5% -3.0%
3.2.3 Exports of knowledge-intensive services -0.2% 2.6% 0.8% 5.4% -0.2% -1.9% -3.4% -0.5% n/a 1.7%
3.2.5 License and patent revenues from abroad -8.5% -8.5% -6.6% -4.9% 8.7% 0.2% 7.4% -0.4% -0.4% -3.1%

===== PDF_PAGE 99 =====
European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
European Commission
European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
2016 – 96 pp – 210 x 297 mm
ISSN 2363-3107
ISBN 978-92-79-57973-8
doi: 10.2873/84537
HOW TO OBTAIN EU PUBLICATIONS
Free publications:
•

one copy:
via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu);

•
 more than one cop
y or posters/maps:
from the European Union’s representations (http://ec.europa.eu/represent_en.htm);
from the delegations in non-EU countries (http://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/index_en.htm);
by contacting the Europe Direct service (http://europa.eu/europedirect/index_en.htm) or
calling the 00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 (freephone number from anywhere in the EU) (*).

(*)
 The inf
ormation given is free, as are most calls (though some operators, phone boxes or
hotels may charge you).

Priced publications:
•
 via EU Bookshop (
http://bookshop.europa.eu).

===== PDF_PAGE 100 =====
ET-AY-16-001-EN-N
ISSN 2363-3107
ISBN 978-92-79-57973-8
doi: 10.2873/84537
European Innovation Scoreboard 2016
