Briefing
September 2017
EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service
Author: Lieve Van Woensel with Victoria Joseph
Scientific Foresight Unit (STOA)
European Parliament - PE 603.205
Forward-looking policy-making at the European Parliament through
scientific foresight
The European Parliament's Science and Technology Options Assessment ( STOA) Panel, supported by the Scientific
Foresight Unit (STOA), decided two years ago to experiment with a process involving scenario development and
assessment to explore possible future techno-scientific developments and their potential impacts, while backcasting
possible future opportunities and concerns to options available to policy-makers today. This was achieved with the
involvement of experts from a variety of backgrounds , together with stakeholders , using a multi -perspective
approach. In this setting, various types of possible impacts are explored, which provide the foundations for imagined
exploratory scenarios. From these scenarios we can learn about the possible challenges and opportunities arising
from the m. By communicating these challenges and opportunities to the Members of the European Parliament
(MEPs), together with related legal and ethical reflections, the MEPsare provided with potential insights into how to
anticipate future policy issues. The MEPs might thus be able toidentify options for working towards the most desirable
futures and avoiding undesirable futures, and even for anticipating undesirable scenarios. Therefore, foresight-based
policy preparation can help the European Parliament stay well preparedfor what might lie ahead, allowing informed,
anticipatory action.
1. Context
In January 2015, STOA published a first outline for an approach 'Towards scientific foresight in the European
Parliament'. Meanwhile, two scientific foresight studies have been completed and two are ongoing. Since the pilot
study on 'The ethics of cyber -physical systems' (i.e. robotics), the added value of foresight was explored and the
experience led to insights about the potential power of foresight approaches for policy purposes regarding techno-
scientific trends. This briefing outlines the experience towards an improved foresight practice by learning.
2. What are relevant topics for foresight studies?
In the area of scientific foresight and technology assessment (TA), the selection of the most relevant topics is of the
utmost importance: the topics have to be tangible issues for the European Parliament, with relevance for the
European citizens and society at large. Various methods are used to select these topics. Most recently, STOA
conducted a study entitled 'Horizon scanning and analysis of techno-scientific trends' to find exciting new topics for
which it would be worthwhile to carry out in-depth analysis and identify policy options to anticipate the future.
3. What are the various steps of a foresight process?
'Foresight' is a proactive approach to help us understand what the future might bring, and to help us prepare
ourselves. It is not about predicting the future, but about understanding what might happen in the future and how
we could or should anticipate it. Foresight can help in taking strategic policy decisions. At the European Parliament,
any Member of a parliamentary committee can ask for such a study to support them in their daily work. STOA 's
priority areas are in the first instance strategic and of a multi-disciplinary nature.
Although there is no single way to conduct foresight studies, at the EuropeanParliament we work on the basis ofthe
following steps, especially in the techno-scientific context:
 The starting point is explorin g the current state of affairs. In the case of science or technology foresight for
European policy purposes, this could be a TA study, or an in-depth report by a European agency or a specialised
international organisation.
 The next step is the envisioning of possible future impacts by exploration ofpossible future developments.

 Based upon these potential consequences of techno -scientific developments in the future, we build imagined
future scenarios, which are then explored in-depth for opportunities and challenges.
 The last step we call backcasting towards preparedness for anticipation. This is important for the MEPs, as it can
help them to decide what could or should be done today.
Apart from follow-up at political level, outcomes of the techno-scientific foresight studies couldalso inspire thepublic
debate about how we can better anticipate the (unknown) future.
To summari se, STOA extends TA by focusing on possible long-term impacts of emerging technologies, building
explorative scenarios taking into account envisaged impacts, exploring these imagined scenarios for possible future
challenges and opportunities, and finally backcasting these challenges and opportunities tocurrent policy.
3.1. Envisioning diverse types of impact
For a meaningful analysis of possible consequences of future techno-scientific developments, it is important to fulfil
certain criteria. The main ones are to work with people from diverse disciplines, to involve relevant stakeholders,
and to look into the forward trends from a wide variety of perspectives. Furthermore, unintended impacts as well as
intended ones are to be considered, as well as hard (measureable) and soft impacts (not directly caused by the
technology).
Multi-disciplinary and multi-stakeholder approach
For envisioning diverse types of impacts, STOA's foresight process uses social scientists (philosophers, sociologists
specialised in science and technologyetc.) to discuss the outcomes of the technical briefing papers with the technical
experts, along with a wide range of relevant stakeholders. Together, they analyse possible impacts – in a facilitated
brainstorming environment – in a multi-perspective way.
Multi-perspective approach
A multi-perspective approach is taken by systematically looking through different lenses. Therefore , the 'STEEPED'
(Social, Technological, Economic, Environmental, Political (and legal), Ethical, and Demographic) scheme has been
developed to ensure that no important societal facet is overlooked.
Box 1 - STEEPED (see graph)
We use the STEEPED scheme to ensure our research is credible and coherent.
This scheme is rather a checklist than a methodology. It provides seven different lenses though which one can look into
the issue at stake, when looking at the impacts of techno -scientific developments, therefore ensuring that we cover all
possible areas of interest or concern.
1. Social aspects cover changes in social and cultural values and lifestyles.
2. Technological aspects include how, and in which directions, technology is developing and the diversification of the
use of techno-scientific devices.
3. Economic aspects cover issues related to conjuncture, employment, production systems, different distribution and
trade systems, and consumption of goods and services.
4. Environmental aspects embrace interactions with our natural habitat and our biophysical environment, which is our
planet. This category also includes the availability of natural resources.
5. Political/legal aspects describe developments or changes in various policy -making and legislative systems or forms
of governance. This part covers law that could be considered adequate and appropriate, law that might be
considered for updating, as well as reflections about missing legislation.
6. Ethical aspects cover individual preferences about the diverse values embedded in the broader society.
7. Demographic aspects entail various aspects of socie ty, looking at the society as 'inclusive', being a collection of a
varied set of social groups based upon parameters such as age, gender, religion, origin, profession, education,
income level, etc.
With this method, we can discover a diverse range of opportunities and challenges that arise from techno -scientific
developments, for different types of players in society.

Foresight in the field of science and technology
Multi-disciplinary approach Multi-stakeholder setting Multi-perspective approach
Types of impacts relevant for policy
Possible impacts could be envisioned via facilitated brainstorming, for instance through systematically posing 'what
if?'1 questions and with a focus onsoft impacts2 (those impacts that are not easy to measure– for example, affecting
health, environment and safety – and for which it is not easy to assign responsibility). These could be very helpful in
a professionally driven workshop, facilitat ing the collective imagin ation of the plausible soft impacts on human
actors, their values and their activities.
In the case of the STOA robotics project, the goals of such impact-envisioning brainstorming sessions have been
described in the robotics study3 as follows: (1) to articulate the vision behind a technological development (promises,
values); (2) to explore soft impacts by imaginatively investigating how curren t stakeholder practices might be
affected in unintended ways, including how the prevalent meanings of normative concepts (like human, (dis)ability,
healthy, security, risk, etc.) could be destabili sed; and (3) to explore impacts which are far removed in sp ace and
time.
3.2. Explorative scenario building and assessment
The possible long-range consequences are the basis for building a set of diverse possible scenarios, which are to be
considered as imagined futures.
Such scenarios are written in close cooperation with professional scenario developers. Exploratory imagined
scenarios can be developed by different methods ( for example, deductively and based on a selection of two
influential factors , or inductive ly). Ideally , three or four scenarios could describe diverse worlds covering the
identified impacts.
Once the scenarios are clear, they are explored. This could be done with the same multi -disciplinary and multi -
stakeholder group as for the envisioning of the impacts, or with a smaller subset of this group. The aim is to explore
in this setting the diverse scenarios, which represent possible envisaged future worlds, and to examine how it 'feels'
to live in such a world, detecting opportunities and concerns. The same as in the impact envisioning process, the
purpose is not to strive towards consensus, but to end up with an open list of views.
This thinking experiment results in lists of opportunities and challenges for the set of examined scenarios. These
opportunities and challenges are clustered in coherent sets of related issues, or according to relevant policy areas.
3.3. Backcasting to the present, including legal and ethical reflections
To make sense out of this in the EP context, a 'backcast' is given to the MEPs, listing and describing possible future
challenges and possible future opportunitiesrelevant for considering action today, accompanied by legal and ethical
reflections. These challenges and opportunities do not indicate what is desir able or undesirable, because, i n a
political environment, the judgement as to what are desirable or undesirable futures, is for the politicians to make.
1 Ravetz, J., 1997. The science of 'what-if?' Futures, 29(6), 533–539.
2 Swierstra, T. & te Molder, H. F. M. 2012 Risk and soft impacts. Handbook of risk theory: Epistemology, decision theory, ethics, and
social implications of risk. Roeser, S., Hillerbrand, R., Peterson, M. & Sandin, P. (eds.). Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 1050-1066.
3 STOA study 'Ethical Aspects of Cyber-Physical Systems' (2016), Annex 3, p. 7.

This document is prepared for, and addressed to, the Members and staff of the European Parliament as background material to a ssist
them in their parliamentary work. The content of the document is the sole responsibility of its author(s) and any opinions ex pressed
herein should not be taken to represent an official position of the Parliament. Reproduction and translation for non -commercial
purposes are authorised, provided the source is acknowledged and the European Parliament is given prior notice and sent a copy.
© European Union, 2017.
In general, scenario-based foresight can be conducted for diverse purposes in different ways. In the case of the EP,
the purpose of science or technology foresight is to help MEPs and parliamentary committeesto be prepared well in
advance for possible future developments, by making them familiar and comfortable with certain levels of
uncertainty. As such, science or technology foresight supports them in anticipating future developments.
Findings in a foresight study could feed into the political as well as the public debate. As an example, in the case of
the robotics study, Bill Gates reacted to the Legal Affairs Committee's draft legislative initiative report (rapporteur:
Mady Delvaux, S&D, LU), which drew upon the STOA study .  His reaction sparked the ensuing reflection by Robert
Shiller, 2013 Nobel Prize winner, in his article 'Why robots should be taxed if they take people's jobs'.
4. The case of robotics
Box 2 illustrates the pilot project as a case where a foresight study on robotics, requested by an EP committee, was
intensively used by several parliamentary c ommittees and contributed to the EP legislative initiative resolution,
through which MEPs called on the European Commission to propose rules on robotics and artificial intelligence.
5. Conclusion
Foresight, as applied by STOA, supports EP decisions through:
• Analysis of the consequences and impact of long-range techno-scientific trends, based upon our knowledge of
today, in a multi-disciplinary and multi-stakeholder setting and in a multi-perspective approach;
• Imagined scenario development and assessment for future opportunities and challenges;
• Backcasting imagined futures, with their concerns and opportunities, to policy issues for consideration today;
• Reporting possible future challenges and opportunities to MEPs for possible anticipatory action, including some
legal and ethical reflections.
Foresight is a fundamental path in policy -making, as policy-making is preparing for the future. The s cenario-based
foresight approach as used by STOA has the potential to inspire anticipatory policy-making and to support the EP's
preparedness for future challenges and opportunities related to long -range trends in the field of science and
technology.
Box 2: Steps and timeline of ascientific foresight study conducted by STOAon a request by a parliamentary committee
STOA Foresight study ‘The ethics of cyber-physical systems’, requested by the Committee on Legal Affairs (JURI)
• Starting point – state-of-the-art: Autumn 2015
• Envisioning impacts: January 2016
• Scenario building: February 2016
• Exploration of the imagined scenarios on future challenges and opportunities : February 2016
• Backcasting, legal and ethical reflections, elements for anticipating future challenges and opportunities:
March-June 2016
• Regular updates about the study to the JURI Working Group on Robotics and Artificial Intelligence: 2015 -2016
• Publication: June 2016
• Animated Infographic: February 2017
Towards EP resolution oncivil law rules on robotics
• Draft report (rapporteur: Mady Delvaux, S&D, LU): 31 May 2016
• Between 12 October and 23 November 2016: Opinions of the Committees on Transport and Tourism (TRAN); Civil
Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs (LIBE); Employment and Social Affairs (EMPL); Environment, Public Health and
Food Safety (ENVI); Industry, Research and Energy (ITRE); Internal Market and Consumer Protection (IMCO)
• Vote in Committee on Legal Affairs (JURI), single reading: 12 January 2017
• Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading: 27 January 2017
• Debate in EP plenary: 15 February 2017
• Text adopted by EP, single reading: 16 February 2017 (T8-0051/2017)
