Option for series title…
© European Union 2023 – JRC133609

Sustainable Development Goals and Digital
Technologies: Mapping Scientific Research

SUSTAINABILITY AND DIGITALIZATION

The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) formulated in
2015 by the United Nations (UN) General Assembly set
ambitious targets to achieve a sustainable, fair, and inclusive
future for people worldwide by 2030 [1]. The SDGs are an
unprecedented attempt to close the sustainability gap through
a focus on the main ecological, economic, and social challenges
that humanity faces.
With less than 10 years left, a growing number of policy
initiatives are being put in place to make sure the goals are met
[2]. Science, technology, and innovation are u nquestionably
among the key enablers for the achievement of the 2030
Agenda’s ambitions. Digitalization holds great promise for
sustainable transformation.
Despite an emerging literature, the nexus between digital
transformation and sustainable development  remains poorly
explored and understood. Knowledge on the topic is based
primarily on case studies, expert opinion, and anecdotes.
Growing efforts are made to map the development of digital
technologies [3]. Similar initiatives have also been undertaken
to map the SDGs [4]. Yet, less explored remains the SDGs-
digitalization nexus.
In the context of the INNOVA projects, which support th e work
of the Directorate-General for Research & Innovation (R&I) of
the European Commission, the JRC aims to provide evidence on
the scientific knowledge, measured though academic
publications, related to SDGs, Digital Technologies (DTs), and
their intersection. Scientific knowledge is an important driver of
technological innovation, as research show s [5] strong links
between knowledge creation and new technologies in various
sectors such as, ICT, semiconductors, and biotechnologies.
MAPPING SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

Data in this analysis come from the Web of Science (WoS) Core
Collection, a widely used data source for science mapping. The
analysis considers all scientific articles published between
2010 and 2021 in peer -reviewed journals or confer ence
proceedings. Research on SDGs is mapped collecting
publications containing either in the title, the abstract or the
keywords search terms related to (at least) one of the 17 goals.
Research on D igital Technologies is instead mapped using a
comprehensive list of search terms inspired by recent
HIGHLIGHTS

→ The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) set
ambitious target s to be met by 2030. With less
than 10 years left, technology  is crucial to close
the sustainability gap .
→ This brief provides evidence on the scientific
knowledge related to SDGs, Digital Technologies
(DTs), and their intersection .
→ China and the United States are major players in
scientific research in the selected domains. Yet, EU
countries together produce more scientific
publications than any single country.
→ Unlike other DTs, Artificial Intelligence (AI)  finds
applications in almost all SDGs .
→ Natural Language Processing (NLP) analyses show
that AI is positively associated with most SDGs,
although this does not ap ply to SDG5 (Gender
Equality), SDG10 (Reduced Inequality) and SDG16
(Peace, Justice , and Strong Institut ions). The latter is
the most negatively affected by digital technologies,
particularly blockchain and computing infrastructure .

contributions by OECD and scholars  on the mapping of
advanced digital technologies [ 6]. The developed taxonomy
considers seven macro -categories: Additive Manufacturing;
Artificial Intelligence; Blockchain; Big Dat a; Computing
Infrastructures; Internet of Things; and Robotics. Additional
details on data retrieval processes are available in the Quick
Guide.
The resulting dataset covering research on SDGs comprises of
almost 1.3 million publication records. Among the most
frequent SDGs in the data, SDG13 (Climate action) accounts for
about 22% of these publications whereas SDG3 (Good health
and well -being), SDG6 (Clean water) and SDG14 (Life below
water) cover about 10% of the records each. Among the less
frequent, SDG 1 (No poverty), SDG2 (Zero hunger), SDG8
(Decent work and economic growth), SDG9 (Industry,
innovation, and infrastructure) and SDG10 (Reduced
inequalities) account for just 2% each.
The resulting dataset covering research on Digital Technologies
contains about 860  000 records of which more than half
(~58%) are related to AI and about 110 000 to IoT (~15%) and
Robotics (~17%). The least represented technology is instead
Blockchain (~10  000 publications), followed by Big  data and
Additive Manufacturing (~50  000 publications each). Finally,
scientific production covering at least one SDG and DT together
account for less than 50 000 publications.
The growth of science
Scientific activity has steadily increased over the past  decade.
Web of Science (WoS) publications grew by 75% between 2010
and 2021. Yet, the digital and SDGs domains grew even faster
during this period  (Figure 1) . In particular, the volume of
scientific outcome related to SDGs has increased by about
450% and the volume of outcomes related to DTs by 750%.
Figure 1 – Scientific research in SDGs, DTs and their Intersection.

Source: JRC calculations on WoS  data, 2010-2021. Left axis contains the
number of publications related to SDGs (blue line) and DTs (orange line). Right
axis details the number of publications covering both domains (green line).
Publications jointly related to SDGs and DTs show in turn an
even more pronounced growth rates (2426%), especially in
recent years. This sharp increase is because scientific output at
the intersection between SDGs and the recent DTs was nearly
non-existent ten years ago. In 2021, by contrast, there were
more than 10 000 contributions worldwide. As a result of these
different dynamics, the share of publications related either to
SDGs or DTs grew from 3.6% in 2010 to 13.6% in 2021. While
the volume of scientific research on SDGs remained larger than
the one on DTs throughout the period, the faster growth of DTs-
related scientific production implied a gradual tendency to
close the gap in more recent years: the quantity of scientific
research on SDGs  in 2010 was 188% larger than the one on
DTs; in 2021, it was ‘only’ 125% larger.
Goals and Technologies
Figure 2 maps the scientific knowledge related to both SDGs
and DTs in the 119 combinations obtained intersecting the 17
SDGs (horizontal axis) with the seven DTs composing a digital
ecosystem – i.e., a set of interconnected DTs, each differing in
scope, life cycle, and degree of adoption and diffusion. First, AI
plays a key role in driving the emergence of scientific research
on SDGs -DTs domains, holding the largest number of
publications. Unlike other digital technologie s composing the
digital ecosystem, it finds applications in almost all  SDGs,
confirming its versatility across a wide range of domains.
Among SDGs, AI is particularly prominent in SDG13 (Climate
change), SDG11 (Sustainable cities and communities), SDG7
(Affordable and clean energy), and SDG3 (Good health and
well-being).
Figure 2 – Scientific research in the SDGs-DTs knowledge space.

Source: JRC calculations on WoS data, 2010 -2021. Size and colour of the
bubble is associated with the number of publications found at the intersection
of each SDG and DT.
Other SDGs -DTs combinations account for fewer scientific
publications, with the notable exception of the SDG7 -IoT
combination, which is the second largest combination after
SDG13-AI. Interestingly,  research in SDG7 comprises several
different DTs that, beyond IoT and AI, also include scientific
research on computing infrastructure and big data. This
suggests that recent scientific research related to energy
production, distribution and consumption i s exploring new
paths of knowledge re-combinations with different intertwined
digital technologies. Analogous evidence, yet with lower
numbers, is observed for SDG11, which beyond AI also includes
sizable research on big data and IoT, and SDG13, which beyond
AI also include s sizable research on big data, IoT, computing
infrastructure and robotics.  Finally, AI is the only technology
playing a sizable role in SDG3 (‘Good Health and Well -being’)
thanks also to the research  that has been carried out in the
wake of the COVID-19 pandemic (see Box 1).

THE GEOGRAPHY OF SCIENCE

The United States (US) is the world leader in SDG-related
scientific research with about 194  000 publications, followed
by China with about 145  000.  Notice that the EU taken as a
whole, has more publications in the period  2010-2021 – i.e.,
about 255 000 – with a growth rate comparable to the one of
China. All other countries have much lower numbers of
publications, with the United Kingdom (UK) showing the largest
numbers (about 61  000 publications), followed by Australia
(46 000), Italy (37  000) and Germany (36  000).

China has the largest number of publications on DTs  over the
entire period (about 189 000). In the same years, the EU ranks
second with about 150  000 publications, and the US occupies
the third position with about 115  000 publications . A similar
number of DTs-related publications (about 10 000) is recorded
yearly up to 2017 in both China and the US  as well as in the
EU, while in 2021 China had more than 40 000 as compared to
the EU and the US with about 30 000 and 20,000 respectively.
Among other countries, South Korea and the UK show the
largest number of DTs publications (respectively 33  000 and
31 000 over the entire period), followed by Germany and Italy
(25 000 over the entire period).
Similarly, as in the case of SDGs, the EU as a whole leads in the
production of scientific knowledge on SDGs -DTs (about 7 000
publications, roughly 21% of the to tal), followed by China
(6 500) and the US (5 000). The trends of the EU and China are
very close across years, while the gap with the US accentuated
since 2016. Among other countries, the UK has the largest
number of SDGs-DTs publications in the period (a bout 1 500),
followed by Italy, South Korea, Spain, Germany and Australia
(all approximately SDGs-DTs 1 000 publications).
EU regional -level strength
In absolute terms, the largest scientific production comes from
Cataluña (Spain) in SDGs and Île-de France (France) in DTs, with
more than 10 000 publications since 2010. Other regions with
large absolute numbers (more than 6 000) of publications are:
i) in SDGs, Île -de France (France), Comunidad de Madrid and
Andalucía (Spain), Lombardia and Lazio (Ital y), Zuid-Holland
(Netherlands) and Hovedstaden (Denmark); ii) in DTs,
Comunidad de Madrid (Spain), Lombardia (Italy) and
Oberbayern (Germany). As for the intersection SDGs -DTs, the
highest amount of scientific publications come from Lazio
(Italy) with almost 600 publications, followed by Comunidad de
Madrid and Cataluña (Spain) and Lombardia (Italy), with more
than 200 publications.
Unsurprisingly, the weakest regions are among rural areas,
some EU outermost and less populated regions such as
Flevoland and  Drenthe (Netherlands), Severen Tsentralen
(Bulgaria), Prov. Luxembourg (Belgium), Valle d’Aosta (Italy),
Burgenland (Austria) and Åland ( Finland) where there are less
than 100 publications on SDGs or DTs since 2010.
Considering only absolute counts may be  misleading. Indeed,
more populated regions are expected to have more people
working in the fields of education and R&D activities, leading
to larger amounts of qualified human capital in any domain.
Consequently, we also report a normalized indicator, in which
all figures have been normalized by total regional population
to remove scale effects, at least partly.
When flagging the top -15 NUTS 2 regions by the number of
publications related to SDGs, DTs, and SDGs-DTs normalized by
regional population, an int eresting pattern  emerges. Five
regions from different countries are among the top-15 regions
producing knowledge in all three domains. These regions are:
• Övre Norrland – SE
• Helsinki-Uusimaa – FI
• Bremen – DE
• Hovedstaden – DK
• Grad Zagreb – HR
Scientific production in the digital domain is evenly distributed
across EU countries, having regions from 14 countries in the
top 15. Only Denmark appears two times in the best 15
performing regions (Nordjylland and Hovedstaden).
Geographical patterns ar e clearer when referring to SDG -
related scientific production, where among the top 15
performers there are three Swedish (Övre Norrland, Östra
Mellansverige, Stockholm), three Dutch (Gelderland, Utrecht,
Groningen) and two Belgian regions (Prov. Vlaams -Brabant,
Box 1: COVID-19 and scientific  research
The early scientific response to  the COVID-19 pandemic
was a unique case of a global research effort to assess
the clinical and pathogenic characteristics of the disease
and formulate therapeutic strategies. In this analysis, this
phenomenon is captured by the large increase observed
for publications related to SDG3 , which surged from
about 7 000 publications in 2019 to more than 20  000
in 2020 and almost 50 000 in 2021.
Figure 3 – Occurrences of AI keywords in 5 COVID-19 domains

Source: Abbonato et al. (2022) [7].
In this context, AI has represented an effective solution
to some of the challenges posed by COVID-19 (see Figure
3). Some studies confirm that AI tools have intervened at
different stages of the pandemic, with applications in
three main areas: molecular applications, which included,
e.g., protein structure predictions, drug repurposing, and
drug discovery ; clinical app lications, which  involved,
among others, autonomous and remote -controlled
robots for telemedicine, image -based diagnosis, and
hospital capacity planning ; and social application, which
involved epidemiology, where AI-based solutions have
helped understand p ublic policy interventions such as
social distancing ), and infodemiology , where AI has
helped combat information disorders and manage
information overabundance.

Région de Bruxelles -Capitale). Observing publications at the
intersection of digital technologies and SDGs, four countries
appear two times among the best performers: Italy (Lazio,
Provincia Autonoma di Trento), Finland (Helsinki -Uusimaa,
Pohjois- ja Itä-Suomi), Denmark (Nordjylland, Hovedstaden)
and Greece (Voreio Aigaio, Dytiki Elláda) – see Figure 4.

Figure 4 – Scientific strength of EU regions in SDGs-DTs, 2010-
2021.

Note: Number of publications computed using fractional count s (see quick
guide). Numbers normalised by 2021 NUTS -2 level Population. Source: JRC
calculations on WoS and Eurostat data.
A high divergence emerges when flagging the worst -
performing regions in the three domains. Six regions are in the
bottom-15 list in all domains ( Mazowiecki regionalny – PL,
Severozápad – CZ, Vorarlberg – AT, Severen tsentralen – BG,
Severozapaden – BG and Mayotte - FR). In most cases,
however, being among the weakest regions in one domain is
not associated to being among the weakest also in the others.
THE IMPACT OF TECHNOLOGIES ON  SDGs

While it is recognized that technology has undoubtedly played
a role in exacerbating some of the current challenges that
humanity faces, it also has the potential to be part of the
solution. A growing body of qualitative research has sought to
examine the impact of digital technologies on the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)  [10]. In this
study, we leverage NLP techniques to evaluate abstracts of
scientific publications at the intersection of digital technologies
and the SDGs to determine the overall contr ibution of digital
technologies to the achievement of the SDGs. The analysis
reaches three main conclusions: (i) NLP tools on the corpus of
scientific publications can provide a complementary approach
to qualitative research; (ii) Artificial intelligence i s mostly
positively associated with the SDGs, although this does not
apply to SDG5 (Gender Equality), SDG10 (Reduced Inequality)
and SDG16 (Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions); and (iii)
SDG16 is the most negatively affected by digital technologies,
particularly blockchain and computing infrastructure (see
Figure 5). This analysis represents a first comprehensive step
toward understanding the complex relationship between digital
transformation and sustainability.

Figure 5 – The impact of technologies on SDGs.

Source: JRC calculation on WoS data.
Conclusions

The work of the JRC in the context of the INNOVA project, which
supports the work of the Directorate -General for Research &
Innovation (R&I) of the European Commission, provides the first
evidence of the emergence of scientific research that jointly
studies SDGs and DTs.
The combination of SDGs - and DTs -related in scientific
research is a recent development that has surfaced over the
past ten years and is rapidly expanding . Unsurprisingly, China
and the United States are major players in scientific research
in the selected domains, with each country producing many
publications and holding a significant share of the global
research output. Yet, the European Union produces more
scientific publications than any single country, including China
and the United States, in the SDGs and SDGs-DTs domains and
closely follows China, which leads in terms of DTs publications.
The EU’s strong scientific production in areas combining
knowledge on both sustainable development and digital
technologies, coupled with the strong ongoing EU policy efforts
to promote the development, reinforcement, and diffusion of
advanced digital technologies (such as the EU Digital Strategy),
is likely to foster the opportunities for the creation of EU digital
solutions enabling to approach the achievement of SDGs.
Yet, fully realizing the potential of EU digital re search for
sustainable development requires improvements in the
integration of national research systems to exploit scale and
scope economies that MSs cannot achieve in isolation. This is
particularly important in research on advanced digital
technologies, which is a domain whose development require s
solid infrastructures and specific capabilities, while being
characterised by large investments worldwide. While having
made some progress since the introduction of the European
Research Area (ERA) in 2000, the  EU scientific landscape
appears fragmented  [8]. The EU encourage s international
collaborations with other leading players in the global research
community as well as collaborations with economies that are
less developed. By fostering international collabo rations, the
EU can bring in new ideas, technologies, and talented
researchers from around the world, which will help to further
strengthen and diversify the ERA.  In this context, Horizon
Europe helps providing funding for research towards the twin
transition under pillar II as well as for research infrastructures

under pilar I. Moreover, Horizon strengthens international
cooperation through various actions. As collaborations are of
great importance for the development of science and
technology, future research could cover these aspects.
Finally, this research is a first step toward the overall objective
of providing a better understanding of the complex
relationships between SDGs and DTs using the lens of science.
It showed that applying NLP tools to the scientific literature on
the topic might provide additional and complementary insights
to qualitative analysis. It can help distinguish those Goals which
are more like to be negatively affected by DTs, allowing for
future in-depth analyses.

QUICK GUIDE -  Data used in the analysis come from the Web of Science (WoS) Core Collection. WoS  is a widely used data
source for science mapping and analysis of the “science of science”. The analysis considers all scientific
articles published in peer-reviewed journals and conference proceedings. To identify scientific output in SDGs
and DTs domains, the authors used a keyword-based approach. Queries searched for all publications over
the period 2010 -2021 containing at least one search term either in the title, the abstract, or  among
keywords. Publications on the SDGs were identified using the search  queries for “Mapping Research Output
to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG)”. The project represents a comprehensive effort to map
scientific output related to the 17 different SDG s. Originally developed for Scopus, the search queries are
elegant constructions of keyword combinations, Boolean and proximity operators that have been adapted to
WoS syntax. Digital publications were identified using a comprehensive list of search terms inspired by recent
contributions on the mapping of advanced digital tec hnologies [6]. The analysis uses fractional counts to
analyse scientific performance of countries and European Union (EU) regions . This involve d geo-localizing
each publication exploiting authors’ affiliations  – i.e., attributing a publication to a given country (or region)
when the affiliation of at least one of its authors is in that country (or region). To avoid making assumptions
about the numbers of authors  per publications across different countries (regions) and scientific domains,
the contribution to any given publication of each country (region) is weighted by the number of authors ( n).
A publication with n authors, each one located in different countrie s (regions), will contribute by 1/ n to the
scientific production of each country (or region). Note that multiple affiliations are counted only once when
they are: (i) within the same country  for the national -level analysis; and (ii) within the same  region in the
regional-level analysis. Finally, For NLP analysis, aspect-based sentiment analysis algorithms were used. In
particular, the DeBERTa-v3-large-ABSA-v1.1 model was, a pre-trained deep learning model for sentiment
analysis based on the DeBERTa-v3-large architecture – see [9] for additional details.

Related work
This policy brief is part of the INNOVA projects, which support
the work of the Directorate-General for Research & Innovation
(R&I) of the European Commission by providing better evidence
for policy -making. The INNOVA V project focuses on three
interrelated research streams : R&I monitoring frameworks ;
innovative FDI flows and the development of green and digital
technologies; and digital technologies and SDGs.
RE FERENCES
[1] UN General Assembly (2015). Transforming our world: the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
[2] Sachs, J.D., Schmidt-Traub, G., Mazzucato, M., Messner, D.,
Nakicenovic, N. & Rockström, J. (2019). Six Transformations to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. Nature
Sustainability, 2: 805–814.
[3] European Commission (2018) Artificial Intelligence: A
European Perspective.  European Commission, Joint Research
Centre, Seville.
[4] Purnell, P. J. (2022). A comparison of different methods of
identifying publications related to the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals: Case Study of SDG 13 –
Climate Action. Quantitative Science Studies: 1-56.
[5] Dosi, G., & Grazzi, M. (2010). On the nature of technologies:
knowledge, procedures, artifacts and production
inputs. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 34(1), 173-184.
[6] Bianchini, S., Damioli, G. & Ghisetti, C. (2022). The
environmental effects of the “twin” green and digital transition
in European regions. Environmental & Resource Economics, 1-
42.
[7] Abbonato, D., Bianchini, S., Gargiulo, F., & Venturini, T.
(2023). Questioning the impact of AI and interdisciplinarity in
science: Lessons from COVID-19. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.08923.
[8] Chessa, A., Morescalchi, A., Pammolli, F., Penner, O.,
Petersen, A. M., & Riccaboni, M. (2013). Is Europe evolving
toward an integrated research area?. Science, 339(6120),
650-651.
[9] He, P., Liu, X., Gao, J., & Chen, W. (2020). Deberta:
Decoding-enhanced bert with disentangled attention. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.03654.
[10] Vinuesa, Ricardo, et al. (2020). The role of artificial
intelligence in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
Nature communications 11.1:233.

SUGGESTED CITATION
Bianchini, S., Bottero, P., Colagrossi, M., Damioli, G., Ghisetti, C.
and Michoud, K., Sustainable Development Goals and Digital
Technologies: Mapping Scientific Research, JRC Policy Brief,
2023.
CONTACT INFORMATION
jrc-innova-project@ec.europa.eu
COPYRIGHT
© European Union, 2023
