The U.S. bioeconomy—defined by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) as “economic activity derived from the life sciences, particularly in the areas of biotechnology and biomanufacturing, including industries, products, services, and the workforce” and valued by some at

~$1 trillion

—has been a major focus of policy development over the past few years. These policy advances include the White House Executive Order on “

Advancing Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing Innovation for a Sustainable, Safe, and Secure American Bioeconomy

” (Bioeconomy EO), the

CHIPS & Science Act

, and the

Inflation Reduction Act

(IRA). In March 2024, the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP),

announced the launch of the National Bioeconomy Board

(NBB). The board will “partner across the public and private sectors to advance societal well-being, national security, sustainability, economic productivity, and competitiveness through biotechnology and biomanufacturing,” highlighting the Biden Administration’s commitment to future-proofing an economically sustainable U.S. bioeconomy.

Despite these advances, the vast intersectionality inherent to the bioeconomy (e.g., with health, clean energy, national security, climate change, economic development) poses unique challenges for the U.S. government. This complexity makes it difficult for the various agencies to coordinate and even more difficult for the general public to understand the government’s approach to the bioeconomy. Nonetheless, to maintain the continued growth within the bioeconomy that has resulted from these policy advances, it will be imperative to clarify a strategic vision that coordinates and publicizes governmental efforts that support the burgeoning U.S. bioeconomy.

The NBB can play an important role in promoting this strategic vision. As

directed by the Bioeconomy EO

, the interagency through the Executive Office of the President set up the NBB to promote interagency coordination and collaboration on the bioeconomy. The NBB is co-chaired by OSTP, the Department of Commerce (DOC), and the Department of Defense (DOD), and nine other agencies make up the entirety of the board. Other agencies not represented on the NBB itself, including the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), work with the NBB through various working groups and play an integral role.

To understand the range of governmental priorities for the bioeconomy, the overarching strategy, the work underway, the various programs within the agencies, and the role of environmental sustainability, our team at the Federation of American Scientists (FAS) spoke with key agencies represented on the NBB to collect their perspectives.

The perspectives summarized below demonstrate that the agencies align bioeconomy-related initiatives to their varied mission areas and, through the NBB and other interagency activities, are working together to develop a shared vision. However, the summaries also show the diversity in focus that informs how agencies approach the bioeconomy. The agency views encompass the broader bioeconomy landscape, including biotechnologies from commodity fuels and agriculture to individualized therapeutics, and biomanufacturing solutions from biomass production to final product. This range highlights both the important role that each agency plays in supporting the U.S. bioeconomy as well as the challenge in coordinating their activities and programs across the federal government.

Approach

In order to collect perspectives from the agencies represented on the NBB around the U.S. bioeconomy, FAS conducted semi-structured interviews with key NBB officials from the OSTP, DOC, DOD, Department of Energy (DOE), Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), and the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) from May 2024 through June 2024. With the exception of USDA, all agency interviews were conducted over Zoom and answers were documented by note-taking. All summaries have been reviewed by agency representatives to confirm consent and validity. The USDA perspective was summarized using publicly available reports and have also been confirmed for validity by an agency representative.

Perspectives from these agencies on the Bioeconomy EO deliverables, bioeconomy-related programs, coordination, goals, hurdles, and the role of environmental sustainability are summarized below. The full list of questions used in the semi-structured interviews can be found in

Appendix A

.

Agency Perspectives

Office of Science & Technology Policy

For OSTP’s perspective, FAS conducted a semi-structured interview with

Dr. Sarah Glaven

, principal assistant director for biotechnology and biomanufacturing.

The Office of Science & Technology Policy plays an important role in interagency coordination for topics, like the bioeconomy, that cut across many different agencies, and is one of the co-chairs for the NBB. In adherence with the Bioeconomy EO, OSTP has coordinated interagency efforts and published several reports on the bioeconomy:

Bold Goals for U.S. Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing

,

Building the Bioworkforce of the Future

, and

Visions, Needs & Proposed Actions for Data for the Bioeconomy Initiative

. They are currently working with interagency groups on several activities, including one that recently published a report, in conjunction with USDA and other agencies, that recommended

revisions to the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) and the North American Product Classification System (NAPCS)

to better capture economic activity related to the bioeconomy. The creation of the NBB itself fulfills directives from both the Bioeconomy EO as well as the CHIPS & Science Act, which called on OSTP to establish a coordination office on these topics. Currently, due to a lack of funding, OSTP is not an official coordinating office but will function to coordinate activities through the NBB.

According to OSTP, the Bioeconomy EO reflects the whole-of-government approach that will be needed to support the bioeconomy. For the near term, OSTP plans to show the value and utility of the NBB, execute policy from the Bioeconomy EO, prioritize specific actions from the resulting Bioeconomy EO reports, highlight significant investments, and produce a report on the NAICS and NAPCS codes. In the long term, OSTP hopes that the NBB will become a sustainable government entity that drives a clear national strategy to move the bioeconomy forward and enables the United States to work collaboratively with global partners.

A key challenge is measuring the bioeconomy. It is difficult to prioritize, strategize, or advocate for additional resources in the absence of baseline economic metrics to track impact or estimate the potential return on investment. Ultimately, OSTP believes it is important to clarify the

definition of the bioeconomy

in order to create measurements and classifications.

A challenge for OSTP is continuity as it experiences staff turnover and administration changes. However, the NBB and coordination of the bioeconomy portfolio will be well positioned to persist, in part by relying on the NBB’s co-chairs. Also, the Bioeconomy EO allowed OSTP to create principal and assistant director positions for the bioeconomy portfolio, which can help ensure that it remains a high priority. At OSTP, this portfolio sits within the Industrial Innovation Group, which also houses coordination efforts for semiconductors and clean energy. OSTP leadership understands the importance of the bioeconomy and is keen to see the intersections of biomanufacturing with other initiatives, like the DOE’s Earth Shot programs and other clean energy initiatives.

On the issue of environmental sustainability and the bioeconomy, OSTP highlights efforts by DOE to push for sustainable aviation fuels and USDA’s sustainable biomass supply chain framework as initiatives that are setting the pace for sustainability. There is also an opportunity to consider how biomanufacturing and biosynthesis fit into the broader sustainable chemistry landscape.

Department of Commerce

For DOC’s perspective, FAS conducted a semi-structured interview with

Dr. Christopher Szakal

, acting director, program coordination office at the National Institute of Standards and Technology.

The Department of Commerce is one of the NBB co-chairs. DOC is sector-agnostic and is interested in the bioeconomy as a way to support the broader economy, remain competitive, and solve broader challenges, such as those related to supply chain resilience. In response to the Bioeconomy EO, the DOC has released the

bioeconomy lexicon

from NIST and the

Feasibility Study

for measuring the bioeconomy from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. It has also participated in several interagency activities, including development of OSTP’s

Bold Goals

report and USDA’s

Biomass Supply Chain

report, as well as ongoing working groups focusing on updating systems for measuring economic activities (e.g., the NAICS and NAPCS codes) and on biological data and cybersecurity. Separate from the executive order, the Inflation Reduction Act provided significant investments for the Economic Development Administration in biotechnology-related regional technology hubs. Other ongoing activities at DOC in support of the bioeconomy include efforts to support biotechnology and biomanufacturing standards development at NIST, supply chain analyses at the International Trade Administration, work at the Bureau of Industry and Security and at the Patent and Trademark Office to ensure a safe and fair market, and the

Workforce Development Strategy

.

By nature, DOC keeps a broad perspective and tries to understand how the bioeconomy intersects with other parts of the economy and how technological developments may impact progress. There are important intersections of the bioeconomy with artificial intelligence (AI) and with data security, and policy development in these other areas will have implications for the bioeconomy. For example, the October 2023

Executive Order on AI

called for significant new requirements for providers of synthetic nucleic acids to conduct biosecurity screening, which will have implications for biotechnology and biomanufacturing. NIST is tasked with developing standards for this new policy. The intersectional nature of the bioeconomy requires coordination both within the DOC and across the U.S. government. A key challenge is the need for sustained funding because coordination requires time and effort.

On environmental sustainability, the DOC prioritizes the market and what U.S. companies will find profitable in both the near term and the long term. Elevating sustainability has been challenging because there is uncertainty in how sustainability is measured. Additionally, market drivers have been inconsistent relative to the level needed to address the uncertainty. DOC is looking to utilize the NBB to help provide clarity on how to achieve more consistent market forces in support of sustainability to drive growth of the bioeconomy.

Department of Defense

For DOD’s perspective, FAS conducted a semi-structured interview with

Dr. Peter Emanuel

, senior research scientist, bioengineering at U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command.

The Department of Defense is one of the NBB co-chairs. In September 2022 (before the Bioeconomy EO was announced), DOD announced a

$1.2 billion investment in biomanufacturing

. In March 2023, DOD released a

Biomanufacturing Strategy

, which was informed by both the

National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023

and the Bioeconomy EO. In support of this strategy and the investments made by DOD, the Department’s Defense Production Act Investments (DPAI) Office published an open

Request for Information

that sought input from industry on biomanufactured products and process capabilities that could help address defense needs. Significant additional investments in biomanufacturing are likely to be forthcoming.

The bioeconomy portfolio is a tiny portion of the overall programmatic budget for DOD. Previously, the DOD’s interest in biology and biotechnology was limited to military medicine and chemical and biological defense, but the department is increasingly focused on nonmedical biomanufacturing applications and believes that they will be key for ensuring national security. The department also acknowledges the importance of workforce development and the need for standardization and infrastructure for the bioeconomy and strongly supports these areas. This commitment can be seen with DOD’s large investments in 2020 in

BioMADE

, a Manufacturing Innovation Institute focused on creating a sustainable, domestic end-to-end bioindustrial manufacturing ecosystem.

In the future, DOD hopes to take advantage of biomanufacturing’s potential to support defense objectives beyond just medical countermeasures and other human health-related advances, such as production of bio-based materials, chemicals, and foods. However, DOD faces challenges both internally and externally in communicating the full potential of the bioeconomy and biomanufacturing for DOD.

On environmental sustainability, DOD believes that economic and environmental sustainability for the bioeconomy go hand-in-hand. For example, a company that could make chemicals without waste would have a significant economic advantage and would support environmental sustainability. Historically, DOD has seen significant costs due to polluted sites, and so understands the value of cleaner products and processes. In addition, DOD is investing in different technologies that would valorize waste streams.

Department of Energy

For DOE’s perspective, FAS conducted a semi-structured interview with

Dr. Valerie Reed

, director, Bioenergy Technologies Office.

The Department of Energy has many goals for advancing the bioeconomy, with the common denominator being to decarbonize America’s transportation and fuel sectors and to build resilient clean energy for generations to come. In response to the Bioeconomy EO, the DOE contributed to the OSTP

Bold Goals

report and was tasked to work with other agencies to write reports on

National Security Recommendations for Federal Procurement

(forthcoming) and best practices for cyber security documentation. Furthermore, DOE also played a large role in an upcoming biotechnology and biomanufacturing report mandated by the Bioeconomy EO. Outside of the direct requirements from the EO, the DOE plays a crucial role in supporting industrial biotechnology through additional reports and their involvement in ongoing interagency activities. For example, the

Billion Ton Report

provides a comprehensive assessment of biomass availability today and how to sustainably produce more than one billion tons of biomass per year to meet the demand for sustainable aviation fuel production.

DOE’s bioeconomy efforts are concentrated within the

Bioenergy Technologies Office (BETO)

and the

Office of Science

. BETO aims to utilize biomass for sustainable and renewable fuel and chemical production, while the Office of Science supports fundamental research that enables the bioeconomy, including synthetic biology and thermochemical conversion. Under the Inflation Reduction Act and CHIPS & Science Act, significant support was given to bioenergy solutions and clean energy demonstrations, including DOE tax incentives aimed at carbon reduction in fuel production.

In the short term, DOE is focused on prioritizing the use of biomass for

Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF)

and marine fuel production, as well as supporting renewable diesel and ethanol for medium- and heavy-duty vehicles. Long-term goals include transitioning to electrification using biomass, achieving substantial SAF production by 2035 through the

SAF Grand Challenge

, and scaling up the production of specific chemicals by 2035 as part of the industrial decarbonization strategy. Additionally, in coordination with the USDA, there are focused efforts to increase cultivation of purpose-grown energy crops.

One of the major hurdles the DOE currently faces, and may continue to face in the future, is ensuring sustained funding levels that support ongoing development. Currently,

biomass is seen as an expensive feedstock

. While the IRA provided an initial policy bridge, it is essential to establish a longer-term incentive to meet market demand, like the

40B

(SAF production) and

45Z

(clean fuel production) tax credits.

On environmental sustainability, the DOE is very focused on goals for decarbonization of transportation and fuels, including replacing petroleum-based products with sustainable biomass solutions and conducting life cycle assessments (LCAs) to measure sustainability impacts throughout the supply chain. DOE created the GREET Model for LCAs, which was

updated recently

, to reduce ambiguity and to help standardize the process for measuring carbon emissions. Additionally, DOE’s

Clean Fuels and Products Earthshot

is an important cross-agency collaboration that supports accelerating bio-based fuels and chemicals production and decarbonizing both the fuel and chemical industry.

Department of Health & Human Services

For HHS’s perspective, FAS conducted a semi-structured interview with

Dr. Lyric Jorgenson

, associate director for science policy and the director of the Office of Science Policy at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and Dr. Julia Limage, director, Office of Strategy, Policy, and Requirements in the Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response (ASPR).

The Department of Health & Human Services has two representatives on the NBB, one from NIH and one from ASPR. HHS has a broad mission in support of human health, and many of its programs could be considered part of the bioeconomy. However, the Bioeconomy EO outlined a set of priorities that called for additional focus at HHS on advances specific to biotechnology and biomanufacturing, many of which were included in the OSTP

Bold Goals

report. The EO also tasked HHS with leading the establishment of a Biosafety and Biosecurity Innovation Initiative; a strategic plan for this initiative will be available soon. Another area of intersection of HHS and the Bioeconomy EO is on the regulatory side: the Food and Drug Administration worked with USDA and EPA to provide updates on the regulatory system as deliverables for the EO. Many of the activities related to the EO draw on interagency working groups and other ongoing activities—for example, the work toward pandemic preparedness and biodefense, as well as collaborations between NIH and NSF on health-relevant research.

In the near future, HHS will focus on advancing biotechnologies such as multi-omic medicine, gene editing, and other therapeutics tailored to individual patients. Biomanufacturing and scale-up is another key focus to increase speed and availability of key medicines. In regards to public health, the COVID pandemic highlighted the need for fast and secure biomanufacturing for vaccine production. The Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (

BARDA

) in ASPR has made significant investments in biomanufacturing for this reason. ASPR also has an

Office of Industrial Base Management and Supply Chain

to support domestic biomanufacturing in case of public health emergencies.

For HHS, activities related to the bioeconomy directly and unambiguously support the department’s mission and will continue to be prioritized. A key challenge for HHS is the need for sustained funding, especially for coordination, which requires time and effort above and beyond programmatic work. To be effective, activities initiated by the Bioeconomy EO will need to be funded. Some HHS activities, including some related to biomanufacturing of medical countermeasures, were funded with COVID supplemental funding that will soon run out.

On environmental sustainability, HHS has not had any significant focus. However, there have been efforts to decrease the use of single-use plastics and equipment in research and public health activities.

United States Department of Agriculture

For USDA’s perspective, FAS gathered information from publicly available reports and documents, with guidance and direction from Herrick Fox, USDA’s bioeconomy coordinator in the Office of the Chief Economist, and

Greg Jaffe

, senior advisor in the Office of the Secretary.

The Bioeconomy EO tasked USDA with a wide range of deliverables, and USDA has released many related reports and products that reflect its bioeconomy-related priorities. One set of deliverables focuses on biomass and feedstocks, and supports the strategic vision outlined for agriculture in OSTP’s

Bold Goals

report. This includes the report on

Building a Resilient Biomass Supply—A Plan to Enable the Bioeconomy in America

, along with an

Implementation Framework

. USDA also has a long-standing focus on bio-based products, including support of the

BioPreferred Program

, a program created by the 2002 Farm Bill to increase the purchase of bio-based products and reauthorized in the 2018 Farm Bill. Their recent

Economic Impact Analysis of the U.S. Biobased Products Industry

report

summarizes the status of bio-based products, an important component of the bioeconomy.

USDA also plays a central role in regulating biotechnology products, and the Bioeconomy EO called for updates to the regulatory system. In response, USDA (along with the FDA and the EPA) conducted stakeholder outreach, which is summarized in a report on

Ambiguities, Gaps, and Uncertainties in Regulation of Biotechnology Under the Coordinated Framework

. USDA also released a

Plan for Regulatory Reform under the Coordinated Framework for the Regulation of Biotechnology

and produced an updated

Coordinated Framework website

. Activities to improve coordination across the three major regulatory agencies are ongoing.

Unlike most federal departments and agencies, most programs and activities at USDA have a link with the life sciences, including those that support food and fiber, forests and grasslands, and other natural resources, as well as the manufacturing of numerous bio-based products and biofuels from these resources and the R&D and infrastructure that supports it. From

USDA’s perspective

, the department has served the bioeconomy since its founding in 1862. This broad focus provides many opportunities for strategic partnerships with other parts of the U.S. government working on the bioeconomy, and there are many different ways that USDA can contribute to the NBB.

On environmental sustainability, USDA has demonstrated its commitment to developing a circular bioeconomy, which is reflected in its

Biomass Plan

, and in its support for bio-based products and sustainable agriculture initiatives.

Conclusion

The agencies that make up the NBB highlight the complex nature of the U.S. bioeconomy and the various sectors that fall under it. Nevertheless, despite this complexity, the NBB is providing a whole-of-government approach to enable agencies to better support the burgeoning U.S. bioeconomy. The work underway is underpinned by the agencies’ priorities and programmatic expertise, but comes together to build the foundational base needed to support and grow the U.S. bioeconomy. Each agency also has a focus on environmental sustainability, with some, like DOE, DOD, and USDA, having a stronger focus due to their direct connections with the environment. Finally, agencies also agree on the need for more data on the bioeconomy’s impact as the different sectors evolve and the need for sustained funding to promote coordination, which takes time and effort beyond just programmatic work.

Appendix A. Interview Questions

In response to the September 2022 Bioeconomy EO, your agency has produced some reports and other deliverables on the bioeconomy.

Are we missing any deliverables? Are there any other reports or activities that are already completed or still to come in response to the EO?

Are there programs or other deliverables relevant to the bioeconomy that your agency has pursued under the Inflation Reduction Act or the CHIPS & Science Act?

Are there other activities within your agency that you believe support the bioeconomy? Is the bioeconomy broader than what was captured by the EO and these other efforts?

What does your agency hope to achieve in the foreseeable future and in the more distant future regarding the U.S. bioeconomy?

Are these goals related to the OSTP

Bold Goals Report

or other deliverables for the Bioeconomy EO?

To what extent will this progress be prioritized within your agency? How central to your agency is progress in the bioeconomy – now and into the future?

What are the major hurdles your agency currently faces or may face in the future in reaching these goals?

How does your agency tackle the issue of creating an environmentally sustainable bioeconomy and/or a circular bioeconomy?

Are there any initiatives in place currently or coming up in the near future that speak towards this?
