
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85

Policies for Industrial Development, International
Collaboration and Technological Sovereignty:
Implications for Emerging Economies

Henning Kroll

Place: Karlsruhe
Date: August 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Responsible for content
Henning Kroll, henning.kroll@isi.fraunhofer.de
Recommended citation
Kroll, Henning (2024): Policies for Industrial Development, International Collaboration and Technological Sover-
eignty: Implications for Emerging Economies. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer ISI
Published
August 2024
ISSN
1612-1430
Doi
10.24406/w-34872

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | I

Contents
Introduction and Motivation .................................................................................................... 1
1 Innovation Driven Development ............................................................................... 3
2 Technological Sovereignty for Development ........................................................ 9
3 Emerging Nations' Exposure to Partnership Risks in Collaboration ............ 12
4 Conclusions...................................................................................................................23
Annex ......................................................................................................................................... 27
Literature ......................................................................................................................................29

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | II

List of figures
Figure 1: International Collaboration as a Core Focus of Industrial Policy Types of
Exchanges and Mediators .............................................................................................................. 7
Figure 2: Timeline of Key Tasks of Industrial Development Policy.................................................... 8
Figure 3: Development of foreign direct investment (net inflows) over GDP ............................. 17
Figure 4: Development of High-Tech Goods Relative Trade Balance over Time ...................... 17
Figure 5: Development of Shares of Top-3 Export Partners in all Exports, 2012-22 ................ 18
Figure 6: Development of Shares of Main Import Partners in all Imports, 2012-22 ................ 18
Figure 7: Development of the Share of Top Import Partner in all Imports, 2012-22 ............... 19
Figure 8: Share of Co-Patents in all Patents............................................................................................. 19
Figure 9: Share of Externally Owned Domestic Inventions in all Patents ..................................... 20
Figure 10: Balance of Payments for Intellectual Property per GDP ................................................... 20
Figure 11: Share of Co-Publications in all Scientific Publications ...................................................... 21
Figure 12: Share of Scientific Co-Publications by main partners ....................................................... 21
Figure 13: Top-3 / Top-1 Countries' Share in Total Citations .............................................................. 22
Figure 14: Development of the Share of Domestic Citations over Time ......................................... 22
Figure A 1: Total Number of Patents, sum 2019-21.................................................................................. 27
Figure A 2: Total Number of Patents, sum 2019-21.................................................................................. 27
Figure A 3: Total Number of Scientific Publications ................................................................................. 28
Figure A 4: Growth of Scientific Publications ............................................................................................... 28

Table
Table 1: International Collaboration in S&T at Different Stages of Development,
Conclusions for Industrial Policy acknowledging Specific Aspects of
Sovereignty ........................................................................................................................................ 26

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 1

Introduction and Motivation
This short position paper introduces the concept of technological sovereignty in development as
a guiding notion for future-oriented industrial development policy (Lee et al. 2023), derived from
the current leading economy discourse on technological sovereignty. That concept suggests that
the ambition of all countries should be to develop and retain a combination of own strengths and
broad-based international collaboration. It posits that to improve the well-being of their constitu-
ency and to develop their industries' capacities to meet global standards, governments need to
reinforce domestic capacities and at the same time benefit from external sourcing (Edler et al. 2020).
In doing so, this paper underlines that the adequate balance between both efforts will depend on
the ambition pursued. While, in a world of increasing geopolitical uncertainty (Acharya 2017; Brew-
ster 2018; Hearson et al. 2018; Khandelwal 2020; Krapohl et al. 2021) and an increasing importance
of power-play (Stiglitz et al. 2024), national security concerns may at times justify addressing issues
exclusively on home soil, economic concerns will in the vast majority of cases continue to justify
international outreach and global collaboration. This holds true with a view to cost considerations
and even more so with a view to the sourcing of existing solutions and knowledge. As long as one-
sided dependencies can be avoided (Edler et al. 2020) and countries do not come to unduly rely on
the stability of single political relations, it thus endorses rather than question the established para-
digm that economic development requires cooperation rather than autarky. Against this back-
ground, technological and economic sovereignty are defined as the ability of a country to develop
and retain an independent agency in order to determine its own pathway to develop free of external
constraint - without necessarily possessing all capacities itself (Edler et al. 2023; March et al. 2023).
In more concrete terms, to develop a capacity of supporting its firms in assuming favourable posi-
tions within international value chains - through both domestic capacity building and the conscious
management of international relations in science, technology and trade (Gereffi et al. 2013; Hen-
derson et al. 2002; Kano et al. 2020; Yeung 2021) . In that sense, discourses at the European level
also speak of strategic autonomy, instead of technological sovereignty.
Developing countries are facing a similar challenge starting off from a quite different, initially not
sovereign, position (Cimoli et al. 2008; Lee et al. 1988; Lee et al. 2021b; Rodrick 2007). Through
domestic investments in education and the upgrading of the country's productive assets they are
starting to build own capacities. They will, however, for a long time, remain more dependent on
external investment and knowledge than established technology nations (Lee et al. 1988; Lee et
al. 2021b), to the extent that external factors may prompt domestic institutional shifts (Hamilton-
Hart et al. 2021). They are prone to suffer more directly in case of potential disruptions and have
to be even more conscious to avoid vulnerabilities resulting from one-sided dependencies that
expose them to concentrated risks related to the disruption of single international relations. At
the same time, increasingly tense political relations between their potential development partners
make it more difficult for them to embed their industrial development1 effort and related policies
in a broad, diverse and sufficiently redundant set of international collaboration opportunities.
More often than was, the choice of one partnership may now either rule out that of another one
directly (Capri 2020), or, even if it is temporarily permitted, risk the partial disintegration of a

1 Here and subsequently, 'industry' will be used in the inclusive sense of the English term that includes all services directly perti-
nent to material products without which they could not become solutions. Also, it has the ambition to refer to the broader
array of supporting services, such as logistics and maintenance, without which industrial activities could not take place. In line
with common practice, it therefore continues to use the term 'industrial policy' for a broad array of efforts and measures that
extend across all sectors of the economy. In doing so, it fully acknowledges that - even in pure assembly contexts - value crea-
tion comprises much more than the material production of artefacts.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 2

country's web of development partnerships in case open conflicts force it to take sides (Stiglitz et
al. 2024).
While this contribution will not assess whether taking sides or not is the better hedging strategy,
it starts from the observation that an increasing number of developing nations has once more
been moved into a position that cannot be considered politically neutral vis-a-vis either of the
world's leading nations. Against this background, it will explore the best possible options for an
industrial policy that safeguards nations' sovereignty over their development process in light of a
now more restricted choice of possible partners.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 3

1 Innovation Driven Development
Fundamentals - A brief review of the literature
All economic development and lasting favourable positioning in international value chains (Coe et
al. 2008) rests on a country's capacity to accumulate sufficient human capital and knowledge do-
mestically to eventually move into a position to innovate and realise technological progress inde-
pendently (Grossman et al. 1991; Kim 1997; Kim et al. 2000; Lall 1992; Liu et al. 2017) . Establishing
such a capacity is a gradual process that rests on different preconditions and opens up specific,
new avenues for furthe r development at different stages (Lee et al. 1988; Lee et al. 2021b) . The
essence of our contemporary understanding of economic development thus is that it is a dynamic,
stepwise and cumulative process and that industrial policy requires constant adjustment. In the
course of a country's development (Eum et al. 2022; Wade 1990) , it has to be gradually extended
to further domains (Lin et al. 2009; Radosevic et al. 2018) and eventually enable countries to embark
on sovereign paths of developing own distinctive economic strengths (Lee et al. 2023; Lin 2012; Liu
et al. 2017) . Hence, there can be no simple one -dimensional answer to the historic fundamental
dispute whether developing nations will profit from the engagement with leading economies
(Grossman et al. 1991; Hirschman 1968; Krueger 1997; Krugman 1994; Ohlin 1933; Prebisch 1959,
1962) or whether the potential dangers of that may on occasion prevail.
What has unanimously been established, however, is that, regardless of outward orientation, de-
velopment can only ensue if there is a constant effort directed towards own capacity building in
the field of education, industrial capabilities and, eventually, also the domestic transfer of
knowledge and technologies between science organisations and industries (Bell et al. 1993; Lee et
al. 1988; Lee et al. 2021b; Lee et al. 2023). Without such efforts, the countries will remain in a passive
position in global value chains and subject to external decision making and power networks (Coe
et al. 2015; Dicken 2007). At the same time, both economic theory and historical experience caution
that while such capacity building will need the domestic mobilisation of means, the success of all
industrial development policy will at the same time depend on its capacity to enab le an external
influx of leading-edge knowledge and the collaboration with, at least initially, technologically more
competent partners (Amin 2002; Gereffi 2019; Grossman et al. 1991; Lee et al. 2023; Narula et al.
2010). Learning is a cumulative and, more importantly, an emergent process. Genuine progress can
hence only be achieved in collaboration with the experienced, in a process of strategic coupling -
i.e. the conscious and strategic engagement in certain types of p artnerships accompanied by the
readiness to decline others (Yeung 2016).
Over the past decades, therefore, development economics has clearly established that successful
industrial development policies with the ambition to help nations transcend the middle income trap
(Eichengreen et al. 2013; Gill et al. 2007; Lee et al. 2021a) can only be realised through different
types of collaboration with foreign partners which develop gradually over time (Lee et al. 1988; Lee
et al. 2021b; Lee et al. 2023) . In light of the proven, and consequential, failure of many import
substitution policies, most emerging economies have come to rely on export-based development,
with substantial success and far into the development process.
In their process of gradual capacity building, all developing countries pass through three main
stages that need to be accompanied by industrial development policy (Lee et al. 2023): fundamental
capacity building in education and industrial production, industrial upgrading through imitation
and learning and, finally, developing independent innovative capacities and catch up with the tech-
nological frontier (Eum et al. 2022; Lee et al. 1988; Lee et al. 2001; Lee et al. 2021b).

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 4

During the early stages of development, developing countries have next to no domestic techno-
logical capacity to the extent that domestic firms and research organisations display very limited
absorptive capacity (Cohen et al. 1990) for external knowledge (Bell et al. 1993; Cimoli et al. 2008;
Kim 1999; Lee et al. 1988; Lee et al. 2021b). Most of the public sector's tax income is generated by
both foreign and domestic companies' production activities that leverage cost advantages (Lall
2000). On its own, this cost-based model of revenue generation does not offer lasting prospects
for further development. While a country may have production capacity in "technology sectors",
these may be rather unrelated to genuine technological capabilities in the field (Eum et al. 2022).
Hence, it will remain difficult to motivate either multinationals or domestic assembly plants to en-
gage more actively with their local environment - given the limited educational attainment of the
local population and the limited absorptive and hence collaboration capacity of most local firms.
Apart from supporting domestic firms in leveraging cost advantages, the best available "interna-
tional option" for governments is to attract foreign companies with sufficient own capacities to
operate independently and to re -invest the resulting tax income to improve domestic education
and training systems (Cimoli et al. 2008; Wade 1990) . At this stage, the capacity gap between ex-
ternal investors and local knowledge agents remains too large to provide local governments with
any relevant leverage to anchor multinationals' commitment in anything else than cost advantage
and make it more permanent. In nations where cost-based production depends primarily on foreign
investors, a strong dependence on external technological capacities (Lee et al. 2023) and exposure
to foreign corporate decisions results in a situation of structural dependency which may have a
political element as well. In any case, countries are at this stage of their development very depend-
ent on an unhindered outflow of goods that allows their exports to reach foreign markets as well
as - in case of assembly production - the inflow of intermediate products.
Subsequently, the country enters the most critical stage in the development process in which inter-
national collaboration is leveraged for learning to gain an improved positioning and some level of
agency in global value chains (Lee et al. 1988; Lee et al. 2021b; Liu et al. 2017; Vivarelli 2016; Wade
1990). Also to avoid the so -called "middle income trap" which could result from a country failure
to transcend a follower status in technological terms (Gill et al. 2007; Lee et al. 2019, 2021a) . Over
time, sufficient investments in the educational attainment of the working population, on -the-job
training in firms and the basic upgrading of production facilities have put domestic firms and tech-
nology organisations in a much more favourable position to obtain know ledge from local foreign
investors or even the world market directly - through imports, imitation or re-engineering (Bell et
al. 1993; Kim 1997; Lee et al. 2021b). On the one hand, this results naturally from a much increased
mastery of standard production and development processes which allows a more qualified work-
force to digest external knowledge inputs and to render them fruitful for their own, specific appli-
cation contexts (Kim 1997, 1999; Liu et al. 2017). First attempts at domestic modular or architectural
innovation are typically made at this stage, i.e. at innovations that rearrange existing technological
components to serve markets better (Kroll et al. 2021), while information asymmetries and lack of
capacity keep entrepreneurs from putting forward something fundamentally new (Hausmann et al.
2003; Hausmann et al. 2007). On the other hand, knowledge absorption from global investors can
be notably facilitated by industrial policy support for local human capital circulation between for-
eign investors and domestic firms as well as exploratory re -engineering to access state of the art
knowledge in spite of intellectual property protection by market leaders (Lee et al. 2023; Liu et al.
2017). Accordingly, domestic actors start to unfold conscious and targe ted foreign interactions in
the innovation domain, while at the same time they continue to depend on them (Eum et al. 2022).
While they do not yet bring in their own knowledge, they have developed a much clearer under-
standing of what skills are required domestically, and scout for them in different ways. The channels
through which knowledge is obtained are at this stage divers e. If there are foreign invested firms,
most international flows of knowledge may still occur within those, technologies are acquired in

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 5

the process of production (Eum et al. 2022; Kano et al. 2020; Yeung 2021) in a process of strategic
coupling (Yeung 2016). Yet, some representatives of companies and technology organisations will
begin to actively engage with international expert communities. At this stage, international sourcing
equates international sourcing of state of the art knowledge without which no further technological
progress can be made. Should this not happen, the country may swiftly fall back to stage one.
At the same time, domestic technology transfer is often not yet in the focus of industrial policy
attention because domestic technology organisations are still lagging behind the global state of
knowledge. They are unable to make suitable offers to either advanced foreign investors or ad-
vanced domestic firms, both of which may be technologically ahead of them (Kroll et al. 2010).
Finally, the country has succeeded in bringing its industrial capacities up to standard and improved
not only its basic education and training but also its higher education system (Kroll et al. 2010,
2013). Domestic firms may not have fully developed their products' standard to that provided by
foreign investors or offered through local sales offices, but the gap has become narrower. Accord-
ingly, foreign investors have to begin to invest into research and development locally to remain up
to date with the specific market's requirements, lest they begin to lose out against domestic firms.
In the industrial domain, the exchange of knowledge has thus become bi-directional with local firms
starting to gain leverage as they possess knowledge that most foreign investors do not. In parallel,
domestic technology organisations have improved their capacities to a standard that they can par-
ticipate in scientific exchanges at the global level (Kroll et al. 2010) . While they may not yet be
among the key contributors, they are able to source relevant knowledge globally and transfer it to
relevant domestic partners back in their home country. They also develop own, distinctive areas of
specific capacity (Lee et al. 2001; Lin et al. 2009; Lin 2012) - directionality has shifted with the pro-
duction process which is now informed by the scientific domain of technological development (Eum
et al. 2022). At this stage, industrial policy becomes innovation policy and scientific collaboration,
one of the key channels of international knowledge transfer (Kroll et al. 2022c; Lee et al. 2023; Wang
et al. 2021). In fact, it may replace some of the initially more important channels. The more devel-
oped the local industrial context, the more cautious international investors will become with a view
to disclosing knowledge without specific motivations, even to local em ployees whom they may
swiftly lose again to an increasingly dynamic local job market. At the same time, local firms will have
lobbied their own government to establish a more reliabl e domestic intellectual property system
to protect their own achievements - which, in turn, also limits their ability to conduct overt re -
engineering with impunity (Kim et al. 2012; Kroll 2011, 2016) . At this stage, international relations
have become collaborative in many ways (Kroll et al. 2022c; Wang et al. 2021) . In industrial terms,
the country has become a respected partner and in the scientific domain is developing into a new
contributor to be increasingly reckoned with (Frietsch et al. 2019; Kroll e t al. 2022a; Kroll et al.
2022c). To a larger extent than before, the country will at this stage be able to compensate failures
of international collaborations and in some domains even be able to sustain its position or even
advance without external input, albeit much more slowly. Nonetheless, it will never be able to fully
catch up with established leading nations in scientific or technological terms, lest constant, close
exchanges with actors based in those can be maintained.
Types of international collaboration and their role for development
In line with the above said, international cooperation plays a central role at different stages of the
development process (Lee et al. 1988) . Without international collaboration, no country can build
the capacities needed to advance technologically and, in consequence, economically beyond a mid-
dle income status (Binz et al. 2017; Coe et al. 2008; Coe et al. 2015; Gereffi 2019; Lee et al. 1988). As
has been demonstrated, different objects, channels and mediators of exchange are important in
different ways (Gereffi et al. 2021). At diverse stages of the development process, a lack of access

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 6

to them could result in bottlenecks that prevent further advances in development and a reposition-
ing in the value chain (Coe et al. 2019; Gereffi 2019; Giuliani et al. 2005).
Informed and guided by the notion of technological sovereignty for development it is the task
of industrial development policy to prevent those and advance international exchanges actively, in
line with the current stage of development (Figure 1, Figure 2).
Firstly, international collaboration is a source of income and capital (Coe et al. 2015; Eum et al.
2022; Kim et al. 2000; Lall 2000; Wade 1990) which industrial policy should help mobilise for devel-
opment at the initial stages. Without these initial means, no development efforts can succeed. As
such, this income does not have to derive from technological activities. Some countries have for
example actively leveraged income gained from natural resources for that purpose. However, it has
at times proven a su itable first step into later upgrading if the initial cost based activities were at
least in a sector that is amenable to later upgrading. For example, microelectronics assembly has in
some cases provided a basis for local engineers to gradually acquaint themselves with the products
and solutions with which they later engaged more deeply. Over time, this contribution of foreign
direct investment wanes, as activity in domestic firms picks up and the local government is able to
generate tax income from other sources. The main mediators of this first type of relations are for-
eign firms.
Second, international collaboration guarantees access to complete technology goods (Bell et al.
1993; Coe et al. 2015; Edler et al. 2020; Kim 1997, 1999; Kroll et al. 2022c; Lee et al. 2021b) at the
early stages before a country's firms can produce or even actively engage with them. Without stable
access to technological goods and services, countries will have difficulty to build the infrastructure
required to attract foreign direct investment as well as to upgrade domestic firms' and technology
organisations' production capacity to a level that guarantees a sufficient level of absorptive capacity
(Cohen et al. 1990). At this stage, whilst the country it is not yet able to produce competitive tech-
nology goods, industrial policy needs to support access to those investment goods relevant for the
modernisation of the domestic manufacturing facilities. Subsequently, it will remain important for
re-engineering and the integration of existing and domes tically tailored solutions in architectural
innovation. At this point it is oftentimes strongly accompanied by the licensing of foreign intellec-
tual property rights. In fact, even very developed economies continue to obtain a large share of
their investment goods from foreign sources, so while access to foreign goods may become less
essential during later stages of catch-up it will continue to play an important role (Amin 2002; Binz
et al. 2017; Boschma 2022). The main mediators of this second type of relations are domestic firms
and technology organisations acquiring equipment.
Third, countries depend on collaborations in the technological domain (Kim 1999; Kroll et al.
2012; Kroll et al. 2022b; Kroll et al. 2022c) which allow knowledge and experiences to be transferred
into the country, be they primarily within a corporate context or inter -organisational (Boschma
2024; Dannenberg et al. 2018) . These become relevant at a later stage when foreign companies
have transferred first development capacities into the respective developing economy context and
selected domestic companies have reached a level of technological expertise that allows them to
collaborate with foreign firms (Kroll et al. 2013). At this point in time, co-patenting becomes a rel-
evant issue although it typically still reflects a situation in which a foreign headquarter or home
country development department interacts with a local branch or partner for market adaptation.
These types of collaboration, which industrial policy can foster, guarantee knowledge flows at a
stage when the country is moving beyond improving its absorptive capacities to building own ca-
pacities of creative knowledge generation and collaboration. While particularly crucial at the stage
when a country is developing first endogenous innovation capacities, this type of collaboration
remains central among the technologically most developed economies. Even when the domestic

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 7

science-industry nexus is substantially improved, much knowledge will still enter the country di-
rectly within the industrial sector. During the early stages of development, the primary mediators
of this third type of relations are foreign firms and their local subsidiaries, later joined by domestic
firms as a local partner and, yet later, by those starting off collaborations with own foreign subsid-
iaries.
Finally, collaborations in the scientific and high-end technology domain (Eum et al. 2022; Kroll
et al. 2022b; Kroll et al. 2022c) become more relevant at the very end of the catch-up process, when
the country is approaching the technological frontier. Certainly, some fundaments of scientific re-
lations need to be created early so that they can be readily built upon later when the time comes.
Also, they play some specific roles from the very beginning, e.g. in exposing domestic professors
and teachers to the state-of-the-art in technological development. However, they can only unfold
their full potential once an improved domestic technology transfer system has been put in place.
At the early stages, when this is not yet the case, international knowledge sourc ed by academics
too often remains within the domestic academic sphere and thus unproductive in terms of eco-
nomic development (Kroll et al. 2010) . Once science and industry interact more smoothly,
knowledge obtained within the international academic communi ty will be swiftly translated and
relayed to relevant domestic industries and/or empower local technologists to develop home -
grown solutions based on the international state-of-the-art (Kroll et al. 2010). Moreover, it is par-
ticularly relevant in situations where - for one reason or another - the country's international inte-
gration through foreign-direct investments is less pronounced. The main mediators of this fourth
type of relations are domestic universities and technology organisations.
Figure 1: International Collaboration as a Core Focus of
Industrial Policy Types of Exchanges and Mediators

Source: own summary, in reference to Lee et al. (1988); Lee et al. (2021b)

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 8

Figure 2: Timeline of Key Tasks of Industrial Development Policy

Source: own summary, in reference to Lee et al. (1988); Lee et al. (2021b)

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 9

2 Technological Sovereignty for Development
A new concept - Summing up known insights concisely
The concept of technological sovereignty has evolved in the context of a developed economy,
where scientific and technological leaders are struggling with a situation in which an increasingly
unstable geopolitical environment is forcing them to reconsider their established dense interna-
tional network of scientific and technological relations (Bauer et al. 2020; Crespi et al. 2021; Edler et
al. 2020; Edler et al. 2023; March et al. 2023). While the underlying idea is old (Grant 1983), recent
geopolitical shifts (Khandelwal 2020; Krapohl et al. 2021; Stiglitz 2017) have infused the topic with
renewed relevance and have made it one on the fundamental economic debates of the day. No less
than the question whether proven models of upgrading industrial capacity in emerging nations can
be upheld under inclement geopolitical conditions is at stake and, if so, in what way.
According to Edler et al. (2020), technological sovereignty is given when a nation has sufficient own
technological capacity and can rely on external technological resources free of one-sided depend-
ency. It is absent when there are either insufficient own capacities or the complementary sourcing
of knowledge that is also needed has become too concentrated on single partners. The underlying
assumption is that there can be no sovereignty without own capacity and that, at the same time,
the level of complexity of current technologies and value chains nearly rules out that any one coun-
try will be able to muster sufficient own capacities to address complex challenges in autarky.
While the recent increase in geopolitical tensions (Khandelwal 2020; Krapohl et al. 2021; Luo et al.
2023; Stiglitz 2017) was the primary and in itself novel trigger of this discussion, three underlying
structural vulnerabilities that aggravated its techno -economic implications had developed over
time. First, the cost-based offshoring of production capacities (Cassia 2010; Dicken et al. 2001; Frö-
bel et al. 1978; Grunwald et al. 1985) has reached an extent which has in some cases prompted a
substantive loss of process and in the meantime also product innovation capabilities among former
technological leaders. Second, increasing technological complexity has created a situation in which
it has become next to impossible to effectively re -shore complete innovation chains including all
required auxiliary inputs and competences in all but the biggest countries (Boschma 2024; Coe et
al. 2019; Gereffi et al. 2013) . Third, a number of formerly emerging economies, most prominently
China, have not only reached the techno logical level of established leaders, but in part have sur-
passed it (Kroll et al. 2022a; Kroll et al. 2022b) . All this has made established technology nations'
position in global value chains more fragile and increased the potential impact of them being cut
off from central inputs or collaboration partners for political reasons.
Previously, these countries' position was stabilised and increasing gaps in competence covered
through robust networks of cooperative relations (Dicken 2007; Gereffi et al. 2005; Gereffi et al.
2013; Yeung et al. 2015). At that time, it was enough to excel in certain areas and to rely on external
competence in most others. With the recent proliferation of political tensions and tangible adver-
sarial actions, however, it is often no longer possible to choose freely among fe asible partners at
least not without incurring substantive risks (Kroll 2024). As a result re-fragmentation - or at least
re-balancing - of established, politically agnostic networks of economic integrations appears to be
underway which restrains the availability of options to compensate own shortcomings through
partnerships (Lund et al. 2020; Yeung et al. 2023; Yeung 2023) . Whether a world thus newly frag-
mented into spheres of interest and delineated domains of integration will still provide a sufficient
diversity of options for the choice of those partnerships that guarantee sovereignty, does no longer
appear certain leading firms and nations to consider new strategies (Gao et al. 2023). In that light,
even formerly fixed views regarding the relative cost of re-shoring or friend-shoring (re-location to

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 10

other partners) are being re-visited (Elia et al. 2021; Pla-Barber et al. 2021; Sekliuckiene et al. 2023;
Yeung et al. 2023).
Developing economies are facing that very same situation from quite a different perspective (Lee
et al., 2023; Rodrik/Stiglitz, 2024). As their own capacities are absent (Lee et al. 1988) they can by
definition not be sovereign at the beginning of their development process, regardless of how in-
ternational relations are structured (Dicken 2007; Gereffi 2019). In a very literal sense, they are thus
aiming to move from a situation of technology -economic dependency into one of greater sover-
eignty (Yeung 2016). To achieve this, they will have to invest into the development of own capacity
and at the same time govern their international relations strategically. Until the very final stages of
catch-up, they remain in a positon in which any concentrated dependency on external knowledge
inflows could be very easily exploited should any of the key partners so choose out of political
considerations. At the same time, they become exposed to singular, concentrated risks more easily
once they choose to engage with one spec ific international development partner one whom they
subsequently begin to depend.
Other than in leading economies, their industrial policy cannot yet be directed at defending an
established status, but focuses on developing agencies and to gradually gain sovereignty over their
development process. As has been outlined above, diverse factors are needed to make this happen,
some of them financial but most of them, sooner or later, knowledge related. Without an inde-
pendent capacity to innovate and by itself contribute to the shaping of world markets, no country
can depart from structural dependence and/or improve its position in global value chains (Gereffi
2019; Lee et al. 2023). This, too, has been substantially complicated by the re-emerging fragmenta-
tion of the global system (Gao et al. 2023). As mentioned above, the competences that a developing
country would want to source are often distributed across a number of leading economies, not all
of which belong to the same political camp. While the most obvious current fault line exists between
the US and China further may emerge between Europe and China, the US and the EU or elsewhere
in the coming years. In earlier, political more agnostic years, developing economies' industrial policy
could seek purpose-bound partnerships according to primarily commercial or otherwise pragmatic
considerations (Coe et al. 2015; Dicken et al. 2001; Gereffi et al. 2013) . Today, the situation is no
longer that simple (Gao et al. 2023). While situations in which mutual embargoes formally bar those
collaborating with one partner from collaboration with another rem ain comparatively rare, more
indirect challenges have been abound in recent years. First, the current level of geopolitical tensions
makes it more difficult than in the past for any developing country to remain completely neutral,
resulting in a lack of partners from the other block to even offer collaboration in the first place.
Second, even countries that still succeed in establishing partnerships with development partners
from different sides must be aware that this approach would collapse should open co nflict ever
break out.
What this entails is that the common, post -colonial principle of most developing nations to not
ground their development strategy in one primary partnership alone has become more difficult to
realise. If, in a newly fragmenting world, even leading nations must avoid one-sided dependencies,
this is even more important for developing nations. For them, the exposure to the risk of primary
partnerships failing has potentially far more dire consequences than it has for developed countries
that can fall back on a more developed basis of own capacities should the need arise. Per se less
autonomous developing nations, in contrast, may be left without any access at all to relevant re-
sources.
At the same time the new situation also offers opportunities for industrial policy. As the world eco-
nomic system is at risk of disintegrating into separate economic blocks which are each under-critical
in size, leading economies are reaching out to additional partners. They may now be willing to
accept further emerging economies as partners in new roles and at a level for which they previously

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 11

maintained a fixed set of selected relations. While geopolitical tensions have now rendered some
of these established partnerships less reliable, their own means to domestically re -shore against
marker forces is limited as is the number of qualified, trusted partners that could on their own
substitute for large, established partners. In that situation, a new openness towards diverse devel-
opment partnerships that may help attenuate this problem might well emerge.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 12

3 Emerging Nations' Exposure to Partnership Risks
in Collaboration
Challenges and opportunities in a newly fragmenting world
In light of the above said, the following challenges and opportunities for developing countries '
industrial policy can thus be identified:
First, the geopolitically driven re-organisation of global value chains may cut off some developing
countries from their current sources of cost-oriented investment. At the same time it may open up
opportunities to profit from re -shoring and diversification by major investors. On the one hand,
countries can no longer pool investment from all advanced nations easily. This is an issue in partic-
ular for those nations that had begun to profit from Ch inese or Indian FDI alongside that from
established Western nations. On the other, they may benefit from the fact that, for the first time for
years, several leading nations have developed a substantial interest to divest from established pro-
duction bases and build up alternative production sites . To some degree, selected countries had
been able to profit from such divestment before. They did however offer notable cost advantages
that were able to compensate for their more weakly developed logistics and availability of local
component suppliers. With the risk component now much more prominent in commercial consid-
erations, such weaknesses now even could motivate foreign investors to upgrade the local infra-
structure rather than to abstain from engaging with the respective country altogether. Also, the
diminished need for ruinous cost-side competition and 'welcome packages' for firms could increase
local governments' potential gains in terms of tax incomes.
Second, the availability of technology goods through imports has become an issue in particular for
those countries which take a political position less aligned with those nations who provide the most
affordable investment goods needed for technological upg rading. While, at this level, genuine
sanctions remain rare, developing nations will have to choose between paying more to ascertain
safe delivery or accept the risk of paying less. At times, needed political alliances will now have to
be weighed against unhampered access to the most affordable goods needed for industrial devel-
opment. More generally, redundancies will have to be built in terms of the supply of relevant in-
vestment goods which will in some cases increase the monetary price for development. Likewise,
the increasing efforts of some leading nations to become self-sufficient again, not only technolog-
ically but also to a degree, in terms of domestic production. They may redirect some flows of goods
to their domestic markets, reducing the availabili ty of relevant goods on the world market, or at
least making their prices less favourable. As an ultimate consequence of this tendency of leading
nations to become more inward -looking, developing countries may eventually also have to con-
sider the development of domestic offerings earlier than in the past. While most of the lessons of
import substitution still apply today, it will be more often required to weigh up the increased cost
now associated with global sourcing. This must be done against the problematic, but known, cost
associated with domestic production at rather early stages.
Third, it is against this background absolutely essential to maintain, safeguard and diversify reliable
and effective technological collaborations with other nations that ensure the inflow of knowledge.
For that knowledge to develop an impact on the business sector swiftly, relevant collaborations will
have to be anchored in the industrial domain. Precisely because of this foreseeable, immediate
impact, it is this area that has become jeopardised most. More so than for pure cost-based invest-
ment which is, by itself, less relevant for development, leading nations have begun to choose their
partnerships in this area more strategically - and more oriented towards political and economic
safety. Reasons for this are dual use as well as commercial risk considerati ons. In this area, it will

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 13

therefore become most difficult to uphold a politically fully agnostic approach to international en-
gagement. In any case, developing nations need to be aware and prepare for situations in which
they have to take clear sides in the light of open conflict and - as a consequence - would lose part
of their existing technology oriented FDI or at least see their inflow diminished. At the same time,
much of leading nations' qualified FDI inflow had in the past years become concentrated on a small
number of best de veloped emerging markets. Even so, they were also home to the best first or
second tier suppliers. From a purely commercial standpoint, there would have been very limited
reason to change this set-up for years to come. With increasing uncertainty in these relations, how-
ever, many corporate actors are now actively beginning to search for potential alternative locations.
And in this search, they may at times even be willing to invest into a broader upgrading of human
capital and production facilities and encourage re-location of suppliers - with potentially very ben-
eficial effects.
Fourth, the domain of science remains comparatively least affected. Other than high-quality foreign
direct investment it does directly entail commercial risks and it is also often less directly problematic
from a dual use perspective. While science has become a politically contested field between leading
nations also, the related preoccupation of losing the cutting-edge insights to potential adversaries
appears far less critical in either side's scientific collaboration with developing nations (Hou et al.
2021; Kroll et al. 2022b). Hence, an openness to collaborate irrespective of political positions often
remains - not least in light of the increasing urgency of fundamental, and shared, global challenges.
Even when many other types of collaborations become fraught with risk and pote ntially unstable,
this option for knowledge sourcing thus appears to remain most accessible. For developing coun-
tries this may imply that more effort will have to be dedicated to the upgrading of domestic struc-
tures for technology transfer. This is to put them in a position to reap the benefits of scientific
collaboration earlier, at stages where one would in earlier years still have primarily relied on corpo-
rate FDI without any specific concern.
An overview of the current situation, specific bottlenecks and risk areas
In the following, we will analyse the de facto exposure of a number of relevant developing nations
which are positioned in the middle stage of development. On each continent, the study focuses on
five nations which have on the one hand moved beyond the very early stages of the development
process and developed a certain basis of techno-economic capacities on all continents. These coun-
tries are:
• America: Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, Peru
• Europe: Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, Serbia, Turkey
• Africa: Egypt, Morocco, Nigeria, Tunisia, South Africa
• Middle East/Central Asia: Azerbaijan, Iran, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Saudi Arabia
• South and East Asia: Indonesia, India, Malaysia, Thailand, Viet Nam
As Figures Annex 1 - 4 illustrate, their science and technological capacities remain one to two orders
of magnitude below those of mid-size leading economies like Germany, Japan and Korea. But they
are present and have sufficient scope to support an analysis. On the other hand, countries that have
next to successfully completed the process of catch -up like China, Singapore or Korea are not in-
cluded as this would require a more historical perspective than the available data could enable.
In line with what our model of development phases suggests, Figure 3 illustrates that the relation
of foreign direct investment to gross domestic product has decreased in most of the analysed
countries. Some of the most developed ones among them have turned to become foreign direct
investors themselves most recently. This suggests that, economically, they have been able to mark-
edly decrease their dependency on multinationals' investment as a basis for development. A greater
share of productive assets is now under national management than was, and an overt dependency

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 14

in this area at least less of a worry. The only countries where such a trend is not visible, or less so,
are Vietnam, Indonesia and India which have profited from a relocation of investments from China.
Likewise, we find that most of the cou ntries here considered remain externa lly dependent with a
view to high-tech trade relations (Figure 4). In the domain of high-tech goods, next to all of them
display negative trade balances which have in most cases also not significantly improved in the past
decade. In Malaysia, Thailand and Vietnam, as well as arguably Bulgaria, Greece, Turkey and Tunisia,
improvements in trade balances may indeed reflect technological upgrading or at least an im-
proved capacity to domestically generate and retain value added in high-tech industries. In Malay-
sia, Romania and Thailand, overall trade balances have even turned neutral or slightly positive.
On a positive note, we also find that the diversity of export partners that these emerging nations
are catering for has increased rather than decreased over the past decade. With a few exceptions,
the share that the Top-3 export partners hold in overall exports has decreased, rather than increased
(Figure 5). Very likely, exceptions in Egypt, Kazakhstan, Peru and Mexico may reflect geopolitical
particularities rather than consequences of a growing or changing techno-economic potential for
exports. Once they have reached the stage of development in which they become providers - or at
least producers - of high-tech goods, emerging countries do not seem to overly depend on specific
markets.
On the other hand, import dependence on the Top -3 import partners (Figure 6) has grown sub-
stantially over the past decade, reaching more than 60% in most cases. More specifically, the share
of the most important import partners, in all but one case China, has increased to nearly 50% in
most cases (Figure 7). This is a substantial change from the situation a decade ago when China did
not yet unilaterally assume this role and the share of the Top -1 import partners amounted - on
most occasions - to 20-30% rather than to nearly 50%. Thus, there is clear evidence of the hypoth-
eses put forward in the conceptual section that emerging countries have become more dependent
on single providers of resources, parts and intermediate goods, most prominently China. The reason
for this can in some, mostly Asian, cases be interpreted as an integration into new, emerging value
chains, now governed by Chinese corporations, that start using emerging countries as a production
basis with a more favourable cost environment - as production in China itself has become more
expensive. At the same time, countries in all parts of the world have come to rely ever more exten-
sively on affordable and increasingly advance Chinese input, as an effect independent of geogra-
phies.
In line with these remaining dependencies in the domain of trade, Figure 8 demonstrates that most
of the countries here considered now display higher, rather than lower relative rates of technolog-
ical collaboration and hence potential dependency than advanced nations. Apparently, their em-
beddedness in international corporate structures, as measured in co-patents, is on average two to
three times higher than that of a developed economy like Germany. And, with the exception of
Peru, it has not decreased much anywhere outside the Middle East during the past decade. With a
few exceptions and some structural differences the same holds true for the share of domestic in-
ventions that are subsequently owned by foreign organisations, as documented in Figure 9. In some
cases, continued limitations to technological autonomy are even clearer from this perspective than
with a mere view to co-patents (cf. Argentina and Saudi Arabia). Only in the rather specific case of
Iran, as well as in Jordan and Tunisia has this relatio n fundamentally changed. From a different
angle, this impression of persistent dependencies is corroborated with a view to trends in the bal-
ance of payment for intellectual property which are increasing in all countries for which information
is available, even when normalised by gross domestic product (cf. Figure 10). The sole exception is
once more Tunisia (data for Iran and Jordan are not available).
In technological terms, concentrated and thus potentially risky dependencies exist by and large vis-
a-vis the United States, although it would amount to hyperbole to call them unilateral anywhere

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 15

outside Saudi Arabia. However, while the role of the US as key partner amounts to about 20% in a
developed, broadly integrated nation like Germany and even in Japan only to about 30%, it can be
up to 45% in India and about 50% in Mexico. In South-Eastern Europe, Africa, and, from a different
angle, East Asia, technological dependencies are less pronounced as these have other relevant part-
ners as well, not least among the leading European economies. Here, dependencies on one lead
partner hardly exceed 20-30% at par with those in developed economies. Also, the situation does
not aggravate anywhere outside Saudi Arabia. While some relative intensification of external control
can be observed in Brazil, Mexico and Tunisia none of this reflects fundamental, structural changes.
In the same vein, the limited decreases in Thailand and Vietnam should not be over-interpreted as
sea changes. While international technological integration and dependency does not fade, despite
building US-Chinese tensions, it does not substantially intensify either.
With a view to scientific collaborations, to the contrary, next to all countries analysed by this study
have increased the share of international collaborations among their scientific publications during
the past decade. Only Vietnam, Indonesia and Peru di splay a contrary trend. In some countries, a
substantive national surge of - part limited quality - publications has not been fully matched by
international collaborations. In relative terms, increases in collaboration are highest in Eastern Eu-
rope and Afr ica (cf. Figure 11). In East Asia, absolute growth is at least equally high, but often
matched by a parallel build -up of national capacity so that relative shares do not change, or less
so.
As Figure 12 further underlines, the concentration of collaborations in the academic field is typically
notably lower than in the technological or investment domain. Also, they are on average lower than
in established scientific nations which focus on each other's activities to a larger degree. Even in
Latin America, the focus on the US hardly exceeds 30 -35%. The only exception from this general
rule are former Soviet Republics where the scientific orientation towards Russia is still very pro-
nounced. While China has gained in relevance as a partner in part now comparable to that of the
US, is in general terms not overly dominant either. In Europe and Africa, European lead nations
(often former colonial powers) continue to play an important role.
A slightly different perspective emerges with a view to the knowledge resources that developing
and emerging economies tap into through academic citations (Figure 13). Typically, more than 50%
of all academic citations in emerging nations refer back to publications from three leading academic
powers, the US, the UK and, increasingly, China (in some cases, still other European nations or India).
From a perspective oriented more towards future potential, the above declaration of academic col-
laboration as unproblematic with a view to concentration thus needs to be put into perspective.
While current patterns of collaboration may be more dispersed and less fraught with economic
control mechanisms than in the technological domain, there is still a very limited number of primary
sources of academic knowledge. Furthermore, two of the three most important sources have sub-
stantive political disagreements. While the nature of publication ascertains that access to
knowledge can be guaranteed without personal interactions, any genuine further development of
knowledge, or even participation in its benefits, would requir e joint learning. Should a country be
limited to sourcing either side's insights through documented, codified knowledge only, this would
be a clear limitation to the development process. So as much as current collabo ration appears
unproblematic, the underlying structure of citations reveals that challenges may still lie ahead.
Finally, Figure 14 provides insights into the focus countries' build -up of scientific capacity - as re-
flected in the degree by which they can rely on own, prior work in developing new academic
knowledge. In most of the countries here considered this share ranges between 2.5% and 5%, much
lower than the 15% common in many established scientific nations. Contrary to the developments
in the domain of scientific collaboration, this last stage of capacity building does not seem to have
begun in many countries in the past decade - with the notable exception of Brazil and India.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 16

While there are a great number of particularities pertaining to specific countries and their political
and economic circumstances, our analysis thus clearly confirms our conceptual suggestions. In the
countries considered here, the past decade has seen a decrease in the importance of foreign direct
investment, relative stability in the domain of technological engagement and an increase in scien-
tific collaboration. In the domain of trade, few countries have managed to substa ntially attenuate
their dependency on high-tech imports. While they serve multiple markets, their reliance on China
as a key source of supplies and final products has substantially increased. Directly, this holds for the
Asian and Eastern European nations here considered. If specificities in Iran, Kazakhstan, Mexico and
South Africa are disregarded, the observation also holds for the remaining three groups of African,
Middle Eastern and South American nations here looked at.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 17

Figure 3: Development of foreign direct investment (net inflows) over GDP

Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on World Investment Report
Figure 4: Development of High-Tech Goods Relative Trade Balance over Time

Note: The relative trade balance is defined as (export-imports)/export+imports);
High-tech goods refers to a group of goods defined in the European Commission's ATI project
Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on UN COMTRADE
-300%
-200%
-100%
0%
100%
200%
300%
Argentina
Brazil
Colombia
Mexico
Peru
Azerbaijan
Iran
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Saudi Arabia
Egypt
Morocco
Nigeria
Tunisia
South Africa
Bulgaria
Greece
Romania
Serbia
Türkiye
Indonesia
India
Malaysia
Thailand
Viet Nam
Germany
Japan
Korea, Republic of
2005-07 2010-12 2015-17 2020-22
-100%
-80%
-60%
-40%
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Argentina
Brazil
Colombia
Mexico
Peru
Azerbaijan
Iran
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Saudi Arabia
Egypt
Morocco
Nigeria
South Africa
Tunisia
Bulgaria
Greece
Serbia
Romania
Turkey
Indonesia
India
Malaysia
Thailand
Vietnam
Germany
Japan
Korea
2021 - High-Tech Trade Balance Change 2000-2021

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 18

Figure 5: Development of Shares of Top-3 Export Partners in all Exports, 2012-22
(Concentration of High-tech Exports)

Note: High-tech goods refers to a group of goods defined in the European Commission's ATI project
Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on UN COMTRADE
Figure 6: Development of Shares of Main Import Partners in all Imports, 2012-22
(Concentration of High-tech Imports)

Note: High-tech goods refers to a group of goods defined in the European Commission's ATI project
Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on UN COMTRADE
-50%
-40%
-30%
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
Argentina
Brazil
Colombia
Mexico
Peru
Azerbaijan
Iran
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Saudi Arabia
Egypt
Morocco
Nigeria
South Africa
Tunisia
Bulgaria
Greece
Serbia
Romania
Turkey
Indonesia
India
Malaysia
Thailand
Vietnam
Germany
Japan
Korea
Increase in Share top-3 Export Partners 2012-22
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
Argentina
Brazil
Colombia
Mexico
Peru
Azerbaijan
Iran
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Saudi Arabia
Egypt
Morocco
Nigeria
South Africa
Tunisia
Bulgaria
Greece
Serbia
Romania
Turkey
Indonesia
India
Malaysia
Thailand
Vietnam
Germany
Japan
Korea
Increase in Share top-3 Import Partners 2012-22
Increase in Share top-1 Import Partners 2012-22

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 19

Figure 7: Development of the Share of Top Import Partner in all Imports, 2012-22
(Concentration of High-tech Imports)

Note: High-tech goods refers to a group of goods defined in the European Commission's ATI project
Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on UN COMTRADE
Figure 8: Share of Co-Patents in all Patents
Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on EPO Worldwide Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT)

0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
ARBRCOMXPE AZ IR JO KZSA EGMANGZATN BGGR ROTR ID INMYTHVN DE JP KR
Top-1 Partner Share 2012 Top-1 Partner Share 2022
33%
24%
18%
34%
15%
19%
7%
13%
22%
17%
31%
25%
50%
59%
15%
31%
35%
42%42%
4%
58%
32%33%34%
39%
16%
3%2%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
AR
BR
CO
MX
PE
AZ
IR
JO
KZ
SA
EG
MA
NG
TN
ZA
BG
GR
RO
RS
TR
ID
IN
MY
TH
VN
DE
JP
KR
2009-2011 2019-21

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 20

Figure 9: Share of Externally Owned Domestic Inventions in all Patents

Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on EPO Worldwide Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT)
Figure 10: Balance of Payments for Intellectual Property per GDP (%)

Source: Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on World Development Indicators
71%
31%
18%
41%
26%
12%
5%
12%
18%
80%
31%
39%
25%
31%
17%
35%36%
44%
34%
3%
43%45%
31%
23%
29%
20%
3%2%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
AR
BR
CO
MX
PE
AZ
IR
JO
KZ
SA
EG
MA
NG
TN
ZA
BG
GR
RO
RS
TR
ID
IN
MY
TH
VN
DE
JP
KR
2009-2011 2019-21
0,000%
0,050%
0,100%
0,150%
0,200%
0,250%
Argentina
Brazil
Colombia
Mexico
Peru
Azerbaijan (missing data)
Iran (no data)
Jordan (missing data)
Kazakhstan (missing data)
Saudi Arabia (no data)
Egypt (missing data)
Morocco
Nigeria (no data)
Tunisia
South Africa
Bulgaria
Greece
Romania
Serbia
Türkiye (missing data)
Indonesia
India
Malaysia
Thailand
Viet Nam (no data)
2005-07 2010-12 2015-17 2020-22

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 21

Figure 11: Share of Co-Publications in all Scientific Publications

Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on Elsevier SCOPUS
Figure 12: Share of Scientific Co-Publications by main partners

Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on Elsevier SCOPUS
48%
36%
51%
44%
55%
48%
32%
55%58%
78%
58%
43%
89%
58%
62%
47%
54%54%
44%
28% 25%
30%
55%
47%
67%
56%
33%32%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Argentina
Brazil
Colombia
Mexico
Peru
Azerbaijan
Iran
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Saudi Arabia
Egypt
Morocco
Nigeria
South Africa
Tunisia
Bulgaria
Greece
Serbia
Romania
Turkey
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Thailand
Vietnam
Germany
Japan
South-Korea
2010-12 2020-22
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Peru
Mexico
Brazil
Argentina
Colombia
South Africa
Nigeria
Greece
India
Turkey
Thailand
Jordan
Bulgaria
Azerbaijan
Iran
Romania
Serbia
Egypt
Vietnam
Saudi Arabia
Morocco
Indonesia
Kazakhstan
Malaysia
Tunisia
South-Korea
Japan
Germany
other CN RU US

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 22

Figure 13: Top-3 / Top-1 Countries' Share in Total Citations

Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on Elsevier SCOPUS
Figure 14: Development of the Share of Domestic Citations over Time

Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on Elsevier SCOPUS
US, GB, DE
GB, CN, DE
US, GB, CN
US, GB, CN
US, GB, CN
US, CN, GB
US, CN, GB
US, CN, GB
US, CN, GB
US, CN, IN
US, CN, GB
US, CN, GB
US, CN, GB
US, CN, GB
US, CN, GB
US, GB, DE
US, GB, DE
US, GB, CN
US, CN, GB
US, CN, GB
US, CN, IN
US, CN, GB
US, GB, FR
US, GB, CN
US, CN, FR
US, GB, CN
US, GB, CN
US, CN, GB
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Argentina
Brazil
Colombia
Mexico
Peru
Azerbaijan
Iran
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Saudi Arabia
Egypt
Morocco
Nigeria
South Africa
Tunisia
Bulgaria
Greece
Serbia
Romania
Turkey
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Thailand
Vietnam
Germany
Japan
South-Korea
Top-3 Top-1
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
Argentina
Brazil
Colombia
Mexico
Peru
Azerbaijan
Iran
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Saudi Arabia
Egypt
Morocco
Nigeria
South Africa
Tunisia
Bulgaria
Greece
Romania
Serbia
Turkey
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Thailand
Vietnam
Germany
Japan
South-Korea
1999-2001 2009-2011 2019-2021

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 23

4 Conclusions
In light of the above said, the recent and persistent increase in geopolitical tensions must be con-
sidered as detrimental as it limits opportunities for both export-based development in general, and
international learning with the aim of technological upgrading more specifically. Overall, it will make
it harder rather than easier for emerging countries to overcome the middle income trap through
innovation driven development. Following the analysis above, we must conclude that the traditional
path to economic sovereignty through strategic coupling have - to a degree - been put at jeopardy.
In the geopolitical context, with fewer reliable partners available, developing countries' economic
policy makers will have to re -align their cost-benefit assessments with a view to building techno-
logical capacity. While realism in terms of identifying suitable leverage points for policy is still ad-
visable, it will become more risky to either en tirely rely on external partners or to develop own
capacities 'in dependence' of others for too long. However, it may offer some opportunities for
developing nations also.
In any case, however, they will have no choice but to consciously address the new realities lest they
want to play a substantive price in terms of domestic social welfare.
While it has always been necessary to consciously reinvest gains from cost -based investment to
build own capacity and human capital, starting to do so early has become more critical in the light
also of the increasing cost of technology imports from second best partners.
While it has never been advisable to rely on knowledge input from one single source too readily, it
has now become fundamentally problematic - in particular in those cases when a political alliance
with that main provider could not be upheld in the case of conflict.
While it has always been desirable that scientific development as well as that of a functioning do-
mestic technology transfer system was put on the agenda early, the much higher risk of blockage
of other channels now makes such an investment even more indispensable.
In consequence, developing countries will have to pursue an economic policy that safeguards for-
eign direct investment to the degree possible, using measures of diversification and making the
best possible use of the ongoing re-location efforts of major international corporations. At the same
time, they need to rely less readily on the natural training effects and spill -overs that come with
such foreign investments. In a world characterised by increasing uncertainty other channels, like the
scientific one, have to be developed further and domestic capacities for processing knowledge will
become more essential. If foreign direct investment is still relied on, it should be based on solid risk
assessment and - in consequence - mostly originate from trusted partners who have a substantive
own interest in developing their investment environment further.
To achieve technological sovereignty and overcome the middle income trap in the new situation
emerging country policy makers will thus have
• to acknowledge that while economic development will not be possible without external input,
this external input has become less reliable,
• to avoid situations of concentrated reliance on single partners by diversification, and, if inevi-
table, choose those with whom the country intends to be allied,
• to be even more conscious of the need to build own capacities for the production of invest-
ment goods. However, more importantly, the capacity to productively process different types
of international knowledge domestically.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 24

A prime example of this are the " China plus One" strategies pursued by many US-American and
European firms, which, as a concept, date back to the 2010s ( Economist 20102), but have dynami-
cally gained in importance since3. At the same time, Chinese companies are on their part seeking
to diversify markets4, accompanied by strategies to upgrade local capacities as well as capacities to
improve domestic science industry collaboration. Nonetheless, the implementation of such policies
remains by and large the domain of developed nations and, even there, remains far from conse-
quential5.
As this contribution has argued, emerging economies would be well advised - and well positioned
- to follow more developed nations in these efforts. While the current positioning of Vietnam 6,
India7, Indonesia8, Thailand9 and others as 'plus one' countries for investment is one important
element of adapting to the current geopolitical shift - it remains a by and large passive reaction. In
addition to a mere investment perspective, emerging nations, not least those outside Asia, need to
consciously de-risk their own networks of partnerships of technological collaboration and learn to
ramp up investment in local capacities. Failing that, the current increase in geopolitical uncertainty
will substantively limit their options of overcoming the middle income trap.

2 www.economist.com/asia/2010/09/02/plus-one-country
3 www.mckinsey.com/mgi/our-research/asia-on-the-cusp-of-a-new-era
4 www.channelnewsasia.com/commentary/china-plus-1-one-southeast-asia-singapore-asean-tencent-alibaba-751806
5 www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2023/11/14/dont-be-fooled-by-americas-new-supply-chains
6 www.vietnam-briefing.com/news/china-plus-one-strategy-vietnam-latest-issue-vietnam-briefing-magazine.html/
7 www.india-briefing.com/news/india-china-10664.html/
8 https://thediplomat.com/2021/06/which-asian-nations-can-benefit-from-the-china-plus-one-strategy/
9 www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/mi/research-analysis/asean-china-plus-one-destination-current-situation-risk-out-
look.html

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 25

From an economic policy perspective, this implies that, under the new geopolitical conditions,
emerging countries at a more advanced stage of their development process need to address the
triple challenge of
• promoting the build-up of autonomous capacity in domestic industries which can be sus-
tained and improved with less foreign direct investment,
• consciously managing technological relations, avoiding one sided relations but foreseeing po-
tential conflicts. There is benefit in direct, industrial collaborations, but a real challenge is
posed by biased dependencies,
• building domestic transfer capacity to better profit from science collaborations as the cur-
rently most resilient and dynamic knowledge and learning network.
Following the line of argument presented in this paper, there are thus three main domains in which
new approaches need to be considered and new proactive opportunities for emerging country
policy makers may appear (Table X).
• First, in the established domain of policy support to foreign direct investment as a source of
tax income to enable further development, including e.g. efforts to invest in education and
infrastructure.
These are the areas where we currently see most emerging activities (e.g. of the "plus
one" type), yet - according to many - in part still without sufficient vigour and without
leveraging their full potential.
• Second, in the area of targeted policy to support the import of critical technology goods,
technological collaboration and the licensing of intellectual property to increase the absorp-
tive capacity in industry, including parallel efforts to create domestic tech-transfer capacities.
In this area more relevant for overcoming the middle income trap, even fewer activities
can currently be detected. While the U.S., Europe and also China are have developed
contingency plans for scenarios in which access to critical technology providers is lost,
few such efforts are found in emerging nations.
• Third, industrial (and innovation) policy support of scientific collaborations which help to cre-
ate the basis for domestic innovation capacities. They enable a genuine technological catch-
up with established leaders.
Some emerging economies indeed display activities to develop their international col-
laboration in science and technology and at the same time invest in domestic transfer
capacities. However, the degree of resources committed to those and their strategic ori-
entation leaves room for improvement in many cases.
Overall, developed and emerging nations are united in the challenge to manage an unfortunate
and economically detrimental situation by re -balancing their collaboration based on a sober risk
assessment, while avoiding to lose touch with earlier key partners entirely. After all, there is a strong
remaining hope that, from a secular perspective, current geopolitical disagreements will - in their
current form - pass.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 26

Table 1: International Collaboration in S&T at Different Stages of Development,
Conclusions for Industrial Policy acknowledging Specific Aspects
of Sovereignty
 cost-based
FDI
trade,
technological col-
laboration,
IP licensing
collaboration in
science & high-tech
primary relevance
for
early stage;
low income
mid-stage;
low to middle in-
come
late stage;
middle to high
income
required
domestic capacity
serving as basis
cost-advantage for
production
capacity for learning
and
re-engineering
domestic
tech-transfer
capacity
benefit of relation financial capacity to
upgrade
absorptive capacity
in industry
domestic innovation
capacity
generic task of in-
dustrial policy
invest in education
required for
learning
accelerate industrial
upgrading
support technologi-
cal catch-up with
leaders
(innovation policy)
vulnerability high,
mostly footloose
mid-range,
market based
low,
competence based
degree of
politicisation low high medium
Number of
potential partners high low low
Source: own concept / illustration

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 27

Annex
Figure A 1: Total Number of Patents, sum 2019-21

Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on EPO Worldwide Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT)
Figure A 2: Total Number of Patents, sum 2019-21

Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on EPO Worldwide Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT)

0
20.000
40.000
60.000
80.000
100.000
120.000
140.000
160.000
180.000
AR
BR
CO
MX
PE
AZ
IR
JO
KZ
SA
EG
MA
NG
TN
ZA
BG
GR
RO
RS
TR
ID
IN
MY
TH
VN
DE
JP
KR
0
200
400
600
800
1.000
1.200
1.400
1.600
1.800
2.000
ARBRCOMXPE AZ IR JO KZ SA EGMANGTNZA BGGRRORS TR ID INMYTHVN

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 28

Figure A 3: Total Number of Scientific Publications

Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on Elsevier SCOPUS
Figure A 4: Growth of Scientific Publications, 2010-12 vs. 2020-22

Source: Analysis by Fraunhofer ISI, based on Elsevier SCOPUS
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
500000
600000
Argentina
Brazil
Colombia
Mexico
Peru
Azerbaijan
Iran
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Saudi Arabia
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Thailand
Vietnam
Bulgaria
Greece
Serbia
Romania
Turkey
Egypt
Morocco
Nigeria
South Africa
Tunisia
Germany
Japan
South-Korea
2010-12 2015-17 2020-22
0,00
2,00
4,00
6,00
8,00
10,00
12,00
14,00
Argentina
Brazil
Colombia
Mexico
Peru
Azerbaijan
Iran
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Saudi Arabia
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Thailand
Vietnam
Bulgaria
Greece
Serbia
Romania
Turkey
Egypt
Morocco
Nigeria
South Africa
Tunisia
Germany
Japan
South-Korea

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 29

Literature
Acharya, A. (2017): After liberal hegemony: The advent of a multiplex world order. In: Ethics & in-
ternational affairs, 31 (3), pp. 271–285.
Amin, A. (2002): Spatialities of globalisation. In: Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space,
34 (3), pp. 385–399.
Bauer, M.; Erixon, F. (2020): Europe’s quest for technology sovereignty: Opportunities and pitfalls.
ECIPE Occasional Paper.
Bell, M.; Pavitt, K. (1993): Technological accumulation and industrial growth: contrasts between
developed and developing countries. In: Industrial and corporate change, 2 (2), pp. 157–210.
Binz, C.; Truffer, B. (2017): Global Innovation Systems—A conceptual framework for innovation dy-
namics in transnational contexts. In: Research policy, 46 (7), pp. 1284–1298.
Boschma, R. (2022): Global value chains from an evolutionary economic geography perspective: a
research agenda. In: Area Development and Policy, 7 (2), pp. 123–146.
Boschma, R. (2024): An evolutionary approach to regional studies on global value chains. In: Re-
gional Studies, pp. 1–9.
Brewster, R. (2018): The Trump Administration and the Future of the WTO. In: Yale J. Int’l L. Online,
44, p. 6.
Capri, A. (2020): Techno-nationalism: The US-China tech innovation race. In: Hinrich Foundation,
18.
Cassia, L. (2010): Global Outsourcing Strategies. In: Books.
Cimoli, M.; Dosi, G.; Stiglitz, J. E. (2008): The political economy of capabilities accumulation: The
past and future of policies for industrial development. Preface. LEM Working Paper Series.
Coe, N. M.; Dicken, P.; Hess, M. (2008): Global production networks: realizing the potential. In:
Journal of economic geography, 8 (3), pp. 271–295.
Coe, N. M.; Yeung, H. W. (2015): Global production networks: Theorizing economic development
in an interconnected world. Oxford University Press. ISBN: 0198703902.
Coe, N. M.; Yeung, H. W. (2019): Global production networks: mapping recent conceptual devel-
opments. In: Journal of economic geography, 19 (4), pp. 775–801.
Cohen, W. M.; Levinthal, D. A. (1990): Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and in-
novation. In: Administrative science quarterly, 35 (1), pp. 128–152.
Crespi, F.; Caravella, S.; Menghini, M.; Salvatori, C. (2021): European technological sovereignty: an
emerging framework for policy strategy. In: Intereconomics, 56 (6), pp. 348–354.
Dannenberg, P.; Revilla Diez, J.; Schiller, D. (2018): Spaces for integration or a divide? New-genera-
tion growth corridors and their integration in global value chains in the Global South. In:
Zeitschrift für Wirtschaftsgeographie, 62 (2), pp. 135–151.
Dicken, P. (2007): Global shift: Mapping the changing contours of the world economy. SAGE Publi-
cations Ltd. ISBN: 1412929555.
Dicken, P.; Kelly, P. F.; Olds, K.; Wai‐Chung Yeung, H. (2001): Chains and networks, territories and
scales: towards a relational framework for analysing the global economy. In: Global Networks,
1 (2), pp. 89–112.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 30

Edler, J.; Blind, K.; Frietsch, R.; Kimpeler, S.; Kroll, H.; Lerch, C.; Reiss, T.; Roth, F.; Schubert, T.;
Schuler, J. (2020): Technology Sovereignty: from demand to concept. Perspectives-Policy Brief.
Edler, J.; Blind, K.; Kroll, H.; Schubert, T. (2023): Technology sovereignty as an emerging frame for
innovation policy. Defining rationales, ends and means. In: Research policy, 52 (6), p. 104765.
Eichengreen, B.; Park, D.; Shin, K. (2013): Growth slowdowns redux: New evidence on the middle-
income trap. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Elia, S.; Fratocchi, L.; Barbieri, P.; Boffellid, A.; Kalchschmidt, M. (2021): Post-pandemic reconfigura-
tion from global to domestic and regional value chains: the role of industrial policies,
Eum, W.; Lee, J.-D. (2022): The co-evolution of production and technological capabilities during
industrial development. In: Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 63, pp. 454–469.
Frietsch, R.; Kroll, H.; Jonkers, K. (2019): China’s Development of an Innovation-driven Economy-An
Intermediate Assessment,
Fröbel, F.; Heinrichs, J.; Kreye, O. (1978): The new international division of labour. In: Social Science
Information, 17 (1), pp. 123–142.
Gao, H.; Ren, M.; Shih, T.-Y. (2023): Co-evolutions in global decoupling: Learning from the global
semiconductor industry. In: International Business Review, 32 (6), p. 102118.
Gereffi, G. (2019): Economic upgrading in global value chains. In: Handbook on global value
chains, pp. 240–254.
Gereffi, G.; Humphrey, J.; Sturgeon, T. (2005): The governance of global value chains. In: Review of
International Political Economy, 12 (1), pp. 78–104.
Gereffi, G.; Lim, H.-C.; Lee, J. (2021): Trade policies, firm strategies, and adaptive reconfigurations
of global value chains. In: Journal of International Business Policy, 4 (4), pp. 506–522.
Gereffi, G.; Sturgeon, T. (2013): Global value chain-oriented industrial policy: the role of emerging
economies. In: : Global value chains in a changing world. WTO iLibrary, pp. 329–360.
Gill, I. S.; Kharas, H. J.; Bhattasali, D. (2007): An East Asian renaissance: Ideas for economic growth.
World Bank Publications. ISBN: 082136748X.
Giuliani, E.; Pietrobelli, C.; Rabellotti, R. (2005): Upgrading in global value chains: lessons from
Latin American clusters. In: World development, 33 (4), pp. 549–573.
Grant, P. (1983): Technological sovereignty: forgotten factor in the ‘hi-tech’razzamatazz. In: Pro‐
metheus, 1 (2), pp. 239–270.
Grossman, G. M.; Helpman, E. (1991): Trade, knowledge spillovers, and growth. In: European eco-
nomic review, 35 (2-3), pp. 517–526.
Grunwald, J.; Flamm, K. (1985): The global factory: Foreign assembly in international trade. Brook-
ings Institution Press. ISBN: 0815733038.
Hamilton-Hart, N.; Wai-chung Yeung, H. (2021): Institutions under pressure: East Asian states,
global markets and national firms. In: Review of International Political Economy, 28 (1), pp. 11–
35.
Hausmann, R.; Hwang, J.; Rodrik, D. (2007): What you export matters. In: Journal of economic
growth, 12, pp. 1–25.
Hausmann, R.; Rodrik, D. (2003): Economic Development as a Self-Discovery’Journal of Develop-
ment Economics. Volumen.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 31

Hearson, M.; Prichard, W. (2018): China’s challenge to international tax rules and the implications
for global economic governance. In: International Affairs, 94 (6), pp. 1287–1307.
Henderson, J.; Dicken, P.; Hess, M.; Coe, N.; Yeung, H. W. (2002): Global production networks and
the analysis of economic development. In: Review of International Political Economy, 9 (3), pp.
436–464.
Hirschman, A. O. (1968): The political economy of import-substituting industrialization in Latin
America. In: The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 82 (1), pp. 1–32.
Hou, L.; Pan, Y.; Zhu, J. J. H. (2021): Impact of scientific, economic, geopolitical, and cultural factors
on international research collaboration. In: Journal of Informetrics, 15 (3), p. 101194.
Kano, L.; Tsang, E. W. K.; Yeung, H. W. (2020): Global value chains: A review of the multi-discipli-
nary literature. In: Journal of international business studies, 51 (4), pp. 577–622.
Khandelwal, A. K. (2020): THE RETURN TO PROTECTIONISM PABLO D. FAJGELBAUM PINELOPI K.
GOLDBERG PATRICK J. KENNEDY. In: The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1, p. 55.
Kim, L. (1997): Imitation to innovation: The dynamics of Korea’s technological learning. Harvard
Business school press. ISBN: 0875845746.
Kim, L. (1999): Building technological capability for industrialization: analytical frameworks and
Korea’s experience. In: Industrial and corporate change, 8 (1), pp. 111–136.
Kim, L.; Nelson, R. R. (2000): Technology, learning, and innovation: Experiences of newly industrial-
izing economies. Cambridge University Press. ISBN: 0521779871.
Kim, Y. K.; Lee, K.; Park, W. G.; Choo, K. (2012): Appropriate intellectual property protection and
economic growth in countries at different levels of development. In: Research policy, 41 (2), pp.
358–375.
Krapohl, S.; Ocelík, V.; Walentek, D. M. (2021): The instability of globalization: Applying evolution-
ary game theory to global trade cooperation. In: Public Choice, 188, pp. 31–51.
Kroll, H. (2011): Exploring the validity of patent applications as an indicator of Chinese competi-
tiveness and market structure. In: World Patent Information, 33 (1), pp. 23–33.
Kroll, H. (2016): Exploring pathways of regional technological development in China through pa-
tent analysis. In: World Patent Information, 46, pp. 74–86.
Kroll, H. (2024): Assessing open strategic autonomy. A two-dimensional index to quantify EU-27
autonomy in industrial ecosystems and strategic technologies. Luxembourg: Publications Of-
fice of the European Union. ISBN: 978-92-68-10321-0.
Kroll, H.; Frietsch, R. (2022a): China’s changing role in global science and innovation. Fraunhofer
ISI Discussion Papers-Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis.
Kroll, H.; Liefner, I. (2021): User-driven innovation with frugal characteristics: A multi-case analysis
of China’s innovation-driven economy. In: : Frugal Innovation and Its Implementation: Leverag-
ing Constraints to Drive Innovations on a Global Scale. Springer, pp. 95–116.
Kroll, H.; Schäfer, C.; Knüttgen, N.; Rothengatter, O. (2022b): Monitoring des Asiatisch-Pazifischen
Forschungsraums (APRA). Der asiatisch-pazifische Forschungsraum: Aktuelle Entwicklungen in
Wissenschaft und Technologie. In: 39492451.
Kroll, H.; Schiller, D. (2010): Establishing an interface between public sector applied research and
the Chinese enterprise sector: Preparing for 2020. In: Technovation, 30 (2), pp. 117–129.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 32

Kroll, H.; Schiller, D. (2012): Upgrading strategies of electronics firms within the Regional Innova-
tion System of the Pearl River Delta, illustrated by the example of two Hong Kong Firms. In: :
Technological Entrepreneurship in China. Edward Elgar Publishing. ISBN: 0857938991.
Kroll, H.; Schiller, D. (2013): The role of public R&D funding in innovation systems of East Asian
and ASEAN catch-up countries. In: : Emerging knowledge economies in Asia. Routledge, pp.
94–126.
Kroll, H.; Wieczorek, I.; Schüller, M.; Schäfer, C.; Knüttgen, N.; Rothengatter, O. (2022c): Monitoring
des Asiatisch-Pazifischen Forschungsraums (APRA). Japans Wissenschafts-, Technologie-und
Innovationspolitik. In: 39492452.
Krueger, A. O. (1997): Trade policy and economic development: how we learn. National Bureau of
Economic Research Cambridge, Mass., USA.
Krugman, P. (1994): The fall and rise of development economics. In: Rethinking the development
experience: Essays provoked by the work of Albert O. Hirschman, pp. 39–58.
Lall, S. (1992): Technological capabilities and industrialization. In: World development, 20 (2), pp.
165–186.
Lall, S. (2000): The Technological structure and performance of developing country manufactured
exports, 1985‐98. In: Oxford development studies, 28 (3), pp. 337–369.
Lee, J.; Bae, Z.; Choi, D. (1988): Technology development processes: a model for a developing
country with a global perspective. In: R&D Management, 18 (3), pp. 235–250.
Lee, J.-D.; Baek, C.; Yeon, J.-I. (2019): Middle innovation trap. In: The challenges of technology and
economic catch-up in emerging economies.
Lee, J.-D.; Baek, C.; Yeon, J.-I. (2021a): Middle innovation trap: Capability transition failure and
stalled economic growth. In: The challenges of technology and economic catch-up in emerg-
ing economies, pp. 100–122.
Lee, J.-D.; Eum, W.; Shin, K.; Kim, Y.; Lee, H. J. (2023): Revisiting South Korean industrial develop-
ment and innovation policies: from implementation capability to design capability. In: Asian
Journal of Technology Innovation, 31 (3), pp. 625–656.
Lee, J.-D.; Lee, K.; Radosevic, S.; Vonortas, N. (2021b): The challenges of technology and economic
catch-up in emerging economies. Oxford University Press.
Lee, K.; Lim, C. (2001): Technological regimes, catching-up and leapfrogging: findings from the
Korean industries. In: Research policy, 30 (3), pp. 459–483.
Lin, J.; Chang, H.-J. (2009): Should Industrial Policy in developing countries conform to compara-
tive advantage or defy it? A debate between Justin Lin and Ha‐Joon Chang. In: Development
policy review, 27 (5), pp. 483–502.
Lin, J. Y. (2012): From flying geese to leading dragons: New opportunities and strategies for struc-
tural transformation in developing countries 1. In: Global Policy, 3 (4), pp. 397–409.
Liu, X.; Schwaag Serger, S.; Tagscherer, U.; Chang, A. Y. (2017): Beyond catch-up—can a new inno-
vation policy help China overcome the middle income trap? In: Science and Public Policy, 44
(5), pp. 656–669.
Lund, S.; DC, W.; Manyika, J. (2020): Risk, resilience, and rebalancing in global value chains,

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 85
Fraunhofer ISI | 33

Luo, Y.; van Assche, A. (2023): The rise of techno-geopolitical uncertainty: Implications of the
United States CHIPS and Science Act. In: Journal of international business studies, 54 (8), pp.
1423–1440.
March, C.; Schieferdecker, I. (2023): Technological sovereignty as ability, not autarky. In: Interna-
tional Studies Review, 25 (2), viad012.
Narula, R.; Dunning, J. H. (2010): Multinational enterprises, development and globalization: Some
clarifications and a research agenda. In: Oxford development studies, 38 (3), pp. 263–287.
Ohlin, B. G. (1933): Interregional and international trade,
Pla-Barber, J.; Villar, C.; Narula, R. (2021): Governance of global value chains after the Covid-19
pandemic: a new wave of regionalization? In: BRQ Business Research Quarterly, 24 (3), pp. 204–
213.
Prebisch, R. (1959): Commercial policy in the underdeveloped countries. In: The American eco-
nomic review, 49 (2), pp. 251–273.
Prebisch, R. (1962): The economic development of Latin America and its principal problems,
Radosevic, S.; Yoruk, E. (2018): Technology upgrading of middle income economies: A new ap-
proach and results. In: Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 129, pp. 56–75.
Rodrick, D. (2007): Industrial development: Some stylized facts and policy directions. In: Industrial
Development for The 21st Century. New York: United Nations.
Sekliuckiene, J.; Rybakovas, E. (2023): The quest for regionalization of global value chains in a pan-
demic global business environment. In: Inžinerinė ekonomika, 34 (2), pp. 230–239.
Stiglitz, J. E. (2017): Rethinking globalization in the trump era: US-China relations,
Stiglitz, J. E.; Rodrik, D. (2024): Rethinking Global Governance: Cooperation in a World of Power.
Vivarelli, M. (2016): The middle income trap: a way out based on technological and structural
change. In: Economic Change and Restructuring, 49, pp. 159–193.
Wade, R. (1990): Governing the market: Economic theory and the role of government in East Asian
industrialization,
Wang, T.; Kroll, H.; Wang, L.; Zheng, X. (2021): How S&T connectivity supports innovation-driven
development: an analysis of China’s cooperation networks in high and new technology fields.
In: Asian Journal of Technology Innovation, 29 (1), pp. 134–157.
Yeung, H. W. (2016): Strategic coupling: East Asian industrial transformation in the new global
economy. Cornell University Press. ISBN: 1501704265.
Yeung, H. W. (2021): The trouble with global production networks. In: Environment and Planning
A: Economy and Space, 53 (2), pp. 428–438.
Yeung, H. W. (2023): Troubling economic geography: new directions in the post‐pandemic world.
In: Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 48 (4), pp. 672–680.
Yeung, H. W.; Coe, N. (2015): Toward a dynamic theory of global production networks. In: Eco-
nomic geography, 91 (1), pp. 29–58.
Yeung, H. W.; Huang, S.; Xing, Y. (2023): From fabless to fabs everywhere? Semiconductor global
value chains in transition,
