
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80

Public sector organisations as agents
of transformations
A framework for analysing structural changes within Public Sector
Organisations (PSO)

Thomas Jackwerth -Rice, Nof Afghani, Stephanie Daimer, Ralf Lindner,
Florian Wittmann

Place: Karlsruhe
Date: July 2023

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80

Responsible for content
Thomas Jackwerth-Rice, thomas.jackwerth-rice@isi.fraunhofer.de; Nof Afghani, nof.afghani@isi.fraunhofer.de;
Stephanie Daimer, stephanie.daimer@isi.fraunhofer.de; Ralf Lindner, ralf.lindner@isi.fraunhofer.de; Florian Witt-
mann, florian.wittmann@isi.fraunhofer.de
Recommended citation
Jackwerth-Rice, T.; Afghani, N.; Daimer, S.; Lindner, R.; Wittmann, F. (2023): Public sector organisations as agents of
transformations (Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80). Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer ISI.
Published
July 2023

ISSN
1612-1430

DOI
10.24406/publica-1664

This article is based on the results of the research project "INNOVA", which is funded by the German Environment
Agency from 2021 to 2024.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | I

Content
1 Introduction.................................................................................................................... 1
2 The organisational anchoring of transformative capacities .............................. 2
3 Combining problem-oriented governance with organisation science ........... 4
3.1 Problem-solving capabilities .......................................................................................................... 4
3.2 Expectation structures...................................................................................................................... 5
4 Methods and Data ........................................................................................................ 6
5 Empirical analysis .......................................................................................................... 7
5.1 Reflective-improvement capability ............................................................................................... 7
5.2 Collaborative capability ................................................................................................................... 8
5.3 Data-analytic capability ................................................................................................................... 9
6 Discussion ...................................................................................................................... 11
7 Conclusion .................................................................................................................... 13
Literature ...................................................................................................................................... 15

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | II

Abbreviations
PSO Public Sector Organisations
UBA German Environment Agency

Tables
Table 1 Organisational anchoring of transformative capacities ...................................................... 2
Table 2 Analysing the problem-solving capability of PSOs .............................................................. 5
Table 3 Required changes of organisational structures within the department .................... 11

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 1

1 Introduction
There is widespread agreement among academics that sustainable development requires a more
proactive role for the state, as markets alone cannot effectively address the complex problems we
face, such as climate change (Borrás and Edler 2020; Kuhlmann and Rip 2018; Head and Alford 2015;
Mayne et al. 2020; Schot and Steinmüller 2018). Central to this argument is the transformative ca-
pacity of Public Sector Organisations (PSOs), which requires government agencies to be willing to
adapt their structures, understanding and capabilities to address these societal issues in collabora-
tion with other both state- and non-state actors. The latter may include representatives from busi-
ness, science, regions, cities and civi l society. It is therefore clear that a more proactive state is
needed to drive the necessary changes (Borras et al. 2023; Janssen et al. 2023).
However, the established rationalities of PSO emphasize hierarchical control, rule-following behav-
iour and path-dependent development of the organisation. This is in stark contrast to the need for
a more active role in transformation processes, which highlight s horizontal collaboration across
policy areas and sectors. Furthermore, the classical view of PSOs suggests that they are rather in-
capable of directly influencing society, as they make decisions and interpret problems based on
previous decisions and experiences (Luhmann 2019). However, PSOs need to adopt a more out-
ward-looking stance and rethink their authority, skills and knowledge about societal issues with a
new problem-solving capacity (Jong et al. 2023; Mayne 2020; Torfing and Sørensen 2019).
The ramifications of this new role necessitate us to evaluate how PSO s address the multifaceted
and demanding societal problems at hand (Borras 2019; Damanpour and Schneider 2009; Haddad
et al. 2022; Vries et al. 2016; Wolff et al. 2019). However, considering the intricacy of these problems,
it is currently unfeasible for PSOs to create the solutions and pathways in detail. Consequently, they
should concentrate on the "how" of the transformation, creating potential solution paths experi-
mentally and incrementally, while participating in strategic planning (Arciniegas Pradilla et al. 2022;
Grießhammer and Brohmann 2015; Jacob and Graff 2020). In line with earlier arguments, this study
agrees that the state's capacity to drive transformations can be attributed to the capabilities of
PSOs working with stakeholders to make and implement effective transformation strategies.
This new role could change the way middle and lower level government employees work in the
future. It could be assumed that they devote more of their time and intellectual resources to de-
signing, enacting, evaluating and adjusting transformation strategies in collaboration across policy
fields and sectors . They also must assume more responsibility for formulating policies that span
across sectors and policy fields, thereby modifying traditional governance models (Angeles et al.
2021; Braams et al. 2021).
However, the question is how these PSOs can change their organisational structures to take a more
proactive stance in transformation processes (Borras et al. 2021; Mazzucato 2015; Kattel and Maz-
zucato 2018; Kattel 2022). This new role may entail changes in formal structures or perhaps more
subtle shifts in the culture of PSOs, which is why we have developed an analytical framework for
identifying such necessary changes by combining the concept of problem -oriented governance
with sociological organisation science. Empirical data collected in the context of the German Min-
istry for the Environment are used to illustrate this framework.
This study is structured as follows: Chapter 2 provides an overview of how previous research has
explored the organisational anchoring of transformative capacities within PSOs. Chapter 3 intro-
duces this article's own approach, which links the three capabilities of problem -oriented govern-
ance with organisation science. Chapter 4 presents the empirical analysis and chapter 6 the appli-
cation of the analytical model. Finally, Chapter 7 summarizes the main findings of the study and
outlines how the analytical model can be used to compare PSOs.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 2

2 The organisational anchoring of transformative capacities
Regarding the current studies concerning transformations, the organisational structure of PSOs can
be analysed from three perspectives in order to reveal the transformative capacities of the state.
First, it appears that local agencies are the key to transformative capacities. Research has further
looked at the role of national regulators, cities and municipalities, and environmental agencies
when addressing complex issues. Bowen (2020) considers the capabilities of PSOs to effectively use
state power through measures such as informatio n-based regulations. Li and Chan (2009) stress
the need for PSOs to collaborate in order to strengthen management and enforcement capacities.
An example of this is the Environmental Protection Bureau of Chongqing's Blue Sky Program.
Spyrdaki et al. (2020) looked at city governance structures to assess the capacities needed for sus-
tainable energy projects. However, it is not enough for cities to just collaborate with each other;
they must also engage with private actors to achieve success. Based on this research, it is clear that
local agencies are an essential part of transformative capacities.
The research conducted has highlighted the changing nature of public authorities, which no longer
solely lies within a centralized source. It emphasizes the need for PSOs to effectively manage soci-
etal problems and engage in collaborations with a variety of stakeholders. However, while these
studies emphasize the importance of local agencies in building transformative capacity, our study
looks at a broader level of pro blem solving which is based on policies that look beyond the geo-
graphical boundaries of cities or regions.
Table 1 Organisational anchoring of transformative capacities
 Local agencies Transformative agency Transformative capabil-
ities
Anchoring
of trans-
formative
capacities
Organized interactions
between agencies at the
local level
Transformative "agency"
broadly embedded in a
network of actors
Organisational capabili-
ties as part of policy
making and sustainability
transitions
Main
actors in
problem-
solving
Different agencies at the
local level (cities, munici-
palities)
The state as one co-pro-
ducer among others of
socio-technological
change
PSO that design and im-
plement transformative
policies
Relevance
for this
study
Inter-agency collabora-
tion as coordination
mechanism
Agency is required to in-
duce change based on
networks
Problem-solving capabili-
ties must be anchored in
PSOs
Source: Own illustration
Second, it has been suggested that transformative capacity can be embedded in networks and col-
lectives of organisations. By engaging with each other, actors are able to cultivate the necessary
influence and capacity to tackle complex problems, known as agency. The state is seen as a central
actor in this process, as it plays a key role in the transformation of society, for example in the pro-
vision of energy or mobility. Köhler et al. (2019) highlight that sustainability transitions involve mul-
tiple actors and have normative goals. Subsequently, frameworks such as transiti on management
and strategic niche management have been proposed to regulate such transitions. The core idea
of the so-called transition arenas, which are characteristic of transition management, is to change
governance by bringing together representatives from science, politics, civil society and business

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 3

and creating cooperative rather than competitive relationships. Strasser (2019) has acknowledged
the need for network leadership, while emphasizing the importance of learning processes for the
growth of transformative capacity.
To this end, a conceptual framework is proposed to analyse the role and limits of network leader-
ship in promoting learning processes for the development of transformative capacity. Therefore,
this second perspective proposes the importance of agency and the need to generate a collabora-
tive capacity with both state and non-state actors to address societal problems. Nevertheless, the
concept of agency remains unclear as to the organisational structures in which it is anchored.
A third p erspective, which is directly related to this study, focuses mainly on the organ isational
capabilities of PSOs. Authors have analysed government actions to identify which routines enable
these organisations to shift institutions towards sustainable develop ment, thereby improving the
policy framework for tackling complex problems (e.g. Borras et al. 2023; Kattel 2022; Kattel and
Mazzucato 2018; Mayne et al. 2020). For example, Borras et al. (2023) provided a conceptual frame-
work for understanding the transfo rmative capacity of PSOs based on their organisational roles,
resources and capabilities. Similarly, Kattel (2022) aimed to conceptualise dynamic capabilities in
the public sector to address climate emergencies and other wicked societal challenges. The paper
discusses the origins and elements of dynamic capabilities and how they can be assessed. Mean-
while, Mayne et al. 2020 examine three core conditions conducive to problem-oriented governance.
Overall, it remains unclear from this research what changes in routines within (and across) PSOs might
strengthen the state's transformative capacity. In light of this research gap, this study seeks to assess
how organisational structures within PSOs should be adapted to become more actively involved in trans-
formation processes, thereby potentially enhancing the state's transformative capacity.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 4

3 Combining problem-oriented governance with organisation
science
In order to achieve transformative change, PSOs must be equipped to have an effect on society,
like the way people work, take in, or do business. Nevertheless, according to the system -oriented
concept of organisational theory, PSOs are internally focused and not able to alter society directly,
but make decisions and address issues based on their prior experiences an d decisions (Luhmann
2019; Kühl and Schmitz 2013).
Taking a different stance, problem-oriented governance emphasizes the importance of rethinking
the way state organisations work in order to effectively tackle complex social issues. According to
Mayne et al. (2020), this means making changes to the structure and roles of ministries and public
authorities to better respond to the needs of society. PSO's should strive to b e more outward -
looking, adapting their structures to address public issues that are determined by the public's in-
terests, instead of aligning their structures to problems which they define based on their own ex-
periences and capabilities (Mayne et al. 2020).
Evidently, an outward-looking approach is critical for the management of PSOs that aspire to ac-
tively facilitate changes. However, it is important to remember that restructuring of PSOs can have
a significant impact on its identity and how its members carry out their tasks. Restructuring cannot
just be done by a simple change of the mission statement or by replacing the high-ranking officials.
Strategies, procedures, and communication channels must be modified to take on complex social
issues, and Human Resources must create new job expectations for middle and lower -level em-
ployees as mission statements are usually too general and employees are only judged on their
short-term successes. This leaves little room for strategizing. Taking all of this into consideration, it
is evident that restructuring must be done carefully in order to be successful.
3.1 Problem-solving capabilities
Upon analysing Mayne et al. (2020), it is clear that the capacity of states to address societal issues
is based on the established procedures and practices that PSOs hold a major role in identifying and
resolving social issues. To be more involved in transformation processes, it is imperative for PSOs
to cultivate problem-solving capabilities in three areas.
Initially, it is essential for PSOs to have the capacity for reflective-improvement so they can investi-
gate complex societal issues thoroughly and develop theories to ascertain how changes can be
implemented. This necessitates comprehension of the underlying reasons and effects of the dilem-
mas as well as devising effective solutions and strategies to carry out them.
Subsequently, PSOs should have the aptitude to work together with other organisations to establish
strategic alliances. Through dialogues, the interchange of thoughts an d data, the association of
assets and the creation of groups with a mutual objective, PSOs can enhance their capabilities in
analysing and understanding complex societal issues and in devising solutions. The connections or
coalitions may then stretch out o ver multiple organisational branches, departments, policy areas
and industries.
Thirdly, PSOs necessitate a formidable data -analytical talent to enhance their assessment of intri-
cate societal issues. This requires routinely collecting, organizing and deciphering multiple types of
data and information which may be implicit or expressed. In this way, both human and machine
data processing improves the problem-solving capability. To build up this aptitude, PSOs must set
up collaborative arrangements with other internal and external stakeholders who can supply fresh
information and data, thus augmenting the understanding of complex matters.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 5

3.2 Expectation structures
A system-oriented view of organisations enables the exploration of how problem-solving capabili-
ties can be incorporated into both the formal and informal structures of a PSO. Consequently, the
second lens of our analytical framework considers the expectation structures which are inherent in
the regular operations of PSOs. Generally, there are three separate types of expectation structures
present in any organ isation, regardless of its social ties (Kühl and Schmitz 2013; Luhmann 1999 ;
2021).
First, programmes summarise the criteria by which decisions are made in a PSO. They define what
may be done in the PSO without violating the expectations of belonging to the organisation. Pro-
grammes can be differentiated according to if-then rules that precisely prescribe the processing of
tasks such as processes or workflows (conditional programmes). However, there are also so-called
purpose programmes that leave open how a task is to be completed. Here, for example, goals or
strategies that influence decisions are to be mentioned.
Second, communication channels determine how communication and decisions are made in PSOs
by defining competencies and responsibilities. In this way, communication is formally pre -struc-
tured without controlling the informal communication channels through which decisions can be
prepared. The communication channels can then be influenced, for example, by changes in the
hierarchy, the organisation of project teams or the use of sustainability officers.
Lastly, decisions can also be influenced by the deployment of personnel, because depending on the
qualifications or experience a person brings to a particular position, he or she can be expected to
behave differently in decision-making. Decisions can be influenced by hiring, transfer, dismissal or
personnel development.
Combining the three capabilities of problem-oriented governance with the three expectation struc-
tures outlined above creates an analytical framework that can be used to assess the PSOs capability
to tackle complex societal problems.
Table 2 Analysing the problem-solving capability of PSOs
 Programs Communication
channels
Personnel
Reflective-im-
provement
capability
What changes in the organisational structures are required in order to
strengthen the problem-solving capabilities of PSO? Collaborative
capability
Data-analytic
capability
Source: Own illustration

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 6

4 Methods and Data
The German Federal Ministry of the Environment and its subordinated authorities, such as the Ger-
man Environment Agency (UBA), offer an ideal research context to pinpoint the necessary organi-
sational changes that can enhance PSOs' problem-solving capabilities. This setting is particularly
suitable for assessing the degree to which PSOs can take on a more active role in tran sformation
processes, as the environmental department has expressed its commitment to a transformative
policy approach that prioritize addressing societal problems and shaping transformation processes
towards sustainable development of society (BMUB 2016; Messner 2021; Wolff et al. 2019).
A collaborative research project (2021-2024), commissioned by the ministry and UBA and coordi-
nated by Fraunhofer ISI, tries to uncover new working and policy making ways within government
agencies aiming to take a more active part in sustainability transformations. The organisations ex-
amined in this study are aiming to implement a more transformative environmental policy, which
would lead to policies that either contribute to sustainability transformations or decrease the risks
of increased energy consumption due to digitalisation (Wolff et al. 2018).
The empirical organ isational analysis was conducted through nine semi -structured expert inter-
views, six of which were with the Ministry of the Environment and three with two of the four spe-
cialized agencies (UBA, BASE). The main focus of the analysis was on the organisational aspect.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 7

5 Empirical analysis
This chapter utilizes empirical data to illustrate the analytical framework introduced in Chapter 3. It
also assesses the necessary structural changes that should be implemented within the German en-
vironmental department to strengthen its capability to solve societal problems and actively drive
sustainability transformations.
5.1 Reflective-improvement capability
The German Environment al Department must actively consider the need for reflective -improve-
ment, delving into why transformations are necessary, how they will alter the conditions of local life
and economies, and how they can be actualized. Consequently, such theories which enco mpass
causes and consequences of transformations must be generated by political organ isations but
should remain closely in line with the realities of the situation. Transformations are likely to dramat-
ically alter people's lifestyles and livelihoods, so they must be well-defined, departing from any pre-
existing ideas that individuals may hold and adequately convincing citizens and politicians alike to
back such a transformation.
It was, therefore, astonishing to learn that, even in the Department of Environment, which is devoted
to addressing intricate matters such as climate change, there are hardly any theories that transcend
simplistic notions such as energy transition or sustainable development, as one respondent men-
tioned.
We don't have a picture of a c limate-neutral society. Do we? It's all just numbers and bal-
ance sheets and the 1.5 degree target. That won't be enough to get people on board and,
above all, to convince politicians to move in the right direction.
Such theories understand the necessity of transformations and how they can be achieved to bring
all parties together. In the realm of environmental and sustainability policy, these theories have a
powerful role in legitimizing the government. As one interviewee stated, it is about raising aware-
ness among political administrators about the need for transformations.
That is, my activity consists above all also in making a lot of waves from the ministry in this
research field, simply to produce facts, findings, proposals again and again, in order to do
something for the awareness and the political perception (...).
The interviews have suggested that reflexivity is a collaborative process that involves people inside
and outside of the organ isation. This has the potential to alter how PSO are structured . It is im-
portant for the organisations to consider the viewpoints of those from different areas, such as mu-
nicipalities, companies and citizens, to better comprehend the issues and develop effective imple-
mentation strategies. Based on these results, it is clear that including these different perspectives
in the reflection process is essential.
If we really want to make and develop transformations for society as a whole, we have to
go where it really hurts, and that is always very difficult to develop forma ts for this, to
achieve participation and willingness, and to win over the corresponding mediators.
It is essential for the organisation to include the perspectives of external sources during the entire
process, from identifying the problem to deciding on a course of action. This is because they are
more likely to possess the knowledge and understanding to recognize difficulties and develop via-
ble solutions.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 8

All the issues that exist with transformations are best dealt with by the people in the field,
because they already know what is good in practical and concrete terms. I would also like
to see more of that.
Reflecting on the need for personnel changes, one interviewee used the Digital Services Act as an
example of the need for new skills: "It is essential to consider future developments and the potential
risks associated with transformative measures to ensure the successful completion of any legislative
project." This requires not only anticipating any resistance from society but also reporting to poli-
cymakers ahead of time.
A renewed outlook for administrative staff is being advocated for. It is being suggested that they
transition from simply following orders from higher -ups to becoming real agents of change. One
interviewee expresses that if colleag ues are open to new ideas and can make decisions inde-
pendently, this new model can be successful. Another interviewee goes on to add their thoughts.
We must learn to forge a process out of this dynamic. I think that's the most important
message. It's not about the method set or anything. It's simply about legitimisation. Many
people say yes, but my legitimisation is not transformation, but stabilisation.
This change in expectations has led to a shift in the power dynamics, allowing for more autonomy
and decision-making at the lower levels of PSO. As one individual described it, this has been a
significant change.
Organisations would have to look more closely at how to design certain processes and
procedures so that decisions can also take place at a level below.
5.2 Collaborative capability
To effectively address environmental problems, the collaborative capability plays a vital role. Th is
involves having access to all the relevant data for identifying these environmental problems and
jointly devising appropriate solutions. Research has demonstrated that successful collaboration re-
quires cooperation among different departments, ideally with a shared recognition of the need of
altering established lifestyles, work practices and consumption patterns. Consequently, it is not un-
surprising that our interviews revealed certain challenges related to collaboration.
In the past, we always had the impression that the Ministry of Economics was not interested
in what we were working on. The Ministry of Transport was actually more of a counterpart
to us. The Ministry of Food and Agriculture was also more of a hostile post. (...) In the Min-
istry of Economics, there was no contact person at all for this field. They simply ignored the
issue.
It is unsurprising that the capability to work together for achieving sustainability transformations is
deeply entrenched in the interactions of PSOs with the society. Only through such collective efforts
can PSOs effectively involve those affected by transformation strategies implemented within the
policy process.
Sustainability policy is very dependent on the interaction between people, between those
affected by decisions and those preparing decisions; sustainability policy is very critically
successful, dependent on an open, partly also open-ended multi-stakeholder setting; sus-
tainability policy is very centrally dependent on the existence of informal formats of inter-
action in addition to the formal formats of interaction, which are usually negotiation for-
mats.
An interviewee pointed out that although it is beneficial to work together across silos, organisations,
departments and society, it is unnecessary to speed up the work of experts for transformations

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 9

within the administration. Instead, they argued that taking away opportunities for partici pation
would lead to an even slower process.
The interviews also revealed that collaborative capability relates to the operational level of working
together to speed up the process of designing strategies and policies that potentially promote
transformations. This minimises the chance that these measures lose effectiveness due to lengthy
coordination within the hierarchy. To achieve this, it is proposed that such measures should be
decided on the operational level before they are delegated to the higher-ups. In the interviews, one
expert uses the term "agility" to describe this idea. The aim of these "agile" collaborations is to
minimize administrative coordination by enabling direct communication between the experts, as
he pointed out:
(...) I understand this to mean working out important points in order to then come to deci-
sions that are also decided or where it is said that we do not dare to do this politically. In
such cases, you can also leave it alone to some extent. But in an administration, we can
spend an eternity on notes, draft laws, etc., and then, in case of doubt, things move at a
snail's pace.
In this context, enhancing the ability to collaborate would involve delegating responsibilities for the
design, enactment, evaluation and adjustment of potentially transformative policies to lower levels
of PSO's hierarchies. As the authors of this study suggest, this would be accompanied by more
personal forms of collaboration that are less formal.
This setup also means that organ isations in the environmen tal department will need to adjust to
new expectations for lower and middle-level managers and specialists. Previously, much of the co-
ordination and decision -making was done through writing, but now those personnel within the
relevant organisations and departments will need to communicate with each other in a less struc-
tured and more direct way, which could be facilitated by new methods.
So, methodically, something would have to change massively in the cooperation. As a rule,
however, all those who can decide and take responsibility for this have not experienced this
in their lives. They can't do it themselves, and that's why they don't do it. And they do not
work with it themselves.
5.3 Data-analytic capability
Environmental department organisations need access to relevant data and information to identify
existing environmental problems and their potential impacts. Within this political department, one
of the four authorities, namely the UBA could play a central role in setting up a new data -driven
policy advisory function for the department.
Since its founding in 1972, the UBA has already been established as a scientific policy advisor or-
ganisation and has worked to create the necessary information and data resources. Going forward,
as one interviewee from the UBA points out, environmental policy advice must be increasingly
based on digital data and data-driven evidence to better understand the intricate problems, their
manifestations and their impacts.
Our field of activity is science-based policy consulting. Digitisation plays a major role in this,
of course. Why? Because it also defines a new mode of steering politics, namely the ques-
tion: What do I represent in what evidence? Actu ally, you could say that you're depicting
the present, whether in terms of environmental issues or the constitution of society.
Reflecting on this context, this capability could mean that environmental problems including their
future development are digitized, resulting in improved policy recommendations for tackling such
problems. Data models and future scenarios for environmental problems could provide a powerful

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 10

basis here for policymakers and public administrations to direct their resources and structures to-
ward addressing these problems. At the same time, the UBA is actively undertaking measures to
develop these new digitalisation capabilities. For instance, an AI lab has been established to create
and test new digital solutions for more effective environmental and sustainability policies.
This structural shift in policy advice could also alter the work of transformation specialists. For ex-
ample, during their daily work as experts on the ministry's operational level, information gaps are
often revealed that must be filled rather quickly. To do so, collaborations with research institutes
are often necessary to obtain data that can be used to justify political interventions that might
change society.
You realize that you don't always have the right data for a certain, very specific question.
Then you actually have to sift through data stocks again, create data stocks, in order to
really be able to do small-scale modelling, so to speak.
Nevertheless, it was apparent during the conversations that the digitalisation of ecological regula-
tion is still in its early stages. An interviewee indicated that the inquiry of how to improve environ-
mental policy by utilizing digital techniques remains unsolved.
Now, after the first year and a half, a kind of platform has emerged where the very different
needs and strategic issues are somehow jointly configured. This has also led to the devel-
opment of a separate "capabilities" agenda, also with a view to more effective environmen-
tal policy. Digitisation is not only understood as a kind of organisational efficiency, but the
topic of "digitisation" can ensure improved efficiency of environmental policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 11

6 Discussion
The evidence presented has demonstrated the need for the Dep artment of the Environment to
become a more active participant in transformation processes, acting as an agent of transformation.
This chapter will explain how the analytical framework from Chapter 3 can be used to better under-
stand the required changes to organisational structures.
Table 3 indicates that the problem-solving capability of the department can be improved by intro-
ducing new programs, such as transformation strategies or processes, establishing new communi-
cation channels, like collaborating with those impacted by transformations , and setting higher
standards for personnel, such as self-reflection, anticipation, and increased accountability.
Table 3 Required changes of organisational structures within the department
Source: Own illustration
To strengthen their reflective-improvement capability in the area of environmental and sustainabil-
ity policy, organisations within the department must have procedures for designing, enacting, eval-
uating, and adjusting theories for making changes in response to societal problems on the ground.
These processes must consider the input from actors in the field, such as regions, municipalities,
and cities, to create more valid strategies. This puts new demands on administrative staff, requiring
them to have the necessary qualifications and power to establish organ isational structures for
strategizing and execution.
Regarding the collaborative capability, it is clear that the department must have measures in place
to create and enact transformation strategies with those departments relevant to problem diagno-
sis. This is necessary because these strategies must be rooted in a collective understanding of how
to change society shared by the entire government. At the same time, the authors suggest that the
 Decision programs Communication
channels
Personnel
Reflective-
improvement
capability
The PSOs have processes
in place to develop their
own theories of how
transformations can be
realized on the ground
The organisation incorpo-
rates input from actors in
the field (regions, munici-
palities, cities) to come to
more legitimate strategies
Administrative staff have
the skills and authority to
critically reflect organisa-
tional structures that hin-
der transformations
Collaborative
capability
The administration has
processes in place for
how it implements trans-
formation projects to-
gether with other depart-
ments
The authority for devel-
oping and coordinating
transformative policies is
shifted to lower levels of
the administration (com-
munities of practice)
Collaboration between
administrative units par-
ticularly beyond the de-
partment runs more in-
formally (e.g., fixed con-
tact persons, less text-
based)
Data-analytic
capability
The organisation uses
digitized images of envi-
ronmental problems that
serve as a basis for strat-
egy development and the
justification of policies
The organisation has ac-
cess to internal or exter-
nal digitisation compe-
tencies (data, modelling)
needed for strategy de-
velopment and justifica-
tion of policies
For analysing data on en-
vironmental problems
and modelling transfor-
mation strategies, the ad-
ministration is building
new digital skills

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 12

responsibility for pre-designing transformation strategies can be shifted to lower levels of the ad-
ministration. To reduce the risk that potentially transformative policies are not followed up due to
barriers of hierarchy or other depart ments’ political priorities, the experts should establish cross -
departmental communities of practice. Here, they can exchange knowledge more informally and
establish trust among members from different departments (Brown and Duguid, 1991). This also
puts new demands on the experts from all the relevant departments to work more directly and
informally, to break down the formal barriers of collaboration between ministries.
It is becoming more and more vital to incorporate the use of data -analytic capabilities into the
organisation. Transformation strategies should be based on digital twins of current soci etal prob-
lems and digitized sce narios of the potential consequences on society if no political intervention
occurs. This capability requires staff to possess the new skills to access and analyse data on complex
environmental problems as well as their potential effects if left unaddressed. This would place the
department in a favourable position to better advice policymakers and provide more reasons for
justifying transformations.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 13

7 Conclusion
This research has shown that in order to strengthen problem-solving capacity, both the formal and
informal structures of PSOs must be changed. Indeed, PSOs need to develop new organ isational
structures in order to effectively tackle complex problems and be better equipped to play a more
active role in transforming society. The ability to play the role of 'problem solver' would put the
PSOs in a position as change agents and significantly enhance the transformative capacity of the
state.
In fact, our research has shown that we are talking about organisational changes that help PSOs to
establish new organisational systems between the relevant governmental and non -governmental
organisations. Within these new organisational systems, however, it would be imperative to ensure
that the appropriate departments and experts are provided with the necessary skills and responsi-
bilities to design, implement, evaluate and modify t ransformation strategies. There is no need to
completely reorganize the way ministries or agencies work, but rather to identify the departments
and experts that need to be more closely involved.
In short, it is essential to make changes in the organisational structures of PSOs in order to enable
organisational systems to emerge from new collaborative problem-solving activities. Based on our
empirical analysis, it is therefore important to consider the following changes.
 The department must introduce new programs for designing, enacting, evaluating and refin-
ing collectively binding strategies that could potentially result in regional, municipal and ur-
ban transformations.
 This also requires new communication channels. The department needs to engage with actors
who may be affected by the transformation. Establishing such communication channels be-
tween the department and external actors will ensure that their opinions are heard and taken
into account, which could increase the legitimacy of transformation strategies.
 There is also a need for cultural change in the way PSO staff works. It is important to work
more informally and collaboratively to get buy-in from other PSOs for change strategies more
quickly. By bringing together experts from different departments, they can jointly work on
how to implement and communicate such changes.
 With regard to personnel, it is also imperative that organisational structures that are making
the designing and implementation of transformation strategies hard must be removed. The
authority to make such changes should be delegated to lower levels with better insights into
how daily routines hinder transformations. Those individuals should be given the necessary
skills to instigate these organisational changes.
 The utilisation of digital technologies is essential to properly diagnose environmental prob-
lems and provide valid justifications for political interventions. This is necessary to properly
inform policy-makers and society.
Strengthening the problem-solving capability necessitates a re-evaluation of the department's or-
ganisational structure. It would entail formulating new collectively binding transformation strate-
gies, increasing exchange and engagement with stakeholders, acquiring new skills, and introducing
new digital technologies.
However, strengthening this capability does not mean to completely redesign organisational struc-
tures, but rather to introduce additional ones that replace the existing structures. Instead, it means
to add organisational structures which better channel resources to the designing, implementation,
evaluation and adjusting of transformation strategies (layering) (Mahoney and Thelen 2010).

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 14

Following the understanding of complex social systems, this change might be necessary because it
increases the organisational system's complexity, which is necessary when the environmental com-
plexity grows in the face of intricate problems (Ashby 1958).
The framework presented in this study has demonstrated its effectiveness in identifying organisa-
tional structural changes within and between PSOs, enabling them to assume a more proactive role
as agents of transformation. However, applying a similar analysis to other departments could reveal
variations in organ isational changes. This highlights that there is no one -fit-all solution and the
need for a more accurate assessment of how different departments can enhance their capacity to
drive transformation initiatives.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 15

Literature
Angeles, L.C.; Ngo, V.D.; Greig, Z. (2021): Inert Resilience and Institutional Traps: Tackling
Bureaucratic Inertias Towards Transformative Social Learning and Capacity Building for
Local Climate Change Adaptation. In: Planning Theory & Practice 22 (1), S. 51–71.
Ashby, W. Ross (1958): Requisite Variety and Its Implications for the Control of Complex Systems.
In: Cybernetica 1, S. 83–99.
BMUB (2016): Den ökologischen Wandel gestalten - Integriertes Umweltprogramm 2030.
Bundesministerium für Umwelt, Naturschutz, Bau und Reaktorsicherheit (BMUB). Berlin.
BMU (2019a): Klimaschutzplan 2050 - Klimaschutzpolitische Grundsätze und Ziele der
Bundesregierung. 2nd ed. Edited by: Bundesministerium für Umwelt und Naturschutz und
nukleare Sicherheit (BMU). Berlin.
BMU (2019b): Klimaschutzprogramm 2030 der Bundesregierung zur Umsetzung des
Klimaschutzplans 2050. Edited by: Bundesministerium für Umwelt, Naturschutz und
nukleare Sicherheit (BMU). Berlin.
Borrás, S.; Edler, J. (2020): The roles of the state in the governance of socio-technical systems’
transformation. In: Research Policy 49(5), 103971.
Borras, S.; Haakonsson, S.; Hendriksen, C.; Pallesen, T.; Taudal Poulsen, R.; Somavilla, L. (2021):
Conceptualizing public actors’ roles and capacity in the governance of sustainability
transitions: A literature review. Paper for the 12th International Sustainability Transitions
Conference (IST), Karlsruhe, Germany, October 5-8, 2021.
Bowen, F.; Panagiotopoulos, P. (2020): Regulatory roles and functions in information-based
regulation: A systematic review. In: International Review of Administrative Sciences 86(2),
203-221.
Braams, R.B.; Wesseling, J.H.; Meijer, A.J.; Hekkert, M.P. (2021): Legitimizing transformative
government. In: Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions 39, 191–205.
Budde, B.; Konrad, K. (2019): Tentative governing of fuel cell innovation in a dynamic network of
expectations. In: Research Policy 48(5), 1098–1112.
Damanpour, F.; Schneider, M. (2009): Characteristics of Innovation and Innovation Adoption in
Public Organizations: Assessing the Role of Managers. In: Journal of Public Administration
Research and Theory 19 (3), S. 495–522.
Geels, F.W. (2020): Micro-foundations of the multi-level perspective on socio-technical transitions:
Developing a multi-dimensional model of agency through crossovers between social
constructivism, evolutionary economics and neo-institutional theory. In: Technological
Forecasting and Social Change 152, S. 119894.
Grießhammer, R.; Brohmann, B. (2015): Transformationsstrategien und Models of Change für
nachhaltigen ge-sellschaftlichen Wandel. Wie Transformationen und gesellschaftliche
Innovationen gelingen können. Hg. v. Umweltbundesamt. Dessau-Roßlau.
Haddad, C.R.; Nakić, V.; Bergek, A.; Hellsmark, H. (2022): Transformative innovation policy: A
systematic review. In: Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions 43, S. 14–40.
Head, B.; Alford, J. (2015): Wicked Problems: Implications for Public Policy and Management. In:
Administration & Society 47 (6), S. 711–739.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 16

Jacob, K.; Graaf, L.; Bär, H. (2015): Greening des gesellschaftlichen Wandels. In: ÖW 30 (3), S. 30.
Janssen, M.; Wanzenböck, I.; Fünfschilling, L.; Pontikakis, D. (2023): Capacities for transformative
innovation in public administrations and governance systems. Luxembourg: Publications
Office of the European Union (EUR, 31490).
Jong, J. de; Waardenburg, M.; Steenbergen, B.; Vachon, N. (2023): All Minds on Deck? Assessing
Distributed Strategic Capacity in Public-Sector Organizations. In: Review of Public Personnel
Administration 43 (1), S. 33–55.
Kattel, R. (2022): Dynamic capabilities of the public sector. Towards a new synthesis. Hg. v. UCL
Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose (Working paper, WP 2022/07).
Kattel, R.; Mazzucato, M. (2018): Mission-oriented innovation policy and dynamic capabilities in
the public sector. In: Ind Corp Change 27 (5), S. 787–801.
Köhler, J.; Geels, F.W.; Kern, F.; Markard, J.; Onsongo, E.; Wieczorek, A., et al. (2019): An agenda for
sustainability transitions research: State of the art and future directions. In: Environmental
Innovation and Societal Transitions 31, 1–32.
Kuhlmann, S.; Rip, A. (2018): Next-generation innovation policy and grand challenges. In: Science
and Public Policy 45(4), 448–454.
Kühl, S.; Schmitz, P. (2013): Organizations. A systems theory approach. Farnham, Surrey: Gower.
Li, W.; Chan, H.S. (2009): Clean air in urban China: The case of inter-agency coordination in
Chongqing's Blue Sky Program. Public Administration and Development, Vol. 29, No. 1, pp.
55-67.
Lindner, R.; Daimer, S.; Beckert, B.; Heyen, N.; Koehler, J.; Teufel, B.; Warnke, P.; Wydra, S. (2016):
Addressing directionality: Orientation failure and the systems of innovation heuristic.
Towards reflexive governance. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer ISI (Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers
Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 52).
Luhmann, N. (1999): Funktionen und Folgen formaler Organisation. Mit einem Epilog 1994. 5th ed.
Berlin: Duncker & Humblot (Schriftenreihe der Hochschule Speyer, 20).
Luhmann, N. (2021): Die Grenzen der Verwaltung. Edited by Johannes F. K. Schmidt and Christoph
Gesigora. Berlin: Suhrkamp.
Mahoney, J.; Thelen, K. (2010): A Gradual Theory of Institutional Change. In J. Mahoney, & K.
Thelen (Eds.) (2010): Explaining Institutional Change: Ambiguity, Agency, and Power.
Cambridge University Press.
Mayne, Q.; Jong, J. de; Fernandez-Monge, F. (2020): State Capabilities for Problem-Oriented
Governance. In: Perspectives on Public Management and Governance 3 (1), S. 33–44.
Mazzucato, M. (2015): Building the entrepreneurial state. A new framework for envisioning and
evaluating a mission-oriented public sector. In: SSRN Journal.
Meijer, A. (2019): Public Innovation Capacity: Developing and Testing a Self-Assessment Survey
Instrument. In: International Journal of Public Administration 42 (8), S. 617–627.
Messner, D. (2021), International Sustainability Transitions Conference (IST) 2021, keynote.
YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n-RNh-4MUpQ.
Schot, J.; Steinmueller, W.E. (2018): Three frames for innovation policy: R&D, systems of
innovation and transformative change. In: Research Policy 47 (9), S. 1554–1567.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 80
Fraunhofer ISI | 17

Spyridaki, N.-A.; Kleanthis, N.; Tzani, D.; Matosović, M.D.; Flamos, A. (2020): A city capability
assessment framework focusing on planning, financing, and implementing sustainable
energy projects. In: Sustainability (Switzerland) 12(20), 1-23.
Strasser, T.; Kraker, J. de; Kemp, R. (2019): Developing the Transformative Capacity of Social
Innovation through Learning: A Conceptual Framework and Research Agenda for the Roles
of Network Leadership. In: Sustainability 11 (5), S. 1304.
Torfing, J.; Sørensen, E.; Røiseland, A. (2019): Transforming the Public Sector Into an Arena for Co-
Creation: Barriers, Drivers, Benefits, and Ways Forward. In: Administration & Society 51 (5),
S. 795–825.
Vries, H. de; Bekkers, V.; Tummers, L. (2016): Innovation in the public sector: A systematic review
and future research agenda. In: Public Administration 94 (1), S. 146–166.
Wanzenböck; I.; Wesseling, J.; Frenken, K.; Hekkert, M.; Weber, M. (2020): A framework for
mission-oriented innovation policy: Alternative pathways through the problem-solution
space. In: Science and Public Policy 47(4), 474–489.
Wolff, F.; Brohmann, B.; Fischer, C.; Grießhammer, R.; Heyen, D.A.; Jacob, K., et al. (2019):
Perspektiven für Umweltpolitik: Ansätze zum Umgang mit neuartigen Herausforderungen.
Synthesebericht Ufoplan-Vorhaben „Umweltpolitik im 21. Jahrhundert – Ansätze zur
Bewältigung neuartiger Herausforderungen“ (FKZ 3715 11 102 0). Hg. v. Umweltbundesamt.
