
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94

From High-Tech Strategy
to High-Tech Agenda Germany
An overview of 20 years of the German STI flagship policy

Authors

Florian Wittmann, Nele Weiblen, Andreas Hummler, Ralf Lindner

Place: Karlsruhe
Date: May 2026

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Responsible for content
Florian Wittmann, florian.wittmann@isi.fraunhofer.de; Nele Weiblen, nele.weiblen@isi.fraunhofer.de; Andreas
Hummler, andreas.hummler@isi.fraunhofer.de; Ralf Lindner, ralf.lindner@isi.fraunhofer.de
Recommended citation
Wittmann, Florian; Weiblen, Nele; Hummler, Andreas; Lindner, Ralf (2026): From High-Tech Strategy to High-Tech
Agenda Germany. An overview of 20 years of the German STI flagship policy. Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers In-
novation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research
ISI.

Published
May 2026
ISSN
1612-1430
Doi
10.24406/publica-8517

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | I

Contents
Abstract .......................................................................................................................................... 1
1 Introduction.................................................................................................................... 2
2 Embedding of the strategy: Position in the STI system ...................................... 3
3 Setting priorities: From technology fields to missions and back to key
technologies ................................................................................................................... 8
4 Implementing the strategy: Budget and policy instruments ........................... 13
5 A learning strategy: Role of advisory structures, monitoring, and evaluation
 ......................................................................................................................................... 15
6 High-Tech Agenda Germany: Recent discussions and developments .......... 17
7 Summary ....................................................................................................................... 19
8 Literature ....................................................................................................................... 21

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | II

Figure and Tables

Figure 1: Overview of different strategy editions over time ................................................................ 4
Figure 2: Key policy strategies and instruments at the federal level ................................................ 5
Figure 3: Key priorities of the federal High-Tech Strategies ............................................................. 12

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 1

Abstract
This discussion paper examines how Germany designs and implements its major federal science,
technology, and innovation (STI) policies. Being a flagship policy since 2006, the High-Tech Strategy
and its following successors have not only provided a framework for German STI policy but also
evolved considerably over time. Shifting towards a mission-oriented approach in 2018 with the
High-Tech Strategy 2025, the most recent High-Tech Agenda Germany in turn highlights six key
technologies. This paper provides an overview of the federal High-Tech Strategy (and its successors).
It analyzes strategy context, priority selection, implementation (including budgeting and instru-
ments), and policy learning.
The High-Tech Strategy and its successors have served as the federal government’s umbrella STI
strategy, coordinating activities across ministries since 2006. Strategy development is coordinated
by the Federal Ministry of Research, Technology and Space (Bundesministerium für Forschung, Tech-
nologie und Raumfahrt; BMFTR ) and has relied on different approaches to prioritize activities in-
cluding key technologies, missions and demand areas/future tasks. Despite these changing orien-
tations and political priority setting, there is considerable continuity in overarching priorities, re-
flecting rather a gradual development than radical changes. Serving as an umbrella strategy, it lacks
an independent budget and depends on the willingness of ministries to contribute to the strategy,
being partly locked in a “STI trap”. It focuses mostly on thematically oriented research funding,
providing inputs to selected priorities, while acknowledging the importance of framework condi-
tions (that are partly beyond the scope of the federal level, as universities are financed mainly by
the regional level). Stakeholder involvement has increased over time but does not include the for-
mulation process. While monitoring has been recently established, echoing repeated calls from
advisory bodies, so far, no evaluation has taken place at the strategy level. The recently adopted
High-Tech Agenda Germany reflects a paradigm shift, returning to key technologies and promising
several innovations, including a stronger involvement of the regional level that so far has been
widely absent from this strategy.

Note: This working paper builds on a case study commissioned by the Flemish Advisory Council for Innovation and
Entrepreneurship that has been published as appendix to the Policy report Np 47: Strategic choices for Flanders.
The original case study is available here: https://www.vario.be/files/VARIO_adviezen-en-rapporten/2026_FEBRU-
ARI_VARIO_ANALYSERAPPORT_47_DUITSE-LANDENSTUDIE.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 2

1 Introduction
German STI policy has, since 2006, been closely linked to the High-Tech Strategy, recently renamed
as High-Tech Agenda Germany (2025). Serving as a cross-ministerial umbrella framework to struc-
ture German STI policy at the federal level, it aims to increase STI policy coherence. As a key flagship
policy, it is characterized by multiple shifts with regard to underlying paradigms, including its front-
runner role in mission-oriented policy with the High-Tech Strategy 2025 (2018) or the shift back to
key technologies with the High-Tech Agenda Germany in 2025.
Against the background of recent on-going activities to bring the High-Tech Agenda Germany into
realization, this paper seeks to provide an overview of almost twenty years of High-Tech Strat-
egy/Agenda in Germany and summarizes key developments and characteristics. Bringing together
documents from a variety of sources (including different analyses, reports, insights from parliamen-
tary requests, etc.), this paper focuses on discussing key priorities, institutional arrangements and
learning structures of the strategy.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 3

2 Embedding of the strategy: Position in the STI system
Overview of different strategies over time
Germany’s science, technology, and innovation (STI) system is widely regarded as strong. Its decen-
tralization distributes competencies horizontally across federal ministries and vertically between the
federal government and the Länder, including basic funding for universities and universities of ap-
plied sciences. While this decentralized approach enables policies to be responsive to local socio-
economic needs and to remain agile, it also creates substantial coordination challenges across mul-
tiple levels and actors, resulting in limited policy coherence (Edler et al. 2008; OECD 2022).
Horizontally, STI competences are concentrated in the Federal Ministry of Research, Technology and
Space (BMFTR)1 and the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy (BMWE)2, which together
account for roughly 70% of federal public R&D funding through both institutional and project-
based schemes (BMBF 2024, p. 72). Strong sectoral orientations and fragmented responsibilities
hinder cross-cutting, mission-oriented approaches (EFI 2008; OECD 2022, p. 308). This dualism of-
fers opportunities for coordinated cooperation (OECD 2022, p. 303), but also entails efficiency losses
and implementation problems (Edler et al. 2008, p. 274).
To address this issue, research and innovation policy in Germany since 2006 has been coordinated
by an overarching joint strategy of the federal government that brings together the different min-
istries and is adopted for the duration of an electoral term, i.e. usually four years and being actively
communicated by newly elected governments (Hufnagl 2025, p. 11).3 It was introduced in 2006 as
an umbrella framework, aiming to increase the coherence of different activities of federal ministries
and enhance strategic coordination (Edler et al. 2008, p. 271; OECD 2022, p. 119) and to move
beyond the paradigm of a broad and thematically open funding approach (EFI 2008, p. 45). The
High-Tech Strategy has quickly established itself as a shared label for coordinating STI activities in
Germany and helped to mobilize activities/enhance policy coordination (EFI 2008, p. 6; OECD 2022,
p. 119).
Initially labeled as High-Tech Strategy (HTS) (2006, 2010, 2014, 2018), the name was later changed
to Future Strategy for Research and Innovation (Zukunftsstrategie Forschung und Innovation; 2023)
and High-Tech Agenda for Germany (2025) (Figure 1). Alongside these changes, underlying concep-
tions also have evolved. While initially focusing on technology fields, the HTS 4 shifted in 2010
towards a more challenge-oriented perspective (BMBF 2010) while the High-Tech Strategy 2025,
adopted in 2018, explicitly embraced a mission-oriented approach, making Germany a front-runner
for this emerging policy paradigm (BMBF 2018).
Hufnagl (2025, 13ff) attributes the emergence of strategy to a combination of different factors,
including a growing (international) consensus of a more systemic policy approach, spill-over of
academic advice and attempts of the BMFTR to reposition itself after the loss of competencies in
federalism reforms (2006/2009). With the relabeled edition of the High-Tech Agenda in 2025 also

1 With the reshaping of ministerial portfolios of the election, the former Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) was renamed and lost its
responsibility for Education that was assigned to the newly formed Federal Ministry for Education, Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and
Youth. To avoid confusion in the text, we use the acronym BMFTR also for the BMBF.
2 We use this abbreviation also for earlier names of the Ministry of Economics that experienced several changes (Federal Ministry for Economics
and Technology, Federal Ministry for Economics and Energy, Federal Ministry for Economics and Climate protections).
3 After the collapse of the coalition government in the end of 2024, snap elections took place in February 2025, therefore leading to the formula-
tion of a new strategy. As the most recent High-Tech Agenda for Germany was officially presented in October 2025 and there is a lack of details
on the implementation, this Strategy will be discussed primarily in the section addressing recent discussions and developments.
4 In the following we refer to HTS as a shared denominator for all editions including the most recent Future Strategy (2023) and High-Tech Agenda
Germany (2025).

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 4

came a return to key technologies as the main structuring element, resembling the label/approach
of the Bavarian High-Tech Agenda adopted in 2019.
Figure 1: Overview of different strategy editions over time

Source: Own elaboration.
Position of the HTS in the policy landscape
Acting as an overarching umbrella strategy, the HTS prioritizes topics of key national interest, bring-
ing together ministries and policy initiatives. At the same time, it is complemented by more sec-
tor/technology-specific strategies that are coordinated by one or multiple ministries on behalf of
the federal government. Priorities of these strategies may thematically (partly) overlap with priori-
ties of the HTS. This includes, for example: 5
 National Bioeconomy Strategy (2010/2013//2020) – BMFTR/BMEL
 Artificial Intelligence Strategy (2018/2020) – Federal Government (lead by
BMFTR/BMWK/BMAS)
 Automated and Connected Driving Strategy (2015) – Lead BMV
 Quantum Technologies Conceptual Framework Program (2023) – Lead BMFTR
 National Hydrogen Strategy (2020/2023) – Lead BMWE
Figure 2 provides an overview of selected key initiatives in the field of STI policy and neighboring
fields. These strategies – depending on the lead ministerial responsibilities – reach beyond STI pol-
icy and include more sectoral policies such as regulation, taxation, standardization, and investment
into infrastructure etc.
Being linked to the aim of coordinating strategy priorities, the relationship between the HTS and
other strategies is, however, ambiguous. On the one hand, it is highlighted that there are compre-
hensive overlaps between different (sectoral) strategies and the HTS. In case of the Future Strategy
(2023-2025), the BMFTR identified approximately 150 strategies/action plans that share some links
(BMBF 2023a). Furthermore, there is a multitude of cross-references between strategies, with the
HTS in its different manifestations continuously referring to key strategies for its implementation,
while other strategies are explicitly stated to be part of the HTS (e.g. in case of the National Bioe-
conomy Strategy, BMEL 2014, p. 16).

5 Explanation of abbreviations: Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture ( Bundesministeriumg für Ernährung und Landwirtschaft; BMEL); Federal
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (Bundesministerium für Arbeit und Soziales; BMAS); Federal Ministry of Transport (Bundesministerium für
Verkehr; BMV).

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 5

Figure 2: Key policy strategies and instruments at the federal level

Source: own elaboration.
On the other hand, strategic coordination with other strategies – even when explicitly linked to the
HTS – is often limited or remains ambiguous. First, defining itself as an R&I strategy, the HTS and
its successors – despite a claim to be a mission-oriented strategy (2018/2023) – remain mostly
restricted to the STI domain (OECD 2022; Roth et al. 2021 cf. also section 3.3). In consequence, the
HTS only subsumes selected STI initiatives, whereas the role of more implementation-oriented ele-
ments remains unclear (cf. also strategies above). Secondly, serving as an overarching framework,
complementary strategies do not necessarily closely align with the overarching goals of the HTS.
This is demonstrated, for instance, by the case of Research for Sustainability – FONA. While FONA
was linked to several of the missions of the HTS 2025 (2018) (Circular economy, climate neutral
industry, biodiversity, good living conditions across the countries), it pursues multiple other priori-
ties alongside (BMBF 2021b).
Temporarily coinciding with the introduction of the HTS were different agreements between the
federal level, regional level and actors in the field of science and higher education. First, the creation
of the so-called Pact for Research and Innovation (Pakt für Forschung und Innovation; PFI) , grants
non-university research organizations (Max-Planck Society , Fraunhofer Society, Leibniz Association,
Helmholtz Association of German Research Centres, German Research Foundation) a reliable financial
budget (with a 3% annual increase) in exchange for increased coordination, cooperation and con-
tributions to overarching policy objectives (Frietsch et al. 2022; OECD 2022, p. 119). Goals are ne-
gotiated individually for each research organization and cover the topics transfer, scientific excel-
lence, cooperation with other actors in the field of science, attracting talents and provision of re-
search infrastructures that are constantly monitored (BMFTR 2024).
In parallel, the Excellence Initiative was created in 2005, providing additional funding for self-se-
lected excellent research priorities of universities to strengthen Germany’s research excellence and
international competitiveness. Until 2017, when the Excellence Initiative was replaced by the Excel-
lence Strategy, approximately 4,6 bln were granted, 75% funded by the federal level and 25% by
the Länder in which the universities are situated. The subsequent Excellence Strategy continues this
approach by funding clusters of excellence, and excellence universities generally. Some argue that
while strengthening institutional competition, it produced only limited gains in international com-
petitiveness due to funding constraints and insufficient scale (Sieweke 2010) or providing mixed
results (Frietsch et al. 2017b; Schubert et al. 2024). Moreover, critics claim that the institutional
competition fosters tensions between universities and between research and teaching, while also

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 6

shifting competitive pressures from researchers to institutions, which might have adverse effects
on scientific performance (Hartmann 2010; Schlegel 2011).
Third, the so-called Higher Education Pakt (Hochschulpakt) between federal and regional govern-
ments that was initially adopted in 2007 and then prolonged for the periods 2011-2015 and 2016-
2020 to meet the growing demands for university places without compromising on quality. From
2017 until 2020, the federal level provided approximately 17,7 bln and the Länder 16,6 bln towards
this goal (German Science And Humanities Council 2024; GWK 2022). 2020 a new agreement was
reached (Future Contract for Strengthening Studying and Teaching in Higher Education (Zukunfts-
vertrag Studium und Lehre stärken)), which aims to maintain the capacity and quality of universities
and continues to be co-funded with same parts by the federal and Länder level.
These three pacts, alongside the federalism reform of 2006, formally aimed to strengthen the au-
tonomy and scope for action of the Länder while establishing clearer frameworks for joint federal-
Länder funding and cooperation in higher education and science/research more generally (Mayer
2016; Storm 2007). The reforms and pacts were also intended to promote competition between
higher education institutions (and, thus, Länder), to foster differentiation, and to expand institu-
tional autonomy at the level of individual higher education institutions (Storm, 2007; Pasternack,
2011). In practice, however, the actual development diverged from this intention. Rather than a
clear disentanglement (Entflechtung) of federal and Länder responsibilities, the reform arguably
increased the influence of the federal level, with the Bund remaining an active and equal actor,
specifically regarding funding and the intended separation of competencies could not clearly be
sustained. (Mayer 2016; Pasternack 2011; Teichler 2018). While the three pacts did result in greater
investment in science and research and strengthened commitments from the Länder, this also came
at times at the cost of other areas of financing, such as teaching and basic institutional funding
(Mayer 2016).
Institutional responsibility and coordination activities
Formally the different editions of the HTS are strategies of the whole federal government bringing
together ministries, aiming to bundle different activities in the field of STI policies. The approach of
an overarching cross-ministerial strategy has been characterized as a form of “soft” coordination
between ministerial actors aiming to increase overall policy coherence (Edler et al. 2008, p. 274).
Particularly in the first years it stimulated increased coordination, such as the joint Agreement on
Strengthening the Innovation Focus of Public Procurement (“Beschluss zur verstärkten Innovations-
orientierung öffentlicher Beschaffung”) by state secretaries of six federal ministries (BMI et al. 2007).
The development and implementation of the strategy itself since 2006 have been coordinated by
the BMFTR while responsibility for priorities is shared among ministries. For example, the Future
Strategy (2023) indicates that its six missions were co-lead by two or three ministries and involved
up to nine additional ministries (BMBF 2023b).
Despite this broad formal involvement, in practice the HTS is closely tied to the BMFTR as its lead
ministry. Consequently, it is often perceived as a BMFTR-strategy resulting in difficulties to mobilize
other ministries to actively commit to the priorities of the strategy (Wiarda 2025a). The overall mode
of coordination in the HTS therefore rather resembles the approach of “negative coordination”
(Roth 2011: 31 Hufnagl 2025, p. 28), i.e. attempts to avoid overlaps between different ministries
without aiming for coordinated action or a coherent policy framework (cf. Braun 2008; Scharpf
2000). A fact which has been, despite some progress, a repeated issue in the annual reviews of the
Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation (Expertenkommission Forschung und Innovation;
EFI) (EFI 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2015, 2018, 2019, 2025). The established mode of interministerial
coordination in combination with the strong sectoral principle has proven difficult to establish en-
hanced policy coordination (cf. EFI 2017, p. 90). The systematic involvement of state secretaries to

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 7

facilitate cross-ministerial coordination activities has been recommended (EFI 2017, 2021, 2024). A
first attempt to overcome the silo structure by the creation of mission teams in the Future Agenda
(2023) has not yet yielded the expected results, leading to calls for more decisive approaches (EFI
2023; Wiarda 2025a).
Regarding the internal management of the HTS, it is moreover important to note that responsibil-
ities are split across different units within the same ministry ( BMFTR). Above all, there is a division
between a strategic unit in charge of the overarching coordination of the strategy and the thematic
units that are responsible for specific priorities/missions. This dualism has in the past proven to be
a challenge in the implementation of novel concepts/approaches like mission-orientation, creating
obstacles to ownership in the relevant units (Roth et al. 2021, 40ff). A key challenge in this regard
is that there are no dedicated budgets for priorities/missions (EFI 2017, 2024) or additional re-
sources for coordination, resulting in such activities being added on top of existing workloads (Roth
et al. 2021, p. 42).
Involvement of regional entities and other stakeholders
Overall, there have been demands for broader approaches to involve stakeholders across institu-
tional, territorial and sectoral boundaries to shape the implementation of the HTS (OECD 2022, p.
24).
The subnational/regional level – despite early calls from expert bodies (EFI 2008:45) and expecta-
tions for an alignment with the regional level (Edler et al. 2008, p. 271) – has been widely excluded
from the formulation of the HTS and the limited coordination between the federal and Länder level,
e.g. in regards to thematic priorities, has been criticized (Gebert et al. 2024). 6 Overall, the HTS po-
sitioned itself as a federal level strategy, with regional governments reacting to the strategy and
adjusting their priorities. Similarly, the OECD has called for a better alignment of domestic policy
with strategic considerations of the EU level to increase leverage at both EU and national levels
(OECD 2022, 25; 45).
However, the new High-Tech Agenda Germany (2025) has brought back the issue of regional in-
volvement, postulating the goal for stronger involvement of subnational governments ( Länder).
Whether this will enhance an increased bi-directional coordination remains to be seen (cf. also the
Section High-Tech Agenda Germany: Recent discussion and developments).
There have been multiple demands to ensure a stronger participation of new actors and civil society
for policy-making (EFI 2011, 2013, 2015, 2016). While the advisory board, has been successfully
extended to new stakeholder groups, the ambition for broader engagement approaches has been
only partly fulfilled, particularly with regard to strategy formulation.7 Consequently, mobilizing ad-
ditional stakeholders to commitment to strategies, particularly with financial contributions, has
largely been absent (Roth et al. 2021).

6 This includes also the limited links between the HTS and the 2019 adopted High-Tech Agenda Bavaria. Most subnational units do not have a
similar strategy.
7 The HTS 2025 (2018) – among others – attempted for a series of workshop trying to bring implementation closer to different territorial areas
such as regions, but suffered from a lack of clearly defined goals (Priebe et al. 2024; Wittmann et al. 2023).

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 8

3 Setting priorities: From technology fields to missions and
back to key technologies
Formulation process
The formulation process of the HTS is primarily an internal process driven by priorities outlined in
the coalition agreements of federal government, which set thematic priorities, the name of the
strategy, and partly also the approach (CDU et al. 2005, 23f; CDU et al. 2009, p. 63; CDU et al. 2013,
16; 25, 2017, 34; 40, 2025; SPD et al. 2021). Building on these negotiated results, the strategy is
further developed and specified within the relevant ministries. Despite being a strategy of the whole
federal government, the process of setting up the HTS is coordinated by the BMFTR that acts as the
lead ministry. This implies that a first draft is provided by the lead ministry that subsequently seeks
coordination with other ministries involved in relevant areas. This has been characterized as a hier-
archy-type of coordination (Hufnagl 2025).
The EFI (EFI 2008, p. 6, 2009, 2010) has highlighted the need for a systematic development of trans-
parent selection criteria for relevant priorities, making use of foresight activities and stakeholder
involvement. The BMFTR has institutionalized foresight activities (Warnke et al. 2022, p. 53) that
fulfil a cross-cutting function and contribute to different strategy processes within the ministry,
including the HTS (BMBF 2021a; Warnke et al. 2016). However, it is important to note that foresight
activities across different ministries are not well coordinated, leading to fragmented activities and
a lack of a cross-ministerial perspective (EFI 2008; Warnke et al. 2022). Another issue remains a
limited linkage to the EU level and activities in Horizon 2020/Horizon Europe. While other countries,
like Austria have closely aligned domestic RTI policy with EU missions, the German Future Agenda
(Deutscher Bundestag 2023) points to existing thematic overlaps without linking its activities spe-
cifically to dedicated EU missions. Besides the role of priority setting in coalition negotiations, the
thematic continuity/path-dependency (see below) here might act as a barrier to systematically align
the strategy with the European level.
The formulation process does not entail systematic and strong involvement of external stakehold-
ers. While the implementation of the HTS is accompanied by some expert panel/consultation forum
(cf. subsequent chapters for further details), these advisory boards are created after strategy for-
mulation and therefore the selection/prioritization process is out of scope. In the Future Strategy
(2023-2025), stakeholders from research organizations, professional associations etc. were for the
first time invited to submit written comments on the draft of the HTS as part of a consultation
process (BMBF 2021a, p. 14; Warnke et al. 2016). The consultation process, among other things,
asked for suggestions regarding prioritization within the six mission areas. The final strategy was
published two months after the end of the consultation process, without providing a statement on
the nature of changes.
Development of thematic priorities over time
The way priorities are structured within the HTS has changed considerably over time (cf. Figure 2).
While the first edition of the HTS in 2006 formulated 17 key technology fields (within three major
categories) the subsequent editions have followed a more concerted approach. Moving from mul-
tiple challenge-oriented themes (which encompassed multiple technologies/areas of prioritization)
the HTS 2025 (2018) formulated twelve dedicated missions at different levels of granularity. While
the Future Strategy (2023-2025) relied on six rather broad mission areas that were considered as a
“downgrade” of the mission-oriented approach (Hufnagl 2025, p. 42), the new High-Tech Agenda
Germany identifies six key technologies as the main strategic focus, plus five strategic research

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 9

areas. This structure has usually been combined with a set of additional/cross-cutting elements that
relate to structural conditions of the innovation system/general principles (like open innovation
etc.) or crosscutting (key enabling) technologies fields. Framework conditions comprise a wide
range of different activities, including for example, support for start-ups, disruptive innovation (par-
ticularly with the creation of the agency for disruptive innovation SPRIN-D in 2019) or thematically
open initiatives such as the Clusters4Future initiative (2019) in case of the HTS 2025 (2019) that are
not systematically linked to thematic priorities.
The question of priority setting has accompanied the HTS since its inceptions, resulting in repeated
discussions of these issues in the annual reports of the EFI (EFI 2010, 2011, 2015, 2017, 2018, 2025).
Particularly in the beginning, the number of key technologies was considered too high and the EFI
called for a stronger prioritization (EFI 2010, p. 44). While prioritization of topics has generally been
welcomed by the EFI by acknowledging their relevance, a persistent weakness remains the poor
translation of overarching priorities into distinct actions. In this context, the EFI has also repeatedly
pointed to the need for clearer specification of goals and the formulation of milestones or
roadmaps on how to achieve them (EFI 2008, 2015, 2017, 2019, 2023).
Thematic priorities can be considered as a rather broad portfolio aiming to combine different (al-
ready existing) priorities and activities. Priority setting therefore – despite different approaches for
structuring (missions, key technologies, priority fields) – reflects rather a logic of gradual evolution
and continuous development over time instead of radical changes. The majority of topics at the
strategy level were existent throughout all editions of the HTS between 2006 and 2025. As can be
seen from Figure 2, there is considerable continuity among certain clusters of topics that are char-
acterized by shifting internal priorities/adjustments to existing technological developments, instead
of changing priorities altogether. While this does not exclude newly emerging priorities (such as
the mission on new sources of knowledge in the HTS 2025 (2018) ), the overall picture is one of
gradual change and adjustment reflecting recent developments, such as the growing importance
of AI and quantum computing. At the same time, some topics like space and maritime technolo-
gies/research moved to the background after the initial HTS in 2006, only to re-emerge as a mission
area in the Future Strategy (2023) or as a strategic research field in the High-Tech Agenda Germany
(2025). Among overarching priorities that remained constitutive (with varying internal priorities and
framing) for the HTS over time are:
 IT/communication technology
 Mobility
 Health
 Sustainability
 Security
The priorities set in the High-Tech Agenda Germany (2025) confirm this picture, combining a re-
newed emphasis of existing topics (biotechnology), a response to growing importance of selected
technologies (quantum technologies, AI), as well as an overall continuation of existing priorities
(partly subsumed in the newly created strategic research fields or the cross-cutting levers that aim
to facilitate the implementation). It is important to highlight that a number of technologies identi-
fied as key technologies in the High-Tech Agenda Germany (2025) were already identified in 2006
as key technologies (biotechnology, fusion research) but were subsequently less prioritized in the
HTS editions until 2020.
The topic of sustainable energy has been a continuous theme of the HTS (though there was no
dedicated mission in the HTS 2025), showing strong thematic continuity over time. This may be
linked to the on-going efforts and debates about the German Energiewende (energy transition),
putting this topic high on the political agenda. Fusion energy as a specific technology, after being
an explicit part of the HTS in 2006, largely disappeared until the Future Strategy in 2023 brought

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 10

back this technology as a promising avenue for tackling challenges in energy production. Similarly,
the issue of mobility has been continuously emphasized in the different editions of the HTS. Over
time, electromobility aspects gained increasing importance, shifting the focus more towards sus-
tainability.
A major shift is evident regarding biotechnology, which became highly visible again with the High-
Tech Agenda Germany (2025). While it was defined as one of the key technologies in the HTS (2006),
subsequent editions of the HTS did not dedicate a prominent position to this field. The Future
Strategy (2023) defined biotechnology as a key technology, linking it to different mission areas. A
similar picture also emerges for microelectronics, which has been continuously present in strategies,
however, without giving it a key position.
Two cases of prioritization are quantum technologies and AI, which are linked to technological
progress in these fields. While they were not being explicitly referred to until 2014, topics gained
importance with the HTS 2025 (2018). Formulating a dedicated AI mission in the HTS 2025 (2018),
the Future Strategy (2023) strongly anchored these topics in the mission on technological sover-
eignty, with AI however, being a cross-cutting solution to almost all missions.8
Besides the key technologies, the High-Tech Agenda Germany ( 2025) lists five strategic research
fields: i) space and aviation, ii) health, iii) security and defense, iv) maritime/climate and sustainabil-
ity, and v) humanities and social sciences. These strategic research fields show considerable conti-
nuity with regard to previous editions, addressing thematic clusters like health and sustainability
that are not covered in the key technologies. The purpose of strategic research fields is not clearly
defined in the strategy, instead the description mainly focuses on the importance of fields and lists
selected (technological) initiatives/activities. According to some observers, these strategic research
fields may have served as a counterbalance in coalition negotiations, to move beyond the strong
tech-push approach advocated by the CSU (Christian Social Union; current coalition party ) and its
Bavarian High-Tech Agenda (Wiarda 2025c).
The strategic research fields are rooted in previous editions of the HTS. Space, aviation, and mari-
time were particularly prominent in the first HTS in 2006 with space and maritime forming the
foundation for one of the mission areas in the Future Strategy (2023). In a similar vein, the topics of
health and sustainability have been longstanding priorities of the HTS and key elements throughout
all editions. Both topics have, likewise, been paired with different additional priorities, health e.g.,
with nutrition care or digitalization and sustainability with energy, biodiversity or food security.
Security research clearly illustrates changing priorities over time, linked to major geopolitical shifts.
Initially centered on issues of crime/terrorism (2006), it shifted towards response to natural disas-
ters, cyber security, and the protection of critical infrastructure (2010, 2014). After the Russian attack
on Ukraine, it increasingly took up threats to democracy and issues of defense and civil protection
(2023, 2025).
The third pillar of the High-Tech Agenda Germany (2025) are the so-called levers that accompany
the implementation of key technologies. This includes topics like transfer, legal framework, venture
capital and labor force and can be understood as an adjustment to current circumstances, including
e.g. issues of dual use, resilience of research and raw materials.
There is a number of technologies/topics from earlier editions of the HTS that do not feature prom-
inently in the High-Tech Agenda Germany as (part of) key technologies or strategic research fields.
This includes among others, optical technologies, material research or industry 4.0. However, this

8 AI is a good example for specific strategies that were formulated below the HTS as the umbrella strategy and which was then continuously
adapted to new developments. As one of the first countries, Germany already formulated a specific AI strategy in 2018, which allowed Germany
a specific influence when the European strategy as well as the AI Act were formulated. The AI strategy in Germany also adapted to the European
developments, especially over a period of about five years (up to 2023, when the coalition already fell apart).

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 11

does not imply a termination of this topic – instead they come back in to the High-Tech Agenda
Germany via specific applications or even the levers. Optical technologies, for examples are referred
to as elements for advancing the fields of fusion and quantum technologies. Material research, in
contrast, is part of the lever 7 aimed to tackle resource constraints, by highlighting a novel pro-
gramme for material innovations. In a similar vein, Industry 4.0 and production technology do not
appear as a distinct topic, but are referred to multiple times as application areas.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 12

Figure 3: Key priorities of the federal High-Tech Strategies

Source: Own elaboration based on BMBF 2006, 2010, 2014, 2018, 2023, 2025.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 13

4 Implementing the strategy: Budget and policy instruments
Financing
In line with its character as an umbrella strategy there is no dedicated budget for the HTS or its
individual priorities/units (Bundesregierung 2024, 1f). Instead of allocating resources “top-down”
to the strategy the budget results from the sum of relevant funding schemes and programs that
are part of the strategy but remain under the responsibility of the respective ministries in charge.
Consequently, there is no dedicated budget for the strategy or selected priorities, but the budget
of the HTS depends on the willingness of ministries to contribute to the strategy, mobilizing their
own budgets and linking these activities to the HTS. This vagueness, particularly with regard to the
endowment of selected priorities, has been a major point of criticism of the EFI since the beginning
of the strategy, limiting the transparency on available funding (EFI 2008, p. 45, 2011, p. 30).
As a result, no consistent picture concerning the budget emerges, pointing to different underlying
definitions and approaches for defining the budget. Whereas the first HTS reports a budget of EUR
14.6 bn., for later years estimates are mostly available via parliamentary requests. While for the
HTS2020 a budget of approximately EUR 27 bn. (2010-2013) is provided (Bundesregierung 2012, p.
4), for 2017 alone ( New HTS) the annual budget is estimated at EUR 17.4 bn. (Bundesregierung
2017, p. 4). In contrast, for the High-Tech Agenda Germany (2025) for the whole electoral period
(2025-2029) recent reports indicate a budget of EUR 18 bn. (Wiarda 2025b). The HTS therefore
covers only parts of federal spending on science, research and development, its delineation, how-
ever, remains a challenge.
Types of policy instruments
A key ambiguity is the link between individual policy instruments and the relevant strategies. Acting
as an umbrella strategy, the HTS provides a framework for different priorities but has only limited
agency to shape new initiatives. While in the first period the HTS – among others – lead to a stream-
lining of different funding lines in one thematically-open program for SMEs by the BMWE (ZIM –
Zentrales Innovationspogramm Mittelstand) (OECD 2022, p. 119) and went along with new initiatives
like the Spitzencluster-Initiative in 2007 as part of the HTS (BMBF 2006), it is questionable whether
the instrument mix is systematically developed based on the priorities of the strategy or rather
evolves (partly) in parallel. 9 The development of the instrument mix is influenced by subsuming
existing activities and often unclear delineation of instruments (Roth et al. 2021), pointing to an
overall limited connection between strategy and individual policy instruments beyond selected key
initiatives.
While strategy documents of the HTS define a list of key activities related to priorities/missions,
there is no comprehensive overview of all instruments associated with a priority (cf. Wittmann et al.
2021b, p. 21). Moreover, complex strategies like FONA – Research for sustainability may, with some
of their elements, contribute to certain priorities but not necessarily in their entirety (Wittmann et
al. 2021b, p. 63). Consequently, the link between specific instruments and the overarching strategy
can be considered rather limited, implying a dualism between overarching strategic priorities and
the continuity/path-dependency of individual instruments and their specific development logic.
A review of policy instruments in the context of the HTS 2025 (2018) (BMBF 2021a) provides some
insights into the instrument mix: First, there is a considerable continuity of various, partly long-

9 One example might be the Clusters4Future initiative that was announced in the HTS 2025 (2018) that might be linked to recommendations of
the evaluation of the Spitzencluster initiative (Dehio et al. 2014, p. 225).

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 14

standing policy instruments that are supposed to contribute to existing priorities. While in some
cases (Mission on Combating Cancer) there has been a deliberate shift towards the introduction of
newly tailored instruments for specific priorities, other missions relied on a set of existing instru-
ments/continuation of existing platform/strategies (EFI 2011, p. 30, 2017, p. 90; Wittmann et al.
2021b, p. 68). Although this continuity is a common practice in STI policy, there was little evidence
of a systemic alignment of individual instruments with the relevant strategies (Wittmann et al.
2021b, 67f.). Second, funding is closely linked to established R&I funding and the creation of incen-
tives with the majority of funding being instruments of direct distribution (project/Institutional sup-
port) (Roth et al. 2021, p. 27; Wittmann et al. 2021b, p. 65). Complementary elements are infor-
mation-based instruments or approaches for systemic management.
Besides initiatives in the thematic priorities, instruments may also target overarching framework
conditions, e.g. with technologically open initiatives and activities related to transfer such as ZIM or
the Spitzencluster-Initiative. However, the relation between the thematic priorities of the HTS and
thematically open, large-scale funding instruments such as ZIM (Zentrales Innovationsprogramm
Mittelstand) are often rather unclear (Wittmann et al. 2021b, p. 51).
Resources provision in the HTS for thematic priorities pursues a thematically bound funding, invit-
ing different stakeholders (universities, research institutes, private enterprises etc.) to engage in
competitive funding application processes for resources that go beyond basic public funding of
universities etc. In contrast, resource mobilization from non-public actors – beyond own contribu-
tions to project financing – has remained widely absent (Roth et al. 2021). Given its self-understand-
ing as an STI strategy and its strong anchoring in the BMFTR, companies mainly appear as benefi-
ciaries/partners in collaborative research projects or are addressed via cross-cutting priorities/the-
matically open instruments.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 15

5 A learning strategy: Role of advisory structures, monitoring,
and evaluation
Advisory structures
Since its creation in 2006, the HTS has been accompanied by its own top-level advisory board.
Initially composed of selected representatives from science and industry, since the New HTS (2014-
2018) representatives of civil society were also included in the High-Tech Forum (previously Research
Union). The main purpose of this advisory board was to accompany the implementation process
and provide recommendations for further development. While the High-Tech Forum in the HTS
2025 (2018) opted for an approach providing impulses that cut across the structure of missions, the
Future Agenda (2023) assigned the members of its advisory board ( Forum #Zukunftsstrategie) to
specific missions to better align recommendations with individual missions.
Moreover, the Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation (EFI) as an advisory body to the
federal government, usually comments on the development of the HTS in its annual reports. Draw-
ing on own research and externally commissioned studies it formulates recommendations for Ger-
man STI policy. Among other things, the EFI outlines the need for further adjustments and devel-
opments covering both thematic priorities and provides hints regarding the organizational/struc-
tural forest-up of the HTS. While these reports are non-binding, it appears that the EFI has consid-
erable “soft power” (cf. also OECD 2022, p. 308). A number of recommendations/requests formu-
lated by the EFI have experienced some uptake in the HTS over time (e.g. broadening of stakeholder
involvement, monitoring & evaluation activities, involvement of state secretaries.), whereas other
issues (like budget) were not addressed.
Monitoring, and evaluation
Despite a self-understanding as a learning strategy (Bundesregierung 2012) and calls by the EFI for
monitoring and evaluation (EFI 2015, 2019, 2023), efforts to monitor activities have only recently
been undertaken. Progress and final assessment the strategy has been provided by the BMFTR in
the form of a progress and final report (BMBF 2024). For the Future Strategy (2023) an internal
monitoring system was established that focuses on 17 cross-cutting indicators for the innovation
system10 (BMBF 2023b) but does not yield insights into the progress of dedicated missions. More-
over, an internal monitoring of mission goals was reported to take place.11
While Germany generally has a strong system-oriented evaluation culture (Borrás et al. 2019), there
is limited systematic evaluation of the HTS as such. Evaluation is mandatory for individual instru-
ments according to paragraph 7 of the Budgetary Regulations (BMJV 2025). In contrast, policy mix
evaluation is only moderately developed (Borrás et al. 2019). For the time being, no comprehensive
evaluation of the HTS has taken place and is not foreseen (Bundesregierung 2024). However, there
have been different activities accompanying the implementation such as commissioned studies
looking at dedicated aspects such as the fit of thematic areas (Frietsch et al. 2013; Frietsch et al.
2017a). Moreover, in 2017 a review of the first decade of HTS took place but has not been published
(Daimer et al. 2017). For the HTS 2025 (2018) the Fraunhofer ISI was mandated to conduct accom-
panying research supporting the implementation process of selected missions and to develop a
framework for impact assessment of the mission-oriented approach (Roth et al. 2021; Wittmann et

10 This includes among others R&D spending, creation of new enterprises in high-tech sectors, the success of some flagship initiatives (such as
SPRIND, DATI), employment and education in the field of R&D, gender equality and internationalization in research, number of spin-offs and
framework conditions ( (Deutscher Bundestag 2023, pp. 16).
11 https://stip.oecd.org/moip/case-studies/28 (last accessed on November 27, 2025).

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 16

al. 2021a). While relying on individual missions to test this approach, no comprehensive assessment
of mission implementation took place.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 17

6 High-Tech Agenda Germany: Recent discussions and devel-
opments
The current edition of the HTS, labelled High-Tech Agenda Germany (2025) was adopted by the
government in July 2025 and was publicly presented in November 2025, thus a number of issues
related to implementation were not yet specified at the time of this publication. This section pro-
vides a brief overview of relevant changes, developments, and on-going discussions related to the
High-Tech Agenda Germany (2025).
Overall, there has been a positive reception regarding the ambitious priorities set by the High-Tech
Agenda Germany (2025) as such, including its priority setting on selected key technologies (BMFTR
2025). At the same time, concerns have been raised about a number of potential negative devel-
opments and barriers, in particular regarding the implementation and budget (Ronzheimer 2025;
Wiarda 2025b). This includes the absence of the BMWE in the agenda’s public kick-off pointing to
a continued dualism between BMFTR/BMWE, the lack of further operationalization of goals and
overall limited financing. The latter is particularly relevant against the background of increased
public spending in the coming years, aiming to spend around EUR 500 bn. on additional resources
for infrastructure and sustainable development within the next twelve years. In addition, and par-
tially due to disputes within the coalition, BMFTR budget items included in the Special Infrastructure
and Climate Neutrality Fund ( Sondervermögen für Infrastruktur und Klimaneutralität 12) remained
blocked until the start of 2026 by the Budget committee of the German Bundestag. This includes
funds designated, for instance, for central projects of the High-Tech Agenda Germany such as quan-
tum computing (Wiarda 2025d). While mid-January 2026, EUR 569m of the budget were released
for 2026, the budget committee nevertheless continues to demand revisions of initiatives within
the High-Tech Agenda Germany, for instance regarding milestones (Wiarda 2026).
While the EFI (2025, p. 24) has argued in favor of continuing the mission-oriented approach in
German STI policy, the High-Tech Agenda Germany (2025) indicates a shift away from addressing
grand societal challenges, placing again – like the 2006 version – key technologies at the heart of
the strategy (BMFTR 2025). The shift towards key technologies has been anchored in the coalition
agreement of the current government (CDU et al. 2025) and might be potentially driven by different
factors: i) difficulties with the implementation of the concept of mission-oriented policies, ii) a par-
adigm shift of the political discourse highlighting the importance of economic growth and com-
petitiveness, iii) the blueprint of the Bavarian HTA13 that is closely linked to one of the parties of
the coalition that took over the newly created Ministry of Research, Technology and Space BMFTR
(cf. also Wiarda 2025c ).
Following long-standing calls for increased monitoring and roadmapping by the EFI (EFI 2015, 2019,
2023), the High-Tech Agenda Germany ( 2025) (BMFTR 2025) formulates the ambition for a 360°
monitoring approach and the provision of key indicators on overall systemic developments and the
formulation of technology specific roadmaps. These roadmaps for the six key technologies are to
be developed with input from stakeholder dialogues with relevant stakeholders including repre-
sentatives from industry, science and regional governments. 14 For each of the key technologies,

12 This special asset that was agreed upon 2025 aims to provide additional 500 bln EUR for investments into infrastructure and climate neutrality
that are debt-financed and aim to update infrastructure/enhance economic growth (Bundesministerium der Finanzen 2026).
13 The High-Tech Agenda Bavaria (Hightech Agenda Bayern; HTA) was introduced in 2019 to strengthen science, research, academia and the re-
gional economy of Bavaria and concentrates on four key technologies: artificial intelligence, super and quantum computing, aerospace and
CleanTech (Bavarian State Government 2019).
14 https://hightech-agenda-deutschland.de/en/key-technologies/dialogues/ (last accessed 04/10/2026).

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 18

multiple stakeholder formats are organized, partly linked to existing platforms/conferences and/or
focusing on subtopics within the respective technology (e.g. software engineering and robotics in
AI). Stakeholder dialogues with representatives from the state level are organized as distinct stake-
holder dialogues, covering so far, the topics of fusion/climate-neutral energy generation, microe-
lectronics, climate-neutral mobility (battery), and biotechnology.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 19

7 Summary
The High-Tech Strategy and its successors became the key flagship policy for STI policy at the fed-
eral level that is linked to the electoral term of federal governments. It serves as an umbrella strat-
egy, aiming to provide an overarching framework for different STI activities of ministries of the
federal government.
 While aiming for enhanced policy integration and portraying itself as a cross-depart-
mental strategy of the federal government, the HTS is strongly anchored in the BMFTR
(formerly BMBF) since its first edition in 2006, defining it as a STI strategy. In consequence,
the HTS struggles with established practices of “negative coordination”, resulting in limited mo-
bilization and commitment of other ministries (particularly the BMWE), i.e. falling into the “STI
trap”. Links with other sectoral and implementation-oriented policies therefore rather re-
main weak (even with regard to BMFTR strategies). At the same time, it mainly serves as a
national STI strategy, having only limited connection with either the European or the re-
gional level.
 While addressing crosscutting framework conditions as well, main priorities of the HTS were
either clustered around technology fields or societal challenges. Priority setting for the HTS
often takes place at the political level, anchoring priorities of the HTS in the coalition treaty of
governing coalitions. Overall thematic development points to a gradual evolution allowing
to embed recently (re)emerging topics (e.g. quantum, AI) and themes (such technological
sovereignty) within the framework, instead of radical thematic shifts. This approach has the
advantage to
i) flexibly react to recent developments with managing a portfolio of different topics
that may have changed importance over time and
ii) being relatively resistant to abrupt policy changes by allowing existing topics to
continue under new labels (cf. also OECD 2022, pp. 301 on German STI policy in general)
and therefore providing reliable framework conditions.
The downside is a certain path-dependency that often comes along with a continuity of
established instruments and policies subsumed under changing labels instead of com-
prehensive policy change – in consequence, while adding new initiatives in line with key pri-
orities, it does not necessarily lead to the adjustment or phase-out of existing priorities and
approaches. Moreover, thematic prioritization in the strategy is counterbalanced by cross-cut-
ting/thematically open priorities being linked to large-scale funding schemes.
 Having experimented with a mission-oriented approach (particularly in the HTS 2025 (2018))
there has been a shift backwards to key enabling technologies as main priorities of the strat-
egy, linking the agenda again more to economic and competitiveness considerations instead
of societal challenges.
 Acting as a main umbrella strategy, the HTS has contributed to a prioritization of STI polices,
and contributed to policy change, both within the HTS (ZIM, Excellence Clusters) and the policy
landscape with the Pact for Research and Innovation and the Excellence Initiative (OECD 2022,
p. 119). At the same time, it has limited agency and guidance for introducing new policy
instruments. Lacking an independent budget, it is dependent on the willingness of min-
istries to contribute to the agenda by indicating relevant policy initiatives. In consequence,
the instrument mix is not designed top-down to fit with the goals but emerges from a bottom-
up negotiation/coordination process at the ministerial level, creating difficulties to partly delin-
eate what is part of the strategy and creating a potential disconnect between strategy and
policy. The continuity of priorities with long-term goals has been seen at odds with the electoral

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 20

cycles (EFI 2024, p. 13). Strategic priorities do not necessarily translate into policy change,
as the instrument level is often not directly linked to the HTS.
 Strategy implementation primarily takes place via instruments of direct distribution, gener-
ally delivered through thematic calls. Regulatory aspects etc. are beyond the scope of the strat-
egy given its self-understanding as STI strategy and the strong role of negative coordination.
 Formulating the self-understanding as a “learning strategy” overall means for reflexivity
are only weakly developed. Internal monitoring was only introduced in 2023, a comprehensive
evaluation at the strategy level has not taken place so far. The EFI can be considered as a driver
for change, as there is an uptake of its recommendations in its annual reviews of STI policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 21

8 Literature
BMBF (2006): Die Hightech-Strategie für Deutschland.
BMBF (2010): Ideen. Innovation. Wachstum. Hightech-Strategie 2020 für Deutschland.
BMBF (2018): Forschung und Innovation für die Menschen. Die Hightech-Strategie 2025.
BMBF (2021a): Bericht der Bundesregierung zur Hightech-Strategie 2025. Erfolgsmodell Hightech-
Strategie für ein starkes Innovationsland Deutschland. Bundesregierung. Available at
https://www.bmftr.bund.de/SharedDocs/Publikationen/DE/1/138398_Bericht_zur_Hightech-
Strategie_2025.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&amp;v=5, accessed 08.05.2026.
BMBF (2021b): Research for Sustainability. A strategy of the Federal Ministry of Education and Re-
search. Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung. Available at
https://www.bmftr.bund.de/SharedDocs/Publikationen/DE/FS/31648_Forschung_fuer_Nachhal-
tigkeit_en.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=5, accessed 08.05.2026.
BMBF (2023a): Strategien und strategieähnliche Maßnahmen im Rahmen der Zukunftsstrategie
Forschung und Innovation. Available at https://www.bmftr.bund.de/SharedDocs/Down-
loads/DE/zukunftsstrategie-strategien-ma%C3%9Fnahmen.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=4,
accessed 08.05.2026.
BMBF (2023b): Umsetzung der Zukunftsstrategie Forschung und Innovation. Bericht der Bundes-
regierung. Available at https://www.bmftr.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/2023/umset-
zungsbericht_zukunftsstrategie.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=4, accessed 08.05.2026.
BMBF (2024): Bundesbericht Forschung und Innovation 2024. Forschungs- und innovationspoliti-
sche Ziele und Maßnahmen. Available at https://www.bundesbericht-forschung-innova-
tion.de/files/BMBF_BuFI-2024_Hauptband.pdf.
BMEL (2014): Nationale Politikstrategie Bioökonomie. Nachwachsende Ressourcen und biotech-
nologische Verfahren als Basis für Ernährung, Industrie und Energie. Available at
https://biooekonomie.de/sites/default/files/files/2016-09/npsb.pdf, accessed 08.05.2026.
BMFTR (2024): Pakt für Forschung und Innovation. Available at
https://www.bmftr.bund.de/DE/Forschung/Wissenschaftssystem/Wissenschaftsorganisa-
tionen/PaktFuerForschungUndInnovationen/paktfuerforschungundinnovationen_node.html,
accessed 08.05.2026.
BMFTR (2025): Hightech Agenda Deutschland. Berlin. Available at
https://www.bmftr.bund.de/SharedDocs/Publika-
tionen/DE/L/31881_Hightech_Agenda_Deutschland.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=14, ac-
cessed 27.11.2025.
BMI; BMWi; BMVg; BMVBS; BMU; BMBF (2007): Beschluss zur verstärkten Innovationsorientierung
öffentlicher Beschaffung. Berlin. Available at https://www.bundeswirtschaftsministe-
rium.de/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/B/beschluss-verstaerkte-innovationsorientierung-oeffen-
tlicher-beschaffung.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=1, accessed 13.04.2026.
BMJV (Ed.) (2025): Bundeshaushaltsordnung. BHO. Available at https://www.gesetze-im-inter-
net.de/bho/__7.html.
Borrás, S.; Laatsit, M. (2019): Towards system oriented innovation policy evaluation? Evidence from
EU28 member states. In: Research Policy, 48 (1), pp. 312–321. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.re-
spol.2018.08.020.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 22

Braun, D. (2008): Organising the political coordination of knowledge and innovation policies. In:
Science and Public Policy, 35 (4), pp. 227–239. https://doi.org/10.3152/030234208X287056.
Bundesministerium der Finanzen (2026): Das Sondervermögen für Infrastruktur und Klimaneutrali-
tät. Available at https://www.bundesfinanzministerium.de/Web/DE/Themen/Oeffentliche_Fi-
nanzen/SVIK/sondervermoegen-infrastruktur-klimaneutralitaet.html, accessed 08.05.2026.
Bundesregierung (2012): Unterrichtung durch die Bundesregierung. Zukunftsprojekte der High-
tech-Strategie (HTS-Aktionsplan). Available at https://dserver.bundes-
tag.de/btd/17/092/1709261.pdf, accessed 08.05.2026.
Bundesregierung (2017): Antwort der Bundesregierung auf die Kleine Anfrage der Abgeordneten
Kai Gehring, Beate Walter-Rosenheimer, Katja Dörner, weiterer Abgeordneter und der Fraktion
BÜNDNIS 90/DIE GRÜNEN – Drucksache 18/12016 –. Available at https://dserver.bundes-
tag.de/btd/18/122/1812258.pdf, accessed 08.05.2026.
Bundesregierung (2024): Antwort der Bundesregierung auf die Kleine Anfrage der Abgeordneten
Dr. Michael Kaufmann, Nicole Höchst, Dr. Götz Frömming, weiterer Abgeordneter und der
Fraktion der AfD – Drucksache 20/13827 –. Available at https://dserver.bundes-
tag.de/btd/20/140/2014082.pdf, accessed 08.05.2026.
CDU; CSU; FDP (2009): Wachstum. Bildung. Zusammenhalt. Koalitionsvertrag zwischen CDU, CSU
und FDP. 17. Legislaturperiode. Available at https://www.kas.de/c/document_li-
brary/get_file?uuid=83dbb842-b2f7-bf99-6180-e65b2de7b4d4&groupId=252038, accessed
08.05.2026.
CDU; CSU; SPD (2005): Gemeinsam für Deutschland. Mit Mut und Menschlichkeit. Koalitionsver-
trag von CDU, CSU und SPD. Available at https://www.bundesregierung.de/re-
source/blob/974430/778548/262e947ed0871d9e14c68e682188dffe/koalitionsvertrag-
data.pdf?download=1, accessed 08.05.2026.
CDU; CSU; SPD (2013): Deutschlands Zukunft gestalten. Koalitionsvertrag zwischen CDU, CSU und
SPD. Available at https://archiv.cdu.de/sites/default/files/media/dokumente/koalitionsver-
trag.pdf, accessed 08.05.2026.
CDU; CSU; SPD (2017): Ein neuer Aufbruch für Europa. Eine neue Dynamik für Deutschland. Ein
neuer Zusammenhalt für unser Land. Koalitionsvertrag zwischen CDU, CSU und SPD. 19. Legis-
laturperiode. Available at https://www.bundesregierung.de/re-
source/blob/974430/847984/3d417686a16696f156611b06a1508ad0/2018-03-14-koali-
tionsvertrag-data.pdf?download=1, accessed 08.05.2026.
CDU; CSU; SPD (2025): Verantwortung für Deutschland. Koalitionsvertrag zwischen CDU, CSU und
SPD. 21. Legislaturperiode. Available at https://www.koalitionsvertrag2025.de/sites/www.koali-
tionsvertrag2025.de/files/koav_2025.pdf, accessed 08.05.2026.
Daimer, S.; Hufnagl, M.; Frietsch, R.; Lindner, R.; Neuhäusler, P.; Rothengatter, O. (2017): 10 Jahre
Hightech-Strategie: Bilanz und Perspektiven. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institut für System- und In-
novationsforschung ISI.
Deutscher Bundestag (2023): Unterrichtung durch die Bundesregierung: Zukunftsstrategie For-
schung und Innovation, 20/5710. Available at https://dserver.bundes-
tag.de/btd/20/057/2005710.pdf, accessed 26.11.2025.
Edler, J.; Kuhlmann, S. (2008): Coordination within fragmentation: governance in knowledge policy
in the German federal system. In: Science and Public Policy, 35 (4), pp. 265–276.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 23

EFI (2008): Research, innovation, and technological performance in Germany. Berlin. Available at
https://www.e-fi.de/fileadmin/Assets/Gutachten/2008/EFI_Report_2008.pdf, accessed
08.05.2026.
EFI (2009): Research, innovation, and technological performance in Germancy. Berlin. Available at
https://www.e-fi.de/fileadmin/Assets/Gutachten/2009/EFI_Report_2009.pdf, accessed
08.05.2026.
EFI (2010): Research, innovation and technological performance in Germany. Berlin. Available at
https://www.e-fi.de/fileadmin/Assets/Gutachten/2010/EFI_Report_2010.pdf, accessed
08.05.2026.
EFI (2011): Research, innovation and technological performance in Germany. Berlin. Available at
https://www.e-fi.de/fileadmin/Assets/Gutachten/2011/EFI_Report_2011.pdf, accessed
08.05.2026.
EFI (2012): Research, innovation and technological performance in Germany. Berlin. Available at
https://www.e-fi.de/fileadmin/Assets/Gutachten/2012/EFI_Report_2012.pdf, accessed
08.05.2026.
EFI (2015): Research, innovation and technological performance in Germany. Berlin. Available at
https://www.e-fi.de/fileadmin/Assets/Gutachten/2015/EFI_Report_2015.pdf, accessed
08.05.2026.
EFI (2017): Research, innovation and technological performance in Germany. Berlin. Available at
https://www.e-fi.de/fileadmin/Assets/Gutachten/2017/EFI_Report_2017.pdf, accessed
08.05.2026.
EFI (2018): Research, innovation and technological performance in Germany. Berlin. Available at
https://www.e-fi.de/fileadmin/Assets/Gutachten/2018/EFI_Report_2018.pdf, accessed
08.05.2026.
EFI (2019): Research, innovation and technological performance in Germany. Berlin. Available at
https://www.e-fi.de/fileadmin/Assets/Gutachten/2019/EFI_Report_2019.pdf, accessed
08.05.2026.
EFI (2023): Report on research, innovation and technological perofrmance in Germany. Berlin.
Available at https://www.e-fi.de/fileadmin/Assets/Gutachten/2023/EFI_Report_2023.pdf, ac-
cessed 08.05.2026.
EFI (2024): Report on research, innovation and technological performance in GErmany. Berlin.
Available at https://www.e-fi.de/fileadmin/Assets/Gutachten/2024/EFI_Report_2024.pdf, ac-
cessed 08.05.2026.
EFI (2025): Report on research, innovation and technological performance in Germany. Berlin.
Available at https://www.e-fi.de/fileadmin/Assets/Gutachten/2025/EFI_Report_2025.pdf, ac-
cessed 08.05.2026.
Frietsch, R.; Beckert, B.; Bierwisch, A.; Bratan, T.; Eichhammer, W.; Friedewald, M.; Grandt, S.; Hü-
sing, B.; Kayser, V.; Krail, M.; Lindner, R.; Marscheider-Weidemann, F.; Neuhäusler, P.; Rohde, C.;
Rothengatter, O.; Schade, W.; Schricke, E.; Som, O.; Thielmann, A.; Walz, R.; Wydra, S. (2013):
Ökonomische Analyse der Bedarfsfelder der Hightech-Strategie. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institut
für System- und Innovationsforschung ISI.
Frietsch, R.; Bührer-Topçu, S. (2022): Strukturen und Governance öffentlicher Finanzierung der au-
ßeruniversitären Forschungsorganisationen in Deutschland. In: Forschung. Politik-Strategie-
Management.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 24

Frietsch, R.; Neuhäusler, P.; Rothengatter, O. (2017a): Die deutschen Patentanmeldungen im inter-
nationalen Vergleich – Erklärungsversuche für neue Trends. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institut für
System- und Innovationsforschung ISI.
Frietsch, R.; Schubert, T.; Rothengatter, O. (2017b): An analysis of the Excellence Initiative and its
effects on the funded universities. Available at https://www.e-fi.de/fileadmin/As-
sets/Studien/2017/StuDIS_11_2017.pdf, accessed 06.05.2026.
Gebert, M.; Hapig, N.; Burk, M.; Eckardt, C.; Hetze, P. (2024): Die Ausrichtung von Innovationspoli-
tik auf Landesebene. Analyse und Einordnung der RIS3-Strategien der Bundesländer. Essen.
German Science And Humanities Council (2024): Der Hochschulpakt 2020 im Kontext großer Her-
ausforderungen im Hochschulsystem. Köln: Wissenschaftsrat. https://doi.org/10.57674/ecee-
e117.
GWK (2022): Hochschulpakt 2020. Abschlussbericht von Bund und Ländern. Bonn: Gemeinsame
Wissenschaftskonferenz. Available at https://www.gwk-bonn.de/fileadmin/Redaktion/Doku-
mente/Papers/GWK-Heft-81-Hochschulpakt-Abschlussbericht.pdf, accessed 22.04.2026.
Hartmann, M. (2010): Die Exzellenzinitiative und ihre Folgen. In: Leviathan, 38 (3), pp. 369–387.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11578-010-0091-9.
Hufnagl, M. (2025): Unboxing innovation policy strategies: an empirical exploration on objectives,
coordination, and capacity. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institut für System- und Innovationsfor-
schung ISI. Available at https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/isi/dokumente/cci/innova-
tion-systems-policy-analysis/2025/discussionpaper_91_2025.pdf, accessed 25.01.2026.
Mayer, K. U. (2016): Die drei Pakte und ihre Wirkung: Die Exzellenzinitiative, der Hochschulpakt
2020 und der Pakt für Forschung und Innovation. In: Simon, D.; Knie, A.; Hornbostel, S.; Zim-
mermann, K. (Eds.): Handbuch Wissenschaftspolitik. Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien Wiesba-
den, pp. 465–481. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-05455-7_19.
OECD (2022): OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Germany 2022. Building Agility for succesful
Transition. Paris. Available at https://doi.org/10.1787/50b32331-en.
Pasternack, P. (2011): Sechzehn plus eins. Der deutsche Hochschulföderalismus. In: die hoch-
schule. Jounal für Wissenschaft und Bildung, 20 (1), pp. 6–18.
https://doi.org/10.25656/01:16325.
Priebe, M.; Herberg, J. (2024): Regioning mission-oriented innovation policy: The articulation of
directionality between federal and regional arenas in the German High-Tech Strategy. In: Envi-
ronmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, 52, p. 100899.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2024.100899.
Ronzheimer, M. (2025): Wundertüte der Innovationspolitik. Available at https://back-
ground.tagesspiegel.de/digitalisierung-und-ki/briefing/wundertuete-der-innovationspolitik,
accessed 08.05.2026.
Roth, F.; Lindner, R.; Hufnagl, M.; Wittmann, F.; Yorulmaz, M. (2021): The future of mission-ori-
ented policies. Final report of the Scientific Support Action to the German High-Tech Strategy
2025 - volume 1. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institut für System- und Innovationsforschung ISI.
Scharpf, F. W. (2000): Institutions in Comparative Policy Research. In: Comparative Political Stu-
dies, 33 (6-7), pp. 762–790. https://doi.org/10.1177/001041400003300604.
Schlegel, J. (2011): Die Exzellenzinitiative–ein Paradigmenwechsel in der Wissenschaftspolitik von
Bund und Ländern. In: Forschung. Politik-Strategie-Management, (3+4), pp. 75–79.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 25

Schubert, T.; Kroll, H.; Blind, K.; Frietsch, R. (2024): Forschungs-, Technologie- und Innovationspoli-
tik muss die Entstehung kritischer Massen fördern. In: Wirtschaftsdienst, 104 (4), pp. 241–245.
https://doi.org/10.2478/wd-2024-0067.
Sieweke, S. (2010): Die Wirkungen der Exzellenzinitiative auf die deutsche Hochschullandschaft. In:
die hochschule. Jounal für Wissenschaft und Bildung, (2), pp. 120–139.
SPD; BÜNDNIS 90/Die GRÜNEN; FDP (2021): Mehr Fortschritt wagen. Bündnis für, Freiheit, Ge-
rechtigkeit und Nachhaltigkeit. Available at https://www.spd.de/fileadmin/Dokumente/Koali-
tionsvertrag/Koalitionsvertrag_2021-2025.pdf, accessed 08.05.2026.
Storm, A. (2007): Auswirkungen der Föderalismusreform auf Hochschulen und Wissenschaft in
Deutschland. In: Beiträge zur Hochschulforschung, 29 (3), pp. 8–16.
Teichler, U. (2018): Recent changes of financing higher education in Germany and their intended
and unintended consequences. In: International Journal of Educational Development, 58, pp.
37–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedudev.2016.10.008.
Warnke, P.; Priebe, M.; Veit, S. (2022): Studie zur Institutionalisierung von Strategischer Voraus-
schau als Prozess und Methode in der deutschen Bundesregierung. Available at
https://www.bundesregierung.de/re-
source/blob/974430/2059788/d0eacc04d717e06b48d43ecbc61abf8c/2022-07-08-studie-strat-
egische-vorausschau-data.pdf?download=1, accessed 26.11.2025.
Warnke, P.; Schirrmeister, E. (2016): Small seeds for grand challenges—Exploring disregarded
seeds of change in a foresight process for RTI policy. In: Futures, 77, pp. 1–10.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2015.12.001.
Wiarda, J.-M. (2025a): "Das darf nicht noch einmal passieren". Available at
https://www.jmwiarda.de/blog/2025/03/25/das-darf-nicht-noch-einmal-passieren, accessed
08.05.2026.
Wiarda, J.-M. (2025b): Mehr Zukunft als die Zukunftstrategie. Available at
https://www.jmwiarda.de/blog/2025/10/29/mehr-zukunft-als-die-zukunftsstrategie, accessed
08.05.2026.
Wiarda, J.-M. (2025c): Von Wunschlisten, Preisschildern und großen Linien. Available at
https://www.jmwiarda.de/blog/2025/03/27/von-wunschlisten-preisschildern-und-grossen-
linien, accessed 08.05.2026.
Wiarda, J.-M. (2025d): Koalitionszwist bremst erneut Bärs Hightech-Pläne. Available at
https://www.jmwiarda.de/blog/2025/12/17/koalitionszwist-bremst-erneut-baers-hightech-
plaene, accessed 08.05.2026.
Wiarda, J.-M. (2026): Die Hightech-Agenda rückt nach oben. Available at
https://www.jmwiarda.de/blog/2026/01/15/die-hightech-agenda-rueckt-nach-oben, accessed
08.05.2026.
Wittmann, F.; Hufnagl, M.; Roth, F.; Lindner, R.; Kroll, H. (2021a): A Framework for Formative Evalu-
ation and Impact Assessment of Mission-oriented Innovation Policies. Final report of the Scien-
tific Support Action to the German High-Tech Strategy 2025 – volume 2. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer
Institut für System- und Innovationsforschung ISI. Available at https://www.isi.fraun-
hofer.de/content/dam/isi/dokumente/ccp/2021/HTS2025_Begleitforschung_Band_2_eng-
lisch.pdf, accessed 08.05.2026.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 94
Fraunhofer ISI | 26

Wittmann, F.; Priebe, M. (2023): German High-Tech Strategy 2025. In: : Evaluation study on the rel-
evance and internal coherence of Horizon 2020 and its policy mix. Luxemburg: Publications Of-
fice of the European Union, pp. 102–108.
Wittmann, F.; Roth, F.; Hufnagl, M.; Yorulmaz, M.; Lindner, R. (2021b): Second Mission Analysis Re-
port of the Scientific Support Action to the German Hightech Strateg 2025. Zooming in: Trans-
lating missions into policy instruments. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer ISI. Available at
https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/isi/dokumente/ccp/2021/Hightech_Strategy_2025-
second_mission_analysis_report.pdf, accessed 08.05.2026.
