
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 64
ISSN 1612-1430
Karlsruhe, April 2020

Developing a Typology for Mission-Oriented
Innovation Policies

Florian Wittmann
Miriam Hufnagl
Ralf Lindner
Florian Roth
Jakob Edler

Karlsruhe, Fraunhofer ISI

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Contents I
Contents
1 Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 1
2 Review and critical assessment of existing mission typologies ...................... 4
2.1 Existing approaches ................................ ................................ ............ 4
2.2 Demands for a new typology of missions ................................ ............. 7
2.2.1 Conceptualizing the level of analysis ................................ ................... 8
2.2.2 The role of governance and actors for the implementation of
mission-oriented policies ................................ ................................ ..... 9
3 Towards a new typology of missions ................................ ............................... 10
3.1 Accelerator vs. transformer missions ................................ ................. 11
3.2 Accelerator Type 1 and Type 2 ................................ .......................... 13
3.3 Transformer Type 1 and Type 2 ................................ ........................ 14
3.4 Discussion of typology ................................ ................................ ....... 15
4 Empirical application of the typology to the German High-Tech
Strategy (HTS 2025) ................................ ................................ ........................... 16
4.1 Operationalization ................................ ................................ .............. 16
4.2 Empirical classification of HTS missions ................................ ............ 18
4.3 Discussion of empirical findings ................................ ......................... 21
4.4 Thoughts on the selection of missions for in-depth
investigation ................................ ................................ ...................... 23
5 Conclusions ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 24
Appendix: Detailed discussion of the 12 HTS missions ................................ ........ 33

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
II Contents

Figures
Figure 1: Types of missions ................................ ................................ ....... 11
Figure 2: Dendrogram for the twelve German HTS missions ........................ 21

Tables
Table 1: Characteristics of different types of missions ................................ . 16
Table 2: Dimension of typology and operationalization ............................... 18
Table 3: Assessments for relevant dimensions. ................................ .......... 20
Table 4: Mission-types and types of challenges ................................ .......... 25

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Introduction 1

Abstract
The goal to address broader societal problems by mission -oriented research and inno-
vation policy has brought new demands for the governance and implementation to the
forefront and led to a great diversity of missions. By developing a typology for the clas-
sification of different types of missions, this working paper can serve as a first step for
studying the impact of the missions of the German High-Tech Strategy 2025 (HTS).
Combining existing literature on mission -oriented innovation policy with insights from
governance structures, we identify four types of missions - two subtypes of transformer
and accelerator missions each - and demonstrate that this typology can be successfully
applied to the 12 missions of the German HTS 2025. Thereby, we contribute to a more
fine-grained understanding of the different demands and challenges inherent to different
missions and thus provide the opportunity for a systematic comparison and a refle ction
on the varying requirements for assessing the impact of mission-oriented policies.

1 Introduction1
The orientation of science and innovation policy has changed considerably in the past
decades. Whereas the traditional focus was on fueling economic growth by the commer-
cialization of scientific insights without considerable interference by the state (see Arnold
et al. 2018, p. 3), a more active and guiding role of the state has gained importance
recently (Schot and Steinmueller 2018) . In contrast to the earlier types of mission -ori-
ented policies, current innovation policies are characterized by attempts to closer align
policy with tackling grand societal challenges (Robinson and Mazzucato 2019).2 Consid-
ering pressing problems or as stated in the Lund Declaration in 2009 the “grand c hal-
lenges of our time”3 such as pollution, climate change or demographic change, there are
high hopes that innovative ideas, processes and products will not only address but also
solve these problems (directionality). The rising interest of policy makers to foster edu-

1 This discussion paper originated in the context o f a research project (WP 6) commissioned
to support the implementation of the German High-Tech Strategy 2025. The project is funded
by the Federa l Ministry of Research and Education (Förderkennzeichen 16HTF03). The
views expressed here are those of the authors and may not be regarded as stating an official
position of the Ministry. For more information on the project, please visit: https://www.isi.
fraunhofer.de/en/competence-center/politik-gesellschaft/projekte/htf2025.html
2 For changes in the discourse and the shift from a perception of problems towards challenges
see Kaldewey 2018; Kallerud et al. 2013.
3 See https://era.gv.at/object/document/130.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
2 Introduction

cation, research and science that leads to solutions for these pressing problems corre-
sponds with this development and has been labelled as the ‘new mission for science and
technology policy’ following the so-called Maastricht Memorandum (Soete and Arundel
1993).
To this end, over the past ten to 15 years, several c ountries have introduced so-called
innovation policy strategies such as the German High-Tech Strategy (BMBF 2006) or the
British Innovation and Research Strategy for Growth (BIS 2011) accentuating a more
active role of the state. During the past legislative periods, the focus of these policy strat-
egies has changed from fostering single technological fields or disciplines4 to supporting
adequate solutions for the above-mentioned challenges by formulating comprehensive
missions such as "fighting cancer" or "preserving biological diversity" (BMBF 2018). Ac-
cording to Kuittinen et al. (2018a, ii), these new mission-oriented policies are character-
ized as "ambitious, exploratory and ground -breaking in nature, often cross-disciplinary,
targeting a concrete problem/challenge, with a large impact and a well -defined
timeframe" (Kuittinen et al. 2018a; similar Mazzucato 2018b; see Larrue 2019, pp. 7–9
for an overview of definitions).
This re-orientation towards societal goals requires conceptualizing innovation policy in a
broader and crosscutting way , taking into consideration a significantly wider range of
actor groups and stakeholders, understanding the potential impacts of these policies in
different sectors and application areas, and introducing new governance arrangements.
This becomes clear when Larrue (2019, p. 9) proposes a "concept of mission-orientation
constructed as a composite of diffe rent elements. It refers to the objective of t he policy
(societal challenges), its content (a co-ordinated bundle of instruments) and some imple-
mentation characteristics (goals and timeframe)". In consequence, mission-oriented pol-
icies challenge existing institutional settings for implementing innovation policy and call
for a better integration of different policy instruments and actors to achieve the aspired
goals. However, without changes to the top-down organized process of implementation,
a re-orientation will not necessarily lead to any real transformative innovation, but may
also lead to subsuming previous activities under new headlines like putting “old wine into
new bottles” (Daimer et al. 2012, p. 223).
At the same time, this new type of missions aiming to address societal challenges instead
of merely supporting single technological fields has also multiple implications for the
study and evaluation of innovation and research policy . First, the directionality of the

4 The very first version of the German High-Tech Strategy covered 17 different sub-strategies
targeting selected technologies and disciplines such as medical devices, information and
communication technologies or microsystems technology (BMBF 2006).

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Introduction 3

policy and the higher coordinative efforts imply an even greater necessity to better un-
derstand the role of the state in achieving the desired policy goals. Secondly, new and
additional actors need to be taken into account and involved, thereby adding to the com-
plexity of the governance of the missions (Warnke et al. 2016). And thirdly, the far-reach-
ing goals also require new approaches for measurement and evaluation (Amanatidou et
al. 2014), as the impact of missions cannot be easily grasped with traditional evaluation
techniques, given the lack established approaches (Weber and Polt 2014, p. 9).
In the following, we develop a new typology addressing the diversi ty of missions with
regard to policy goals and inherent challenges. In contrast to most previous literature ,
this typology specifically emphasizes the importance of governance structures and the
role of the state in mission implementation. The purpose of this typology is twofold: First,
given the growing number, diversity, and relevance of mission-oriented policies, it aims
at providing orientation to analysts and policy-makers on the key distinguishing charac-
teristics of contemporary missions, thereby facilitating systematic comparisons and pol-
icy learning. Second, as the typology is developed in the context of a research project in
support of the ongoing implementation of the missions of the current German High-Tech
Strategy (HTS)5, by developing – among other aspects – an impact measurement con-
cept, the typology will be used to select four different types from the twelve HTS missions.
In the next steps of the project, there will be an in -depth investigation of the selected
missions, particularly with regard to the mission goals and the measures and instruments
used to reach these goals. The typology therefore serves both as a tool for the selection
of relevant missions and provides indications about the different types of challenges as-
sociated with different types of missions. The latter is particularly important in order to
develop a framework for impact assessment which is sufficiently sensitive with regard to
increasing variety among missions.
To arrive at a sound typology that is distinct and – meaningful – from a policy perspective,
the paper starts with a summary and a critical assessment of existing mission typologies.
Based on this review, requirements for a comprehensive and useful mission typology are
outlined (sec. 2). Drawing on the insights of th e review and taking into account the re-
quirements identified, a typology is developed and the relationships between different
types of missions are discussed (sec. 3). In section 4, we apply this typology to the twelve
missions of the HTS, discuss problems encountered during this step and reflect on which
missions should be selected based on the typology. The final section 5 summarizes the
key insights presented in the paper and proposes areas for further investigation.

5 https://www.hightech-strategie.de/en/index.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
4 Review and critical assessment of existing mission typologies

2 Review and critical assessment of existing mission
typologies
2.1 Existing approaches
Given the turn towards a stronger mission orientation, there is a growing diversity of
innovation policies and individual missions with regard to their scope, goals, and ambi-
tions (Kuittinen et al. 2018a, p. 32; Larrue 2019). For instance, the German High-Tech
Strategy 2025 with its strong focus on the policy areas of research and technology com-
prises missions ranging from the introduction of a certain technological solution in the
health sector, to further investments in research to fight cancer to addressing large soci-
etal problems such as carbon dioxide emissions or a transformation of the mobility sector
(BMBF 2018). The current British Industrial Strategy (BIS 2011) serves as another ex-
ample in this respect. Here, the guiding principle is the identification of four Grand Chal-
lenges that correspondent with broad, cross-sectoral missions. On the one hand, this
approach led to formulating complex and aggregated policy ambitions like tackling the
Grand Challenge of an "Ageing society" by the corresponding mission: "Ensure that peo-
ple can enjoy at least 5 extra healthy, independent years of life by 2035, while narrowing
the gap between the experience of the richest and poorest". On the other hand, the UK
strategy also contains missions that seem rather straightforward in scope and scale. The
challenge of "Clean Growth", for instance, is tackled by two missions: "at least halve the
energy use of new buildings by 2030" and "establish the world’s first net -zero carbon
industrial cluster by 2040 and at least 1 low-carbon cluster by 2030".6
Recent approaches to classify mis sion-oriented policies are mostly based on a one -di-
mensional, often dichotomous understanding. Whereas some authors emphasize the
scope of underlying problems as the main distinguishing dimension, others primarily fo-
cus on the anticipated solutions and goa ls of missions. Only recently, the role and pro-
cess of implementation have increasingly attracted the attention of researchers. There-
fore, the debate about the classification of mission -oriented policies provides multiple,
but related starting points.
Firstly, mission-oriented policies can be understood in terms of the underlying challenges
which are the prerequisite for the formulation of a challenge-based approach (Mazzucato
2018b). Georghiou et al. (2018, p. 5) distinguish between two types of challenges: Type
A missions with "potentially solvable" challenges that can be translated into specific/ver-

6- https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/industrial-strategy-the-grand-challenges/mis-
sions

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Review and critical assessment of existing mission typologies 5

ifiable goals (e.g. developing a vaccine for Ebola) and Type B mission, the complex char-
acter of which makes finding a solution complicated (e.g. Nixon's war on cance r). The
understanding of challenges is thereby linked to concepts such as those of "wicked prob-
lems" (Rittel and Webber 1973) or the distinction between simple, complex and compli-
cated problems (Glouberman and Zimmerman 2002).
Secondly and closely related to this perspective, there are a number of attempts that
categorize policies based on mission characteristics, i.e. the defined goals. Kuittinen et
al. (2018a; 2018b) distinguish between accelerator missions, which have a narrowly de-
fined scientific/technological focus, and broader transformer missions aiming at a trans-
formation of existing systems and often addressing societal problems (see also Hekkert
n.d.). A similar understanding can also be found in Robinson and Mazzucato (2019), who
distinguish between traditional (Type 1) and challenge-driven (Type 2) mission-oriented
policies, where the latter is characterized by a greater diffusion of responsibilities and
the expectations for changes affecting also societal behavior. The main characteristics
of mission-oriented policies comprise the call for missions being oriented towards prob-
lems of wi der societal relevance and have a cross -disciplinary and cross-sectoral/-ac-
toral approach.7
Building on an inductive approach and the insights of over a hundred case studies, Polt
et al. (2019) extend this typology further. Observing differences with regard to the moti-
vation (aspirational vs. problem -driven), the intention (understanding vs. solution), the
definition of a target/the scope (well - vs. ill defined), and the means (technological vs.
socio-institutional), they empirically identify four types of missions:
i. science missions (e.g. US Cancer Moonshot - fundamental/basic research with
high uncertainty)
ii. technological missions (e.g. Concorde, Apollo mission - specific goal with a
strong focus on technological/scientific solutions)
iii. transformative missions (e.g. German Energiewende - aiming at systemic
change)
iv. umbrella missions (e.g. German High Tech Strategy - comprehensive long-term
policy frame)

7 However, differences between policies might also have a gradual character and meeting the
requirements to varying degree (Mazzucato 2018b; Kuittinen et al. 2018b ). Taking these
requirements as a baseline, one could argue that higher degrees of mission -orientation
should be more prevalent for transformer missions, as described by Polt et al. (2019), com-
pared to more narrowly defined accelerator or science missions.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
6 Review and critical assessment of existing mission typologies

While these concepts rest on the assumption that types of challenges and corresponding
missions are closely linked with each other, Wanzenböck et al. (2019) seek to disentan-
gle these dimensions and highlight the different modes of interaction between them. Sim-
ilar to Patton (2011), they argue that both problems and solutions can exhibit varying
degrees of complexity, creating different ideal types of constellations in a 2x2 problem -
solution matrix. The more views on both the problem and the possible solution diverge,
the harder it will be to achieve the desired outcomes. What sets Wanzenböck et al.
(2019) apart from the so far discussed typologies is that unlike the others, it does not
follow a static, but a dynamic perspective. Accordingly, constellations can change over
time, e.g. through public debate or new technological developments, shifting the situation
more towards an alignment of views on the problem/solution. 8 Therefore, they outline
several policy pathways that can lead to the desirable state of alignment: a (1) problem-
led, experimental, (2) an open, fundamental research knowledge creation, and (3) hy-
brid, co-evolutionary pathway. However, while pinpointing to the potential dynamics of
the process, the time horizon – depending on the perspective – might reach beyond the
goal of a mission and rather capture challenges at different states of alignment.
Finally, some authors have broadened the perspective by highlighting that besides com-
plexity as an inherent characteristic of problems and/or solutions, mission-oriented poli-
cies can vary with regard to their implementation requirements. Larrue (2019) develops
a framework that serves a twofold goal: Firstly, classifying policies on a meta -level with
regard to the main purpose of a policy (characteristics of different initiatives, not mis-
sions) and it s integration into the overall policy framework. In consequence, he distin-
guishes between a focus of the policy on outlining a general conception, (e.g., German
High-Tech Strategy), the priority of policy-coordination (e.g., German Energiewende) or
the active link to the implementation level (e.g., DARPA in the US). Secondly, in order to
systematically analyze mission-oriented policies, he provides a comprehensive check list
of potential factors which can be grouped into three main categories: strategic ori enta-
tion, policy co -ordination and policy implementation. This perspective implies that the
diversity of missions might not only be captured by the underlying challenges and mis-
sions, but also by the resulting requirements how to coordinate and manage the realiza-
tion of missions and thus pay more attention to governance and implementation. In par-
ticular, this focus can contribute to overcoming the inherent challenges in the evaluation
of mission-oriented policies (see above), by better understanding the dynamics and pro-
cesses within a mission.

8 At the same time, Wanzenböck et al. (2019) do not discuss the hypothetical case of disalign-
ment and an increasing contestation of a solution , assuming that seemingly problems only
can converge towards alignment or remain locked-in at the status quo.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Review and critical assessment of existing mission typologies 7

In contrast, the strand of research in science, technology and innovation (STI) studies
analyzing fundamental shifts in technological areas or disciplinary fields appears less
suited for enhancing an understanding of missions. While research on transition path-
ways can yield insights into the dynamics of innovation processes (see, for example,
Geels 2002; Geels and Schot 2007; Geels et al. 2016) , it does not allow a more pro-
nounced understanding of mission characteristics and in particular the r ole of govern-
ance structures (Arnold et al. 2018, p. 37). Relying on an ex-post perspective, it exhibits
an implicit preference for "successful" cases , being primarily interested in explaining
changes instead of a reproduction of systems (cf. Geels and Schot 2007, p. 406). While
Geels and co -authors reject the criticism of pursuing an overall structuralist approach
and offer refined pathways incorporating a stronger role of agency (2007; 2016), their
focus is primarily on the innovation process of single technologies rather than the imple-
mentation of policies.
The perspective of Geels and Schot is in so far broader, as they assume that policy
coordination is the result of the convergence of opinions during transition processes ,
while they downplay the role of specific policies for achieving this goal. This perspective
becomes particularly clear when Geels and Schot (2007, p. 402) argue that "[i]n our view,
no transition is planned and coordinated "from the outset" (p. 1502 [Smith et al. 2005])”.
And every transition becomes coordinated at some point through the alignment of visions
and activities of different groups". From this perspecti ve, mission-oriented policies are
located at a different conceptual level, as they constitute a part of a transition process
and should only gain relevance once there is consensus on a given goal. Whereas mis-
sions in our understanding are clearly embedded in a deliberate political strategy aimed
at achieving a certain outcome and require an active coordination, transition pathways
describe the overall process.9
2.2 Demands for a new typology of missions
To provide a useful starting point for a better understanding of mission-oriented innova-
tion policy, there is further need for capturing the diversity of missions in a typology with
regard to the inherent challenges, goals and governance requirements. This ties in with
the observation of Cherp et al. (2018, p.187), who contend that there is a lacking con-
sensus on how to integrate different perspectives in transformative policies into a uniform
framework. Aiming to strive towards an uniform framework, we therefore argue that a
typology should address the following two main challenges: (1) overcome the vagueness
with regard to the level of analysis and outline a typology based on individual missions,

9 For a call for a stronger integration of politics in the understand ing of innovation processes
see also Meadowcroft (2009).

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
8 Review and critical assessment of existing mission typologies

and (2) bridge the gap in current research by bringing together the understanding of
challenges (problems/solutions) with the role of actors and the governance of missions.
2.2.1 Conceptualizing the level of analysis
Firstly, many of the conceptions are rather ambivalent with regard to the level of analysis
and are seemingly more closely related to the strategic policy level than to specific mis-
sions. This becomes most visible with regard to the "umbrel la missions" as understood
by Polt et al. (2019), which refer to policies comprising of a number of individual missions
(like the German High-Tech Strategy) and therefore might be on a different conceptual
level than the remaining types o f missions. In consequence, several science missions,
for instance, could be part of an "umbrella mission". The diversity of goals makes it not
only harder to assess the impact of mission-oriented policy, but also creates conceptual
obstacles, as typologies might not necessarily “travel” across different analytical levels.
For a more systematic perspective on mission-oriented policies, it is therefore necessary
to clarify the level of analysis before proceeding with the development of a typology.
Keeping in mind the goal of performing an impact assessment in later steps, the mission
level appears to be the natural level of analysis, as it can open the “black box” of larger
strategic programs and prepare the ground for unpacking the diversity within larger pol-
icies in a more systematic way. While missions can be considered as the groundwork for
mission-oriented innovation policies, their connection to challenges and overall policies
is not straightforward. Missions, as the intermediary level between overarching strategies
and single policy instruments, are supposed to be translations of challenges into solvable
problems (Mazzucato 2018a, pp. 811–812; Robinson and Mazzucato 2019, p. 936), thus
can address only a subset of a challenge or can be linked to other missions and overall
policy strategies in different ways.10 Firstly, a single challenge can be addressed by mul-
tiple missions, so that missions and the main goal related to a challenge are not neces-
sarily identical (see European Commission - Directorate-General for Research and In-
novation 2017, p. 15). Secondly, missions can address challenges at different levels o f
granularity, thus putting emphasis on different aspects of a challenge (Larrue 2019,
pp. 20–21). Finally, several missions can be subsumed in one - more or less coherent -
policy strategy, addressing multiple challenges (like in the German HTS). Moreover, dif-
ferent types of missions may differ systematicall y in their orientation. Griniece and So-
rokins (2018), for instance, report from a survey among stakeholders in R&I policy that

10 A single strategy might be driven by the interplay of different goals of different missions,
creating additional obstacles for understanding the impact of policies due to the complemen-
tary character of missions. In consequence, it can be difficult to disentangle individual con-
tributions at an aggregate level.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Review and critical assessment of existing mission typologies 9

not all criteria for mission -oriented policy suggested by Mazzucato (2018b) can be
equally applied to all missions.
2.2.2 The role of governance and actors for the implementation
of mission-oriented policies
The focus on the scope of necessary transformations (Kuittinen et al. 2018b; Polt et al.
2019) or the complexity of solutions (Wanzenböck et al. 2019) only indirectly links to the
actor constellations and challenges arising from the implementation of mission-oriented
policies that have been emphasized recently (e.g. Grillitsch et al. 20 19; Larrue 2019) .
The directionality coming along with mission -orientation imposes a more active role of
the state in coordinating and formulating goals, bringing together different groups of ac-
tors at different levels and creating the need for new means of cooperation (Weber and
Rohracher 2012; Arnold et al. 2018, p. 56; Boon and Edler 2018; Mazzucato 2018b).11
At the same time, it is likely that directionality will fuel the emergence of conflicts between
different actors with their distinct own preferences which do not necessarily coincide with
the goals formulated in the outline of the policy, thereby entailing higher degrees of po-
liticization of innovation policy. In consequence, mission-oriented policies require a sys-
temic policy-making approach that i) allows for coordination of different parts of the in-
ternal policy system, ii) engages them in discursive processes (reflexive and transform-
ative governance), and iii) leads to the development and implementation of policy mixes
(Smits and Kuhlmann 2004) cutting across and reaching beyond the confines of estab-
lished policy areas and policy communities. This has been also reflected in frameworks
trying to conceptualize the types of transformations by highlighting the role of coordina-
tion as one core dimension (Berkhout et al. 2004; Grin et al. 2010)
Against this background, it is obvious that the role of governance is of key importance in
order to achieve the changes aspired by mission-oriented policies. In general terms, we
understand governance activities as "purposeful efforts to guide, steer, control, or man-
age (sectors or facets of) societies" (Kooiman 1993, p. 2). In relation to the policy areas
of science, technology and innovation, we draw on Borrás and Edler who define govern-
ance as the
"[...] way in which societal and state actors intentionally int eract in order to transform
ST&I systems, by regulating issues of societal concern, defining processes and direction

11 The example presented by USAID (2018, p 3-4) demonstrates well that complexity might not
be necessarily limited to the technological solution. For instance, the science part in a vac-
cination program might be of limited complexity, while the logistic of distributing the vaccina-
tion can be the larger challenge and for instance requires the cooperation of multiple actors
in a difficult environment.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
10 Towards a new typology of missions

of how technological artefacts and innovations are produced, and shaping how these are
introduced, absorbed, diffused and used within society and economy." (Borrás and Edler
2014, p. 14)
Compared to other suggestions, this definition is particularly useful in our context as it
refers specifically to innovation and the transformation of systems. In addition, the defi-
nition explicitly emphasises actors' purposeful attempts to influence decisions, decision-
making processes and framework conditions to achieve certain ends (Lindner et al.
2016)
Given the importance of governance of change for mission-oriented innovation policies,
a meaningful typology has to account for the distinct goals and specific governance -
modi. The complexity for governance can arise along two lines, requiring a critical reflec-
tion on the role and performance of public and private actors, who should bring about
the desired change connected to the missions (Edler et al. 2003; Braun 2008; Lindner
2012; Matthews 2011; Flanagan et al. 2011). The first perspective ought to take the view
of internal governance arrangements since missions, according to their crosscutting na-
ture, more often than not fall into the shared responsibility of several ministries as well
as several units in the involved ministries. In consequence, mission implementation im-
poses higher demands for the internal coordination and cooperation among public ac-
tors.
Secondly, the realization of policies depends on the interplay and cooperation of multiple
public and external stakeholders from industry, science and society. The main challenge
in this context is to ensure an efficient coordination among all these actors and use the
available policy instruments in a way that they serve the desired outcomes. Again, a
greater number of involved actor groups and a great variety of policy instruments in-
crease the level of complexity for policy coordination and should hence be reflected in a
useful typology of mission-oriented innovation policies.

3 Towards a new typology of missions
This section o utlines a novel approach for understanding the variation of mission -ori-
ented policies by suggesting a typology at the mission -level that addresses the afore-
mentioned problems. While explicitly building on previous literature highlighting the prob-
lem structure of missions as a crucial feature (complexity of problem/solution), we extend
this understanding by accounting for the requirements arising from the governance of
missions - both the interplay of public and private actors, the way they are affected by
different types of instruments, and the governance of responsibilities and activities within

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Towards a new typology of missions 11

public administration. This adds a better understanding of the obstacles within the imple-
mentation of such missions and allows differentiating more precisely betwee n varying
levels of complexity.
We propose to distinguish a total of four (ideal) types of missions, which are nested into
the two main categories of transformer and accelerator missions (see also Figure 1 for
an overview). The differences between the main categories of transformer and acceler-
ator missions, which are well established in the literature, can be found in the structure
of the underlying problem and the way the problem is supposed to be addressed. At the
same time, within these overarching categories, the demands for coordination and gov-
ernance can vary considerably, so that we distinguish between two sub -types for both
cases. The following section outlines the main characteristics of each of the types in
greater depth and discusses the existing differences.

Figure 1: Types of missions (own elaboration)

3.1 Accelerator vs. transformer missions
The first difference between missions relates to their purpose. Inspired by the notion of
Wanzenböck et al. (2019), who argue that the extent of complexity of a mission arises
from both the type of challenge addressed and the possible solutions, we follow the well-
established differentiation between accelerator and transformer missions.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
12 Towards a new typology of missions

First of all, missions vary with regard to the kind of failure they address. Following Weber
and Rohracher (2012) innovation policies can aim to fix different kinds of failures: market
failures (e.g. information asymmetries, externalities of expenditures), structural system
failures (e.g. lack of infrastructure, capacity, formal rules), and transformational system
failures (e.g. lack of vision on project, difficulty to lea rn about public demand, need for
policy coordination).12 With increasing complexity of the challenge, additional types of
failures gain importance, layered on top of lower level failures such as market failure and
therefore impose additional requirements for state interventions (Weber and Rohracher
2012, p. 1042). This understanding of failure closely links to the scope of the underlying
challenges. In the case of accelerator missions, the main target of interventions is to
overcome market or structural institutional failures, while in the case of transformer mis-
sions, the failures tend to be much more complex and multi-faceted. These missions are
directed towards overcoming more substantial problems such as the difficulty to deter-
mine public demand and attempt to steer the direction of the innovation process.
Secondly and closely related to the kind of challenge, also the solution of the problem
might vary in its complexity. While generally more complex problems also make more
complex interventions necessary (see also Walton 2016, p. 414), missions might attach
varying importance to the rol e of scientific progress vis -a-vis the other dimensions.
Whereas in accelerator missions, changes primarily affect the area of science and/or
technology and can involve changes in the institutional setting (laws, regulations, etc.),
the level of change is more comprehensive for transformer missions. Goals of trans-
former missions cannot be achieved only by technological/scientific progress, but imply
a substantial transformation of the overall system and its structure, including the societal
sphere, institutions and behavior of actors. Accordingly, they complement the neo-clas-
sical canon of input and output additionality to remedy market failure by aiming at behav-
ioral change and additionality. Following an exploratory definition of Gök and Edler
(2012, p. 307), "a policy [addressing behavioral change] is only successful if it increases
the capacities of agents that are crucial for innovation activity and performance (cogni-
tive, networking, etc.) and by doing so leads to persistent effects". Transformer missions
are hence substantially broader in their goals and take a broader variety of stakeholders
into consideration. Therefore, they require the application of a more diverse set of policy-
instruments to reach these goals.
This distinction between transformer and accelerator missions closely ties in with the
well-established perspective of missions as a dichotomy which can frequently be found
in the literature (Kuittinen et al. 2018a; Kuittinen et al. 2018b; Robinson and Mazzucato

12 Daimer et al. (2012) use the term orientation failure.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Towards a new typology of missions 13

2019; Hekkert n.d.). Instead of breaking with this perspective, we argue that it is neces-
sary to differentiate missions beyond this dichotomy and take into consideration the role
of governance and anticipated pathways of reaching mission goals including the role of
the applied policy instruments and their mix.
3.2 Accelerator Type 1 and Type 2
Accelerator missions can be understood as missions that seek to find an answer to a
challenge with a relatively confined scope (e.g. Moonshot, research in one particular
field), but do not aim for a comprehensive system change. Despite this uniformity at the
aggregate level, one can delineate two different sub-types of accelerator missions.
While being rather clearly delineated from transformer missions, accelerator missions
internally differ with regard to the type of failure they address as well as the anticipat ed
complexity of the solution. Accelerator Type 1 (A1) missions primarily seek to overcome
a market failure and rely on scientific and/or technological innovation in order to address
the challenge. In contrast, the constellation in Type 2 (A2) is often more complex, as the
failure is not only rooted in information asymmetries or the lacking externalities of
costs/benefits, but also requires structural adjustments, e.g. in the regulatory dimension.
In consequence, accelerator Type 2 mission goals typically cannot be accomplished by
technological or scientific solutions alone, but need to be accompanied by a broader set
of measures and a more complex policy-mix in order to make these insights applicable
to a wider range of areas.
Whereas these two criteria already allow for a distinction of subtypes of accelerator mis-
sions, the additional dimensions reveal further insights into the implementation struc-
tures. Type 1 missions (A1) tend to be aligned with fundamental research, having two
implications. Firstly, the final product has a higher level of uncertainty, so that the mission
is rather defined by the problem (dealing with a certain illness, etc.) than by the solution
how to achieve it. Secondly, the focus on research activities limits the demands for gov-
erning a change process, as both the number of involved groups and the diversity of
policy instruments (financing research activities) is rather low.
In contrast, A2 missions have a different focus as there exists an already defined solu-
tion, the main challenge therefore is the pathway to achieve the goal. In consequence,
the process is less open with regard to the type of solution and the choice of technol-
ogy.13 At the same time, it emphasizes the spill-over/application of scientific/technologi-

13 This deviates from the idea that mission -orientation implies an openness to different solu-
tions and technology (Dachs et al. 2015, p. 11).

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
14 Towards a new typology of missions

cal insights to a broader range of actors, which in turn increases the importance of gov-
erning the process. On the one hand, state actors need to be actively involved in the
implementation process of the mission beyond financing, e.g. by coordinating different
groups or actors or adjusting legislation in line with the desired outcomes.
3.3 Transformer Type 1 and Type 2
Transformer missions aim to achieve a comprehensive change affecting a socio -tech-
nical system as a whole and are therefore not limited to scientific progress and regulatory
changes. In contrast to the previously discussed accelerator types A1 and A2, which
exhibit multiple clear-cut differences, the two sub -types of transformer missions rather
differ in degree than by kind. Therefore, they can be considered as id eal types on a
continuum, placing missions at different levels of complexity with regard to the goal and
the role of governance.
Transformer type 1 missions (T1) are comparatively narrow in their scope in two ways.
Firstly, T1 missions emphasize the solut ion over the goal to address the problem, thus
possess a clearly defined agenda what part of a challenge to address by which means.
Secondly, despite high levels of complexity for coordination and governance, the
changes might be smaller compared to transformer type 2 missions. While the crosscut-
ting character of the mission affects a wider group of actors, these are rather located at
a low level of the innovation chain, thus do not directly affect end users. In consequence,
they can be managed more easily, as both the range of public and private actors is less
comprehensive and they are less likely to be exposed to interaction effects with other
fields. Moreover, the achievement of mission goals is also (partly) linked to improve-
ments in efficiency, thus do es not strive for a full overhaul of the existing system. An
example could be missions that aim for systemic change in production systems, but nei-
ther directly affect end users, nor are likely to substantially disadvantage certain actors
as the solutions are primarily improving efficiency.
In contrast, type 2 missions (T2) have the highest level of complexity of all mission types.
Given the considerable scope of the challenge and the absence of a promising solution,
they are primarily problem-driven and rather present a framework of possible goals. How-
ever, they do not offer a specific solution yet, so that there might be multiple avenues for
addressing the problem. They require an active state intervention and are particularly
prone to interaction effects as they are embedded in a multi-actor setting providing solu-
tions closer to the end users and thus require also considerable behavioral changes.
Moreover, they have stronger redistributive effects compared to T1 missions, as changes
may affect actors unevenly and impose costs only on some of them. For instance, alter-
ing the existing practices of mobility may shift power and resources between different

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Towards a new typology of missions 15

sectors and means of transportation. Given the existence of potential interaction effects
with other policie s, the crosscutting character results in a larger number of actors in-
volved. This subsequently increases the risk of conflicts, deadlocks in negotiation and
imposes a higher need for coordination and cooperation among involved actors.
3.4 Discussion of typology
This typology suggests a framework that distinguishes between transformer and accel-
erator missions and at a second level differentiates between subtypes in each of the
categories. Table 1 summarizes the key characteristics of the four mission types that
were discussed in greater detail in the previous sub-sections. While this typology shares
some commonalities with the findings of Polt et al. (2019), it extends it in several im-
portant ways. Firstly, it suggests a more fine-grained distinction between different types
of transformer missions. Instead of considering transformer missions as a uniform cate-
gory of missions with rather broad goals reaching beyond technological solutions alone,
it seeks to understand the differences with regard to structure and its distinct challenges
within this category. As discussed beforehand, the main difference can be found in the
increasing complexity of governance structures, tying in with the recent trend in the anal-
ysis of mission-oriented policies to pay more attention to the implementation and role of
governance (Grillitsch et al. 2019; Larrue 2019). This step might be particularly relevant
against the background of attempts to better understand the impact of mission-oriented
innovation policies as it can help to better map relevant missions, open up the way for a
more systematic comparison, and link the evaluation of missions closer to their key char-
acteristics.
Moreover, the relationship between different types deserves additional attention. Gener-
ally, the framework can be understood as a continuum of increasing complexity ranging
from accelerator missions to more comprehensive and complex transformer missions
with a wider variety of obstacles in implementation (Kuittinen et al. 2018a, p. 32; Arnold
et al. 2019).14 At the same time, the framework is not perfectly symmetric. Whereas in
the case of accel erator missions there seems to be a consistent picture with regard to
the different dimensions pointing to a systematic cut-off point, the differences in case of
transformers are of a more gradual character. In consequence, T1 and T2 appear even
more strongly as ideal types within a continuum, suggesting that T2 might be more vague
and ambiguous by comprising more complex and far -reaching challenges. This is also
an alternative understanding to the term "umbrella missions" used by Polt et al. (2019).

14 This perspective gains additional support from attempts to employ factor analysis for elimi-
nating irrelevant dimensions. The analysis found that most factors were loading on one di-
mension only.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
16 Empirical application of the typology to the German High-Tech Strategy (HTS 2025)

Instead of subsuming multiple missions under the auspices of one policy, umbrella mis-
sions might be understood as widely defined goals with a low level of specification of
means to achieve the formulated goal.
Table 1: Characteristics of different types of missions
 Accelerator Mission Transformer Mission
Type 1 (A1) Type 2 (A2) Type 1 (T1) Type 2 (T2)
Type of problem Market failure Market and
structural failure
Transformational
system failure
Transformational
system failure
Type of solution Scientific in-
novation
Technological/
regulat. change

hangechange
Transformation of
system
Transformation of
system (behavior)
 Problem vs.
goal oriented
Problem-ori-
ented
Goal-oriented Goal-oriented Problem-oriented
Demand for
governance
Low Medium High Very high

4 Empirical application of the typology to the German
High-Tech Strategy (HTS 2025)
4.1 Operationalization
Building on the typology developed in the previous sections, the following paragraphs
provide a step towards the application of the typology to the twelve HTS missions. In
particular, we outline an operationalization for the relevant dimensions and discuss sub-
components for the governance dimensions. In most cases, given the lack of quantifiable
data, the subsequent analysis will rely on qualitative assessments, providing a usually
dichotomous distinction between different options. Table 2 provides an overview of the
relevant sub-dimensions to be included, the character of the variable (binary, index) and
the relation to other literature.
Given the absence of a natural threshold, a qualitative assessment can distinguish be-
tween high and low levels for individual dimensions. The first two dimensions primarily
describe the structure of the challenge and possible soluti ons to it. Firstly, the type of
failure and thus the underlying scope of the problem shapes the need for intervention
and gives insights into the complexity of the problem. Following Weber and Rohracher
(2012), we assume that a transformational system failure implies a higher level of com-
plexity compared to market or structural system failures alone. Therefore, only those
missions that are motivated by a failure that is deeply rooted in the existing system struc-
ture will be classified as a transformational system failure. The second dimension refers
to the anticipated solution of the problem and is more closely linked to the mission as
such. The main question to delineate the type of the solution is whether the anticipated

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Empirical application of the typology to the German High-Tech Strategy (HTS 2025) 17

change is driven by scientific/technological progress, or whether the mission requires a
deeper transformation reaching further and leading to a reconfiguration of the institutional
setting and potentially even altering the behavior of actors in the field.
Beyond this distinction between accelerator and transformation missions, the previous
sections have outlined additional characteristics. First of all, there is the question whether
the mission is primarily developed based on the perception of a problem, or whether it
already provides the solution to a problem, shifting the focus on the steps towards
achieving this goal. A problem-orientation implies that the type of challenge is acknowl-
edged and one aims for the improvement of the situation, however, without yet being
able to provide a solution how to achieve this.
Secondly, the demand for coordination can be characterized by an internal and external
perspective on governance. Given the multi-faceted character of these aspects, we rely
on multiple items in an additive index to capture the demands for coordination. External
coordination can be understood as the interplay of public and private actors and the
means used to achieve the desired ou tcomes, thus the question about actors (agency)
and policy instruments. A wider range of involved actors increases the need for coordi-
nation. To capture the range of potential actors, we use an additive index of key players
(state, research/science, economy, society understood as citizens and formal organiza-
tions representing relevant non-economic groups). As key players we define those actors
that can be considered as necessary for achieving the mission goal. We consider the
following dimensions of state activity as relevant to understand the interplay of actors
and the dynamics in the field:
i. Informing: supporting the acceptance of technological advancements that ad-
dress missions or/and facilitate behavioral change among citizen by providing
information and persuasive efforts.
ii. Financing: providing a substantial share of financing in order to ensure the reali-
zation of the mission.
iii. Regulating: adjusting existing regulations to new developments and set a lega l
frame for its implementation.
iv. Coordinating: coordination of the interplay of different actors and actively creating
new (institutional) structures for the realization of the mission.
v. Redistributing: the potential importance for the state to overcome redistributive
consequences in order to ensure the realization of the mission.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
18 Empirical application of the typology to the German High-Tech Strategy (HTS 2025)

Table 2: Dimension of typology and operationalization
Dimension Operationalization Type of
variable
Related Literature
Type of
problem
Type of failure (transformative
vs. non-transformative) Binary Daimer et al. 2012; Weber and
Rohracher 2012
Type of solu-
tion
Scientific/technolog. innovation
as the main driver vs. systemic
change (behavioral additionality)
Binary
Gök and Edler 2012; Polt et al.
2019; Wanzenböck et al. 2019;
Hekkert n.d., p. 13
Problem- vs.
goal-ori-
ented
Mission defined by goals vs.
problem description Binary Polt et al. 2019
External co-
ordination
(equally
weighted)
Cross-sectoral diversity (state,
science, economy, society)

Additive
index

Dimensions of state activity (fi-
nancing, regulating, coordina-
tion, redistribution, information)
Additive
index
Lowi 1972; Hufnagl 2010; Lar-
rue et al. 2019, p. 13; Borrás
and Edler 2020
Internal co-
ordination
Dimensions of internal interac-
tion (number/type of actors in-
volved, governance architec-
ture/leadership)
Additive
index Larrue et al. 2019

While governance on the one hand implies that public and private actors need to collab-
orate, the turn towards mission-oriented policies also requires a rethinking of traditional
forms of administration, cross -cutting ministerial and territorial responsibilities. This in-
ternal dimension of governance can act as a constraining or limiting factor to the govern-
ance of change. The more complex the governance o f mission-oriented policies within
state actors, the harder it will be to effectively get involved in the realization of the mission
goals and successfully fulfill its role in the interaction with other actors. Again, the com-
plexity of internal coordinatio n is measured by an additive index, capturing different
sources increasing the efforts for internal coordination:
i. Horizontal coordination: number of ministries involved in coordination of policy
(low: <3 ministries, medium: 3-4 ministries; high: >4 ministries).
ii. Vertical coordination: multi-level structure (national, regional, local, subordinated
agencies, supranational) in implementation of policy required.
4.2 Empirical classification of HTS missions
Having outlined a general concept for the classification of individual missions in mission-
oriented policies, this section applies the typology to the twelve missions of the German
High-Tech Strategy 2025. According to the official information about the HTS 2025, the

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Empirical application of the typology to the German High-Tech Strategy (HTS 2025) 19

missions are grouped into three main categories (societal challenge; future competen-
cies; open innovation and venture culture), ranging from the challenge of health over
regional development to sustainability. Relying on a qualitative assessment by multiple
members of the project team, each mission was coded for the aforementioned dimen-
sions based on information provided in official program documents of the HTS 2025
(BMBF 2018, 2019; a detailed description justifying the coding of individual missions can
be found in the appendix). Table 3 summarizes the coding and provides an overview of
the classification into the four categories.
Empirically, the HTS seemingly contains missions corresponding to each of the four ideal
types formulated in the mission typology. Among accelerator missions, especially the
research-oriented mission on Cancer appears as a Type 1, as its focus on science and
research activity limits the challenges with regard to internal and external governance.
In contrast, the more applied missions on intelligent medicine (2), battery cells (8), artifi-
cial intelligence (11), and carbon dioxide reduction in the industry (4) are classified as
accelerator Type 2 missions. The remaining transformer missions usually address more
substantial types of failures and therefore require a more complex intervention, both with
regard to the solution and the governance of involved public and private actors. However,
even in these complex settings, some variation exists.
As can be seen from Table 3, especially the missions on circular economy (5) and open
knowledge (10) appear to exhibit a lower degree of complexity with regard to the coordi-
nation of private and public actors and the use of policy instruments. As discussed in the
following section, however, not all missions neatly fit into a certain category, but exhibit
sometimes hybrid characteristics or ambiguities due to the description of the mission.
The results of this classification are illustrated by the use of cluster analysis techniques.
Figure 2 displays the dendrogram for a cluster analysis for the selected categories (av-
erage linkage, Gower dissimilarity measure for mixed binary/continuous data). 15
Whereas the upper branch of the dendrogram indicates the existence of two subtypes of
transformer missions with quite some difference to each other, especially the cancer
mission (1) stands out among the accelerator missions. In all subtypes there is evidence
for minor diversity, however, the overall differences are rather small in compa rison to
differences between subtypes, as indicated by the length of the vertical lines in the den-
drogram.

15 The emerging cluster structure is highly similar when using a single/weighted linkage or dif-
ferent dissimilarity measures. Also aggregating requirements for coordination into one vari-
able does not alter the emerging picture.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
20 Empirical application of the typology to the German High-Tech Strategy (HTS 2025)
Table 3: Assessments for relevant dimensions (Index variables only display aggregated values of individual dimensions).

Combating cancer
(1)
Intelligent medi-
cine (2)
Battery cells (8)
Artificial intelli-
gence (11)
CO2 emission in-
dustry (4)
Circular Economy
(5)
Open knowledge
(12)
Plastic waste (3)
Biodiversity (6)
Mobility (7)
Good life (9)
Technology for hu-
mans (10)
Type of failure (transformational sys-
tem failure) No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Type of solution (technological
change as main factor) Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No No No No
Orientation of mission (solution-ori-
ented) No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No No
Complexity external governance (0-1) 0.55 0.65 0.58 0.68 0.68 0.78 0.8 0.9 1 1 1 1
Sectoral depth (Number of key ac-
tor groups involved) (0-1) 0.5 0.5 0.75 0.75 0.75 0.75 1 1 1 1 1 1
Range of policy instruments (0-1) 0.6 0.8 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.8 0.6 0.8 1 1 1 1
Complexity internal governance (0-1) 0 0,75 0 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.75 1 0.75 0.75 1 1
Depth of governance/Involved
ministries (0-1) 0 0.5 0 0.5 0.5 0.5 0,5 1 0.5 0.5 1 1
Vertical depth/Multi-level structure
(0-1) 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1
Type of Mission A1 A2 A2 A2 A2 T1 T1 T2 T2 T2 T2 T2

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Empirical application of the typology to the German High-Tech Strategy (HTS 2025) 21

Figure 2: Dendrogram for the twelve German HTS missions
4.3 Discussion of empirical findings
The application of th is new typology to the twelve missions of the German High-Tech
strategy demonstrates its usability to systematically classify real-world missions. What
sets this new typology apart from previous research are mainly three points: the concep-
tual delineation between policies and missions, the emphasis on the actor constellations
and governance as a factor for shaping the realization of mission goals, and the attempt
to provide a more fine-grained differentiation between different types of transformer mis-
sions. The latter, so far, have usually been subsumed in a single category, ignoring the
existing variation between them. Instead, we argue that there might exist important dif-
ferences between different types of transformer missions that require further attention.
While we believe that this new typology offers a practical and theoretical value for con-
ceptualizing and evaluating mission-oriented policies, we acknowledge several theoreti-
cal and methodological limitations. First of all, our classification is closely linked to the
formulation of the missions.16 On the one hand, missions may only address a subset of
a challenge or adopt a narrow approach to it. This is most obvious in the case of mission
four (reduction of carbon dioxide in industry). The mission description puts its focus on

16 Not all missions might necessarily fulfill the commonly agreed criteria for mission-orientation
(see also Mazzucato 2018b; Kuittinen et al. 2018b) and instead might rather reflect old par-
adigms for research and innovation policy.
Fighting cancer (1)

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
22 Empirical application of the typology to the German High-Tech Strategy (HTS 2025)
technological solutions, without aiming for broader systemic changes. On the other hand,
the assessment depends on the quality of the mission definition, i.e. how specific goals
and means to achieve these goals are defined, what was a challenge in case of some
rather vaguely and ambiguously defined missions (6, 9, 12). From this perspective, the
incorporation of governance structures constitutes a major asset of this typology, as it
brings in additional dimensions that can be observed using quantifiable data. At the same
time, the attributed values across dimensions appear to be highly correlated, thus in-
creasing the reliance of the previously obtained values. In order to overcome the poten-
tial problems arising from a bias of mission descriptions, the empirical classification of
missions and its dimensions underwent extensive discussion in the proje ct team and
were cross-checked wherever possible with external data. Also, in view of the rather
early stage of enacting the HTS 2025 missions, further empirical investigations might
reveal the need to revise some of the assessed criteria, allowing for the possibility that
missions change over time.
Secondly, in many instances there is an empirical overlap of several of the key dimen-
sions, a problem already described in the practical implementation of research in this
area (Walz et al. 2017, p. 15). While complex problems in most instances result in mis-
sions with complex interventions, there are good reasons to rely on a broader conceptual
framework. On the one hand, as argued beforehand, missions may address only sub -
parts of a challenge, making it necessary to take a closer look at the overall setting.
Especially from a comparative perspective, this can be a crucial step to identify variation
even among seemingly similar missions. On the other hand, the rather comprehensive
approach is rooted in the foreseen impact assessment. As different types of missions
might have different foci for evaluation due to different types of problems and outcomes,
it is necessary to capture potential variation from the very beginning, in order to provide
an adequate framework for impact assessment.
Finally, the typology as such does not directly conceptualize the relationship between
different missions within a strategy (like the HTS 2025). Aiming to study several missions
from a comparative perspective might therefore imply the need to broaden the horizon
in order to understand how different missions are related to each other. This raises the
question to what extent other missions affect the implementation of a mission. Such in-
terdependencies and couplings may impose an additional layer of complexity for evalu-
ation, as the success of a mission might be affected by outcomes of other missions
(Amanatidou et al. 2014, p. 425).

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Empirical application of the typology to the German High-Tech Strategy (HTS 2025) 23
4.4 Thoughts on the selection of missions for in-depth in-
vestigation
The mission typology developed in this paper is a first step towards the measurement of
impacts of mission-oriented research and innovation policy. By providing a fine-grained
typology, it is possible to select individual missions for an in-depths study that can build
on a framework that takes into consideration the specific challenges and pitfalls of each
type. This section outlines some thoughts that might provide a starting point for the re-
finement of the case selection process.
For selecting cases, we propose to take the following two main criteria into consideration:
Firstly, selected missions should be typical/representative cases (see, e.g., Seawright
and Gerring 2008) that exhibit a high degree of similarity to the ideal types described in
section 3. From a comparative perspective, typical cases are particularly beneficial as
they allow maximizing the variation between cases under study and make the selection
less vulnerable to ambiguities in the project description (see discussion above). While
missions can be located in a continuum between these ideal types, hybrid cases make
it more difficult to investigate the with-in case dynamics and may limit the ability for gen-
eralized conclusions. Secondly, the complexity for evaluation may increase with the level
of interdependency/interaction with other missions, making it dif ficult to control for all
dynamics (Amanatidou et al. 2014, p. 425). From this perspective, particularly the follow-
ing missions might be promising:
 Accelerator Type 1: Fighting cancer (1) → Being the only example for an accel-
erator Type 1, fighting cancer is a paradigmatic example for a “classical” science
mission, having a broadly defined goal and being exposed to high uncertainty
about the outcomes. Moreover, the challenges for coordination are limited due to
the prevalent focus on research activities.
 Accelerator Type 2: Intelligent medicine (2) , CO2 emissions in industry (4)
and battery cells (8) → The aforementioned missions come closest to the prin-
ciple of bringing knowledge into application and have a clearly defined final prod-
uct. While these translation efforts might be also observed in case of artificial
intelligence (11), in the latter case there might exist a number of interactions
with other missions, making it difficult to clearly delineate effects.
 Transformer Type 1: Circular economy (5) - A relatively strong focus on tech-
nological/scientific solutions and the supply side (producers) places mission 5 at
the low end of transformer missions, as consumers only play an indirect ro le for
the realization of the mission. In contrast, the more fuzzy mission of open
knowledge (12) appears to exhibit stronger tendencies towards Type 2, as be-
havioral changes play a more pronounced role.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
24 Conclusions
 Transformer Type 2: The missions on mobility (7) and good life (9) can be con-
sidered as a representative cases for the fourth category. Both missions have
highly transformative goals, a complex constellation of actors both from an inter-
nal and external perspective, and potential redistributive conflicts. Th e mobility
mission can be considered to be located at the high end of the innovation chain,
with mobility being affected by innovations in many related fields and even other
missions of the HTS 2025 (like battery cells).

5 Conclusions
The paper has presented a novel analytical framework for the study of mission-oriented
innovation and research policies. The key argument is that the turn towards a stronger
directionality of these policies has substantial implications for the role of the state. Ac-
cordingly, the study of mission-oriented policies needs to adjust its perspective and pay
more attention to governance, implementation processes, and actor constellations. We
thereby seek to go beyond the dichotomy of the state correcting vs. creating markets by
taking a closer look at the role of state actors - a blind spot in innovation research recently
addressed by Borrás and Edler (2020). Building on previous research and the distinction
between transformer and accelerator missions, we have outlined a framework at the
mission-level that distinguishes between four types of missions. Thereby, we aim to re-
flect the varying degrees of complexity within mission implementation and account for
the different logics and goals of mission-oriented policies.
Based on these insights, the typology can contribute to develop appropriate approaches
to evaluate and measure the impact of mission-oriented innovation and research policies
by accounting for mission-specific problems and characteristics. Arnold et al. (2018, 16-
54) argue that the complexity of evaluation depends on the complexity of the problem.
In a similar vein, Kuittinen et al. (2018b, p. 35) argue that "mission-oriented R&I initiatives
should be evaluated against criteria adapted to their objectives and the problems they
target", rejecting a one-size-fits-all approach. In other words, different mission types face
different challenges at different levels (see Table 4) and thus require different ap-
proaches for evaluation. Therefore, the focus on the effects of missions in case of accel-
erator type 1 might be more closely linked to the generation of new knowledge and thus
can be addressed by conventional science, technology and innovation indicators,
whereas a stronger transformation component like in transformer missions requires a
broader approach that draws on additional measures and indicators.
We apply this typology to the twelve missions of the German High-Tech Strategy 2025
and find that most missions can be clearly classified along the mission types. Based on
this typology, we outline suggestions for the selection of adequate missions for an in -

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Conclusions 25
depth study, focusing on representative cases for each mission type while making an
informed choice about the role of interaction effects between missions . It should be
noted, however, that missions might evolve over time and could theoretically travel from
one type to another. Such potential dynamic changes need to be taken into account in
any typology-driven analysis of mission-oriented innovation policies.
Table 4: Mission-types and types of challenges
 Goals Obstacles/potential issues
A1  Increasing research output
and scientific knowledge
production in defined area
 Coordination of instruments and research actors
 Ensuring efficiency of means and resources used
 Setting up and implementing instruments, selec-
tion beneficiaries
 Creation of appropriate infrastructure and context
conditions
A2  Creation of new infrastruc-
ture
 Adjustment of regulatory
framework
 Bringing products to mar-
ket
 Coordination of support schemes, regulation, in-
terplay of different actors
 Transfer of knowledge (science -> economic ac-
tors)
 Management of insecurity about outcomes
T1  Substitution/Reconfigura-
tion of existing systems

 Coordination of transformation process and policy
mix
 Long-term orientation and strategic planning
 Translation efforts between different areas and
from science to application
T2  Substitution/Reconfigura-
tion of existing systems
 Change in behavior and at-
titudes
 Coordination of transformation process and policy
mix
 Long-term orientation and strategic planning
 Translation efforts between different areas and
from science to application
 Moderating transformation processes and changes
in societal behavior
 Compensation of potential losers of transformation
Identifying variation across missions points to several implications for future research.
Firstly, research should empirically test this mission typology by applying it to additional
cases, like the British Innovation and Research Strategy for Growth. Secondly, the com-
parison of different mission types can help to explore to what extent different challenges
and governance structures shape the dynamics and outcomes of missions and their im-
plementation processes (see Table 4).
Thirdly, it seems of utmost importance to analyze the connection between the formulated
missions and the ways and means on how these missions should be accomplished or
tackled, namely the policy instruments. Fostering innovation by applying policy instru-
ments has always been a difficult task. However, given the complex setting of mission-

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
26 Conclusions
oriented policies, it even becomes more challenging to correctly observe and examine
the cause and effect relationship of policy actions and the desired outcomes. Shifting the
perspective towards the role of governance may help to map the field more clearly. Es-
pecially the study of failed missions might be particularly revealing, in order to understand
whether complex missions indeed fail due to their overall complexity and too high ambi-
tions or because of problems at the implemen tation level. Thus, this typology also can
contribute to a better understanding on the context-specific role of policy-mixes (Rogge
and Reichardt 2016) and the effectiveness of different policy instruments (Edler et al.
2016).
Finally, the typology allows shedding light on the interplay between different missions
and exploring interactions in larger policy frameworks. While multiple missions may ad-
dress one challenge at the same time, their relation with each other may vary consider-
ably (complementary, reenforcing, conflicting). Mapping the different types of missions
may be one step ahead to grasp the interplay of different missions theoretically and study
their impacts from a broader perspective, by moving from the mission-level to the overall
policy-level.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Publication bibliography 27
Publication bibliography
Amanatidou, Effie; Cunningham, Paul; Gök, Abdullah; Garefi, Ioanna (2014): Using
Evaluation Research as a Means for Policy Analysis in a ‘New’ Mission-Oriented Policy
Context. In Minerva 52 (4), pp. 419–438.
Arnold, Erik; Aström, Tomas; Andréasson, Helen; Nielsen, Kalle; Wain, Martin; Tofteng,
Maja; Røtnes, Rolf (2019): Raising the Ambition Level in Norwegian Innovation Policy.
Final Report. technopolis group.
Arnold, Erik; Aström, Tomas; Glass, Charlotte; Scalzi, Marika de (2018): How should
we evaluate complex programmes for innovation and socio-technical transitions? tech-
nopolis group.
Berkhout, Frans; Smith, Adrian; Stirling, Andy (2004): Socio-technological Regimes and
Transition Contexts. In Boelie Elzen, Frank Geels, Ken Green (Eds.): System Innova-
tion and the Transition to Sustainability: Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 48–75.
BIS (2011): Innovation and Research Strategy for Growth. Department for Business In-
novation & Skills (BIS Economic Papers, 15). Available online at https://assets.publish-
ing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/32445/11-
1386-economics-innovation-and-research-strategy-for-growth.pdf, checked on
10/11/2019.
BMBF (2006): Die Hightech-Strategie für Deutschland. Bonn, Berlin. Available online at
https://www.fona.de/medien/pdf/die_hightech_strategie_fuer_deutschland.pdf, checked
on 10/11/2019.
BMBF (2018): Forschung und Innovation für die Menschen. Die Hightech-Strategie
2025. Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung - Referat 113 Grundsatzfragen
der Innovationspolitik. Berlin. Available online at https://www.hightech-strate-
gie.de/files/HTS2025.pdf, checked on 12/1/2019.
BMBF (2019): Fortschrittsbericht zur Hightech-Strategie 2025. Bundesministerium für
Bildung und Forschung - Referat 113 Grundsatzfragen der Innovationspolitik. Berlin.
Boon, Wouter; Edler, Jakob (2018): Demand, challenges, and innovation. Making
sense of new trends in innovation policy. In Science and Public Policy 45 (4), pp. 435–
447.
Borrás, Susana; Edler, Jakob (2014): The Governance of Socio-Technical Systems.
Explaining Change: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Borrás, Susana; Edler, Jakob (2020): The Transformative Roles of the State in the
Governance of Socio-Technical Systems Change. Fraunhofer Institut für System- und
Innovationsforschung. Karlsruhe (Discussion Papers Innovation System and Policy
Analysis, 63).
Braun, Dietmar (2008): Organising the political coordination of knowledge and innova-
tion policies. In Science and Public Policy 35 (4), pp. 227–239.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
28 Publication bibliography
Cherp, Aleh; Vinichenko, Vadim; Jewell, Jessica; Brutschin, Elina; Sovacool, Benjamin
(2018): Integrating techno-economic, socio-technical and political perspectives on na-
tional energy transitions. A meta-theoretical framework. In Energy Research & Social
Science 37, pp. 175–190.
Dachs, Bernhard; Dinges, Michael; Weber, Matthias; Zahradnik, Georg; Warnke, Phi-
line; Teufel, Benjamin (2015): Herausforderungen und Perspektiven missionsorientier-
ter Forschungs- und Innovationspolitik. Expertenkommission Forschung und Innovation
(EFI) (Studien zum deutschen Innovationssystem, 12-2015).
Daimer, Stephanie; Hufnagl, Miriam; Warnke, Philine (2012): Challenge-oriented policy-
making and innovation systems theory: reconsidering systemic instruments. In Fraun-
hofer Institut für System- und Innovationsforschung (Ed.): Innovation system revisited -
Experiences from 40 years of Fraunhofer ISI research. Stuttgart: Fraunhofer Verlag,
pp. 217–234.
Edler, Jakob; Kuhlmann, Stefan; Smits, Ruud (2003): New Governance for Innovation.
The Need for Horizontal and Systemic Policy Co-ordination. Report on a Workshop
held at the occassion of the 30th anniversity of the Fraunhofer Institute for Systems
and Innovation Research (ISI), Karlruhe/Germany, 14/15 November 2002. Fraunhofer
Institut für System- und Innovationsforschung. Karlsruhe (Discussion Papers Innova-
tion System and Policy Analysis, 2). Available online at https://www.econstor.eu/bit-
stream/10419/28536/1/368668401.pdf, checked on 11/19/2019.
Edler, Jakob; Shapira, Philip; Cunningham, Paul; Gök, Abdullah (2016): Conclu-
sions: Evidence on the effectiveness of innovation policy intervention. In Jakob Edler,
Paul Cunningham, Abdullah Gök, Philip Shapira (Eds.): Handbook of innovation policy
impact. Cheltenham, UK, Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing (EU-SPRI
Forum on Science, Technology and Innovation Policy), 543-564.
European Commission - Directorate-General for Research and Innovation (2017): To-
wards a mission-oriented research and innovation policy in the European Union. An
ESIR memorandum - Study. Brussels, checked on 7/17/2019.
Flanagan, Kieron; Uyarra, Elvira; Laranja, Manuel (2011): Reconceptualising the 'policy
mix' for innovation. In Research Policy 40 (5), pp. 702–713.
Geels, Frank W. (2002): Technological transitions as evolutionary reconfiguration pro-
cesses. A multi-level perspective and a case-study. In Research Policy 31 (8-9),
pp. 1257–1274.
Geels, Frank W.; Kern, Florian; Fuchs, Gerhard; Hinderer, Nele; Kungl, Gregor; Mylan,
Josephine et al. (2016): The enactment of socio-technical transition pathways. A refor-
mulated typology and a comparative multi-level analysis of the German and UK low-
carbon electricity transitions (1990–2014). In Research Policy 45 (4), pp. 896–913.
Geels, Frank W.; Schot, Johan (2007): Typology of sociotechnical transition pathways.
In Research Policy 36 (3), pp. 399–417.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Publication bibliography 29
Georghiou, Luke; Tataj, Daria; Celio, Julio; Giannini, Stefania; Pavalkis, Dainius; Ver-
ganti, Roberto; Renda, Andrea (2018): Mission-Oriented Research and Innovation Pol-
icy. A RISE Perspective. European Commission - Directorate-General for Research
and Innovation. Brussels.
Glouberman, Sholom; Zimmerman, Brenda (2002): Complicated and complex systems.
What would successful reform of Medicare look like? [Saskatoon]: Commission on the
Future of Health Care in Canada (Discussion paper, 8).
Gök, Abdullah; Edler, Jakob (2012): The use of behavioural additionality evaluation in
innovation policy making. In Research Evaluation 21 (4), pp. 306–318.
Grillitsch, Markus; Hansen, Teis; Coenen, Lars; Miörner, Johan; Moodysson, Jerker
(2019): Innovation policy for system-wide transformation. The case of strategic innova-
tion programmes (SIPs) in Sweden. In Research Policy 48 (4), pp. 1048–1061.
Grin, John; Rotmans, Jan; Schot, Johan (2010): Transitions to sustainable develop-
ment. New directions in the study of long term transformative change. With assistance
of Frank Geels, Derk Loorbach. New York, London: Routledge (Routledge studies in
sustainability transitions, 1).
Griniece, Elina; Sorokins, Juris (2018): Analysis Report. Responses to the call for feed-
back on “Mission-Oriented Research and Innovation in the European Union” by Mari-
ana Mazzucato. European Commission - Directorate-General for Research and Inno-
vation.
Hekkert, Marko (n.d.): Mission Oriented Innovation Policy – the Dutch experience. Uni-
verseiteit Utrecht - Copernicus Institute of Sustainable Development, n.d.
Hufnagl, Miriam (2010): Dimensionen von Policy-Instrumenten - eine Systematik am
Beispiel Innovationspolitik. Karlsruhe.
Kaldewey, David (2018): The Grand Challenges Discourse. Transforming Identity Work
in Science and Science Policy. In Minerva 56 (2), pp. 161–182.
Kallerud, Egil; Amanatidou, Effie; Upham, Paul; Nieminen, Mika; Klitkou, Antje; Dorothy
et al. (2013): Dimensions of Research and Innovation Policies to Address Grand and
Global Challenges. Nordisk institutt for studier av innovasjon. Oslo (Working Paper,
13/2013).
Kooiman, Jan (1993): Modern governance. New government - society interactions.
London: SAGE.
Kuittinen, Hanna; Skov Kristensen, Frank; Pelkonen, Antti; Lehenkari, Janne; Goe-
theer, Arjen; van der Zee, Frans et al. (2018b): Mission-oriented research and innova-
tion. Assessing the impact of a mission-oriented research and innovation approach : fi-
nal report. European Commission - Directorate-General for Research and Innovation.
Luxembourg.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
30 Publication bibliography
Kuittinen, Hanna; Unger, Maximilian; Türk, Andreas; Polt, Wolfgang; Fisher, Robbert;
Domini, Alberto et al. (2018a): Mission-oriented research and innovation. Inventory and
characterisation of initiatives : final report. European Commission - Directorate-General
for Research and Innovation. Luxembourg.
Larrue, Philippe (2019): New mission-oriented policy initiative as systemic policies to
address societal challenges: analytical framework and types of initiatives. OECD.
Larrue, Philippe; Machado, Diogo; Yoshimoto, Takuro (2019): New mission-oriented ini-
tiatives as systemic policies to address societal challenges: Analytical framework and
typology. 2019 EU-SPRI CONFERENCE – Science Technology and Innovation Policies
for Sustainable Development Goals. Rome, 06.06., 2019.
Lindner, Ralf (2012): Cross-sectoral coordination of STI-policies: governance principles
to bridge policy-fragmentation. In : Innovations Systems Revisited – Experiences from
40 years of Fraunhofer ISI research. Stuttgart: Fraunhofer Verlag, pp. 275–289.
Lindner, Ralf; Daimer, Stephanie; Beckert, Bernd; Heyen, Nils B.; Köhler, Jonathan
Hugh; Teufel, Benjamin et al. (2016): Addressing directionality. Orientation failure and
the systems of innovation heuristic : towards reflexive governance. Karlsruhe (Discus-
sion Papers Innovation System and Policy Analysis, 52).
Lowi, Theodore J. (1972): Four Systems of Policy, Politics, and Choice. In Public Ad-
ministration Review 32 (4), pp. 298–310.
Matthews, Felicity (2011): The capacity to co-ordinate - Whitehall, governance and the
challenge of climate change. In Public Policy and Administration 27 (2), pp. 169–189.
Mazzucato, Mariana (2018a): Mission-oriented innovation policies. Challenges and op-
portunities. In Industrial and Corporate Change 27 (5), pp. 803–815.
Mazzucato, Mariana (2018b): Mission-Oriented Research & Innovation in the European
Union. A problem-solving approach to fuel innovation-led growth. European Commis-
sion - Directorate-General for Research and Innovation. Brussels.
Meadowcroft, James (2009): What about the politics? Sustainable development, transi-
tion management, and long term energy transitions. In Policy Sciences 42 (4), pp. 323–
340.
Patton, Michael Quinn (2011): Developmental evaluation. Applying complexity concepts
to enhance innovation and use. New York: Guilford Press.
Polt, Wolfgang; Weber, Matthias; Biegelbauer, Peter; Unger, Maximilian (2019): Match-
ing type of mission and governance in mission-oriented R&I policy: conceptual im-
provement and guidance for policy. 2019 EU-SPRI CONFERENCE – Science Technol-
ogy and Innovation Policies for Sustainable Development Goals. Actors, Instruments
and Evaluation. Rome, 06.06., 2019. Available online at https://www.re-
searchgate.net/publication/334277744_Matching_type_of_mission_and_govern-
ance_in_mission-oriented_RI_policy, checked on 9/25/2019.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Publication bibliography 31
Rittel, Horst W. J.; Webber, Melvin M. (1973): Dilemmas in a General Theory of Plan-
ning. In Policy Sciences 4, pp. 155–169.
Robinson, Douglas K.R.; Mazzucato, Mariana (2019): The evolution of mission-ori-
ented policies. Exploring changing market creating policies in the US and European
space sector. In Research Policy 48 (4), pp. 936–948.
Rogge, Karoline S.; Reichardt, Kristin (2016): Policy mixes for sustainability transitions.
An extended concept and framework for analysis. In Research Policy 45 (8), pp. 1620–
1635.
Schot, Johan; Steinmueller, W. Edward (2018): Three frames for innovation policy.
R&D, systems of innovation and transformative change. In Research Policy 47 (9),
pp. 1554–1567.
Seawright, Jason; Gerring, John (2008): Case Selection Techniques in Case Study Re-
search. In Political Research Quarterly 61 (2), pp. 294–308.
Smits, Ruud; Kuhlmann, Stefan (2004): The rise of systemic instruments in innovation
policy. In International Journal of Foresight and Innovation Policy 1 (1/2), pp. 4–32.
Soete, Luc; Arundel, Anthony (1993): An Integrated Approach to European Innovation
and Technology Diffusion Policy: A Maastricht Memorandum. Edited by Commission of
the European Communities. Luxembourg (SPRINt Programme).
USAID (2018): Programme Cycle Discussion Note: Complexity-Aware Monitoring.
USAID Office of Learning Evaluation and Research. Available online at https://usaid-
learninglab.org/sites/default/files/resource/files/cleared_dn_complexity-aware_monitor-
ing.pdf, checked on 8/5/2019.
Walton, Mat (2016): Expert views on applying complexity theory in evaluation. Opportu-
nities and barriers. In Evaluation 22 (4), pp. 410–423.
Walz, Rainer; Gotsch, Matthias; Gandenberger, Carsten; Peters, Anja, Bodenheimer,
Miriam; Günther, Edeltraud (2017): Nachhaltiges Wirtschaften – Stand der Transforma-
tion zu einer Green Economy. Fraunhofer Institut für System- und Innova-
tionsforschung (Working Paper Sustainability and Innovation, No. WP03-2017).
Wanzenböck; Iris; Wesseling, Joeri; Frenken, Koen; Hekkert, Marko; Weber, Matthias
(2019): A framework for mission-oriented innovation policy: Alternative pathways
through the problem-solution space. Available online at
http://dx.doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/njahp, checked on 7/16/2019.
Warnke, Philine; Koschatzky, Knut; Dönitz, Ewa; Zenker, Andrea; Stahlecker, Thomas;
Som, Oliver et al. (2016): Opening up the innovation system framework towards new
actors and institutions. Fraunhofer Institut für System- und Innovationsforschung. Karls-
ruhe (Discussion Papers Innovation System and Policy Analysis, 49). Available online
at https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/isi/dokumente/cci/innovation-systems-pol-
icy-analysis/2016/discussionpaper_49_2016.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
32 Publication bibliography
Weber, Matthias; Polt, Michael (2014): Assessing mission-orientated R&D programs:
combining foresight and evaluation. In Fteval - Journal for Research and Technology
Policy Evaluation (39), pp. 5–10.
Weber, Matthias; Rohracher, Harald (2012): Legitimizing research, technology and in-
novation policies for transformative change. In Research Policy 41 (6), pp. 1037–1047.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Appendix: Detailed discussion of the 12 HTS missions 33
Appendix: Detailed discussion of the 12 HTS missions
Mission 1 (Fighting cancer)
Fighting cancer (Mission 1) can be considered as a clear case of an accelerator type 1
mission. Being heavily reliant on further progress in science in order to develop new
approaches to cure cancer, the main failure in the past is the limitation of financing, clas-
sifying it as an archetypical case of market failure. The mission is defined from the per-
spective of the problem (fighting cancer) and does not provide a clear pathway how to
achieve this goal. While the most current report also highlights the goal to bring the in-
sights to application, the focus is mainly on research, whereas insights from application
are supposed to feedback into research activities. At the same time, the governance
structure both internally and externally is of limited complexity. Neither does the role of
the state go considerably beyond financing research, nor does the coordination appear
to be crosscutting a wide range of public and private actors.
Mission 2 (Intelligent medicine)
The introduction of the electronic patient file can be classified as a case for an acceler-
ator type 2 mission. The main challenge connected to this mission is less based on
finding new technological solutions, but rather implementing an already defined solution
(electronic patient record) and thereby overcoming the prevailing transformational sys-
tem failure. The role of the state is not limited to financing, but also includes regulatory
and coordinative tasks, making both efforts for internal and external coordination neces-
sary.
Mission 3 (Plastic waste)
The mission on plastic waste can be considered as a transformer mission type 2. Ad-
dressing a part of the grand challenge on sustainability, it seeks to engage in a large
variety of areas (research, information, regulation, etc.) and strives for a change of soci-
etal behavior. Thus it does not limit the mission to finding technical solutions, but aims
for a systemic change. The complexity of the endeavor is also reflected in the variety of
national (and international) stakeholder resulting in highly diverse projects and the coor-
dination of the mission across six ministries (BMBF, BMU, BMEL, BMJV, BMWi, BMZ).
Mission 4 (Zero emission CO2)
The mission aims at reducing carbon-dioxide emissions in the industry and is classified
as an accelerator type 2. While addressing a complex problem, the emphasis in the
mission is clearly on providing new technological solutions and their application at in-
dustrial level (BMBF 2019). Thus, the scope of the m ission is much more narrow than
the overall challenge, as can be seen from the lacking reference to regulatory means in
current documents. The rather narrow understanding of the mission goal and focus on
technological progress suggests also comparatively limited levels of internal and external

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
34 Appendix: Detailed discussion of the 12 HTS missions
complexity (though the collaboration of BMU and BMWi might imply competing interests).
Depending on the reading of the mission and weight attached to the underlying chal-
lenge, a different classification might be possible.
Mission 5 (Circular economy)
Mission 5 with its focus on circular economy leans towards transformer mission type
1. While the underlying problem is complex and involves a wide variety of actors and
cannot be understood by a market/structural failure o nly, it appears as rather narrowly
defined for a transformer mission. Having outlined a clear, quantifiable goal (increase
resource productivity by 30% until 2030), the mission strongly emphasizes the role of
technological innovation and structural changes compared to a broader transformation.
At the same time, this focus on innovation and increasing productivity/efficiency implies
a lower level of contestation (redistributive questions) and a more limited scope of (public
and state) actors, as the mission is primarily focused on the production/recycling pro-
cess. At the same time, it can be considered at the low end of the innovation chain and
thus being less exposed to interdependencies with efforts in related fields.
Mission 6 (Biodiversity)
Mission 6 fall s into the category of a transformer mission, leaning towards type 2.
The decline of biodiversity can be considered as a multi -faceted complex problem that
is affected from a transitional failure requiring a comprehensive state intervention, ad-
dressing not only technological but also regulatory and behavioral dimensions. While the
initial programming document emphasized the role of research, the current report in-
cludes regulatory activities. The constellation can be also considered as more problem-
oriented and complex when thinking about its implications for anticipated activities like
regulatory changes in the agricultural or housing/planning sector, making coordination
more conflicting and complex both between public and private and within state actors
(BMBF, BMEL, BMU).
Mission 7 (Mobility)
Much alike the mission related to carbon dioxide, mission 7 (mobility) can be considered
as a transformer mission type 2. It addresses a fundamental challenge with transitional
failure which cannot be solved by regulato ry and technological means only. Presenting
a bundle of measures it does not provide yet a solution to the problem, but departs from
the observation that mobility is at the edge of a transformational process. It comprises a
wide variety of stakeholders and has potential redistributive effects turning the issue into
a highly contested debate. At the same time, the crosscutting character of this challenge
also necessitates the cooperation of multiple state -actors imposing a high coordinative
burden on the state in order to fulfil its role in steering the development process.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Appendix: Detailed discussion of the 12 HTS missions 35
Mission 8 (Production of battery cells)
The production of battery cells can be considered as an accelerator mission type 2.
Being placed at the intersection of scientific innovation and the application into the in-
dustrial domain it has a rather clearly defined final product. While the mission description
highlights the role of research, the anticipated role of state behavior is not limited to fi-
nancing of research, but requires a more active involvement in shaping a favorable en-
vironment for fueling the production of battery cells.
Mission 9 (Good life)
Like climate change and the related topic of mobility, mission 9 targets one of the big
challenges, arising from demographic change and t he widening gap between rural and
urban communities. Therefore, it also qualifies as a transformer mission type 2, given
the wicked structure of the challenge and the transformative character of a possible so-
lution that requires a broad variety of instrume nts. Enlisting a number of problematic
dimensions, the mission does not yet provide a solution and thus is more problem ori-
ented. Furthermore, the multi-faceted character of this problem makes the coordination
between public and state actors necessary and is likely to lead to contestation about the
prioritization of measures (for instance about the geographical prioritization of support).
A similar structure can be also found with regard to the internal governance of the mis-
sion, which crosscut several policy fields and therefore creates high demands for a suc-
cessful coordination of different actors.
Mission 10 (Technology for humans)
Mission 10 targets a broad field of problems, making current technological developments
available for social purposes. While resting on a notion of technological innovation, the
scope of this mission is considerably broader aiming to reach into domains like the work
environment. Instead of focusing on a single technology, it suggests a general approach,
suggesting that it is best classified as a transformer mission type 2. Addressing a topic
with broad societal implications, it pursues a problem-oriented approach, which rests on
the insights of emerging challenges based on technological innovation. Following the
rather vague mission description, the focus is more towards exploring the impacts of new
technologies on the social sphere including behavioral change of citizens and the adjust-
ment of existing regulations as a reaction to a changing environment.
Mission 11 (Artificial intelligence)
Similar to mission 8, also mission 11 which aims to promote the development of artificial
intelligence can be classified as an accelerator mission type 2. While highlighting the
importance of research, the mission clearly links the goal to the application of insights
and strengthening the German position in the emerging field. Again, governance is more
complex compared to Type 1 missions, as it involves a wider range of potential actors

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
36 Appendix: Detailed discussion of the 12 HTS missions
(universities, enterprises, etc.) and cannot be achieved by a support of research activities
only. Facilitating the emergence of new applications requires both the creation of favor-
able environments as well as higher regulatory and coordinative efforts and the disper-
sion of information to address emerging issues.
Mission 12 (Open knowledge)
The mission aims at creating new avenues for open knowledge and has the character-
istic traits of a transformer mission, leaning towards type 1 . It deals with a problem
that is not a mere market- or structural failure, but has deeper roots that require an overall
transformation of existent processes of knowledge exchange and innovation. Having al-
ready defined a focus on open access/science/data/innovation the mission has moved
from a mere problem description towards a solution -oriented approach with a feasible
technical solution. What limits its complexity with regard to the governance is mainly the
fact that the level of contestation might be rather limited, as it complements existing
strands (what can be also seen by the combination of existing instruments used) without
replacing them completely. The outreach might be also limited in so far, as the coordina-
tion is supposed to be carried out by two ministries only, suggesting that the topic is not
treated as crosscutting a wide variety of policy fields and ministerial responsibilities.
