
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 71
ISSN 1612-1430
Karlsruhe, August 2021

From mission definition to implementation:
Conceptualizing mission-oriented policies
as a multi-stage translation process

Florian Wittmann1, Miriam Hufnagl1,2, Florian Roth1,
Merve Yorulmaz1, Ralf Lindner1

Karlsruhe, Fraunhofer ISI

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
1 Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research ISI, Karlsruhe, Germany
2 Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Hamburg, Germany

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Contents I

Contents
Abstract ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 1
1 Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 2
2 The need for a process-oriented perspective ................................ .................... 3
3 Conceptualizing MOIP as multi-stage translation processes ........................... 6
3.1 Mission formulation: Translating (societal) challenges into
missions ................................ ................................ .............................. 6
3.2 Mission design: Translating goals into policy instruments and
activities ................................ ................................ .............................. 9
3.3 Mission implementation ................................ ................................ ..... 11
4 Towards a perspective of interconnected translation processes .................. 12
5 Conclusion ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 14
6 References ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 16

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Abstract 1

Abstract
The promise of mission -oriented innovation policies (MOIP) to address some of the
grand societal challenges as a cross -sectoral and interdisciplinary approach to innova-
tion policy with increased directionality has raised high hopes. However, the complexity
attached to MOIP constitutes a challenge, both for policy-makers and innovation schol-
ars. Seeking to enhance our understanding of MOIP and the diverse policy choices and
challenges involved, we propose a conceptualization of missions as multiple, intercon-
nected translation processes that span from a societal challenge as the starting point to
impacts as the ultimate translational stage. We argue that adopting a process -oriented
perspective is well-suited to account for the interdependencies and complex feedback
dynamics among the different stages during the realization of MOIP. The proposed
framework aims to support the development of frameworks for impact assessment, but
also yields relevant insights for policy-makers implementing MOIP.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
2 Introduction

1 Introduction
Over the past years, mission-oriented approaches have attracted considerable attention
in innovation policy debates. In a nutshell, mission-oriented innovation policy (MOIP) aim
to effectively address pressing societal challenges and propel the transformation of so-
cio-technical systems. While the popularity of MOIP among policy-makers and scholars
has constantly grown, awareness and understanding of the far-reaching implications that
MOIP entail for agenda-setting, policy design, governance, implementation, and assess-
ment have remained rather low.
Whereas research has provided different facets of the challenges and requirements for
MOIP formulation, design and implementation, a comprehensive anal ytical framework
that covers all these steps is still lacking. In consequence, discussions have often cen-
tred on selected aspects of MOIP, without integrating these perspectives and accounting
for the dynamics of MOIP realization. This paper addresses some of these challenges
by investigating the following question: How can the different sources of complexity of
MOIP be conceptualized in order to increase analytical rigor and to support the political
and administrative processes needed for successful missio n-oriented innovation poli-
cies?
The paper aspires to a conceptual contribution, proposing a comprehensive and pro-
cess-oriented analytical perspective on MOIP that contributes to a better understanding
of the inherent complexity towards the materialization of impacts in MOIP. It argues that
the realization of MOIPs should be conceptualized as a multiple-staged translation pro-
cess from a grand societal challenge to mission -specific impacts. Thereby, we draw on
the argument by Kroll (2019), following which the results of complex policies are shaped
by multiple translations processes that need to be kept analytically apart. For this pur-
pose we combine insights from empirical studies of MOIP with policy studies, adding a
stronger procedural perspective.
We distinguish between three interrelated but distinct translation processes that shape
MOIPs, related to (1) mission definition, (2) mission design, and (3) mission implemen-
tation. By disentangling the distinct dynamics and consequences thereof, we present a
conceptual framework to provide a better understanding of the overarching dynamics
that characterize MOIPs. This framework aims to contribute to a more systematic analy-
sis of MOIPs. Further, we hope to support policy-makers by highlighting potential pitfalls
in the implementation process, and lay the foundation for evaluation frameworks for
transformative policies like MOIP.
Following this introduction, the following section highlights the need for a better under-
standing of the dynamics of MOIP that is closely linked to existing challenges for impact

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
The need for a process-oriented perspective 3

assessment. Seeking to enhance analytical rigor, we subsequently argue for the adop-
tion of a process-oriented perspective on MOIP that manifests itself in multiple translation
processes. This provides more granularity and a more comprehensive picture of the spe-
cific choices and challenges involved at each procedural stage. Moving towards an inte-
grated perspective, the following section focuses on the interactions between different
translation processes. The final se ction summarizes the key insights and outlines the
implications for scholars studying MOIP, impact assessment and policy-makers.
2 The need for a process-oriented perspective
The concept of MOIP bears the promise of shifting Science Technology and Innovation
(STI) policies towards a broad and transformative approach in order to address and pos-
sibly solve grand societal challenges, moving beyond economic goals (Kuhlmann and
Rip 2014). This directionality is the key characteristic of mission orientation and truly the
ultimate goal to be kept in sight throughout the entire policy process. MOIP seeks to
mobilize actors and resources in a cross -sectoral and interdisciplinary way, providing a
comprehensive and integrated approach that emphasizes directionality and intentionality
towards a clearly defined goal. Over the last years, many countries and international
organizations have sought for a re -orientation of their STI policies towards mission -ori-
ented approaches.
Whereas expectations towards MOIP approaches are high, we observe two connected
shortcomings: firstly, despite the popularity of the MOIP label, there is still no established
consensus on the guiding principles of mission orientation among academia and policy
makers. Even though the so-called "new mission orientation" has been the topic of de-
bate for more than a decade, including valuable efforts to identify key characteristics
based on comparative analyses (Kuittinen et al. 2018a; Larrue 2021), it still seems that
‘theory is running ahead of practice'. This conceptual deficit is also reflected by a second
shortcoming: the very limited empirical evidence concerning the costs and benefits of
MOIP in form of evaluations (Larrue 2021) . Despite first attempts in this direction
(Wesseling and Meijerhof 2020), an established analytical framework for conceptualizing
and measuring the impacts of MOIP is still missing (Weber and Polt 2014, p. 9; Hekkert
et al. 2020, p. 77; Amanatidou et al. 2014). Developing such a framework is complicated
by several factors. This includes the broad scope of MOIP, the interconnectedness of
policy goals and instruments, a common time-lag in regard to impacts, the multiplicity of
analytical levels, new emerging requirements for evaluation, as well as the empirical di-
versity of missions with varying levels of ambitions and degrees of transformativity (e.g.
Amanatidou et al. 2014; Kuittinen et al. 2018a; Weber and Polt 2014; Wittmann et al.
2021).

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
4 The need for a process-oriented perspective

At the same time, the growing interest in MOIP has led to a growing number of concep-
tual and empirical insights from different theoretical perspectives and national contexts.
This includes a variety of topics, including the heterogeneity of mission types and goals
(Polt et al. 2019; Wanzenböck et al. 2020; Wittmann et al. 2020a) , their boun daries
(Hekkert et al. 2020; Wittmann et al. 2020c; Wesseling and Meijerhof 2020), differences
in governance arrangements and policy instruments (Janssen 2020; Wittmann et al.
forthcoming) and international comparative case studies (Kuittinen et al. 2018b; Larrue
2021). The analysis of these works have contributed to pinpointing obstacles and chal-
lenges for the realization of MOIP at different stages. The connection between the
stages, however, have received rat her limited attention. This is unfortunate, given the
key importance of these linkages in the policy process. These connections, which we
call "translation processes" in the following, may contribute to a better understanding
how the interplay of the various stages jointly contributes to the success (or the absence
thereof) of missions. While there is abundance of literature on policy making per se, this
research has mostly clinged to the heuristic of the "policy cycle" as a sequence of stages
like 'agenda setting, policy formulation, policy adoption, implementation, evaluation and
termination [...] and frameworks [which] focus on distinct stages of the policy process"
(Weible et al. 2012, p. 3).
Hence, what is missing is a framework to better understand and systematize the different
interdependencies between the mission stages and the materializ ation of impacts. We
aim to fill this gap by developing a process-oriented perspective on MOIP realization, to
increase analytical rigor of analysis and connecting the debate about MOIP implemen-
tation with impact assessment. Our framework builds on the ide a of Kroll (2019), who
traces deviations from the anticipated outcomes in EU Regional Policy back to multiple
sources that need to be kept analytically apart. He argues that attempts to measure im-
pacts against initial ambitions might fall short of anticipating the p rocess of translation
and interpretation in-between, calling for a process-oriented perspective. Otherwise, he
concludes, " it remains impossible to tell whether an innovation strategy was already
flawed in ambition, wrong decisions were taken on thematic areas of action, or if, indeed,
one is witnessing a technical failure in the choice of measures" (ibid, p. 636),
Departing from the idea of multiple loosely coupled streams of implementation and policy
debate that is driven by their own path -dependent logic, he emphasizes the process -
character of such translation processes that leads to new impulses "into an existing path-
dependent system of narratives and support policy practices " (ibid, 637) between the
level of strategic agenda (setting sphere of politics and political discourse), the level of
thematic orientation (political administration), and the level of actual implementation (ex-
ecutive level of agencies/implementation of programs). To conduct a comprehensive

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
The need for a process-oriented perspective 5

analysis this requires the assessment of the consistency of activities within each levels,
as well as the coherence of the translation process between different levels.
Taking up the idea that the materialization of impacts can be shaped by different trans-
lation processes, this conceptualization provides us with a useful perspective to unravel
the complex dynamics of MOIPs. Following Kroll (2019, p. 637) we understand the trans-
lation process as "as a process of ideation, negotiation and decision-making that is driven
and governed by multiple actors". We believe that this perspective adds valuable insights
for MOIP which typically cut across different thematic areas and institutional responsibil-
ities:
MOIP can be seen as a process of multiple translations, departing from the underlying
societal challenge (e.g. aging society and more deadly cases of cancer) towards the
desired impacts (e.g. reduction of avoidable new cases of cancer by early detection
(awareness building) and an improved lifestyle (better prevention measures).
All steps are ideally targeted at a clear normative goal (directionality). This procedure is
not to be understood as a linear process but one that includes feedback loops. Further,
these translations are shaped by actors involved at different levels and with different
roles during the realization of MOIP. Depending on the topic, various national ministries
as well supra-national or sub-regional authorities (regional, local), specialized agencies,
representatives of affected industry branches, civil society, etc. may be involved.
Secondly, besides an increase in the number of involved actors, negotiation processes
along MOIP at different levels should gain importance. Introducing directionality through
the inclusion of political and normative goals that may be contested by some actors fa-
cilitates a politicization of MOIP compared to traditional innovation policies (Boon and
Edler 2018; Hekkert et al. 2020). Moreover, the paradigm change towards MOIP may be
a gradual process conflicting with established routines, practices and responsibilities. In
practice, many research and innovation policies con stitute a mixture of elements from
different paradigms (Arnold et al. 2019, p. 53), implying that the transition towards MOIP
is no abrupt but a gradual process involving considerable learning processes among
involved actors.
Delineating these different dynamics analytically and exploring the interaction of different
actors and rationales provides the opportunity to explore possible drifts in priorities and
approaches. Moreover, a process-oriented perspective can help to open the analysis of
MOIP systematically for insights from policy studies, like research dealing with different
elements of the policy cycle (cf. Jann and Wegrich 2017), the debate on the composition
of and necessity for systemic instruments (Smits and Kuhlmann 2004; Wieczorek and
Hekkert 2012; Daimer et al. 2012).

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
6 Conceptualizing MOIP as multi-stage translation processes

3 Conceptualizing MOIP as multi-stage translation
processes
In case of mission-oriented policies, we argue that there exist three main steps of trans-
lation that occur along the way from deriving a mission out of a societal challenge and
turning policy inputs into impacts that take place at different analytical levels and repre-
sent different dynamics. This tri -partite perspective can be also found in Larrue et al.
(2019) distinguishing between strategic orientation, policy coordination and policy imple-
mentation. In the following section we discuss these steps in greater detail, discu ssing
their origins, influencing factors and arising challenges (see table 1).
 Step 1: Mission formulation: Translation of societal challenges into specific missions
with dedicated priorities
 Step 2: Mission design: Translation of mission goals into a specific set of instruments,
activities and coordination structures
 Step 3: Mission implementation: Translation of mission activities into impacts
From our perspective there are several aspects that matter with regard to these steps at
all times: firstly, despite the appeal of "newness" (MOIP as a new generation of policies
with directionality), traditional unsolved challenges of coordination and political leader-
ship that have been debated for decades are also relevant in the context of MOIP, which
overlap with many existing approaches of fostering STI (Arnold et al. 2019). Secondly,
actively integrating and working with a multitude of actors at different levels and subsys-
tem to make MOIP a reality is a mission in itself, but a cknowledging different perspec-
tives, belief systems and normative assumptions of actors as part of a translation process
might ease tension and misunderstanding. And thirdly, MOIP is a demanding and com-
plex concept in itself, imposing high requirements for policy-making and discussion pro-
cesses, calling for (strategic and reflexive) learning capacity by policy makers on the one
hand, and more systemic and formative evaluation schemes to be provided by the com-
munity of scholars.
3.1 Mission formulation: Translating (societal) challenges
into missions
The first translation process that occurs with regard to missions is the translation of grand
societal challenges into dedicated missions. Despite ambitious goals, no mission is
equivalent to the underlying societal challenges, but prioritizes and weighs certain as-
pects it seeks to achieve, while displaying certain boundaries and diminishing the role of
other aspects related to a societal challenge. Larrue (2021, p. 9) points out that missions

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Conceptualizing MOIP as multi-stage translation processes 7

can be considered as a narrowing down process that in many instances starts from "chal-
lenge areas" instead of missions. While missions and societal challenges are often un-
derstood as directly connected, the relationship is often more complex in practice. In line
with this Larrue (2021, p. 34) has highlighted that "[t]he relation between the nature of
challenges and the design of MOIPs is still largely unexplored ", even though research
has pointed to the importance of the process of mission formulation (Janssen et al. 2020;
Wittmann et al. 2020b).
Table 1: Key characteristics of translation processes
 Mission
formulation
Mission design Mission
implementation
Key actor strategic level
(high-level politics,
public discourse)
political administration executive level of
administrations,
funding agencies,
etc.
Type of trans-
lation process
narrowing down
societal challenge
to specific mission
goal
choosing an adequate
instrument mix and co-
ordination structures fit
for purpose to meet
the goals
effective and effi-
cient implementa-
tion and coordina-
tion of instruments
Issues of
negotiation
legitimacy, direc-
tionality, level of
ambition
stakeholder in-
volvement and rep-
resentation
actor and resource
mobilization
combination of differ-
ent types of instru-
ments, instruments of
different types, gener-
ations etc.
coordination structures
administrative fea-
sibility, cognitive
gaps, strategic ca-
pacity, systemic
understanding
Influencing
factors
political and institu-
tional context
ideational frames,
belief systems
existing policies
participating actors
administrative
capacity and re-
sources for learn-
ing/evaluation
coordination struc-
tures
The process of negotiating mission goals is closely linked to the strategic level of policy-
making deciding about priorities of a mission, pointing to the importance of actor constel-
lations and processes as key factors driving mission formulation. The nature of the un-
derlying character and the cross-cutting character of MOIP imply a wide range of poten-
tially relevant stakeholders for missions. A first issue of negotiation in this context is the
question about: who is involved at which stages and to what extent do these actors ac-
tively participate in formulating missions and their priority. Policy literature in general and

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
8 Conceptualizing MOIP as multi-stage translation processes

research on agenda setting in particularly have pointed to the diverse challenges arising
in this context that can shape outcomes (Schot and Steinmueller 2018; Kuhlmann and
Rip 2018).
A second issue of negotiation is the question of scope and ambition. The concept of
MOIP is closely linked to the perceived legitimacy (Larrue et al. 2019) and the felt ur-
gency of a societal challenge (Janssen et al. 2020) calling for ambitious and comprehen-
sive mission goals. However, not every mission is set out with a transformative ambition
aiming at changing an entire socio-technical systems as such but some surely do. There-
fore it is evident as the directionality imposed by MOIP favoring a certain direction leads
to a politicization of the policy, favoring some outcomes over others mi ght occur and
needs to be acknowledged (Boon and Edler 2018; Hekkert et al. 2020) . Creating room
for contestation, especially MOIPs formulating transformative goals challenge rather risk
averse authorities to try for ‘policy innovations ' (Howlett 2014) and inhibit considerable
costs and redistributive consequences for some stakeholders, resulting in potential op-
position to these goals (Wittmann et al. 2020a).
Taking place at the strategic level, the choice of priorities and goals does not happen in
a vacuum but is embedded into a broader social, political, economic and in stitutional
context shaping the specific priorities and scope of missions. Edler and Salas Gironés
(2020) explore the importance of ideational factors in shaping mission across different
countries (case of mobility transition in Germany, the Netherlands, United King dom).
Thereby, they find that the same overarching challenge in different (national) contexts is
approached in multiple ways, highlighting different priorities and formulations (similar
Larrue 2021). Even within single strategies, such as the German Hightech Strategy 2025,
there exist different wa ys of linking missions to societal challenges. Wittmann et al.
(2020) find evidence for different understandings on how the goals of missions are to be
achieved, e.g. prioritizing scientific progress as the main driver of a mission or highlight-
ing the importance of changes in human behavior. In practice, one can observe a con-
siderably diversity of missions with regard to the level of ambition, the scope of goals etc.
that are subsumed under the label of MOIP (Larrue et al. 2019; Polt et al. 2019; Kuittinen
et al. 2018a; Wanzenböck et al. 2020).
At the same time, the negotiation process on goals and priorities may feed back into the
perception of the overall societal challenge, affecting the perceived urgency, relevance
etc. of this topic. This has been also outlined by Wanzenböck et al. (2020) who highlight
the possibility of diverging views on solutions and/or problems that may evolve over time
and potentially converge towards a shared perception.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Conceptualizing MOIP as multi-stage translation processes 9

Aiming to understand this translation process, we propose the following guiding ques-
tions:
 What is the concrete societal challenge that should be overcome by the mission?
 What are the aspects and areas with regard to the challenge that the mission priori-
tizes?
 Which parts of the challenge are not addressed by the missions?
 Is there an obvious and intended directionality resulting from translating a challenge
into mission goals?
 What is the underlying understanding of the problem and its solution?
 What type of (systemic) change does the mission aim for? What role do STI policies
relative to other approaches play in the socio-technical system relevant for the aspired
change?
 Who are relevant stakeholders and are they involved in the process of choosing and
defining mission goals?
 How is stakeholder input incorporated in this process? How open is the process of
mission formulation for different interest groups?
3.2 Mission design: Translating goals into policy instru-
ments and activities
The next translation occurs b etween mission goals and the operationalization of these
goals into a set of specific policies and the development of adequate structures for ex-
change and coordination. In contrast to the process of mission formulation at the strate-
gic level, the translati on process of mission design is located at a lower level i.e. in in-
volved ministries, agencies, street level bureaucrats (Hill and Hupe 2014; Lipsky 1980)
and other stakeholders representing different subsystems and the way these actors op-
erationalize the defined goals and opt for coordination structures.
To put missions into actions, an understanding on the instruments and coordination
structures that are necessary to achieve the postulated goals is needed. Thereby, this
translation step is centered on the identification, selection and mobilization of resources
and inputs and the alignment of these activities towards the mission goal. At the same
time, it creates the need for delineating the boundaries of a mission at an instrument -
level, defining activities that contribute to the mission goals and are part of the govern-
ance arrangement of a mission and those that characterize the wider socio -technical
system. Negotiation processes therefore are likely to center around several aspects. First
of all, aiming for a broader cross-sectoral approach, MOIP require high level of commit-
ments from different actors and their readiness to contribute to the postulated goals,

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
10 Conceptualizing MOIP as multi-stage translation processes

subordinating own resources and activities to the overarching goal of a mission. Lacking
this commitment, there is little reason to assume that missions will differ systematically
from earlier generations of innovation policies that were characterized by a strong top -
down approach. Hence, besides the fact of providing resources the question is the way
actors agree to c oordinate their efforts through the creation of dedicated bodies of ex-
change.
Secondly, complex interventions in many cases require a bundle of different measures,
implying that missions are more than the sum of their individual components and thus
are defined by the interplay of the different instruments. They supposed to do so by ap-
plying a variety of policy instruments that 'span different stages of the innovation cycle
from research to demonstration and market deployment, mix supply-push and demand-
pull instruments, and cut across various policy fields, sectors and disciplines ' (Larrue
2021, p. 11). A final issue of negotiations links to the coordination of activities and actors,
finding adequate governance arrangements for steering mission implementation.
This translation process may be affected by different aspects:
First of all, actors may differently interpret the way of how to achieve to the postulated
goals. Edler and Salas Gironés (2020) point to the importance of different policy tradi-
tions, beliefs about the role of the state and ownership of a problem . This aspect is
closely linked to the understanding of the possible solutions (Wanzenböck et al. 2020).
In particular, it touches upon the question to what extent a mission may go beyond the
confines of STI policy and employ additional means such as regulation in order to facili-
tate the required changes (see e.g. EFI 2021 for a discussion) . In this regard, especially
the choice of actors taking a leading role for a mission mig ht impose a certain narra-
tive/approach that shapes the mission design.
Secondly, missions are rarely built from scratch but are embedded into an established
field of policy measures and activities (Larrue 2021, p. 9), so that missions are likely to
be a combination of past and present policy instruments or are even built around existing
policies. Empirical works highlight that missions often rely on previously existing policies
that are only selectively accompanied with new instruments (Janssen 2020; Wittmann et
al. forthcoming). Mission design therefore is not only about designing new interventions,
but purposefully combining and adjusting existing interventions. Therefore, the input of
MOIPs in many instances will be characterized by different modes of institutional change,
such as layering or refurbishing of different past and present policies and activities (cf.
e.g., Hacker 2004; Thelen and Streeck 2005 ; Kern and Howlett 2009 ; Mahoney and
Thelen 2010). This ties in with the observation of Rose (1990, p. 263) that 'Policy-makers
are heirs before they are choosers'.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Conceptualizing MOIP as multi-stage translation processes 11

 Who takes the lead for mission design (and implementation)?
 What actors and resources are mobilized for goal achievement?
 What activities, measures and instruments are part of the mission realization?
 To what extent does the mission build on existing instruments? How are these instru-
ments aligned with mission goals?
 What is the relative role of STI instruments compared to other types of policy instru-
ments?
 What are the means to achieve the mission goals?
3.3 Mission implementation
The final stage of translation focuses on the materialization of mission impacts through
the implementation of instruments and activities. Having designed a set of interventions,
the implementation process can be considered as the translation of policy inputs into
impacts. Thereby, it focuses on the level of instrument implementation (effectiveness/ef-
ficiency) and the coordination between different instruments and activities that is often
located at ministries or funding agencies, thus asking for capacities at the individua l (or
partly at the organizational level) (cf. Considine et al. 2014; Wu et al. 2017) ; to bring
these instruments into realization. In contra st to mission design focusing on the choice
of instruments and their combination to maximize the potential synergies, this step fo-
cuses on the outputs of instruments and the coordination of activities contributing to an
alignment of activities towards the postulated goals. In this context, Hüsing et al. (2017)
highlight the importance of a bottom -up alongside a top-down perspective that focuses
on the project level and explores to what extent goals are addressed and achieved with
the employed programs and activities.
There are multiple determinants regarding mission implementation. First of all, it links to
capacities and resources of the involved actors implementing these programs. This in-
cludes the avoidance delays of the implementation of measures, poor ha ndling of the
interdependency of different parts of the policy mix, or balancing bottlenecks. At the
same time, (internal) learning processes, reflexivity and evaluation of on-going measures
may constitute an input both for the implementation of the mission informing the overall
instrument mix MOIP (Larrue 2021).
Shifting the focus towards the implementation of a mission, the final translation process
deals with the question how inputs into a mission can contribute to achieving the desired
mission goals. For further analysis, we rely on the following guiding questions:

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
12 Towards a perspective of interconnected translation processes

 How (effectively) is the implementation of individual measures carried out?
 Do instruments reach the relevant groups and provide the anticipated results?
 How does the coordination between different instruments play out in practice?
 How does implementation reaction to changes, exogenous shocks and other chal-
lenges for implementation?
 How does the monitoring of the mission progress feedback into the mission imple-
mentation?
 What role do learning and feedback processes play? What elements of the mission
(goals, inputs, implementation procedures) do they affect and how?
 How do the implemented instruments mobilize other activities and actors to undertake
activities in line with the mission
4 Towards a perspective of interconnected
translation processes
In the previous sections we presented the three main translation processes constitutive
for MOIP: missio n formulation, mission design, and mission implementation. Each of
these involves specific actors and skills and is associated with specific political and tech-
nical challenges. While highlighting the analytical value from distinguishing these differ-
ent processes, we believe that only an integrated view on the entire process provides a
holistic picture of the dynamic of MOIPs. Thereby, we acknowledge that missions hardly
follow a simple linear logic from design to effect, but rather are characterized by multiple
interaction and feedback loops between different translation processes (see figure 1). In
this section we describe possible interactions, spill -overs and feedback dynamics that
may arise from these translation processes.
Mission formulation is closely linked with the subsequent processes of mission design
and implementation. This ties in with the argument by Kroll (2019) that the absence of
impacts can have multiple origins. Problems at earlier stages may cascade down to sub-
sequent stages of mission im plementation, as dynamics in many instances are hard to
reverse. First of all the development of a powerful narrative and a well-designed process
of mission formulation is a key prerequisite for actor and resource mobilization and there-
fore can shape missi on design and implementation. A compelling mission goal may
strengthen the legitimacy and therefore enforce a higher commitment of involved actors
to contribute to the goals and a broader instrument mix. In contrast, missions with poorly
defined and ambiguous goals may not only limit the ability to mobilize actors for a shared
goal but also opens room for negotiation and contestation, providing actors with agency
to interpret the goals according to their own preferences.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Figure 1: Translation processes and interdependencies

Source: own elaboration

13 Towards a perspective of interconnected translation processes

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
14 Conclusion

In turn, mission formulation processes can hardly be thought of as independent of the
feasible options for mission design, implementation and assessment. In other words, if
policy-makers do not have suitable instruments at their di sposal for implementing an
ambitious mission in a comprehensive fashion, this certainly feeds back into mission
formulation. In a similar way, long -standing existing policy approaches may shape the
understanding of goals and solutions, resulting in missions being centered around these
policies. Moreover, mission implementation may necessitate an adjustment of goals and
mission design, making them more or less ambitious or even altering the character alto-
gether. We contend that the success or failure of specific instruments may feed back into
the (re)formulation of mission objectives and instrument mixes. For example, if a policy
instrument fails to trigger behavioral change on the society level needed for system trans-
formation (e.g. in the context of decarbo nization), mission goals may be "cut back" ret-
rospectively to fit a more narrow technology-focused, accelerated type mission. In a sim-
ilar vein, there might occur a narrowing down of the portfolio approach, once promising
solutions emerge during implementation.
Finally, the results of MOIP may feed back in different ways into the process. Positive
results may reinforce the positive narrative of a mission and its legitimacy and credibility
of intention, strengthen actor commitment and mobilization. Positive results may also
contribute to an increasing convergence of perspective of solutions and problems, shift-
ing missions towards a higher level of alignment (cf. Wanzenböck et al. 2020). Needless
to say that besides such virtuous circle, missions may be also affected by a vicious circle
of not materializing results that may undermine a mission's legitimacy and decrease ac-
tor mobilization, while opening up the discussion about goals, legitimacy of a mission.
Distinguishing between different analytical stages, the chronology and interdependen-
cies might be less clear in practice, allowing dynamics to interact and also to run the
opposite direction. In consequence, mission formulation and design in many instances
can be understood as co -evolving processes. This implies that missions are no static
policies, but should be considered as developing over time and exhibiting different char-
acteristics along their development (Janssen et al. 2020; Hekkert et al. 2020).
5 Conclusion
This contribution proposed to conceptualize the realization of MOIPS as a multiple -
staged translation process, starting from a grand societal challenge and evolving into
mission specific impacts. First of all, this conceptualization allows to analytically disen-
tangle different steps and dynamics at different levels that characterize MOIP and
thereby allows to reduce the complexity of MOIP from an analytical perspective.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Conclusion 15

We perceive these translation processes as connected, because the results of one trans-
lation process has profound implications for the subsequent development. Problems re-
lated to the choice of a mission, such as a poor mission definition may also ‘cascade '
down to the anticipated impact. While this is not to deny that missions may evolve over
time, e.g. because of learning process or external factors once taken decision shape the
developments of missions in the long run. Accounting for the interdependencies of dif-
ferent translation processes limits the risk of overly attributing responsibility e.g. to the
input/policy mix or implementation activities, while ignoring more fundamental challenges
that are linked to the formulation of a mission.
For researchers studying the realization an d impacts of MOIP this paper provides an
analytical clarification for systematically disentangling the dynamics in MOIP at different
levels and identifying the specific dynamics related to them. At the same time, it raises
awareness for the importance of p ath-dependencies in this process, highlighting the
need for a comprehensive understanding of MOIP. Secondly, it connects the study of
MOIP more closely to the strand of literature of policy studies that can provide useful
insights for the different dynamics and processes that characterize complex policies such
as MOIP.
Regarding the development of framework of impact assessments, this paper empha-
sizes the pitfalls of a too narrow approach that ignores the dynamics that may affect the
materialization of impa cts at different stages. A mission undermining the key pillars of
the MOIP approach, such as the mobilization of private actors and resources will face
considerable challenges from the very beginning. Aiming to understand the impacts of
mission therefore should not depart from mission goals as such, but incorporate the pro-
cess and context of mission formulation into its perspective to adequately capture the
context in which a mission emerged.
For policy-makers our framework seeks to clarify the different procedural steps and point
to the specific challenges and pitfalls that are connected with each of them. Thereby, it
can support the process and implementation by making possible consequences of deci-
sions more explicit. By doing so, it can help to contribute to answering the stronger need
for ex-ante evaluation and a different, more formative focus of evaluation (Teirlink et al.
2011; Amanatidou et al. 2014; Weber and Polt 2014). Against the background of Larrue's
comparative analysis that "[f]ew of MOIP initiatives have set objectives that have the
expected mission characteristics: clear, bold a nd inspirational, with wide societal rele-
vance, ambitious but realistic, targeted, measurable, time -bound and solution neutral "
(Larrue 2021, p. 9) the path-dependency of such decisions outlined in this contribution
calls for a careful planning of the process from the very beginning.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
16 References

6 References
Amanatidou, Effie; Cunningham, Paul; Gök, Abdullah; Garefi, Ioanna (2014): Using Eva-
luation Research as a Means for Policy Analysis in a ‘New’ Mission-Oriented Policy
Context. In Minerva 52 (4), pp. 419–438.
Arnold, Erik; Aström, Tomas; Andréasson, Helen; Nielsen, Kalle; Wain, Martin; Tofteng,
Maja; Røtnes, Rolf (2019): Raising the Ambition Level in Norwegian Innovation
Policy. Final Report. technopolis group.
Boon, Wouter; Edler, Jakob (2018): Demand, challenges, and innovation. Making sense
of new trends in innovation policy. In Science and Public Policy 45 (4), pp. 435–
447.
Considine, Mark; Alexander, Damon; Lewis, Jenny M. (2014): Policy design as craft:
teasing out policy design expertise using a semi-experimental approach. In Policy
Sciences 47 (3), pp. 209–225. DOI: 10.1007/s11077-013-9191-0.
Daimer, Stephanie; Hufnagl, Miriam; Warnke, Philine (2012): Challenge-oriented policy-
making and innovation systems theory: reconsidering systemic instruments. In
Fraunhofer Institut für System- und Innovationsforschung (Ed.): Innovation system
revisited - Experiences from 40 years of Fraunhofer ISI research. Stuttgart: Fraun-
hofer Verlag, pp. 217–234.
Edler, Jakob; Salas Gironés, Edgar (2020): How do framing and ideas influence the de-
sign of missions? A c omparative analysis between Germany, the Netherlands, &
the United Kingdom. EU -SPRI virtual session on Shaping System Transitions -
Insights from practice. 5th of June 2020, 2020.
EFI (2021): Gutachten zu For -schung, Innovation und technologischer Leistung sfähig-
keit Deutschlands 2021. Edited by Expertenkommission Forschung und Innovation
(EFI). Berlin. Available online at https://www.e -fi.de/fileadmin/Assets/Gu-
tachten/2021/EFI_Gutachten_2021.pdf, checked on 5/12/2021.
Hacker, Jacob S. (2004): Privatizing Risk without Privatizing the Welfare State: The Hid-
den Politics of Social Policy Retrenchment in the United States. In American Polit-
ical Science Review 98 (2), pp. 243–260.
Hekkert, Marko P.; Janssen, Matthijs J.; Wesseling, Joeri H.; Negro, Simona O. (2020):
Mission-oriented innovation systems. In Environmental Innovation and Societal
Transitions 34, pp. 76–79.
Hill, Michael J.; Hupe, Peter L. (2014): Implementing public policy. An introduction to the
study of operational governance. 3. ed. Los Angeles: SAGE Publications.
Howlett, Michael (2014): Why are policy innovations rare and so often negative? Blame
avoidance and problem denial in climate change policy-making. In Global Environ-
mental Change 29, pp. 395–403.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
References 17

Hüsing, Bärbel; Kulicke, Marianne; Wydra, Sven; Stahlecker, Thomas; Aichinger, Heike;
Meyer, Niclas (2017): Evaluation der „Nationalen Forschungsstrategie BioÖkono-
mie 2030“. Wirksamkeit der Initiativen des BMBF - Erfolg der geförderten Vorha-
ben - Empfehlungen zur strategischen Weiterentwicklung. Abschlussbericht. Edi-
ted by Fraunhofer Institut für System- und Innovationsforschung. Karlsruhe.
Jann, Werner; Wegrich, Kai (2017): Theories of the policy cycle. In Frank Fischer, Gerald
J. Miller (Eds.): Handbook of public policy analysis: Routledge, pp. 69–88.
Janssen, Matthijs (2020): Post-commencement analysis of the Dutch ‘Mission -oriented
Topsector and Innovation Policy’ strategy. Utrecht University - Copernicus Institute
of Sustainable Development. Mission -Oriented Innovation Policy Observatory
(MIPO). Utrecht. Available online at https://www.uu.nl/sites/default/files/Post-com-
mencement%20analysis%20of%20the%20Dutch%20Mission-ori-
ented%20Topsector%20and%20Innovation%20Policy.pdf, checked on 4/29/2021.
Janssen, Matthijs J.; Torrens, Jonas; Wesseling, Joeri; Wanzenböck, Iris; Patterson,
James (2020): Position paper. ‘Mission -oriented innovation policy observatory’.
Copernicus Institute of Sustainable Development, Utrecht University. Utrecht.
Available online at https://www.uu.nl/sites/de-
fault/files/MIPO%20position%20paper%20-%20v21-05-2020.pdf, checked on
11/2/2020.
Kern, Florian; Howlett, Michael (2009): Implementing transition management as policy
reforms: a case study of the Dutch energy sector. In Policy Sciences 42 (4),
pp. 391–408.
Kroll, Henning (2019): How to evaluate innovation strategies with a transformative ambi-
tion? A proposal for a structured, process-based approach. In Science and Public
Policy 46 (5), pp. 635–647.
Kuhlmann, Stefan; Rip, Arie (2014): The challenge of addressing Grand Challenges: a
think piece on how innovation can be driven towards the "Grand Challenges" as
defined under the prospective European Union Framework Programme Horizon
2020: European Research and Innovation Area Board (ERIAB). Available online at
https://ris.utwente.nl/ws/files/5140568/The_challenge_of_address-
ing_Grand_Challenges.pdf, checked on 6/1/2021.
Kuhlmann, Stefan; Rip, Arie (2018): Next-Generation Innovation Policy and Grand Chal-
lenges. In Science and Public Policy 45 (4), pp. 448–454.
Kuittinen, Hanna; Skov Kristensen, Frank; Pelkonen, Antti; Lehenkari, Janne; Goetheer,
Arjen; van der Zee, Frans et al. (2018a): Mission-oriented research and innovation.
Assessing the impact of a mission-oriented research and innovation approach: Fi-
nal report. European Commission - Directorate-General for Research and Innova-
tion. Luxembourg.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
18 References

Kuittinen, Hanna; Unger, Maximilian; Türk, Andreas; Polt, Wolfgang; Fisher, Robbert;
Domini, Alberto et al. (2018b): Mission-oriented research and innovation. Inventory
and characterisation of i nitiatives: Final report. Edited by European Commission.
European Commission. Luxembourg.
Larrue, Philippe (2021): The design and implementation of mission -oriented innovation
policies. A new systemic policy approach to address societal challenges. OECD.
Paris (OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, 100). Available
online at https://doi.org/10.1787/3f6c76a4-en.
Larrue, Philippe; Machado, Diogo; Yoshimoto, Takuro (2019): New mission-oriented pol-
icy initiative as systemic policies to address soc ietal challenges: analytical frame-
work and types of initiatives. Edited by OCED. OECD. Paris.
Lipsky, Michael (1980): Michael Lipsky. Street -Level Bureaucracy: Dilemmas of the In-
dividual in Public Services. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1980 (10).
Mahoney, James; Thelen, Kathleen Ann (Eds.) (2010): Explaining institutional change.
Ambiguity, agency, and power. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Polt, Wolfgang; Weber, Matthias; Biegelbauer, Peter; Unger, Maximilian (2019): Match-
ing type of mission and governance in mission-oriented R&I policy: conceptual im-
provement and guidance for policy. Eu -SPRI Conference. Rome, 06.06.2020.
2019 EU-SPRI CONFERENCE – Science Technology and Innovation Policies for
Sustainable Development Goals. Actors, Instruments and Evaluation, 2019. Avail-
able online at https://www.researchgate.net/publication/334277744_Match-
ing_type_of_mission_and_governance_in_mission-oriented_RI_policy, checked
on 9/25/2019.
Rose, Richard (1990): Inheritance Before Choice in Public policy. In Journal of Theoret-
ical Politics 2 (3), pp. 263–291. DOI: 10.1177/0951692890002003002.
Schot, Johan; Steinmueller, W. Edward (2018): Three frames for innovation policy. R&D,
systems of innovation and transformative change. In Research Policy 47 (9),
pp. 1554–1567.
Smits, Ruud; Kuhlmann, Stefan (2004): The rise of systemic instruments in innovation
policy. In International Journal of Foresight and Innovation Policy 1 (1/2), pp. 4–32.
Teirlink, Peter; Verbeek, Arnold; Delanghe, Henri; Heijs, Joost; Sachwald, Fr édérique;
Bayhan, Deniz et al. (2011): Optimising the research and innovation policy
mix: The practice and challenges of imapct assessment in Europe. Findings from
FP7 OMC -net project 234501. Available online at https://www.aca-
demia.edu/1140284/Optimizing_the_research_and_innovation_pol-
icy_mix_The_practice_and_challenges_of_impact_assessment_in_Europe,
checked on 2/13/2020.
Thelen, Kathleen Ann; Streeck, Wolfgang (2005): Beyond continuity. Institutional change
in advanced political economies. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
References 19

Wanzenböck, Iris; Wesseling, Joeri H.; Frenken, Koen; Hekkert, Marko P.; Weber, K.
Matthias (2020): A framework for mission -oriented innovation policy: Alternative
pathways through the problem–solution space. In Science and Public Policy 47 (4),
pp. 474–489. DOI: 10.1093/scipol/scaa027.
Weber, Matthias; Polt, Michael (2014): Assessing mission -orientated R&D programs:
combining foresight and evaluation. In Fteval - Journal for Research and Technol-
ogy Policy Evaluation (39), pp. 5–10.
Weible, Christopher M.; Heikkila, Tanya; deLeon, Peter; Sabatier, Paul A. (2012): Un-
derstanding and influencing the policy process. In Policy Sci 45 (1), pp. 1–21. DOI:
10.1007/s11077-011-9143-5.
Wesseling, Joeri; Meijerhof, Nick (2020): Development and application of a Mission-ori-
ented Innovation Systems (MIS) approach (Working Paper). Available online at
https://www.uu.nl/sites/default/files/Wesseling%20and%20Meijer-
hof%202020_working%20paper.pdf, checked on 4/29/2021.
Wieczorek, A. J.; Hekkert, M. P. (2012): Systemic instruments for systemic innovation
problems: A framework for policy makers and innovation scholars. In Science and
Public Policy 39 (1), pp. 74–87.
Wittmann, Florian; Hufnagl, Miriam; Lindner, Ralf; Roth, Florian; Edler, Jakob (2020a):
Developing a Typology for Mission-Oriented Innovation Policies. Fraunhofer Insti-
tut für System- und Innovationsforschung. Karlsruhe (Discussion Papers Innova-
tion System and Policy Analysis, 64), checked on 8/25/2020.
Wittmann, Florian; Hufnagl, Miriam; Lind ner, Ralf; Roth, Florian; Edler, Jakob (2021):
Governing varieties of mission-oriented innovation policies: A new typology. In Sci-
ence and Public Policy (published online before print). DOI:
10.1093/scipol/scab044.
Wittmann, Florian; Hufnagl, Miriam; Roth, Florian (2020b): Governing mission-oriented
innovation policies. Workshop Summary. Fraunhofer ISI-Utrecht University Work-
shop. Utrecht, 20th February, 2020. Available online at https://www.uu.nl/sites/de-
fault/files/uu_workshop_summary_isi_draft.pdf, checked on 1/8/2021.
Wittmann, Florian; Hufnagl, Miriam; Roth, Florian; Yorulmaz, Merve; Lindner, Ralf (forth-
coming): Second Mission Analysis Report of the Scientific Support Action to the
German Hightech Strategy 2025: Zooming in: Translating missions into pol icy in-
struments. Fraunhofer Institut e for Systems and Innovation Research ISI. Karls-
ruhe.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
20 References

Wittmann, Florian; Roth, Florian; Hufnagl, Miriam (2020c): First Mission Analysis Report
of the Scientific Support Action to the German Hightech Strategy 2025. Setting the
stage: Positioning the missions in the socio -technical system. Fraunhofer Institut
für System - und Innovationsforschung ISI. Karlsruhe. Available online at
https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/isi/doku-
mente/ccp/2020/Hightech%20Strategy%202025%20-%20first%20mis-
sion%20analysis%20report.pdf, checked on 4/28/2021.
Wu, X.; Ramesh, M.; Howlett, M. (2017): Policy capacity. A conceptual framework for
understanding policy competences and capabilities. In Policy and Society 34 (3-4),
pp. 165–171. DOI: 10.1016/j.polsoc.2015.09.001.
