
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90

Fostering Transformation. A Governance Frame for
Large Public and Private Organisations as Change
Agents in Transformations

Jakob Edler, Florian Helfrich, Stefan Kuhlmann

Place: Karlsruhe
Date: June 2025

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Responsible for content
Jakob Edler, jakob.edler@isi.fraunhofer.de; Florian Helfrich: Florian.Helfrich@uni-oldenburg.de; Stefan Kuhlmann,
s.kuhlmann@utwente.nl, s.coelman@gmail.com
Recommended citation
Edler, J.; Helfrich, F.; Kuhlmann, S. (2025): Fostering Transformation. A Governance Frame for Large Public and Private
Organisations as Change Agents in Transformations, (Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Pol-
icy Analysis No. 90). Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer ISI.
Published
June 2025
ISSN
1612-1430
Doi
10.24406/publica-4767

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | I

Contents
Abstract .......................................................................................................................................... 1
1 Introduction: The quest for system transformation and the critical role of
large public and private organizations ................................................................... 2
2 Literature perspectives on LPPOs and system transformation ......................... 7
2.1 Organisational change literature ................................................................................................... 7
2.2 System transitions literature and change requirement of critical actors ............................ 9
2.3 Summary and a gap to fill ............................................................................................................. 12
3 Meta-governance Frame for LPPOs as change agents ..................................... 13
3.1 Governance approach: the basic idea ........................................................................................ 13
3.2 Governance approach A: Ensuring quality of interaction ..................................................... 14
3.3 Governance approach B: Positioning & orchestrating structural change......................... 15
3.4 Governance approach C: Building supportive premises ....................................................... 15
4 Empirical illustrations: Meta-governance Frame for LPPOs as change agents
 ......................................................................................................................................... 16
4.1 Case selection and methodology ................................................................................................ 16
4.2 A major public-private energy provider .................................................................................... 17
4.3 A national agency for research and innovation ...................................................................... 19
4.4 A technical university .................................................................................................................... 20
5 Discussion and Conclusions .....................................................................................23
References ................................................................................................................................... 27

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 1
Abstract
This article seeks to fill a critical gap in the context of mission oriented and transformative policies by
conceptualising generic governance conditions for large public and private organisations to engage
constructively with the transformation of wider socio -technological systems as an ongoing learning
process.
So far, innovation and other policies to achieve transformative missions tend to rely on established
instruments, mostly supply side, fostering research and innovation activities to move in desired direc-
tions. More sophisticated approaches stimulate absorp tion and diffusion of innovation and support
market creation and uptake. However, for existing socio -technological systems to shift towards sus-
tainability, constitutive actors within such systems, like large public and private organisations, need to
actively foster the transformation, as a process of internal and external organisational experimentation
and innovation. They are critical actors in their respective system context in two ways: in the past they
have co-produced the problematic effects of existing systems; in the future they can severely influence
the speed and direction of transition of systems and act as change agents towards more sustainable
systems - provided they manage to transform themselves, too.
Those actors are very diverse organisations, ranging from large companies, governmental funding
bodies, higher education institutions, and related intermediary organisations. They are situated be-
tween the individuals and their behaviour on the one hand and the broader systems level on the other,
i.e. at the meso level of systems change, where they fulfil critical systemic functions.
In order to adjust to and support transformations, they need to re-orientate their organisational mis-
sions, strategies and behaviours – far beyond their research and innovation activities – and to re-con-
figure their internal and external relationships. The y have to actively engage in the very process of
defining directions and orchestrating the system transformation, critically reflecting about their roles
in related processes, and to build up capabilities to change. If critical meso-level actors resist change,
transformations will be hindered or fail altogether. Therefore, in this article we explore – in a diagnostic
manner – generic governance conditions that diverse critical actors will need to become constructive
and effective change agents. We do so by drawing on and expanding a set of (meta-)governance
(Jessop 2002) principles that originally were developed in the context of ‘responsible research and
innovation’, a context posing very similar challenges for corporate actors (Kuhlmann et al. 2016;
Randles 2017).
We illustrate the relevance of these governance conditions with three short vignettes of critical actors
in Europe, a major public-private energy provider, a governmental funding agency, and a university of
technology. Inspecting the suggested generic conditions helps to reveal fostering and hampering fac-
tors for transformative ambitions of these actors and their capacity to act as change agents.
Highlights
• Large public and private organisations can be critical for system transformation.
• As transformative change agents large public and private organisations need to re-configure
their internal and external identity and organisational ways of working.
• We suggest an array of generic meta-governance principles as diagnostic measures and require-
ments for constructive and productive organizational change.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 2
1 Introduction: The quest for system transformation and the
critical role of large public and private organizations
Most governments, international organisations and an increasing number of political actors agree that
climate change, energy crises, global health threats and other grand challenges ask for major trans-
formations of incumbent socio-technological and socio-economic systems. Recent examples include
the “Green Deal” of the European Commission (2019), the “Immediate Climate Action Programme” of
the German Government (Federal Government 2022) and the United States’ “Inflation Reduction Act”
addressing climate change (Larsen et al. 2022). Yet, purposeful system transformation is complex and
normatively highly contested. The starting point of this article is that one cannot devise a straight -
forward top-down governance approach to induce and deliver desired transformations.
Our premise is that, to trigger and sustain system transformation, we need to focus on critical systemic
roles of large public and private organizations (LPPOs) as central change agents in socio-technological
systems, such as large companies, governmental research and innovation funding bodies, higher ed-
ucation institutions, and related intermediary organisations. Large companies can help to develop
products, processes and markets to meet transformative requirements; funding bodies can introduce
transformative research and innovation programmes; higher education and research institutions can
develop new knowledge and educate new generations of transformative change agents.
This paper explores in a diagnostic manner and tentatively applies a meta -governance framework to
understand and support the role of such LPPOs as change agents in transitions. In our concept ‘gov-
ernance’ includes all related actors, their resources, interests and power, fora for debate and arenas for
negotiation between actors, rules of the game, and policy instruments applied helping to achieve le-
gitimate agreements (Kuhlmann 2001; Benz 2006), while ‘meta -governance’ is about “organising the
conditions of governance” (Jessop 2002, p. 242).
Why is this perspective relevant? Since the early 2000s science, technology and innovation policies
have increasingly become geared towards addressing objectives reaching beyond an immediate eco-
nomic focus on growth and competitiveness (Lindner et al. 2016; Boon and Edler 2018). This ‘normative
turn’ is expressed in the strategic reorientation of national and supranational research and innovation
policies to address the ‘Grand Societal Challenges’ such as health, demographic change, wellbeing and
sustainability (Foray et al. 2012; Kallerud et al. 2013; Kuhlmann and Rip 2018) or, on a more operational
level, societal missions (Mazzucato 2018).
However, system transformation is often occurring very slowly or at risk to fail because of the inherent
contestation for the direction and scope of change, the complexity of required interwoven changes
and the heterogeneity of the actor landscape and related practices. Also, it remains an open question
“how transformative change policies can go beyond some niche social and geographical spaces, and
scale up to influence the current world -wide organization of production and consumption.” (Giuliani
2018, p. 1580)
Failures concern poor ‘directionality’ of change in underlying science and innovation activities (Stirling
2024), as well as societal practice, policy coordination, demand-articulation and reflexivity (Weber and
Rohracher 2012; Schot and Steinmueller 2018). Even more basic, the required transformations “[…] are
too complex to be addressed in versions of a ‘command and control’ mode. While there will still be
roles for central, more, or less authoritative actors, like governments, their ac tion would be more like
modulation of ongoing dynamics (…) and versions of nudging […]”, as Kuhlmann and Rip put it (2018,

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 3
p. 1). In other words, change will come about only as a result of an interplay of different actor strategies.
Therefore, scholars and policymakers need to unpack notions of directionality, experimentation, de-
mand articulation, policy coordination and learning in innovation systems (Diercks et al. 2019; Grillitsch
et al. 2019; Wanzenböck et al. 2020; Kern and Rogge 2016), with particular attention to the role of
LPPOs. As Giuliani (2018, p. 1580) puts it: big corporate actors “have demonstrated an ability to shape
the world we live in, in many fundamental ways”. Increasingly LPPOs, such as global ‘Tech Giants’ are
drawing on and even foster “asymmetric, predatory relations in the innovation process” (Rikap and
Lundvall 2021, p. 59; similar: Mazzucato and Robinson 2018). If such LPPOs are “[…] part of the problem,
they should be also part of the solution. (…) any policy solution that does not contemplate them to the
full is likely to have a marginal impact” (Giuliani 2018, p. 1580). Still, while recent calls for transformative
mission-based policies have addressed the critical role of LPPOs (e.g. Mazzucato 2018; Robinson and
Mazzucato 2019, Turnheim and Sovacool 2020), there are two shortcomings in existing studies on
LPPO. First, the majority of studies on large organisations focus on incumbent firms. But for system
transformation to happen, the broader actor landscape and many kinds of actors need to be involved
and mobilised (Lindner et al. 2016, Turnheim and Sovacool 2020). For organisations as agents in the
distributed agency of transformations, a key premise is their role as intentional actors, which is part of
the governance definition of ’intentional‘ coordinative action (Lindner et al. 2016; Borrás and Edler
2014). This means that organisational actors are not objects, but subjects of transformation. Thus, it is
critical to understand who all the major agents are, what material interests, motivations and capabilities
they have (Mazzucato et al. 2020).
Second, existing literature analyses the strategic behaviour of large organisations, i.e. firms mainly, but
they do not dig deeper into the meso -level organisational conditions and management practices
within large critical actors that need to actively both adapt to and influence the direction of the trans-
formation.
These are important shortcomings. As the ’nature‘ and urgency of articulated challenges and of needs
for system-transformative are societally contested (Kuhlmann and Rip 2018), the problem perception
and framing of a challenge and related mission by incumbent and new system actors at meso -levels
is challenged as well and will change during time. Consequently, the governance and management of
LPPOs need to facilitate their organisational capacity and reflexive capabilities to cope with contesta-
tion, to overcome imprinted problem perceptions, to reflect, and to adopt the responsibility and ca-
pability to learn.
We apply a broad understanding of LPPOs and their potential role as change agents. LPPOs “[…] have
a constitution which defines their legitimate domain, potential membership, and operational rules.” At
the same time, as organisations they “[…] are internally differentiated, and their actions are often the
product of internal conflicts and power struggles.” LPPOs are not necessarily and “[…] primarily output-
oriented; they engage in symbolic as well as defensive action, reciprocate favours, and may need to be
prodded and provoked before they move.” (Mayntz 1986, p. 19). To overcome their structural inertia,
LPPOs need external turbulence, pressure and incentives, such as the above-mentioned major govern-
mental policy initiatives, and favourable internal governance conditions, the focal interest of our paper.
We regard LPPOs as critical actors if they are being situated in central industrial, societal or political
positions that are closely interwoven with decision making processes and markets that are directly
related with the system transition. They operate b etween the individuals and their behaviour on the
one hand and the broader systems level on the other, i.e. at the meso level of systems change, where
they fulfil critical systemic functions. In their positions they possess the ability to drive and/or bloc k

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 4
systemic change; they may, for example, have crucial influence on the acknowledgement, conceptual-
isation and advancement of the transformation of energy infrastructures and markets, either explicitly,
or implicitly embodied. LPPOs are simultaneously actors within transformation processes but at the
same time have the agency to become and fulfil a role as critical actors in which they can actively
contribute and shape, either by fostering or hindering, the ongoing societal transformation processes,
including agendas and changes of the environment (markets, regulatory frameworks, networks and
relationships with other actors) in which they are situated in. This might in some instance include forms
of starting/setting things in motion, as well as adapting to ong oing transformation processes which
have been set in motion by other actors.
We have selected a rather broad definition of what constitutes an LPPO, due to the fact that organisa-
tions or institutions being critical actors, can have various, multifaceted forms and actors with diverse
structural characteristics. What unifies them however under our understanding of LPPOs, is that these
actors are all of a substantial size (either considering their body of employees or market share which
they hold) and/or all uphold forms of strategic and influential (power) positions, through which the y
have the agency to actively impact their environment or the markets on which they operate and inter-
act with. Due to their relative position vis-à-vis the transformation, they are de facto veto players, either
advancing or (at least) slowing down other ac tors in their transformational processes, given their
meaning in the transformation at hand. Although these organisations might be guided by very differ-
ent institutional logics, organisational models, and positions, they can be classified as critical actor s
due to these conditions and characteristics.
As highlighted by our principles and further analysis (see p.14-15), organisations and institutions which
can be considered under our definition of LPPOs, are not necessarily and inherently fulfilling their role
towards being or becoming critical actors. L PPOs which do not actively become involved in the dy-
namics of the ongoing transformation processes in which they are situated, namely through forms of
direction setting, re-structuring or engagement with other stakeholders, thus cannot be considered
critical actors in our definition. It is important to highlight here that we understand the term and in-
stances of “becoming active” here as any form of action by actors, both encompassing actions that
might support or foster transformation processes, as well as forms of hinderance and actively resisting
(through selective, strategic passive resistance or active counterplaying actions). Additionally, through
a flexible and diverse understanding of such LPPOs as critical actors, we are indicating that there is an
array of actors which are equally important with regards to studying transformations in societies and
ongoing processes of transformative change with regards to large-scale societal problems such as the
energy transition.
Although we recognise the transformative potential and capabilities of smaller scales of organisations
like system intermediaries, startups or citizen movements as change agents (e.g. Kemp et al. 1998;
Schot and Geels 2008; Raven et al. 2010), our focus is set at more large scale systematic change and
overarching societal influence of such critical actors due to their central and deeply embedded posi-
tions of incumbent power, political influence, visibility and est ablished (industrial) market positions.
LPPOs as critical actors can directly enable, guide and hinder large scale systematic transformative
change.
We presume that, even though the activities of LPPOs in socio-technological systems are quite diverse,
there are also generic core structures and processes influencing their respective organisational capac-
ity and reflexive capabilities to act in transformative ways. These conditions need to be explored, un-
derstood and addressed. Successful changes have a critical potential to contribute to effective system-

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 5
wide transformations in ways that make those transformations more legitimate and effective. We spe-
cifically want to highlight that our overarching approach and corresponding meta-governance frame-
work beyond analysing mere forms of organisational change within the internal structure of LPPOs
that are only reactive to changes around them. Instead, our understanding of the term “governance”
should highlight the specific role of LPPOs as change agents, which enables them to actively contribute
to the transformation process itself by changing their organisational structure, vision and/or (business)
strategy. As highlighted through our principles (see p. 14-15), such actions of change agents are mul-
tifaceted, whereby we consider forms of internal reorganisation as being only one part of the overall
contribution and influence change agents have on ongoing transformation processes.
To function as effective change agents, LPPOs will profit from a set of generic orientating principles as
to how to organise system transformation processes across a range of diverse organisational and cor-
porate actors and their respective organisational remits, institutional incentives, regulatory constraints,
normative expectations in constructive and productive ways. As we will show in Section 2 below, rele-
vant bodies of literature (on organisational change, on sociotechnical system transitions and on related
policies) do not sufficiently capture such generic conditions of organisational change. Therefore, in
Section 3 of this paper we will complement extant literature with an overarching governance concept
originally developed to foster responsible research and innovation (“RRI”, e.g. von Schomberg 2013).
This orientating RRI framework (“Responsibility Navigator”, Kuhl mann et al. 2016) aims to facilitate
responsibility-related debates, strategic reflection and decision-making processes in research and in-
novation organisations, in ways that are perceived by involved actors as constructive and productive.
We will modify and further develop this framework to address the specific transformative conditions
of LPPOs as change agents.
Given the above intricacies of system transformation and the essential role of LPPOs in this process, a
generic overarching framework is required to support the transformation of a diverse range of actors,
such as funding organisations; ministries; boards of universities and of companies; civil society organ-
isations. Our two conceptual questions are:
• What are the external and internal conditions and organisational practices that shape the willing-
ness and ability of LPPOs in the socio-technological systems to contribute as change agents con-
structively to system transformation that is seen as legitimate and in line with societal prefer-
ences?
• How can the diagnostic lens of overarching governance principles support our understanding of
those conditions and practices and help to foster the willingness and ability of change agents to
support system transformation?
Tackling those research questions also responds to recent claims within the systems transition litera-
ture, which has recognised the need to re -appraise the role of large organisational players who are
incumbents in the system that is about to be transforme d (Bien and Sassen 2020; Bögel et al. 2019;
Turnheim and Sovacool 2020; Köhler et al. 2019; Mühlemeier 2019; Heiskanen et al. 2018; Heiberg et
al. 2022). Turnheim and Sovacool (2020) ask for a re-assessment of their roles and call for more em-
phasis on the resources those organisations can deploy, such as capability, material, political, or idea-
tional to "change their strategies over time" (ibid p. 182) and actually support transformation, whereby
organisational change becomes "integral part of transition processes" (Bögel et al. 2019, p. 359). In this
article, we offer a foundational conceptual approach that focuses on internal governance conditions
in order to make this critical change happen, embedded in a dynamically evolving political and eco-
nomic environment. We thus go beyond approaches wh ich focus on how purposive transition

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 6
initiatives support or interact with organisational change (Bos and Brown 2014; Bögel et al. 2019; Brez-
nitz et al. 2018), as we assume that the adequacy and effectiveness of those schemes rests on a sound
understanding of the transformation conditions of those critical actors (see also a related recent liter-
ature review by Borras et al. 2023). Our concept is not, however, an attempt to understand transitions
as such better, but the role LPPOs can play within them.
This article is structured as follows. The next section outlines the requirements for LPPOs to engage
productively in the purposeful transformation of systems. This is based mainly on organisational
change related literature and transition literature. Section 3 will then introduce overarching principles
and guidance for change agents to meet those requirements. In Section 4 the working of these prin-
ciples and guidelines will be illustrated through three empirical vignettes. Section 5 will then summa-
rise the main contribution of this conceptual approach and draw conclusions on how to further extend
and enhance the concept for LPPOs as change agents in transformation.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 7
2 Literature perspectives on LPPOs and system transformation
In this paper we consider LPPOs as organised actors engaging in markets, public policy and civil soci-
ety, such as large companies, universities, governmental funding bodies, related intermediary organi-
sations, at local, national and international levels. They are critical actors because they have consider-
able organisational weight in their respective systems and they can adopt at least three critical roles
and become essential change agents in system transformation:
• They have co-produced and they embody material, knowledge, market and regulatory structures
of different domains within incumbent socio-technological systems.
• This said, they would have to adopt, internalize and enact the new, transformative structures to
be effective for their respective domain and system transformation at large.
• Successful change agents can serve as avantgarde and positive role model for other LPPOs in
their domain.
In these critical roles LPPOs need to be confronted with and exposed to significant environmental turbu-
lence – such as radical political and regulation shifts; disruptive technologies; natural disasters – disarrang-
ing their incumbent internal and external rule regimes. While LPPOs can be regulated and incentivised by
public policy towards supporting transformation, our starting assumption is that if they are unwilling or
unable to support the transformation, and to adjust their own role in the process, transformation will be
impeded, slowed down or distorted. We thus question, what are the generic institutional requirements for
LPPOs to engage productively in the purposeful transformation of systems?
In order to better understand and further conceptualise strategic orientations and requirements for change
agents, we mobilise extant conceptual and empirical work on organisational change and transformations
before we link it with the debate on responsible research and innovation which inspires us to reflect about
preconditions to become a productive agent of change. We start with rather general organisational theory
approaches that deal with the need of organisations to adapt to environmental change.
2.1 Organisational change literature
One major concern of organisational studies, going back at least to Cyert and March (1963), has been
the adaptation of organisations. There are a range of major organisational theories that focus on the
questions how and why firms adapt to changes in their environment. In distinguishing "adaptation"
from any form of strategic change management, a broad review of adaptation approaches has identi-
fied four key major characteristics of adaptation processes in organisations (Sarta et al. 2021, p. 46):
the change in organisations is intentional, i.e. "[…] rooted in organizational members’ awareness of
their environment, resulting in a choice to react to, anticipate , or ignore changes in the environment
[…]" (ibd. p. 46); relational, meaning that the organisation and the environment influence each other;
conditioned, i.e. the changes in the environment and in the organisation are also influenced by other
organisations in that environment, and finally convergent, meaning that the organisational character-
istics move towards a functional fit with the (changing) environment.
From the various organisational theories that explain adaptation behaviour, organisational sociology
(Greenwood and Hinnings 2014), contingent theory approaches (Petrovska and Berzins 2000; Alves et
al. 2017; Donaldson 1987), and variation-selection-retention models (Henderson and Stern 2004) focus
on the changes, pressures and opportunities stemming from changes in the environment (Sarta et al.
2021, p. 49). These complementary theoretical approaches all postulate that there needs to be a

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 8
functional fit between the structure and strategy of an organisation on the one hand and its environ-
ment and the role the organisation plays in this environment on the other hand. The quality of this
functional fit determines the level of organisational performance. Thus, changes in the environment of
organisations – the contingencies – will influence the role the organisation performs as well as its
structure and strategy. A related approach in management and political science, the punctuated equi-
librium approach (Gersick 1991; Romanelli and Tushman 2017) stresses the disruptive nature of many
adaptation processes implying that “[…] organisations will typically accomplish fundamental transfor-
mations in short, discontinuous bursts of change involving most or all key dominant domains of or-
ganisational activity. These include changes in strategy, structure, power distribution, and control sys-
tems.” (Lam 2005, p. 135-136).
This, however, is not a deterministic process, there rather is a “structural adjustment to regain fit ”
(Donaldson 1987). As both performance and environmental changes (contingency) are multidimen-
sional (Adegbite et al. 2018, p. 30), there is no deterministic relationship and thus there are strategic
choices to be made. One of the most important dimensions of those is normative. Value judgements
– and their changes – by strategic leadership determine the choices to be made in the course of the
re-adjustment to environmental changes that optimise normative fit and secure necessary acceptance
by external expectations (Boiral 2007; Le Mens et al. 2011; Henderson and Stern 2004). The organisa-
tional mechanisms based on those normative adjustments for adaptation are numerous, mostly en-
compassing a combination of changing internal resources and behaviour, organisational routines, ca-
pabilities and knowledge in the organisation (for a summary see Sarta et al. 2021).
These insights from organisational and management studies are very useful as they demonstrate the
need for companies to keep in mind their functional fit to their environment and to react to changes
in their environment. The more fundamental the environmen tal changes, the more fundamental the
needs for organisations to react, and the more important to understand the feedback loops of organ-
isational change and environmental change. While those studies focus on economic performance and
survival of firms, these insights can easily be extended to the role and performance of other organisa-
tions in their respective systems.
For our purpose of developing a concept for the understanding of governance within large organisa-
tions in the context of transitions, we must now turn to literature that deals with organisational change
requirements in the context of fundamental contingencies, i.e. system transformation. This embedding
into the transition literature is crucial because we postulate that the changes in the organisational
environment that characterise system transitions are different in various ways. First, they are more
fundamental and holistic then most changes in markets that the organisational change literature is
normally concerned with. All elements of a functional system such as energy, mobility, health etc. are
under pressure to perform differently, societal expectations and standards of legitimate action within
a system change, and with it regulatory framework conditions, infrastructure provision, necessary skills,
technologies and value chains and social practices. This may put pressure on the very identity of LPPOs
and the value they provide to that system. At the same time, as outlined above, the LPPO itself is critical
for the direction and speed of transformation, i.e. it will experience some sort of demand for change
and not to act as a veto player for the transfor mation. Further, depending on the nature of the LPPO
and its function in the system, for the LPPO to simply fail is not an option if there is no functional
equivalent. Many LPPOs are sticky, in the public realm they are often without functional equivalent, in
the marketplace they are often too big to fail or exert too much downstream pressure. Thus, failure to
adapt may not necessarily result in the failure of the LPPO, but it will inevitably hinder the transition
itself, adding to the societal and potentially political pressure to change.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 9
2.2 System transitions literature and change requirement of critical
actors
Understanding LPPOs as incumbents within larger socio -technical systems and organisational struc-
tures, more contemporary literature (such as Van Mossel et al. 2018, Turnheim and Sovacool 2020),
further enriches the perspective on LPPOs being situated within processes of transformation. Most
often, in the transition literature incumbents are conceptualised as reacting to transitions that are trig-
gered elsewhere, in the niche outside the regime the LPPO is situated in. Incumbents are often found
to remain in an inert position or actively delaying the ongoing transition within their environment are
mentioned in the literature (Van Mossel et al. 2018, p. 57). In some instances, incumbents might actively
resist change (Geels 2014) or working against fundamental change through forms of cooperation with
other incumbents (Hess 2014; Musiolik et al. 2012), either of economic or political nature (Van Mossel
et al. 2018, p. 44, 53). Moreover, such a form of resistance can also be exerted through strategical
technology development or setting technical standards that hinder the advancement of ongoing tran-
sition processes (Smink et al. 2013; Cooper and Schendel 1976; Dunford 1987; Van Mossel et al. 2018,
p. 44, 53). Importantly, Berggren et al. (2015) demonstrate that firms may be both sticking to the old
system and at the same time support the development of niches. Situated in the MLP approach and
linking it with technology strategy literature, Berggren et al. show how incumbents can be productive
through policies that provide bridges between the niche markets and the established regime markets.
(Berggren et al. 2015, p. 1026)
The flexibility and dynamic capabilities of incumbents for coping with the transition processes around them
is dependent on their previously set routines and the resources that might be valuable in the transitioning
environment (Walker et al. 2002; Miller and Shamsie 1996; Rumelt 1984; Thornhill and Amit 2003; Eisen-
hardt and Martin 2000; Van Mossel et al. 2018, pp. 51-52, 56). However, it also needs to be noted that not
all forms of transformative capacity are developed, and not all actions of incumbents are made solely
sourced from their environment. Here, practices of retaining routines and strategies by dominant LPPOs
based on their previously successful history, even if they do not prove to be aligned with their current
environment, are noted in the literature (Henderson and Clark 1990; Starbuck 1983; Van Mossel et al. 2018,
pp. 50, 56). These findings, in fact, point to the very need of better understanding what drives or hinders
the build up of awareness for the need to change in the context of transitions and subsequent internal
organisational changes to happen that are conducive to that change.
For this approach to develop, we deliberately do not situate ourselves firmly within one distinct tran-
sition approach such as MLP or Transition Management. Their inherent pre -theoretical assumptions
and major perspectives would limit our approach, as we se ek to provide a framework to understand
the internal governance requirements regardless of the role LPPOs are attributed with theoretically.
For example, the MLP approach conceptualises powerful incumbent players, mainly firms, rarely as
pro-active change agents, as here change is driven bottom up, from niches outside the regime and its
incumbents (for an overview see Turnheim and Sovacool 2020). What is thus needed is a framework
that is generic in the sense of being applicable to the entire scope of roles played by incumbents, from
incumbents as reacting to bottom-up dynamics that challenge their very role in existing systems (re -
active mode) to incumbents as a source of change (pro-active mode). Further, we need to expand the
view to literature that seeks to dig deeper into the internal processes in organisations in the context
of transition. A decade ago, Ansari and Krop (2012) have conceptualised that firms react differently to
transformative challenges depending on properties in three dimensions: their organisational field, the

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 10
kinds of innovative challenges they are faced with and the pre-existing incumbent firm properties such
as capabilities, boundary management and strategies.
To develop the latter dimension of organisational properties, we cannot lean to one particular transi-
tion approach, rather we mobilise complementary literature in an eclectic manner. Overall, Lindner et
al. (2016) identify and operationalise four types of capacity on system and actor levels: self-reflection
(including demand articulation); bridging/integrating capacity (absorptive capacity, opening up etc.);
anticipation; and experimentation. In a similar vein Grillitsch et al. (2019) plot four dimensions ( direc-
tionality; experimentation; demand articulation; policy learning / coordination) against three levels (ac-
tors and their interests; networks; institutions). They claim that organisational actors need to develop
capabilities to play transformative roles in their respective networks and regimes, and that they need
policy support to do so (Grillitsch et al. 2019, pp. 1050). The article hints at the need to distinguish
between capabilities of actors to support change, and capabilities to deal with the conse quences of
the change for their own organisation. Accordingly, simple programmes or appeals towards actors to
change are not very promising if one does not understand their respective institutional context, soft
factors, capabilities and normative orientation.
One recent strand of literature looks at the capabilities public policy actors need to support transfor-
mation through policy design and implementation. Mazzucato et al. (2020) identify challenges of cog-
nitive paralysis given the wicked problems of transfor mation that are hard to grasp. Those cognitive
challenges are met with traditional policy views and instruments which tends to lead to organisational
inertia. To overcome those challenges, they formulate several "dynamic capabilities" of public policy
actors, such as the ability to engage with social actors, the mobilisation of a diverse set of competencies
and the ability to reflect and evaluate changes in strategies. In a similar vein, with more differentiation,
a literature review of Borrás et al. (2023) identify five categories of capabilities for public sector organ-
isations supporting transitions, i.e. analytical, coordination capacity, operational, regulatory, anticipa-
tory capabilities.
Next to the requirement to develop capacities internally, organisations also face pressure to adapt
structurally. Analysing the organisational changes within the innovation agency Vinnova, Fünfschilling
et al. (2017) highlight that organisations that seek to influence transformations also need to adjust
their own internal structures to match the cross -sectoral and challenge driven requirements of the
transformation. They need to set in place reflexive mechanisms to monitor how appropriate new, trans-
formative activities are and if they need to be readjusted. This is in line with insights of sociological
management studies, stating that organisational learning in transitions also requires to adapt organi-
sational routines to the changes in context (van Mierlo and Beers 2020, p. 259). They find that engaging
in transformations means to engage with a broad spectrum of actors within those transformations.
Further, transformational actors appear to rely on an interplay of strong transformational leadership
on the one hand and support of bottom-up initiatives (Fünfschilling et al. 2017; van Mierlo and Beers
2020).
The literature finally asserts the need for changes in the very identity of organisational actors. All or-
ganisational changes required for actors supporting transformations culminate in what management
studies have long coined ‘organisational learning’ which van Mierlo and Beers (2020) have reviewed in
the context of transitions. The wickedness and openness of transformational dynamics results in a
quest for a new orientation as to the very role of the organisation. What is needed is collective sense-
making (Lindner et al. 2016; Bien and Sassen 2020), or collaborative "negotiation of meaning" (van
Mierlo and Beers 2020) which can create internal and external legitimacy for change (Lindner et al.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 11
2016). This complex process rests on the organisational ability to be reflexive. These considerations
within the transformation literature point to a more general strand of literature that has been dealing
with the needs for and conditions of major organisational change.
The learning processes needed for transformational change alters the very core of the organisational
self-image. The organisational learning strand of literature highlights that through multiple learning
loops within the organisations and in interaction with other actors “[…] individuals modify their images
of the organisation and their understandings of organisational phenomena ” (van Mierlo and Beers
2020, p. 261). The authors go on to claim that organisational learning “must become embedded in the
images of organisation held in its members’ minds, and/or in the epistemological artefacts (the maps,
memories and programs) embedded in the organisational environment” (Argyris and Schön 1996, p.
16, as quoted in van Mierlo and Beers 2020, p. 261). This reasoning is in line with the more general
observation of historians that institutions of scientific and technical progress tend to fall victim to their
own self-referentiality (Renn 2020, p. 19). LPPOs as change agents need to escape the evolutionary
feedback loops of scientific and technological 'progress' that they have co -produced as part of their
own organisational life cycles. This is a critical insight for the understanding of the role o f LPPOs in
system transformations that goes beyond the management approaches reviewed above. System trans-
formations may challenge their very role dramatically, and thus their very identity, and it is a complex
and cumbersome process of organisational learning that is needed to make this organisational transi-
tion. Related learning capability and processes will differ across LPPOs being critical actors – which is
why in this article we are interested in generic ‘meta’-conditions.
A related strand of literature, focused on transformation as a policy problem, confirms and further
differentiates the requirements organisations face in transformations. Wanzenböck et al. (2020, p. 474)
assert that the understanding of societal problems "should be based on three dimensions of wicked-
ness: (1) contestation; (2) complexity; and (3) uncertainty", and that this understanding then should be
the basis for transformative policy design. While change agents are desperately needed to support
mission orientation and necessary system transformation at the meso-level, they are hardly prepared
to cope with such wickedness. Rather, as organisations they tend to develop organisational inertia
(Hannan and Freeman 1984; Barnett and Pontikes 2008) which in turn can lead to failure of ambitious
national (or other) policies. Such policies tend to neglect the complexities and the auto -dynamics of
critical actors down the road, such as LPPOs (Rip 1998; Pressman and Wildavsky 1984).
In the literature on transformative innovation policy the inertia issue has been addressed as “reflexivity
failure” (Weber and Rohracher 2012), though without a focus on the particular governance and man-
agement conditions of meso-level organisations (e.g. Todnem By 2005). LPPOs need to overcome ’im-
printed‘ internal and external ’world views‘, path dependence and instruments. Marqu is and Tilcsik
(2013, p. 201) define imprinting “[…] as a process whereby, during a brief period of susceptibility, a
focal entity develops characteristics that reflect prominent features of the environment, and these
characteristics continue to persist despite significant environmental changes in subsequent periods”.
For LPPOs this means that they have to construct orientation for the directionality discourse. They must
engage in coordination and to express (future) preferences in relation to transformation, being a com-
petent user, and engaging in user -producer interaction. Again, all this requires reflexivity: change
agents need to engage in collective sense making (Bien and Sassen 2020) which in turn asks for internal
capabilities to do so, continuous monitoring and anticipation, absorptive capacities to follow and con-
tribute to expert-based discourses.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 12
2.3 Summary and a gap to fill
To sum up the above literature review, there are high demands for critical actors to change in order to
play a constructive role in transformations as postulated by various strands of literature concerned:
For LPPOs to become change agents they need to
• consider their critical roles in transformations and build up capabilities for change,
• adjust internal and influence external normative frameworks,
• re-orientate behaviour and to re-configure internal and external relationships,
• actively engage in the process of negotiating, defining directions, orchestrating and co-creating
organisational and systems change,
• and in doing so may be pushed to adapt their very organisational and corporate identity.
What is missing in this on-going and increasingly important debate is a sound and differentiated con-
ceptualisation of the internal governance processes and requirements that facilitate transformative,
responsive and legitimate governance of change agents. What we need, in other words, is a generic
meta-governance framework for LPPOs as change agents. It would also help to fill the lacunae found
in the three strands of literature above. Having reviewed three complementary strands of literature on
the need for organisations to change within transformations of their systems, the strategic organisa-
tional change literature more generally and the policy change literature, we can now turn towards a
conceptual approach that operationalises the governance requirements within critical actors.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 13
3 Meta-governance Frame for LPPOs as change agents
3.1 Governance approach: the basic idea
In conceptualising the conditions for organisational change in the context of system transformation,
we can fruitfully link the current debates on transformative innovation policies with a quest for ‘Re-
sponsible Research and Innovation’ (e.g. von Schomberg 2013; Stilgoe et al. 2013; Guston 2014; Van
Oudheusden and Shelley-Egan 2021). In essence, responsible innovation aims at improving the align-
ment of the impacts of technology and innovation with societal demands and values as far as possible.
However, ‘directionality’ and ‘responsibility’ have always been subject to changing value choices and
contestation (e.g. Arnaldi and Gorgoni 2016). Rather than trying to define what responsible innovation
should mean in substance (e.g. Stilgoe et al. 2013; Pandza and Ellwood 2013; de Saille 2015) for LPPOs
it can be crucial to better understand and organise the often contested transformation procedures, i.e.
the processes of negotiating and co -creating directionality (Robinson et al. 2021). Recent studies of
the institutionalisation of responsible innovation through organisational change (Wittrock et al. 2021;
Randles 2017) found limited grounding of RRI, e.g. in universities, but rather a performative and con-
tested discourse ‘in the m aking’ (Owen et al. 2021). Therefore, instead of downplaying tensions and
potential conflicts, it was suggested to identify meta-conditions and viable mechanisms that facilitate
the capacities and capabilities of relevant actors to engage in constructive and productive negotiations
(Kuhlmann et al. 2016) [2].
For system and organisational transformation in a LPPO to happen, the change must be seen by key
members as legitimate, and the measures taken to transform must be effective. For this, we suggest a
meta-governance framework with a set of principles and gui delines. Here we take advantage of the
above discussed literature. The working of these principles and guidelines will be illustrated through
three empirical vignettes.
Why would we need such an overarching governance approach? LPPO engage in very diverse trans-
formative situations, in different sectors and markets, varieties of technologies and knowledges, di-
verging regulatory frames, and societal attitudes and culture. Given the idiosyncrasies of organisational
contexts, simple one-size-fits-all governance recipes for transformation would fail. The open -ended-
ness of ongoing transformations, with emerging new spaces for articulating and negotiating problem
views and innovative ways of coping with problems, will prompt LPPOs to draw on generic modes of
meta-governance as “organising the conditions for governance” (Jessop 2002, p. 242), thus comple-
menting modes of market exchange and hierarchic command. Meta -governance can help to experi-
ment in tentative ways (Kuhlmann et al. 2019) with governance constellations that can be more or less
productive in a particular context. A meta-governance framework thus helps to understand, systema-
tise the external and internal conditions and organisational practices, and subsequently help to im-
prove the willingness and ability of critical actors in the socio -technological systems to contribute
constructively to system transformation that is seen as legitimate and in line with societal preferences.
Our development of the meta -governance framework in LPPOs is deductive. Based on the literature
discussed above we explore the working of a pre -existing RRI governance framework to the require-
ments of transformation of critical actors in transforming systems. For illustrative purposes in Section 4
(below) we will apply this deductive framework and its principles to three LPPOs. This will help us to
further adjust and develop the framework. The resulting governance principles and requirements (Sec-
tion 5, below) can be used as a blueprint for increased reflection on and decision-making for changed

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 14
directionality in ways that then best fit the specific change situation of an LPPO – the meta framework
is not meant to work as a tool for immediate and specific advice for individual LPPOs and their man-
agement.
The overarching governance approach chosen draws largely on and expands a related concept, devel-
oped in the context of policies for RRI (“Responsibility Navigator”, Kuhlmann et al. 2016). This frame-
work aims to foster responsibility-related debates, strategic reflection and decision-making processes
in research and innovation organisations, in ways that are perceived as constructive and productive.
The principles and guidelines suggested by the “Responsibility Navigator” are organised along three
major governance approaches:
a. ensuring the quality of interaction among incumbent and new stakeholders,
b. positioning and orchestration of old vs. new procedures and modes of organisation, and
c. developing supportive premises, with organisational capabilities and reflexive capabilities to cope
with transformative change.
For this RRI governance framework, we can claim a high degree of robustness of the suggested prin-
ciples given a strong empirical foundation (Randles et al. 2016; Mejlgaard and Griessler 2016) plus a
fine-tuning and testing in an elaborated ‘co -construction process’ with key meso -level stakeholders
from meso-level research and innovation organisations in Europe and beyond (Bryndum et al. 2016).
For the transformation challenge at the level of change agent, we now develop those principles further
and adjust them according to the requirements and demands derived from the transitions literature
and the mission policies literature discussed above.
Consequently, we suggest the following set of meta -governance principles and requirements for
change agents, enabling them to drive transformation.
3.2 Governance approach A: Ensuring quality of interaction
Key organisational actors aiming for transformative innovation will have to prepare for a radically
changing organisational and corporate environment. They will face new clients, business partners, po-
litical and regulatory agents, and competitors, and they will have interacted with them in productive
ways. At the same time, they will have to abandon incumbent partners whose contribution is no longer
considered sustainable. New partnerships also require new knowledge. Given the fluid and contested
nature of transformation directions and requirements the modes of knowledge production and use
need particular attention.
Principle 1.1., Inclusion: navigation through innovation missions will be transformative if key meso -
level organisations (as intermediaries, sponsors, regulators, organisers) mobilise the diversity of both
internal and system actors relevant for the wanted system change, in a way that engages them directly
and effectively in debate and activities, in such a way that they perceive processes of decision making
and policy implementation as legitimate, transparent and trustworthy.
Principle 1.2., Moderation: organizational modes appropriate to build up trust, collect data and organ-
ize dialogue are needed in the form of ‘fora', institutionalized places or procedures for interaction and
for ‘bridging’ different perspectives between contesting internal and syste m actors, after which an
identification of (potentially diverging) transformative goals, measures and procedures is achieved.
Principle 1.3., Deliberation: system transformation – confronted with uncertainty and competing inter-
ests – requires new knowledge and a re -orientation of organisational objectives and values. Critical

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 15
actors need to facilitate exploration, anticipation, assessment, sense-making, decision-making, reflex-
ivity and learning among actors with different knowledge claims, and with different positions in current
and transformed systems.
3.3 Governance approach B: Positioning & orchestrating structural
change
Key critical actors need to ‘re -invent’ and re -build their organisation, internally and vis -à-vis their
changing environments.
Principle 2.1., Modularity and flexibility: transformation of firms requires navigation in “unchartered
waters” (van de Ven et al. 2000). Change strategies will combine ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ regulatory mecha-
nisms, allowing for self -regulation and organisation, external control and accountability structu res
(e.g. supervision), where flexibility of governance arrangements should not lead to arbitrariness.
Principle 2.2., Subsidiarity: transformation will have to happen at all organisational and corporate levels.
Complementary to the self-governance some level of hierarchical command-and-control process may
be necessary in certain circumstances, performed mainly by independent actors, ca pable to oversee
and enforce.
Principle 2.3., Adaptability: LPPOs need to understand the particular historical situation of the transfor-
mation process they aim to boost with their own organisation, requiring targeted adaptation and im-
plementation of overarching transformation requests. Such calibration requires to assess how govern-
ance arrangements found in other, external organisations would have to be customised to effectively
and legitimately serve own transformative goals.
3.4 Governance approach C: Building supportive premises
Key critical actors need to “un-learn” imprinted organisational routines and practices, and to develop
new capabilities and capacities.
Principle 3.1., Capabilities: supporting reflexive individuals capable of recognizing, anticipating, delib-
erating, communicating, and pursuing in a collective manner societally desired processes and out-
comes of corporate activities, including their evaluation (‘governance literacy’).
Principle 3.2., Capacities: for capabilities to unfold, they need a supportive organisational and network
infrastructure, such as access to information, knowledge, and resources for participation.
Principle 3.3., Institutional entrepreneurship: engaged leadership is needed, top-level and continuous
support, vision and strategy, lobby work and the rewarding of institutional improvement to facilitate
transformative change.
Principle 3.4., Culture of transparency and tolerance: the need for and direction of organisational and
corporate transformation will be debated, if not contested. Such reorganisation processes can be mis-
applied and corrupted. Therefore, basic democratic principles such as rule of law and freedom of
speech, will make transformation-related governance effective and sustained overtime.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 16
4 Empirical illustrations: Meta-governance Frame for LPPOs as
change agents
4.1 Case selection and methodology
We illustrate the relevance of these governance conditions with short vignettes of transformative am-
bitions in three different organisational and corporate contexts.
We deliberately chose three diverse functional areas, i.e. one firm in the marketplace, one public actor
in the area of education/science supporting the intellectual infrastructure for transitions and one fund-
ing organisation supporting those that support the intellectual infrastructure for transitions. The choice
was not meant to represent the broad diversity of functional areas within transitions. However, by
deliberately selecting those three functional areas we sought to have a sufficient breadth in the cov-
erage of cases to demonstrate the broad value of the concept, in line with the demand of Turnheim
and Sovacool (2020) extending the realm of the marketplace and firms. Once we made this basic
choice, we then selected the organisations on the basis of a broad international screening to detect
those with an important, critical role within their functional areas and for whom we had indications of
clear transformative ambitions in each of the functional areas and where processes were still on-going.
A last criterion was convenience as to what access we could get in those organisations representing
the three functional areas and meeting the criteria.
In sum, the selection made sure that the three case vignettes differed in in three major dimensions:
1) type of LPPO (public, private, regulatory context),
2) kind of transformations (economic, technological, political, societal and cultural embedding),
3) transformation ‘situation’ of the LPPO (politics and powering, social movements, markets, win-
dows of opportunity).
Our three illustrative cases are sufficiently different, based on their institutional character, geographical
location, their mission, business orientation and organisational structure and their position in their
environment and societal context. We want t o further note that a vignette -style of illustrative cases,
such as we have presented, cannot possibly cover the multifaceted nature or organisational structures,
context and institutional characters of actors for which our framework could be applied and b ecome
useful. Our three exemplary cases thus are more targeted towards providing examples and institutional
logics with which our academic audience might most likely be familiar with and thus providing direct
indications on how our meta-framework could become relevant for their own research and/or reflec-
tions on their own institutions.
The selected LPPOs are:
• EnBW Energie Baden-Württemberg AG, a public-private energy company which since 2013 en-
gaged in a transformative agenda towards climate-friendly future of energy, applying a holistic
approach with changing technologies, markets, internal organisation, and client relations; the
transformation can be considered as a halfway success.
• Vinnova, a government innovation funding agency which in 2011 launched a transformative
agenda towards grand societal challenges, breaking with expectations of incumbents, oriented
towards more inclusion of societal actors and new types of programmes; the full transformation
potential of the agency has not yet realised.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 17
• University of Twente, a university of technology, active in competitive international markets,
which in 2019 designed a strategy towards 2030, with new technologies and capabilities for
healthcare, smart materials and industries digitalised society, and resilience; the implementation
of the transformative strategy turned out to be cumbersome.
For each vignette, extensive document analyses were performed based on publicly available infor-
mation, forms of representation online and in media, presentations and advertisements, as well as on
publicly accessible reports, strategy papers and other internal documents from the organisations. For
case (2), a national agency for research and innovation, the insights from our document analysis were
enriched by a selection of academic literature on the same organisation (see Eriksson 2006; Schwaag-
Serger and Palmberg 2021; Fünfschilling et al. 2017; OECD 2016).
In addition to this, three to five expert interviews with key actors in the transformation processes have
been conducted for each case. For these interviews, individuals with long-term expertise and employ-
ment in these organisations have been selected, providing extensive insights and knowledge on their
internal structure, culture and organisational identity. These selected senior individuals thus were able
to adequately depict their organisations transformational change throughout the last years and to
further illustrate how they, as individuals in their positions themselves, have significantly contributed
to the realisation of the transformative ambitions within their organisations.
The following sections provide a detailed overview of the insights that could be derived based on the
document analyses and expert interviews. Each vignette will be represented through a small descrip-
tion on their transformative ambitions, as well as a tab ular illustration on which principles from our
meta-governance framework have been found.
4.2 A major public-private energy provider
This LPPO claims to be one of the initial drivers of the transformative process in the German energy
sector, presenting themselves as early adopters of a transformative agenda that is centred around the
significant expansion of renewable energies. They hav e presented a holistic approach with changing
technologies, markets, internal organisation, and client relations, that should acknowledge their eco-
nomic, ecological and social responsibility, while being in direct line with the overarching aim of the
company to become climate neutral by 2035 (EnBW 2021b, c, d, e, f, g).
Since this new agenda was presented in 2013, the LPPO claims to have gradually developed from their
role as a traditional energy provider towards a strong industry partner with expertise in energy and
infrastructure. Additionally, they claim to be the first major energy company that started to present a
cultural shift in the companies’ identity that resolutely aligns themselves to the opportunities offered
by the Energiewende. According to them, this LPPO has been “[…] looking at the bigger picture earlier
than other competitors.” (EnBW 2021a). The organisations transformation towards realising these
goals, can be considered as a halfway success.
Since presenting their transformative agenda in 2013, the company has shown a significant develop-
ment in realising their goal to gradually develop from their role as a traditional energy provider to-
wards a strong industry partner with expertise in energy a nd infrastructure. This has been shown
through the LPPO’s investments and company restructuring, systematically transforming and realign-
ing their company portfolio towards more sustainability and a significant expansion of renewable en-
ergies (EnBW 2021c, d ). Three sources for renewable energies are imagined with this regard,

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 18
hydropower, wind energy and solar energy and are supported through the companies’ various inter-
national investments and pilot projects (EnBW 2021a, h, i).
Along these increasing investments into new forms of energy generation, the LPPO’s transformative
corporate agenda presented the gradual and systematic phasing out and discontinuation of fossil fuel
and nuclear power-based energy generation. Until 2022, all the LPPO’s nuclear power plants, and by
2035 all of their coal -fired power generation should be discontinued and then dismantled (EnBW
2021c, d, h). In 2020, 40% of the company’s particularly carbon -intensive electricity generation was
already phased out. To date, four nuclear power plants of the company are being dismantled, an ap-
plication to decommission an additional one has been submitted (EnBW 2021c, h).
With regards to forms of moderation, the company showed forms of using and participating in part-
nership cooperation models for engagement with municipal utilities and communities, thus applying
novel forms of organisational modes for increased dialogue with citizens and municipalities as a basis
for establishing new relationships, building trust and organised places and opportunities for the ex-
change of ideas (EnBW 2021b). This form of engagement was presented by the company as forms of
supporting local aut horities and households in becoming sustainable energy producers themselves
(EnBW 2021c).
A major shift in the company’s internal culture and identity towards acknowledging economic, ecolog-
ical and social responsibility could be noticed. This vision towards corporate responsibility extends
towards its body of employees. Responsibility for the climate, a clean environment and the conserva-
tion of biodiversity is considered a major task for the entire company (EnBW 2021j). Awareness for the
responsibility individual employees have in their own personal working environment should be raised
and employees should be motivated to get involved in sustainable behaviour (EnBW 2021e; EnBW
2021h; EnBW 2020; Interview A 2021; Interview B 2021). All employees should be considered with re-
gards to phasing out coal- and nuclear power-based energy generation and the changes associated
with it. The company presents itself as being committed to providing opportunities for the personal
development of employees and maintaining their employability, through retraining and further quali-
fication measures with regards to positions that might be closed due to this discontinuation process
(EnBW 2021h; EnBW 2020).The successful development of an environmental conscious and responsible
corporate culture and employee identity is closely related to individuals in leadership positions or on
the management level. This importance of leadership positions for the transformative process within
the LPPO was mainly shown through one individual that had embodied and represented this role,
namely the LPPO’s CEO. When he started, the CEO was p resented with the major challenge to trans-
form the group towards more sustainable energy generation, mainly rooted in the rapid rise of public
pressure after the nuclear disaster of Fukushima in 2011 ( Interview B 2021 ; Tagesschau 2021). This
created an economic hardship that urgently needed to be changed, because the exit from nuclear
power generation created a strong pressure to transform the company. In addition to the often lengthy
and bureaucratic processes that sometimes hinder the groups new investments in renewable energy
production, the drastic transformation towards new forms of energy production meant limited finan-
cial earnings for the initial years of their implementation and operation (Interview A 2021; Tagesschau
2021; Ntv 2019; FAZ 2021). Instead of opting for a top-down regulatory approach, the CEO tried and
succeeded in activating employees and getting them involved in the transformation. Applying this
deliberation approach he embodied the transformation strategy that was developed through his ac-
tions and the guidance he gave to the management level of the group (Interview A 2021).

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 19
Although there was significant success in the transformative process of the company, there are still
some persistent issues and challenges which hinder the full realisation of the LPPO’s transformative
potential. One of these issues is that there are tendencies among some employees (especially at man-
agement level) regarding the change of solely using renewable energy sources in the long run for the
company’s business portfolio. The perception of the LPPO from these individuals appears to be still
very traditional and linked to the companies’ image as a traditional (fossil) energy supplier. Here, coal
and nuclear power plants are seen as the real, reliable power sources and as driving forces for the
company. The dismantling of these branches of the company is thus building up resistance and fear
of redundancy among some employees. These tendencies have already been seen with the nuclear
phase-out and can now also be noticed with the dismantling of the companies’ coal-fired power plants
(Interview A 2021; Interview B 2021; Tagesschau 2021).
A second challenge for the company is to truly present and embody the envisioned holistic approach
for the companies’ competences across all business investments and portfolios, as well as internally
across all company sections. A final challenge for the r ealisation of the transformative agenda of the
LPPO as change agent are hindrances through some aspects of bureaucratic and regulatory frame-
works in which the company operates, both on national and international levels (Interview B 2021).
The main lessons from this case of a major public-private energy provider were
• A strategic internal restructuring and gradual transformation of company expertise and portfolio.
• Creating an internal group culture that perceives employees and their habits as an essential part
of the transformative process.
• The successful development of an environmental conscious and responsible corporate culture
and employee identity, especially through individuals in leadership positions
Process characteristics inhibiting more comprehensive transformation were:
• Persisting reluctant tendencies with regards to phasing out of traditional business portfolios from
individuals in leadership positions and some employees.
• Truly presenting and embodying the envisioned holistic approach for the companies’ compe-
tences.
• Hindrances through some aspects of bureaucratic and regulatory frameworks in which the com-
pany operates.
4.3 A national agency for research and innovation
Founded as a national innovation agency in 2001, this LPPO’s main mission was to "[…] promote sus-
tainable economic growth by financing needs-driven R&D and by developing innovation systems […]"
(Eriksson 2006, p. 8). Within the innovation systems failure rationale, like many other innovation agen-
cies, it was focused on strengthening research cooperation between academia, companies and poli-
tics/public sector in the Swedish innovation system. In 2011, the innovation funding agency launched
a transformative agenda towards grand societal challenges, breaking with expectations of incumbents,
with more inclusion of societal actors and new types of programmes. To date, while the organisation
has transformed considerably, the full transformation potential of the agency has not yet been fully
realised.
A major shift happened in 2011 with the development of the challenge-driven innovation programme
(Fünfschilling et al. 2017; OECD 2016). Building on first earlier ideas, e.g. in the area of regional sus-
tainable growth, this finally signalled a development of the agency towards a needs driven approach,

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 20
whereby up to 10% (F ünfschilling et al. 2017) of the funding now was being allocated based on the
contribution to satisfying societal needs (Vinnova 2014, as cited in Schwaag -Serger and Palmberg
2021).
Four basic themes were designed within which consortia could propose R&D projects that could prom-
ise a strong emphasis on societal impact. Consequently, societal actors and public sector was now
included stronger than before. A second programme, the Strate gic Innovation Programme SIP,
launched in 2012, also added more directionality and strategic intent. SIP was intended to generate
somewhat more transformative innovation agendas built on a strong bottom-up element of delibera-
tion with the communities (Interview Z), and in parts it succeeded, especially in a refined second and
third version of the programme (OECD 2016, p. 110). The agency took a further step in the develop-
ment towards a transformative organisation when it orientated its activities along the Sustainable De-
velopment Goals. Meanwhile, the programme portfolio now shows a number of large scale explicitly
transformative programmes. While some internal and external critics feared and that the agency would
neglect too much its traditional and critica l role as programme implementing agency for economic
well-being, the agency has nevertheless been labelled "pioneer in designing and implementing trans-
formative innovation programs with explicit references also to societal challenges and the SDGs"
(Schwaag-Serger and Palmberg 2021, p. 31).
However, the full transformative potential of the agency is not realised. Some of the approaches re-
quired were still missing, such as supporting the demand side or embedding into other policy areas
that are critical for supporting transformations (Schwaag-Serger and Palmberg 2021). Further, there is
still some way to go to change the internal funding logic away from many rather small scale projects
towards focusing on large, systemic transformative projects (Interview X, Interview Y).
The main lessons from this case of a national agency for research and innovation as change agent
were as follows. Positive enablers were:
• Strategic leadership
• A high level of autonomy in the system
• Mobilisation of highly credible external expertise internationally
• Normative link to and mobilisation of other critical policy initiatives (SDGs, EU level declaration)
• Strategic intelligence, and understanding limits of systems analysis, identifying game changing
development
• Process characteristics inhibiting more comprehensive transformation were: Limitations in estab-
lishing a more radical culture shift to a system change facilitator beyond small scale projects
• De facto sticking to a traditional role of the agency and its civil servants as small-scale pro-
gramme implementers.
4.4 A technical university
This technical university, founded in 1961, is one of four polytechnics in the Netherlands. The university
has a tradition of combining technology, science and engineering with social sciences. It has been
listed among the top 200 universities in the world by various ranking tables, and it is a partner in the
European Consortium of Innovative Universities (ECIU). With almost 12.000 students the university is a
small to medium sized higher education institution in its national context. The four technical universi-
ties compete against each other in national and international markets for education and research, while
they also collaborate via an institutional alliance (4TU.Federation 2017). In 2017-2018, in the context
of a ‘National Research Agenda’ process and effort to mobilize extra public funding for research and

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 21
higher education, the 4TU Federation launched the slogan 'High-tech for a sustainable future', claiming
to effectively resolving societal challenges in the long term (4TU.Federation 2017).
Against this background, in 2019, the university Board stated: “[…] we all must rethink our lives and
help redesign society. For us, this calls for a reinvention of our university”. Consequently, an organisa-
tion-wide process was launched for designing a strategy towards 2030, finally establishing the mission
to become the “ultimate people-first university of technology. We empower society through sustain-
able solutions.” (University of Twente 2020)
With this transformative ambition (“reinvention”) the university made an effort to position itself stra-
tegically in competitive national and international markets for funds, researchers and students. In the
Netherlands, public universities enjoy a relatively high degree of strategic discretion in the Dutch public
science system. While the adopted transformative vision is rather ambitious, its implementation as a
strategy across the university turned out to be cumbersome, slow and fuzzy.
The term ‘people -first’ in the new mission statement was supposed to mean that ”the wellbeing of
people is our guiding principle”. As a technological university the LPPO claimed to take responsibility
“for ensuring that the power of science and technology is harnessed to achieve the best possible im-
pact in a changing world”, drawing on a rich tradition of combining technical and social sciences in an
interdisciplinary manner (University of Twente 2020).
The mission was then translated into the vision to contribute to developing a “fair, sustainable and
digital society” until 2030, inclusive, open and entrepreneurial ways. The vision was broken down to
three strategic goals (University of Twente 2020):
• “Shaping society”, with social challenges are a guiding principle and aiming to become a sustain-
able organisation.
• “Shaping connections”, with a strong presence outside the campus, a fostered citizen science
movement, and engagement with the “European University of Innovation”.
• “Shaping individuals”, with the university spurring academic social entrepreneurship and im-
proved talent development.
To implement these goals in 2020 six thematic “special interest groups” were established to create
synergy between colleagues, teams and departments (Innovation of Education; Citizen Science; Indi-
viduals and Teams; Digitalization; Inclusion; Sustainability), with 34 quite heterogeneous targets, and
a number of short-term goals for 2023 were identified for short-term development and implementa-
tion. When this article was written, these short -term goals had been achieved only partly, differing
considerably per theme group. For instance, an ambitious “new way of working for staff and students”
was elaborated by the thematic group on “Individuals and Teams”, yet only slowly adopted in daily
human resource policy routines (University of Twente 2021).
During the ideation and design phase of this transformative strategy process, pro -active university
leaders and enthused, engaged working groups and individuals were able to instigate and drive the
development. In the subsequent implementation phases thoug h, when short -term targets and
measures needed to be rolled out across the entire organisation, they were received and picked up by
the different, semi-autonomous faculties, units and individuals to quite diverging degrees.
The translation of transformative goals into daily work contexts of academics and administrators
turned out to be troublesome. Professional and inspiring leadership was required not only at the or-
ganisational top but also in each academic and administrativ e unit. Such leadership would include
setting targets and taking risks (financial, academic, career -wise), recognizing that this could put

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 22
individuals and units in conflict with the traditional benchmarks of their wider professional context,
locally and internationally.
Main lessons from this case of a technical university were
• Designing a strategic vision and mission for the LPPO as change agent is crucial, with broad in-
clusion of people across the organisation and beyond.
• Moderation and deliberation, supported by “strategic intelligence” helps to trigger creative vi-
sioning.
• Institutional entrepreneurship is indispensable for instigating and launching the transformative
strategy.
Process characteristics inhibiting more comprehensive transformation were:
• Public universities are complex organisations, with different academic and epistemic cultures, and
diverse incentive structures.
• Confronted with potential transformative change, organisational units and individuals tend to
play “waiting games” to avoid first mover risks (Scharpf 1997).
• The transformative ambition will spark tensions and conflicts of interest within and beyond the
LPPO; they should not be ignored but actively addressed, as political issues.
• A conscious and well-resourced implementation phase of the transformation process becomes a
decisive component. It would also include targeted revisions of decision-making criteria and pro-
cesses.
• Career development criteria should enable risk taking and transformative capacity.
• If supportive career development criteria are not anchored at all levels and in all relevant units of
the organisation, they will have second-tier relevance.
• Throughout the implementation phase institutional entrepreneurship is needed, also at lower
levels of the organisational hierarchy.
To sum up, the three illustrative vignettes provide a structured and systematic application of the cho-
sen meta-governance framework in three different LPPOs with diverse organisational and corporate
contexts. The insights derived from our document analyses and expert interviews indicate the useful-
ness of the framework, as a simplifying device to understand the challenges and levers for change
agents to transform in the context of system transformations. At the same time, our focus on internal
and external organisational conditions of change revealed missing dimensions in the chosen meta -
governance framework. Therefore, in the closing section of this paper, we will further accentuate the
relevance and complement these depicted generic meta-governance principles and requirements for
the particular needs of LPPOs as change agents, enabling them to foster transformation.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 23
5 Discussion and Conclusions
This paper aimed to explore two conceptual questions: (1) What are the external and internal condi-
tions and organisational practices that shape the willingness and ability of LPPOs in the socio-techno-
logical systems to contribute as change agents constructively to system transformation that is seen as
legitimate and in line with societal preferences? (2) How can the diagnostic lens of overarching gov-
ernance principles support our understanding of those conditions and practices and help to foster the
willingness and ability of change agents to support system transformation?
Based on the insights on requirements of organisations to adapt to their changing environments de-
rived from organisational, transition and policy studies, our two main starting assumptions were that
LPPOs are critical for transformation, and that for them to play constructive and effective roles in trans-
formations, they actively and consciously need to transform themselves.
We have identified and analysed three cases of LPPOs in different institutional contexts. These cases
served as illustrative examples for LPPOs in various organisational contexts and provide a multifaceted
basis for applying and presenting our framework. The selection was based on an explorative screening
of LPPOs for which we observed an explicit ambition to go through a process of tra nsformation and
which covered a range of criteria across three functional areas. We stress that these conclusions are
not meant to be a generalisation, a result of representative and deep case study work. Rather, on the
basis of this paper such a study would now be possible. We can draw explorative conclusions though.
Applying the suggested governance principles as diagnostic lenses helped to reveal fostering and
hampering factors for transformative ambitions of these actors and their capacity to act as change
agent. In all three cases we found serious, credible strategies designed and implemented to transform
the organisations. Across all three major dimensions of our framework (quality of interactions; posi-
tioning and orchestration; supportive environments), all three organisations implemented strategic
action.
We do not want to appraise the relative success of those three transformations in any greater detail.
Nevertheless, our analysis shows that all organisations managed to initiate a strategic departure that
led to substantive change. To achieve those changes, they managed to put in place a range of inno-
vative governance practices.
We have seen that the specific implementation of the meta-governance principles that we have used
to analyse their strategies (“Responsibility Navigator”, Kuhlmann et al. 2016) has been instrumental in
moving the organisation in the desired direction. At t he same time, the three cases have also shown
that the interaction between organisational change and the changes in the context – i.e. the socio -
technological, political and economic transformation – has been critical. The importance of this inter-
play between organisational change and contextual change suggests extending the initial meta-gov-
ernance in important ways.
As set out at the beginning of this paper our framework is designed as tool for facilitating and accel-
erating reflection processes by actors on the institutional structures they are a part of. We are convinced
that our approach has heuristic value as a tool that provides actors with support for (self -)reflection/
“self-help” in diverse contexts, and not a concrete recipe for change and decision-making that provides
detailed and situational advice.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 24
The three illustrative cases lead us to several cross-cutting lessons learned (also in line with a recent
literature review on the transformative capacity of public sector organizations, Borrás et al. 2023), as
well as to lessons for our three major governance dimensions. We start with cross-cutting observations.
All three organisations, to different degrees, still have some way to go. There are stubborn structural
and cultural internal and external challenges that are hard to overcome for achieving what, w e think,
is the ultimate necessity when transforming an LPPO, a change of vision of what the organisation shall
be, and a translation of this identity into the incentive structures and managerial practices at all levels
of the organisations: from a provider of electricity to an agent of change in the energy transitions and
provider of new electricity services; from a funder of R&D projects in different areas of science, tech-
nology and the economy to an agent of systems change through developing transformati ve system
wide programmes and projects; from a provider of basic and applied research and tertiary education
to an enabler and even active driver of socio-technological change. All those changes mean more than
developing new capabilities and adding a few activities. Rather, the question is how the organisations,
all their members, perceive their roles in the wider system context.
While bottom-up dynamics can build up pressure for change, in all three cases a strong, credible in-
tention from the very top was critical. While this sounds like a management commonplace, for pro-
cesses initiating a revision of the very vision and mission of an organisation leadership is indispensable.
In all three cases it was the leadership that created conditions for the three dimensions of our frame-
work: quality of interaction, positioning and orchestrating as well as creating supportive environments.
Moreover, transforming an organisation does not happen in isolation. Rather, it needs to take into
consideration the wider institutional and systemic context of the organisation, which can be both sup-
portive and hindering. For example, the workforce of any LPPO develops its capabilities and profes-
sional ethics not only against the strategic choices of the given organisation, but also in view of the
institutional demands of the wider labour market and other peer organisations, which in turn might
function as a countervailing force for change.
At the same time, transforming LPPOs can take advantage of external pressures or external incentives
and create a productive interplay with internal strategic intent. For example, the utility company linked
its transformative ambition to a narrative of eco nomic inevitability, long before competing utilities
followed. The innovation agency supported the political drive of the country and the EU towards SDGs
very directly, thereby constructing an inevitable link to its own organisational purpose. The University
developed the transformative strategy in view of their future competitive position in national and in-
ternational markets for higher education and research.
Further, in all three cases the three dimensions of conceptual meta-governance principles that we have
employed to diagnose their strategies, helped us to show how the LPPOs have moved their organisa-
tion in a desired direction, while at the same time revealing persistent challenges that none of the
three actors could fully overcome:
• Quality of interaction: Inclusion, moderation and deliberation are clearly crucial to push-start
transformative strategies of an LPPO as change agent in their ideation phase. In later phases of
the strategy implementation the modes, content and composition of inclusion, moderation and
deliberation may have to be revised and adjusted.
• Positioning and orchestrating: The notions of modularity, subsidiarity and adaptability capture
meta-governance conditions that have particular relevance in the LPPO’s strategy implementa-
tion phase. There is a tendency in LPPO to, over time, fall back in deeply rooted organisation rou-
tines, hampering the envisaged transformative thrust.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 25
• Supportive internal premises: The requirement to build and draw on transformative capabilities of
both individuals and organisational units is visible in all three cases. At the same time institu-
tional entrepreneurship and leadership are indispensable. A change agent culture of transpar-
ency and tolerance will increase the credibility and legitimacy of change agents.
The persistent shortcomings to fully transform in each case leads us to conclude that to be useful for
LPPOs as change agents, the chosen meta-governance framework needs to be further developed. We
suggest devising a research programme focussing on three main areas:
(1) The main areas of development are internal incentive structures and their adaptation over time. In
our framework we have included internal incentive structures within the dimensions ‘capabilities and
capacities’. The cases have shown that the normative motivation of members of an organisation cannot
depart too much fr om the demands of the incentive structure they face in the organisation and its
external environment. Therefore, for the future we suggest to pay more attention to the organisational
and contextual incentive structures for members of the organisations at all levels more prominently,
starting from top management to shop floor members. Rethinking the role and modes of incentives
could also be an important lesson for the extant transition policy and ‘responsibility’ literature.
(2) At the same time, our three vignettes show that the specific characteristics and particular missions
of different change agents, and their respective idiosyncrasies, cannot be underestimated: the public-
private energy provider found itself in a radically shifting, highly competitive energy market. They had
to ‘sink or swim’ when they started their transformative journey, there was and is a considerable ‘sense
of urgency’. The national agency for research and innovation, a government-owned intermediary, tra-
ditionally enjoys a relatively high degree of leeway. The technical university, as a higher education
institution, is exposed to a classical tension between a role as “shaper of values of societies” and a role
as parent organisation of only loosely coupled sub-systems (Godemann et al. 2014). These idiosyncra-
sies underline that applying a guiding, but flexible meta -governance approach is useful. And again,
rethinking the role and modes of idiosyncrasies could also be an important lesson for the extant tran-
sition, policy and ‘responsibility’ literature.
(3) We have seen how transformation governance faces different challenges over time: the ideation
phase and kick-off towards a transformative agenda requires other governance approaches and capa-
bilities than at later stages. More research and critical refl ection is needed about changing organisa-
tional challenges and needs along the time axis. Can we identify typical learning curves, “obligatory
passage points” (Callon 1984) and life cycles of LPPO transformations? Also here, extant transition,
policy and ‘responsibility’ literature should more explicitly include the time dimension.
All of those findings have of course implications beyond the management of LPPOs as change agents.
They lead to the conclusion that transformative policy should indeed take note of the governance and
capability requirements within critical actors as defined in this study, and be ready to react with support
if the inactivity or inability of incumbents risks not only to make them fail, but to hinder desired tran-
sitions. Capability building in a broader sense may then become a further role of the state (Borrás and
Edler 2020). Transformative policy needs to be based on an understanding of how critical those or-
ganisations are, and how hard their transformation is. Support could then be offered both discursively,
creating joint narratives of transformations that enables organisations to find their new roles, and in-
stitutionally, supporting regulatory and educational reform needed to allow not only the new business
models and identities to thrive, but also all members of the organisations to be part of this transfo r-
mation.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 26
Acknowledgements
This paper draws on encompassing conceptual and empirical work in the context of the EU FP7 project
Res-AGorA (2013 –2016) which has co -constructed a good -practice framework, the “Responsibility
Navigator” (www.responsibility-navigator.eu). Particular thank s go to Gonzalo Ordóñez -Matamoros,
Sally Randles, Bart Walhout, Ralf Lindner, Matthias Weber, Douglas Robinson.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 27
References
4TU.Federation (2017): 4TU to boost National Research Agenda.
https://www.4tu.nl/en/news/impulse/.
Adegbite, O. E.; Simintiras, A. C.; Dwivedi, Y. K.; Ifie, K. (2018): Organizational Adaptations. A Pluralistic
Perspective; Springer, Cham.
Alves, M. W. F. M.; de Sousa Jabbour, A. B. L.; Kannan, D.; Jabbour, C. J. C. (2017): Contingency theory,
climate change, and low-carbon operations management. Supply Chain Management: An
International Journal, 223-236.
Ansari, S. S.; Krop, P. (2012): Incumbent performance in the face of a radical innovation: Towards a
framework for incumbent challenger dynamics, Research policy 41(8), 1357-1374.
Argyris, C.; Schön, D. A. (1996): Organizational Learning II: Theory, Method, and Practice. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley.
Arnaldi, S.; Gorgoni, G. (2016): Turning the tide or surfing the wave? Responsible Research and
Innovation, fundamental rights and neoliberal virtues, Life Sciences, Society and Policy, 6, DOI:
10.1186/s40504-016-0038-2.
Barnett, W. P.; Pontikes, E. G. (2008): The Red Queen, success bias, and organizational inertia.
Management Science, 54(7), 1237-1251.
Benz, A. (2006): Governance in connected arenas – political science analysis of coordination and
control in complex control systems. In Jansen, D. (Ed.): New Forms of Governance in Research
Organizations. From Disciplinary Theories towards Interfaces and Integration. Heidelberg/New
York: Springer, 3-22.
Berggren, C.; Magnusson, T.; Sushandoyo, D. (2015): Transition pathways revisited: Established firms
as multi-level actors in the heavy vehicle industry. Research policy, 44(5), 1017-1028.
Bien, C.; Sassen, R. (2020): Sensemaking of a sustainability transition by higher education institution
leaders. Journal of Cleaner Production, 256, 120299.
Bögel, P.; Pereverza, K.; Upham, P.; Kordas, O. (2019): Linking socio-technical transition studies and
organisational change management: Steps towards an integrative, multi-scale heuristic. Journal
of Cleaner Production, 232, 359-368.
Boiral, O. (2007): Corporate greening through ISO 14001: A rational myth? Organization Science, 18,
127-146.
Boon, W.; Edler, J. (2018): Demand, challenges, and innovation. Making sense of new trends in
innovation policy. Science and Public Policy, 45(4), 435-447.
Borrás, S.; Edler, J. (2020): The roles of the state in the governance of socio-technical systems’
transformation. Research Policy, 49(5), 103971.
Borrás, S.; Edler, J. (Eds.) (2014): The governance of socio-technical systems: explaining change. Edward
Elgar Publishing.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 28
Borrás, S.; Haakonsson, S.; Taudal Poulsen, R.; Pallesen, T.; Hendriksen, C.; Somavilla, L.; Kugelberg, S.;
Larsen, H.; Gerli, F. (2023): The Transformative Capacity of Public Sector Organizations in
Sustainability Transitions: A Conceptualization (No. 2023/2). Lund University, CIRCLE-Centre for
Innovation Research.
Bos, J.; Brown, R. (2014): Assessing organisational capacity for transition policy programs."
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 86: 188-206.
Breznitz, D.; Ornston, D.; Samford, S. (2018): Mission critical: the ends, means, and design of
innovation agencies. Industrial and Corporate Change, 27(5), 883-896.
https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dty027.
Bryndum, N.; Alexander Lang, A.; Mandl, C.; Velsing Nielsen, M.; Bedsted, B. (2016): The Res-AGorA
Co-construction Method. In: Lindner, R.; Kuhlmann, S.; Randles, S.; Bedsted, B.; Gorgoni, G.;
Griessler, E.; Loconto, A.; Mejlgaard, N. (Eds.): Navigating Towards Shared Responsibility in
Research and Innovation. Approach, Process and Results of the Res-AGorA Project.
Karlsruhe/Germany (Fraunhofer ISI), 46-53 (ISBN: 9-783000-517099;
https://indd.adobe.com/view/eaeb695e-a212-4a34-aeba-b3d8a7a58acc).
Callon, M. (1984): Some elements of a sociology of translation: domestication of the scallops and the
fishermen of St Brieuc Bay. The sociological review, 32(1_suppl), 196-233.
Cooper, A. C.; Schendel, D. (1976): Strategic responses to technological threats. Business Horizons, 19,
61–69.
Cyert, R. M.; March, J. G. (1963): A behavioral theory of the firm. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
De Saille, S. (2015): Innovating innovation policy: the emergence of ‘Responsible Research and
Innovation’. Journal of Responsible Innovation, 2(2), 152-168.
https://doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2015.1045280.
Diercks, G.; Larsen, H.; Steward, F. (2019): Transformative innovation policy: Addressing variety in an
emerging policy paradigm. Research Policy, 48(4), 880-894.
Https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.10.028.
Donaldson, L. (1987): Strategy and structural adjustment to regain fit and performance: In defence of
contingency theory. Journal of Management Studies, 24, 1-24.
Dunford, R. (1987): The suppression of technology as a strategy for controlling resource
dependence. Administrative Science Quarterly, 512-525.
Eisenhardt, K. M.; Martin, J. A. (2000): Dynamic capabilities: what are they?. Strategic management
journal, 21(10‐11), 1105-1121.
EnBW Energie Baden-Württemberg AG. (2020): Komm Plus, Sonderausgabe Klimaschutz und
Nachhaltigkeit. Retrieved from https://www.enbw.com/media/downloadcenter-
konzern/kommplus/kommplus_2020_4.pdf.
EnBW Energie Baden-Württemberg AG. (2021a): The power behind the transformation: water, wind
and sun. Retrieved from https://www.enbw.com/integrated-annual-report-
2019/transformation/the-power-behind-the-transformation/.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 29
EnBW Energie Baden-Württemberg AG. (2021b, May 26): Harnessing the power of change, our
strategy for the future. Retrieved from https://www.enbw.com/company/the-group/about-
us/group-strategy/.
EnBW Energie Baden-Württemberg AG. (2021c, May 26): Tomorrow. Today. Yesterday. Time of
transition – Time of renewal. Retrieved from https://www.enbw.com/company/the-
group/about-us/company-profile/.
EnBW Energie Baden-Württemberg AG. (2021d, May 26): Consistent development of our sustainable
corporate strategy. Retrieved from
https://www.enbw.com/company/sustainability/environment/climate-protection.html.
EnBW Energie Baden-Württemberg AG. (2021e, May 26): Environmental protection. Retrieved from
https://www.enbw.com/company/sustainability/environment/environment-protection/.
EnBW Energie Baden-Württemberg AG. (2021f, May 26): Sustainability approach. Retrieved from
https://www.enbw.com/company/sustainability/sustainability-approach/.
EnBW Energie Baden-Württemberg AG. (2021g, May 26): Corporate engagement. Retrieved from
https://www.enbw.com/company/sustainability/corporate-engagement/.
EnBW Energie Baden-Württemberg AG. (2021h, May 26): Acting today for tomorrow. Retrieved from
https://www.enbw.com/integrated-annual-report-2020/acting-for-tomorrow/.
EnBW Energie Baden-Württemberg AG. (2021i, May 26): Clean energy from the wind and sun.
Retrieved from https://www.enbw.com/renewable-energy/renewables/.
EnBW Energie Baden-Württemberg AG. (2021j, May 26): Sustainablilty management. Retrieved from
https://www.enbw.com/company/sustainability/sustainability-
management/#hero_teaser_karussell_zeile_2.
Eriksson, P. (2006): VINNOVA and its role in the Swedish Innovation System – Accomplishments since
the start in 2001 and ambitions forward; September 2006.
Foray, D.; Mowery, D.C.; Nelson, R.R. (2012): Public R&D and social challenges: What lessons from
mission R&D programs? Research Policy, 41 (10), 1697-1702, ISSN 0048-7333.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.07.011.
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (FAZ) (2021, May 26): Geht doch. Retrieved from::
https://zeitung.faz.net/faz/unternehmen/2021-05-
28/b8a7d4c23a5e0364e81f12d955e17696/?GEPC=s5.
Fünfschilling, L.; Bauer, F.; Clemente, J. (2017): Challenge-driven innovation: A new avenue for
transformative policy at Vinnova, Sweden. A Transformative Innovation Learning History in
collaboration with the Transformative Innovation Policy Consortium (TIPC) and Vinnova.
Retrieved from https://www.tipconsortium.net/resource/finland-transformative-innovation-
learning-history/.
Geels, F. W. (2014): Regime resistance against low-carbon transitions: introducing politics and power
into the multi-level perspective. Theory, culture & society, 31(5), 21-40. Retrieved from:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0263276414531627.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 30
Gersick, C. J. (1991): Revolutionary change theories: A multilevel exploration of the punctuated
equilibrium paradigm. Academy of management review, 16(1), 10-36.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/258605?origin=crossref.
Giuliani, E. (2018): Regulating global capitalism amid rampant corporate wrongdoing – Reply to
“Three frames for innovation policy”. Research Policy, 47(9), 1577-1582.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048733318302002?via%3Dihub.
Godemann, J.; Bebbington, J.; Herzig, C.; Moon, J. (2014): Higher education and sustainable
development: Exploring possibilities for organisational change. Accounting, Auditing &
Accountability Journal. https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/aaaj-12-2013-
1553/full/html.
Greenwood, R., Hinings, C. R.; Whetten, D. (2014): "Rethinking institutions and organizations." Journal
of management studies 51.7: 1206-1220.
Grillitsch, M.; Hansen, T.; Coenen, L.; Miörner, J.; Moodysson, J. (2019): Innovation policy for system-
wide transformation: The case of strategic innovation programmes (SIPs) in Sweden. Research
Policy, 48(4), 1048-1061. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.10.004.
Guston, D. H. (2014): Giving content to responsible innovation, Journal of Responsible Innovation,
1(3), 251-253, DOI: 10.1080/23299460.2014.972085.
Hannan, M.; Freeman, J. (1984): Structural Inertia and Organizational Change. American Sociological
Review, 49(2), 149-164. Retrieved June 11, 2020. www.jstor.org/stable/2095567.
Heiberg, J.; Truffer, B.; Binz, C. (2022): Assessing transitions through socio-technical configuration
analysis–a methodological framework and a case study in the water sector. Research Policy,
51(1), 104363.
Heiskanen, E.; Apajalahti, E. L.; Matschoss, K.; Lovio, R. (2018): Incumbent energy companies
navigating energy transitions: strategic action or bricolage?. Environmental Innovation and
Societal Transitions, 28, 57-69.
Henderson, A. D.; Stern, I. (2004): Selection-based learning: The coevolution of internal and external
selection in high-velocity environments. Administrative Science Quarterly, 49: 39-75.
Henderson, R. M.; Clark, K. B. (1990): Architectural innovation: The reconfiguration of existing product
technologies and the failure of established firms. Administrative science quarterly, 9-30.
Hess, D. J. (2014): Sustainability transitions: A political coalition perspective. Research Policy, 43(2),
278-283.
Jessop, B. (2002): The Future of the Capitalist State. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Kallerud, E.; Amanatidou, E, Nieminen, M.; Upham, P. (2013): Dimensions of research and innovation
policies to address grand and global challenges; Eu-SPRI Forum Position Paper of the project
“The emergence of challenge-driven priorities in research and innovation policy (CPRI)”
Retrieved from http://www.euspri-forum.eu/key_missions/CPRI_Position_paper.pdf.
Kemp, R.; Schot, J.; Hoogma, R. (1998): Regime shifts to sustainability through processes of niche
formation: the approach of strategic niche management. Technology analysis & strategic
management, 10(2), 175-198.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 31
Kern, F.; Rogge, K. S. (2016): The pace of governed energy transitions: Agency, international dynamics
and the global Paris agreement accelerating decarbonisation processes?. Energy Research &
Social Science, 22, 13-17.
Köhler, J.; Geels, F. W.; Kern, F.; Markard, J.; Onsongo, E.; Wieczorek, A.; Alkemade, F.; Avelino, F.;
bergek, A.; Boons, F.; Fünfschilling, L.; Hess, D.; Holtz, G.; Hyysalo, S.; Jenkins, K.; Kivimaa, P.;
Martiskainen, M.; McMeekin, A.; Mühlemeier, M. S.; Nykvist, B.; Wells, P. (2019): An agenda for
sustainability transitions research: State of the art and future directions. Environmental
innovation and societal transitions, 31, 1-32.
Kuhlmann, S. (2001): Governance of Innovation Policy in Europe – Three Scenarios. Research Policy,.
30, 6, 953-976. DOI: 10.1016/S0048-7333(00)00167-0.
Kuhlmann, S.; Edler, J.; Ordóñez-Matamoros, G.; Randles, S.; Walhout, B.; Gough, C.; Lindner, R. (2016):
Responsibility Navigator, Karlsruhe/Germany (Fraunhofer ISI), www.responsibility-navigator.eu.
Published also in: Lindner, R.; Kuhlmann, S.; Randles, S.; Bedsted, B.; Gorgoni, G.; Griessler, E.;
Loconto, A.; Mejlgaard, N. (Eds.): Navigating Towards Shared Responsibility in Research and
Innovation. Approach, Process and Results of the Res-AGorA Project. Karlsruhe/Germany:
Fraunhofer ISI, 132-155. ISBN: 9-783000-517099; https://indd.adobe.com/view/eaeb695e-
a212-4a34-aeba-b3d8a7a58acc.
Kuhlmann, S.; Rip, A. (2018): Next-Generation Innovation Policy and Grand Challenges. Science and
public policy. https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scy011.
Kuhlmann, S.; Stegmaier, P.; Konrad, K. (2019): The tentative governance of emerging science and
technology—A conceptual introduction, Research Policy 48, 1091-1097,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.01.006.
Lam, A. (2005): Organisation Innovation. In: Fagerberg, J.; Mowery, D. C.; Nelson, R. R. (Eds.). The
Oxford handbook of innovation. Oxford university press, 115-147.
https://global.oup.com/academic/product/the-oxford-handbook-of-innovation-
9780199264551?cc=de&lang=en&.
Larsen, J.; King, B.; Kolus, H.; Dasari, N.; Hiltbrand, G.; Herndon, W. (2022): A Turning Point for US
Climate Progress: Assessing the Climate and Clean Energy Provisions in the Inflation Reduction
Act. United States of America. Retrieved from https://policycommons.net/.
Le Mens, G.; Hannan, M. T.; Pólos, L. (2011): Founding conditions, learning, and organizational life
chances: Age dependence revisited. Administrative Science Quarterly, 56, 95-126.
Lindner, R.; Daimer, S.; Beckert, B.; Heyen, N.; Koehler, J.; Teufel, B.; Warnke, P.; Wydra, S. (2016):
Addressing directionality: Orientation failure and the systems of innovation heuristic. Towards
reflexive governance. Karlsruhe (Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and
Policy Analysis No. 52) ISSN 1612-1430.
Marquis, C.; Tilcsik, A. (2013): Imprinting: Toward a multilevel theory. Academy of Management
Annals, 7(1), 195-245. https://doi.org/10.5465/19416520.2013.766076.
Mayntz, R. (1986): Corporate actors in public policy: changing perspectives in political analysis. Norsk
Statsvitenskapelig Tidsskrift, 2(3), 7-25.
Mazzucato, M. (2018): Mission-oriented innovation policies: challenges and opportunities. Industrial
and Corporate Change, 27(5), 803-815. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dty034.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 32
Mazzucato, M.; Robinson, D. K. R. (2018): Co-creating and directing Innovation Ecosystems? NASAs
changing approach to public-private partnerships in low-earth orbit. Technological Forecasting
and Social Change, 136, 166-177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.03.034.
Mazzucato, M.; Kattel, R.; Ryan-Collins, J. (2020): Challenge-driven innovation policy: towards a new
policy toolkit. Journal of Industry, Competition and Trade, 20(2), 421-437.
Mejlgaard, N.; Griessler, E. (2016): Monitoring RRI in Europe: approach and key observations. In:
Lindner, R.; Kuhlmann, S.; Randles, S.; Bedsted, B.; Gorgoni, G.; Griessler, E.; Loconto, A.;
Mejlgaard, N. (Eds.): Navigating Towards Shared Responsibility in Research and Innovation.
Approach, Process and Results of the Res-AGorA Project. Karlsruhe/Germany: Fraunhofer ISI,
114-118. ISBN: 9-783000-517099; https://indd.adobe.com/view/eaeb695e-a212-4a34-aeba-
b3d8a7a58acc.
Miller, D.; Shamsie, J. (1996): The resource-based view of the firm in two environments: The
Hollywood film studios from 1936 to 1965. Academy of management journal, 39(3), 519-543.
Musiolik, J.; Markard, J.; Hekkert, M. (2012): Networks and network resources in technological
innovation systems: Towards a conceptual framework for system building. Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, 79(6), 1032-1048.
Mühlemeier, S. (2019): Dinosaurs in transition? A conceptual exploration of local incumbents in the
Swiss and German energy transition. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, 31,
126-143.
Ntv (2019, September 9): 59 Monate Genehmigungszeit EnBW kritisiert Energiewende-Bürokratie.
Retrieved from https://www.n-tv.de/wirtschaft/EnBW-kritisiert-Energiewende-Buerokratie-
article21260207.html.
OECD. (2016): OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy. Sweden 2016; Paris.
Owen, R.; Pansera, M.; Macnaghten, P.; Randles, S. (2021): Organisational institutionalisation of
responsible innovation. Research Policy 50(1). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2020.104132.
Pandza, K.; Ellwood, P. (2013): Strategic and ethical foundations for responsible innovation, Research
Policy 42, 5, 1112-1125. ISSN 0048-7333, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2013.02.007.
Petrovska, Elina, and Gundars Berzins (2000): Use and development of contingency theory; Faculty of
Business and Economics, University of Latvia. Retrieved from
http://dspace.lu.lv/dspace/handle/7/54227.
Pressman, J. L.; Wildavsky, A. (1984): Implementation: How great expectations in Washington are
dashed in Oakland; Or, why it's amazing that federal programs work at all, this being a saga of
the Economic Development Administration as told by two sympathetic observers who seek to
build morals on a foundation (Vol. 708). University of California Press.
Randles, S. (2017): Deepening ‘Deep Institutionalisation’. JERRI Project Deliverable 2.1, Retrieved
September 18th 2020, from: https://www.jerri-project.eu/jerri-wAssets/docs/deliverables/wp-
1/JERRI_Deliverable_D1_2_Deepening-Deep-Institutionalisation.pdf.
Randles, S.; Edler, J.; Gee, S.; Gough, C. (2016): Res-AGorA case studies: drawing transversal lessons.
In: Lindner, R.; Kuhlmann, S.; Randles, S.; Bedsted, B.; Gorgoni, G.; Griessler, E.; Loconto, A.;
Mejlgaard, N. (Eds.): Navigating Towards Shared Responsibility in Research and Innovation.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 33
Approach, Process and Results of the Res-AGorA Project. Karlsruhe/Germany (Fraunhofer ISI),
64-72 (ISBN: 9-783000-517099; https://indd.adobe.com/view/eaeb695e-a212-4a34-aeba-
b3d8a7a58acc).
Raven, R.; Van Den Bosch, S.; Weterings, R. (2010): Transitions and strategic niche management:
towards a competence kit for practitioners. International Journal of Technology Management,
51(1), 57-74.
Renn, J. (2020): The evolution of knowledge. Princeton University Press.
Rikap, C.; Lundvall, B. Å. (2021): Tech Giants’ Corporate Innovation Systems. In The Digital Innovation
Race (pp. 43-63). Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
Rip, A. (1998): Modern and Post-Modern Science Policy, EASST Review, 17(3), 13-1.
Robinson, D. K.; Simone, A.; Mazzonetto, M. (2021): RRI legacies: co-creation for responsible,
equitable and fair innovation in Horizon Europe, Journal of Responsible Innovation, 8:2, 209-
216. DOI: 10.1080/23299460.2020.1842633.
Robinson, D. K.; Mazzucato, M. (2019): The evolution of mission-oriented policies: Exploring changing
market creating policies in the US and European space sector. Research Policy, 48(4), 936-948.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.10.005
Romanelli, E.; Tushman, M. L. (2017): Organizational transformation as punctuated equilibrium: An
empirical test. Academy of Management journal, 37(5), 1141-1166.
Sarta, A.; Durand, R.; Vergne, J. P. (2021): Organizational adaptation. Journal of management, 47(1),
43-75.
Scharpf, F. W. (1997): Games Real Actors Play: Actor-Centered Institutionalism in Policy Research.
Boulder, Colorado: Oxford: Westview Press.
Schot, J.; Steinmueller, W. E. (2018): Three frames for innovation policy: R&D, systems of innovation
and transformative change. Research Policy, 47(9), 1554-1567.
Schot, J.; Geels, F. W. (2008): Strategic niche management and sustainable innovation journeys:
theory, findings, research agenda, and policy. Technology analysis & strategic management,
20(5), 537-554.
Schwaag-Serger, S.; Palmberg, C. (2021): Towards transformative policy in Finland and Sweden –
Some viewpoints from practice, In: Benner, M.; Schwaag Serger, S. Marklund, G. (Eds), Towards
a smart society? Innovation policy and the challenges of social inclusion, environmental
resilience and sustainable growth. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Smink, M. M.; Hekkert, M. P.; Negro, S. O. (2013): Keeping sustainable innovation on a leash?
Exploring incumbents’ institutional strategies. Business Strategy and the Environment, 24(2), 86-
101.
Starbuck, W. H. (1983): Organizations as action generators. American sociological review, 91-102.
Stilgoe, J.; Owen, R.; Macnaghten, P. (2013): Developing a framework for responsible innovation,
Research Policy, 42, 9, 1568-1580. ISSN 0048-7333;
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2013.05.008.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 34
Stirling, A. (2024): Responsibility and the hidden politics of directionality: opening up ‘innovation
democracies’ for sustainability transformations. Journal of Responsible Innovation, 11(1),
2370082. https://doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2024.2370082.
Tagesschau. (2021, May 5): Von der Kohle zur Klimaneutralität. Retrieved from
https://www.tagesschau.de/wirtschaft/enbw-energiewende-kohle-hauptversammlung-
101.html.
Thornhill, S.; Amit, R. (2003): Learning about failure: Bankruptcy, firm age, and the resource-based
view. Organization science, 14(5), 497-509.
Todnem By, R. (2005): Organisational change management: A critical review. Journal of change
management, 5(4), 369-380. https://doi.org/10.1080/14697010500359250.
Turnheim, B.; Sovacool, B. K. (2020): "Forever stuck in old ways? Pluralising incumbencies in
sustainability transitions." Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions 35 (2020): 180-
184.
University of Twente. (2020): Shaping 2030 UT Mission - Vision – Strategy, Enschede, The
Netherlands. Retrieved from https://www.utwente.nl/en/organisation/about/shaping2030/.
University of Twente. (2021): Shaping Individuals and Teams. Manifesto and Guiding Principles.
Enschede, The Netherlands. Retrieved from
https://www.utwente.nl/en/organisation/about/shaping2030/organisation/manifesto-shaping-
individuals-and-teams.pdf.
Van de Ven, A. H.; Angle, H. L.; Poole, M. S. (Eds.) (2000): Research on the management of innovation:
The Minnesota studies. Oxford University Press on Demand.
Van Mierlo, B.; Beers, P.J. (2020): Understanding and governing learning in sustainability transitions: A
review. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, 34(2020), 255-269.
Van Mossel, A.; van Rijnsoever, F. J.; Hekkert, M. P. (2018): Navigators through the storm: A review of
organization theories and the behavior of incumbent firms during transitions. Environmental
innovation and societal transitions, 26, 44-63.
Van Oudheusden, M.; Shelley-Egan, C. (2021): RRI Futures: learning from a diversity of voices and
visions, Journal of Responsible Innovation, 8:2, 139-147. DOI: 10.1080/23299460.2021.1989656.
Von Schomberg, R. (2013): A vision of responsible innovation. In: R. Owen, M. Heintz and J. Bessant
(Eds.): Responsible Innovation. London: John Wiley.
Walker, G.; Madsen, T. L.; Carini, G. (2002): How does institutional change affect heterogeneity among
firms?. Strategic Management Journal, 23(2), 89-104.
Wanzenböck, I.; Wesseling, J. H.; Frenken, K.; Hekkert, M. P.; Weber, K. M. (2020): A framework for
mission-oriented innovation policy: Alternative pathways through the problem–solution space.
Science and Public Policy, 47(4), 474-489.
Weber, K. M.; Rohracher, H. (2012): Legitimizing research, technology and innovation policies for
transformative change: Combining insights from innovation systems and multi-level
perspective in a comprehensive ‘failures’ framework. Research Policy, 41(6), 1037-1047.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2011.10.015.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 90
Fraunhofer ISI | 35
Wittrock, C.; Forsberg, E.-M.; Pols, A.; Macnaghten, P.; Ludwig, D. (2021): Implementing Responsible
Research and Innovation. Organisational and National Conditions. SpringerBriefs in Ethics.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54286-3.

[1] For a broad literature review on those see Sarta et al. 2021.
[2] See also Owen et al. 2021, who stress the importance to build up legitimacy for the institutionalisation of RI within organisations.
