
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 49
ISSN 1612-1430
Karlsruhe, February 2016

Opening up the innovation system framework
towards new actors and institutions

Philine Warnke, Knut Koschatzky, Ewa Dönitz, Andrea Zenker,
Thomas Stahlecker, Oliver Som, Kerstin Cuhls, Sandra Güth

Karlsruhe, Fraunhofer ISI

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Contents I

Contents
1 Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 1
2 Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 2
2.1 Basic elements of the innovation system framework ............................ 2
2.2 Why is it still relevant, why does it need revision? ................................ 4
3 Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation
system framework ................................ ................................ ............................... 5
3.1 User innovation ................................ ................................ ................... 5
3.1.1 Key aspects ................................ ................................ ......................... 5
3.1.2 Relevance ................................ ................................ ........................... 7
3.1.3 Implications for the innovation system framework ................................ 7
3.2 Social innovation ................................ ................................ ................. 8
3.2.1 Key aspects ................................ ................................ ......................... 8
3.2.2 Relevance ................................ ................................ ........................... 9
3.2.3 Implications for the innovation system framework .............................. 10
3.3 Collaborative innovation ................................ ................................ .... 10
3.3.1 Key aspects ................................ ................................ ....................... 10
3.3.2 Relevance ................................ ................................ ......................... 13
3.3.3 Implication for the innovation system framework................................ 15
3.4 New innovation intermediaries ................................ ........................... 17
3.4.1 Key aspects ................................ ................................ ....................... 17
3.4.2 Relevance ................................ ................................ ......................... 21
3.4.3 Implications for the innovation system framework .............................. 21
3.5 Venture philanthropy ................................ ................................ ......... 22
3.5.1 Key aspects ................................ ................................ ....................... 22
3.5.2 Relevance ................................ ................................ ......................... 24
3.5.3 Implications for the innovation system framework .............................. 25
3.6 Social and relational capital ................................ ............................... 25

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
II Contents

3.6.1 Key aspects ................................ ................................ ....................... 25
3.6.2 Relevance ................................ ................................ .......................... 26
3.6.3 Implications for the innovation system framework .............................. 27
3.7 Non R&D-intensive industries ................................ ............................ 27
3.7.1 Key aspects ................................ ................................ ....................... 27
3.7.2 Relevance ................................ ................................ .......................... 29
3.7.3 Implications for the innovation system framework .............................. 30
4 Conclusions – Towards a broadened innovation system framework ............ 31
5 Literature ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 36

Figures
Figure 1: Innovation system framework ................................ ................................ ..... 3
Figure 2: Selected intermediaries, their degree of formalization and (direct)
focus on innovation (schematic overview ................................ .................. 21
Figure 3: New elements in the innovation system framework ................................ ... 31
Figure 4: Revised innovation system analytical framework ................................ ...... 33
Figure 5: Locating the TIS functions in a spatial innovation system
framework ................................ ................................ ................................ . 35

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Summary 1

1 Summary
The paper revisits the established framework of the national and regional innovation
system (NIS/RIS) in the light of recent insights from innovation research in order to
increase its capaci ty for generating meaningful insights for policy makers and other
actors wishing to influence innovation capacity of nations, regions or sectors. We r e-
view six research strands that challenge the classical NIS/RIS framework by pointing to
a wider range of actors, institutions and innovation modes relevant for the innovation
landscape: User innovation, social innovation, collaborative innovation, new innovation
intermediaries, venture philanthropy, social and relational capital and non -R&D inten-
sive industries. We find that each of these phenomena points to relevant contributions
to national or regional innovation capacities that are not well captured by the esta b-
lished NIS/RIS framework. While some aspects could easily be integrated by adding
some "arrows and boxes" in the graphics usually used for representing the framework,
we find that several phenomena point to the need for a more fundamental revision of
the innovation system framework. In particular it emerges that a distinctive assignment
of actors to f unctions in the innovation process is no longer possible. Given, for exa m-
ple, the research insights on user innovation, social innovation and collaborative inn o-
vation, societal actors can no longer be assigned to the role of "demand articulation".
Rather t hey actively contribute or sometimes even take over the generation of
knowledge and innovation ideas as well as other functions such as financing, e.g.
through crowdfunding activities. The broadened view on innovation also requires a
wider understanding of the infrastructures and frameworks forming the enabling basis
for innovation activities. Social and relational capital for instance that is deeply embe d-
ded in the cultural context of a region becomes a key enabler for trustful interactions of
the diverse innovation actors such as low R&D intense firms that make huge contrib u-
tions to innovation and employment but generate their knowledge through interaction
with customers. The growing recognition of the economic and social relevance of co l-
laborative and social innovation implies that collaboration platforms become as relevant
infrastructures as classical technology transfer schemes. Finally the broadened view on
innovation points to a wide range of intermediaries that form the backbone of an inn o-
vation syste m without necessarily seeing innovation as their primary purpose. As a
consequence of these insights we suggest a revised innovation system framework.
This system captures three types of contributions: Innovation supply and demand, i n-
novation influx and in novation framework. Actors that may provide relevant contrib u-
tions in one of these domains are grouped in open clouds, emphasizing the fluidity b e-
tween functions and actors. We hope that this framework will allow for a more mea n-
ingful analysis of the innovation capacity of specific NIS/RIS systems.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
2 Introduction
2 Introduction
2.1 Basic elements of the innovation system framework
Starting in the mid 1970s, system approaches in innovation research gained conside r-
able importance due to strong insights into the economics of innov ation (e.g. in terms
of innovation patterns of SMEs, the importance of technological trajectories, the cum u-
lative character technological change), and the development of new ideas about the
complexity and non -linearity of innovation processes (cf. Nelson a nd Winter 1977;
Freeman 1982; Dosi 1982; 1988). Christopher Freeman is regarded as the 'father' of
the concept of a "national system of innovation" (Freeman 1987). He considered it
necessary that the national government promotes the technological infrastru cture of a
country and assumes that short -term strategies (such as wage or exchange rate
changes) have only limited effects on the strengthening of the international compet i-
tiveness of an economy.
The most important characteristics of an innovation system are summarized in the def-
inition by Edquist who wrote that innovation systems are defined by "... all important
economic, social, political, organizational, institutional, and other factors that influence
the development, diffusion, and use of innovation" (Edquist 2005: 182). During the late
1980s and especially during the 1990s, complex analyses of the national framework
conditions for technology development and diffusion, on technical change, and on i n-
novation and learning were carried out (e.g. Dosi et al. 1988).
According to Nelson (1993: 517 -520) and Patel and Pavitt (1994), innovation systems
are constituted by four main elements:
1. The institutional structures of a country, region or sector: They are formed by
companies, universities, research and train ing organizations, norms, routines,
networks, financial organizations, and the policy of promoting and regulating of
technical change.
2. The incentive system of a country, region or sector. These include, among ot h-
ers, incentive systems for innovation, techn ology transfer, learning and qualific a-
tion, for business formation and job mobility within and between organizations.
3. The skills and creativity of innovation and economic actors in a country, region or
sector. Both between and within countries and between companies in a country
there are great differences in the diversity and quality of products and services
and opportunities to forge new paths of development.
4. The cultural peculiarities of a country, region or within a sector, which are r e-
flected, for examp le, in different acceptances and user understandings of tec h-
nologies.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Introduction 3

For a long time, these central characteristics formed the basis of different interpret a-
tions of innovation systems and were usually adapted according to specific application
needs (Koschatzky 2012). In many cases, heuristic models of innovation systems are
built around the general institutional set -ups of countries, regions or sectors. An exa m-
ple of an innovation system model often used and extended in studies is the one d e-
veloped by Kuhlmann and Arnold (2001) (cf. Figure 1). This model focuses on the two
main sub-systems industry and education/research, and links them through the active
role of intermediary organizations. These sub -systems are influenced and infl uence
themselves the demand system, the framework conditions and the existing infrastru c-
ture system, and are shaped by the political system.
Figure 1: Innovation system framework

Source: Kuhlmann and Arnold (2001: 2)
In recent y ears it became clear that aspects like sustainability, globalization, the co n-
sideration of socio-cultural aspects, user demands, a new understanding of innovation
like social innovation, open innovation, low -tech i nnovation, and service innovation
question the traditional understanding of the structure and functions of an innovation
system. Recent contributions to the innovation system literature developed multi -level
conceptual frameworks for the comprehensive analysis of sectoral and technological
innovation and for bridging the different territorial scales in innovation policies. Major
impulses arose primarily from the articles by Geels (2004), Hekkert et al. (2007) and
Bergek et al. (2008). Important new elements are the multi -level perspective (MLP)
defined by landscape, regimes and niches and the extension of sectoral innovation
system approaches by the integration of a socio -technical systems, mission - and de-
Framework Conditions
Financial environment; taxation and
incentives; propensity to innovation and
entrepreneurship; mobility ...
Education and
Research System
Professional
education and
training
Higher education
and research
Public sector
research
Industrial System
Large companies
New, technology-
based firms
Intermediaries
Research
institutes
Brokers
Consumers (final demand)
Producers (intermediate demand)
Demand
Banking,
venture capital
IPR and
information
Innovation and
business support
Standards and
norms
Infrastructure
Political
System
Government
Governance
RTD policies
Mature SMEs

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
4 Introduction
mand-oriented perspective as formulated by Geels (2004), the functional perspective of
Hekkert et al. (2007) and Hekkert and Negro (2009), and the application of the fun c-
tional approach in the context of technological innovation systems by Bergek et al.
(2008). As an attempt of a synthesis between the socio -cultural multi-level approach
and the func tion-based technological system approach, the paper by Markard and
Truffer (2008) argues that technological innovation systems must be complemented by
the multi-level perspective with landscape, regimes and niches.
2.2 Why is it still relevant, why does it need revision?
These new approaches complement and enlarge the understanding of functions and
impacts of innovation systems and provide a better basis for conclusions about the
governance implications of innovation system analyses. The classical institutional and
organizational understanding of innovation systems is still a helpful tool to sketch the
organizational structure of a country, sector or region and to identify strength or wea k-
nesses in the innovation infrastructure and in the interaction between the different or-
ganizations or sub -systems. The new approaches are valuable to understand and e x-
plain the development of new technological regimes and are therefore o ften applied
nowadays for analyzing and modeling the emergence of new technologies in a systems
dynamic perspective (cf. Köhler et al. 2016).
Both approaches, old and new, miss a revised understanding of actors and actor co n-
stellations in innovation systems. Pointing to the new understanding of innovation and
innovation processes (user-based innovation, open innovation etc.), it is insufficient to
consider only groups like industry, research organizations, or the classical intermedia r-
ies like chambers or transfer offices. More and more is innovation triggered and infl u-
enced by civic engagement and new actors groups which emerged as a reaction to a
specific problem. Additionally, cluster and network management organizations which
support the specific interests of their members are a new form of intermediaries which
did not exist at the time of the de velopment of the innovation system approach. The
actor perspective is also not included in the new functional approaches which, by def i-
nition, highlight different new functions of and in innovation systems - but not the role of
specific actor groups.
In many cases the justification and design of innovation policy measures is still based
on the classical understanding of the innovation system concept and its actors. Due to
the fact that current forms and understandings of innovation are not reflected by at
least the classical innovation system concept, policies based on this classical unde r-
standing miss new interpretations of innovation. As a matter of fact, there is an urgent
need to review the innovation system concept in the light of the new findings and t o

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework 5

develop it further in a conceptual manner to effectively advise innovation policy and in
particular mission-oriented strategies. Starting from the description and understanding
of the mechanisms involved, the derivation of political needs and possible ap proaches
and design options for policy instruments is required and also research about specific
barriers and obstacles of such "new" innovation systems is necessary. The objective of
this paper is to further develop the existing innovation system concept i n a way that
new forms of innovation and actor constellations can be mapped.
In the following section we will discuss five strands of innovation thinking that we feel
should be to be recognized by the innovation system framework. In chapter 4 we will
then introduce our suggestion for a revised innovation system heuristics doing better
justice to this wider perspective on actors and institutions relevant for analyzing innova-
tion landscapes.
3 Innovation phenomena challenging the established
innovation system framework
3.1 User innovation
3.1.1 Key aspects
Already in the 1970s and 1980s some researchers started to point out the role users
and customers play for successful innovations. In 1976 Eric von Hippel, the "father of
user innovation", identified the role of users for innovations in the scientific instrument
industry revealing that many users provided product ideas and even created product
innovations by themselves to adapt products to the specific needs ( von Hippel 1976).
He concluded that "the information needed to innovate in important ways is widely di s-
tributed" (von Hippel 2005: 14). In 1978 von Hippel distinguished bet ween the „Manu-
facturing-active" and the „Customer-active paradigm" (von Hippel 1978). In von Hippel
(1986) he pointed out that a specific small g roup of customers, called Lead Users, in a
very early stage anticipate market needs and are willing to provide ideas for the deve l-
opment of new products or even develop new or modify existing products. Lead users
can improve the approximation of product at tributes to heterogeneous users ' needs.
Even more, these lead users often share their information within the entire se ctor. This
phenomenon was also called "free revealing" (von Hippel 2005: 77 ff.).
A lead user is no average user but much more an extreme user with more expectations
and benefits in case of an innovation. The main incentive to innovate is the direct use
(self-use) benefit from a design, a product, or a service and the willingness to solve the
own needs (Piller and West 2014). Lead Users face specific requirements in particular

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
6 Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework
when markets are fast -paced and the desired product or services are not available on
the market (ibid.).
In the 1990s the term "user innovation " has emerged to describe the phenomenon
where users innovate by themselves. Notions such as customers-as-innovators or user
driven innovations have become widespread. In this context, many studies have found
that user innovators have often lead user characteristics. The Lead User Method (von
Hippel 1986; 2005) or the development of products using (web -based) user toolkits
(Dahan and Hauser 2001) was proposed to support user innovations. While the lead
user concept proposes the physical integration of customers at the leading edge of the
target market in the development process, us er toolkits enable them to design their
own products supported by tools within a certain solution space. Toolkits have the a d-
vantage over the lead user concept that at the end of a user -design phase, neither
market appeal, nor management priorities have to be tested at the manufacturers' side.
However, some toolkits provide rather small solution spaces which allow just to "super-
ficially" design their own products. Such toolkits are considered to be instruments for
mass-customization rather than true user integration (Piller and Reichwald 2006).
A couple of studies investigated the incentives and motivations for companies or ind i-
viduals to actively engage in the innovation process and showed user innovations are
of particular relevance in situations with high ly heterogeneous user requirements. In
such situations despite a fine segmentation of the market, user needs are often not
fulfilled entirely by the products offered by manufacturers.
In recent years case studies of user innovation have often focused on sp ecific indus-
tries. They include diverse domains like extreme sports industries, such as mountain
biking (Lüthje et al. 2002), kite surfing (von Hippel 2005: 103), kayaking (Hienerth
2006), software development (Morrison et al. 2000; Franke and von Hippel 2003), or
high-tech industries like the semiconductor and electronic manufacturing equipment
producers (Urban and von Hippel 1988). Herstatt and von Hippel (1992) described the
application of the Lead User method at Hilti AG, and Lilien et al. (2002) reported a case
study at 3M. The emergence of user created content has fundamentally changed the
dominant modes of content creation and diffusion in the creative content sector in pa r-
ticular books, music, audiovisual (film and television), video games and cultural spaces
sub-sectors (Mateos-Garcia et al 2007; OECD 2006a). In addition to the Lead User
method the phenomenon of creative consumers has gained in importance in the low -
tech and high -tech industries and has been extensively discussed in the literature in
the recent years (McCarthy 2014). A creative consumer is defined as "an individual or
group who adapts, modifies, or transforms a proprietary offering, such as a product or
service" (Pierre et al. 2007). One early example of creative consumers is the T Fo rd

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework 7

which was adapted by farmers as a power source for driving generators, mills and
lathes. Pierre et al. (2007) place the creative consumer, called "underground consum-
er", in opposition to the Lead User, thus his needs often remain personal and not ne c-
essarily become general. However, Tsinopoulos and Al -Zu'bi (2014) describe the Lead
User as a specific type of creative consumer.
3.1.2 Relevance
There is a large amount of literature studying the various roles of customers within the
innovation process and its imp act on innovation performance. Studies delivered rich
empirical evidence for different form s of involvement of users, the lead user approach
and the use of user innovation toolkits (for an overview see e.g. von Hippel 2005). Most
studies corroborate that u ser innovations have a higher success rate on the market
(Blättel-Mink and Menez 2015). More general, empirical studies based on CIS data
have shown that customers are the most important external information source and
that the share of companies which co-operate with customers has increased in the last
decade (OECD 2008). Laursen and Salter (2006) are amongst those authors who d e-
livered evidence that the use of customer information is positively related to the innova-
tion performance. Recently, three nation al surveys of representativ e samples of users
have revealed that millions of users collectively spend billions of dollars annually d e-
veloping and modifying consumer products to serve their own needs. Consumer pro d-
uct development seems to be a major activit y among citizens acting alone and in co l-
laborative teams (Hienerth et al. 2014).
3.1.3 Implications for the innovation system framework
As outlined above, user innovation has become a major innovation mode with high
economic and social relevance. It goes beyond the traditional customer orientation as
propagated by marketing and market research that sees the consumer as a passive
object of market research. Rather in the extreme cases, the full product development is
"outsourced" to the customer who creates his or her own products, while the manufac-
turer is providing the tools for the product development and adaptation by the custo m-
er. It is even no longer necessary to understand what the customer wants. Instead of
trying to understand users' needs, those parts of the process, where costly information
on needs is usually integrated, are undertaken by the user.
The obvious conclusion from the insights of user innovation studies is the need to pr o-
vide a more active role for the users of innovation both for companies ( B2B) and con-
sumers (B2C). Instead of being just passive carriers of "needs", users become active
and knowledgeable contributors of ideas and even – in the case of the lead users –

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
8 Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework
fully fledged innovators. Moreover, user communities fulfill an important fu nction in i n-
novation systems and should thus be visible in the framework.
Beyond these immediate implications however the user innovation perspective cha l-
lenges the attempt to assign clear roles to certain groups on a more fundamental level.
It becomes clear that actors take different roles depending on the context.
3.2 Social innovation
3.2.1 Key aspects
For some years now, "social innovation" is high on the agenda of innovation research
and increasingly receives attention in innovation policy circles. Nevertheless, the very
concept remains contested ( Moulaert et al. 2013; Howaldt and Schwarz 2010). Two
main groups of perspectives on social innovation prevail.
The first group distinguishes social innovation from other innovation types through its
positive impact on society. For example, the EU project TEPSIE defines "social innova-
tion" as follows : "Social innovations are new solutions (products, services, models,
markets, processes etc.) that simultaneously meet a social need (more effectively than
existing solutions) and lead to new or improved capabilities and relationships and/or
better use of assets and resources. In other words, social innovations are both good for
society and enhance society's capacity to act" (The Young Foundation 2012: 18).
This definition comp rises all sorts of innovation media such as technologies, services
and processes.
The other group of schol ars such as Howaldt and Schwarz (2010) distinguishes social
innovation by its medium rather than its purpose. They see social innovations as novel
configurations of social practices with the purpose of fulfilling the innovators ' own
needs.1 In this understanding social innovations are different from technological inn o-
vations because they involve novel practices (i.e. ways of doing) rather than novel
technologies or products. At the same time they differ from classical innovations in se r-
vices, processes or business models as they do not primarily target market impleme n-

1 "The substantive distinction between social and technical innovations can be found in their
immaterial intangible structure. The innovation does not occur in the medium of technical
artifact but at the level of social practice. A socia l innovation is new combination and/or
new configuration of social practices in certain areas of action or social contexts prompted
by certain actors or constellations of actors in an intentional targeted manner with the goal
of better satisfying or answer ing needs and problems than is possible on the basis of e s-
tablished practices" (Howaldt and Schwarz 2010: 21).

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework 9

tation but rather address needs and problems. Adopting this definition implies that s o-
cial innovations are socially desirable from the point of view of the social innovators but
not necessarily good for the whole society and may also have negative impacts.
Another concept related to social innovation is "social entrepreneurship". The OECD
defines social enterprises as "any private activity conducted in the public interest, orga-
nized with an entrepreneurial strategy, but whose main purpose is not the maximization
of profit but the attainment of certain economic and social goals …" (OECD 2013: 3). In
Europe the concept of social enterprise is rooted in the tradition of social economy and
which gathers entities with various legal forms such as co -operatives, associations,
mutuals and foundations. Social enterprises can be distinguished from voluntary organ-
izations by several criteria including a continuous activity producing goods and/or sel l-
ing services and a minimum amount of paid work (ibid.: 4).
3.2.2 Relevance
Social innovators often operate in a hybrid space between non -profit/voluntary, public
and for-profit/business sector (Berglund et al. 2012: 34 ff.; Bjerke and Karlsson 2013:
25; Defourny and Nyssens 2013: 49) . In spite of their limited or non -profit orientation
social enterprises generate substantial economic overturn and employment. In all
Western societies a growing share of people is employed in the "third (or citizen) sec-
tor" and the "social economy" (Bjerke and Karlsson 2013: 41 ; OECD 2013: 12). At the
same time social innovators and social enterprises contribute to delivery of good quality
social welfare services, inclusion and local economic development. As several authors
point out this relevance is bound to grow in the face of the crisis of many European
welfare systems (Defourny and Nyssens 2013: 43). Finally, as stressed by a vast d eal
of literature, addressing societal challenges such as demographic change, health and
sustainability requires social innovations to complement technological ones (Howaldt
and Schwarz 2010; Young Foundation 2012). For all these reasons policy actors from
several domains such as health, aging, environment and education are looking for
ways to underpin social innovation capacities and to provide beneficial framework co n-
ditions for this kind of innovation. For this purpose they require information on these
actors and their function within the innovation system. In particular however for mission
oriented innovation policy strategies that aim at addressing societal challenges through
innovation it is crucial to include social in novators into the picture as on e of the key
enablers of transformative socio -technical innovations. To sum up there are a number
of good arguments for integrating social innovation as a relevant element of innovation
systems be it on national, regional or local level.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
10 Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework
3.2.3 Implications for the innovation system framework
From the point of view of the innovation system there are two major aspects arising
from including social innovations and social enterprises independently from which of
the two definitions is adopted. Firstly, the focus on innovation in social practices needs
to be added to the established understanding of the innovation system which is very
much focusing on technological innovation and does only marginally cover even co m-
mercially oriented soft innovations such as service innov ation. Innovation in social
practices and in particular those that are not primarily aiming at market introduction are
not recognized by the established system. Accordingly, the respective social innov a-
tors, i.e. actors who develop new practices for addres sing problems and needs , are
hardly viewed as relevant innovation actors in the established framework. Integrating
social innovation into the innovation system concept would therefore mean including
the actors, infrastructures and institutions involved in innovation of social practices.
Secondly, both definitions point to innovators in the third sector or citizen sector (Bjerke
and Karlsson 2013: 24) who are neither operating within a business environment nor
employed in the public sector. These "citizen entrepreneurs" are sometimes seen as a
subgroup of social entrepreneurs (Bjerke and Karlsson 2013: 43) , a wider group that
also includes business innovators with social purposes and public sector innovators.
Similar to the case of user innovation one consequence of including social innovation is
to allow a more active and innovating role for "ordinary citizens". In contrast to user
innovators, however, social innovators do not turn to companies to feed in their ideas
but rather act themselves to address the perceived need through new practice. Ther e-
fore, they need to be placed on an equal level to companies.
3.3 Collaborative innovation
3.3.1 Key aspects
A number of concepts in the current academic debate address the emergence of inte r-
net-based large- and medium-scale collaborations among individuals as a new mode of
innovation, production and consumption.
One of the most prominent concepts is the notion of "commons-based peer-production"
proposed by Yoachi Benkler from Yale Law School (Benkler 2002; 2004; 2006; 2011 ;
2013; Benkler and Nissenbaum 2006). Peer production is defined as a form of open
creation and sharing performed by groups online that set and execute goals in a d e-
centralized manner, harness a diverse range of participant motivations, partic ularly
non-monetary motivations, and separate governance and management relations from

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework 11

exclusive forms of property and relational contracts. The two core characteristics of
commons-based peer production are decentraliz ation and the use of social cues and
motivations for coordination instead of pricing or hierarchies.
This definition explicitly excludes systems where the definition of the problem and se t-
ting of the goals is done by one central actor such as the InnoCentive platform or ones
that rest primarily of financial motivations and narrowly focus on optimizing systems
such as Amazon's Mechanical Turk and collective intelligence within firms where partic-
ipants and resources are bound by contracts (Benkler 2013).
Benkler stresses that commons-based peer production as a socio-economic system of
production has always played an important role, but is bound to gain even more rel e-
vance in digitally networked environments where coordination costs are significantly
lowered: "Facilitated by the technical infrastructure of the i nternet, the hallmark of this
socio-technical system is the large scale collaboration of individuals [...] who cooperate
effectively to provide information, knowledge or cultural goods without relying on either
market pricing or managerial hierarchies to c oordinate their common enterprise "
(Benkler and Nissenbaum 2006: 394).
While the model first emerged within the context of software production, this is but one
instance of a more general phenomenon: "At its core, peer production is a model of
social produ ction, emerging alongside contract - and market based, managerial -firm
based and state based production " (ibid.: 400). Benkler argues that, in certain cases,
the commons-based peer production model is superior to the other two models due to
information and allocation gains: "the widely distributed model of information production
will better identify who is the right person to produce a specific component of a project,
all availability and to work on a specific module within a specific timeframe considered "
(Benkler 2006: 111). He states that in the particular conditions of the digitally ne t-
worked knowledge economy, these conditions apply to an increasing number of pr o-
duction tasks. Benkler proposes three key preconditions for the applicability of co m-
mons-based peer production: Modularity of the objects, fine granularity of the modules
and availability of low cost integration mechanisms and quality control. In his recent
work he argues that the core benefit of commons based peer production, its ability to
elicit self directed action from diverse sources of human talent and diverse motivations
without the formalization losses of market based interactions, is particularly beneficial
in highly uncertain and dynamic environments (Benkler 2013). Benkler 's work was tak-
en up and further developed in a number of publications both in academic and bus i-
ness realm (Bauwens et al. 2012; Wittke and Hanekop 2011b). A concept very much in
line with the notion of commons -based peer production , but more focused on innov a-
tion is "Open source innovation (OSI)" (Raasch et al. 2008). The term is characterizing

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
12 Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework
a new innovation model emerging from the generalization of open source software d e-
velopment (OSS) and the transfer of this principle to industries. OSI refers to "innova-
tion, which is (1) generated through volunteer c ontributions and (2) characterized by a
non-market transfer of knowledge between the actors involved in invention and those
involved in exploitation. Actors involved in invention provide open access to their r e-
sults f or anyone wishing to exploit them, allowing utiliz ation, modification, and re -
distribution" (Raasch et al. 2008: 4). The OSI concept is not restricted to user comm u-
nities but encompasses companies or intrinsically motivated volunteers.
A third concept rela ted to collaborative innovation is the notion of collaborative co n-
sumption. This is a socio -economic model that is based on the shared usage of co m-
modities (Piscicelli et al. 2015). In contrast to commons -based peer -production, the
focus of this perspectiv e is on the model of consumption rather than of innovation or
production. Collaborative consumption is enabled by a specific type of "product service
systems" (PSS), i.e. value propositions oriented to fulfill needs and provide satisfaction
to consumers (or users) through delivery of an integrated system of products and se r-
vices. PSS that enable collaborative consumption can be classified as use oriented or
result oriented (Tukker 2006). The uptake of such models is often advocated for re a-
sons of reducing the environmental footprint of production and consumption by increas-
ing resource efficiency and reducing waste. A concept related to collaborative co n-
sumption that has received growing attention is the so called "sharing economy "
(Botsman and Rogers 2010; Schor 2014). There is a wide range of activities discussed
under the notion of the "sharing economy". At one end of the spectrum there are cla s-
sical access -oriented business models that charge product use rather than selling
product ownership such as leasin g schemes. On the other end there are community
based non-profit initiatives such as time banks or solidarity initiatives. With respect to
the type of "sharing" activities Schor (2014: 2) distinguishes four broad categories of
sharing economy: recirculatio n of goods, increased utilization of durable assets, e x-
change of services and sharing of productive assets. All four types can either be done
for-profit or non-for-profit. They may be organized fully among individuals (peers) or be
driven by a company. In his detailed analysis of a wid e range of "sharing" practices
Belk (2014) points out that only few of these practices really involve sharing in an a n-
thropological sense. In particular practices such as short and long term renting and
leasing as well as onli ne mediated bartering are not really sharing practices but rather
specific types of business relationships. He does however single out four "true" sharing
practices (ibid: 14 ff.):
 Intentional online sharing of ephemera (opinions, expertise, photos, videos ) as part
of a group of others doing the same thing and thereby creating and recreating a
community.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework 13

 Online facilitated offline sharing i.e. borrowing and lending without any fees involved
such as e.g. non-profit tool libraries.
 Non commercial peer to peer online sharing such as Kickstarter.
 Non-profit online facilitated hospitality such as CouchSurfing.
While sharing is a very old social practice the fast spreading of collaborative services
among very large groups of people is "enabled by a number of techn ological develop-
ments that have simplified sharing of both physical and non physical goods and se r-
vices through the availability of various information systems on the internet " (Hamari et
al. 2015: 2). Several empirical studies are under way, that are look ing at the motiv a-
tions of actors participating in collaborative consumption or sharing activities (Wittke
and Hanekop 2011b). First results indicate that while value orientations play a major
role studies should look at practices (Piscicelli et al. 2015) a nd extrinsic motiv ations
(Hamari et al. 2015) as well.
3.3.2 Relevance
All three phenomena discussed above (commons based peer production, open source
innovation and collaborative consumption) have a clear economic relevance. Co m-
mons-based peer production and i n particular the free/libre and open source software
(FLOSS) movement have developed highly successful innovations such as the
GNU/Linux operating system or the Apache web server. Many established companies
such as IBM, Google, HP and Oracle adopted FLOSS products and approaches in
major parts of their technology business. Hybrid business models where commercial
companies offer complementary services to FLOSS software or platforms for peer pr o-
duction activities abound and are highly successful. The collabor atively developed i n-
ternet encyclopedia Wikipedia is one of the most used websites of the world, with its
articles of a comparable quality to the Encyclopedia Britannica. Several peer produced
sites such as TripAdvisor or Yelp are more successful than prop rietary a lternatives
(Benkler 2013: 6 ff).
In the case of open s oftware development, Bonaccorsi and Rossi (2003: 1252) argue
that the license agreements used by the FLOSS developers have transformed software
from a private to a non excludable and non riva lry collective good with major benefits
for the overall innovation system. They stress that in general "in contexts where there is
knowledge-intensive innovation, the goods no longer have a fixed nature but are to
different degrees both private and appropriable, and public and universal " (ibid: 1257).
This implies that collaborative innovation may have major advantages over company
driven innovation in a knowledge intensive context with the consequence that basic

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
14 Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework
preconditions of the innovation system frame work that rests on a clear distinction b e-
tween these types of goods may have to be revised.
For the case of collaborative consumption economic relevance is also obvious. Several
analysts and consultancies declare emphasizing the high profit potential of the "sharing
economy". According to Geron (2013: 1) "FORBES estimates the revenue flowing
through the share economy directly into people 's wallets will surpass $3.5 billion this
year, with growth exceeding 25%". The two most well known for -profit sharing platform
such as Airbnb and Uber are valued at 10 and 18bn dollars respectively. A t the same
time most of the for -profit endeavors discussed under the heading of the "sharing
economy" are a subset of service oriented business models such as e.g. ren ting or
leasing i.e. non-technological innovations that have always been part of the i nnovation
system in particular with the increasing service orientation of the last decades (Miles
2005).
Several authors however point out the potential societal relevance of coll aborative
innovation. Some authors expect major benefits for social welfare (Baldwin and von
Hippel 2010). Others argue that peer production enhances the individuals' capacities to
do more things for/by themselves and for/with others ( Bauwens et al. 2012: 173). Jer-
emy Rifkin (2014) sees collaborative innovation as a key mechanism in his "zero mar-
gin cost society " with a substantially re duced environmental footprint. Benkler (2013)
stresses that peer production may be able to generate solutions that could no t have
been achieved otherwise such as catering to highly diverse tastes and interests, mob i-
lizing tacit knowledge and addressing situations of high uncertainty: "A system that
allows agents to explore their environment for problems and solutions, experime nt,
learn, and iterate on solutions and refinement without requiring intermediate formaliz a-
tions to permit and fund the process will have an advantage to a system that does r e-
quire those formalizations; and that advantage will grow as the uncertainty of what path
to follow, who is best situated to follow it, and what class of solution approaches are
most promising becomes less clearly defined." (ibid: 10).
It seems that such situations of high uncertainty and complexity are especially relevant
in the context of the "grand challenges" our societies are facing. Finally, as mentioned
above, collaborative consumption is often seen as a key element of a sustainable
economy due to its potential of increasing resource efficiency and reducing waste
(Tukker 2006). At the same time scholars emphasize possible positive effects on social
inclusion (Schor 2014) but also warn of possible dangers of certain concepts.
Several scholars stress that the growing relevance of collaborative innovation poses
new research challenge s to innovation studies. (Baldwin and von Hippel 2010 : 30 )

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework 15

even call for a "paradigm shift" in innovation research: "Taken in combination we think
the patterns and findings we have described represents significant change in the "prob-
lem field" of innovation research, policymaking and practice". The core questions high-
lighted evolve around better understanding the dynamics of collaboration (motivation,
governance) and its enabling factors: "How can autonomous, highly decentralized a c-
tivities of large numbers of actors be coordinated and integrated into the highly divided
production of sophisticated products and services? The critical point here is that co l-
laborative production is a new kind of collective action that is socially embedded in i n-
ternet communities. The specifics of this social embeddedness have received less a t-
tention in the debate" (Wittke and Hanekop 2011a: 11).
"Another [avenue for future theoretical research] is to explore further the technological
and institutional factors needed for collaborative non-rivalrous innovation to become an
important contributor to technological progress and economic development " (Baldwin
and von Hippel 2010: 31). A number of scholars call for substantial research efforts on
cooperative human system design. The high number of ongoing failed and successful
projects offers a unique possibility to study motivational drivers across communities
and several empirical studies are already available such as (Hamari et al. 2015) who
mapped 254 colla borative consumption website s. Bonaccorsi and Rossi (2003) su g-
gest the collective action framework and the concept of critical mass to study the evolu-
tion of Open Source software.
Another key research domain is the combination of classical firm -driven and collabora-
tive innovation activities: "The critical question here is how can collective action of a u-
tonomous actors be successfully combined with the value -creation activities of compa-
nies? This is a controversial issue in the current debate " (Wittke and Hanekop 2011a:
11).
3.3.3 Implication for the innovation system framework
Even if we apply a broad definition of innovation as the generation of novel solutions
that are adopted by society rather than only the market, not all phenomena described
above are innovation activities but rather production, service provision, development or
consumption. Still, in all these cases the collaborative mode of providing these activ i-
ties can be seen as a substantial organizational innovation often complemented by a
series of groundbreaking institutional in novations such as the FLOSS licensing agre e-
ments. At the same time, there certainly is a substantial part of commons -based-peers
production, Open Software Innovation and collaborative consumption truly dedicated to
innovation such as e.g. open design initi atives and software development. In addition,
as argued above, more and more classical innovation activities are combined with co l-

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
16 Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework
laborative innovation modes. As several scholars stress, the number of innovation d o-
mains where collaborative modes prove supe rior to firm based ones is bound to grow.
Thus it seems relevant for the innovation systems approach to consider its suitability
for underpinning the investigation of collaborative innovation and supporting policy
strategies. At first sight there are three key implications:
Broaden the notion of key innovation actors
Collaborative innovation projects involve hundreds of individuals with diverse motiv a-
tions coordinating with each other. This raises the question whether individual innov a-
tors need to be recogn ized as innovation system actors. Secondly, communities of a c-
tors ranging from Neighborhood-Innovators (Schor 2014: 3) to programmer circles and
hackerspaces become key nodes of the innovation ecosystem a s argued by Bauwens
et al. (2012: 4): "Two main agents of transformation guide this work. One is the emer-
gence of community dynamics as an essential ingredient of doing business . It is no
longer a matter of autonomous and separated corporations marketing to essentially
isolated consumers, it is now a matter of deeply inter -networked economic actors i n-
volved in vocal and productive communities ." Finally, according to some researchers,
actors of the social economy (Rifkin 2014: 17 ff .) play a major role in collaborative i n-
novation.
Recognize diverse innovation motivations
Classical innovation system theory is mainly preoccupied with market based innovation
that is driven by profit incentives. Several policy measures focus on counteracting the
effects of distorted market signals (market failure) and restoring th ese financial incen-
tives. Collaborative innovation does by definition harness a wide range of motivations
(Benkler et al. 2013: 11) many of them non monetary such as e.g. desire to advance
the social wellbeing of humanity (Rifkin 2014: 21 ff.), serve needs at community scale
(Schor 2014: 5), enhancement of reputation or just pleasure. Innovation systems ai m-
ing at mobilizing this type of innovation capacity would need to understand and mob i-
lize this diverse mix of motivation.
Consider new enabling infrastructures and institutions
Collaborative innovation activities require specific enabling infrastructures. On e key
aspect that is emphasized in the literature (e.g. Strandburg 2008; Baldwin von Hippel
2010; Bauwens et al . 2012) is the provision of adequate form s of intellectual property
rights. "The combined effect of digital reproduction and the increasingly 'socialized'
production of value, makes the individual and corporate privatization of 'intellectual'

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework 17

property if not untenable, then certainly more difficu lt, and in all likelihood, ultimately
unproductive. Hence the combined development of community -oriented and 'open'
business models, which rely on more 'social' forms of intellectual property" (Bauwens et
al. 2012: 4).
Other aspects of enabling infrastructu res for collaborative innovation mentioned by
various authors are public sharing platforms (Rifkin 2014; Schor 2014), Internet/Internet
of things (secure neutral, protected, collaborative/p2p (Rifkin 2014), reliable reputation
mechanisms (Schor 2014: 8), i ntellectual infrastructure (e.g. Open Science)
(Frischmann 2012).
3.4 New innovation intermediaries
3.4.1 Key aspects
The inno vation system concept based on Kuhlmann and Arnold (2001) includes the
group of intermediaries that mediate between "education and research" and the "indus-
trial system" (cf. Figure 1). When the increasing complexity of innovation systems is
taken into account, the perspective on intermediary actors and actor groups in innov a-
tion systems should be broadened to include further actors beyond research institutes
and brokers (given as examples in the above -cited concept). In addition, the group of
intermediary actors should be further investigated in order to obtain a more detailed
picture on their characteristics, activit ies and relationships with other players. Relevant
issues comprise questions like: Which actors or stakehold ers are associated with and
summarized under the label of "intermediaries"? Which functions, goals, influence and
impact do intermediaries have? Is this group of intermediaries comparatively stable
over time or does it involve more and/or different stakeholders in the course of the evo-
lution of innovation systems? Which relationships with further actors in the innovation
system do exist (see also Koschatzky et al. 2014)?
The initial innovation system concept assigns intermediaries a mediating function be-
tween education, qualification and research on the one hand and private businesses on
the other hand. Intermediaries thus assume the role of transferring knowledge generat-
ed in the science and research system to private companies where it is applied and
exploited for innovation (Meißner 2001). Conversely, companies may transfer their
need for research via intermediaries to the science system. From this r ationale follows
that intermediaries "translate" knowledge between science and industry actors, pr o-
ceed, adapt and transfer it between them. Their function could be described as broke r-
ing, bridging, mediating, or transferring knowledge (Howells 2006; Klerkx and Leeuwis
2009; Stewart 2008) . Examples for those intermediary actors are for instance applied

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
18 Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework
research institutes or development providers. In parallel, it is assumed that the
knowledge production and knowledge exploitation parts of the innovation system main-
tain direct relationships.
With the increasing degree of interrelated innovation processes that involve various
different actors this picture seems very simplified. Further actors enter the scene: b e-
sides (public or private) research institutes service providers, networks, clusters, public
agencies etc. are involved in knowledge transfer and intermediation (cf. Nauwelaers
2011). Part of these functions can also be standardized and delivered for instance
through internet portals or platforms. In addi tion, the institutional structure of intermed i-
aries seems to become increasingly blurred: Besides organizations with a formal stru c-
ture that exclusively work on innovation mediation, there are for instance departments
within universities that fu lfill intermediary functions towards industry (cf. Smedlund
2006). Finally, the intermediation function is not re stricted to bridging between science
and industry; there are also bridging actors within those sub -systems, with the policy
area, with users and further elements of the innovation system (Nauwelaers 2011).
Intermediaries can hence be described as a heterogeneous and dynamic element in
innovation systems. Evolutions and modifications may affect functions and tasks, but
also the composition of actors: new intermediaries may emerge, while established ones
may disappear or – more probably – turn to other fields of activities (Koschatzky et al.
2014). Further, it can be assumed that the general framework conditions for innovation
as well as the political system a nd its shaping function also have an impact on the
types and numbers of intermediaries (see the aspects of coordination and governance
in the Varieties of Capitalism approach, Hall and Soskice 2001).
Investigating innovation systems and their individual ch aracteristics leads to consider
intermediaries under different perspectives. In the case cited above, i.e. actors whose
primary function is to broker and transfer knowledge within the innovation system, i n-
termediaries' activities can be considered as delib erate or intentional processes that
aim at facilitating innovation. However, there are further actors whose activities can be
considered as by-product of their primary function (e.g. research -liaison offices at un i-
versities, cf. Nilsson and Sia-Ljungström 2013: 165), or whose activities do not primar i-
ly target innovation, but have an indirect impact on innovation. Various examples can
be cited in this respect: non -researching firms that focus on development activities,
solution providers mandated by their ( industrial) clients, or individuals who express
their vision on future developments, technological pioneers, clubs and lobby groups
that express their clients ' interests (cf. van Lente et al. 2003) . Consumer advisors,
technical advisors (such as Chaos Comp uter Club, technology assessment), emplo y-
ers' interest groups such as trade unions, but also the 'crowd', i.e. the critical public,

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework 19

have an important role to play in this context, since many of their activities have an
indirect impact on the innovation sys tem. As a consequence, we propose to broaden
the definition of 'intermediaries' and to include (1) mediating bodies that fulfill a deliber-
ate function in innovation systems by coordinating two or more actors or actor groups
and (2) actors that do not prima rily target innovation, but whose activities have an i m-
pact on parts of or the whole innovation system. This includes associations as defined
by Koschatzky et al. (2014), but also individuals and interest groups that are composed
(often for a limited time) to defend a specific topic that has implications on innovation
and the innovation system.
How to define these new actors?
Recent literature has to an increasing extent included innovation intermediaries into the
discussion of innovation activities and inn ovation systems (Howells 2006; Koschatzky
et al. 2014; Nauwelaers 2011; Stewart 2008; van Lente et al. 2003) . Theoretical and
conceptual discussions are enriched by case studies (see for instance Dalziel and
Parjanen 2012; Howells 2006; Nilsson and Sia-Ljungström 2013). Watkins et al. (2014)
focus on industry associations as institutional intermediaries in innovation systems,
particularly in developing countries , van Lente et al. (2003) discuss "systemic interme-
diaries" in contrast to "traditional intermediaries" and their focus on bilateral operations,
while Bennett (1998a; 1999; 2000) and Bennett and Ramsden (2007) focus on bus i-
ness associations and trade organizations.
According to Dalziel (2010 : 1), innovation intermediaries are "... organizations or
groups within organizations that work to enable innovation, either directly by enabling
the innovativeness of one or more firms, or indirectly by enhancing the innovative c a-
pacity of regions, nations, or sectors " (cf. also Smedlund 2006; van Lente et al. 2003 ).
This definition refers to the above -mentioned first type of actors with immediate and
deliberate effects on firms ' innovation activities. Intermediaries of this type may be of
public, private or mixed nature (van Lente et al. 2003) . Following this definition, all or-
ganizations and actors that pursue the goal to enable innovation would be included in
the group of innovation intermediaries. They can be iden tified and described on the
basis of their activities and functions. In addition however there are a ctors that fulfill a
different primary goal, but whose activities also have an impact on innovation and the
innovation system.2 This includes individuals or groups of individuals who might act on
their own, but might also be connected through different degrees of formalization (tem-

2 In addition, there are hybrid cases such as technology transfer offices at universities (Dalziel 2010).

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
20 Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework
porary relations, advocating specific interests or ideas vs. relations in a long -term per-
spective as registered association).
This shows that the group of "intermediaries" consists of a core of actors with well -
defined and innovati on-focused functions and activities, encircled by divergent actors
whose activities are to a decreasing extent directly focusing on innovation and whose
organizational structure becomes less uniform and formaliz ed. Hence the picture b e-
comes increasingly blurred; "new intermediaries" belong to this oute r circle. Identifying
and analyzing this latter type seems to be (1) very specific in individual innovation sy s-
tems, (2) hardly possible through directly innovation-related functions and activities,
and (3) relying on qualitative information and good knowledge of the innovation system
under analysis. Figure 2 tries to capture this by illustrating some examples in a matrix
shaped by the innovation focus and the degree of formalization.
Summarizing, "new intermediary actors" are individuals or associations that so far have
not explicitly been integrated in innovation studies because of their limited direct rel a-
tion to innovation. These actors' motivations focus on fields outside the innov ation pro-
cess, but have implications on innovation. Examples are trade unions (main focus o n
representing employees, labo r conditions, etc.), business clubs (main focus on repr e-
senting their clients ' interests) or computer clubs (mediation technical/ socia l develop-
ment) or citizens (expression of interests in selected technology -related fields) (cf. Fig-
ure 2). Their main activities are in representation of interests, lobbying or awareness
rising, which might have an impact on technology and innovation devel opment or pr e-
vention.
In addition, intermediaries might also act as 'bridges' beyond knowledge producers and
knowledge users, e.g. with the political system. Innovation dialogue processes and
platforms as well as (regional) conferences could be cited as examples.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework 21

Figure 2: Selected intermediaries, their degree of formalization and (direct)
focus on innovation (schematic overview

Source: own draft
3.4.2 Relevance
Intermediaries have been considered in innovation system concepts ba sed on their
direct knowledge and technology their intermediation between knowledge of different
parts of the system. In the last years, a rising awareness for additional actors/ proces s-
es / functions and interrelations could be observed. It becomes obviou s that the inte r-
mediary segment is much broader than initially conceived, and that it shapes various
parts and facets of an innovation system. Since innovation becomes increasingly co m-
plex and comprehensive, not considering these actors and activities woul d give an i n-
complete picture. The investigation of "new intermediaries" in the concrete case is very
specific to the innovation system in question, because their number, characteristic and
degree of freedom highly depend on the legal and institutional fram ework conditions.
However, due to their high (and increasing?) presence and specific mediating fun c-
tions, it is indispensable to include them in the innovation system concept. As interm e-
diaries in the "traditional" understanding, they may have important (d irect or indirect)
impacts on innovation and the innovation system – some of them rather in the long -
term perspective – and should thus be considered in innovation system analyses.
3.4.3 Implications for the innovation system framework
The broadening of the noti on of innovation mediators implies that one box with one
specific mediation function e.g. between universities and companies is no longer suff i-
cient. As a consequence, we propose to broaden the view related (1) to the specific
(Direct) innovation focus
Technology transfer
agencies Cluster, Networks Trade Unions
Degree of formalization
Clubs (Business /
computer club) Citizens, action groups,
crowd‘

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
22 Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework
actors to be considered and ( 2) to the interlinkages they organize. The first notion r e-
fers to actors that have previously not been considered in innovation system analyses
and/or actors with less innovation -oriented primary functions, while the second notion
emphasizes the linkages t hat those intermediaries occupy. In terms of actors to be
considered, the new innovation system model should broaden the notion of intermed i-
aries and include representatives of relevant actors such as (business) associations
and clubs, actor interfaces suc h as networks and clusters, representatives of co -
workers in (innovating) companies such as trade unions, in addition to (industry -
oriented) research institutes, transfer agencies, etc. In terms of interlinkages, the new
model should go beyond relating the industrial and the research system and broaden
the view to mediating activities within and between all sub -systems of the innovation
system model. This view broadens the initial concept of brokering scientific and techno-
logical knowledge, and includes kno wledge flows leading to non -technological innova-
tion and embraces actors that were not at the core of previous innovation system ana l-
yses, such as for instance specialized service providers, agencies that focus on cre a-
tive industries, but also platforms re lating citizens and social actors with business and
research actors. This full spectrum of intermediary actors and mediation functions
leads us to consider mediators as "background cloud" in the new innovation system
model.
3.5 Venture philanthropy
3.5.1 Key aspects
Along with the rise of social entrepreneurship in the mid 1990s, the mode of financing
social projects changed significantly. Promoted as a way to revolutionize grantmaking,
"venture philanthropy" developed significantly in the US in the mid 1990s, took h old in
the UK from 2002 and since 2010 and is expanding into continental Europe. According
to Moody (2008) venture philanthropy grantmakers borrow the venture capital funding
model, which has been used to nurture and grow start -up businesses in the "new
economy", and adopt and adapt the model for philanthropic funding. Due to its role in
providing finance and professional services to social purpose organizations – helping
them expand their social impact – venture philanthropy and social entrepreneurship are
in many ways two side of one coin: "The rise of social entrepreneurship and the chang-
ing face of philanthropy are reshaping the social sector in tandem" (Martin 2004: 21).
Venture philanthropy is an approach to charitable giving that applies venture capit al
principles, such as long-term investment and hands-on support to the social economy.
Venture philanthropists work in partnership with a wide range of organizations that

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework 23

have a clear social obj ective. These organizations may be charities, social enterpri ses
or socially driven commercial businesses, with the precise organizational form subject
to country-specific legal and cultural norms. According to John (2006) key characteri s-
tics of venture philanthropy are:
High engagement: Venture philanthropists hav e a close hands-on relationship with
the social entrepreneurs and ventures they support, driving innovative and scalable
models of social change. Some may take board places on these organizations, and all
are far more intimately involved at strategic and o perational levels than are traditional
non-profit funders.
Multi-year support: Venture philanthropists provide substantial and sustained financial
support to a limited number of organizations. Support typically lasts at least three -to-
five years, with an objective of helping the organization to become financially self -
sustaining by the end of the funding period.
Tailored financing: As in venture capital, venture philanthropists take an investment
approach to determine the most appropriate financing for ea ch organization. Depend-
ing on their own missions and the ventures they choose to support, venture philanthr o-
pists can operate across the spectrum of investment returns. Some offer non - returna-
ble grants (and thus accept a purely social return), while others use loan, mezzanine or
quasi-equity finance (thus blending risk-adjusted financial and social returns).
Organizational capacity-building: Venture philanthropists focus on building the ope r-
ational capacity and long -term viability of the organizations in their portfolios, rather
than funding individual projects or programs. They recognize the importance of funding
core operating costs to help these organizations achieve greater social impact and o p-
erational efficiency.
Non-financial support: In addition to financial support, venture philanthropists provide
value-added services such as strategic planning, marketing and communications, e x-
ecutive coaching, human resource advice and access to other networks and potential
funders.
Performance measurement: Venture philanthropy investment is performance -based,
placing emphasis on good business planning, measurable outcomes, achievement of
milestones, and high levels of financial accountability and management competence.
Basically, venture philanthropy is about t he concentration of financial resources to a
few selected organizations, which are considered as efficient and effective. These or-
ganizations are supported over a long period of time with the necessary resources.
Therefore, the social entrepreneur will not only receive financing but also management

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
24 Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework
support, social networks and contacts. The term "high engagement philanthropy " has
been created to describe this kind of activity (Venture Philanthropy Partners and Com-
munity Wealth Ventures 2004).
The specific f inancing modes applied by venture philanthropy are similar to those
known from the classic venture capital funding: donation, grants, soft loans, guarantees
and equity (Achleitner 2007). However, in compared to classic venture capital funding,
donation is the most important element in venture philanthropy (John 2006).
3.5.2 Relevance
The expansion of social entrepreneurship and venture philanthropy results in the estab-
lishment of new intermediaries. Given the fact that social entrepreneurs spend most of
the time with fund raising, new actors or organizations can strengthen the efficiency of
the whole sector (Drayton 2006). At the same time foundations and donors devote a
large part of their resources on the identification and selection of projects, Mee han et
al. (2004) come to the following conclusion: "That means that in the social capital ma r-
ket, the cost of raising capital consumes roughly 22 to 43 percent of the funds raised, a
dreadfully inefficient process".
Worldwide, not only in the US and UK, creative appr oaches have been developed to
establish a philanthropic version of most of the areas of the capitalist market system:
Social Investment Banking, Social Investment Management, a conversion of private
banking, information brokers and analysts and rating agen cies are according to Mai t-
land (2004) typical concepts of this trend. Like the "normal" capital markets, which r e-
quire intermediary organizations to be efficient, they are similarly significant for the pr i-
vate financing of the social sector.
The relevance of venture philanthropy for adapting the innovation system concept lies
in the fact that respective intermediary or ganizations can be regarded as a new and
increasingly important group of actors, which have the potential to improve the fram e-
work conditions for innovation. However, their importance varies between the different
countries. The US is clearly a pioneer in this field – based on decades of experience in
the area of classic venture capital funding and the importance of philanthropy in ge n-
eral. In Germany for instance, opportunities for venture philanthropy may arise as the
federal state leaves more and more room for social activities (Achleitner 2007). Ther e-
fore, social entrepreneurship receives more and more support. New organizations like
"Ashoka – Innovators for the Public", BonVenture (the first venture philanthropy fund in
Germany, founded in 2003) or the Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship are
examples for new models to support social entrepreneurship. However, when speaking

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework 25

of inno vation as the main "output" of innovation systems, the project portfolio of the
relevant organization has to be analyzed in detail, in order to assess the "innovative
content" of the (social) projects funded.
3.5.3 Implications for the innovation system framework
The emergence of venture philanthropy in the innovation field is increasing the diversity
of funding sources. In particular when integrating social innovation into the system
view, it seems crucial to consider this type of funding in addition to more tra ditional
sources. At the same time the function is different from classical financing as there is a
normative component in the selection of projects so next to finances also orientations
are injected into the system.
3.6 Social and relational capital
3.6.1 Key aspects
When introducing the actor perspective in the innovation system concept, a relation to
the socio-cultural dimension of innovation, defined as social and not only as technical
process (cf. section 3.2), is necessary. In this respect, two sociological con cepts are of
relevance: social and relational capital.
Regarding social capital, a distinction is made between the collective perspective by
Bourdieu (1979), and the more individualistic perspective by Coleman (1988). When
the analytic view is on actors, b oth perspectives are relevant, because an actor in an
innovation system not only acts for himself, but has to be considered in the systemic
and interactive innovation perspective. In this respect, social capital "...consists of the
stock of active connections among people: the trust, mutual understanding, and shared
values and behaviors that bind members of human networks and communities and
make cooperative action possible" (Cohen and Prusak 2001: 4). Social capital does not
only consist of active connecti ons, but also of their content. This content can be e x-
pressed by obligations and expectations, information channels and social norms
(Coleman 1988). Nevertheless, the individual absorptive capacity of social contacts
and the making use of them are as well important. Therefore authors like Charme s
(1998) or Mahieu (1998) emphasiz e that social capital is an individual and not only a
collective asset.
In the economic context, which is of great relevance for an innovation system, Putnam
describes social capital as "features of social life – networks, norms, and trust – that
enable participants to act together more effectively to pursue shared objectives... S o-

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
26 Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework
cial capital, in short, refers to social connections and the attendant norms and trust "
(Putnam 1995: 664-665). Here we find the collective character of social capital and the
importance of networking in attaining it. Also Paldam (2000: 630) states that " social
capital deals with cooperation in groups and networks within groups of people ". He
concludes that i t is a micro concept, which may be aggregated to the national level
(and thus to the regional level as well).
Summarizing this short reflection, it becomes clear that social capital is constituted by
general components like trust, norms, values, attitudes and understandings and is a t-
tained through the process of social interaction. Since social interaction plays an i m-
portant role, the dimension of social capital is not only individualistic, but has a strong
collective feature. Social capital can be regarded as public good, but since networks
might not be open to everybody and groups are able to control the access of other indi-
viduals to the group, it could also have the character of a club good.
A typical club good is relational capital. It stresses the impo rtance of interactions. A c-
cording to Capello and Faggian (2005: 77) it is defined as "...the set of all relationships
– market relationships, power relationships and cooperation – established between
firms, institutions and people that stem from a strong s ense of belonging and a highly
developed capacity of cooperation, typical of culturally similar people and institutions".
Relational capital is therefore associated with social capital, because it is "...the sum of
the actual and potential resources embedd ed within, available through, and derived
from the network of relationships" (Nahapiet and Goshal 1998: 243).
Building on available social and relational capital, collective actions by more than one
actor become possible. According to the collective actio n framework literature, organi-
zations in the form of groups or clubs emerge as response to the need of joint action
(i.e. collective interests) and the supply of collective goods (Olson 1985). This again
stresses that not only single actors need a stronger focus in innovation system ana l-
yses, but groups of actors pursuing joint interests.
3.6.2 Relevance
Actors and actor groups can act as collective bodies between individual and state a c-
tion (Bennett 1998a) and be regarded as an outcome to the need of collective action.
Their range of activities is quite broad and includes collective bargaining (e.g. trade
unions), self-regulation (e.g. development and protection of standards), representation
and lobbying, as well as forum or club activities (e.g. social exchange and informal
networking) (Bennett 1998b). In this respect, actors in an individualistic and in a group
perspective can be related to social as well as relational capital. In the case actors i n-

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework 27

tend to perform intermediary functions, which are a typical acti vity within innovation
systems, relational capital and thus the underlying amount and quality of relations
among relational actors is a key factor for successful collective action. Relational cap i-
tal implies a capability for interaction and collective lear ning, and is therefore an i m-
portant input and outcome of innovative activities (Capello and Faggian 2005; Maskell
2000).
3.6.3 Implications for the innovation system framework
Both relational and social capital are closely related to social interaction and thu s to
social proximity and embeddedness. Proximity is an important factor in innovation pr o-
cesses and innovation systems, especially regarding the exchange of tacit, locally -
bound knowledge and expertise (Carrincazeaux and Coris 2011). Embeddedness,
which was introduced by Granovetter (1973; 1985) into the scholarly debate, is esp e-
cially similar to social proximity. Among the five different forms of proximity (cognitive,
organizational, social, institutional, geographical), social proximity reflects "…economic
relations (that) are ... embedded in a social context" (Boschma 2005: 66). It is therefore
necessary to emphasize the relevance of proximity relations between innovation actors,
e.g. through non -transferable person -embodied knowledge, in the innovation s ystem
concept (Asheim and Coenen 2005; Asheim and Gertler 2005). Due to the fact that
innovation activities strongly rely on the creation of new, so far unknown knowledge,
the immediate framework in which innovation takes place has to be elaborated and the
innovation system approach adapted to the specific actor constellations.
Another implication is the focus on actors and actor groups which pursue joint interests.
In analyses it should be made clear who are the most important (or relevant) actors or
actor groups, how are they related and what are their major interests and collective a c-
tion channels. Without this knowledge a sound analysis of the efficiency of an innovation
system will not be possible.
3.7 Non R&D-intensive industries
3.7.1 Key aspects
Arundel et al. (2008) found that the half of the surveyed firms in the Community Innova-
tion Survey does not conduct any research or development at all. Drawing from the
innovation and research policy debate, research and development (R&D) is just one
possibility in whi ch innovativeness can be attained. Thus, there are many firms which
can be innovative without R&D and the levels of eco nomic performance do not differ
(Hirsch-Kreinsen 2008a). However, by what are these firms characterized?

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
28 Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework
Manufacturing industries can cla ssified into the divisions "high-tech", "medium-tech"
and "low-tech" by their sectors' average share of R&D expenditures (Hirsch-Kreinsen et
al. 2005 ; von Tunzelmann and Acha 2005 ). The OECD classification established in
1994 consists of four thresholds in stead of just three, and was modified by Legler and
Frietsch in 2007. Sectors with a less than 3%, respectively less than 2.5% (Legler and
Frietsch 2007) share of R&D expenditures in turnover are classified as non -R&D-
intensive or low-tech sectors (OECD 1994). Industries such as textiles, clothing, leather
products, furniture, and metal products belong to this category. Industries such as ae r-
ospace, computers, semiconductors, telecommunications, pharmaceuticals and i n-
struments are commonly classified as "high-tech" with more than 7% share of R&D
expenditures in turnover. Medium -tech sectors, like electrical and non -electrical m a-
chinery, transport equipment and parts of the chemical industries possess a share of
R&D expenditures in turnover between 2.5% and 7%.
Based on this classification, low-tech and medium -low-tech sectors account for the
largest part of manufacturing output and employment in OECD and European econ o-
mies, and their preponderance is decreasing only at a very slow rate (Sandven et al.
2005; Bender 2006; Gehrke and Legler 2010; Som et al. 2010; Hahn 2009). Non -R&D-
intensive firms generally perform more weakly with regard to product innovation co m-
pared to R&D -intensive firms (Huang et al. 2010; Arundel et al. 2008; Heidenreich
2009), but low-tech and medium-low-tech firms are key customers of innovation gener-
ated in high -tech industries and are also involved in knowledge -creating activities
(Robertson and Patel 2007). Hauknes and Knell (2009) revealed the direct and indirect
flows of knowledge b etween different R&D -intensive industries in several countries in
Europe. Furthermore, Pavitt (1984) showed that technology flows between high -tech
and low-tech industries are dominated by the flo ws into low-tech sectors. Besides low-
tech industries stimul ate or even influence new innovation activities in high -tech sec-
tors, either by giving customer feedback on their practical experiences with high -tech
products or by acting as suppliers to high-tech industries (Mendonça 2009).
Even though innovative product-related services are often developed in close associ a-
tion with a new product, non R&D -intensive industries also show weaker performance
in the field of product -related services (Kirner et al. 2008, 2009b). Thus, innovation in
low-tech firms is assumed t o be mostly in the form of improvements to existing pro d-
ucts (Raymond and St -Pierre 2010). These results also correspond with the taxon omy
of Pavitt (1984) who argued that firms of traditional (= non R&D-intensive) sectors of
manufacturing consist largely of small, "supplier dominated firms" with weak in -house
R&D and weak engineering capabilities.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework 29

3.7.2 Relevance
In the classical linear understanding of the innovation process, R&D plays a leading
role (Godin 2006). R&D investments are expected to lead to the cre ation and develop-
ment of prototypes and to the introduction of new products to the market (Saviotti and
Nooteboom 2000). This linear R&D -based innovation paradigm has been challenged
from different perspectives. Firstly, innovation is often in practice a n on-linear, rather
complex, collaborative and multi -level process which is embedded in innovation sy s-
tems (Lundvall 1992). Secondly, non -technological forms of innovation are also i n-
creasingly recognized as distinct innovation paths which can contribute to a firm's eco-
nomic success (Damanpour and Evan 1984; Piva and Vivarelli 2002; OECD 2005).
Innovation is also linked to complex mechanisms of knowledge distribution (Edquist
1997) and can arise through different innovation modes.
Given the different modes of innovation, the interdependent nature of innovation pr o-
cesses and their embedd edness into innovation systems, innovation can be assumed
to be a diverse phenomenon with R&D forming only one of many possible sources .
According to Schumpeter, innovation is a means to an end, the end being economic
success, increased competitiveness or growth (Schumpeter 1934). Besides developing
new products, manufacturing firms can also develop new product -related services, in-
troduce innovative manufacturing technologies or implement innovative organizational
concepts. Each of these innovation types can be a source of competitive advantage in
itself.
But today, the majority of scholarly research , policy documents and instruments on
innovation is still based on neoclassical m odels of mainstream innovation research
(Arundel 2007), however, other methods that firms can use to innovate increase slowly.
If only R&D indicators are used to measure innovation capability, firms without R&D will
not be captured adequately and in conseq uence they will be classified as non -
innovative or even be excluded from innovation studies. Firms that do not perform fo r-
mal R&D have been largely neglected by academic research and the policy commun i-
ty.
Non-R&D-intensive firms are definitely able to suc cessfully develop new products or
even market innovations (Kirner et al. 2009a) and new process innovation (Evangelista
et al. 2002; Nascia and Perani 2002). Innovation activities of non -R&D-intensive firms
are often more focused on production efficiency, product differentiation and ma rketing
(von Tunzelmann and Acha 2005; Heidenreich 2009) by process and organiz ational
innovations (Som 2012).

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
30 Innovation phenomena challenging the established innovation system framework
A source of innovation for non-R&D-intensive firms are the acquisition and purchase of
innovative machinery and eq uipment or intermediate goods from external sources
(Bender 2006; Bargegil et al. 2008). They are thereby relatively more dependent on the
diffusion of external knowledge than R&D -performing firms (Arundel et al. 2008;
Heidenreich 2009). The development an d availability of absorptive capacity plays a
major role, as it enables them to manage and implement technology adoption success-
fully (Bender and Laestadius 2005; Hirsch -Kreinsen 2008b; Hauknes and Knell 2009).
Non-or-less-R&D-performing firms gain innovat ion success from external knowledge
sourcing or formal cooperation with external partners, particularly with customers, su p-
pliers and competitors (Huang et al. 2010; Rammer et al. 2009).
Creativity and innovation -enabling capabilities through customer -related and practical
knowledge are furthermore a key source for innovation in non -R&D-intensive firms
(Bender and Laestadius 2005; Hirsch -Kreinsen 2004, 2008a). For instance, non -R&D
innovators, like production engineers, design staff or low- and unskilled production em-
ployees are alternative sources of knowledge generation and accumulation than sc i-
ence-based modes of expert knowledge (Arundel et al. 2008; Kirner et al. 2009b). I n-
ternal organizational practices, knowledge management and personnel policy, in p ar-
ticular, play a vital role for innovation and the innovation performance of low -tech firms
(Bender 2006; Hirsch-Kreinsen 2008b; Rammer et al. 2009).
3.7.3 Implications for the innovation system framework
Innovation in non-R&D intensive industries does not fun damentally question the estab-
lished notion of the innovation system. Rather, the respective companies can be seen
as an important part of the industrial system. Nevertheless, it is obvious that the esta b-
lished perception was very much focused on high- or at least medium-tech companies.
The transfer of scientific knowledge from universities and research organizations was
viewed as the main mode of knowledge transfer relevant for innovation. As shown
above, however, non R&D intensive innovation builds on diff erent ways of knowledge
exchange and also rest on different knowledge types such as non formalized tacit
knowledge. Therefore, explicitly including this sector of industry seems crucial in order
to increase the relevance of the heuristics for large parts of the innovation landscape.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Conclusions – Towards a broadened innovation system framework 31

4 Conclusions – Towards a broadened innovation
system framework
As the discussions in the last sections have revealed, recent innovation debates imply
a number of revisions of the innovation system concept. The innovation system frame-
work needs to cover a wide range of new actors and institutions in order to allow for an
analysis of the capacity of a system to generate novel solutions (cf. Figure 3).
Figure 3: New elements in the innovation system framework

Source: Adapted from Kuhlmann and Arnold (2001)
When reviewing the phenomena discussed above , it becomes apparent however that
adding a few new boxes and arrows will not do justice to the new perspectives.
Several of the p henomena discussed above such as collaborative consumption, user
innovation and the role of social and relational capital point to a more fundamental blur-
ring of clear boundaries between actors roles and functions.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
32 Conclusions – Towards a broadened innovation system framework
In addition it becomes obvious that it is no longer possible to make a distinct assig n-
ment of functions3 in the innovation process to certain actors and vice versa:
 The function of knowledge generation can no longer be primarily situated at the
research system. Other actors such as user innovator s, customers, new intermed i-
aries, collaborative innovators and citizen innovators make substantial contributions
especially to the newly recognized innovation types such as low tech innovation and
social innovation, but also to classical product innovation.
 For the function of resource mobilization industry remains the main contributor for
classical product innovations. When looking at the broader range of innovation activ-
ities in the public and third sector, however, the contributions of other actors such as
venture philanthropists, third sector institutions, governments, cities and individual
citizens become ever more relevant.
 Consumers and customers can no longer be assigned to the function of "market
formation". Rather they make key contributions to kno wledge generation, diffusion
and resource mobilization.
These considerations point to the need for a more radical revision of the innovation
system analytical construct. Firstly, an analytical framework for the innovation system is
required that captures the broadest possible notion of innovation as "novel solutions"
that are successfully embedded into society be it new technologies, products, social
practices, processes and concepts. Market uptake is one of the possible pathways for
such an embedding, but others such as e.g. implementation in a public sector organ i-
zation such as a hospital or uptake of a social innovation in several c ommunities are
equally covered. Secondly, the framework should not fix any assignment of actors and
functions but rather allow for multiple roles of actors groups (e.g. companies as provi d-
ing, demanding and financing innovation) as well as fulfillment of functions by several
different actor groups.
In order to fulfill these requirements we have developed the analytical framewor k de-
picted in Figure 4.

3 Innovation systems are considered to provide certain functions for the innovation process.
Typologies differ slightly but the main functions discussed in literature are k nowledge gen-
eration, knowledge diffusion, g uidance for the direction of search, e ntrepreneurial exper i-
mentation, market formation, legitimation and resource mobilization (Köhler et al. 2016).

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Conclusions – Towards a broadened innovation system framework 33

Figure 4: Revised innovation system analytical framework

Source: own drawing
We distinguish three types of contributions to innovation processes symbolized by the
dotted lines. Actors that may contribute to the respective innovation types are listed in
the colored clouds. The fuzziness of the clouds emphasizes that the actual list of actors
is open so new actors may contribute here at any time.
Situated at the core of the analytical framework is innovation supply and demand (in
grey). This type of direct contribution to the dynamics of innovation can be fulfilled by a
wide range of diverse actors from civil society, business and the public sector who are
immediately engaged into the innovation process through generating, requesting or
embedding innovations.
On a second level, innovation input (in green), are the actor groups that feed the
innovation process by providing crucial inputs such as research organizations providing
scientific knowledge, education providing competent innovators and users and finan c-
ers providing financial resources. Actors from the first level may contribute here as well
of course as is indicated by the grey clouds outreach.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
34 Conclusions – Towards a broadened innovation system framework
Finally, at the third level we place the innovation frameworks (in purple). One core
element here is provided by basic enabling infrastructures for the different types of i n-
novation ranging from fast internet to co -creation platforms. Also crucial for the fram e-
work are fundamental institutions such as intellectual property rights as well as stan d-
ards and norms. Finally, innovation frameworks are provided by the cultural context
with its social and relational capital as well as by various policies among them research
and innovation policies but also other fields such as social policy, health and transport
that impact on innovation framework condition.
Just like the established system depicted in Figure 1, our advanced framework does
not attempt to depict one specific innovation system. Rather it is meant as an analytical
framework guiding the analysis of any spatial (national, regional) innovation system to
identify its specificities and support policy makers in advancing the system's capacities.
We do hope however that our broadened concept will allow for an analysis that reveals
a more diverse set of innovation types and thereby underpins innovation policy strat e-
gies seeking to extent support to a wider range of innovation types as it is increasingly
the case.
Important avenues for further research are the testing of our newly developed fram e-
work by case studies. Another important avenue for further research is the linkage b e-
tween spatial innovation systems (NIS, RIS) and technological innovation systems
(TIS). For the TIS analysis it is common practice to derive the actors that could pote n-
tially fulfill a certain function for a specific technology from the NIS framework (e.g.
Hekkert et al. 2011). We feel that the advanced framework may provide a useful widen-
ing of the range of actors to be considered. Figure 5 provides an example how TIS
functions could be fulfilled by the actors and institutions in our framework. Both case
studies and an analysis of the innovation system of wind power in Germany using our
advanced innovation system framework are the next steps in our research.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Conclusions – Towards a broadened innovation system framework 35

Figure 5: Locating the TIS functions in a spatial innovation system framework

Source: own drawing

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
36 Literature
5 Literature
Arundel, A. (2007): Innovation Survey Indicators: What Impact on Innovation Policy? In:
Science, Technology and Innovation Indicators in a Changing World: Responding
to Policy Needs. Paris, OECD publishing, 49-64.
Arundel, A./Bordoy, C./Karneva, M. (2008): Neglected Innovators: How Do Innovative
Firms That Do Not Perform R&D Innovate? Results of an analysis of the
Innobarometer 2007 survey No. 215. INNO-Metrics Thematic Paper.
Achleitner, A.-K. (2007): Social Entrepreneurship und Venture Philantropy – Erste An-
sätze in Deutschland. In: Hausladen, I. (Ed.): Management am Puls der Zeit.
Festschrift für Univ. Prof. Dr. Dr. h.c. mult. Horst Wildemann, Band 1: Unterneh-
mensführung. München: TCW, 57-70.
Asheim, B.T./Coenen, L. (2005): Knowledge bases and regional innovation systems:
Comparing Nordic Clusters, Research Policy, 34, 1173-1190.
Asheim, B.T./Gertler, M.S. (2005): The Geography of Innovation: Regional Innovation
Systems. In: Fagerberg, J./Mowery, D.C./Nelson, R.R. (Eds.): The Oxford Hand-
book of Innovation. New York: Oxford University Press, 291-317.
Baldwin, C./von Hippel, E. (2010): Modeling a Paradigm Shift: From Producer Innova-
tion to User and Open Collaborative Innovation, MIT Sloan School of Manage-
ment Working Paper # 4764-09; Harvard Business School Finance Working Pa-
per No. 10-038.
Bauwens, M./Mendoza, N./Iacomella, F. (2012): Synthetic Overview of the Collabora-
tive Economy, P2P Foundation. Online: http://p2p.coop/files/reports/collaborative-
economy-2012.pdf (accessed 21-12-2015).
Belk, R. (2014): Sharing versus Pseudo-Sharing in Web 2.0. In: Anthropologist, 18(1),
7-23.
Bender, G. (2006): Peculiarities and Relevance of Non-Research-Intensive Industries
in the Knowledge-Based Economy. Final Report of the Project "Policy and Inno-
vation in Low-Tech – Knowledge Formation, Employment & Growth Contributions
of the 'Old Economy' Industries in Europe – PILOT". Dortmund: Technische
Universität.
Bender, G./Laestadius, S. (2005): Non-Science Based Innovativeness. On Capabilities
Relevant to Generate Profitable Novelty, Journal of Mental Changes, 11(1-2),
123-170.
Benkler, Y. (2002): Coase's penguin, or, Linux and The Nature of the Firm. Yale Law
Journal, 112(3), 369-446.
Benkler, Y. (2004): Sharing Nicely, The Yale Law Journal, 114, 273-358.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Literature 37

Benkler, Y. (2006): The Wealth of Networks. How Social Production Transforms Mar-
kets and Freedom. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Benkler, Y. (2011): The Penguin and the Leviathan: How Cooperation Triumphs Over
Self-Interest. New York: Crown Business.
Benkler, Y. (2013): Peer production and cooperation. In: Bauer, J.M./Latzer, M. (Eds.):
Handbook on the Economics of the Internet. Northhampton: Edward Elgar.
Benkler, Y./Nissenbaum, H. (2006): Commons-based peer production and virtue, Jour-
nal of Political Philosophy, 14(4), 394-419.
Benkler, Y./Shaw, A./Mako Hill, B. (2013) Peer production: A Modality of Collective
Intelligence. Unpublished draft. Online:
https://mako.cc/academic/benkler_shaw_hill-peer_production_ci.pdf (accessed
21-12-2015).
Bennett, R.J. (1998a): Business associations and their potential contribution to the
competitiveness of SMEs, Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 10, 243-
260.
Bennett, R.J. (1998b): Explaining the Membership of Voluntary Local Business Associ-
ations: The Example of British Chambers of Commerce, Regional Studies, 32,
503-514.
Bennett, R.J. (1999): Explaining the membership of sectoral business associations,
Environment and Planning A, 31, 877-898.
Bennett, R.J. (2000): The Logic of Membership of Sectoral Business Associations, Re-
view of Social Economy, 58, 17-42.
Bennett, R.J./Ramsden, M. (2007): The Contribution of Business Associations to
SMEs: Strategy, Bundling or Reassurance?, International Small Business Jour-
nal, 25, 49-76.
Bergek, A./Jacobsson, S./Carlsson, B./Lindmark, S./Rickne, A. (2008): Analysing the
functional dynamics of technological innovation systems: A scheme of analysis,
Research Policy, 37, 407-429.
Blättel-Mink, B./Menez, R. (2015): Kompendium der Innovationsforschung. 2. Auflage.
Wiesbaden: Springer VS.
Bonaccorsi, A./Rossi, C. (2003): Why Open Source software can succeed, Research
Policy, 32(7), 1243-1258.
Boschma, R.A. (2005): Proximity and Innovation: A Critical Assessment, Regional
Studies, 39, 61-74.
Botsman, R./Rogers, R. (2010): What's mine is yours : The rise of collaborative con-
sumption. New York, N.Y.: HarperCollins Publ.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
38 Literature
Bourdieu, P. (1979): La distinction: critique sociale du jugement. Paris: Les Éd. de
Minuit.
Capello, R./Faggian, A. (2005): Collective Learning and Relational Capital in Local In-
novation Processes, Regional Studies, 39, 75-87.
Carrincazeaux, C./Coris, M. (2011): Proximity and innovation. In: Cooke, P./Asheim,
B./Boschma, R./Martin, R./Schwartz, D./Tödtling, F. (Eds.): Handbook of Region-
al Innovation and Growth. Cheltenham, Northampton: Edward Elgar, 269-281.
Charmes, J. (1998): Ostentation, solidarités, protection sociale: des dépenses ostenta-
toires à l'accumulation d'un capital social, vers une convergence des interpréta-
tions des phénomènes économiques dans les sociétés africaines? Mimeo.
Guyancourt: Centre d'Economie et d'Ethique pour l'Environnement et le Déve-
loppement, Université de Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines.
Cohen, D./Prusak, L. (2001): In Good Company. How Social Capital Makes Organiza-
tions Work. Boston, Ma.: Harvard Business School Press.
Coleman, J.S. (1988): Social capital in the creation of human capital, American Journal
of Sociology, 94 (Supplement), 95-120.
Dalziel, M. (2010): Why do Innovation Intermediaries Exist? Paper presented at the
DRUID Summer Conference 2010. Online:
http://www2.druid.dk/conferences/viewpaper.php?id=500976&cf=43 (accessed
21-12-2015).
Dalziel, M./Parjanen, S. (2012): Measuring the Impact of Innovation Intermediaries: A
Case Study of Tekes. In: Melkas, H./Harmaakorpi, V. (Eds.): Practice-Based In-
novation: Insights, Applications and Policy Implications. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag, 117-134.
Defourny, J./Nyssens, M. (2013): Social innovation, social economy and social enter-
prise: what can the European debate tell us?. In: Moulaert, F./MacCallum,
D./Mehmood, A./Hamdouch, A. (Eds.): The International Handbook on Social In-
novation. Collective Action, Social Learning and Transdisciplinary Research.
London and Northampton: Edgar Elgar, pp. 40-52.
Dosi, G. (1982): Technological paradigms and technological trajectories. A suggested
interpretation of the determinants and directions of technical change, Research
Policy, 11, 147-162.
Dosi, G. (1988): The nature of the innovative process. In: Dosi, G./Freeman, C./Nelson,
R./Silverberg, G. /Soete, L. (Eds.): Technical Change and Economic Theory.
London: Pinter Publishers, 221-238.
Dosi, G./Freeman, C./Nelson, R./Silverberg, G./Soete, L. (Eds.) (1988): Technological
Change and Economic Theory. London: Pinter Publishers.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Literature 39

Drayton, B. (2006): The Citizen Sector Transformed. In: Nicholls, A. (Ed.): Social En-
trepreneurship, New Models of Sustainable Social Change. New York: Oxford
University Press, 45-55.
Edquist, C. (2005): Systems of Innovation. Perspectives and Challenges. In:
Fagerberg, J./Mowery, D.C./Nelson, R.R. (Eds.): The Oxford Handbook of Inno-
vation. New York: Oxford University Press, 181-208.
Evangelista, R./Iammarino, S./Mastrostefano, V./Silvani, A. (2002): Looking for regional
systems of innovation: Evidence from the Italian innovation Survey, Regional
Studies, 36(2), 173-186.
Franke, N./von Hippel, E. (2003): Satisfying Heterogeneous User Needs via Innovation
Toolkits: The Case of Apache Security Software, Research Policy 32(7), 1199-
1215.
Freeman, C. (1982): The Economics of Industrial Innovation. London: Frances Pinter.
Freeman, C. (1987): Technology Policy and Economic Performance: Lessons from
Japan. London, New York: Frances Printer Publishers.
Frischmann, B.M. (2012): Infrastructure. The Social Value of Shared Resources. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Geels, F.W. (2004): From sectoral systems of innovation to socio-technical systems:
Insights about dynamics and change from sociology and institutional theory, Re-
search Policy, 33, 897-920.
Gehrke, B./Legler, H. (2010): Forschungs- und Wissensintensive Wirtschaftszweige –
Außenhandel, Spezialisierung, Produktion, Beschäftigung und Qualifikationser-
fordernisse in Deutschland. Studien zum deutschen Innovationssystem Nr. 04-
2010. Hannover.
Geron, T. (2013): Airbnb and The Unstoppable Rise Of The Share Economy. In:
Forbes, February 11, 2013.
Godin, B. (2006): The Linear Model of Innovation: The Historical Construction of an
Analytical Framework, Science, Technology & Human Values, 31, 639–667.
Granovetter, M. (1973): The Strength of Weak Ties, American Journal of Sociology, 78,
1360-1380.
Granovetter, M.S. (1985): Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of
Embeddedness, American Journal of Sociology, 91, 481-510.
Hahn, K. (2009): Der Lissabon-Prozess: Warum eine Hightech-Strategie zur Innovati-
onsförderung nicht ausreicht, WSI Mitteilungen, 6/2009, 302-308.
Hall, P.A./Soskice, D. (2001): An Introduction to Varieties of Capitalism. In: Hall,
P.A./Soskice, D. (eds.): Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional Foundations of
Comparative Advantage. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1-68.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
40 Literature
Hamari, J./Sjöklint, M./ Ukkonen, A. (2015): The sharing economy: Why people partici-
pate in collaborative consumption, Journal of the Association for Information Sci-
ence and Technology (in press).
Hauknes, J./Knell, M. (2009): Embodied knowledge and sectoral linkages: An input-
output approach to the interaction of high- and low-tech industries, Research Pol-
icy, 38, 459-469.
Heidenreich, M. (2009): Innovation patterns and location of European low- and medi-
um-technology industries, Research Policy, 38, 483-494.
Hekkert, M.P./Suurs, R.A.A./Negro, S.O./Kuhlmann, S./Smits, R.E.H.M. (2007): Func-
tions of innovation systems: A new approach for analysing technological change,
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 74, 413-432.
Hekkert, M.P/Negro, S.O. (2009): Functions of innovation systems as a framework to
understand sustainable technological change: Empirical evidence for earlier
claims, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 76, 584-594.
Hekkert, M.P/Negro, S.O/Heimeriks,G./Harmsen,R. (2011): Technological Innovation
System Analysis. A manual for analysts. Utrecht.
Herstatt, C./von Hippel, E. (1992): From Experience: Developing New Product Con-
cepts Via the Lead User Method: A Case Study in a "Low Tech" Field, Journal of
Product Innovation Management, 9, 213-221.
Hienerth, C. (2006): The Commercialization of User Innovations: The Development of
the Rodeo Kayak Industry, R&D Management, 36(3), 273-294.
Hienerth, C./von Hippel, E/Jensen, M.B. (2014): User community vs. producer innova-
tion development efficiency: A first empirical study, Research Policy, 43, 190-201.
Hirsch-Kreinsen, H. (2008a): "Low-Tech" Innovations, Industry and Innovation,
15(1),19-43.
Hirsch-Kreinsen, H. (2008b): Innovationspolitik: Die Hightech-Obsession. In: Hirsch-
Kreinsen, H./Weyer, J. (eds.): Soziologisches Arbeitspapier Nr. 22/2008. Dort-
mund: Technische Universität.
Hirsch-Kreinsen, H./Jacobson, D./Laestadius, S. (Eds.) (2005): Low-tech Innovation in
the Knowledge Economy. Frankfurt am Main: P. Lang.
Howaldt, J./Schwarz, M. (2010): Social Innovation: Concepts, Research Fields and
International Trends. In: Henning, K./Hees, F. (Eds.): Studies for Innovation in a
Modern Working Environment - International Monitoring. Volume 5. Aachen.
Howells, J. (2006): Intermediation and the role of intermediaries in innovation, Re-
search Policy, 35(5), 715-728.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Literature 41

Huang, C./Arundel, A./Hollanders, H. (2010): How Firms Innovate: R&D, Non-R&D,
and Technology Adoption. UNU-Merit Working Paper #2010-027. Maastricht,
United Nations University. Online:
http://www.merit.unu.edu/publications/wppdf/2010/wp2010-027.pdf.
John, R. (2006): Venture Philantropy – The Evolution of High Engagement Philantropy
in Europe, Skoll Center for Social Entrepreneurship. Said Business School, Uni-
versity of Oxford.
Kirner, E./Kinkel, S./Jäger, A. (2009a): Innovation Paths and the Innovation Perfor-
mance of Low-Technology Firms – An Empirical Analysis of German Industry,
Research Policy, 38, 447-458.
Kirner, E./Lay, G./Kinkel, S. (2008): The relevance of services for high-, medium- and
low-tech firms – an empirical analysis in German industry. In: Hirsch-Kreinsen,
H./Jacobson, D. (Eds.): Innovation in Low-Tech Firms and Industries.
Cheltenham, Northampton: Edward Elgar, 175-198.
Kirner, E./Som, O./Jäger, A. (2009b): Vernetzungsmuster und Innovationsverhalten
von nicht forschungsintensiven Betrieben. Empirische Ergebnisse aus der deut-
schen Industrie. Stuttgart: Fraunhofer Verlag.
Klerkx, L./Leeuwis, C. (2009): Establishment and embedding of innovation brokers at
different innovation system levels: Insights from the Dutch agricultural sector,
Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 76, 849-860.
Köhler, J./Braungardt, S./Hettesheimer, T./Lerch, C./Nabitz, L./Sartorius, C./Walz, R.
(2016): The dynamic simulation of TIS functions in transitions pathways (Discus-
sion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 48). Karlsruhe: Fraun-
hofer ISI.
Koschatzky, K. (2012): Fraunhofer ISI's systemic research perspective in the context of
innovation systems. In: Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research
(Ed.): Innovation System revisited. Experiences from 40 years of Fraunhofer ISI
research. Stuttgart: Fraunhofer Verlag, 1-24.
Koschatzky, K./Schnabl, E./Zenker, A./Stahlecker, T./Kroll, H. (2014): The Role of As-
sociations in Regional Innovation Systems (= Working Papers Firms and Region
No. R4/2015). Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer ISI.
Kuhlmann, S./Arnold, E. (2001): RCN in the Norwegian Research and Innovation Sys-
tem. Background Report No. 12 in the evaluation of the Research Council of
Norway. Karlsruhe, Brighton: Fraunhofer ISI, Technopolis.
Laursen, K./Salter, A. (2006): Open for Innovation: The Role of Openness in Explaining
Innovation Performance among U.K. Manufacturing Firms, Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 27, 131-150.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
42 Literature
Legler, H./Frietsch, R. (2007): Neuabgrenzung der Wissenswirtschaft. Forschungsin-
tensive Industrien und wissensintensive Dienstleistungen (NIW/ISI Listen 2006).
Studien zum deutschen Innovationssystem Nr. 22. Bundesministerium für Bil-
dung und Forschung (BMBF).
Lilien, G./Morrison, P./Searls, K./Sonnack, M./von Hippel, E. (2002): Performance as-
sessment of the lead user idea-generation process for new product development,
Management Science, 48(8), 1042-1060.
Lindner, R/Daimer, S./Beckert, B./Heyen, N./Koehler, J./Warnke, P./Wydra, S./Teufel,
B. (2015): Addressing orientation failure: Conceptual thoughts on how to inte-
grate directionality in the systems of innovation heuristic. The 2015 Annual Con-
ference of the EU-SPRI Forum Helsinki
Lundvall, B.Å. (1992): National Systems of Innovation. Towards a Theory of Innovation
and Interactive Learning. London: Pinter Publishers.
Lüthje, C./Herstatt, C./von Hippel, E. (2002): The Dominant Role of Local Information in
User Innovation: The Case of Mountain Biking (= Working Paper 4377-02). MIT
Sloan School of Management.
Mahieu, F.-R. (1998): Du capital social. Mimeo. Guyancourt: Centre d'Economie et
d'Ethique pour l'Environnement et le Développement. Université de Versailles
Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines.
Markard, J./Truffer, B. (2008): Technological innovation systems and the multi-level
perspective: Towards an integrated framework, Research Policy, 37, 596-615.
Martin, M. (2004): Surveying Social Entrepreneurship. St. Gallen: Zentrum für Führung
in Gesellschaft und Öffentlichkeit, Universität St. Gallen.
Maskell, P. (2000): Social capital and competitiveness. In: Baron, S./Field, J./Schuller,
T. (Eds.): Social capital. Critical perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
111-123.
Mateos-Garcia, J./Geuna, A./Steimüller, E. (2007): Discussion Paper On Technology
Trends in the Creative Content Sector EPIS Work Package 2 – Deliverable 2.2.
McCarthy, I.P. (2014): Special Issue on User Innovation and the Role of Creative Con-
sumers (editorial), Int. J. Technology Marketing, 9(1), 1-6.
Meehan, W.F./Kilmer, D./O'Flanagan, M. (2004): Investing in Society – Why we need a
more efficient social capital market and how we can get there, Stanford Social In-
novation Review, Spring 2004, 33-43
(http://ssir.org/articles/entry/investing_in_society)
Meißner, D. (2001): Wissens- und Technologietransfer in nationalen Innovationssyste-
men. Dresden.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Literature 43

Mendonça, S. (2009): Brave Old World: Accounting for 'High-Tech' Knowledge in 'Low-
Tech' Industries, Research Policy, 38, 470-482.
Miles, I. (2005): Innovation in Services, In: Fagerberg, J./Mowery, D.C./Nelson, R.R.
(Eds.): The Oxford Handbook of Innovation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Moody, M. (2008): "Building a Culture": The Construction and Evolution of Venture Phi-
lanthropy as a New Organizational Field, Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarter-
ly, 37(2), 324-352.
Morrison, P./Roberts, J./von Hippel, E. (2000): Determinants of User Innovation and
Innovation Sharing in a Local Market, Management Science, 46(12), 1513-1527.
Moulaert, F./MacCallum/Hillier, J. (2013): Social innovation: intuition, precept,
concept, theory and practice. In: Moulaert, F./MacCallum, D./Mehmood,
A./Hamdouch, A. (Eds.): The International Handbook on Social Innovation. Col-
lective Action, Social Learning and Transdisciplinary Research. Cheltenham and
Northampton: Edgar Elgar, 13-24.
Nahapiet, J./Goshal, S. (1998): Social capital, intellectual capital and the organizational
advantage, Academy of Management Review, 23(2), 242-266.
Nascia, L./Perani, G. (2002): Diversity of Innovation in Europe, International Review of
Applied Economics, 16(3), 277-293.
Nauwelaers, C. (2011): Intermediaries in regional innovation systems: role and chal-
lenges for policy. In: Cooke, P./Asheim, B.T./Boschma, R./Martin, R./Schwartz,
D./Tödtling, F. (Eds.): Handbook of Regional Innovation and Growth. Chelten-
ham, UK, Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd, 467-481.
Nelson, R.R. (1993): A Retrospective. In: Nelson, R.R. (Ed.) (1993): National Innova-
tion Systems. A Comparative Analysis. New York: Oxford University Press, 505-
523.
Nelson, R.R./Winter, S.G. (1977): In search for a useful theory of innovation, Research
Policy, 6, 36-76.
Nilsson, M./Sia-Ljungström, C. (2013): The Role of Innovation Intermediaries in Innova-
tion Systems. Online: http://centmapress.ilb.uni-
bonn.de/ojs/index.php/proceedings/article/viewFile/310/294 (accessed 21-04-
2015).
OECD (1994): Science and Technology Policy: Review and Outlook. Paris: OECD.
OECD (2006a): Information Technology Outlook 2006. Paris: OECD.
OECD (2006b): Participative Web: User generated content DSTI/ICCP/IE(2006)7/Final.
Paris: OECD.
OECD (2008): Open Innovation in Global Networks, ISBN 978-92-64-04767-9. Paris:
OECD.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
44 Literature
OECD (2013): Policy Brief on Social Entrepreneurship – Entrepreneurial Activities in
Europe. Luxembourg 2013.
Olson, M. (1985): Aufstieg und Niedergang von Nationen: Ökonomisches Wachstum,
Stagflation und soziale Sicherheit. Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr.
Paldam, M. (2000): Social Capital: One or Many? Journal of Economic Surveys, 14,
628-653.
Patel, P./Pavitt, K. (1994): The Nature and Economic Importance of National Innova-
tions Systems, STI-Review, 14, 9-32.
Pavitt, K. (1984): Sectoral patterns of technical change: towards a taxonomy and a
theory, Research Policy, 13, 343-373.
Piller, F./Reichwald, R. (2006): Interaktive Wertschöpfung: Open Innovation, Individua-
lisierung und Neue Formen der Arbeitsteilung, 1. Auflage. Wiesbaden: Gabler
Verlag.
Piller, F./West, J. (2014): Firms, Users, and Innovation: An Interactive Model of Cou-
pled Innovation. In: Chesbrough, H./Vanhaverbeke, W./West, J. (Eds.): New
Frontiers in Open Innovation. Oxford University Press.
Piscicelli, L./Cooper, T./Fisher, T. (2015): The role of values in collaborative consump-
tion: insights from a product-service system for lending and borrowing in the UK,
Journal of Cleaner Production, 97(0), 21-29.
Putnam, R.D. (1995): Tuning in, tuning out: The strange disappearance of social capital
in America, Political Science and Politics, 28, 664-683.
Raasch, C./Herstatt, C./Abdelkafi, N. (2008): Open Source Innovation - Characteristics
and Applicability Outside the Software Industry (= TIM-Working Paper). Ham-
burg: Technische Universität Hamburg-Harburg.
Rammer, C./Czarnitzki, D./Spielkamp, A. (2009): Innovation Success of Non-R&D-
Performers: Substituting Technology by Management in SMEs, Small Business
Economics, 33, 35-58.
Raymond, L./St-Pierre, J. (2010): R&D as a Determinant of Innovation in Manufacturing
SMEs: An attempt at empirical clarification, Technovation, 30, 48-56.
Rifkin, J. (2014): The zero marginal cost society: the internet of things, the collaborative
commons, and the eclipse of capitalism. New York [et al.]: Palgrave Macmillan.
Robertson, P.L./Patel, P.R. (2007): New wine in old bottles: technological diffusion in
developed economies, Research Policy, 36, 708-721.
Sandven, T./Smith, K./Kaloudis, A. (2005): Structural Change, Growth and Innovation:
The Roles of Medium and Low Tech Industries, 1980-2000. In: Hirsch-Kreinsen,
H./Jacobson, D./Laestadius, S. (Eds.): Low-Tech Innovation in the Knowledge
Economy. Frankfurt a. M.: Peter Lang, 31-59.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Literature 45

Saviotti, P.P./Noteboom, B. (2000): Technology and Knowledge: From the Firm to In-
novation Systems. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Schor, J. (2014): Debating the Sharing Economy, Great Transition Initiative. Online:
http://www.greattransition.org/publication/debating-the-sharing-economy (ac-
cessed 21-12-2015).
Schumpeter, J. (1934): The Theory of Economic Development. Cambridge, MA.: Har-
vard University Press.
Smedlund, A. (2006): The roles of intermediaries in a regional knowledge system,
Journal of Intellectual Capital, 7, 204-220.
Som, O. (2012): Innovation without R&D – Heterogeneous Innovation Patterns of Non-
R&D-Performing Firms in the German Manufacturing Industry. Wiesbaden:
Springer Gabler.
Som, O./Kinkel, S./Kirner, E./Buschak, D./Frietsch, R./Jäger, A./Neuhäusler, P./Nusser,
M./Wydra, S. (2010): Zukunftspotenziale und Strategien nichtforschungsintensi-
ver Industrien in Deutschland - Auswirkungen auf Wettbewerbsfähigkeit und Be-
schäftigung (= TAB-Arbeitsbericht No. 140). Berlin: Büro für Technikfolgen-
Abschätzung beim Deutschen Bundestag (TAB).
Stewart, J. (2008): Intermediaries, Users and Social Learning in Technological Innova-
tion, International Journal of Innovation Management, 12, 295-325.
Strandburg, K. (2008): Users as Innovators: Implications for Patent Doctrine. University
of Colorado Law Review, 79, 467-542.
The Young Foundation (2012) 'Social Innovation Overview - Part I: Defining social
innovation'. A deliverable of the project: "The theoretical, empirical and policy
foundations for building social innovation in Europe" (TEPSIE), European Com-
mission – 7th Framework Programme, Brussels;
Tsinopoulos, C./Al-Zu'bi, M.F. (2014): Lead users, suppliers, and experts: the explora-
tion and exploitation trade-off in product development, International Journal of
Technology Marketing, 9(1), 6-20.
Tukker, A.T.U. (Ed.) (2006): New Business for Old Europe: Product-Service Develop-
ment, Competitiveness and Sustainability. Sheffiled UK: Greenleaf Publishing.
Urban, G./von Hippel, E. (1988): Lead User Analyses for the Development of New In-
dustrial Products, Management Science, 34(5), 569-582.
van Lente, H./Hekkert, M./Smits, R./van Waveren, B. (2003): Roles of Systemic Inter-
mediaries in Transition Processes, International Journal of Innovation Manage-
ment, 7, 247-279.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
46 Literature
Venture Philantropy Partners/Community Wealth Ventures (2004): High-Engagement
Philanthropy: A Bridge to a More Effective Social Sector, Venture Philanthropy
Partners. Online:
http://venturephilanthropypartners.org/learning/reports/report2004/report2004.pdf
(accessed 8-12-2015).
von Hippel, E. (1976). The Dominant Role of Users in the Scientific Instrument Innova-
tion Process, Research Policy 5(3), 212-239.
von Hippel, E. (1978): Successful Industrial Products from Customer Ideas, Journal of
Marketing, 42(1), 39-49.
von Hippel, E. (1986): Lead Users: A Source of Novel Product Concepts, Management
Science, 32(7), 791-805.
von Hippel, E. (2005): Democratizing Innovation. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT
Press.
Von Tunzelmann, N./Acha, V. (2005): Innovation in "low-tech" Industries. In:
Fagerberg, J./Mowery, D.C./Nelson, R.R. (Eds.): The Oxford Handbook of Inno-
vation. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 407-432.
Watkins, A./Papaioannou, T./Mugwagwa, J./Kale, D. (2014): National Innovation Sys-
tems, Developing Countries, and the Role of Intermediaries: A Critical Review of
the Literature (= IKD Working Paper No. 70). The Open University.
Wittke, V./Hanekop, H. (2011a): New Forms of Collaborative Innovation and Production
on the Internet. In: Wittke, V./Hanekop, H. (Eds.): New Forms of Collaborative In-
novation and Production on the Internet. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen,
9-29.
Wittke, V./Hanekop, H. (Eds.) (2011b): New Forms of Collaborative Innovation and
Production on the Internet. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen.
