
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 52
ISSN 1612-1430
Karlsruhe, July 2016

Addressing directionality: Orientation failure
and the systems of innovation heuristic.
Towards reflexive governance.

Ralf Lindner, Stephanie Daimer, Bernd Beckert, Nils Heyen,
Jonathan Koehler, Benjamin Teufel, Philine Warnke, Sven Wydra

Karlsruhe, Fraunhofer ISI

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Contents I

Contents
1 Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 1
2 Conceptual foundations for a revised systems of innovation
heuristic ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 7
2.1 Systems of innovation approaches and first steps towards re-
conceptualisation ................................ ................................ ................. 7
2.2 Grand challenges and mission oriented policies ................................ 11
2.3 STS – micro level thinking ................................ ................................ . 14
2.4 Governance of science, technology and innovation ........................... 14
3 Reflexivity of innovation systems ................................ ................................ .... 18
3.1 Reflexivity stages and capabilities ................................ ..................... 18
3.2 Ten quality criteria for reflexive innovation systems ........................... 22
3.3 A revised heuristic of innovation systems ................................ .......... 27
4 Discussion and conclusions for STI research and policy .............................. 30
5 Reference List ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 34

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
II Contents

Figures
Figure 1: Graphical representation of a Reflexive Innovation System (based
on Kuhlmann and Arnold 2001: 2, own compilation) ................................ . 28
Figure 2: Improved graphical representation of a Reflexive Innovation
System (own compilation based on Warnke et al. 2016) ........................... 29
Tables
Table 1: Examples of mission oriented innovation policies................................ ...... 13
Table 2: Quality criteria of reflexive innovation systems ................................ .......... 26

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Introduction 1

1 Introduction
Since about 15 years, science, technology and innovation (STI) policies are increa s-
ingly geared towards addressing objectives reaching beyond an immediate economic
focus on growth and competitiveness. This "normative turn" (Daimer et al. 2012) is e x-
pressed in the strategic reorientation of national and supranational STI policies to a d-
dress the so-called ‘grand challenges’ (Kallerud et al. 2013) . Well known examples for
this ongoing para digm shift are the European Union 's Europe 2020 strategy, the US
Strategy for American Innovation or Germany 's Hightech Strategy. What is more, the
quest to address ‘grand challenges’ such as health, demographic change, wellbeing
and sustainability by the means of research and innovation is complemented by and
propelled forward by the emerging discourse on responsible (research and ) innova-
tion.1 In essence, RRI aims at improving the alignment of the impacts of technology
and innovation with societal demands and values as far as possible. The concept is
inherently characterised by a high degree of normativity in order to provide necessary
guidance as to what constitutes desired or ‘responsible’ research and innovation
(Randles et al. 2014; Lindner and Kuhlmann 2016). The prominent position of RRI in
the European Union's research and innovation programme 'Horizon 2020' and the en-
dorsement of the "Rome Declaration on RRI in Europe " by the European Council in
2014 indicate that RRI is increasingly developing relevance for policy, research funding
and scientific communities.
Arguably, the articulation and growing relevance of normative directions of research,
technology development and innovation in addition to and beyond the objectives of
economic growth and inter national competitiveness signify a paradigm -shift in STI po l-
icy. While this reorientation towards addressing challenges, which can be empirically
observed, might be welcomed from a normative point of view, it poses significant cha l-
lenges for the substance, procedural design and coordination of STI. Since the late
1990s, the systems of innovation approach (cf. Edquist 1997 ; 2005) has established
itself as the most influential paradigm within the international innovation research
communities. The systems of i nnovation perspective does not only frame the scientific
debates dealing with innovation, it also provides conceptual orientation and strategic
guidance for many governments and international and supranational organisations
such as the OECD and the European Union (Fagerberg and Verspagen 2009; Lindner
2012).

1 For the purpose of this paper, the concepts “Responsible Innovation” and “Responsible
Research and Innovation” with its acronym RRI will be used interchangeably. For a discu s-
sion of the different understandings and applications cf. Tancoigne et al. (2016).

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
2 Introduction

However, in view of the observed normative turn in STI policy, the innovation system
heuristic is increasingly being criticized for its inability to incorporate the dimension of
normative direction and/or the lack of openness to address objectives beyond systemic
imperfections (Daimer et al. 2012; Weber and Rohracher 2012). The innovation system
approach has mainly focused on the explanation of (cross-national) differences in the
innovation performance of national/technological/sectoral systems by factors outside of
the neoclassical framework (Lundvall 1992; Nelson 1993; Sharif 2006). In the course of
further developments , market failure as the predominant policy rationale of the time
and the chief justification for policy intervention was complemented by the system fai l-
ure rationale, which takes into account shortcomings such as infrastructural failures,
capability and learning failures, transition failures, network failures or institutional fai l-
ures (Woolhtuis et al. 2005; Chaminade and Edquist 2006; Gassler et al. 2006 ). Con-
sequently, the innovation system approach is applied with the aim to analyse and
tackle structural issues of an innovation system as a means to foster competitiveness,
economic growth and employment. So far, the innovation system heuristic neither pro-
vides sufficient analytical nor conceptual orientation for questions related to fostering
innovation towards certain ends in addition to and/or beyond the narrow economic
growth paradigm ( Quitzow 2011; Ba jmócy and Gébert 2014). As a result, established
practices and institutions continue to operate with the chief aim of improving innovation
capacities by "getting the structures right ", thereby sidestepping the question "getting
the structures right to achieve what?".
However, despite the fact that the innovation system approach and its numerous var i-
ants have frequently been criticised for, among other weaknesses, their one -
dimensional focus on economic development, the tendency to overemphas ize techno-
logical innovation and implicit mechanistic notions (Soete et al. 2010; Dodgson et al.
2011; Mahroum 2012), we claim that the heuristic itself continues to provide useful
analytical lenses and co nstitutes a valuable conceptual frame of reference for the d e-
sign of STI policy. Most n otably and well established within the STI community, the
emphasis of the innovation system approach on interactivity and interdependence b e-
tween different actors, the understanding of innovation as a collective endeavour which
is influenced by complex framework cond itions, the awareness about the roles of di f-
ferent sources of innovation (e.g. non -R&D activities) and the prominent position of
reciprocal learning processes as chief drivers of innovation remain important gu ide-
posts (Metcalf 2003; Soete et al. 2010).
Given these valuable analytical qualities, the question is raised how the innovation sys-
tem approach should be revised and developed further in order to respond to the cha l-
lenges of directionality and normative orientation.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Introduction 3

Reflexive innovation systems
As an answer to this question, we propose to introduce a set of conceptual elements
with the objective of enabling the systems of innovation heuristic to incorporate r e-
quirements of directionality and normative orie ntation. These four elements, constitu t-
ing what we term reflexive governance, are conceptualised as quality criteria of innova-
tion systems – understood as ensembles of all relevant institutions and actors involved
in the development, diffusion and use of i nnovation (Edquist 2005: 182; Kuhlmann et
al. 2010: 3; Warnke et al. 2016: 2). These quality criteria shall help to identify, assess
and ultimately guide innovation processes towards desired directions. The four capac i-
ties for reflexive governance of innovation systems are:
 Self-reflection capacities,
 Bridging and integration capacities,
 Anticipation capacities, and
 Experimentation capacities.
Section 3 presents the four capacities in detail, and demonstrates how they relate to
the three stages of ‘directional’ innovation processes – situation analysis, goal formula-
tion and specification, and implementation – which we differentiate for analytical pu r-
poses. In fact, ‘directional’ innovation processes are not assumed to be more lin ear
than ‘undirected’ innovation paths, but the difference is that the concept of reflexive
governance makes the steps of situation analysis and goal formulation /specification
explicit and required parts of the process. The definition of the situation and the formu-
lation of goals (hitherto growth and competitiveness) are thus internalized and no
longer exogenous to the innovation system.
The term reflexivity was chosen to characterise the proposed quality criteria as they
essentially attend to an innovation system's collective ability to reflect about a given
situation, to deliberatively define the goals of innovation and eventually to transpose
these into strategy. Applying the concept of governance in the context of the systems
of innovation heuristic is u ncommon. Even so, we suggest to introduce the notion of
governance, understood as the intentional interaction and coordination of state and
non-state actors with the aim to influence innovation sys tems (Borrás and Edler 2014:
14), in order to conceptually capture actors' purposeful attempts to change decisions
and decision-making processes, framework conditions and STI processes towards cer-
tain ends (or to prevent such change).
To recapitulate, our points of departure for this proposition are (1) the observation of a
conceptual ‘blind spot ’ in the established systems of innovation heuristic. While the
systems of innovation approach primarily serves to identify relevant system elements

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
4 Introduction

and supports the analysis of the interplay of interaction and knowledge e xchange, it
fails to provide conceptual underpinnings on the requirements for an innovation system
to identify, assess and ultimately instigate actions with the aim of guiding innovation
towards desired directions. This deficit might also be termed as the 'governance gap' of
the conventional systems of innovation approach. (2) Contemporary literature on the
governance of STI provides a rich reservoir of approaches, instruments and mech a-
nisms on how to steer, influence or 'nudge' actors and institutions with the specific aim
of modulating and orchestrating innovation trajectories according to desired ends.
Hence, we propose to systematically integrate a dedicated governance perspective into
the systems of innovation heuristic in order to address the iden tified orientation failure.
To a large extent, the rise of the analytical term ‘governance’ since the 1980s is a reac-
tion to the perception of the state's weakening capacity to effectively steer, and to the
growing interdependence between societal subsystems su ch as different policy areas
and communities or different functional areas. As growing interdependencies in general
mean increasing complexity of policy and politics, this implies that cooperation and
coordination between different actors become progressively more important (Jessop
2003: 103). Given the highly complex nature of the grand societal challenges, which
require far -reaching socio -economic transformation if they are to be adequately a d-
dressed (Kuhlmann and Rip 2014; OECD 2015) , governance approach es suggest
themselves as a potentially useful contribution when dealing with complex actor co n-
stellations and their interplay.
The rationale for introducing the element of reflexivity in the re -conceptualisation of the
systems of innovation approach, oper ationalised as a set of four capacities, is twofold.
First and most obvious, a conceptual vehicle was sought to integrate substantial issues
(normative direction, problem -/solution-orientation, policy goals, missions etc.) in sy s-
tems of innovation thinking. To this end, the governance perspective with its analytical
focus on actors ' intentionality to influence innovation and its fittingness to cope with
interdependencies was proposed. Second, such a rather technocratic approach is
prone to advance or at lea st assert top -down prescriptions which normative directions
an innovation system should take. ‘Grand challenges’, missions or similar broad and
far-reaching substantive goals and related implementation measures are likely to face
low acceptance and will ultimately suffer under weak legitimacy when they are not well-
grounded in broad-based processes of collective sense-making, deliberation and nego-
tiation. Thus, we propose to endogenise the processes of defining and concretising
normative directions and thei r implementation within an innovation system. While the
broad objectives and directions to take remain to be set through formally legitimised
representative-democratic decision -making routines, the STI actors need to be ad e-
quately involved in the concretis ation of directions and the definition of socio -technical

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Introduction 5

pathways. In order to achieve this, innovation systems require reflexive capacities and
appropriate governance mechanisms.
In addition to the objective of addressing orientation failure, the emphas is on reflexive
capacities in the systems of innovation framework also resonates with and responds to
a number of interrelated phenomena and developments observed by contemporary
innovation research:
 As Warnke et al. (2016) convincingly show, the actor lan dscape in innovation sy s-
tems has become significantly more diverse compared to the established unde r-
standing reflected in systems of innovation literature, calling for a broadened view of
the relevant actors as well as a revision of their relationships and the functions a s-
signed to them.
 Closely related to the appearance of new actors in innovation systems, new types of
innovation, such as user -driven innovation (von Hippel 2005), social innovation
(Moulaert et al. 2013) or forms of collaborative innovation (Warnke et al. 2016: 10 ff.),
are increasingly recognised as relevant , thus changing the dynamics of innovation
systems accordingly.
 Science-society relations are shifting, indicated by changing expectations of society
towards science and research concern ing contributions to societal challenges and
value-orientation. Moreover, knowledge availability and science -literacy have i n-
creased, empowering parts of the citizenry to critically assess and proficiently ques-
tion science and research.
 STI and related policy are facing increased pressures to legitimise their actions and
outcomes, calling for more transparency and higher levels of readiness of scientists
and researchers to engage with and respond to stakeholders and lay people.
 The increasing influence of s ocietal missions and challenge -oriented research has
sparked debates about the status of academic freedom and scientific autonomy. A r-
guably, the collective processes of goal formulation in reflexive innovation systems
have the potential to regain some infl uence for research and innovation actors con-
cerning which directions to take, when they are acting with an outward -looking per-
spective. And in a reflexive innovation system, the balance between investigator -
governed research and mission -governed research (Arnold and Giarracca 2012)
should be subject to deliberate social choice.
 Participatory approaches and particularly upstream engagement as important a p-
proaches to social control of technology have received much attention in STI pol icy
discourse (Wilsdon and Willis 2004; Fisher et al. 2006). However, they have also re-
ceived criticism for implicit notions of linearity, technology determinism and their vu l-
nerability to instrumental use (Stirling 2008: 264). The proposed reflexive capacities,
which reach beyond participatory mechanisms, address all phases of the innovation
process and deliberately incorporate processes of deliberation, experimentation and
also policy or "strategic intelligence" (Kuhlmann et al. 1999) . They can also be u n-

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
6 Introduction

derstood as an attempt to breakup these confines and avoid prematurely closing
down the possible range of technological choice (Stirling 2008). This connects to the
STS literature and its Social Construction of Technology framework. If technology is
socially ‘constructed’, then th e goals and norms of society will necessarily play a
role.
Based on the considerations outlined in this introduction , we propose that reflexivity or
reflective capacities should be major criteria of the quality of innovation systems. The
ability of innovation systems to collectively reflect about orientation and objectives, and
to bring together actors to deliberate goals, to prioritize and to specify them should en-
ter the systems of innovation concept as quality criteria in addition to the system func-
tionalities currently primarily endorsed by the concept. Taken together, the reflexive
capacities constitute an add itional 'reflexivity layer' in the innovation system, and func-
tions as a framework condition similar to the socio -cultural context of a system (see
also section 3.3).
In the following section 2, the development of the main strands of the systems of inn o-
vation literature will be discussed and complemented with the key insights of conte m-
porary debates related to the ‘grand challenges’ and the governance of STI. In section
3, our proposition to revise the systems of innovation approach by incorporating refle x-
ivity and associated quality criteria is presented in detail. The final section 4 discusses
the conceptual contribution and draws conclusions for STI analysis and policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Conceptual foundations for a revised systems of innovation heuristic 7

2 Conceptual foundations for a revised systems of
innovation heuristic
2.1 Systems of innovation approaches and first steps to-
wards re-conceptualisation
As briefly outlined above, the systems of innovation heuristic (Lundvall 1992; Nelson
1993; Edquist 1997) continues to be the most influential paradigm within the intern a-
tional innovation policy community . In systems of innovation thinking, innovation is
conceptualised as a nonlinear, evolutionary and interactive process characteri sed by
reciprocity and iterative feedback mechanisms, in which actors (e.g. firms), organis a-
tions (e.g. universities, customers, government) and institutions (e.g. regulations , cul-
ture) interact in many ways. A distinction can be made between national (Freeman
1995; Nelson 1993), regional (Braczyk et al. 1998; Cooke et al. 1997), sectoral (Br e-
schi and Malerba 1997; Malerba 2002) and technological innovation systems (Carlsson
1995; Carlsson and Jacobsson 1997). Particularly the latter has increasingly become a
popular concept in analyzing innovation processes concerned with emerging technol o-
gies. Technological innovation systems (TIS) are defined as "socio -technical systems
focused on the development, diffusion and use of a particular technology (in terms of
knowledge, product or both)" (Bergek et al. 2008: 408). The TIS framework consists of
different structural elements, such as actors or networks of actors, institutions and the
interactions between them (Markard and Truffer 2008; Wieczorek and Hekkert 2012).
Next to structural components, the focus on systemic processes (functions) within TIS
is a more recent addition to the concept (e.g. , Hekkert et al. 2007; Suurs et al. 2009;
van Alphen et al. 2010). Hence, within the TIS framework, the structures and functions
are usually analyzed on a system level.2
Innovation system analysis mainly focuses on the explanation of the economic pe r-
formance of national/regional/technological/sectoral systems by factors not considered
by mainstream neoclassical thinking in economics (Sharif 2006). The predominant pol-
icy rationale of market failure has been complemented by the system failure concept,
which takes into account weaknesses such as infr astructural failures, capability and
learning failures, transition failures, network failures (weak and strong) or institutional
failures (Woolthuis et al. 2005; Chaminade and Edquist, 2006). Thus, the systems of
innovation approach is usually applied as an alternative to the neoclassical approach

2 The literature usually operates with seven key systems functions which technological inn o-
vation systems nee d to fulfil: 1. entrepreneurial experimentation, 2. knowledge development,
3. knowledge exchange, 4. guidance of the search, 5. formation of markets, 6. mobilization of
resources, and 7. counteracting resistance to change (Hekkert et al. 2007).

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
8 Conceptual foundations for a revised systems of innovation heuristic

with the aim to tackle generic questions of innovation and its role for economic growth
and employment. To a large extent, t his narrow focus on economic growth and e m-
ployment has been reinforced by corresponding d emands of policy makers. Edquist
points out for example: "I assume that the objectives – whichever they are – are al-
ready determined in a political process. It should also be mentioned that they do not
necessarily have to be of an economic kind. They can a lso be of a social, enviro n-
mental, ethical or military kind. They must be specific and unambiguously formulated in
relation to the current situation in the country or in other countries. With regard to inn o-
vation policy the most common objectives are formu lated in terms of economic growth,
productivity growth or employment." (2002: 220). Also in Porter 's work (1990), the role
of policy in directing innovation is mentioned, however this does not refer to strategic
priority-setting but rather to standards and regulations. Apart from that, Porter and Ne l-
son (1993) agree in their view that the direction of innovation is a function performed
mainly by customers.
However, it has frequently been criticized that innovation system analysis places too
much emphasis on the strengthening of generic innovation capabilit ies and less on
certain outcomes (Wydra 2015). As Daimer et al. argue: "Despite all the refined under-
standing of innovation systems, the instruments derived from the innovation system
approach are mainly di rected at enhancing the innovation ecosystem in order to
strengthen innovation capability. So far, there is no attempt to build on the innovation
system heuristic in order to modulate innovation journeys towards certain desirable
objectives. So whereas system failure appears to be addressed, 'orientation failure' has
largely not been tackled." (2012: 222). Similarly, Quitzow points out: "To date, the sys-
tems of innovation approach has largely been employed to tackle generic questions of
innovation and its r ole in economic development. From a policy perspective, research
has not focused on understanding how policy might steer innovation in a particular d i-
rection (i.e. towards improving the environmental performance of the economy) but on
how to strengthen innovation within the economy more generally." (2011: 13).
Criticism has also been raised against the TIS approach. This concept presumes that
the diffusion of a pre -defined specific technological solution is desirable from a socio -
economic point of view. Th is perspective has its limits particularly in a long -term per-
spective, given the complexity and uncertainty of innovation paths. In addition to the
problematic ex-ante determination of a technological choice, Truffer points out that "TIS
scholars are blamed to reduce transitions to a simple problem of diffusing new and better
technologies, whereas the reorientation of user practices, power relationships, regulatory
structures, mind sets and public discourses remains unaddressed." (2015: 65).

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Conceptual foundations for a revised systems of innovation heuristic 9

Mazzucato (2015a, b) arrives at similar conclusions regarding directionality failures in
her current work on the role of the state in innovation processes. She points out that
markets are "blind" (Nelson and Winter 1982; Dosi 1982) and that the direction of
change provid ed by markets often represents suboptimal outcomes from a societal
point of view. Hence, the market failure approach but also the systems of innovation
heuristic "cannot explain and justify the kinds of transformative mission -oriented i n-
vestments that in t he past picked directions, coordinated public and private initiatives,
built new networks, and drove the entire techno -economic process, which resulted in
the creation of new markets, not just in the fixing of existing ones " (2015a: 5). With re-
gard to addressing societal challenges, governments have to lead the process and
provide the direction toward new "techno-economic paradigms" (Perez 2002), which do
not come about spontaneously out of market forces. Besides referring to the theoretical
conception of t echno-economic paradigms , Mazzucato underpins her argumentation
with the empirical observation that for many technological transformations, gover n-
ments made direct "mission-oriented" investments in the technologies that enabled
these revolutions to emerge (Mazzucato 2015a: 6).
Against the background of these discussions and observations, innovation scholars
started to recognize the need to further develop the systems of innovation approach
and related innovation policy concepts in order to better address socio-economic goals.
Bajmócy and Gébert (2014) combine the systems of innovation approach with the c a-
pability approach that has been developed by Amartya Sen. They take the capability
approach as a starting point for an alternative to the growth -centred paradigm and ex-
amine whether such a shift to well-being as the main policy objective changes the set
of information needed for the design, implementation and evaluation of innovation pol i-
cies. They conclude that the capability approach would broaden the bound aries of in-
novation system analysis and require s a change in the informational basis. How ever,
the authors do not focus on the operationali sation of such an extended innovation
model.
Weber and Rohracher (2012) integrate insights from the systems of innova tion a p-
proach and a Multi-Level Perspective (MLP) (Geels 2002) in a comprehensive 'failures'
framework that includes the focus on societal goals. They claim that the combination of
MLP's goal -oriented system transformation approach, complemented by the rel ated
approaches of Strategic Niche Management (Kemp et al. 1998 ) and Transition Ma n-
agement (Rotmans and Loorbach 2006), with structure-oriented systems of innovation
approaches improve the conceptual foundation and actual implementation of transfo r-
mation oriented innovation policies . The authors propose the recognition of additional
types of failures next to market and system failures in an innovation (production and
consumption) system, the so -called transformational system failures in order to take

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
10 Conceptual foundations for a revised systems of innovation heuristic

into account the requirements of goal -oriented transformative change . Among others,
they identify two type s of failures that seem to be linked to socio -economic outcome
orientation: directionality failure and reflexivity failure. Regarding directionality failure
they point "… to the necessity not just to generate innovations as effectively and eff i-
ciently as possible, but also to contribute to a particular direction of transformative
change. This direction is defined, for instance, by the identification of major societal
problems or challenges, for which solutions need to be developed with the help of r e-
search and innovation " (Weber and Rohracher 2012: 142).3 However, different failure
mechanism may occur, e.g ., the lack of a shared vision regarding the goal and d irec-
tion of the transformation process or the inability of collective coordination of distributed
agents involved in shaping systemic change. Concerning reflexivity failure, they claim
that "…a continuous monitoring with respect to progress towards the tra nsformation
goals and the development of adaptation strategies" (Weber and Rohracher 2012: 142)
is required to address the uncertainty surrounding innovation and change in the tran s-
formative process. Potential failure mechanisms may relate e.g. to a lack of distributed
reflexive arrangements to connect different discursive spheres, and insufficient spaces
for experimentation and learning (Weber and Rohracher 2012).
Apart from these contributions concerning the rationale of innovation policy, a few au-
thors a nalyze potential implications for governance and policy measures to better
achieve such socio-economic goals4.
Daimer et al. (2012) propose that systems of innovation approaches should incorporate
an orientation function as an integral element in order to improve innovation capabilities
to address ‘grand challenges’. They study the refining of policy instruments towards
addressing societal outcomes for two systemic policy instruments, evaluation and for e-
sight. For example, participatory evaluation approaches could be complemented with
the analysis of new impact types (e.g. sustainability) or behavioural additionality. Sim i-
larly, foresight processes that explore innovation journeys as an element of challenge
oriented innovation policy strategies are identified as suitable orientation instruments.
Mahroum (2012) claims that most existing innovation policy tools only address co n-
straints and barriers of innovation linked to broader socio -economic problems, but the
policy instruments themselves are not linked to the desired outcome. In order to esta b-
lish those linkages, he introduces an analytic -diagnostic framework that aims to help
develop innovation policies designed to achieve certain socio-economic outcomes. The

3 This line of reasoning may be combined with rationales of other aspects of mission -
oriented policy, such as policy coordination etc.
4 The review is based on earlier work of Wydra (2015).

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Conceptual foundations for a revised systems of innovation heuristic 11

main idea is to start from the desired outcome and deduct (among others) policy r a-
tionales and policy instruments. Overall he identifies four categories of outcomes which
would be addressed by different interventions (e.g. mission -oriented policies): develop-
ing capabilities to meet critical needs in de fence, environment and health; broad and
diversified capabilit ies to create higher living standards; generation of new supply
chains that would create new value; wide market uptake for specific solutions such as
alternative energy products.5
To conclude, there have been different contributions to the justification of mission -
oriented policies as well as some approaches to develop innovation policies to achieve
certain socio-economic outcomes. However, they do not systemically elaborate how
the innovation system concept could be modified to be able to analyse orientation c a-
pabilities and thus contribute to the avoidance of orientation or outcome failures.
2.2 Grand challenges and mission oriented policies
Regarding policy practice, the notion of ‘mission orientation’ in STI policy was subject to
significant transformations since the mid of the 20th century. Daimer et al. (2012: 218 ff.)
outline several paradigm shifts of innovation policy . In the 1960s, the primary goal of
innovation policy was to fix ‘market failures’ by funding basic research . This was fo l-
lowed by several different phases of mission oriented innovation policies that were d e-
signed to reach pre -defined goals: After the first phase of ‘classic’ mission orientation
that was mainly characterized by funding schemes such as the US Apollo 1 space pr o-
gram, the second phase that started in the 1980s combined several policy instruments.
In this second phase, non -linear, recursive interactions of heterogeneous actors were
addressed, however, "policies solel y targeted selected sectors and technologies "
(Daimer et al. 2012: 219). In the 1990 s, innovation policy entered a third phase that
was driven by the idea of optimi sing the ‘innovation ecosystem’ to improve innovation
capabilities with the aim to strengthen competitiveness and economic growth. Policy
instruments were targeted at enhancing systems ' learning capability, improving the
management of interfaces and capacity building among different actors in the innov a-
tion system. The application of innovation system thinking and analysis did not neces-
sarily come along with new policy paradigms as they rather complemented already
established approaches.

5 However, he only links broad strategies of innovation policy making to c ertain goals and
does not specify to which extent certain instruments themselves change. Moreover, the
possibility that one policy intervention may intend to address several potential goals at the
same time is not considered.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
12 Conceptual foundations for a revised systems of innovation heuristic

Today, the rationales of competitiveness and economic growth have been compl e-
mented by additional goals of STI policy that can be summarized as addressing ‘grand
challenges’, such as adaption to climate change, health or integrative societies. This
transformation of goals beyond a quantitative economic output is what Daimer et al.
(2012: 218 f.) call a "normative turn" in innovation policy and related innovation activ i-
ties. The correspond ing idea of a new mission orientation typically combines several
characteristics (cf. Dachs et al. 2015: 5 ff.): In order to achieve societal goals, transdis-
ciplinarity, international collaboration, and emphasises a broad dissemination of inn o-
vation need to be fostered . Its instruments are open to different competing technol o-
gies, and focuses on system innovations that integrate both social and technological
innovations. It addresses a wider circle of actors within the innovation system, and is
systematically coordinated between different ministries, departments and other public
agencies at different levels.
An empirical comparison of today 's national innovation policies in dif ferent countries
(OECD 2014: 110 ff.) reveals significant differences in the realization of this new mi s-
sion orientation: While many national innovation strategies lack an explicit reference to
‘grand challenges’, most of the other strategies are designed "[…] both to strengthen
growth and to address a range of global and social challenges, including climate
change and health." (OECD 2014: 94). Table 1 shows all national and supranational
innovation policies/strategies that are explicitly related to ‘grand challenges’. The ‘grand
challenges’ addressed across these strategies can be attributed either to a societal
domain or to sustainability/ ‘green growth ’. Most of these strategies address several
‘grand challenges’ ranging over different domains. Remarkably, they often represent
issues that are related to specific characteristics of the respective country . Thus,
speaking of ‘global grand challenges’ seems exaggerated at this point.
The French National Research Strategy represents an innovation policy that is alread y
quite similar to the idea of a new mission orientation described above: French industrial
policies have always been mission -oriented, they were driven for example by military
missions, but also by grand societal challenges, such as public health. The cur rent
strategic turn was initiated in 2013 by president Hollande and is motivated by an endur-
ing economic crisis and the need for ‘structural’ economic and social reform. Strategy -
making involved a forward-looking approach in order to address m ajor transformations
under way (ageing, digital revolution, transition to low-carbon economy, metropolisation
and more), which call for programming of government action (Pisani-Ferry 2015). Next
to the anticipatory approach, the strategy has strong learning and partici patory el e-
ments.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Conceptual foundations for a revised systems of innovation heuristic 13

Table 1: Examples of mission oriented innovation policies; source: OECD
(2014)
Country/strategy Goals/mission orientation
Argentina/Bases for an STI
Strategic Plan
Increase consistency and social equality,
Promote sustainable development
Brasil/National Strategy for
Science, Technology
and Innovation (ENCTI)
Promote a green economy;
contribute to eradicating poverty and decreasing social and
regional inequalities
China/Medium and Long-
term National Plan for
Science and Technology
Development
Build a conservation-minded and environmentally friendly
society
Columbia/Sectoral Strate-
gic Plan for Science,
Technology and Innovation
Promote knowledge and innovation for production and social
transformation
Japan/4th S&T Basic Plan Comprehensive promotion of S&T and innovation and an is-
sue-driven approach through: integrated development of STI
policies to address societal challenges; realisation of a policy
to be created and promoted with civil society.
Priority areas: environment; energy; health and medi-
cal/nursing care; social challenges.
France/National Research
Strategy (SNR)
Ten societal challenges are identified, and for each challenge
a research strategy is defined; a strategy for large equipment,
a limited number of major scientific and technological priorities
and some steering rules.
The ten challenges: sustainable resource management and
adaptation to climate change; safe, effective and clean en-
ergy; stimulate industrial revival; health and wellness; food
security and demographic challenge; sustainable mobility and
urban systems; information society and communication; inno-
vative, integrative and adaptive societies; spatial ambition for
Europe; freedom and security for Europe, its citizens and its
residents.
South Africa/National De-
velopment Plan (NDP):
A Vision for 2030
Give South Africa a diversified economic base by extracting
more local value from mineral resources, ensuring access to
good quality water and alternative sources of energy, identify-
ing new and innovative ways to address poverty, inequality
and the burden of disease. Priorities areas: water, power,
marine, space and software engineering.
EU28/EU Framework Pro-
gramme for Research and
Innovation – Horizon 2020
Meeting societal challenges: address concerns of citizens in
Europe and elsewhere (health and well-being, food security,
sustainable agriculture, bioeconomy, secure and clean en-
ergy, smart and integrated transport, environment, resource
efficiency, inclusive, innovative and secure societies).

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
14 Conceptual foundations for a revised systems of innovation heuristic

2.3 STS – micro level thinking
Science and technology studies (STS) are the study of the processes and outcomes of
science and technology. STS is interdisciplinary, including sociology, history, philos o-
phy of science and technology, and anthropology (Sismondo 2010). For the purposes
of governance of innovation, we summarise the technology side of STS. It views tech-
nology as well as science as social activities. It is non -positivist, in particular, it argues
that there is no technological ‘method’ tha t can simply be used to apply scientific
knowledge to produce technological artefacts.
"...the interpretations of knowledge and artefacts are complex and various: claims ,
theories, facts and objects have very different meanings to different audiences. "
(Sismondo 2010: 11)
Instead, both science and technology are ‘constructed‘ by people in society. Both sci-
ence and technology are therefore products not only of objective laws, but of their s o-
cial context. This has led to the idea of Social Construction of Technology (SCOT).
There is little direct consideration of the governance of innovation in the basic introdu c-
tion to STS in Sismondo (2010). However, science policy is also a result of the insights
generated by STS.
This constructivist approach to technology implies that technology is influenced by po l-
icy as one part of society, together with other social actors. This then is similar to the
innovation systems analysis, but with an emphasis on the sociological aspects of tec h-
nology – how it plays a role in pe oples’ lives and how actors understand their use of
artefacts to fulfil their needs.
The implication for reflexive governance is quite strong: innovation is a social ph e-
nomenon, determined not just by the scientific and empirical knowledge in society, but
also by the views and needs of social actors. Governance processes can therefore play
a role in determining and realising the direction of innovation, as can the other actors
involved in technological development.
2.4 Governance of science, technology and innovation
The debates on governance of STI are largely detached from conceptual developments
of the systems of innovation heuristic. However, against the background of the cha l-
lenges associated with the growing importance of directionality and normativity in STI,
governance and its actor perspective are becoming more important as a means of pro-
viding orientation, guidance and eventually coordinating/orchestrating the complex
processes of societal transformation.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Conceptual foundations for a revised systems of innovation heuristic 15

While a broadly shared and uncontroversial defi nition of governance does not exist,
most would agree that the concept refers to the increased role of non -government ac-
tors in policy -making (Bache 2003). Most importantly, forms of hierarchical, top -down
command-and-control approaches have been increasin gly complemented and often
supplanted by non-hierarchical forms of decision-making such as negotiation, consulta-
tion or dialogue (Jessop 2003: 104). In this sense, governance can be located som e-
where between the market's 'invisible hands' and the 'iron fist' of centralised, hierarchi-
cal government (Jessop 2003: 101). In an overview of the debate, Grande (2012: 566 f.)
identifies five core elements which seem to constitute the core of contemporary unde r-
standings of governance: (1) importance of non -hierarchical forms of decision -making;
(2) a growing role of non -state actors; (3) growing interdependencies between policy
areas and societal subsystems; (4) increasing complexity; and (5) increasing impo r-
tance of coordination and cooperation.
The rise of the term governance during the last three or four decades is related to a
number of interconnected changes in the way contemporary, highly industrialised s o-
cieties are organised and governed. In essence, governance can be understood as a
response to intensified so cial complexity. According to Scharpf, " the advantages of
hierarchical coordination are lost in a world that is characterized by increasingly dense,
extended, and rapidly changing patterns of reciprocal interdependence, and by increas-
ingly frequent, but ep hemeral, interactions across all types of pre -established bounda-
ries, intra - and interorganizational, intra - and intersectoral, intra - and international "
(1994: 37).
However, the increased importance of non-state actors – a development often referred
to as "from government to governance" – does not simply result in a diminishing role
for government per se. Instead, the changes in the modes of coordination we can o b-
serve are not a uniform shift away from government, but represent multiple and inte r-
twined cha nges between state intervention and societal autonomy in which different
forms of rule setting, steering and governing co -exist and interact (Jordan et al. 2005:
484; Mayntz 2009: 105; Lange et al. 2013).
Many definitions of governance are based on the key elements outlined above and
thus emphasis – in a variety of combinations and by stressing different aspects – the
interactive processes of purposeful coordination and/or management between different
(types of collective) actors in coupled and overlapping arenas (cf. Kooiman 1993;
Kuhlmann 2001; Jessop 2003; Benz 2006; Voß et al. 2006; Mayntz 2009).

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
16 Conceptual foundations for a revised systems of innovation heuristic

With the aim of making the general governance concept fruitful for our conceptual a p-
proach to reflexive innovation systems, we draw on Borrás and Edler (2014) who de-
fine governance in relation to STI as the
"[...] way in which societal and state actors intentionally interact in order to transform
ST&I systems, by regulating issues of societal concern, defining processes and d i-
rection of how technological artefact s and innovations are produced, and shaping
how these are introduced, absorbed, diffused and used within society and eco n-
omy." (2014: 14).
Two aspects make this definition particularly useful compared to other suggestions.
First, Borrás and Edler (2014) provide a definition which specifically refers to research
and innovation systems, thereby highlighting the complex processes of co -construction
and diffusion. Second and even more important in our context, the definition explicitly
addresses actors ' purposeful attempts to influence decisions and decision -making
processes, framework conditions and STI processes towards certain ends (or to pr e-
vent such change) . This understanding also underscores the fact that governance
more often than not encounters contestation between different problem definitions,
goals, and interests.
The topic of reflexivity or reflexive governance is not new in STI -related research. On
the contrary, an impressive number of approaches and concepts dealing with questions
of societal embed ding of technology and innovation, steering socio -technical change,
and the integrated assessment of the potential social, economic and ecological impacts
of STI have been developed and implemented in the past. To some extent they const i-
tute what might be termed 'de facto reflexive governance'.6
One of these concepts is 'strategic intelligence', understood as a set of sources of i n-
formation and explorative as well as analytical (theoretical, heuristic, methodological)
tools employed to produce 'multi-perspective' insight in the actual or potential costs and
effects of public or private policy and management (Kuhlmann et al. 1999 ). Typically,
Technology Assessment (TA), foresight processes, evaluations and the like constitute
strategic intelligence and share the objective of contributing to the development of STI
strategies by analysing and assessing their broader implications in advance ( Ely et al.
2014; Lindner et al. 2016). While strategic intelligence is primarily – but not exclusively
– based on expert knowledge and intends to enlighten and rationalise debate and deci-

6 Using the term ‘ de-facto reflexive governance’ in this context was originally inspired by
Rip’s (2010) discussion of ‘ de facto governance’. Its application was further elaborated by
Randles et al. (2016) who refer to governance related to responsible research and innov a-
tion.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Conceptual foundations for a revised systems of innovation heuristic 17

sion-making, other governance approaches place less emphasis on appraisal and
rather focus on the active integration of diverse perspectives and stakeholders in the
actual processes of STI. We ll-known examples include Constructive TA (Rip et al.
1995), real-time TA (Guston and Sarewitz 2002), mid-stream modulation (Fisher et al.
2006), value-sensitive design (van der Hoven and Manders-Huits 2009) or anticipatory
governance (Guston 2014). Most o f the rather recent conceptual contributions to the
RRI debate follow this line of reasoning by explicitly emphasising reflexivity in the go v-
ernance of research and innovation (cf. Stilgoe et al. 2013; Kuhlmann et al. 2016).
These de facto reflexive governance approaches can be seen as a response to the
increasing speed, dynamic and uncertainty of contemporary technology development.
The approaches' common objective to modulate STI trajectories in a forward -looking,
anticipatory and broad-based manner integrating multiple perspectives is driven by the
hope to come to terms with the Collingridge -Dilemma (Collingridge 1980). The fund a-
mental uncertainties we face when dealing with STI is further amplified by the complex-
ity and ambivalence associated with the ‘new missions ’ or societal challenges a d-
dressed by contemporary STI policy as they require broad systemic transformations
encompassing interdependent social, technological, economic and ecological el e-
ments.
Against this background, approaches are needed whic h take into account complexity,
uncertainty and ambiguity. Reflexive governance currently seems to be the most a p-
propriate governance mode in the field of STI due to its openness towards alternative
solutions and pathways, experimentation and learning. Ins tead of trying to follow the
illusion of complete knowledge and control, reflexive governance fosters continuous
reflection and learning while tentatively modulating developments (Voß et al. 2006: 6 f.).

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
18 Reflexivity of innovation systems

3 Reflexivity of innovation systems
In our understanding, reflexivity of innovation systems means a set of system qualities
and processes underpinning the ability to address directionality in innovation. Reflexi v-
ity denotes a specific quality of an innovation system, similar as framework conditions
such as culture, infrastructure, standards, norms or policies defining the 'rules of the
game'. Reflexivity is a 'layer' of an innovation system which is embodied in certain c a-
pabilities owned by individual actors in the system, by the organizations (collective a c-
tors) in the system, and hence by the system as a whole (see section 3.3). These ca-
pabilities are reflected by the attitudes and expressed opinions of individual and colle c-
tive actors and by the way they organize processes and interactions in the system. To
illustrate the abstract concept, we provide dimensions of reflexivity, indicators and e x-
amples below.
We propose reflexivity as a response to increasing complexity in innovation because
an innovation system with reflexive cap abilities is able to better endogenize the direc-
tionality question. Reflexive innovation systems, as we conceptualize them, are charac-
terized by the internalization of problem -oriented and strategic thinking into innovation
processes, by the ability of actors to debate challenges, to agree which challenges
need prioritization and how to concretise their implementation . Thus, reflexivity is an
answer to the currently observed normative debate in innovation policy, in which policy
objectives beyond immediate economic growth and competitiveness – such as a d-
dressing the grand societal challenges of our time – become relevant. This sheds a
different light on how innovation systems can perform the ‘guidance of the search ’ –
one of the seven functions put forward in the context of technological innovation sy s-
tems (TIS) (cf. section 2.1). TIS-approaches often implicitly assume the ‘guidance of
the search’ to be exogenously set by the decision to follow a certain, pre -defined tech-
nological path. In contrast, a reflexive ‘guidance of the search’ includes collective strat-
egy processes of the system actors to agree on common goals and to pathways on
how to achieve them (and eventually this might mean to pursue multiple (technological)
paths in parallel in the beginning when uncertainty about their contributions to reaching
the common goals is still high).
3.1 Reflexivity stages and capabilities
How do we make the reflexivity of innovation systems more tangible? How can we de-
tect reflexivity in an i nnovation system? Or what exactly would be needed to reach
higher levels of reflexivity in an innovation system? We have said above that reflexivity
means a set of system qualities which are reflected in capabilities, interactions and
processes. As such, reflexivity is a quality criterion of the innovation system.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Reflexivity of innovation systems 19

In this section, we define a set of quality criteria of reflexive innovation systems. We
have deducted this set of overall ten criteria from literature on innovation systems, in
particular on syst emic instruments, on the governance of STI, and based on insights
from sustainability transition literature. This set of quality criteria shall help to implement
our concept in the empirical study of innovation systems as the individual quality crit e-
ria can be directly linked to functional units, organizations, and/or policy instruments in
the system.
We have argued that the innovation system heuristic needs a governance perspective,
and that the governance of an innovation system should serve to direct the system. In
order to allow for system -internal strategy formulation and implementation, substantial
orientation of the system needs to be endogenized. In their book "Reflexive Gover n-
ance", Voß et al. (2006) differentiate between two meanings of reflexivity . Our unde r-
standing of reflexivity is very much the same in what they term "second order reflexi v-
ity" – a conscious and strategic way of decision-making and action (2006: 6).
Furthermore, the authors of "Reflexive Governance" define "strategy elements" of re-
flexive governance and locate these along the stages of "system analysis", "goal fo r-
mulation" and "strategy development and implementation" (Voß et al. 2006: 18). These
stages are consistent with what we argue are the most pressing needs of innovation
systems: A conscious view on system outputs and the kind of directions they serve, as
well as the ability to communicate about goals, priorities and strategies within the sy s-
tem. Consequently, the stages "system analysis", "goal formulation" and "strategy d e-
velopment" help to ‘politicize’ the innovation system. Instead of keeping overarching
objectives (be it economic growth by way of strong innovation output or the reference
to grand societal challenges as defined by policy) exogenous to the innovation syste m,
these stages help to internalize related debate. This is important because the overall
strategic orientation of the system is an essential framework condition of all system
activities. In order to avoid 'window dressing' of system outputs, understood as a sim-
ple 're-labeling' of outputs in the language of an overarching strategy, the actors in the
system should be committed to the overall strategy. This is less likely if strategy deve l-
opment is external to the system. Thus, the actors in the innovation s ystem should be
able to participate in the making of the strategy. However, the governance of innovation
systems should not be misunderstood as a "self -steering of society" (Voß et al. 2006:
8), but as something in which democratic policy -making of represe ntative systems
plays a central role. These reflexive elements, which allow for participation and interac-
tion of the actors performing research and innovation as well as user groups, are co m-
plementary to policy-making processes in representative political systems – and not a
replacement. Or phrased differently, our approach calls for an enhanced role for go v-

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
20 Reflexivity of innovation systems

ernment to engage in actively shaping and supporting the political and cultural project
of socio-technical transformation (OECD 2015).
The three stages of reflexivity, where these actors need to act and interact, are (own
compilation based on Voß et al. 2006: 18):
 System analysis – defined as the identification of needs, demands, values , actors,
structures and trends.
 Goal formulation – defined as the definition of interests, positions, goals and visions.
We adjust the definition of this stage and call it goal formulation and specification .
This underlines the need that goals should not only be fixed in general terms (e.g.
sustainability) but most often require further specification.
 Strategy development and implementation – defined as the making of a joint stra t-
egy and instruments for its implementation and evaluation.
Given the richness in the literature on reflexive governance elements, we identify and
define four types of reflexivity capacities of innovation systems. In the list below, we
show how we combine the various sources in the literature into our scheme of capac i-
ties. The most important sources are Voß et al. (2006) who talk about strategy el e-
ments of reflexive governance, and Weber and Rohracher (2012) who list capacities
which are missing in the innovation system. They group these (missing) capacities into
four types of failures: reflexivity failures, directionality failures, demand articulation fail-
ures and policy coordination failures. As our concept of reflexivity is defined broader,
we view all of these capabilities relevant and include them in the list below.
So far we have spoken of system qualities, but most of these criteria cannot be mea s-
ured directly at a system level. While some criteria require central (governmental)
processes or instruments, many others should be present as cultural, structural or pr o-
cedural elements in the organizations performing research and innovation as well as i n
stakeholder groups. Here it becomes evident why the reflexive innovation system co n-
cept is in need of a governance perspective as it entails a dedicated conceptual a p-
proach to the actors in the system. This is needed to understand the actors – be it indi-
vidual or collective ones – not as functional units, but as acting ones, based on their
values, goals and strategies.
Four capacities of reflexivity:
 Self-reflection capacities: These can mainly be found at the level of (individual or
collective) actors. They include the critical reflection about values and orientation (cf.
"value debate" in Daimer et al. 2012: 181), "demand-articulating competencies "
(Weber and Rohracher 2012: 1045) , as well as the ability to adapt own positions
and goals.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Reflexivity of innovation systems 21

 Bridging and integration capacities: Here, we distinguish between capacities at actor
level and capacities at system level. At actor level, bridging and integration capac i-
ties are the (individual) ability (or organizational culture) to think and work transdi s-
ciplinary, the openness for different and new knowledge sources, and conflict re c-
ognition and moderation. At system level, bridging and integration capacities can be
found in " arrangements to connect different discursive spheres " (Weber and
Rohracher 2012: 1045), in "joint learning processes between technological AND so-
cietal innovators" or "bi -directional" stakeholder participation (Daimer et al. 2012:
177, 180), in processes or structures that allow for "participatory goal formulation "
(Voß et al. 2006) . A "shared vision regarding the goal and direction of the transfo r-
mation process" (Weber and Rohracher 2012: 1045) is desirable, but bridging and
integration capacities can also be found in the avoidance of "premature closure on
easy fixes and actively bring these conflicts into the open" (Daimer et al. 2012: 181).
Further system capacities include the "interactive strategy development" (Voß et al.
2006) or the "collective coordination of distributed agents involved in shaping sy s-
temic change ", "concerted policy initiati ves" (Kuhlmann and Rip 2014) as well as
multi-level, horizontal, vertical and temporal "policy coordination " (Weber and
Rohracher 2012: 1045).
 Anticipation capacities: These capacities are those of (individual or collective) actors
as well as of the system itself. They include futures literacy (Miller 2007) which can
be the "anticipation of long-term effects" (Voß et al. 2006) , the anticipation of tran s-
formation (Daimer et al 2012: 181; Kuhlmann and Rip 2014) or the ability to deal
with uncertainty, e.g. by "adaptive policy portfolios to keep options open " (Weber
and Rohracher 2012: 1045). They also include demand literacy, which means "an-
ticipating and learning about user needs to enable the uptake of innovations by u s-
ers" (Weber and Rohracher 2012: 1045).
 Experimentation capacities: Here, we are thinking of collective experiments (Daimer
et al. 2012: 181; Joly et al. 2010) and thus phenomena which can be found primarily
at system level. We define experimentation as allowing for parallel approaches and
learning through failure on all levels and in different contexts . The need for exper i-
mentation has also been highlighted by others, e.g. Voß et al. (2006: 433 f.) call for
"Experimentation and adaptivity of strategies ", Weber and Rohracher (2012) for
"spaces for experimentation and learning" and Kuhlmann and Rip (2014) for "tent a-
tive policy mixes" . In 2008, the Lisbon Expert Group arrived at the conclusion that
formats such as OMC-Nets7, ERA-Nets8 and Technology Platforms9 provide a good
basis for policy experimentation at the European level, and they should be therefore
continued (European Commission 2008: 11).

7 Acronym for Open Method of Coordination. For more information on OMC -Nets see:
http://ec.europa.eu/invest-in-research/coordination/coordination02_en.htm
8 Acronym for European Research Area. For more information on ERA -Nets see
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/era-net_en.html
9 For more information see http://ec.europa.eu/research/innovation-
union/index_en.cfm?pg=etp

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
22 Reflexivity of innovation systems

3.2 Ten quality criteria for reflexive innovation systems
We argue that these capacities should be present in all three stages. In all stages it will
be necessary that actors are at the same time self -reflexive and able to anticipate the
values and interests of others, and there should be the capacities to deal with unce r-
tainties of the present and the future and to react to them. Obviously, some of these
capacities seem to have a 'natural' relationship to some of the stages, for example in
the stage of system analysis self-reflection capacities and anticipation capacities play a
central role. In the stage of strategy development and implementation, certainly b ridg-
ing and integration capacities will help to sustain collective coordination, democratic
decision-making and joint action.
Nevertheless, in this conceptual step, we relate the four capacities in a matrix structure
to the three stages (see Table 2) in order to arrive at a model for further discussion. In
this 3x4 matrix, we identify ten relevant relationships which appear to be distinct. There
are no 'blind' cells with impossible combinations, but we merge the three stages into
one in the case of experimentation capacities as this reflects best the understanding of
experiments as learning at all stages and on all levels.
As a result, we define ten quality criteria for reflexive innovation systems which are
described below includin g illustrative examples of relevant actors and/or policy instr u-
ments as well as suitable indicators for measuring the presence of these reflexivity a s-
pects. We are convinced that only the empirical application of this matrix can reveal
further insights reg arding the relative relevance of the cells. Empirical discussion will
show which of these cells are needed in order to qualify an innovation system as ‘re-
flexive’. We assume that some of these quality features will appear to be very important
for the system, so they might be identified as obligatory quality features. Others might
appear as second-order features which exist in companionship with other features. The
ten quality criteria for reflexive innovation systems are:
(1) Self-reflection capacities in situation analysis
The central questions are: Do the actors critically reflect their own situation? Are they
aware of their values and orientations? And do they consider other actors ' situation,
values and positions? The actors in the focus of this analysis sho uld be the relevant
stakeholders in the innovation system of interest. In most cases, these will be organiza-
tions. Potential indicators to measure this level of self-reflection are content analyses of
position papers.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Reflexivity of innovation systems 23

(2) Self-reflection capacities in goal formulation and specification
Central questions are: Are goals formulated at all? Do actors show the capacity to r e-
flect about their goals and to articulate them? Have actors taken up general, overarc h-
ing goals and specified them to their situation (e.g. , "how we can contribute to sustai n-
ability")? To what extent a re the goals adaptive to their environment, e.g. changing
framework conditions or other actors ' goals? The actors in focus are mainly the same
as in the first cell. However, one can also look at th is at system level and ask whether
there is a system -wide process to reflect about goals or whether system -wide goals
have been explicitly formulated. Potential indicators are position papers (as in the first
cell), and organizational mission and vision statements. We might also find goal formu-
lation as the first step of (system-wide) strategy and agenda processes.
(3) Self-reflection capacities in strategy development and implementation
Although there is a logical link to at least cell no. 2, the central quest ions here are: Is a
strategy explicitly developed? Are the goals reflected /applied in the strategy? How
does the strategy address its environment, i.e. the framework conditions? Is the stra t-
egy resulting from a reflection/learning process? To what extent i s the strategy impl e-
mented? Are the success and suitability of the strategy evaluated on a regular basis?
Is the strategy adapted accordingly, if necessary, in other words, do the actors learn
along the pathway? Again, the units of analysis can be the acto rs in the system or the
system as a whole. Potential indicators are strategy processes and papers, agenda
processes and their outcomes, or formative policy evaluation.
(4) Bridging and integration capacities in situation analysis
Bridging and integration capac ities in situation analysis can be analyzed at actor -level
and at system -level. Central questions in situation analysis are: Which knowledge
sources are being used or integrated? Do they reflect different types of knowledge,
different academic traditions and other knowledge sources? Are different points of view
accepted? These might serve as indicators: diversity of members in review panels, task
forces or expert groups, 'new' members in such groups beyond the 'usual' suspects;
communication style in debate s: more 'arguing' than 'bargaining' as an indicator for
high bridging and integration capacities.
(5) Bridging and integration capacities in goal formulation and specification
Here, the central questions are: Who participates in goal formulation and specification?
And how is the diversity of interests and goals of the actors addressed – in particular at
the system-level, where consensus cannot be expected? Do we find conflict recogn i-
tion and moderation at this stage? Potential indicators are certain process cha racteris-

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
24 Reflexivity of innovation systems

tics of goal formulation: Existence of participatory agenda -setting, critical reflection on
power imbalances, and the degree of inclusiveness.
(6) Bridging and integration capacities in strategy development and impleme n-
tation
For the stages of strategy development and implementation, similar process features
are needed as in the case for goal formulation and specification. Quality criteria of this
stage are: Are strategy processes interactive? Is strategy -making and implementation
coordinated across rel evant actors? Potential indicators are similar process indicators
as in cell no. 5: Heterogeneity of actors involved, coordination across silos, as well as
bottom-up and top-down elements for strategy development.
(7) Anticipation capacities in situation analysis
Central questions to analyze anticipation capacities are: Are the actors aware of poten-
tial future developments? Which uncertainties do they recognize? How do they deal
with them? This can be a quality at actor -level as well as at system -level. Indicators to
look at are: Use of forward-looking techniques such as foresight, radars and scenarios.
We should also look for evidence of this quality in communications and publications.
(8) Anticipation capacities in goal formulation and specification
A central question is whether "futures literacy" is also present in the stage of goal fo r-
mulation or specification: Do we find openness towards goals for alternative futures?
Does the goal formulation recognize potential uncertainties? Are existing goals reco n-
sidered in light of alternative future developments? This quality is present if goals do
not confirm present routines, but help to overcome potential lock-in. Potential indicators
– in particular at actor level – are: Existence of processes to break organizational l ock-
in or to open mindsets beyond daily operational work (e.g. transition management, ho-
rizon scanning).
(9) Anticipation capacities in strategy development and implementation
At the stage of strategy development and implementation, similar questions are central:
Are strategies adaptive and robust in light of the identified uncertainties and potential
(unintended) side-effects? And is the use of anticipation capacities systematic, i.e. do
we find a foresight culture? Potential indicators are the existence of sy stematic use of
foresight and systematic assessments of the environment (e.g. environmental scanning
(360°)).

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Reflexivity of innovation systems 25

(10) Experimentation capacities in all stages
Central focuses of analysis are experimentation capacities and actual examples of e x-
periments: Are experiments used to integrate new actors or new goals or to overcome
a lock-in of the system? Is the implementation of parallel approaches allowed for, fo s-
tered and accepted? Potential indicators are new formats for discussion or coordin a-
tion, or new instrumen ts as an alternative to established ones. An important feature of
such new formats and instruments is that they support a constant learning process,
e.g. a continuous questioning of values, goals and approaches and a search for (para l-
lel) alternative approaches.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
26 Reflexivity of innovation systems
6 Reflexivity of innovation systems
Table 2: Quality criteria of reflexive innovation systems
 Self-reflection capacities Bridging and integration
capacities
Anticipation capacities Experimentation capacities
Situation analysis Critical reflexion about val-
ues and orientation.
(1)
Indicators: position papers
Transdisciplinarity, collective
intelligence
(4)
Indicators: more arguing
than bargaining; diversity of
stakeholders, new actors
Futures awareness, recogni-
tion of uncertainties
(7)
Indicators: reflected in com-
munications and publica-
tions; processes dealing with
uncertainty (scenarios, ra-
dars, foresight)
Learning through failure on all
levels and in different contexts

Allowing for parallel ap-
proaches

(10)
Indicators:
Experimental practices
Goal formulation
and specification
Articulation, adaptation - On
both levels – individual and
systems level
(2)
Indicators: organizational
mission and vision state-
ments, system-wide agen-
das..
Participatory goal formula-
tion, conflict recognition and
moderation
(5)
Indicators: Existence of par-
ticipatory agenda-setting;
critical reflection on power
imbalances, degree of inclu-
siveness
Openness towards goals for
alternative futures
(8)
Indicators: Existence of
processes to break organ-
izational lock-in or to open
mindsets beyond daily op-
erational work, e.g. transition
management, horizon scan-
ning
Strategy devel-
opment and im-
plementation
Articulation, adaptation and
learning
(3)
Indicators: strategy proc-
esses and papers, agenda
processes and their out-
comes; formative policy
evaluation
Interactivity and coordination
(6)
Indicators: Heterogeneity of
actors involved, coordination
across silos, bottom-up and
top-down elements for strat-
egy development

Awareness of uncertainties,
assessment of (non-
intended) side-effects
(9)
Indicators: Existence of sys-
tematic scanning and as-
sessments (environmental
scanning (360˚)), foresight
cultures.
Sources: Own compilation, integrating insights from Voß et al. (2006), Weber and Rohracher (2012), Daimer et al. (2012), Kuhlmann and Rip
(2014).

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Reflexivity of innovation systems 27

3.3 A revised heuristic of innovation systems
Introducing governance thinking into the innovation system heuristic opens up a new
analytical focus on innovation systems which we have elaborated in the previous se c-
tion. The proposed concept of reflexi ve governance is a set of ten quality criteria of
innovation systems. As such it is also compatible with the descriptive heuristic of inn o-
vation systems. We argue that reflexivity is a quality of innovation systems that should
be present similar to other framework conditions of the system, e.g. such as certain
cultural characteristics or infrastructure.
Translating this conceptual thinking into a graphical representation was an iterative
process during which we drew on existing innovation system frameworks – particularly
Kuhlmann and Arnold (2001: 2) – and developed these further by integrating comp o-
nents of reflexivity thinking. Figure 1 shows an intermediate result of this process. The
main subsystems of the innovation system are depicted at the centre (po litical system,
education and research, intermediaries, industry, and consumers/producers), whereas
relatively stable key factors and basic conditions influencing actors’ behaviour and i n-
teraction between the subsystems are represented as different layers surrounding the
core. In addition to general framework conditions and infrastructure, a new ‘reflexivity
layer’ was introduced.
With the aim of integrating the revision of established innovation system frameworks as
proposed by Warnke et al. (2016), we added a reflex ivity layer to this inn ovation sys-
tem model (see Figure 2). This new way of presenting the inn ovation system heuristic
takes into account se veral aspects which are also of relevance in our concept: they
introduce new actors such as philanthr opists, innovation intermediaries or societal a c-
tors and they present a more adequate and enriched picture of scienc e-society rela-
tions.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
28 Reflexivity of innovation systems

Figure 1: Graphical representation of a Reflexive Innovation System (based on
Kuhlmann and Arnold 2001: 2, own compilation)
Intermediaries
Education and
Research System
Political SystemIndustrial
System
Demand
Professional
education and
training
Higher education
and research
Public sector
research
Large companies
Mature SMEs
New, technology-
based firms
Research
institutes
Brokers
Consumers (final demand)
Producers (intermediate demand)
Government
R&I policies
Governance
Bridging and integration capacities
IPR and information
Taxation and incentives

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Reflexivity of innovation systems 29
flexivity of innovation systems 29
xivity of innovation systems 29
ity of innovation systems 29
of innovation systems 29
innovation systems 29
novation systems 29
vation systems 29
tion systems 29
n systems 29
systems 29
stems 29
ems 29
ms 29
s 29
Figure 2: Improved graphical representation of a Reflexive Innovation System (own compilation based on Warnke et al. 2016)
Society
Consumers, User Innovators
Social Entrepreneurs, Collaborative
innovators, citizens
Education
Public and private educators
on all levels
Mediators
Applied research, Clubs,
associations, trade unions, cluster
managers, NGOs
Infrastructure
ICT, Internet, databases, Co-
Creation Platforms …
Institutions
IPR, standards, norms
Culture
Social and relational capital
Values, lifestyles, attitudes
Innovation Frameworks
Policies
Ps influencing innovation
framework conditions (RTI)
and demand patterns (energy,
environment, mobility, health,
defense, home …)
Financers
Banks, venture capital,
philanthropists, crowds
Innovation Input
Innovation
Supply and
Demand
Research
Universities, RTOs, citizen
scientists ...
Public Sector
PS actors generating and
demanding innovation
Cities, hospitals, administrations …
Business
Firms of all sizes and sectors
generating and demanding
innovation
Reflexivity

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
30 Discussion and conclusions for STI research and policy

4 Discussion and conclusions for STI research and
policy
In this paper we propose to further develop and partly revise the c urrent systems of
innovation approach as a response to the inability of this heuristic to convincingly cope
with the challenges of directionality and normative orientation in contemporary STI po l-
icy. In order to better incorporate the requirements posed by this "normative turn", we
introduce a set of four capacities – self-reflection, bridging and integration, anticipation,
and experimentation – that signify the capability of innovation systems to guide innova-
tion processes towards desired ends.
Our vantage point is the critical assessment of the narrow economic growth perspe c-
tive in established systems of innovation approaches. While the systems of innovation
heuristic remains a valuable conceptual frame for the analysis and the design of STI
policy, it falls short to address issues of directionality and questions which innovations
are desirable from a societal perspective. In the recent past, fixing market failures and
systemic imperfections as the dominant rationales for economic and innovation policy
have increasingly been complemented by new rationales for state intervention and i n-
novation policy (Foray et al. 2012; Mazzucato 201 3). Enacting these new rationales or
'missions' requires additional and different approaches than those solely aimed at fo s-
tering generic innovation system functions such as interactivity, mutual learning or di f-
fusion. In effect, supporting certain technological trajectories and innovation paths e x-
plicitly entails the partial departure from the conventional principle of 'neutrality' (Aghion
et al. 2009: 688).
Due to its focus on strategic interaction and on actors ' intentionality to influence the
quality and direction of innovation processes, the integration of a dedicated governance
perspective into the systems of innovation approa ch is a promising conceptual vehicle
to support the identification and assessment of substantive goals, and eventually the
guidance of decisions and actions to achieve these ambitions within a given innovation
system. Of the rich theoretical and conceptual literature on the governance of STI, we
conclude that the literature on reflexive governance is particularly useful in this context.
While normative directions for the governance of research and innovation, as widely
articulated in missions such as the so -called ‘grand challenges’ and in part promoted
by the RRI discourse, are plentiful, these normative directions are – by and large – im-
posed upon the innovation system actors exogenously, and neither their broad acce p-
tance nor their adequacy are a given. W ith the aim of increasing the sense of 'owner-
ship', legitimacy and eventually societal robustness, we propose to partly endogenise
processes of defining and specifying normative directions. Putting increased emphasis
on and improving the capacities of reflexive governance will potentially contribute to the

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Discussion and conclusions for STI research and policy 31

strengthening of the innovation systems' input-legitimacy. As such, the often criticised
preoccupation with output -legitimacy (i.e., the economic performance of innovation
systems) can be rebalanced in fa vour of a stronger focus on the input dimension. 10 Of
course, the formal mechanisms of legitimacy in the context of representative democracy
remain in place. But in view of the specific characteristics of the STI field such as a high
degree of autonomy and self-reliance of the actor landscape together with the substan-
tive openness of research and innovation directions, hierarchical steering and conve n-
tional governance settings seem even less suitable in this field than in most other policy
areas. Within this setting and in view of the requirements that need to be fulfilled to facili-
tate innovation systems' self-reflective capacities, to orchestrate the opening-up and clos-
ing-down of decision-making processes, and to implement appropriate policy and regula-
tory measures, the state will have to play a particularly decisive role.
Limitations and future research
We are convinced that the proposed reconceptualisation of the systems of innovation
heuristic along the lines of intensified reflexive governance, operatio nalised by a set of
four capacities and related quality criteria, will potentially improve the analysis of inno-
vation systems' ability to address the complex challenges of directionality and, in the
long run, also the systems’ ability itself . However, while the conceptual development is
still in its infancy, we identified a number of limitations and not yet resolved issues
which need to be addressed in order to improve both the concept 's theoretical unde r-
pinnings and its practical use for policy analysis an d advice. The most salient points of
clarification seem to be:
 We claim that the proposed quality criteria, covered by the respective indicators
(Table 2), contribute to the reflexivity of an innovation system. However, at this point
it remains an open question, how many and particularly to what extent these criteria
should be met in order to signify a 'reflexive' innovation system. We expect that cer-
tain criteria are more decisive than others for achieving higher levels of reflexi vity in
innovation systems, perhaps leading to a hierarchy of first and second order criteria.
 Almost all of the reflexivity criteria relate to both the individual/actor -centred level
and the macro/system level. So far, the dynamic interrelationships betwe en these
levels are not well understood; moreover, they need to be further specified in terms
of the respective indicators. This creates particular challenges for empirical analysis.
 More work needs to be done to identify appropriate, context -sensitive tools, pro c-
esses and instruments which can be applied by governments to foster the reflexive

10 For a general discussion see e.g. Scharpf 1999, Hurrelmann et al. 2007 and Mayntz (2010:
10 ff.).

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
32 Discussion and conclusions for STI research and policy

capacities of innovation systems. To this end, the diverse contributions from the di f-
ferent disciplines in the social sciences and economics which have been concerned
with STI policy and governance represent a valuable reservoir of knowledge.
 Without doubt, enhancing reflexive capacities of innovation systems contributes to
the ‘opening up’ of the wider debate and the related decision -making processes on
STI policy. Ye t, policy-making routines and factual requirements of programme d e-
sign, budget-planning, implementation and the like call for policy choices at some
point. Thus, the challenge for any reflexive governance arrangement is not only to
identify the appropriate scope and the right timing for ‘closing down’, but to develop
institutional conditions for closing down processes that are less prone to be unduly
distorted by incumbent interests, power dynamics and strategic framing.
 The proposed revision of conventiona l systems of innovation thinking aims to be
compatible with the different innovation system concepts – i.e., national, regional,
sectoral and technological systems of innovation. To which extent this claim can be
confirmed needs to be tested.
 We claim that innovation systems with high er degrees of reflexivity are more su c-
cessful in effectively addressing the challenges of directionality. If, to which extent
and how reflexivity influences the performance of an innovation system in this r e-
gard will have to be explored empirically.
Most of these open questions and challenges will have to be approached through e m-
pirical research. Ideally, a large -scale research programme would need to be devised
in which systematic comparative analyses of different innovation sy stems (national,
regional, sectoral, technical) could be conducted. Based on a preliminary and very te n-
tative secondary examination of existing national and sectoral innovation system
analyses, we anticipate to identify varieties of reflexivity, depending on factors such as
a system 's respective institutional make -up, levels of socio -technical and socio -
economic development, and cultural variables. Once a sufficient empirical corpus of
comparative data is available, a typology of varieties of reflexive inno vation systems
could be developed.
In many ways, these are exciting times for STI-related research: The debates on ‘grand
challenges’, RRI and questions of directionality open new opportunities and give u r-
gency to researchers committed to innovation system thinking to draw on STS and its
understanding of how social and political processes influence innovation trajectories
and pathways. At the same time, the complexity of effectively addressing ‘grand chal-
lenges’ opens new connections to and opportunities for exchange with the sustainabil-
ity research community and their expertise on transitions, and transformative change.
The research conducted for this paper is an attempt to contribute to this on -going proc-
ess of cross -disciplinary collaboration and the unde rlying paradigm -shifts in STI r e-
search and policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Acknowledgements 33

Acknowledgments
The research for this paper was funded by the Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and
Innovation Research ISI. On numerous occasions the authors took advantage of co n-
ceptual input and enlight ening discussions with our peers in the research community.
We are particularly indebted for constructive feedback to Jakob Edler, Susana Borrás,
Stefan Kuhlmann, Peter Biegelbauer, Karoline Rogge, Ellen Moors, Annette Braun and
many more.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
34 Reference List

5 Reference List
Aghion, P./David, P.A./Foray, D. (2009): Science, technology and innovation for
economic growth: Linking policy research and practice in 'STIG Systems',
Research Policy, 38, 681-693.
Arnold, E./Giarracca, F. (2012): Getting the Balance Right. Basic Research, Missions
and Governance for Horizon 2020. EARTO.
Bache, I. (2003): Governing through Governance: Education Policy Control under New
labour, Political Studies, 51, 300-314.
Bajmócy, Z./Gébert, J. (2014): The outlines of innovation policy in the capability
approach, Technology in Society, 38, 93-102
Benz, A. (2006): Governance in connected arenas – political science analysis of coor-
dination and control in complex control systems. In Jansen, D. (ed.): New Forms
of Governance in Research Organizations. From Disciplinary Theories towards
Interfaces and Integration, Heidelberg/New York: Springer, 3-22.
Bergek, A./Jacobsson, S./Carlsson, B./Lindmark, S./Rickne, A. (2008): Analyzing the
functional dynamics of technological innovation systems: A scheme of analysis,
Research policy, 37, 407-429.
Borrás, S./Edler, J. (2014): Introduction: on governance, systems and change. In: Bor-
rás, S./Edler, J. (eds.): The Governance of Socio-Technical Systems. Explaining
Change, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing, 1-22.
Braczyk, H. J./Cooke, P. N./Heidenreich, M. (1998): Regional innovation systems: the
role of governances in a globalized world, Abingdon: Psychology Press.
Breschi, S./Malerba, F. (1997): Sectoral innovation systems: technological regimes,
Schumpeterian dynamics, and spatial boundaries, In: Edquist, C.: Systems of
Innovation, London: Pinter, 130–156.
Carlsson, B. (1995): Technological Systems and Economic Performance: The Case of
Factory Automation. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston.
Carlsson, B., Jacobsson, S. (1997): Diversity creation and technological systems: a
technology policy perspective. In: Edquist, C. (Ed.), Systems of Innovation:
Technologies, Institutions and Organisations. Pinter, London.
Chaminade, C./Edquist, C. (2006): From theory to practice. The use of the systems of
innovation approach in innovation policy. Innovation, Science and Institutional
Change, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Collingridge, D. (1980): The social control of technology, London: Francis Pinter.
Cooke, P./Uranga, M. G./Etxebarria, G. (1997): Regional innovation systems:
Institutional and organisational dimensions. Research policy, 26, 475-491.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Reference List 35

Dachs, B./Dinges, M./Weber, M./Zahradnik, G./Warnke, P./Teufel, B. (2015): Heraus-
forderungen und Perspektiven missionsorientierter Forschungs- und Innovations-
politik. Hg. v. Expertenkommission Forschung und Innovation (EFI). AIT, Fraun-
hofer ISI. Wien, Karlsruhe (Studien zum deutschen Innovationssystem, Nr. 12-
2015).
Daimer, S./Hufnagl, M./Warnke, P. (2012): Challenge-oriented policy-making and
innovation systems theory: reconsidering systemic instruments. In: Fraunhofer ISI
(eds.): Innovation system revisited - Experiences from 40 years of Fraunhofer ISI
research. Stuttgart: Fraunhofer Verlag, 217-234.
Dodgson, M./Hughes, A./Foster, J./Metcalfe, S. (2011): Systems thinking, market
failure, and the development of innovation policy: The case of Australia,
Research Policy, 40, 1145-1156.
Dosi, G. (1982): Technological Paradigms and Technological Trajectories: A
Suggested Interpretation of the Determinants and Directions of Technical
Change, Research Policy, 11, 147-162.
Edquist, C. (1997): Systems of Innovation. Technologies, Institutions and
Organizations, London: Routledge
Edquist, C. (2002): Innovation policy. A systemic approach. In: Archiburgi D., Lundvall
B.-A. (eds.): The globalizing learning economy. Oxford,New York: Oxford
University Press; 2002. pp. 219–38.
Edquist, C. (2005): Systems of Innovation. Perspectives and Challenges. In:
Fagerberg, J./Mowery, D.C./Nelson, R.R. (eds.): The Oxford Handbook of Inno-
vation. New York: Oxford University Press, 181-208.
Ely, A./van Zwanenberg, P./Stirling, A. (2014): Broadening out and opening up
technology assessment: Approaches to enhance international development, co-
ordination and democratisation, Research Policy, 43, 505–518.
European Commission (2008): Lisbon Strategy: Between revolution and illusion. The
governance challenge for knowledge policies. Synthesis report of the Lisbon
Expert Group. Brussels.
Fagerberg, J./Verspagen, B. (2009): Innovation studies – The emerging structure of a
new scientific field, Research Policy, 38, 218–233.
Fisher, E./Mahajan, R./Mitchum, C. (2006): Midstream Modulation of Technology: Gov-
ernance From Within Bulletin of Science, Technology and Society, 26, 485-496.
Foray, D./Mowery, D.C./Nelson, R.R. (2012): Public R&D and social challenges: What
lessons from mission R&D programms?, Research Policy, 41, 1697-1702.
Freeman, C. (1995): The national system of innovation "in historical perspective",
Cambridge Journal of Economics, 19, 5–24.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
36 Reference List

Gassler, H./Polt, W./Rammer, C. (2006): Schwerpunktsetzungen in der Forchungs- und
Technologiepolitik – eine Analyse der Paradigmenwechsel seit 1945.
Österreichische Zeitschrift für Politikwissenschaft (ÖZP), 35. Jg. (2006), H. 1, 7-
23.
Geels, F.W. (2002): Technological transitions as evolutionary reconfiguration
processes: a multi-level perspective and a case-study, Research Policy, 31,
1257–1274.
Grande, E. (2012): Governance-Forschung in der Governance-Falle? – Eine kritische
Bestandsaufnahme, Politische Vierteljahresschrift PVS, 53, 565-592.
Guston, D.H./Sarewitz, D. (2002): Real-time Technology Assessment. Technology,
Society, 24, 93–109.
Guston, D.H. (2014): Understanding 'anticipatory governance'. Social Studies of Sci-
ence, 44, 218-242.
Hekkert, M.P./Suurs, R.A.A./Negro, S.O./Kuhlmann, S./Smits, R. E. H. M. (2007):
Functions of innovation systems: A new approach for analysing technological
change. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 74, 413-432.
Hurrelmann, A./Schneider, S./Steffek, J. (eds.) (2007): Legitimacy in an Age of Global
Politics. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Jessop, B. (2003): Governance and meta-governance: on reflexivity, requisite variety
and requisite irony. In: Bang, H.P. (ed.): Governance as social and political
communication, Manchester: Manchester University Press, 101-116.
Joly, P.-B./Rip, A./Callon, M. (2010): Re-Inventing Innovation. In: Arentsen, M.J./Van
Rossum, W./Steenge, A.E. (eds.): Governance of Innovation: Firms, Clusters and
Institutions in a Changing Setting, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 19−32.
Jordan, A./Wurzel, R./Zito, A. (2005): The Rise of New Policy Instruments in Compara-
tive perspective: Has Governance Eclipsed Government?, Political Studies, 53,
477-496.
Kallerud, E./Klitkou, A./Sutherland Olsen, D./Scordato, L./Amanatidou, E./Upham,
P./Nieminen, M./Lima-Toivanen, M./Oksanen, J. (2013): Dimensions of research
and innovation policies to address grand and global challenges; Eu-SPRI Forum
Position Paper of the project "The emergence of challenge-driven priorities in
research and innovation policy (CPRI)" (http://www.euspri-
forum.eu/key_missions/CPRI_Position_paper.pdf) (accessed 03-06-2016).
Kemp, R./Schot, J./Hoogma, R. (1998). Regime shifts to sustainablilty through
processes of niche formation: the approach of strategic niche management.
Technology analysis and strategic management, 10, 175-196.
Kooiman, J. (ed.) (1993): Modern Governance: New Government-Society Interactions,
London: SAGE Publications.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Reference List 37

Kuhlmann, S./Boekholt, P./Georghiou, L./Guy, K./Héraud, J.-A./Laredo. P./Lemola,
T./Loveridge, D./Luukkonen, T./Polt, W./Rip, A./Sanz-Menendez, L./Smits, R.
(1999): Improving Distributed Intelligence in Complex Innovation Systems. Final
report of the Advanced Science & Technology Policy Planning Network (ASTPP),
a Thematic Network of the European Targeted Socio-Economic Research Pro-
gramme.
Kuhlmann, S. (2001): Future Governance of Innovation Policy in Europe – Three Sce-
narios. Research Policy, special issue, 30, 953-976.
Kuhlmann, S./Arnold, E. (2001): RCN in the Norwegian Research and Innovation Sys-
tem. Background Report No. 12 in the evaluation of the Research Council of
Norway. Karlsruhe, Brighton: Fraunhofer ISI, Technopolis.
Kuhlmann, S./Shapira, P./Smits, R. (2010): Introduction. A Systemic Perspective: The
Innovation Policy Dance. In: Smits, R.E./Kuhlmann, S./Shapira, P. (eds.): The
Theory and Practice of Innovation Policy. An International Research Handbook,
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 1-22.
Kuhlmann, S./Rip, A. (2014): The challenge of addressing Grand Challenges. A think
piece on how innovation can be driven towards the "Grand Challenges" as
defined under the European Union Framework Programme Horizon 2020, Report
to ERIAB; DOI: 10.13140/2.1.4757.184.
Kuhlmann, S./Edler, J./Ordóñez-Matamoros, G./Randles, S./Walhout, B./Gough,
C./Lindner, R. (2016): Responsibility Navigator. In: Lindner, R.; Kuhlmann, S.;
Randles, S.; Bedsted, B.; Gorgoni, G.; Griessler, E.; Loconto, A.; Mejlgaard, N.
(eds): Navigating Towards Shared Responsibility in Research and Innovation.
Approach, Process and Results of the Res-AGorA Project, Karlsruhe, 135-158
https://indd.adobe.com/view/eaeb695e-a212-4a34-aeba-b3d8a7a58acc
Lange, P./Driessen, P.P.J./Sauer, A./Bornemann, B./Burger, P. (2013): Governing To-
wards Sustainability – Conceptualizing Modes of Governance, Journal of Envi-
ronmental Policy and Planning, 15, 403-425.
Lindner, R. (2012): Cross-Sectoral Coordination of STI-Policies: Governance Principles
to Bridge Policy-Fragmentation, In: Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and
Innovation Research ISI (ed.): Innovation System revisited. Experiences from 40
Years of Fraunhofer ISI Research, Stuttgart: Fraunhofer Verlag, 275-287.
Lindner, R./Goos, K./Güth, S./Som, O./Schröder, T. (2016): Das Konzept 'Responsible
Research and Innovation' und dessen Relevanz für die deutsche Forschungs-,
Technologie- und Innovationspolitik. TA-Studie, Büro für Technikfolgen-
Abschätzung beim Deutschen Bundestag. Berlin (forthcoming)
Lindner, R./Kuhlmann, S. (2016): Responsible Research and Innovation und die
Governance von Forschung & Innovation: Herausforderungen und Prinzipien.
Forschung: Politik – Strategie – Management, Fo 1+2/2016, 22-27.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
38 Reference List

Lundvall, B.-Å. (1992): National Systems of Innovation. Towards a Theory of Innovation
and Interactive Learning. London, New York: Pinter.
Mahroum, S. (2012): Innovation Policies and Socio-Economic Goals: An Analytic-
Diagnostic Framework. INSEAD Working Paper No. 2012/35/INSEAD Innovation
Policy Initiative.
Markard, J./Truffer, B. (2008): Technological innovation systems and the multilevel
perspective: towards an integrated framework, Research Policy, 37, 596–615.
Malerba, F. (2002): Sectoral systems of innovation and production, Research Policy,
31, 247–264.
Mayntz, R. (2009): Von politischer Steuerung zu Governance? Überlegungen zur
Archtektur von Innovationspolitik (2008). In: Mayntz, R. (ed.): Über Governance.
Institutionen und Prozesse politischer Regelung, Frankfurt: Campus, 105-120.
Mayntz, R. (2010): Legitimacy and Compliance in Transnational Governance (MPIfG
Working Paper 10/5). Online: http://edoc.vifapol.de/opus/volltexte/2011/3011/
(accessed 07-09-2015).
Mazzucato, M. (2013): The Entrepreneurial State. Debunking Public vs. Private Sector
Myths, London: Anthem Press.
Mazzucato, M. (2015a). Building the Entrepreneurial State: A New Framework for
Envisioning and Evaluating a Mission-oriented Public Sector. Levy Economics
Institute of Bard College Working Paper, 824.
Mazzucato, M. (2015b). From Market Fixing to Market-Creating: A New Framework for
Economic Policy (No. 2015-25). SPRU-Science and Technology Policy
Research, University of Sussex.
Metcalf, J.S. (2003): System failure and the case of innovation policy. In: Llerena,
P./Matt, N. (eds.): Innovation Policy in a Knowledge-Based Economy. Theory and
practice, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 47-74.
Miller, R. (2007): Futures literacy: A hybrid strategic scenario method. Futures, 39, 341-
362.
Moulaert, F./MacCallum, D./Mehmood, A./Hamdouch, A. (eds.) (2013): The Interna-
tional Handbook on Social Innovation. Collective Action, Social Learning and
Transdisciplinary Research, London and Northampton: Edgar Elgar.
Nelson, R.R., (1993): National Innovation Systems: A Comparative Analysis, New
York/Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nelson, R.R./Winter, S.G. (1982): An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change.
Cambridge (MA): Belknap Press.
OECD (2014): FDI in Figures. February 2014, http://www.oecd.org/investment/FDI-in-
Figures-Feb-2014.pdf (accessed 03-06-2016).

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Reference List 39

OECD (2015): System innovation: Synthesis Report. Paris.
Perez, C. (2002): Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital: The Dynamics of
Bubbles and Golden Ages, Cheltenham, UK: Edgar Elgar.
Pisani-Ferry, J. (2015): France Statégie. A presentation. March 2015.
Porter, M. (1990): The Competitive Advantage of Nations. Harvard Business Review,
March-April 1990.
Quitzow, R. (2011): Towards a strategic framework for promoting environmental
innovations. Working Paper No.6 (lead markets), 2012 Berlin Conference on the
Human Dimensions of Climate Change, October 5 – 6, 2012, Freie Universität
Berlin.
Randles, S./Dorbeck-Jung, B./Lindner, R./Rip, A. (2014): Report of the Roundtable at
S.NET Boston 2013: ‚Where to Next for Responsible Innovation’?, In: Coenen,
C.; Dijkstra, A.; Fautz, C.; Guivant, J.; Konrad, K.; Milburn, C.; van Lente, H.
(eds.): Innovation and Responsibility: Engaging with New and Emerging
Technologies, Berlin, 19-38.
Randles, S./Edler, J./Gee, S./Gough, C. (2016): Res-AGorA case studies: Drawing
Transversal Lessons. In: Lindner, R./Kuhlmann, S./Randles, S./Bedsted,
B./Gorgoni, G./Griessler, E./Loconto, A./Mejlgaard, N. (eds.): Navigating Towards
Shared Responsibility in Research and Innovation. Approach, Process and
Results of the Res-AGorA Project, Karlsruhe, 64-73.
https://indd.adobe.com/view/eaeb695e-a212-4a34-aeba-b3d8a7a58acc
Rip, A./Schot, J.W./Misa, T.J. (1995): Managing Technology in Society: The Approach
of Constructive Technology Assessment, New York: Pinter Publishers.
Rip, A. (2010): De facto governance of nanotechnologies. In: Goodwin, M./Koops,
B.J./Leenes, R. (eds.): Dimensions of Technology Regulation, Nijmegen: Wolf
Legal Publishers, 285-308.
Rotmans, J./Loorbach, D. (2006): Transition management: reflexive steering of societal
complexity through searching, learning and experimenting. In: Van den Bergh, J.
C. J. M./Bruinsma, F.R. (eds.): Managing the Transition to Renewable Energy.
Theory and Practice from Local, Regional and Macro Perspectives, Cheltenham,
15-46.
Scharpf, F.W. (1994): Games Real Actors could Play: Positive and Negative Co-
Ordination in Embedded Negotiations. Journal of Theoretical Politics, 6, 27-53.
Scharpf, F.W. (1999): Governing in Europe: Effective and Democratic?, New York:
Oxford University Press.
Sharif, N. (2006): Emergence and development of the National Innovation Systems
Concept. Research Policy, 35, 745-766.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
40 Reference List

Sismondo, S. (2010): An Introduction to Science and Technology Studies, 2nd ed.,
Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Soete, L./Verspagen, B./Ter Weel, B. (2010): Systems of innovation. in: Hall, B. H.,
Rosenberg, N. (eds), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 1160-1181.
Stilgoe, J./Owen, R./Macnaghten, P. (2013): Developing a framework for responsible
innovation. Research Policy, 42, 1568-1580.
Stirling, A, (2008:): "Opening Up" and "Closing Down". Power, Participation, and Plural-
ism in the Social Appraisal of Technology. Science, Technology, & Human Val-
ues, 33, 262-294.
Suurs, R.A.A./Hekkert, M.P./Smits, R.E.H.M. (2009): Understanding the build-up of a
technological innovation system around hydrogen and fuel cell technologies, Int.
J. Hydrog. Energy, 34, 9639–9654.
Tancoigne, E./Randles, S./Joly, P.-B. (2016): Evolution of a concept: a scientometric
analysis of RRI. In: Lindner, R.; Kuhlmann, S.; Randles, S.; Bedsted, B.; Gorgoni,
G.; Griessler, E.; Loconto, A.; Mejlgaard, N. (eds.): Navigating Towards Shared
Responsibility in Research and Innovation. Approach, Process and Results of the
Res-AGorA Project, Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer ISI, 39-44.
https://indd.adobe.com/view/eaeb695e-a212-4a34-aeba-b3d8a7a58acc
Truffer, B. (2015): Challenges for Technological Innovation Systems research:
Introduction to a debate, Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, 16,
65-66.
van Alphen, K./Hekkert, M.P./Turkenburg, W.C., (2010): Accelerating the deployment
of carbon capture and storage technologies by strengthening the innovation
system, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control 4, 396–409.
van der Hoven, J./Manders-Huits, Noemi (2009): Value-Sensitive Design. In: Berg
Olsen, J.K./Pedersen, S.A./Hendricks, V.F. (eds.): A Companion to the Philoso-
phy of Technology, New York: Wiley-Blackwell, 477-480.
von Hippel, E. (2005): Democratizing Innovation. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT
Press.
Voß, J.-P./Bauknecht, D./Kemp, R. (eds.) (2006): Reflexive Governance for Sustaina-
ble Development, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Warnke, P./Koschatzky, K./Dönitz, E./Zenker, A./Stahlecker, T./Som, O./Cuhls,
K./Güth, S. (2016): Opening up the innovation system framework towards new
actors and institutions (= Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy
Analysis Nr. 49). Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer ISI.
http://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/isi-wAssets/docs/p/de/diskpap_innosysteme
_policyanalyse/discussionpaper_49_2016.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Reference List 41

Weber, K.M./Rohracher, H. (2012): Legitimizing research, technology and innovation
policies for transformative change: Combining insights from innovation systems
and multi-level perspective in a comprehensive 'failures' framework. Research
Policy, 41, 1037-1047.
Wieczorek, A. J./Hekkert, M. (2012): Systemic instruments for systemic innovation
problems: A framework for policy makers and innovation scholars. Science and
Public Policy, 39(1), 74-87.
Wilsdon, J./Willis, R. (2004): See-through science: Why public engagement needs to
move upstream. London: Demos.
http://www.demos.co.uk/files/Seethroughsciencefinal.pdf?1240939425 (accessed
April 15, 2016).
Woolthuis, R. K./Lankhuizen, M./Gilsing, V. (2005): A system failure framework for in-
novation policy design, Technovation, 25, 609-619.
Wydra, S. (2015): Challenges for technology diffusion policy to achieve socio-economic
goals. Technology in Society, 41, 76-90.
